We develop a theory of the spin battery effect in superconductor/ferromagnetic insulator (SC/FI) systems taking into account the magnetic proximity effect. We demonstrate that the spin-energy mixing enabled by the superconductivity leads to the enhancement of spin accumulation by several orders of magnitude relative to the normal state. This finding can explain the recently observed giant inverse spin Hall effect generated by thermal magnons in the SC/FI system. We suggest a non-local electrical detection scheme which can directly probe the spin accumulation driven by the magnetization dynamics. We predict a giant Seebeck effect converting the magnon temperature bias into the non-local voltage signal. We also show how this can be used to enhance the sensitivity of magnon detection even up to the single-magnon level. Generation and detection of pure spin signals is one of the main paradigms in spintronics Spin pumping Recently it has been discovered Most of the experimental Here we consider the spin battery effect The considered setup is detailed in Fig. in the non-local circuit Fig. Here G F = G F n ∞ 0 dεN (ε)∂ ε n 0 is the linear local tunneling conductance and P D the spin polarization of the SC/FM junction, N (ε) is the density of states in the superconductor and n 0 = tanh(ε/2T ) is the equilibrium distribution function. In the superconducting case the information carried by the strength of the spin pumping which determines the FMR linewidth is different from that in μ s . It is generally proportional to the amplitude of magnetization dynamics μ s ∝ m × ∂ t m , where m(t) is the unit vector of magnetization direction in FI. In superconductors, arXiv:2103.07412v1 [cond-mat.mes-hall] 12 Mar 2021 FIG. however, the proportionality constant of μ s is sensitive to the magnitude of energy relaxation time Γ -1 . In the typical case Γ -1 τ s the resulting non-local voltage V D can be parametrically larger in the superconducting state than in the normal state by the factor ∼ (Γτ s ) -1 . In superconductors Nb and Al these times are of the order in both materials The origin of the very large spin accumulation in FI/SC contacts is twofold. First, magnetization dynamics results in the energy current where α is the contribution to the Gilbert damping coefficient due to the contact. Second, in superconductors the spin splitting in the Bogoliubov spectrum generated by FI through the magnetic proximity effect Energy current j e generates spin-neutral energy accumulation W by non-equilibrium quasiparticle states shown schematically by the filled circles in Fig. The elastic spin-scattering collision integral is given by I s = (f s -κ se f e )/T 1 , where T 1 is the longitudinal spin relaxation time in the superconducting state For weak spin splitting h 0 ∆ 2 , we can estimate κ se ∼ h 0 /(ε∆), where ∆ is the superconducting gap. The spin-diffusion equation modified by the spin-energy coupling is given by where J sz (ε) and J e (ε) are the spectral densities of the time-independent spin j sz = dεJ sz and energy j e = dεJ e currents. The sources of these currents are determined by the boundary conditions at the FI interface with dynamical magnetization fixing the values of interfacial currents J e (x = 0) ∝ |∂ t m| 2 and J sz (x = 0) ∝ z • m × ∂ t m . They are obtained generalizing the theory of normal-state spin battery effect The first term has a large prefactor Γ -1 and provides the possibility of spin signal enhancement by the parameter κ se /(ΓT 1 ) as compared to the normal state, where only the second term contributes. The detailed calculation for the quasiclassical Green's function (GF) ǧ in 8×8 space consisting of Keldysh, Nambu and spin indices. • B](t 1 , t 2 ) = dtA(t 1 , t)B(t, t 2 ) -B(t 1 , t)A(t, t 2 ) and similarly for the anticommutator {X , • Y }. Here the interface is characterized by the effective exchange coupling We assume the time-dependent magnetization is m ⊥ (t) = m Ω (cos(Ωt), sin(Ωt), 0) consisting of the leftand right-hand parts m ⊥ (t) = m Ω,l e iΩt (x -iy) + m -Ω,r e -iΩt (x + iy) with m Ω,l = m -Ω,r = m Ω /2. In general, solving Eqs. where χ lr is the second-order spin response function. Here we consider a superconductor film with thickness d S sn , ξ 0 small compared to the spin relaxation and coherence lengths in the superconductor. Then Eqs. (3-4) can be reduced The calculated dependencies of pumped spin accumulation μ sz , non-local voltage V D and energy W are shown in Fig. Results in Fig. Ω /Γ, where α(Ω) is the frequency-dependent increase of Gilbert damping. The plot of the ratio W (Ω, T )/W (Ω, T c ) = α(Ω, T )/α(Ω, T c ) shows the presence of the superconducting gap since the damping is generally suppressed for Ω < 2∆ 0 . For temperatures somewhat below T c there is a coherence peak Next, we consider the spin accumulation driven by the stochastic magnetization corresponding to the magnon thermal field at temperature T m = T which can be controlled with the help of electrical spin injection based on the spin Hall effect where v s , the volume per unit spin in FI, determines the number of magnon modes. For YIG, for parameters qualitatively corresponding to the EuS/Al and YIG/Nb based FI/SC bilayers that have been studied recently This can be demonstrated in the quasiequilibrium limit, assuming the rapid internal thermalization process that allows to parametrize the distribution function by temperature T S and the spin-dependent chemical potential shift eV s . Then kinetic Eqs. ( Here G e-ph is the electron-phonon thermal conductance, The magnon-electron conductances for spin and heat, G ms and G me , are expressed[51] through the linear spin susceptibility The second term is again due to the spin-energy mixing, and it provides the dominating contribution in the superconducting state. The Seebeck coefficient is plotted in Fig. The large value of the Seebeck coefficient converting the magnon temperature difference to an electrical voltage indicates that this device can be used as an ultrasensitive detector of propagating magnons,[51] analogous to the thermoelectric detector suggested in Refs. 72 and 73. The detector can have a very low noise equivalent power of the order of N EP 2 ∼ G th T 2 , limited by the weak thermal conductance G th = G me + G e-ph from the superconductor to the relevant heat baths. Similar to the other nanoscale superconducting detectors To conclude we have shown how the electron-hole symmetry breaking present in SC/FI bilayers mixes the spin and energy modes and leads to a giant enhancement of the spin battery effect. This leads to the large magnondriven Seebeck effect which can be considered as a very sensitive detector of magnons. We expect this effect also to explain the giant spin-Hall signal measured in The mechanism of producing giant spin signals does not necessarily require superconductors, but we expect similar effects in any system exhibiting strong spinresolved electron-hole asymmetry, such as semimetals in the presence of large exchange fields or magnetic topological insulators Here we provide technical details of the formalism, verification of our approach by comparison with known results as well as the extended results of calculations for wide range of parameters. In Sec. I A we describe the general formalism of Keldysh-Usadel equation with the dynamical boundary conditions at the S/FI interface. In Sec. I B we show that our general formalism yields the conventional expression for the spin current with pumped and backflow terms. In Sec. I C we show that our formalism in the normal superconducting state yields the usual expression for static spin current and spin accumulation (spin battery effect). The generalization of kinetic equations to describe spin accumulation in the superconducting spin sink are derived in Sec. I D. In Sec. I E we describe the perturbation theory approach to solving Keldysh-Usadel equation to the second order of the driving Zeeman field to calculate the stationary spin accumulation. Here we present the extended calculation results of spin and energy accumulation as well as the non-local voltage driven by the magnetization dynamics for a wide range of parameters. Beyond perturbation theory we have also developed the numerically exact solution of the non-stationary Keldysh-Usadel equation with the time-dependent Zeeman field. The method is described in Sec. I F. Using the results for spin accumulation driven by the deterministic magnetic signal we can treat the case of stochastic magnetization dynamics driven by the field of thermal magnons. The approach based on the calculation of electron-magnon collision integral is presented in Sec. I G. We verify our approach by deriving the known results for the magnon-driven spin and energy currents in the normal state of FI/metal bilayer. In Sec. I H We demonstrate that general relations between pumped spin and energy currents are valid in the superconducting state. Section I I considers the FI/SC/FM system as a magnon detector and estimates the corresponding figures of merit. We describe the superconducting film using Keldysh-Usadel equation Here ǧ is the quasiclassical Green's function (GF) in the 8×8 space consisting of Keldysh, Nambu and spin indices, D is the diffusion coefficient and Ǐ = D(ǧ • ∂ x ǧ) is the matrix current in the x-direction. For single-time variables it reduces to a product The commutator is [X , • Y ] = X • Y -Y • X, and the time-derivative acts as The value of the superconducting order parameter ∆ is determined from the self-consistency equation We assume the weak-coupling limit, so that the coupling constant λ and the high-energy cutoff Ω D can be eliminated in favor of the transition temperature T c0 in the absence of pair-breaking effects. Elastic spin relaxation in the ladder approximation is determined by the spin-orbit scattering self-energy ( The differential equation ( • ǧ]. The boundary condition determines the interfacial matrix current. To demonstrate how the spin pumping arises in this formalism, we now derive an expression for the energyintegrated spin current generated at the interface. The Fourier transform of the Keldysh part of the matrix current is where mω ≡ dtτ 3 σm(t)e -iωt . Fourier convention for double-time functions is We extract the quasiclassical part of the energyintegrated current by imposing an energy cutoff Λ satisfying ∆ 0 , T c0 , Ω Λ E F , so that In terms of a matrix n(ω) = The last term appears from energy shifts about the cutoff, where g K ε,ε-ω ≈ 2 sgn(ε)τ 3 δ(ω) does not depend on the state of the system. Transforming to the time domain and extracting the spin-dependent part, we find the boundary condition for the spin current Here the spin current and the quasiclassical part of the spin accumulation are defined as respectively, with an implicit high-energy cutoff. Above, the center-of-mass time-coordinate t is the Fourier transform of the frequency Ω = ε 1 -ε 2 and ε = (ε 1 + ε 2 )/2 as in Eq. ( Consider a normal metal (N) in contact with FI with time-dependent magnetization m(t). In the normal state Eq. ( Spin diffusion equation in the normal metal, obtained from the Keldysh part of Eq. ( where τ -1 s is the spin relaxation rate in the normal state. In the normal-state we can use the energy-integrated Eq. ( From the diffusion equation ( and the boundary condition mixes the harmonics. Here the wavevector is κ = √ 1 + iωτ s /λ s with the spin diffusion length λ s = √ Dτ s . We assume the FI magnetization m has a circularly polarized alternating component m ⊥ (t) = Re[m Ω (x + iy)e iΩt ], with m * Ω = m Ω . It drives the alternating spin accumulation where .. denotes the time averaging. We assume the FI magnetization m has a static component m 0 = z and a circularly polarized alternating component m ⊥ (t) = Re[m Ω (x+iy)e iΩt ], with m * Ω = m Ω . Solving Eqs. ( In time-domain, μ s (t) is real, so the negative frequency is given by μ s (x = 0, -Ω) = μ s (x = 0, Ω) * . At the second order in m ⊥ (t), the static spin current at the interface is given by the boundary condition In the low-frequency limit ωτ s 1 we can put κ = λ -1 s so that combining Eqs. (29-30) we get the constant spin current in the conventional form Here the first term is the inverse of pure imaginary spinmixing conductance of the FI interface -2iJ sd /ν while the second term is the usual contribution from the spin relaxation in the spin sink with the effective field h 0 = J sd /d. It corresponds to the Bloch equation with h = h 0 m. Here we have electron paramagnetic resonance at Ω = 2h 0 . The stationary non-equilibrium Keldysh function can be presented in the form where ĝR,A hh are the corrections to the spectral function and ĝa hh is the anomalous part which contains the information about non-equilibrium quasiparticles. The anomalous and spectral parts can be calculated separately. In general, the corrections to GF satisfy the relation coming from the normalization condition where g R/A/a h are the first-order corrections and g R/A/a hh are the second-order corrections. To derive the simplified description in terms of the stationary kinetic equations one can use a parametrization in terms of the spindependent distribution functions This parametrization implies that ĝR 0 ĝa hh + ĝa hh ĝA 0 = 0 and therefore it is not exact. It neglects the contribution ĝR h • fhfh • ĝA h to the second-order correction to the anomalous function, where fh is the first-order correction to the distribution function. However this contribution does not contain large parts determined by the inelastic relaxation. Therefore by comparing the results given by this parametrization Distribution functions satisfy stationary kinetic equations where the spin-relaxation collision integral is given by with spin relaxation time given by τ - ] with spin-singlet g RA s and spin-triplet g RA t parts of the difference ĝRA = ĝR -ĝA . The spectral densities of currents are given by with diffusion coefficients found in In this representation the spin-orbit scattering collision integral ( where T 1 = τ so N ↑ N ↓ /N 2 is the longitudinal spin relaxation time and spin-energy coupling is quantified by the coefficient Note that κ se (ε) = 0 requires the description of the static magnetic proximity effect, i.e., the generation of the spin splitting h 0 in the superconductor. The spindiffusion equation modified by the spin-energy coupling is given by where J sz (ε) and J e (ε) are the spectral densities of the time-independent spin and energy currents. The sources in Eqs. (45a-45b) are determined by the boundary conditions for these currents at the FI/SC interface, generated by the magnetization dynamics. We obtain it from the general boundary conditions (114-115) by leaving only the anomalous part of the sources Tr(σ z [σmτ 3 , • ĝh ] a )(ε) ( The anomalous part of the boundary conditions can be calculated by subtracting the spectral part, i.e., the part independent of the nonequilibrium state of the system, from the full Keldysh component of the currents. We assume the magnetization dynamics given by m(t) = m 0 z + m ⊥ (t) with rotating time-dependent component given by m ⊥ (t) = m Ω (cos(Ωt), sin(Ωt), 0). It can be represented as the sum of left-hand and right-hand components with the same amplitudes m ⊥ (t) = m Ω,l e iΩt (xiy) + m -Ω,r e -iΩt (x + iy) where m Ω,l = m -Ω,r = m Ω /2. This signal can be induced in the standard ferromagnetic resonance setup. The frequency Ω can be tuned by the external magnetic field. The spectral part of the boundary conditions reads With that we obtain the anomalous part Substituting these expressions to e (ε, T ) functions at a given frequency of the driving magnetization are shown in Fig. In this section we develop the perturbation theory which allows for calculating the corrections to spectral and anomalous parts of the GF in FI/SC system to the second order of the time-dependent magnetization. This calculation yields the boundary conditions for spin and energy currents which are the sources for kinetic equations discussed in Sec. I D. Besides that here we consider a general form of the anomalous function and hence can go beyond the approximation used for deriving the kinetic equations. This allows to study the limit of vanishing spin relaxation. Integrating Eq. ( • ǧ} = [ σhτ 3 + ∆τ 1 + Γ + Σso , • ǧ] ( where σk , τk , k = 0, 1, 2, 3 are Pauli matrices. The effective Zeeman field is h = (J sd /d)m. In the presence of both the non-zero spin-splitting field h and spin relaxation we can solve Eq. (50) only numerically. Let us write the iteration scheme for Eq. ( - (51) Zeroth order solution is found in the form ĝ0 (t 1 , t 2 ) = ĝ0 (ε)e iε(t1-t2) , with the Keldysh component ĝK 0 (ε) = g RA n 0 (ε). The spectral components satisfy the stationary equilibrium Eilenberger equation The first-order perturbation solutions g h (12)e iε1t1-iε2t2 and g h (21)e iε2t1-iε1t2 where ε 1 = ε 2 +Ω are determined by Here we also denote Λ = h 0 σ z τ 3 + ∆τ 1 . The second order perturbation yields the stationary correction from g hh (ε)e iε(t1-t2) Here the spin-orbit terms are The linear spin response is diagonal in the circular basis. Provided that there are components h l,Ω , h r,-Ω we can write μ s (Ω) = χ l h l,Ω (x + iy)/h 0 and μ s (-Ω) = χ r h r,-Ω (x -iy)/h 0 . For left-hand field, h Ω = (1, i, 0)h l,Ω /2, the first-order (imaginary-time) Green function solution reads Here g 0 (ε) = 1+σz 2 g + (ε) + 1-σz 2 g -(ε), and The algebraic equations for ω ± , ∆ ± need to be solved numerically. The R, A components are obtained via g R,A h (12) = g h (1 R,A , 2 R,A ) where ε R,A = ε ± iΓ. The spin susceptibility is conveniently obtained via the analytic continuation, where χ l (12) = h0 8h l,Ω tr τ 3 σ r g h where ĝR,A hh are the corrections to the spectral function and ĝa hh is the anomalous part which contains the information about non-equilibrium quasiparticles. The anomalous and spectral parts can be calculated separately from Eq. ( Using the scheme described above we calculate μ sz (Ω, T ), W (Ω, T ) and V (Ω, T ) in the wide range of parameters. The series of calculation results for varying h 0 and τ s are shown in Figs. F. Numerical higher-order calculation in thin-film limit Numerical calculations can be also performed beyond low-order perturbation theory. The Usadel equation in the thin-film limit can be written as where Ω = ∂ t δ(t -t ) + X where X is the operator on the r.h.s. of Eq. ( where sgn is the sign function, defined as the analytic continuation sgn z = sgn Re z of sgn from real axis to complex plane, so it extends to an operator-valued function. For finite matrices, it can be defined via the eigenvalue decomposition X = V diag(λ 1 , . . . , λ n )V -1 as sgn(X) = V diag(sgn Re λ 1 , . . . , sgn Re λ n )V -1 . To deal with the time convolutions, for periodic forces h(t) = h(t + 2πΩ -1 ), we can make a Green function Floquet Ansatz, One can now check that (A Moreover, ( ) m,n (E) = (E + nω)δ m,n , and (h) m,n (E) = dt e -i(n-m)Ωt h(t). We take h = h 0 ẑ + Re[h ac,x e iΩt ]x + Re[h ac,y e iΩt ]ŷ , (68) + ŷ 1 2 (h ac,y δ m,n+1 + h * ac,y δ m,n-1 ) . Hence, Ω → (Ω) m,n (E), and Eq. ( The results are compared with the perturbation calculation of the previous section in Fig. Here we show how to derive the electron-magnon collision integral in the case of a spin-split superconductor. The approach is relatively standard We can quantize time-dependent components of magnetization by introducing the bosonic creation and anni-hilation operators where S 0 is the value of the localized spin, the matrix Θ p, p describes spin-dependent scattering at the surface and b, b † are the magnon field operators at the interface. They are expressed through the operators of the magnon modes in the usual way b(r) = k e ikr √ N F I bk , where N F I is the number of sites in the FI. To calculate the matrix current driven by the electronmagnon interaction The left-and right-handed magnon propagators are D where The dc part of the collision integral ( where the angular brackets .. denote the average by momentum and disorder. Since only the first term in Eq. (99) depends on the distribution of magnons and the collision integral is zero in equilibrium we can write it as Ĵ(ε, Ω) = Ĵr + Ĵl where Here we denote the response functions where are the non-equilibrium parts of magnon Keldysh functions. In the stationary case they can be parametrized by the magnon distribution function δD K r/l (Ω) = D RA r/l (Ω)δf m (Ω). If the non-equilibrium is determined by the temperature difference between superconductor and magnon subsystem, the distribution function reads δf m (Ω) = coth(Ω/2T m ) -coth(Ω/2T ). For small damping α ω k we can write D RA r = 2iδ(ω k -Ω) We can sum by the magnon states to replace D RA r/l with the density of states for magnons as where m M is the magnon mass and Step(x) is a step function, v s = F I /N F I is the volume per spin, D m (Ω) = m 3/2 M |Ω| 1/2 is the magnon density of states. To avoid extra parameters in the model, we have set the magnon gap to vanish, but it can be easily added if needed. Using the symmetry relation D K l (Ω) = D K r (-Ω) we can write the total current where v s = V F I /S 0 N F I is the volume per spin in FI. The correlators in Eqs. (100-101) can be determined by calculating the matrix currents generated by the classical time-dependent exchange field Ĵcl where m r/l,Ω = (m x,Ω ± im y,Ω ) are the right-hand and left-hand polarized components. The expressions for Ĵcl r/l can be found using the quasiclassical equations. Then, to get the magnon-driven current we can replace the classical field amplitudes by the magnon propagators m r,Ω m l,-Ω → v s δD K r /Ω and m l,Ω m r,-Ω → v s δD K l /Ω. Using this general matrix current we can calculate spin and energy currents as j e = ν ∞ -∞ J e dε and j sz = ν ∞ -∞ J sz dε where the spectral densities are As shown in the next section, these currents can be in general expressed through the linear spin susceptibility In the normal state and low-frequency regime we have seen in Sec. I C that νJ sd Imχ l = ΩReA ↑↓ eff . Then taking into account (104) coincides with that derived in H. Spin-energy pumping: general relations For coherent magnetization precession at frequency Ω, boundary conditions for dc spin and energy currents are The currents can be written as where we introduce the linear response functions for the Keldysh GF and where σ± = (σ x ± iσ y )/2. The total energy and spin currents are defined as j e = J e dε and j sz = J sz dε, respectively. They can be written as j sz = νJ sd [χ r (-Ω) -χ l (Ω)]m l,Ω m r,-Ω , (120) j e = νJ sd Ω[χ r (-Ω) -χ l (Ω)]m l,Ω m r,-Ω , where we introduce The total spin and energy currents satisfy the relation Using the relation χ r (-Ω) = χ * l (Ω) we obtain for the currents j sz = 2J sd Imχ l (Ω)m l,Ω m r,-Ω , (125) j e = 2J sd Ω Imχ l (Ω)m l,Ω m r,-Ω . (126) Let us establish the connection between spin current and the Gilbert damping coefficient. From the boundary condition where χ(0) is the nonlinear static spin susceptibility. Spin current can also be parametrized in terms of the damping-like and field-like components as where α is the Gilbert damping coefficient and δΩ is the FMR frequency shift. Comparing the two expressions for the current, the coefficients in (128) can expressed as The last term in the frequency shift drops out when comparing difference in the frequency shift between the superconducting state and the normal state. We find that the energy current can be in general written as For thermal magnons with small temperature bias we can write j sz/e = G ms/me δT , with thermal spin and heat conductances defined as where ν is the density of states and V S the volume. The giant magnon-induced voltage signal in the superconductor can be used to realize a bolometric or calorimetric magnon detector and an optimized device could reach single-magnon sensitivity down to tens of GHz of magnon frequencies. Assuming unit quantum efficiency, i.e., that the main damping mechanism of magnetization dynamics in the junction is provided by the coupling to the quasiparticles in the superconductor, we can then proceed analogously to the description of the thermoelectric read-out of the dissipated spin signal as in the case of thermoelectric detection of electromagnetic radiation, presented in Refs. 72 and 73. In particular, the noise equivalent power NEP can be made of the order of the thermal fluctuation noise due to the heat contacts to the phonons and magnons. The optimum regime is one where the heat conductances G th to both are of the same order of magnitude, in which case the thermal fluctuation noise is given by where ZT i is the intrinsic thermoelectric figure of merit of the junction. For low temperatures and not too large spin polarization P of the superconductor-ferromagnet contact, it is ZT i = P 2 /(1 -P 2 ) given by where τ eff ≈ τ th , the thermal relaxation time in the superconductor. For an Al detector at k B T ∼ 0.2∆, with a superconductor volume of 10 -19 m -3 , we would then obtain N EP ∼ 10 -19 W/ √ Hz and energy resolution enough for single-magnon detection accuracy for magnons with frequency above 200 GHz. On the other hand, with 100 times smaller detector sizes, still within reach of regular sample preparation techniques, the figures of merit could be 10 times smaller, and hence a single-magnon regime could be reached with magnon frequencies above 20 GHz.