Nonlinear heat transfer can be exploited to reveal novel transport phenomena and thus enhance people's ability to manipulate heat flux at will. However, there hasn't been a mature discipline called nonlinear thermotics like its counterpart in optics or acoustics to make a systematic summary of relevant researches. In the current review, we focus on recent progress in an important part of nonlinear heat transfer, i.e., tailoring nonlinear thermal devices and metamaterials under the Fourier's law, especially with temperature-dependent thermal conductivities. We will present the basic designing techniques including solving the equation directly and the transformation theory. Tuning nonlinearity coming from multi-physical effects, and how to calculate effective properties of nonlinear conductive composites using the effective medium theory are also included. Based on these theories, researchers have successfully designed various functional materials and devices such as the thermal diodes, thermal transistors, thermal memory elements, energy-free thermostats, and intelligent thermal materials, and some of them have also been realized in experiments. Further, these phenomenological works can provide a feasible route for the development of nonlinear thermotics. 1 Introduction Nonlinear phenomena are ubiquitous and also very important in our world. A system is nonlinear means the feedback is not proportional to the input variables, which usually can be governed by a or a set of nonlinear differential (or difference) equations, while some simple nonlinear systems just need an expression standing for the nonlinear relationship between input and output variables. A well-known case of nonlinear system is a pendulum, whose dynamics can be linearized under small amplitude approximation Thermodynamics is another important field of physics, as heat implies the energy transport and conversion, which provides the material foundation for human life and so-cial production. However, nonlinear phenomena in heat transfer haven't been systematically summarized as a mature discipline (called nonlinear thermotics) in theory like its optical/acoustical counterpart, and lack already wellestablished practical applications like the fundamental electronic devices which have changed people's life profoundly, although quite a lot efforts have been put into this field. Considering the increasing demand to manipulate heat transfer efficiently from macroscopic building temperature control to chip cooling at the nanoscale, nonlinearity in thermal phenomena needs more attention for the development of nonlinear thermotics in both theory and applications. So, the first question might be what should be the central topic of nonlinear thermotics? In other words, what the nonlinearity means here? Since there are three basic mechanisms for heat transfer, i.e., thermal conduction, thermal convection, and thermal radiation, it's quite difficult to give a comprehensive answer at once. Instead, we could start from heat conduction and the conductive thermal diode (rectifier) as thermal rectification might be the most widely studied nonlinear thermal phenomenon especially in the conduction regime. 1.1 Thermal conduction: The Fourier's law and beyond It's well known that heat conduction is driven by a spatial thermal bias, and usually can be described by the famous Fourier's law in bulk materials, i.e., j = -κ∇T. ( The Fourier's law shows a relationship between the heat flux density vector j on a cross-section and temperature (denoted by T ) gradient in space. The coefficient κ in front of the temperature gradient is the thermal conductivity (conductance). With the law of continuity for heat flux and in the absence of an internal source, the evolution equation of the temperature is Here ρ is the density and C is the specific heat capacity. In steady cases, we can see thermal conductivity is the only material property to influence heat transfer if we don't consider inhomogeneous shapes which could change the surface area through which the heat is flowing. The nonlinearity of the heat conduction equation can come from a temperature-dependent density ρ(T ), specific heat capacity C(T ) and thermal conductivity κ(T ). We should notice that the nonlinearity of the equation is not equal to construct a nonlinear form (between j and ∇T ) of Eq. ( Finally, κ(T ) might be the most used nonlinear property in researches. The specific expression of κ(T ) can have various forms. If we use the nonlinear polarization theory in nonlinear optics as an analogy, then κ should depend on ∇T since the temperature/negative temperature gradient can corresponds to the electric potential/electric field. However, the conductivity of natural nonlinear materials usually shows a direct dependence on temperature, like κ ∝ T n (n is a real number). For example, physical kinetics gives κ ∝ T -1 (the Eucken's law) or κ ∝ T 3 for dielectric materials at high/low temperatures, and κ ∝ √ T for metals at low-temperatures Fourier's law describes the heat conduction as a diffusive process in which the heat carriers (phonons in semiconductors and insulators, or electrons in metals) are able to collide multiple times, and implies an instantaneous response of thermal signals whose speed of propagation is infinite. There are two common types of deviation from Fourier's law: the anomalous heat conduction mainly about size effects, and the non-Fourier conduction with intrinsic wave nature. When the mean free-path of the heat carriers is much smaller than the size of the material, Fourier's law is valid and κ is not extensive as the size increases. However, in low-dimensional micro and nanoscales systems, the size's influence on κ can be significant due to classical (e.g., effusion of highly rarefied gas) or quantum (e.g., tunneling) effects As will be seen below, nonlinear thermal transport like rectification are mainly studied under the Fourier's law (normal conduction) and the anomalous heat conduction. In anomalous heat conduction, an effective thermal conductivity as a function of the size and other shape parameters can be used in the heat equation, and sometimes the temperature-dependent conductivity κ(T ) is also seen as a kind of anomalous conduction. Anyway, a nonlinear heat equation should mainly refer to κ(T ) because other variables in κ can't violate the superposition property although they can bring other effects such as spatial asymmetry. 1.2 From thermal diodes to nonlinear thermal metamaterials A thermal diode or a thermal rectifier is a two-terminal device in which the magnitude of the heat flow should change when reversing the direction of the thermal bias (from the forward mode to the reverse mode). Such a rectification effect can be applied to solar energy collecting, passive cooling for buildings where Q + x and Q - x denote the directional fluxes in the forward and reverse modes respectively. Here the subscript x implies the temperature bias is applied on the x direction, and both Q + x and Q - x can be positive or negative according to their directions. How to calculate Q ± x also can cause some controversy. For a one-dimensional system in which the cross-section area vertical to the x direction is the same everywhere, we can simply use the spatial average heat flux densities j+ x and jx . In particular, if no internal heat source exists, it's obvious that j± x = j ± x due to the continuity of heat flux. In some other cases with a good symmetry about the x axis, the structures can have a varying or graded cross-sectional area S(x) and it's convenient to use the average flux volume Q ± x = L 0 j ± x (x)S(x)dx/L in the calculation of rectification ratio. Here L is the length of the whole system along the x direction. For more general two/three-dimensional cases, it's even not easy to say "applying the thermal bias along the x direction" because the two terminals/ports to which the heat sources are attached can have different cross-section areas and might even be non-parallel. In these cases, the flux flowing out of the system from one terminal might be another choice, which equals to the flux flowing into the system form the other terminal in the absence of internal sources. For simplicity, in the following contents, we prefer the notation j± x used in one-dimensional systems if no extra statement about the structure is needed. Obviously, γ = 1 means no rectification. For a thermal diode, γ is usually smaller than 1, and a greater-than-one γ should be accounted for by a mode pumping heat from the cold source to the hot one driven by external energies. According to the definition, a thermal diode must has an asymmetric relationship between the average directional heat flux density jx and the temperature bias ∆ x T on the two terminals, i.e., jx (∆ x T ) = -jx (-∆ x T ) (at least for a given ∆ x T ). Usually there is no heat flux in the absence of an external thermal bias, then the asymmetry actually prohibits the global linearity. In other words, the jx -∆ x T curve can't be a straight line as a whole in forward and reverse modes. Fig. However, realistic materials can hardly meet the theoretical requirements exactly and a more experimentallyfriendly route could be exploiting nonlinear heat transfer under the phenomenological Fourier's law. Since the ratio jx /∆ x T can be seen as the effective conductivity/conductance, we can directly focus on the temperature-dependent thermal conductivity to design thermal diodes and other devices. Besides rectification, how to realize other functions for controlling heat fluxes inspires the researchers to combine nonlinearity with thermal metamaterials. Thermal metamaterial This review focuses on the recent process on nonlinear thermal (meta)-devices and thermal metamaterials which are able to work when the Fourier's law is still valid and are mainly made of macroscopic temperature-responsive materials. For simplicity, we use the term "nonlinear elements" in the following part to refer to these nonlinear artificial functional materials and devices. These researches can provide a route for the development of nonlinear thermotics, and form an analogue to the nonlinear polarization theory of nonlinear optics in the classical regime, while the works based on microscopic classical/quantum heat carriers might be taken as the counterpart of nonlinear photonics handled totally by quantum theories Solving the nonlinear heat equation analytically for the temperature or heat flux distribution is the most direct way to seek for the condition of a certain thermal phenomenon. This method can also be called the scatteringcancellation method/technique in metamaterials First we continue the discussion on thermal diodes or thermal rectification. Under the Fourier's law for steady states, some experiments more than 40 years ago have shown thermal rectification can be realized in contacting bulk materials with strongly different temperatureresponsive thermal conductivities, such as a quartzgraphite junction and a monocrystalline nonhomogeneous GaAs sample Anyway, until now, such a two-segment heterojunction is still the most used structure due to its simplicity in simulation and analysis. Here T h and T c are the temperatures of the hot and cold sources respectively, and the two segments have the same shape and size as rectangles (which is a default structure condition if there's no other statement in th following paragraphs). We can see a higher γ can be achieved if n 1 n 2 < 0 which means the conductivities of the two materials behave in the opposite directions when the temperature increases. Cases in which the thermal conductivities of the two materials can be expressed as different polynomials of the temperature have also been studied In experiments, To enhance the rectification performance, phase change materials (PCMs) are also introduced since phase change can be seen as an extreme nonlinearity. For example, the maximized γ in Refs. which shows a S-curve, and thus it belongs to the sigmoid functions. It's easy to check that κ h and κ c are the thermal conductivities (far) above and below the transition tempearature T p respectively, and β is a scaling factor to control the quickness of the jump from high conductance to low conductance. The larger β is, the faster the transition happens. A single phase change material can naturally be a thermal switch which can have two different flux-thermal-bias curves (or straight lines) representing the on/off states when the temperatures of the two sources are higher or lower than the transition temperature simultaneously. For thermal diodes, based on the general principle of nonlinearity plus asymmetry, the familiar two-segment structure can be used again, composed of a phase change material (Material A) and another different material (Material B). The effect of the presence of Material B is to guarantee the whole phase change material are in the same phase when T h > T p > T c . Material B can be a non-phase change material (temperature-dependent or temperature-independent) or another phase change material. Anyway, it's better that the two segments have opposite temperature coefficients ∂κ/∂T within the working temperature ranges if we make a simple extension of Eq. ( When the thermal conductivity of Material B is temperature-independent or can approximately be seen as a constant(see Fig. when the thermal conductivity of Material B is √ κ h κ c . In addition, the length ratio of the two materials can also be considered to optimize γ Another mechanism to get a sudden change in thermal conductance is creating moving contact structures. Tso and Chao Although the experimental samples in the works mentioned above are usually in millimeter size, the basic ideas to realize thermal rectification based on the different temperature trends of κ Finally, we want to talk about the relationship between thermal diode/rectification and nonreciprocity which are both related to one-way transport. In wave systems, the counterpart of a thermal diode can be a Faraday isolator Now we turn to another possible characteristic pattern in the flux-bias curve, which is crucial for building thermal transistors and other devices like a logic gate to do Boolean operations and the heat flux across the interface with a temperature jump form T iA on the left to T iB on the right is Here, L i is the length of the middle segment (taken as a constant in their numerical validation), and P is the interface pressure. The coefficients C 1 and C 2 are two close positive numbers. R i ia actually a function of the temperature since P is influenced by the thermal expansion of the materials. For the existence of NDTR, dR i /dT R = (∂R i /∂P )(dP/dT R ) should be positive if T L is fixed, so the materials must shrink when being heated and form a gap and a much smaller P . As a result, the materials should have negative thermal expansion coefficients, for example, the silicon (Si). Material A and Material B can be the same so the structure can be a homojunction. In fact, here the extrinsic ITR is dominant as the Kapitza resistance is mainly a monotonically decreasing function of temperature Besides thermal transistors and thermal logic gates, NDTR can also be utilized to realize thermal bistability and then thermal memory. Bistability means the system can have two stable states under the same input parameters, and this concept can be naturally extended to multistability. In fact, bistability and multistability correspond to the bifurcation theory of nonlinear differential equations, which refers to the change in numbers of stable solutions Here, we take thermal bistability as a broad concept, mainly describing a physical quantity can have two different values for every T within a certain range of temperature, e.g., the previously mentioned κ-T hysteresis loops of SMA and VO 2 . Then the different values usually reflected as the high/low temperature signal at a certain place can also be exploited to build a thermal memory. Thermal memory based on thermal bistability have been first designed by nonlinear lattices The emergency of two stable states usually involves two competing mechanisms with the opposite evolution trends, so the coefficients A 1 and A 2 should have opposite signs. By doing the Kirchhoff transformation, they finally solved out the parameters for all the materials if the two stationary temperatures in Region C and the sources' temperatures (T h > T c ) are given. Also, their conclusion was validated by numerical results shown in Fig. Another nonlinear element based on NDTR and hysteresis is the thermal memristor, the counterpart of the electrical memristor in the thermal domain. In 1971, As an analogy from electric resistance to thermal resis- on the left side and on the right. The reference temperature is T 0 = (T ph + T pc )/2 and the heating period 1/f should the larger than both the time scale of the phase transition along the whole W 0.2 V 1.98 O 2 bar and the relaxation time of heat conduction for the use of steady equation. Their calculations show that it does demonstrate a Lissajoustype flux-thermal-flux curve during a heating/cooling cycle on which NDTR must exist because a monotonic function can't be plotted as a loop (actually, a selfcrossing loop); see the segment with negative slope in Fig. Although the W 0.2 V 1.98 O 2 bar is set to be 10 μm long (less than 0.5 mm as required) and 30 nm wide Usually, maintaining the temperature near a desired target needs to consume a lot of energy, for example, using an air conditioner or a refrigerator. In these scenarios, thermostats which are a temperature sensor and actuator to switch the heating or cooling functions on or off, should be designed carefully to reduce energy consumption. Keeping the temperature invariant is also related to the thermal cloak as it's expected to prohibit the heat flux from flowing into the cloak without external energy input, whether it's designed based on the transformation theory To build a realistic energy-free thermostat, Here is δ a large thermal conductivity value while ε is a small value. In addition, λ = 1 K -1 , which corresponds to β = -1 and β = 1 in Eq. ( In addition, In this section, we turn to another basic method to design nonlinear elements especially the nonlinear thermal metamaterials, i.e., the transformation theory or transforming the nonlinear heat equation. Transformation theory was established and first applied on optics Though transformation theory seems to have tight relationships with general gravity, we have known that the Fourier's law is even incompatible with special relativity due to the infinite propagating speed of thermal signals. In addition, the Fourier's law is not frame-invariant because the movement of media should bring a convective term Here g is the determinant of the matrix g ij composed of the metric tensor's covariant component g ij , and κ ij (T ) is the contravariant components of the nonlinear thermal conductivity tensor κ(T ). Writing such a covariant formulation doesn't bring any extra information as it's a trivial result of the definition of tensors. It's crucial to recall the motivation why the transformation theory is used. In Section 2, we mainly talked about how to solve the heat equation directly to find the suitable thermal conductivity κ for certain thermal phenomena, whether the solution is exact or approximate. It's indeed the few fortunate situations where the inverse problem can be solved analytically, i.e., how to obtain a certain temperature distribution when the coefficients including κ in the Fourier's law are not given? Often the inverse problems can have no analytical or exact solutions so the numerical optimization is needed. The essence of transformation theory is providing an analytical technique to solve some inverse problems. Then the motivation of transformation thermotics can be stated as follows. First, the pre-transformed temperature distribution T (r) with its corresponding material parameters and boundary conditions is given. Then the question is how to achieve the target temperature distribution T (r ) under the same boundary conditions (both r and r are position vectors in E 3 ). The transformation theory can work when T (r) and T (r ) can be linked through a geometric transformation: f : Ω → Ω (Ω, Ω ⊆ E 3 ; see Fig. Here we can see f should be a bijection. We can write down the heat conduction equation in the transformed area Ω with the density ρ , specific heat capacity C and thermal conductivity tensor κ to be determined Although Ω itself can be a curved space, a part of the global Cartesian coordinates {x, y, z} in E 3 can still be used in Eq. ( The most critical point is that, the geometric transformation f must have the same structure (isomorphism) with a coordinate transformation h : Ξ → Ξ with Ξ, Ξ ⊆ R 3 (R 3 is the three-dimensional real coordinate space), so Eq. ( through a trick to use coordinates {x , y , z } instead of {x i , x j , x k } in form and the relationship κ ij J -1 xi J -T jy = κ xy . In addition, J is the Jacobian matrix ∂x i /∂x or ∂x /∂x and satisfies an identity with the metric as √ g = 1/ det J. The isomorphism between f and h also indicates that the often mentioned virtual space and physical space are diffeomorphic [155] as long as f is smooth enough. Comparing Eq. ( All the thermal conductivity tensors are expressed as matrices here to reduce ambiguity in their interaction with the Jacobian matrix, and in the Cartesian coordinate system we don't need to distinguish the covariant and contravariant components. For a more general case when the pre-transformed parameters takes ρ(T, r)C(T, r) and κ(T, r), we can easily check that the conclusions above is still valid. In addition, heat flux is transformed as It may be argued that T (r ) can also satisfies another heat equation if multiplying all coefficients (ρ C and κ ) by a constant. However, it can be proved that only Eq. ( using polar coordinates (r, θ), and Ω is the region 0 < r < R 2 excluding the pole "0". The larger region Ω 0 also doesn't contain the pole and Ω 0 \Ω is the "background". The heat sources or other boundary conditions are usually applied on the boundary Ω 0 \0. At the interface (Ω\0) of the transformed region and background in Fig. Here we can see the transformation rules in Eq. ( The usual geometric transformations are all temperatureindependent which can induce passive functions like cloaking, concentrating and rotating, and the corresponding devices always exhibit the same function no matter how the ambient temperature changes [171] has another criterion for nonlinearity, meaning the transformed position vector r has a nonlinear relationship with the pretransformed r, i.e., f (r 1 + r 2 ) = f (r 1 ) + f (r 2 ). We can see the transformation for a cloak in Eq. ( Now the problem is how to make a passive metamaterial more intelligent, for example, let it behave as a thermal cloak at high temperatures but lose this ability at low temperatures. Here, the logistic function (recall Eq. ( T p , the transformed thermal conductivity tends to the conventional value for the function of cloaking. However, when the temperature is lower than T p , the transformed thermal conductivity would be close to the pretransformed one. The simulation results for the Type-A cloak in the steady regime are shown in Fig. Based on the structures of Type-A and Type-B cloaks, they further fabricated a macroscopic thermal diode In the transient regime, Li et al. [166] designed a switchable concentrator using the same technique to incorporate a switching or phase-change factor into the geometric transformation Eq. ( The three devices above all have a linear pretransformed thermal conductivity. As we have mention before, Sklan and Li also designed a thermal cloakconcentrator but in a nonlinear background This transformation means shifting the direction of the heat flux by an angle θ thus the unit cell is called a thermal shifter. The combination of shifters with different angle parameters can realize various basic manipulation of heat flux, such as a shield (cloak), a concentrator, a diffuser (splitting the flux into two directions), and a rotator; see Fig. Under the transition temperature T p , the unit cell is isotropic and no transformation happens, while the heat flow is turned an angle above T p . These tunable unit cells are fabricated using layered structures of stainless steel and phase change nanocomposites which are made of carbon nanotubes and copper powder embedded into n-octadecane. The PCMs here can melt or freeze and thus behave as the switch providing high or low thermal conductivities. Using a 4 × 4 modular structure (16 unit cells) they successfully built a switchable thermal shield (cloak), and used it for thermal management in printed circuit boards as it can insulate the heat or improve heat dissipation when put on different positions surrounded by different environment temperatures Nonlinearity in heat conduction discussed in the previous sections mainly comes from the temperature-responsive thermal conductivity. If we don't consider nonlinear density or nonlinear specific heat capacity in the transient regime, new mechanisms to introduce nonlinearity in heat transport should ask multiphysics effects for help. Actually, we have talked about some works based on thermomechanics in Sections 2-3. The word "multiphysics" here can be used to refer to multiple modes of heat transfer like conduction-radiation or convection process, and a thermal filed coupled with other physical fields like elasticity. The methods that solves or transforms the multiphysics equations will be included as long as heat conduction is governed by the Fourier's law. Here σ is the Stefan's constant, ε is the emissivity, h is the heat transfer coefficient, A is the surface area of heat flow, T env is the environment temperature of ambient fluids, and T sur is the temperature of radiating surroundings. The radiative term brings a nonlinearity since it includes T 4 . However, it might need more detailed designs to realize nonlinear elements under such a regime. Ordnez-Miranda et al. [188] designed a bipolar transistorlike thermal device using PCM VO 2 . The three parallel components of the device includes a collector (temperature T 1 ), an emitter (temperature T 2 ), and the base (temperature T ; made of VO 2 ) between them; see Fig. The conductive effect of the intracavity gas is absorbed in G = (h + κ/L) -1 , taking ∇ z T = (-1) n (T n -T )/L. The effective emissivity ε e (T ) = (1/ε 0 + 1/ε(T ) -1) -1 is temperature-responsive due to the similar property of ε(T ) for VO 2 , while the emissivity ε 0 for the surface of the collector/emitter is temperature-independent. where T e = 4 (T 4 1 + T 4 2 ) /2 and ε e (T ) = dε e (T )/dT . It is easy to see that α can be maximized when the denominator approaches zero. For a bipolar transistor, the base temperature T is modulated by the applied flux φ 3 , and the solution T p (more than one value) for a zero denominator in Eq. ( Here n is the refractive index, and β is the Rosseland mean opacity. Rosseland diffusion approximation has been widely used for studying the thermal transport properties in high-temperature environments, such as the mantle in Earth and other planets The relationship κ rad ∝ T 3 between radiative conductivity and temperature can also be obtained directly from Stefan-Boltzmann law The last basic mechanism of heat transfer we haven't talked about carefully is convection since the Newton's law of cooling mentioned above can be seen as an application of Fourier's law in the normal direction of the solid-liquid surface. Convection actually includes the heat transfer driven by both the movement of media (advection) and spatially varying temperature (conduction).The heat equation for convection or advection-conduction is the same thing as Fourier's law in a sense. Replacing ∂ ∂t in Eq. ( Here u is the velocity of media. If u, ρ and C are functions without an explicit variable of the temperature, the advection-conduction equation is still linear and the solution of temperature satisfies the superposition property. However, the local constitutive relationship of heat flux density doesn't show a linear response to the temperature gradient anymore, i.e., Here, for simplicity, the reference temperature of the environment T env is neglected for all (T -T env ) above. More specifically, the constitutive relationship of heat flux density along the x axis is j x = -κ∇ x T + ρC p T u x since we only reverse the temperature bias in this direction. When the conductive flux is much larger than the advective one, there should be no rectification. In the opposite case when advection dominates the heat transfer (meaning large Prandtl numbers Pr), isotherms of the temperature will be squeezed at the heat (T h ) or cold (T c ) source when exchanging two heat sources, which forms quasiuniform temperature distributions and thus gives a rectification ratio γ estimated as (T h + T c )/T h . This estimation comes from the trick that the heat flux density is uniform in a quasi-one-dimensional channel without intrinsic heat sources. If we write back the environment temperature, the rectification ratio can be expressed more precisely as The key point here is u x is invariant in the forward and backward modes, and changing the speed of media (or Pr) can tune the rectification ratio in a certain range. So, this can be an example of making a thermal diode in a linear system or with temperature-independent materials. Another possible technique to realize rectification under linear conduction is using asymmetric thermal conductivity tensor Recently, some works found convection's influence on temperature distribution can be mimicked through spatiotemporal modulation of the thermal conductivity and density (or specific heat capacity) for wave-like temperature profiles [219] realized a similar structure called horizontal planar liquid-vapor thermal diode. The planar here is flatter than the previous axial chamber, so the vapor from the hotter bottom in the forward mode can arrive and condensate at the upper side (a colder plate), and thus transfer more heat. They got a high rectification ratio close to 1. From Refs. [218, 219], we can see phase changes can also be introduced in convective systems to design nonlinear elements, such as vaporation/condensation Besides the radiation (electromagnetic field) and convection (mass transport), other multi-physical effects can be incorporated into the Fourier's law to behave as or induce nonlinearity. Though some important mechanisms like thermoelectrics where n, A, B and C are phenomenological parameters (n < 1), and L i is the distance between the bars. Eq. ( Since the transformed thermal conductivity is usually inhomogeneous and anisotropic that can't be found in naturally occurring materials, we have seen examples in which multilayered structures made of common materials are used instead Here, we focus on some recent works studying the calculation of effective nonlinear thermal conductivity for different structured composites, particularly, the nonlinearity enhancement phenomenon. We will talk about the extension of three basic models in EMT to nonlinear heat conduction, including the Maxwell Garnett (M&G) theory, the Bruggeman theory, and the Rayleigh method. Because the steady Fourier's law and electrical conduction equation has the same Laplace type (the temperature or electric potential behave as the general potential), the effective medium theory for thermal and electrical conductivities can share similar conclusions in the linear regime. However, the nonlinear electrical conductivity is usually affected by the electric field or the gradient of potential, whereas its thermal counterpart depends on the potential directly. This difference would make the calculation in nonlinear heat conduction quite complicated or even invalid if we directly apply the methods in nonlinear electrical conduction [238]. The Here κ A and κ B (f A and f B ) are respectively the thermal conductivities (area fractions) of Material A and Material B, and there must have f A + f B = 1. In principle, the effective thermal conductivity κ e is defined through the Fourier's law over the whole composite: -κ e ∇ x T = j x . Here we take κ e as a scalar for simplicity and only care about the x-direction component of the spatial average flux j x and temperature gradient ∇ x T , if the thermal bias is put along the x direction. It's well known that the Bruggeman theory is symmetric for where κ A0 , κ B0 are constants and χ A , χ B are the nonlinear coefficients. Here a reference temperature T ref can also be added into thermal conductivities, meaning replacing T by (T -T ref ), which wouldn't change the final results. Then they directly took these expressions of conductivities into Eq. Here κ e0 is the constant or linear part of κ e (T ), and χ e is the effective nonlinear coefficient. In addition, if the higher order terms of temperature could be ignored, a further assumption of weak or perturbative nonlinearity is needed. Now, the problem is well-posed when only one material is nonlinear, and χ e can be calculated through series expansion. For example, when χ B = 0 (denoted as Case I), they got [245] Similarly, the corresponding results for nonlinear coefficients they obtained from the Bruggeman theory are ) We can see the two formulas in Eq. ( The structures above treated with the M&G and Bruggeman theories are disordered as the inclusions are embedded randomly. Due to the mean filed effect, these theories actually demonstrate the discrete dipole approximation representing the interaction between different materials The Rayleigh method was developed specifically to handle this dilemma, and has been used in photonic, phononic, and electric systems If we choose one unit cell (named as the 0-th cell) and establish the polar coordinates (r 0 , θ 0 ) with the pole in its center, the temperature solution in the inclusion (T A 0 ) can be generally expressed using a simple version of the Bessel-Fourier series [250] Similarly, we can also write the general solution in the host (T B 0 ) as [250] Then Rayleigh's inference is based on which factors could influence the solution of T B 0 in the host Here the coordinates (r k , θ k ) are established in the k-th cell with the pole in the center, and the two parts of Eq. ( Then the Rayleigh identity can be obtained from comparing Eq. ( Here β 1 = 3.31248 and it comes from a lattice sum over all unit cells. As the inclusions are circular, here the area fraction f A has a upper limit with π/4 and Eq. ( For electrical conduction with weak nonlinearity, the perturbation method and high-order Rayleigh identities can be developed to find the approximate analytical solution of temperature's high order small quantities [250]. However, this technique isn't suitable for nonlinear heat conduction because the uncertainty of C 00 (or the presence of the reference temperature T ref ) and the direct dependence of temperature in thermal conductivity can make the solving procedure difficult to proceed. Inspired by the truncated series expansion in the M&G and Brugge-man theories [258], 2 , if only Material A is nonlinear, (43a) 2 , if only Material B is nonlinear. (43b) Here the ratio λ = κ A0 /κ B0 is used for simplification, the thermal conductivities of the two materials have the same form as those used in the M&G and Bruggeman theories, and the nonlinear conductivity is still assumed to be much smaller than the linear part. For Eq. ( Gaole Dai, Front. Phys. , (2021) remarks on the above works dealing with the effective conductivities of nonlinear composites. The M&G and Bruggeman theories can describe the mixing effect of composites with random or disordered features. Generally, their equations can be applied to inclusions with other shapes and extended to cases when more than two materials are mixed To summarize, we have presented the recent progress of designing nonlinear thermal devices and metamaterials under the Fourier's law in the current review. The nonlinearity here mainly refers to a temperature-dependent thermal conductivity. We talked about two basic designing methods, i.e., solving the heat equation directly and the transformation thermotics. Also, exploiting the nonlinear phenomena in multiphysics and the effective medium theory for nonlinear conductive composites were included in our discussion. We can see nonlinear heat transport can provide thermal metamaterials and devices with more active and tunable functions just as their counterpart in other domains In particular, radiation, convection and other field effects like thermal expansion can enrich the mechanisms of nonlinear behaviors in addition to modulating the conduction only. Most of the works we have introduced focus on the direct analysis from the equations. How to transform the multiphysics equations, especially the nonlinear coupled ones, is still a problem as we have known some important equations in continuum mechanics are not form-invariant under arbitrary coordinate (geometric) transformations, although transformation theory has been extended to some coupled dual-physics cases such as ther-mal convection in the porous media What's more, the methods of solving or transforming a equation can be regarded as a whole to deal with an inverse problem seeking for suitable physical quantities for a certain thermal phenomenon. Actually, transformation theory has an intrinsic relationship with the famous inverse problem (Calderón's problem) to hide an object in electrical impedance tomography Last but not least, we want to talk about the possible heat waves in nonlinear thermal elements. Tuning the wave nature of heat conduction is often difficult and even controversial Gaole Dai, Front. Phys. , (2021) 