It is generally believed that magnetization measurements on sulfur hydride under high pressure performed in 2015 High-temperature conventional superconductivity has reportedly been found in several hydrogen-rich materials under high pressure in recent years In this paper we focus on magnetic evidence of super-conductivity in hydrides under high pressure. We start by analyzing the claim that the magnetization data for sulfur hydride reported in 2015 Figure However, from the data shown in Fig. Fig. Let us consider for comparison similar data obtained for the superconductor GdBa 2 Cu 3 O 7 in Ref. G 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved ogous behavior to the one shown in Fig. Indeed, we see a similarity in the magnetization data of Fig. It can be seen that a simple Curie law fits the paramagnetic susceptibility data inferred from Fig. One of the surprising features of the YBa2Cu307 high-Tc superconductors is the insensitivity of the transition temperature Tc to the substitution of Y by the trivalent magnetic rare earth ions The sample investigated in this paper (GdBaaCuaCV) is granular with grain diameter probably of order 10-20 /an. The magnetic measurements were done with a vibrating sample magnetometer as described in reference Figure As in the case of YBa2Cu307 As the field is further increased from HTM2 we observe the onset of a regime of strong irreversibilities at a third critical field Hci (~ 300 G at 4.2 K) identified as the first critical field of the grains. It can be seen (Fig. We argue that the explanation proposed by the authors of We then have to ask: is there any other standard superconductor where such a behavior of the magnetic susceptibility below T c is observed? We define 'standard superconductor' theoretically by superconductors described in Tinkham's book Among these superconducting material classes there are the conventional magnetic superconductors (C10) and the ferromagnetic superconductors (U7), that one could consider as prime candidates for exhibiting large paramagnetic susceptibility below T c superposed to a diamagnetic response. One may also consider numerous other classes that exhibit magnetic phases nearby in the phase boundary such as Chevel phases (C9), borocarbides (P3), plutonium compounds (P4), heavy-fermion superconductors (U1), organic compounds (U2), cuprate superconductors (U3, U4), strontium ruthenate (U5), cobalt oxyde hydrate (U8), iron-based superconductors (U10, U11). However, none of these materials exhibit the anomalous behavior of magnetic susceptibility below T c exhibited by sulfur hydride shown in Fig. Regarding theory, Tinkham's book describes the phenomenology of the magnetic behavior of standard type I and type II superconductors expected from London theory and Ginzburg-Landau theory, irrespective of the particular microscopic mechanism giving rise to superconductivity Forgetting for the moment about superconductivity, we know of no magnetic material that would show a behavior of its magnetic susceptibility like the one shown in Fig. The magnetic response of materials originates in orbital magnetism or spin magnetism or a combination of both. Let us recall the known behaviours: 1) Temperature independent paramagnetic susceptibility is seen in metals due to the electron magnetic moment and Fermi statistics. 2) Small temperature independent diamagnetic susceptibility is seen in insulators with atoms with closed shells. 3) Temperature dependent paramagnetic susceptibility originates in localized magnetic moments or in the magnetic moment of itinerant electrons in magnetic met-als, and results in Curie or Curie-Weiss behavior with a Curie-Weiss temperature θ. If θ is positive the material undergoes a transition to a ferromagnetic state at T = θ. If θ is negative the material may undergo a transition to an antiferromagnetic state at a finite temperature. The magnetic susceptibility shown in Fig. Within mean field theory, the critical temperature for onset of ferromagnetic order in a system of magnetic moments interacting through a ferromagnetic coupling J can be written in the form where z is the number of nearest neighbors to a moment and k B is Boltzmann constant. The magnetic susceptibility is given by (Curie-Weiss law) with χ 0 a constant. To describe the behavior shown in Fig. There have been suggestions in the literature that hydrogen or hydrogen-rich compounds under high pressure would undergo a transition to a magnetic phase at low temperatures rather than a superconducting phase Considering now the superconductivity, note that the magnetic field range in Fig. where H is the applied field and M the magnetization. Since each vortex can hold exactly one quantum of flux φ 0 , as the temperature is lowered the number of vortices must increase to accommodate the extra magnetic flux resulting from the induced magnetization (in the range where the sample is in the mixed state). This should cause the diamagnetic response to decrease as the temperature is lowered rather than increase rapidly as indicated by the data in Fig. In summary, we cannot imagine a plausible explanation for the reported linear increase in paramagnetic response as the temperature is lowered within the conventional understanding of magnetism in solids, and the joint increase in paramagnetic and diamagnetic response as the temperature is lowered shown in Fig. We conclude that it is highly likely that the experimental data shown in Fig. Since 2015, superconductivity in high pressure hydrides evidenced by resistance measurements in diamond anvil cells has been reported in the following compounds: SH x up to 203K However, to establish that a material is a superconductor it is essential to show that it exhibits a response to magnetic fields expected for superconductors. Many of the papers cited above limit themselves to consider the effect of magnetic field on resistance. We will discuss that effect at the end of this section. However, concerning the magnetic response to magnetic fields, we have reviewed the existing literature on high pressure superconductivity in hydrides looking for such information and have found only 5 papers, on three different materials, namely: • The magnetization measurements on sulfur hydride • Ac magnetic susceptibility measurements for CSH • Ac magnetic susceptibility measurements for sulfur hydride • Ac magnetic susceptibility measurements for LaH x • Nuclear resonant scattering (NRS) measurements for sulfur hydride Let us consider each of these. As discussed in the previous sections, the magnetization versus magnetic field data given in (Fig. The myth has persisted for the ensuing 5 years until the present. In a recent review paper It should also be noted that the field cooled (FC) data shown in Fig. Reference As pointed out in Ref. Instead, the raw data shown in the insets of the left and middle panels of Fig. As noted in Ref. Reference Kruglov et al. 40 also presented a T c calculation for the phase of LaH 10 and obtained T c ∼ 200 K at 150 GPa, which nificantly lower than reported T c 's at 150 GPa (∼250 K). 26 The r for this discrepancy is not clear, and further, more extended retical efforts would be helpful in understanding how the soft may influence T c in the LaH 10 samples around the dynamic insta pressure range. Representative diffraction patterns of three samples are shown in Fig. Figure In a second four-probe conductivity measurement, we performed the laser heating synthesis, x-ray diffraction, and electrical conductivity in situ on samples in the cryostat on the x-ray beam line. Although these samples were considerably smaller and mixed phase We have attempted to obtain additional information to evaluate the significance of these data by contacting the authors of Ref. Reference Reference The data surveyed above comprise the totality of measurements of the magnetic response of hydrides under high pressure to applied magnetic fields that exist in the scientific literature to date. We argue that they do not provide strong evidence for the existence of superconductivity in these materials, for the variety of reasons discussed above. Most of the 19 papers cited above that report the finding of high temperature superconductivity in hydrides measured the effect of magnetic field on resistance, and found that a large magnetic field lowers the apparent transition temperature. From these measurements they extract values of the upper critical magnetic field H c2 , in the range approximately between 50T and 150T . However, we have pointed out in Refs. To test this hypothesis, we propose that the effect of magnetic field on resistance as a function of the orientation of the magnetic field with respect to the sample should be explored. To our knowledge, all the experiments performed to date that measured resistance applied the magnetic field in the direction perpendicular to the plane of the sample; this plane is defined as perpendicular to the short dimension of the sample, which is parallel to the applied pressure. As shown in Fig. We note that the lattice structures that have been hypothesized for these compounds are isotropic Instead, if the drop of resistance is not due to superconductivity but for example to the action of the magnetic Lorentz force on normal charge carriers giving rise to 'geometrical magnetoresistance' Electrical resistivity in materials that are not superconducting covers a range from about 10 -8 Ωm to 10 20 Ωm, that is, 28 orders of magnitude. For that reason a drop of two or three orders of magnitude in the resistance of a material as a function of temperature or pressure, as typically reported for the hydrides, could be due to many reasons other than superconductivity. It should also be noted that papers in this field almost always show resistance rather than resistivity data due to the difficulty of obtaining reliable information on samples' dimensions. This precludes the possibility of evaluating the significance of the magnitude of the resistivity in these materials. It should also be recalled that throughout the history of superconductivity there have been many reports of 'USO's, "unidentified superconducting objects," based on observations of resistance drops, that were never confirmed To establish that a material is a superconductor it is essential to show that it exhibits the characteristic behavior in external magnetic fields that only superconducting materials do. As we have shown in this paper, such evidence for the hydrides is scant and ambiguous at best. Furthermore it is incomprehensible that such measurements once performed are not repeated in the same or in different labs with the same or higher accuracy to either confirm or rule out the initial conclusions. The 2015 measurements of magnetization in sulfur hydride discussed in this paper required the development of a new high pressure technique, a specially designed miniature nonmagnetic DAC cell made of Cu-Ti alloy that could accomodate a SQUID magnetometer Based on the analysis of the magnetic evidence discussed in this paper, together with the anomalous re-sistance versus temperature behavior in several hydrides discussed in our recent work Examination of the literature in this field suggests the reason for this anomalous state of affairs: the field is entirely driven by theory. Essentially every experimental paper reporting measurements interpreted as superconductivity in a hydride starts with a lengthy exposition of why the conventional BCS-Eliashberg-electron-phonon theory of superconductivity makes the existence of high temperature superconductivity in the material inevitable and unavoidable. Sometimes experimental evidence for superconductivity is only presented towards the end of the paper, almost as an afterthought If BCS-Eliashberg-electron-phonon theory is the correct theory to describe the superconductivity of a large set of materials in nature, the so-called conventional superconductors, such an approach may be justified. How-ever, it should be recalled that historically, conventional BCS-Eliashberg theory coupled with density-functional band structure calculations has not been an effective tool to predict and find new superconductors For the moment, unless or until the high temperature superconductivity of hydrides under pressure is convincingly established through experiments that reproducibly measure the magnetic response expected for superconductors, we suggest that an alternative possibility should be considered: that the high pressure hydrides may in fact not be high temperature superconductors; hence that BCS-Eliashberg theory may not be an effective tool to predict superconducting materials in any of the 32 classes of materials surveyed in 