The estimation of losses in high-temperature superconductors (HTS) is fundamental during the design of superconducting devices since losses can strongly influence the cooling system requirements and operating temperature. Typically, 2D finite element analysis is used to calculate AC losses in HTS, due to the lack of analytical solutions that can accurately represent complex operating conditions such as AC transport current and AC external applied magnetic field in coils. These 2D models are usually a representation of an infinitely long arrangement. Therefore, they cannot be used to analyze end effects and complex 3D configurations. In this publication, we use the T-A homogenization in 3D for the analysis of superconducting coils. This allows simulating complex geometries such as racetrack coils. We show that this approach has lower computation time than the currently available 3D homogenization of the H formulation. The approach is first validated against measurements and 2D axisymmetric solutions. Then, it is used to estimate losses and study the electromagnetic behavior of a racetrack coil. T HE electrical properties of high-temperature supercon- ductors (HTS) have inspired several applications in different fields such as electrical machines Several analytical solutions have been developed to estimate losses in HTS tapes There are two main formulations of Maxwell's equations that are commonly used to model superconductors by using finite elements method (FEM). The first one is based on the magnetic field strength (H) and has already been used to C.R. Vargas-Llanos and F. Grilli are with the Institute for Technical Physics (ITEP) of the Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (KIT), 76131 Karlsruhe, Germany (e-mail: francesco.grilli@kit.edu). study numerous applications Most of the FEM-based models used to study superconducting devices are 2D. They usually represent the cross-section of an infinite long or axisymmetric arrangements. Therefore, the end effects are not considered. Moreover, the current 3D models require high computation times to simulate single coils in commercially available computers In this work, we use the 3D T-A homogenization and show its effectiveness in simulating 3D objects like HTS racetrack coils. The 3-D homogenized T-A formulation was first proposed by Huang et al. In this section we first present a small review of the T-A formulation and homogenization to set the basis that allows us to extend these concepts to 3D. Then, the 3D T-A homogenization is explained and its implementation in circular and rectangular geometries/sections is presented. The first applications of the T-A formulation to study superconducting devices by using FEM were introduced in This formulation of Maxwell's equations couples the current vector potential T and magnetic vector potential A, which are defined by the current density J and magnetic flux density B: arXiv:2103.06590v2 [cond-mat.supr-con] 26 Mar 2021 Fig. The magnetic vector potential is computed in all the domains under study by using Maxwell-Ampere's law (μ is the relative permeability of the material): The current vector potential is calculated only in the superconducting domain by using Maxwell-Faraday's law: The resistivity of the superconducting material is typically modeled with a power-law E-J relation An approximation is done by considering that the superconducting layer in the tapes under study (for instance rare-earth barium copper oxide/REBCO tapes) has a very large width-tothickness ratio. Therefore, we can collapse the thickness of the tape (δ) as shown in figure We can obtain the required boundary conditions at the edges of the tape/layer by integrating the current: As it can be seen in figure The homogenization technique assumes that the superconducting tapes that are wound in coils can be represented by an anisotropic bulk that is able to reproduce the overall electromagnetic behavior of the coil The procedure is summarized in figure In principle, the homogenization makes use of Maxwell's equations in the same way as the 3D T-A formulation. Therefore, we keep the thin strip approximation of the tape that allows reducing the current vector potential into a scalar quantity. This means that even if the tapes are replaced by a homogeneous bulk, the current can only flow in the plane parallel to the original superconducting sheets. For example, in the zoom presented in the bottom left corner of figure  and express equation (1) as: The magnetic vector potential is calculated in all the domains and we solve the current vector potential only in the superconducting domain by using Maxwell-Faraday's law: where n can be easily determined in the T-A formulation because it is the vector perpendicular to the superconducting sheet. Therefore, it is usually defined by default in commercial software like COMSOL Multiphysics. However, once the stack of tapes is replaced, it is not easy to define n inside the bulk. We have no longer a reference surface from which we can define the normal vector. A similar issue can be found in the 2D T-A homogenization when complex (rotated or curved) cross-sections are modeled in 2D. this reason, we followed the geometrical path of the tape before homogenization to define the vector. If the tape is parallel to the y -z plane then: If the tape is wound in a circular shape with the center in the origin, then n will be parallel to the radial vector in cylindrical coordinates ρ: The normal vector can also be defined by domains to represent more complex geometries as the one shown in the right corner of figure Finally, we have to establish the boundary conditions to solve our problem. The homogenized bulk represents a densely packed group of HTS sheets. Each one of these sheets should transport the same current as its original counterpart The first analyzed case with the 3D T-A homogenization is the circular coils presented in The coils under study have an internal radius of 30 mm, external radius 33.9 mm and 24 turns. They are wound with a 4 mm REBCO tape that has a 1 μm superconducting layer. The critical current of the tape at 77 K and self-field is 128 A. More information about the coils and measurements can be found in Since the resistivity of the superconductor is several orders of magnitude lower than the resistivity of other materials in the tape, we model the HTS tape in 2D by considering only the superconducting layer surrounded by a homogeneous medium with a resistivity of 1 Ω m and vacuum permeability. This approximation is valid for low-frequency applications like the transport losses of the circular coils under analysis The critical current density dependence on the magnetic field magnitude and direction is modeled as: We analyze first the behavior of one single coil. Then, we simulated groups of two, three and four coils stacked one on top of the other with AC transport current (f = 36 Hz) and without an external magnetic field. Figure Figure Since the modeling technique was already validated in the previous section with 2D axisymmetric models, we can proceed to analyze more complicated geometries that can not be investigated in 2D. In this section, we study the racetrack coil presented in The dimensions of the coil under study are summarized in table I. This coil is wound with a 4 mm tape with a critical current of 160 A at self-field. We assume in this section the same parameters presented in The critical current density dependence on the magnetic field magnitude and direction was modeled by using the parallel (B ) and perpendicular (B ⊥ ) components of the magnetic flux density Figure The main advantage of this new 3D modeling technique is a significant reduction in computation time. Table V. CONCLUSION A 3D T-A homogenization modeling technique was used to study the behavior of superconducting coils. The modeling approach was applied to the circular coils described in 