10 MeV proton-irradiation effects on a YBCO-based test structure were analyzed by measuring its current-voltage (IV) characteristics for different cumulated fluences. For fluences of up to ∼ 80•10 9 p/cm 2 no changes in the electrical behavior of the device were observed, while for a fluence of ∼ 300•10 9 p/cm 2 it becomes less conducting. A detailed analysis of the room temperature IV characteristics based on the γ power exponent parameter [γ = dLn(I)/dLn(V )] allowed us to reveal the main conduction mechanisms as well as to establish the equivalent circuit model of the device. The changes produced in the electrical behavior, in accordance with Monte Carlo TRIM simulations, suggest that the main effect induced by protons is the displacement of oxygen atoms within the YBCO lattice, particularly from oxygen-rich to oxygen-poor areas, where they become trapped. There are many applications where it is of vital importance to have reliable non-volatile memories (NVM) that withstand the harsh conditions the environment impose. This is the case in spaceborne applications, where the use of radiation tolerant, thermal cycling resistant memories is essential to keep critical information uncorrupted, both for navigation and operation purposes As Flash memories are very sensitive to both Single Event Effects and cumulative effects like Total Ionizing Dose (TID) or Displacement Damage (DD) The general conclusions on their functionality under irradiation indicate that metal-oxidemetal structures withstand large doses of ionizing radiation while maintaining operation, within a reliability margin. For example, Barnaby et al. Although being mostly known for its superconducting properties at T ≤ T c (≃ 90 K), YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7-δ (YBCO) has been widely used to study their resistive switching properties at room temperature for ReRAM memory applications Additionally, YBCO-based memories were successfully used onboard a small satellite orbiting at a Low Earth Orbit (LEO) over a period of more than one year In this article, we analyze the effects of 10 MeV protons on the current-voltage (IV) characteristics of a Au-YBCO based ReRAM memory device. No changes were detected for fluences of up to 80•10 9 p/cm 2 , while for 295•10 9 p/cm 2 the device under test (DUT) became less conducting. A detailed analysis of the electrical conduction mechanisms through this interface enabled us to model an equivalent schematic circuit and, more importantly, to infer the microscopic effects produced by the irradiation with protons. Monte Carlo Transport of Ion in Matter (TRIM) simulations confirm our interpretation of the data, which indicates that protons mainly knock-on oxygen atoms out of the YBCO structure transferring them from the oxygen-rich zones to oxygen-poor ones. YBCO thin films were grown by using the pulsed laser deposition (PLD) technique. Fully relaxed films were obtained on top of a 500 μm thick (100) single crystal SrTiO 3 substrate. A 150 nm YBCO thick layer was deposited by applying 1500 pulses with a growth rate of 0.1 nm/pulse, as determined by previous calibrations The DUT was built by sputtering 30 nm of T-shaped Pt and Au metal contacts (∼ 1.5 mm width and 2.0 mm long) on top of the surface of the film, arranged in a planar structure. A schematic representation of the DUT is depicted in Fig. Initially, the DUT was prepared in such a way to induce the resistive switching (reset) of the Au-YBCO ("-") interface from a low resistance state (LRS) to a high resistance state (HRS), so as to highlight its non-linear behavior. This condition makes it more sensitive to the microscopic changes that could occur due to irradiation than it would be if it behaves as an ohmic and more conducting interface. By using a B2902B Agilent source-measurement unit (SMU), we applied a series of 10 ms resetting positive current pulses (20 mA to 50 mA) at room temperature to increase the resistance of the Au-YBCO interface. The process is depicted in Fig. Fig. The PF conduction is a bulk mechanism associated with the existence of traps in the YBCO oxide. Electric field and/or thermal fluctuations de-trap carriers, promoting them to the conduction bands and allowing the existence of a current in the dielectric material To analyze the effects of the 10 MeV proton irradiation To measure the IV characteristics of the DUT, LS-01 was configured to apply 100 ms current pulses while measuring the corresponding voltage drop, performing a complete loop from 0→-1.2 mA→1.2 mA→0 mA in steps of 15 μA. For clarity, considering that no rectifying behavior was observed and that similar results were obtained independently of the applied polarity, only data of the first positive quadrant are presented here. LS-01 with the DUT was placed inside the vacuum chamber of the irradiation line (see Fig. To gain insight into the effects produced by protons on the Au-YBCO stack, we performed Kinetic Monte Carlo simulations by using TRIM, a set of tools included in the SRIM 2013 (Stopping and Range of Ions in Matter) package Only 0.02 % of their initial energy is lost during transport. Having used an YBCO layer ten times as thick as the actual one allowed us to collect ten times more data without affecting the underlying physics of the process. The result is equivalent to perform a simulation with 10 million protons, a quantity that is unpractical to use with TRIM code. Second, in order to assess additional damage produced by the high density cascades of displaced ions, the obtained PKAs spectrum was used to perform a second simulation (run 2) to estimate the damage of the full cascade. changes were noticed in the electrical characteristics, no changes in the memory operating parameters (e.g., V set , V reset or the resistance change in the RHSL) nor in its performance should be expected. This is a promising result, as it shows how tolerant the devices are to one of the most abundant ionizing sources in LEO. A straight comparison with operational conditions in outer space is a complex task. Proton fluence depends on orbital parameters and solar activity as well as on the spacecraft or satellite shielding. For instance, according to SRIM simulations, 10 MeV protons are likely to be stopped by a 2 mm thick aluminum shield. Although protons with energy less than 20 MeV will not reach the interior of the spacecraft, high energy protons would pass through the shield inducing radiation damage into the spacecraft electronics. Nevertheless, to make a comparison with our results, simulations using the Space Environment Information System tool with where R ± 0 is a pre-factor associated with the geometry of the conducting path, the electronic drift mobility (μ) and the density of states in the conduction band. E ± T rap is the trap energy level, k B the Boltzmann constant, q the electron charge, ǫ ′± the real part of the dielectric constant of the oxide and d ± the interfacial thickness where most of the voltage drops (for each interface ±). By replacing the expressions of Eq. 2 and Eq. 3 in Eq. 1 and by equating the total current of each interface, the implicit and non-linear Eq. 1 was solved numerically by applying a generalized reduced gradient method. The purpose of this was to obtain the parameters A ± , B ± and R ± p for the pristine and the most irradiated DUT. Different starting values for these parameters were tested allowing us to obtain the solution with the lower residuals. We have checked that the obtained parameters for this solution (within a 10 % interval) also generate the lower residuals when fitting the data of the negative quadrant (not presented here). Our best results comparing the experimental and the calculated IV characteristics and their corresponding γ representation are shown in Fig. The best fits of the IV characteristics excellently reproduce the details of the experimental data. It can be observed that for the pristine sample, leak resistors make an important Both insets show the experimental and the fitted γ vs V 1/2 dependence. TABLE II: Fitting parameters derived from numerically solving Eq. 1 for the pristine and the proton irradiated (295•10 9 p/cm 2 ) DUT. The ratio of the irradiated over the pristine values is also presented. State contribution to the total current at low and intermediate voltages, while proton irradiation decreases this contribution. As in a series configuration the overall non-linear behavior is determined by the less conducting PF element, the observed change in the slope of the γ curve (∼ B for a single PF emission) is related to the poorest conduction of the PF -element at low voltages (with B -> B + ). In contrast, the roles are interchanged at higher voltages, determining a γ limited by the PF + element, with a lower slope for this voltage region. This effect is less pronounced for the irradiated DUT. The peak observed in the experimental γ was not reproduced by our simulations, as we obtain a smooth cross-over from one regime to another. The experimental peak can be related to a more complex equivalent circuit that may include a small contribution of a Fowler-Nordheim element The results obtained for Monte Carlo TRIM simulations are presented in Fig. The results of the Full Cascade of run 2, presented in Fig. In this way, both our IV measurements and TRIM simulations indicate that protons mainly produce the knock-on of oxygens, displacing them from their structural site. As this generation of point defects would be more likely in the near optimally oxygenated YBCO, where oxygen is principally located, the areas presenting the ohmic conduction would be more affected, in accordance to the changes produced by proton irradiation on the fitting parameters (see the ratios presented in Table This situation is schematically represented in Fig. Thus, our studies confirm which is the specific damage caused on YBCO by its irradiation with 10 MeV protons. This question was addressed in previous studies that tried to unveil which were the main defects generated by protons of this energy range on YBCO, but were not conclusive. A previous report These results give a clue regarding the strategy to follow in order to achieve memories hardened to proton irrradiation. Indeed, it would be expected that interfaces based on a YBCO with poor oxygen content would be less damaged by protons, thus allowing to extend the maximum fluence for which no changes in their electrical properties are detected. We have characterized the effects of proton irradiation (10 MeV) on the IV characteristics of a metal-YBCO thin film test structure at room temperature. Up to fluences as high as 81•10 9 p/cm 2 no effects were observed, giving a clear indication that ReRAM-type memories based on perovskite oxides seem to be suitable for use under hostile environments with high proton radiation. An equivalent circuit model was proposed, which reproduces very well the details of the experimental IV characteristics and indicates the degree of inhomogeneity of the oxygen distribution within YBCO, near the interfaces. We also performed a deep analysis of the microscopic effects produced for a higher fluence of 295•10 9 p/cm 2 , which, in accordance with Monte Carlo TRIM simulations, determine an scenario where protons increase the overall resistance of the DUT, mainly by inducing oxygen migration from oxygen-rich areas (ohmic conduction) to oxygen-poor areas (PF emission), where it ends up being trapped, locally modifying the electrical transport. Although our YBCO-based test structure is far from being a real memory device, our studies may serve as an initial proof of concept for validating the use of perovskite oxides to build ReRAM devices for a particular use. Indeed, our results indicate that, in the quest for materials intended to optimize the operation of electronic memories in harsh environments, low-oxygen-content YBCO could occupy a prominent place in the design of memories whose main requirement is to remain operational under high irradiation fluence of protons.