We studied experimentally the effect of grain size and maximum load on the compaction and subsequent relaxation of a granular column when it is subjected to vertical uniaxial compression. The experiments were performed using two different types of grains: 1) solid glass beads, and 2) porous beads that consist of agglomerates of glass powder. We found that the compression force increases non-linearly with time, with sudden drops for the case of glass beads and periodic undulations for dust particles. Whereas the grain size effect is small in the average force load, the fluctuations become larger as the grain size increases. On the other hand, the relaxation process is well described by the Maxwell model with three different relaxation time scales. The relaxation process of a granular material after being continuously compressed is not totally well understood. This is reflected for instance in the undesirable sinking of airports and highways Acccording to Ref. For the case of hierarchical granular matter In this paper, we extend our previous research For experiments with glass beads (density ρ = 2.5 g/cc), we used particles (supplied by AS-ONE Corp) of five different representative sizes D g : 0.1 mm (0.105-0.125 mm), 0.4 mm (0.350-0.500 mm), 0.6 mm (0.500-0.710 mm), 0.8 mm (0.710-0.990 mm) and 2 mm (1.500-2.500 mm). For experiments with dust particles, we first produced the dust agglomerates as follows: powder composed of tiny glass beads of 5 μm in diameter was poured into a rotating drum and sprayed with water, the rotation process induced the formation of quasi-spherical powder aggregates of different sizes due to the cohesion induced by liquid bridges. The resulting particles were left to dry at ambient temperature (after that, the aggregates have strength keeping their shapes because molecular water always exists as long as we perform the experiments under the atmospheric pressure environment, and at the same time, van der Waals forces can contribute to the cohesion in micrometric scale). Finally, the agglomerates were carefully sieved to separate them by size in four ranges of diameters: D d < 0.6 mm, 0.6-1.4 mm, 1.4-2 mm and 2-4 mm. The porous dust particles resulting from the above process had in average a grain packing fraction φ grain d ≈ 0.30. Figure Figure It can also be noticed in Fig. Figure The results of F vs z for the compression of dust particles until reaching a maximum force load of 20 N are shown in Fig. For the case of glass beads, figs. 2a(inset) and 3b show log-linear plots of F vs t for different values of D g and F max , respectively. Since the piston stroke is z = vt, the observed linear behavior suggests an exponential growth of the form F ∝ exp(z/z g ), where z g is a fitting parameter, in agreement with previous results found using different compression rates. This dependence is discussed in detail in Ref. What is considerably modified by the grain size is the magnitude of the abrupt force drops. From the data plotted in fig. The instantaneous drop of F(t) from F max at t = 0 in figs. 2a and 3c (color lines) suggests that F decreases exponentially during the relaxation of glass beads. The Maxwell model has been used to describe the stress relaxation in polymers, polymer matrix composites and soft materials By performing compression-relaxation tests on granular columns composed of glass beads or dust aggregates, we show that the measured force load increases nonlinearly with time, with abrupt drops or periodic undulations, respectively. In both cases, the mean value of F(z) is largely unaffected by the grain size, in the studied range, but the amplitude of the fluctuations increases with the grain diameter. This suggests that the force drops for glass beads are associated to particles rearrangements and stick-slip motion, whereas periodic undulations of the force load for porous dust particles are associated to their deformability and fragility. On the other hand, the Maxwell model with three exponential terms describes reasonably well the relaxation process in both scenarios. Financial support: JSPS KAKENHI Grant No. 18H03679.