Generalizing prior work of P. W The origin of the Josephson-Anderson relation lies in the work of Josephson on tunneling of Cooper pairs through normal-superconductor metal junctions and, in particular, his AC effect where u = ∇θ/m is the superfluid velocity. A special significance holds for this relation because topological phase-defects exist in superfluids as discrete vortex lines with circulation quantized in units of h/m A superfluid would be expected to flow without any applied chemical potential gradient (or pressure-gradient, for the incompressible isothermal limit), but Anderson showed that a drop in chemical potential would occur if there were a time-average flux of quantized vortices across the streamlines of the potential superfluid flow A significant extension of these ideas was obtained subsequently by Huggins That classical fluids should satisfy a similar relation was already understood by Anderson, who devoted Appendix B of his 1966 article to deriving an analogous result for classical hydrodynamics Unrecognized by Anderson and the rest of the superfluid community, however, there were already important applications of closely related ideas in classical hydrodynamics. A very early foreshadowing was work on turbulent pipe flow by Taylor In this paper we present a new application of the classical Josephson-Anderson relation to flow past a finite, solid body and to the problem of the origin of drag. This is in some ways a much more illuminating application of the relation, although it requires some significant modification of the analysis both of Huggins and of Lighthill. In fact, Lighthill in his paper We begin with a very brief review of the essential ideas in the theories of Huggins Although we shall be principally concerned with simple fluids described by the incompressible Navier-Stokes equation at constant density ρ, the ideas of Huggins apply to an extended system of equations with additional accelerations, due to forces both conservative -∇U for a potential U and non-conservative g with ∇×g = 0, written in the form: where p = P/ρ is kinematic pressure and ν = η/ρ is kinematic viscosity. For example, U could be a gravitational or electrostatic potential and g could arise from the stress of a polymer additive. Huggins in terms of an anti-symmetric tensor and a generalized enthalpy or total pressure (static pressure plus dynamic pressure) The meaning of the tensor Σ is discovered by taking the curl of equation (II.1) to obtain the analogue of the Helmholtz equation for conservation of vorticity with Σ ij representing the flux of the jth component of vorticity in the ith coordinate direction. For this reason, we shall refer to Σ as the Huggins vorticity-flux tensor. The various terms in Eq.(II.3) have transparent physical meanings, with the first representing advective transport, the second transport by vortex-stretching/tilting, the third term in parentheses viscous transport and the final term a flux by the Magnus effect transverse to the applied force. The rewriting of the momentum conservation equation in the form (II.2) is the classical Josephson-Anderson relation in its simplest version. It implies, for example, that for a steady solution or for a suitable timeaverage • (average over a period for an oscillatory solution or long-time ergodic average for a chaotic solution) the mean gradients of h and the mean vorticity fluxes are exactly related by Thus, a mean gradient of h must always be associated to a transverse vorticity flux, and vice versa. Furthermore, Huggins and the complementary field u ω = uu φ which represents the velocity due to vorticity. It then easily follows that u φ and u ω are orthogonal (II.9) which is the essence of Kelvin's theorem. Using this orthogonality, Huggins was able to derive equations for energies in the potential flow and Here the line integrals are along streamlines of the potential flow and dJ = ρu φ •dA is the element of mass flux with h = h + φ, which implies an instantaneous equality between energy transfer rate and work done by the total pressure field h . Note that energy dissipation due to viscosity and other non-potential forces removes energy only from the rotational motions. See Appendix A for a brief, self-contained derivation of Huggins' result. The velocity decomposition introduced by Huggins is very natural for superfluids, where u φ represents the ground-state superfluid velocity and u ω the (incompressible) vortical excitations such as vortex rings. As we shall see in Section III B, Lighthill which is now called the Lighthill vorticity source. In fact, Lighthill wrote his source explicitly for a flat wall only, and the general formula above for a curved wall was first proposed by Lyman (II.15) Here we have included the term ∂ t u, which is non-zero if the wall is accelerating tangential to itself, that was first introduced by Morton In this section we present the derivation of the new Josephson-Anderson relation for flow around a body, which requires extended mathematical discussion. However, a reader who is most interested in concrete applications can skip directly to section IV where flow around a sphere is considered in detail as an illustrative example. We consider the flow around a finite solid body B with smooth boundary ∂B, held at rest, in an incompressible fluid that is filling the region Ω = R 3 \B and moving at constant velocity V = Vx upstream of the body and at far distances from it. See Figure with the boundary conditions Note that in Eq.(III.1) we have written the Navier-Stokes equation as a local conservation law for linear momentum, with the total stress tensor (in dyadic notation) where S = 1 2 [(∇u) + (∇u) ] is the strain-rate tensor. We shall assume here that the Navier-Stokes solutions are smooth for all times. For comparison, we shall also consider the potentialflow solution of the incompressible Euler equation with u φ = ∇φ given by a velocity potential φ which satisfies the boundary conditions Standard theory of potential flow implies that there is a unique, smooth solution with potential φ satisfying the Laplace equation φ = 0 for b.c. (III.5) and with kinematic pressure given by the Bernoulli equation Here the pressure p φ has been assumed for convenience to equal the constant value -1 2 V 2 at infinity. This potential flow is, of course, the subject of the famous D'Alembert paradox has vanishing drag, or V•F φ = 0. Note in Eq.(III.7) and hereafter that n denotes the normal at the surface ∂B pointing from the solid body into the fluid. Following the approach of Huggins (III.8) Although the Navier-Stokes velocity field is thereby decomposed as u = ∇φ + ∇×ψ ω into gradient and curl parts, this is not the familiar Helmholtz decomposition. Recall that the Helmholtz decomposition for a piecewise smooth vector field v which is zero inside B and smooth in the external flow domain Ω takes the form: See As already noted by Lighthill, "there is only a restricted class of vorticity distributions that correspond to real flows satisfying also the no-slip condition" The velocity field (III.10) is not, however, the only one that yields the vorticity distribution ω = ∇×u. As also noted by Lighthill, "for any given solenoidal distribution of vorticity ω outside the body (whose motion is again prescribed), one and only one solenoidal velocity field exists, tending to zero at infinity and with zero normal velocity relative to the surface" as a consequence of (III.2),(III.5). The Helmholtz decomposition for this velocity field u ω yields the representation (III.12) and likewise the Euler solution u φ is given by which is an alternative representation of the potential flow as u φ = ∇×ψ φ in terms of a vector potential. The quantities n×u ω , n×u φ in the integral representations (III.12),(III.13) have a simple physical interpretation as singular vorticity sheets on the surface ∂B, equal and opposite to each other. This observation allows us to identify the fields u ω , u φ introduced by Huggins We take here, however, a very different point of view. Since the Euler flow u φ satisfying the b.c. (III.5) is unique and easily computed, either analytically or numerically, we shall instead use the definitions (III.8) to introduce a new formulation of incompressible Navier-Stokes which we call the potential/vortical formulation. This can be easily obtained by taking the difference of the Navier-Stokes and Euler equations to obtain an equation of motion for u ω , of the form (III.14) This must be solved with the b.c. and also the pressure p ω chosen to enforce the incompressibility condition ∇•u ω = 0. From the obtained u ω , the Navier-Stokes solution can then be reconstructed as The equation (III.14) can be regarded as expressing the local conservation of the integral P ω = ρ Ω u ω dV, which we shall call the vortex momentum. Of course, other equivalent forms of equation (III.14) can be derived. For example, substituting ∂ t u φ = ∇ φ and using vector calculus identities yields where in the second line the Bernoulli equation (III.6) was invoked. This version of the potential/vortical formulation is more physically intuitive in terms of vortex dynamics and shall be our main tool in this work. However, this version contains expressions such as u×ω which are hard to give rigorous meaning when Re → ∞, and thus the conservation form (III.14) is preferred in considering the infinite Reynolds-number limit. As should be clear from the review in section II, the detailed Josephson-Anderson relation involves as well the conservation of vorticity and kinetic energy. The equation expressing local conservation of vorticity can be obtained in the potential/vortical formulation by taking the curl of (III.17). It has the same form as (II.5) with the vorticity-flux tensor Σ as given in (II.3) with g ≡ 0. This is, of course, just the usual Helmholtz equation. The equation for the local conservation of the kinetic energy of the rotational flow can be obtained by dotting u ω into (III.17), which yields Note that the u φ •(ν∇×ω) term is needed on the righthand side of (III.18) so that νu×ω will appear in the square bracket on the lefthand side. Otherwise, the term inside the square bracket would be νu ω ×ω, whose normal component does not vanish on the surface ∂B of the object. Since the expression in the square bracket is a spatial energy flux, it should imply a vanishing flux through the surface. A corresponding equation can be obtained also for the interaction energy of potential and vortical flow, by dotting u φ into (III.17): The equal and opposite terms on the righthand sides of Eqs.(III.18),(III. Importantly, this combination of energies is conserved for ν → 0, as long as solutions remain smooth in the limit. For this reason, we shall refer to the combined quantity as the total kinetic energy. Of course, this is not literally true, because the kinetic energy of the potential flow 1 2 ρ|u φ | 2 is missing. However, the latter energy is separately conserved by the Euler equation (III.4) for u φ , so that this contribution can be neglected when considering the total energy balance involving the rotational motions. The detailed Josephson-Anderson relation for confined channel flow that was considered in section II involves the global balances of kinetic energy, not the local ones. Before we can derive the analogue of that relation for our problem, we must consider vorticity generation at the body surface and the precise far-field asymptotics of the rotational velocity field. In order to make certain that our problem is physically meaningful, we must consider an issue neglected until now, namely, the acceleration of the body from rest to constant velocity. Here it is more natural to consider the body as moving and the fluid as at rest at infinity. This relative motion can be accomplished by a translational acceleration protocol a(t) which over some time interval 0 ≤ t ≤ T takes the body from zero velocity to velocity V, including the possibility of an impulsive acceleration a(t) = Vδ(t) with T = 0. The Lighthill vorticity source for this situation is of the form where it is assumed that a(t) ≡ 0 for t > T. It follows that vorticity is created only tangential to the body surface and, after the time T, is generated along the surface isobars or pressure isolines This result is known as Föppl's theorem The first term involving the spatially uniform acceleration a(t) easily vanishes due to the elementary result (III.24) The term involving the pressure gradient can be rewritten as With the previous results in hand, we now develop asymptotic formulas for the velocities u ω (x, t) and u φ (x, t) in the far-field, or for large r = |x|. We begin with the rotational velocity field u ω . Here we follow closely an argument of Cantwell for a different problem of forced jets so that u ω = ∇×ψ ω . As in where we have introduced the total vorticity including the contribution from the surface vortex sheet, and also the corresponding vortex impulse (III.30) We first note that q ω (t) ≡ 0 so that the "monopole" term in Eq.(III.28) is zero. The volume integral in the definition (III.29) of q ω vanishes by the results of the previous section III C. Furthermore, by the boundary condition for u ω on ∂B, ∂B n×u ω (x, t) dA = - We thus obtain by a curl of (III.28) the final result which is a dipole field. Quite intuitively, the vortical wake behind the body appears at very large distances like a vortex ring with impulse I ω (t). The formula (III.32) can be simply rewritten in spherical coordinates for polar angle θ measured from the positive x-axis, as: with I ω = -I ω x. The sign here can be simply understood because the vortical wake behind the body must reduce the velocity of the potential flow. Alternatively, in the fluid rest frame, the vortical impulse must be in the direction of motion of the body. Asymptotics of the potential flow velocity can be similarly obtained from u φ = ∇×ψ φ where This velocity to leading order is the constant Vx plus a dipole term similar to Eq.(III.32), but involving the vortex impulse I φ (t) associated to the surface discontinuity. However, in what follows we shall only need the leading term, so that or equivalently in terms of the scalar potential (III.36) Using the asymptotic formulas of the preceding section we can now study the global integrals of momentum and kinetic energy for our flow. The total vortex momentum is defined by With the dipole asymptotics (III.32) for the integrand, this integral is convergent but only conditionally so. Note that the vortex momentum is not equal to density times vortex impulse. In fact, it is well-known that This can be shown by an argument of Cantwell x R for a sphere S R of radius R > r . In the Appendix B we give another proof. Total kinetic energy of the vortical wake is clearly welldefined by the integral because the square of the dipole field decays ∼ 1/r 6 . However, the total interaction energy is again at most conditionally convergent and, if convergent, might be expected to vanish! As we recall, the Kelvin minimum energy theorem is exactly the statement that the potential and vortical velocity fields are orthogonal and, in his discussion of a moving body, Lighthill appealed to this result (see The proof is simple: using u ω •u φ = ∇•(φu ω ), we obtain where B R is the ball of radius R centered at the origin so that ∂B R = S R . Note that the contribution from the body surface ∂B vanishes because n•u ω = 0 there. Using the asymptotics Eq.(III.33),(III.36) for u ω and φ, gives the integral over solid angle dΩ = sin θ dθ dφ We conclude finally that the total energy in the body frame is given by a result that should be expected by Galilean invariance. This conclusion will appear very familiar to superfluid physicists, since a similar result holds for a vortex ring moving in unbounded space We can now derive the balance equations for the global integrals in section III E by integrating the local balance equations over Ω. Integrating Eq.(III.14) gives the global momentum balance as where is the total force applied to the fluid by the body. Note that all contributions from infinity are vanishing because the momentum-flux ∼ r -3 from the asymptotics (III.33),(III.35). This force can be rewritten also as since the viscous Newtonian stress vector at the wall τ w = -2ηSn is related to the wall vorticity ω w by τ w = ηω w ×n where the asymptotics of the energy-flux ∼ r -3 implies no contribution from infinity and the no-flow-through condition implies no contribution from the body surface. On the other hand, directly differentiating expression (III.43) for interaction energy and using the global momentum balance (III.45) gives [61], Although F must fluctuate in time, the dot-product above will generally be negative, as the force applied by the body opposes the fluid flow. Thus, drag appears as loss of energy of the potential flow, due to negative work by the body on the fluid. Note that E int (t) is monotonically decreasing, but the energy E int (t) + E φ does not decrease, of course, because there is an infinite reservoir of kinetic energy in the potential flow. The energy is transferred to the vortical flow, as can be seen by integrating Eq.(III.18) in like fashion over Ω to give (III.50) The energy transferred to the rotational fluid motions is ultimately dissipated by viscosity. The combination of (III.48),(III.49) yields the most fundamental result of our paper, the classical version of the detailed Josephson-Anderson relation for flow past a solid body, written in various equivalent forms as where the second two expressions follow the notations in section II. The relation (III.51) expresses an instantaneous balance between power injected by the drag force F acting back on the fluid and the vorticity flux crossing the mass current along potential flow lines. This should be compared with the detailed Josephson-Anderson relation (II.13) derived by Huggins, which expresses an instantaneous equality between the rate of work done on the ideal potential flow by the total pressure h and the vorticity flux across the mass current, which thereby transfers that energy to vortical motions, exactly as here. Although the momentum of the vortical motions is constantly increasing, Eq.(III.50) makes it plausible that the rotational flow energy should have a long-time steadystate limit, sufficiently long after the initial acceleration of the body when the potential flow solution u φ becomes time-independent. In fact, it is generally expected that the entire flow within any fixed distance of the body, after a sufficiently long time that depends upon the distance, shall reach a steady-state whose character depends upon the Reynolds number, with a deterministic stationary flow at low Reynolds numbers, then periodic flow, and finally a chaotic flow with a long-time ergodic behavior at sufficiently high Reynolds number. Of course, there may be multiple distinct stable regimes, each attracting some domain of initial conditions. We shall refer to these hypothesized quasi-steady regimes in some vicinity of the body as the local steady-states. At any finite time, however, one can observe at some far distance downstream a time-dependent flow with increasing momentum. Denoting the suitable time-average for such a local steady regime as • and assuming that total vortical energy does in fact achieve a long-time mean value, we can then average (III.50) and (III.51) to obtain a steady-state version of the Josephson-Anderson relation as where Ω ⊂ Ω has here been chosen large enough so that the space-integrals over Ω and Ω agree to any desired precision [62], denoted by " . =", and then time-averages are taken over a long enough interval to obtain a steadystate within the region Ω . The relation (III.52) expresses equality in the mean of three distinct quantities: the power input by the drag force, the energy transfer from potential to rotational motions by vortex motion, and the viscous energy dissipation. The third expression is clearly non-negative, expressing the time-irreversibility of the viscous Navier-Stokes dynamics. It follows that the drag force must generally oppose the freestream velocity, just as expected. The middle expression in (III.52) involves the vector quantity which is sometimes called the vortex force, and, intuitively, drag is associated to the vortex force opposing the potential flow. An even more useful expression is implying also that ∂ j Σ ij = 0. Together, the two relations (III.54), (III.55) very strongly constrain the vortex dynamics and statistics that contribute to the mean drag. The detailed relation (III.51) holds, of course, even before a local steady regime is achieved (but after the period of initial acceleration). One simple, general deduction can be made from this principle, by substituting the equation of motion (III.17) into the energy transfer term to obtain [63] with h = p + 1 2 |u| 2 + φ as in (II.13). By applying the same arguments as those used to evaluate Ω u φ •u ω dV in section III E, (III.57) The consequence is that given as an integral along each streamline and representing the drop in the total pressure along this entire line. It seems certain that ∆h ≤ 0, since the presence of the body should cause a pressure drop and a reduced streamwise velocity in its wake. The conclusion from (III.58) is that ∆h = 0 along all of these lines, so that the total pressure recovers completely from whatever drop it experienced by the presence of the body. This result underlines the great difference from channel flow, where the detailed Josephson-Anderson relation (II.13) derived by Huggins involves only the total press head in the channel. To make the preceding discussion more concrete, we consider in this section the special case of flow past a sphere. The rich phenomenology of this flow has been the subject of a recent review We give here the general relation (III.51) a concrete form for flow around a sphere of radius a. The first important ingredient of that relation is the inviscid flow solution u φ . This is well-known ( FIG. 2) whose streamlines are plotted in Figure Here we follow the fluid mechanics literature in denoting σ = y 2 + z 2 to avoid confusion with mass density ρ. Note that streamlines are uniquely identified by the values of stream function ψ and azimuthal angle φ. Although not needed for the Josephson-Anderson relation, it is worth recalling that the pressure p φ for the ideal Euler solution u φ follows from the Bernoulli equation (III.6) as a 3 r 3 cos(2θ) (IV.5) and, in particular, on the surface of the sphere: This ideal pressure distribution is perfectly symmetrical, with maximum value equal to p ∞ + 1 2 V 2 , the stagnation pressure, at θ = 0, π and minimum p ∞ - 1 16 V 2 at θ = π/2. This symmetry of p φ around θ = π/2 explains, of course, the vanishing drag for ideal flow past a sphere. We can now use the above results to develop a more concrete expression for the Josephson-Anderson relation (III.51) in the flow around a sphere. First, it is useful to recall that the Stokes stream function is defined for any axisymmetric flow u so that dψ dφ = u•dA along the streamline labelled by ψ, φ, (see It is also straightforward to obtain from (IV.3) an explicit parameterization of the streamlines with fixed ψ in the form x = ±x(σ; ψ) for σ min (ψ) < σ < σ max (ψ) and with azimuthal angle φ constant independent of σ. However, for the qualitative arguments that we make in the next section, the plots of the streamlines in Figure Here we follow a general idea of Huggins in the entire plane normal to N, with Note that j n k = knl (u×ω -ν∇×ω) l lies in the plane. However, only the upper part of this plane corresponds to azimuthal angle φ, whereas the lower part corresponds instead to the half plane with azimuthal angle φ + π and whose normal vector is φ = -N. Thus, only in the upper half plane does ω n = ω φ , whereas in the lower halfplane ω n = -ω φ . We shall see that the conservation laws (IV.8), which hold separately for each plane through the x-axis, are very useful for elucidating the physics. We shall now exploit the Josephson-Anderson relation (III.51) and its time-averaged form (III.54) in order to develop an exact but qualitative picture of the origin of drag in terms of vortex dynamics. Although our picture FIG. has the nature of a "cartoon" which ignores many complex details of the flow in its different regimes (i)-(viii), we argue that it describes the essence of the phenomenon. The concrete predictions that we make should be verifiable empirically in each regime, realized somewhat differently by the specific flow features that are characteristic of that regime which determine the drag quantitatively. An important general deduction from (III.51) is that vorticity ω u φ does not contribute directly to drag, and, furthermore, that vorticity flux in the directions of u φ or ω do not contribute. As can be seen from Fig. The next implication of (III.51) is that outward flux of negative azimuthal vorticity ω φ < 0 increases drag, whereas flux of positive azimuthal vorticity ω φ > 0 in fact decreases drag. Since the mean power consumption by drag can only be positive (see (III.52)), it follows that outward flux of negative azimuthal vorticity must be larger in magnitude. In other words, there must be an asymmetry in sign of the azimuthal vorticity on the sphere, with more area and/or stronger magnitudes where ω φ < 0 and less areas or magnitudes for ω φ > 0. This situation is illustrated by the cartoon in Figure Of course, these conclusions are all in agreement with common observations but it is now seen how they are required for the generation of drag by vortex dynamics. The picture in Figure As the vortex loops grow, they enter the region where u φ ∝ x and then azimuthal vorticity ω φ is no longer the only relevant component. Indeed, referring now to the cylindrical coordinate system, axial vorticity ω σ appears FIG. in this region through the tilting of azimuthal vorticity by the shear in the wake, e.g. as alternating hairpin vortices observed in the shedding regime (iii). It is easy to check that the flux Σ φσ due to opposite azimuthal motion of the two legs of growing hairpin vortices, one with ω σ > 0 and the other with ω σ < 0, contributes also to drag through the relation (III.51) in this spatial region, in addition to the flux Σ σφ of negative azimuthal vorticity axially outward. In fact, these two effects are basically the same because of the anti-symmetry Σ φσ = -Σ σφ and both correspond to growth of the tilted vortex rings, which encompass an increasing amount of mass flux J and gain a proportionate amount of energy from the potential flow. This is the essential mechanism of drag in terms of vortex dynamics for the flow around a sphere as already illustrated in Figure Conservation of azimuthal vorticity has one very important additional implication for this process. We showed at the end of section III F that ∆h = 0 along each streamline of the potential flow. Since now φ = 0, h = h and h( = ±∞) = h ∞ = p ∞ + 1 2 V 2 at each limit of the streamline. Notice that this value is the same as the stagnation pressure at the front of the sphere h F = p F = p ∞ + 1 2 V 2 and also that h B = p B at the base point behind the sphere, since the fluid velocity vanishes everywhere on the surface. We thus see that the decrease of h on the surface S of the sphere is exactly equal and opposite to the increase of h along the streamwise axis X from the base of the sphere to infinity: ∂x on X, it follows that, on average, the net negative azimuthal vorticity generated on the surface of the sphere is exactly cancelled by flux of opposite-signed vorticity across the x-axis. This fact was previously noted by Brown & Roshko In this section we have attempted to give a clear and intuitive description of the origin of drag in terms of a schematic picture of the vortex motions. Although qualitative, this picture makes specific predictions in terms of the signs of the vorticity components ω j and their fluxes Σ ij , which can be checked empirically by measuring these quantities in numerical simulation or experiment and evaluating their contribution to the drag through the relation (III.51). We note that the numerical study The cartoon picture that we presented in the previous section in order to interpret the exact Josphson-Anderson relation (III.51) should be more literally correct for a superfluid, where vorticity is quantized and vortex lines are discrete objects whose motion is objectively defined. In fact, the most fundamental differences between our theoretical results and those for superfluids arise not from the differences between classical and quantum fluids, but instead from the differences between incompressible and compressible. In superfluids there are generally substantial compressibility effects, due to emission of phonons that propagate at the finite speed of sound. Of course, the Josephson-Anderson relation arose in the study of superfluids and its application there to understanding drag and critical velocities is well-established. It is therefore worth reviewing briefly the existing literature in order to point out both the similarities and the differences with classical incompressible fluids. The pioneer work concerning drag acting on bodies moving through a superfluid is that of Frisch et al. Studies of superfluid drag have since been extended to 3D, with the superfluid modeled again by Gross-Pitaevskii and the moving object by a suitable timedependent potential Somewhat ironically, the detailed Josephson-Anderson relation was derived by Huggins To briefly summarize our results in this paper, we have derived the detailed Josephson-Anderson relation (III.51) for incompressible fluid flow around a finite solid body, relating drag and energy dissipation to vorticity flux and implying a time-averaged version (III.52) valid for the local steady-states of the fluid wake. We have furthermore discussed in detail the origins of drag in terms of vortex motion for the concrete example of flow past a sphere, obtaining numerous predictions that can be checked empirically. But why are these results important? We believe first of all that the Josephson-Anderson relation is important because of the theoretical unity that it brings to our understanding of drag for both quantum and classical fluid systems, across all Reynolds number ranges of the latter. The relation clearly identifies what is essential for drag in the vortex dynamics and statistics, bypassing all details of secondary importance. In the classical case, these "details" include fascinating phenomena such as boundary-layer separation, formation of streamwise vortices by tilting, transition to turbulence first in the wake and then in the boundary-layer, etc. All such "details" are, of course, crucial in order to determine the drag quantitatively, but only insofar as they modify the primary process: flux of vorticity across the potential mass flux. The precise vortex dynamics and statistics which contribute to the Josephson-Anderson relation must be explained in any quantitative theory of drag. The relation (III.51) furthermore sheds new insight on the D'Alembert paradox This puzzle is obviously connected with the Onsager theory of turbulence in terms of dissipative weak solutions of the Euler equations and this is a well-defined distribution even if u ω is only square-integrable. Because the potential-flow solution u φ is smooth, this observation allows us to rewrite the transfer term in the Josephson-Anderson relation (III.51) as and, in this form, the relation can be valid even for the limiting weak solutions of Euler equations Granted that the detailed Josephson-Anderson relation (III.51) has important implications, it then becomes interesting to explore the full range of its validity. Although bodies of finite extent are most realistic, it should be illuminating to generalize the relation to more idealized geometries such as flow past cylinders and semi-infinite plates. Validity of the relation for compressible flow would greatly widen the range of applications and we believe that this could be possible, especially for barotropic models where smooth Euler solutions satisfy a Kelvin circulation theorem and potential flow conditions are preserved in time (including the Gross-Pitaevskii model). Finally, there should be a connection with stochastic Lagrangian representation of the vorticity dynamics 