The huge amount of data made available by the massive usage of social media has opened up the unprecedented possibility to carry out a data-driven study of political processes. While particular attention has been paid to phenomena like elite and mass polarization during online debates and echo-chambers formation, the interplay between online partisanship and framing practices, jointly sustaining adversarial dynamics, still remains overlooked. With the present paper, we carry out a socio-semantic analysis of the debate about migration policies observed on the Italian Twittersphere, across the period May-November 2019. As regards the social analysis, our methodology allows us to extract relevant information about the political orientation of the communities of users -hereby called partisan communitieswithout resorting upon any external information. Remarkably, our community detection technique is sensitive enough to clearly highlight the dynamics characterizing the relationship among different political forces.As regards the semantic analysis, our networks of hashtags display a mesoscale structure organized in a core-periphery fashion, across the entire observation period. Taken altogether, our results point at different, yet overlapping, trajectories of conflict played out using migration issues as a backdrop. A first line opposes communities discussing substantively of migration to communities approaching this issue just to fuel hostility against political opponents; within the second line, a mechanism of distancing between partisan communities reflects shifting political alliances within the governmental coalition. Ultimately, our results contribute to shed light on the complexity of the Italian political context characterized by multiple poles of partisan alignment. Over the last two decades, an increasing number of studies have addressed the forms of digital public discourse and its implications for political processes. Particular emphasis has been put on adversarial dynamics taking place online and echoing long-standing concerns on public discourse as a terrain of conflict and not only as the means through which it is expressed With specific reference to this latter strand of analysis, researchers pivoting around the study of political polarization have contributed to uncover the multidimensional, multilayered and variable nature of adversarial dynamics that take place in and through public discourse. More specifically, Looking more closely at the digital context, authors in Situated understandings of reality that underpin and, at the same time, are nurtured by highly clustered networks of relations are found to relevantly affect voting and participation behaviors as well as opinions In this paper, we aim at proposing an analytic framework to advance explorations of adversarial dynamics that take place in the digital space created by social media. In continuity with extant studies, we acknowledge the collective and multiplex nature of these dynamics as we conceive them as the result of entwined social and content-based networked processes animated by a variety of actors, such as citizens, journalists, political leaders, activists and civil society organizations. At the same time, we aim at emphasizing their multidimensionality as homophilic patterns of relations that generate segregated and fragmented community. These online structures do, in fact, evolve over time in connection with major events occurring offline, both in the political arena and in the domain under examination. Investigations of online contentious dynamics pivoting around offline protest events highlight how conversations on social media exert a pre-mediation effect on on-site events. More specifically, several studies provided evidence of the relevance of digital communications for the spurring of offline protests However, this multidimensional relationship is not always linear. For example, in Additionally, we examine networked framing practices occurring within each partisan community by studying the semantic networks they induce via hashtagging practices, which we acknowledge to be powerful framing procedures The starting point of our analysis is represented by tweets that have been publicly posted from 24 April 2019 to 24 November 2019. This period was heated by a set of relevant political events, as the European political elections (26 May 2019) and the Italian governmental crisis (end of August 2019) that ended up breaking the government coalition gathering the Five Stars Movement (Movimento 5 Stelle) with the League party (Lega) but also by a set of contested search-and-rescue operations performed by NGOs such as non-authorized entrance of the Sea Watch-3 boat in the Lampedusa port. A detaleid overview of of the most relevant events characterizing the period under analysis is present in S1 Appendix while in Tweets have been retrieved through the Twitter Streaming API and selected if containing at least one of the following hashtags: #accoglienza ('hospitality'), #apriteiporti ('open the ports'), #chiudiamoiporti ('close the ports'), #immigrazione ('immigration'), #integrazione ('integration'), #migranti ('migrants'), #restiamoumani ('let's stay human'), #rifugiati ('refugees'), #sbarchi ('disembarkation'), #stopinvasione ('stop the invasion'). The hashtags above have been chosen through a daily monitoring of Twitter trending topics having care to include a spectrum of positions in the controversy over migration. A summary of the most relevant hashtags used as anchors for our analysis is present in S2 Appendix. The data acquisition procedure led to a data set of approximately 5 million of tweets, posted by 306.894 users. Hashtags contained in the tweets have then subjected to a pre-processing procedure where any two hashtags have been merged if found to be "similar" according to the Levenshtein (or edit) distance Albeit our analysis seeks to cover the flow of contents and the interactions developed amongst users during the observation period, our work is not meant to provide an exhaustive portrayal of the entire Italian context: ad-hoc publics that assemble around topics, in fact, are not exhausted by communities that form on particular social media platforms -let alone around specific hashtags A bipartite network is an extremely versatile representation of the relationships between two disjoint set of nodes, also called layers, where edges connect only nodes belonging to different sets. In mathematical terms, a bipartite network can be represented by a N ⊤ × N ⊥ matrix M, with N ⊤ being the total number of nodes belonging to the first layer and N ⊥ being the total number of nodes belonging to the second layer. The detection of the partisan communities and of the corresponding semantic networks require two distinct bipartite networks. First, we root the analysis of partisanship on a bipartite network containing two distinct set of Twitter accounts: the former is composed by users who are verified by the platform (to guarantee that these accounts are 'authentic, notable, and active' Each bipartite network belonging to one of the two classes is, then, projected onto the layer of interest to obtain the corresponding monopartite network. Typically, monopartite networks are obtained in a naïve fashion, i.e. by linking any two nodes if the number of their common neighbors is found to be positive: ore quantitatively, given any two nodes α and β, such an algorithm prescribes to quantify the number of common neighbors as and connect them, in the corresponding monopartite projection, if Θ[V * αβ ] = 1, i.e. if V * αβ is strictly positive. Conversely, our analysis follows the approach outlined in where f indicates the probability distribution of the values V αβ under the chosen null model: pairs of nodes are linked if the corresponding p-values are rejected by a multiple hypothesis testing procedure (see S3 Appendix for more details on this). The output of this second procedure is a N ⊥ × N ⊥ adjacency matrix A whose generic entry reads a αβ = 1 if nodes α and β are part of a statistically significant number of V-motifs -and 0 otherwise. The procedure sketched above has been adopted for projecting both onto the layer of verified users and onto that of hashtags. In the scientific literature, other validation procedures have been proposed. Examples of these techniques are provided by the method presented in 3 Results We start looking at networked partisanship by identifying discursive communities of users that assemble around the use of migration-related hashtags Identifying partisan communities. Following the approach of Networked partisanship dynamics are investigated by looking at the monopartite projection of the aforementioned bipartite network on the layer of verified users. Communities are, then, identified through a three-step procedure: 1) communities of verified users are isolated through the Louvain algorithm (see S4 Appendix for more details on this); 2) several non-verified users are assigned to (one of) these communities, according to the highest scoring on a polarization index, quantifying the level of 'embeddedness' within each subgroup (see S5 Appendix and The monopartite projection on the layer of verified users is shown in Fig. More in detail, our procedure leads to identify five different partisan communities, engaged in discussions about migration issues: • Right-wing community (DX) gathering official accounts of right-wing political parties such as Brothers of Italy (Fratelli d'Italia) and the League (i.e., @FratellidItalia, @LegaSalvini), their leaders (i.e., @Gior-giaMeloni, @matteosalvinimi), politicians and journalists working for right-wing national newspapers (e.g. @NicolaPorro); • Center-left wing community (CSX), gathering official accounts of the political parties composing the centerleft alliance such as the Democratic Party and Italy Alive (i.e., Partito Democratico and Italia Viva with their accounts @pdnetwork and @ItaliaViva), their leaders (i.e. @nzingaretti, @matteorenzi), writers and journalists working for left-wing national magazines and newspapers (e.g. @eziomauro, @robertosaviano); • Five Stars Movement community (M5S), gathering accounts related to the Italian populist party named Five Stars Movement and including its leaders (e.g. @luigidimaio, @Roberto_Fico) and institutional accounts (e.g. @M5S_Camera, @M5S_Senato) but also the national newspaper Il Fatto Quotidiano and the journalists working for it (e.g. @fattoquotidiano, @petergomezblog). Notably, the Twitter account of the back-then Italian Prime Minister Giuseppe Conte (suggested by the Movement to overcome the impasse in forming a new government after the 2018 national elections) is included in this community; • Go Italy community (FI), a smaller community gathering the official accounts of prominent members of the Go Italy party (Forza Italia), initiated by Silvio Berlusconi (e.g. @berlusconi, @gabrigiammarco, @forzaitalia); • Media, international governmental and non-governmental organizations community (MINGOs). While not strictly party-related, a fifth community emerges around a variety of verified accounts connected to three main sets of actors: media as weekly national magazines such as L'Espresso (@espressoline), online newspapers like the Italian Huffington Post or Il Post (@huffpostitalia, @ilpost), television shows of investigative journalistic and documentary nature (@reportrai3), journalists covering foreign affairs and migrations (e.g. @martaserafini, @mannocchia); -accounts of non-governmental organizations aimed at defending human rights (e.g. @amnestyitalia) or specialized on migration and international cooperation issues (e.g. @emergency_ong, @ActionAid-Italia), accounts of prominent activists in this domain (such as Regina Catrambon, the initiator of a search-and-rescue NGO called Migrant Offshore Aid Station, and Carola Rackete, the captain of Sea-Watch 3, the ship entering the Italian port of Lampedusa regardless the opposition of the back-then Minister of the Internal Affairs Matteo Salvini); -accounts of international governmental organizations such as the Italian chapters of the UNICEF, the International Organization for Migrations and the United Nations Refugee Agency. In Table Notably, even if the number of users N u is pretty similar, the CSX and the DX communities display opposite behaviors: the average degree of the users within DX is nearly three times the one of the users within CSX -meaning that, on average, a DX user is three times more active than a CSX user; M5S accounts are also quite active, even if less than DX ones Table Partisan community Looking more closely at the type of interactions sustained by networked partisanship, a rather regular pattern seems to emerge. The overall community structure appears to be highly segregated, as the parameter ρ α (see S5 Appendix for more details on this) reveals: in fact, almost the totality of the neighbors of each community members tends to be part of that same community, as already observed in Against this common background, there is nonetheless space for topological variation. A deeper cleavage seems to separate the largest DX and CSX communities from the rest of the discussion, as these two communities show highest levels of segregation ρ α and highly self-referential communicative behaviors μ r . Conversely, the other three communities show a higher tendency to broadcast internally also contents produced elsewhere. Analyzing the rhythm of partisan communities. As shown in Fig. Attention flows within and between partisan communities. In order to trace the attention flows within and between partisan communities, mentions and retweets are detected for all tweets posted by their members and the most mentioned and retweeted accounts are identified. Overall, the list of retweeted users reflects the political affiliation of each partisan community, further confirming the value of this specific interaction feature for the construction of partisan collective identities. However, the results in Table Conversely, mentions are transversely used to interact (also) with members of other communities. Nonetheless, results in Table These findings highlights how social media contribute to polarization processes: while discursive communities coalesce via retweets, they also interact, often in an adversarial way, via direct mentions. In order to complement these findings, in S6 Appendix we quantify the social influence of users via the Hirsch index (or h-index, see Networked partisanship over time. In order to examine the evolution of networked partisanship over time, we partitioned the data set on a monthly scale and defined a set of bipartite networks by considering the retweeting activity of non-verified users across these limited observation periods only. Close inspection of monthly attention flows allows us to grasp the evolution of discursive alliances mostly within (but also across) partisan communities in tight connection with the main events and political dynamics taking place "offline". Two examples well illustrate this point. As shown in Fig. A similar trend can be outlined for the right-wing sector. Albeit sharing seats in the Italian government, the Five Stars Movement and the League party are supported online by two systematically separated partisan communities. At the same time, while not tied to any common government responsibility, the League and the right-wing Brothers of Italy are merged within the same partisan community. While this misalignment speaks to the existence of a fracture within the governmental coalition Let us now study the networked framing of the Italian debate about migration by considering the topological features of the semantic networks induced by each partisan community. For each community, we constructed monthly user-hashtag bipartite networks and projected them on the layer of hashtags, via the procedure described in the Methods section and in S3 Appendix. Consistently with previous studies, we centered our attention on hashtags acknowledging that they "create visibility for a message [. . . ] not only marking context but also changing and adding content to the tweet" Identifying conductive hashtags. In order to identify the most relevant hashtags representing topics-, actors-, eventsrelated slogans or references within the Twitter discussion, we have calculated their betweenness centrality which, in semantic terms, can be considered a proxy for the conductivity of a concept where σ αβ γ is the number of shortest paths between hashtags α and β passing through hashtag γ and σ αβ is the total number of shortest paths between hashtags α and β. Then, the values of betweenness are normalized by the factor (N -1)(N -2)/2 (where N is the number of hashtags within the specific semantic network) in order to compare the values of our centrality measure on networks of different size. The comparison between most conductive hashtags for each community confirms the results on networked partisanship: as Table The hashtags displayed in Table However, the M5S community starts distancing itself from the DX community since the government crisis in August 2019: the relevance of this political event for the M5S is shown by the presence of hashtags that refer to the crisis, as #crisidigoverno ('government crisis') and #governoconte2 ('government Conte 2'). Moreover, as the Five Starts Movements negotiates with the Democratic Party to set up a new governmental coalition, users of the M5S community put an increasing semantic distance between themselves, the League and Matteo Salvini, using hashtags calling him a 'traitor' (as shown by the hashtag #salvinitraditore). The MINGOs community, instead, appears to be semantically focused on the issue of migration and admittedly far from internal political matters. Due to the high presence of NGOs specialized on human rights and migration issues, this community takes a strong pro-migration stance, through hashtags such as #ioaccolgo ('I host') and #inclusione ('inclusiveness'). Similarly, the presence of catholic organizations orients the terms of the discussion around the figure of the Pope who is semantically recalled as a positive figure, opposed to that of Salvini. Semantic networks at the mesoscale: k-core decomposition. In order to gain insight into the mesoscopic organization of semantic networks (i.e. into a less trivial dimension of networked framing), we carried out a k-core decomposition. The so-called k-core individuates a sub-graph whose nodes have a degree whose value is at least k. This kind of analysis partitions a network into shells as the threshold value k varies. In this way, each node can be assigned a 'coreness' score, depending on its level of connectedness with other vertices. Here, we have divided the distribution of k-core values into four quantiles (see S4 Appendix for more details on this), representing the five different regions reported in Fig. K-core decomposition has been shown to provide insightful information about the network structure in several disciplines As shown in Fig. For what concerns the other communities, Fig. A similar configuration of framing practices that also tends to mirror fluid political alliances can be found in other monthly networks. For instance, observing the mesoscale structure of semantic networks in August 2019, it is possible to associate distinct partisanships with opposing framing practices. While there is a transversal tendency to build a connection between migration issues and the governmental crisis, partisan communities are populated by different slogans and keywords, witnessing different ways of reading this connection. On the one side, the innermost core of the CSX-and M5S-induced semantic networks reveals hashtags against Matteo Salvini's decision to start the governmental crisis, as #governodelfallimento, #legatifrega, #salvinitraditore and #salvinidimettiti (respectively, 'government of failure', 'League fools you', 'Salvini liar' and 'Salvini traitor') thus shedding light on the progressive construction of a common ground for the future government alliance between the Democratic Party and the Five Stars Movement; on the opposite side, the DX community shows a strong endorsement for its leader and asks for new elections via hashtags as #iostoconsalvini, #salvininonmollare, #elezionisubito and #vogliamovotare (respectively, 'I stand with Salvini', 'Salvini don't give up', 'elections now' and 'we want to vote'). Interestingly, in response to these positions, the former allies from within the M5S community explicitly denounce Salvini's (alleged) betrayal via the hashtags #legatifrega ('The League fools you') and #salvinitraditore ('Salvini traitor'). Consistently, the core of the MINGOs community does not show any specific hashtags pointing to the governmental crisis. Thus, the innermost k-shell of the semantic network continues to be populated by a set of keywords rather similar to those of the monthly semantic networks of July 2019, such as #corridoiumanitari ('humanitarian corridors') and #papafrancesco ('Pope Francis'). In this paper, we propose a framework to expand current analyses of online adversarial dynamics that grounds in the longitudinal exploration of the two-fold set of social and semantic relations. The application of our framework to the analysis of the Italian debate on migration issues, across the period May-November 2019, provides some interesting insights on the nature of online conflicts between political actors as well as on its multidimensional nature -a conflict to which both elites and citizens contribute by setting up partisan relationships and framing practices that evolve in a fluid fashion. On the one hand, our results confirm those obtained in Our results further shed light on how different social media affordances contribute to adversarial relations between online partisan communities. While these communities coalesce via retweets, they also interact, often in contentious ways, via direct mentions. Importantly, different communities leverage on technological affordances in different ways. Collective identities sustaining communities are, thus, formed in more institutional ways (mainly retweeting messages from parties and their leaders) or, more in line with a substantive criterion, re-broadcasting also messages from accounts that are more meaningfully active on migration issues. Differently, mentions are employed to construct cross-community ties that, on the one hand, soften the segregation induced by partisan endorsement while, nonetheless, often providing a means to channel antagonism. More relevantly, geometries of homophilic and cross-community ties tend to vary over time and in tight connection with relevant events on the ground -whether these are related to the issue of migration per se (as it happens in the case of contested search-and-rescue mission) or are induced by shifting political alliances (as in the case of the governmental crisis at the end of August 2019). Closer exploration of semantic networks helped us to shed light on the more cognitive dimension of online adversarial dynamics. In the Italian case, the issue of migration seems to have provided the backbone against which multiple lines of conflict have overlapped. Along a first line, different partisan communities can be distinguished for how they approach the issue of migration: either substantively -as in the case of the MINGOs community which genuinely focuses on the complex problem of migration, often endorsing a pro-migrant point of view) -or more instrumentally, as in the case of communities shaped around political parties -which in fact leverage on migration to contrast political adversaries. Along a second line of conflict, amongst partisan communities that discuss migration in an instrumental way, networked framing practices seem to follow more closely the fluid evolution of governmental political alliances. Regardless of the changing composition of the government, right-wing and left-wing parties remain on opposite semantic sides. This persisting arrangement mirrors at the level of networked framing practices in two ways: 1) in the case of the DX partisan community, by constructing a semantic bridge between the theme of migration and the reinforcement of internal cohesion around the figure of Matteo Salvini; 2) at the level of cross-community ties between the DX and the CSX groups, in the sustained contrast between two opposite frames on migration -one oriented towards closure (on the right), the other towards openness (on the left). What shifts (and, in fact, remains ambivalent over time) is the framing induced by the M5S community, which appears to be "semantically torn" in between its long-standing difficulty to cope with more extreme positions held by the League and its aversion for established 'big parties' such as the Democratic Party. In this tension, its positioning on migration issues remains vague and, in some sense, ancillary in comparison to a much more prominent interest for discussing political dynamics. Together, these results invite to move beyond consolidated views, often associated to the concept of political polarization, and that map down to dichotomous distinctions between positive/negative or supportive/contrary views with respect to contested issues. As such, they provide a first contribution towards a deeper, and less obvious, understanding of how oppositional and partisan conflict occurs in "non perfectly polarized contexts" where multiple ideological poles are present and often stand in complex inter-relations Above and beyond specifying the social and semantic peculiarities of the considered adversarial debate, our approach innovates the study of online political discussions in two main ways. On the one hand, it grounds semantic analysis within users' behaviors by implementing a method, rooted in statistical theory, that guarantees that our inference of socio-semantic structures is not biased by any unsupported assumption about missing information. On the other hand, our operational approach represents an unsupervised algorithm for detecting partisan communities and semantic networks. In fact, the network approach proposed in this paper provides a method for extracting relevant political information from a Twitter discussion without relying on any pre-existent information on users or media contents. As a consequence, our method is suitable for application to any Twitter discussion. Polarization in Hybrid Media Systems' funded by the Italian Ministry of University and Research within the PRIN 2017 framework (Research Projects of Relevant National Interest for the year 2017; project code: 20175HFEB3). The Italian government crisis ends with the Conte-bis cabinet swearing in. Sep 14 th The rescue vessel Ocean Viking is allowed to disembark 82 rescued migrants in Lampedusa. Oct 26 th The NGOs involved in search-and-rescue operations at sea meet the new Minister of the Internal Affairs Luciana Lamorgese. Nov 1 st After seven days sailing, the rescue vessel Alan Kurdi is allowed to dock in Taranto. common neighbor, defined by the nodes α and β with j belonging to the opposite layer; its value is 1 if nodes α and β share node j as a common neighbor and 0 otherwise. Second, the statistical significance of any two nodes similarity needs to be quantified. To this aim, observations have to be compared against a proper null model that can be defined within the mathematical framework of the so-called Exponential Random Graphs. This framework is based on a very general principle rooted in statistical physics where the sum runs over the set of all possible bipartite graphs with, respectively, N ⊤ nodes on the ⊤ layer and N ⊥ nodes on the ⊥ layer -as the real network system M * . As the entropy-maximization procedure is carried out in a constrained framework, let us define the constraints of the Bipartite Configuration Model (BiCM) with respect to P (M). This leads to: Respectively, 'let them get off', 'I stand with Carola', 'shame on Salvini', 'Salvini is afraid of the parliament', 'Salvini resign' and 'ministry of the organized crime'. These hashtags were used during the Sea-Watch 3 episode by the CSX, M5S and MINGOs communities to either support Matteo Salvini or Carola Rackete (depending on the position about migration). Respectively, 'don't let them get off', 'I stand with Salvini', 'Salvini don't give up' and 'arrest Carola Rackete'. These hashtags were used by the DX community to show support towards the governmental policies on migration promoted by the Minister of the Internal Affairs at the time, i.e. Matteo Salvini, during the Sea-Watch 3 case. Literally, 'illegal immigrants'. A term mostly used by Italian right-and far-wing parties to call migrants who land in the Italian coasts. Literally, 'let's act as a network'. A political slogan used to call for an antifascist grassroots movement dealing with various civic issues and born to counteract the migration policies of Matteo Salvini. #governodelfallimento, #legatifrega, #salvinibugiardo, #salvinitraditore Respectively, 'government of failure', 'League fools you', 'Salvini liar' and 'Salvini traitor'. These hashtags were used by CSX and M5S community to show dissatisfaction towards the behavior of the League and its political leader, leading to the government crisis. The slogan 'government of failure' is a pun linked to the self-proclaimed 'government of change' of the Five Stars Movement and the League. #crisidigoverno, governoconte2 Respectively, 'government crisis' and 'government Conte 2'. These two hashtags were used by M5S community to refer to the political crisis and the newly formed government of the Prime Minister Giuseppe Conte with the support of the Five Stars Movement and the Democratic Party. Respectively, 'elections now' and 'we want to vote'. These hashtags were used by the DX community to show their dissatisfaction towards the agreement between the Five Stars Movement and the Democratic Party to form a new government after the crisis. Respectively, 'human rights', 'inclusion', 'humanitarian corridors', 'I host' and 'world refugee day'. These hashtags were used in the CSX and MINGOs communities to discuss about migration issues as search-and-rescue activities, inclusion and human rights at a national and European level. Literally, 'second security act'. This act represents a revision, proposed by the League party, of Italian migration policies introducing fines for NGOs search-and-rescue activities and stricter rules for requesting the residence permits issued for humanitarian reasons. where x i ≡ e -θi , y α ≡ e -ηα and the quantity p iα ≡ xiyα 1+xiyα is the probability that user i and hashtag α are connected (i.e. that m iα = 1). Links independence under the BiCM implies that 1) the presence of a co-occurrence (i.e. m αj m βi = 1) can be described as the outcome of a Bernoulli trial whose probability reads f Ber (m αj m βi = 1) = p αj p βj and that 2) the term V αβ is the sum of independent Bernoulli trials, each one characterized by a different probability. The behavior of such a random variable is described by the Poisson-Binomial (PB) distribution. Thus, quantifying the statistical significance of the similarity of nodes α and β amounts at computing this procedure is repeated for each pair of nodes, hence obtaining N ⊥ 2 p-values. Third, in order to understand which p-values are significant, a validation procedure for testing simultaneously multiple hypotheses is needed. The choice of the present paper has been directed towards the False Discovery Rate (FDR) a score function measuring the optimality of a given partition, by comparing the empirical pattern of interconnections with the one predicted by a properly-defined benchmark model. In the formula above, a ij is the generic entry of the network adjacency matrix A, the factor kikj 2L is the probability that nodes i and j establish a connection according to the Chung-Lu model, c is the N -dimensional vector encoding the information carried by a given partition (the i-th component, c i , denotes the module to which node i is assigned) and the Kronecker delta δ ci,cj ensures that only the nodes within the same modules provide a positive contribution to the sum. For the present analysis, as already pointed out in Regarding the k-core and the core-periphery decompositions, we briefly describe our approach below. While a proper core-periphery detection can be carried out by adopting the method proposed in An interesting phenomenon that is observed when analysing monthly semantic networks is the co-existence of different types of mesoscopic structures. As pointed out in other works Remarkably, the nodes connecting the thematic clusters act as 'bridges' and represents more general hashtags about migration policies (e.g. #salvini and #libia). In this way, the picture of the list of hashtags with largest betweenness centrality can be further refined upon looking at the innermost k-shells. As an example, let us consider the DX-induced semantic network for the month of July 2019: the keywords playing the role of bridges read #salvini, #capitana (an untranslatable hashtags referring to Carola Rackete as the captain of the rescue vessel Sea Watch 3) and #libia, a signal that these hashtags are included into several discussions within this partisan community. S5 Appendix. Computing the polarization of non-verified users. Once the communities of verified users are detected, the procedure to build partisan communities ends with the 'inclusion', within these communities, of nonverified users. In order to do that, the full retweeting network (with all the Twitter users involved in the discussion throughout the entire observation period) is, now, considered. In this network, the information about the community affiliation of the verified users is preserved via a community label. A measure of the distribution of the community label of the neighbors is, then, assigned to each non-verified user. This measure is called polarization index and determines the balance of the interactions of each non-verified user, in the retweeting network -namely how the portion of interactions of the non-verified users is distributed 'towards' each community of verified users. Let define C c (where c represents the community label) as the set of users belonging to community c with whom the non-verified user α has interacted and N α as the set of neighbors of α with whom he interacted with. The polarization index for each non-verified user α is defined as: where: As shown in After this first step, we have inferred the orientation of the remaining, non-verified users by propagating the tags of each partisan community obtained for the verified users. A label propagation algorithm, as the one proposed in The stability of the results of such an algorithm has been already proven in The aforementioned stability is probably due to several reasons. First, the seeds of the label propagation (i.e., the labels which have fixed values) are themselves extremely stable, as a result of the strict validation procedure. In this sense, the rationale upon which the projection algorithm is based seems to be particularly sound: any two verified users interacting with the same non-verified users are indeed perceived as similar. This interpretation is based on two essential features of the system, i.e. the strong modular structure of the network and the peculiar activity of verified users, much more focused on the production of original messages than on retweeting. Second, due to the adversarial dynamics observed in the present discussion, the label propagation procedure seems not to be sensitive to the topological variation induced by different representations of the retweeting network: indeed, the neighbours of a node are more likely to belong to its community irrespectively of the relative importance of the information carried by the weight. S6 Appendix. Computing the h-index of Twitter users.A useful tool to measure the influence of a given Twitter user, within a discussion, is the well-known Hirsch index (or h-index), widely used to measure the impact of research activity. This index has been also employed for quantifying the ability of Twitter users to produce influential contents via the number of retweets of each of their messages. In S6 Table . List of the first ten verified users with the highest values of h-index (computed by considering the activity throughout the entire observation period). most retweeted and mentioned verified accounts for each partisan community. While retweets are assumed to represent a broadcast action, mentions are indicative of an interactive relationship