Here we present the superconducting property and structural stability of kagome CsV3Sb5 under in-situ high pressures. For the initial SC-I phase, its Tc is quickly enhanced from 3.5 K to 7.6 K and then totally suppressed at P~10 GPa. Further increasing the applied pressures, an SC-II phase emerges at P~15 GPa and persists up to 100 GPa. The Tc rapidly increases to the maximal value of 5.2 K at P=53.6 GPa and rather slowly decreases to 4.7 K at P=100 GPa. A two-dome-like variation of Tc in CsV3Sb5 is concluded here. The Raman measurements demonstrate that weakening of E2g model and strengthening of A1g model occur without phase transition as entering the SC-II phase, which is supported by the results of phonon spectra calculations. Electronic structure calculations reveal that exertion of pressure may bridge the gap of topological surface nontrivial states near EF, i. e. Z2 invariant. Meanwhile, it enlarges Fermi surface significantly, consistent with the increased carrier density. The findings here point out the change of electronic structure and strengthened electron-phonon coupling should be responsible for the pressure-induced reentrant SC. A kagome lattice, composed of atoms at the vertices of a two-dimensional network with the corner-sharing triangles, provides a fascinating playground for exploring and studying the novel frustrated, correlated and topological electronic states of matters recently Recently, a new family of quasi-2D kagome metal AV3Sb5 (A=K, Rb and Cs) has attracted considerable attentions It is known that in-situ pressure tuning is a 'clean' way to tune basic electronic and structural properties without changing the chemical composition, and eventually benefits for elucidating mechanisms of the puzzling state in new superconducting materials In this study, we performed the in-situ high pressure transport measurements on the CsV3Sb5 sample as pressure is up to 100 GPa. Two superconducting domes in the temperature-pressure phase diagram are revealed. Interestingly, in pressure-induced superconducting state, the Tc and crystal structure are rather robust evidenced by the transport measurements, Raman spectra and phonon spectra calculations. Thus, varied electronic structure and possibly enhanced electron-phonon coupling play important roles in inducing reentrant SC. Sample preparation: Single crystals of CsV3Sb5 were grown from Cs (Alfa, 99.98%), V powder (Alfa, 99.9%) and Sb grains (Alfa, 99.999%) using the self-flux growth method similar to the previous reports In-situ high-pressure measurements: High pressure resistivity of CsV3Sb5 single crystals was measured in a physical property measurement system (PPMS, Quantum Design) by using a diamond anvil cell (DAC) at temperatures of 2-300 K. We used the van der Pauw method for electrical transport measurements on the CsV3Sb5 samples. Pe-Cu cells were used for the resistance experiments. The cubic boron nitride (cBN) powders (200 and 300 nm in diameter) were employed as pressure medium and insulating material. The pressure was measured using the ruby fluorescence method at room temperature each time before and after the measurement. In addition, in-situ Raman spectra under high pressure were taken (Horiba, Lab-RAM HR revolution) to characterize their structures. Theoretical calculations: We performed structural optimization and electronic property calculations within framework of the DFT+U by the Vienna ab initio Simulation Package (VASP) code In the inset of Fig. The pressure-dependent Tc and related physical parameters are summarized in Fig. In the normal state, the pressure-dependent key transport parameters are plotted in Fig. Based on the Bloch-Grüneisen model of scattering of electron by longitudinal acoustic vibrations Where ρ0 is residual resistivity, the value of n is typically fixed to be 3, k the cofficient of the cubic term, ΘD the Debye temperature from the resistivity data and B a prefactor depending on the material. We fitted the ρ(T) data above Tc at each P, and obtained the ΘD as shown in Fig. It is instructive to check the structural stability at high pressure, thus we calculated phonon dispersions and projected phonon density of states at P=10 GPa, 20 GPa, 40 GPa, and 60 GPa, see Fig. The heavier Sb atoms dominate the low-frequency branches, while the relatively light V atoms contribute significantly to the high-frequency modes. Cs vibration has a smaller contribution over the whole frequency range due to the negligible chemical bonding with Sb atoms. More interestingly, it is found from Fig. We calculated the electronic band structures at various pressures, as shown in Fig. From Fig. In this work, we have investigated the SC, transport property and structural stability of CsV3Sb5 under high pressure up to 100 GPa. Initial SC phase-I is rapidly suppressed at P~10 GPa, and then a second SC phase-II emerges as P>15 GPa. Interestingly, the SC-II exhibits a dome-like Tc, in which the Tc quickly increases to peak Tc onset of 5.2 K and then slowly decreases to 4.7 K at P=100 GPa. Theoretical calculations and Raman measurements demonstrate that the initial crystal structure can persist in the whole pressure range. Therefore, the reentrant SC should relate to variation of electronic structure and enhanced electron-phonon coupling due to partial phonon softening. The findings here suggest the highly stable SC and structure in such kagome lattice deserves further investigation. 