Until now, the fabrication of electrocatalysts to guarantee long life of fuel cells and low consumption of noble metals remains a major challenge. The electrocatalysts based on metals or metal oxides which are used today are limited by the complexity of their synthesis processes and require several steps before depositing the catalysts on the substrate. Herein is described a chemical synthesis process that consists of a single-step synthesis and direct deposition of catalysts nanoparticles such as gold (Au), palladium (Pd) and platinum (Pt) in the thickness of a carbon-fibers-based porous transport layer (PTL). The synthesis process essentially consists of dissolving in the same PGMEA (Propylene glycol methyl ether acetate) solvent a metal precursor (HAuCl4 or PdNO2 or PtCl4) and a homopolymer PMMA (Polymethylmetacrylate), then the metal solution is deposited on the surface of the PTL after cleaning. Special emphasis is made on Pt-based materials. The obtained PTL-supported nanoparticles were firstly characterized by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) to evaluate their morphology, and then X-Ray diffraction (XRD) to observe the crystal phases. To validate the methodology, Pt-coated PTL materials have been used as anode for the borohydride oxidation reaction (BOR) in a direct borohydride fuel cell (DBFC) and compared to a state-ofthe-art nickel electrode. There is an optimum loading of platinum (below 0.16 mg Pt/cm 2 ) which constitutes the best compromise between power density and faradic efficiency for the borohydride oxidation reaction (BOR). Thanks to this low Pt loading, hydrogen evolved during the anodic reaction is completely valorized. These electrodes combine the advantages of highperformance with a very low metal loading, hence lowering materials'cost. Fuel cells are ranked among the key technologies in 2020 for emerging applications in portable and mobile electronics, where there is an increasing demand for high energy density power supplies. As such, intensive research has been carried out and is still ongoing to overcome technological barriers and commercialize this carbon-neutral technology. Among the different types of fuel cells developed to date, polymer electrolyte fuel cells (PEFCs) exhibit the best performance in terms of power density at relatively low operating temperatures (< 80°C) PEFCs using hydrogen as a fuel have experienced great progress in the last decades, but their commercialization remains limited so far, notably because of the problem of hydrogen storage as well as related safety concerns [2, 3]. Hydrogen must be stored in tanks in compressed or liquefied form (which involves safety issues) or, in hydrogen storage alloys Direct borohydride fuel cells (DBFCs) are recognized as an attractive and promising technology for portable and mobile applications, owing to their high theoretical voltage (1.64 V using O2 as oxidant) and high energy density The demands for suitable electrocatalysts to achieve the best performance in DBFC are still pending. To date, most of the reports have widely used chemical synthesis techniques such as polyol Thus, recent studies tend to indicate that the deposition of catalysts on the surface and in the volume of porous transport layers (PTL, typically gas diffusing layers, GDL), is complex and requires several steps. The colloidal synthesis technique used so far consists of synthesizing the particles first, before depositing them on the support material. Recently, our group proposed innovative routes to synthesize organized Au nanoparticles taking advantage from block copolymer properties and microsegregation [51, 52, 53, 54]. In continuity with these studies a simple and rapid chemical synthesis process is proposed, for which the synthesis and direct deposition of the catalysts on a support material is performed in a single step (Figure The chosen carbon PTL, (Sigracet -SGL -25 AA) with a thickness of 260 μm, does not bear any microporous layer. Pieces of this PTL were cut into rectangles of 1.8 x 3.8 cm 2 , to match the single cell size used for DBFC measurements. Prior depositing the catalysts on the PTL, the pieces were cleaned in a piranha solution (mixture of concentrated sulfuric acid H2SO4 (98%) and hydrogen peroxide H2O2 (30%)). The PTL pieces, once cut, were immersed in the solution during 20 to 30 minutes, then rinsed with distilled water and dried with a stream of air. Besides eliminating all organic residues that could have been present on the surface or in the volume of the PTL, this treatment also improves the hydrophilic properties of the surface, allowing appropriate bounding of the catalysts on the substrate thanks to the presence of numerous hydroxyl groups. The piranha solution being an extremely dangerous solution, its preparation and its use were made under a fume hood in a chemistry room, while respecting all the safety principles required for such a solution. The process for the synthesis of metallic nanoparticles and deposition on a substrate (Figure The process of synthesis of gold nanotriangles consists of dissolving a homopolymer, here PMMA, in a solution with PGMEA as a solvent, then adding gold salts (HAuCl4) to this solution. PMMA acts as a matrix and allows uniform organization of gold nanoparticles on the surface of the substrate. Depending on the mass concentration of the PMMA solution, a high density of nanotriangles and some other minorlyencountered forms (nanosphere, nanopentagon, nanohexagon) of gold particles are observed on the substrate surface. The solution was sampled using a pipette and deposited on the carbon substrate after cleaning by spin-coating; then the samples were annealed at temperatures ≥ 200°C during 1 to 2 hours. After annealing, the surface of the samples was observed (by SEM) (Figure The preparation of Pd nanoparticle electrodes uses the same solvent and polymer as for gold. The salts of palladium (II) nitrate hydrate (PdNO2) were dissolved in a solution of PGMEA containing PMMA, the latter still acting as a matrix. In this process, whatever the mass concentration of the PMMA solution, the particles are of spherical shape. The solution was also sampled and deposited on the carbon as described above, then the substrate was annealed at temperatures ≥ 300°C during 1 to 2 hours. SEM images obtained for these PdNE are represented in Figure -Platinum Nanoparticle Electrodes (PtNE): The preparation of Pt nanoparticle electrodes uses the same solvent and polymer as those for gold. In this case, the salts of platinum chloride (PtCl 4 ) were dissolved in a solution of PGMEA containing PMMA, which acts as a matrix. Whatever the mass concentration of the PMMA solution, spherical-shaped particles are obtained. The solution was sampled and deposited on the carbon substrate as for PdNE, the composite annealed at temperatures ≥ 300°C during 1 to 2 hours, and representative SEM images of the obtained materials were acquired (Figure The synthesized electrodes were characterized using a high resolution FEG scanning electron microscope (SEM) (Hitachi SU8030 Tokyo, Japan) with an acceleration voltage between 5 and 10 keV and a working distance ≤ 10 mm. Crystallographic characterization was performed using X-ray Diffraction (XRD) using a 4-circles Bruker D8 Discover diffractometer equipped with Cu-K source (wavelength 0.154184 nm) and a 2D detector Pilatus-100K from Dectris. The crystallographic structure of the Pt/C electrocatalyst was further characterized by X-ray diffraction (XRD). Measurements were carried out on Bruker D8 Discover equipped with CuK radiation (wavelength: 0.15418 nm, 40 kV, 40 mA), polycapillary optics and a collimator of 1 mm diameter. The detector was a Pilatus 100K (pixel size 172 μm, 195 x 487 pixels) located at 180.5 mm from the specimen. Acquisitions were performed from 35° to 90° in 2 with a step size of 5° between two exposures and an acquisition time of 20s/exposure. The tests at the level of the single cell were carried out using the experimental bench described in Chemical deposition has been used as a synthesis technique to prepare electrocatalysts for heterogeneous catalysis applications, in particular for the anodic reaction (BOR) in DBFCs. After annealing, the morphology of the PTL-supported catalysts was observed using (SEM) (Figure Similar to the preparation of Au/C electrocatalysts, Pd/C and Pt/C electrocatalysts were prepared by depositing Pd and Pt nanoparticles on the surface and in the volume of the carbon substrate. After annealing, the morphology of the PTL-supported catalysts was imaged by SEM (Figure The results obtained for a temperature of 60°C, three platinum loadings (0.16, 0.32 and 0.48 mgPt/cm 2 ) and the nickel electrode described in In summary, a single step chemical synthesis process has been developed for the fabrication and direct deposition of catalysts on the surface and in the volume of porous carbon substrates. The synthesis process simply consists of dissolving in the same solvent (PGMEA) a metal precursor (HAuCl4, or PdNO2 or PtCl4) containing a homopolymer (PMMA), then depositing this solution on the porous carbon fiber substrate. With this methodology, gold nanotriangles (ranging from 30 to 40 nm in size) are obtained depending of the mass concentration of the PMMA solution, while nanospheres are obtained for Pd and Pt ranging from 2 to 7 nm and 2 to 8 nm in size, respectively. The catalysts are uniformly dispersed on the surface and in the volume of the carbon support with a very low extent of aggregation, and present homogeneous size and shape distribution. Platinum-based electrodes were prepared for the anodic reaction in a DBFC. Three platinum loadings (0.16; 0.32; and 0.48 mgPt/cm 2 ) were studied and benchmarked against a state-of-the-art nickel electrode. These platinum-based electrodes demonstrated improved Faradic efficiency, especially with a low platinum loading (0.16 mgPt/cm 2 ) compared to the nickel electrode. An optimum platinum loading was noticed, that is the best compromise between power density and faradic efficiency. These results, demonstrated for the example of DBFC anodes, illustrate that this very simple synthetic process shows promise for the preparation of numerous types of metal catalysts on various supports, which may have potential applications in heterogeneous catalysis and electrocatalysis.