The atomically clean surface of the iron-based superconductor FeTe 0.55 Se 0.45 is investigated by low-temperature STM with different tip apex states. We show that a very sharp tip can enhance the scattering channel between the Γ and X/Y points of the sample's Brillouin zone. Furthermore, by manipulating a single Fe atom onto the tip apex, signatures of the orbital nature of the subsurface Fe layer of FeTe 0.55 Se 0.45 can be identified. By preparing a charged tip state, the intrinsic spatial inhomogeneity of the chemical potential of FeTe 0.55 Se 0.45 can be revealed. As a result, three different types of vortex bound states originating from locally varying topological properties of the FeTe 0.55 Se 0.45 surface are observed by scanning tunneling spectroscopy. During the last decades, a lot of efforts have been devoted to the functionalization of scanning tunneling microscope (STM) probe tips. For instance, to make the tip apex magnetically sensitive, electrochemically etched tips made of bulk magnetic materials like CrO2 Carefully etched Ag Here, we employ three different kinds of special STM tips to study the iron-based superconductor FeTe 0.55 Se 0.45 . First, by making use of a very sharp tip, we have found a significant enhancement of the quasiparticle scattering from the Γ point to the X/Y point compared to a normal tip. Second, by picking up a single Fe atom from the sample surface to the tip apex, we have successfully observed a new type of order on the FeTe 0.55 Se 0.45 surface. We attribute these patterns to the sensitivity of a special tip state to the Fe d-orbital ordering. Third, we can even image the charge or chemical potential distribution of the The STM/STS measurements were performed in ultra-high vacuum (less than 10 -10 mbar) and at a temperature of 1.1 K. A lock-in technique with a bias modulation of 0.03 mV and a frequency of 893 Hz was used to record differential tunneling conductance (dI/dV) spectra. Before recording the spectra, the STM tip has been stabilized with a sample bias voltage V stab and a tunneling current I stab . During the acquisition of dI/dV spectra, the STM feedback loop has been switched off. All the data have been obtained with a bulk Cr tip as a starting point which then has been modified by various in-situ tip treatment procedures as explained in the following. Previous studies showed that the spatial resolution of STM images can significantly be improved by picking up a single atom from a surface onto the STM tip This additional periodicity can even more clearly be identified in the corresponding FFT map of Fig. the Te/Se lattice constant. Furthermore, the atomic Fe lattice is rotated by 45 o relative to the surface Te/Se lattice. Thus, we attribute the newly observed stripe pattern to the Fe lattice below the surface (Fig. A previous study showed that the spin-polarized Yu-Shiba-Rusinov states of individual Fe atoms on the FeTe 0.55 Se 0.45 surface can be revealed by using a bulk Cr tip with an Fe atom at its apex We therefore propose another type of explanation: The stripe pattern we observe might be related with the hybrid Fe d-orbitals probed by the d-orbital of the Fe atom at the tip apex. This interpretation is supported by two experimental facts: 1) The stripe pattern propagates both in the diagonal and the off-diagonal direction of the Te/Se lattice, depending on the particular tip preparation. These findings provide novel microscopic insights into the nature of orbital order in iron-based superconductors In a next series of studies, we were picking up some larger clusters of FeTeSe material from the surface by the STM tip, thereby allowing the imaging of sample specific inhomogeneities on the nanometer scale. This new observation is documented by Figs. 2) The shapes of the bright features are not significantly affected by using a larger negative bias voltage for scanning as shown in Figure 3) The STM tips used for the previous studies of dopant charging and discharging were normal metal tips. However, the new surface inhomogeneous phase was never reported for FeTeSe samples studied with W-or Cr-tips using similar tunneling conditions Our assumption of a spatially inhomogeneous charge and chemical potential distribution is consistent with the observation that not every vortex core of superconducting FeTe 0.55 Se 0.45 in an external magnetic field shows a Majorana zero mode From the corresponding line-cut displayed in Fig. However, at the surface, where the vortex line terminates, a bound state close to the Fermi energy should appear according to the bulk-boundary correspondence. Thus, we can expect a splitting of this bound state at the vortex core due to a significant hybridization, but less splitting at the vortex boundary. Our analysis fits the experimental data shown in Figure In conclusion, by functionalizing the STM tip apex by a single Fe atom or a cluster of (c,g) dI/dV maps taken at 1 mV for the same regions as shown in (a,e) before (c) and after (g) tip modification. A quasiparticle interference pattern can be seen in both (c) and (g). Scale bar: 1 nm. (d,h) FFT maps of (c,g). After tip modification, the intensity of the spots at points and is greatly enhanced in (h) compared to that in (d) before the tip modification. Tunneling parameters in (a,c,e,g): V stab =-10 mV, I stab =600 pA, V osc = 0.03 mV. surface where mainly Se atoms are concentrated