Silicon nitride (SiN) waveguides with ultra-low optical loss enable integrated photonic applications including low noise, narrow linewidth lasers, chip-scale nonlinear photonics, and microwave photonics Silicon nitride photonics is emerging in recent years as advanced photonic devices require better performance than is available from traditional Si or InGaAsP waveguides. As a fully CMOS-compatible material, SiNbased waveguides offer low optical propagation loss, wide transparency from the visible to the infrared, a low thermo-optic coefficient and absence of nonlinear absorption loss SiN photonics has been largely restricted at the standalone component level as the integration with active devices including lasers, modulators, amplifiers and photodetectors has been difficult. First of all, as a dielectric material, SiN lacks a direct energy bandgap for efficient carrier radiative recombination or electro-optic effect, which are the basis of lasers and modulators. In addition, the refractive index of SiN x at telecommunication wavelength (1.55 μm) is around 2, depending on the silicon content. This low refractive index possess significant difficulties in its integration with active III-V gain materials through direct heterogeneous III-V/SiN integration, analogous to heterogeneous III-V/Si integration, which has achieved success in optical interconnect applications Recent progress in multilayer integration leverages an intermediate Si layer as the index matching layer to create III-V/Si/SiN structures 2 . This structure not only provides optical gain to SiN photonic circuits so that lasers or amplifiers can be formed, but can also enrich the photonic functionalities of SiN photonic circuits as optical modulation High-power, low-noise semiconductor lasers are of critical importance in many applications including coherent communications, LIDAR and remote sensing Laser design. The laser is constructed in a way that the Si layer, sandwiched between the III-V epi layer and SiN layer, bridges the refractive indices and provides additional intra-cavity phase control capability. As shown in Fig. Equipped by this multilayer structure, our laser contains the following main sections as shown in Fig. In our E-DBR laser, the SiN waveguide is 90-nm thick and 2.8-μm wide, with an effective mode refractive index around 1.46 and effective mode area of 5.3 μm 2 . In order to enable a highly efficient mode conversion between the Si waveguide and SiN waveguide, the shallow-etched Si waveguide mode is transformed to 269-nm thick Si fullyetch waveguide mode and then tapered to a 150-nm wide taper tip over a 50-μm length. The laser fabrication is a wafer-scale process, which is performed on a 100-mm di-ameter wafer and all the optical lithography is performed using a DUV stepper. Details of the fabrication process can be found in Methods. Laser characterization. Figure As the SiN grating provides the narrow-band reflection and the Si reflector feedback is broadband, the laser wavelength is determined by the SiN grating. Here the grating period is 526 nm and the lasing wavelength is around 1548 nm. Single mode operation is achieved with proper phase conditions and the single-mode laser outputs high power within the mode hop areas as shown in Fig. The extended SiN grating provides a long external cavity which enables a narrow laser linewidth. For an external cavity laser, the laser linewidth ∆υ = ∆υ 0 /(1 + A + B), where ∆υ 0 is the laser Schawlow-Townes linewidth without external feedback, which is determined by the III-V/Si gain section, factor A is the ratio of external passive cavity length (Si waveguide within the laser cavity and SiN grating) to the active III-V/Si gain section length, and factor B includes the detuned loading effect which requires a slight red-detuning of the operation wavelength relative to the grating reflection peak Integration with ultra-high-Q SiN photonics. With the laser fully-integrated within SiN photonic integrated circuits, its performance can be further enhanced by the addition of ultra-low-loss and ultra-high-Q SiN photonics devices. Moving towards an ultra low phase noise system, our laser can be integrated with an ultrahigh-Q SiN ring resonator. For a proof-of-concept, here we butt coupled our SiN laser with a stand-alone SiN high-Q ring resonator with nominal intrinsic Q factor around 40 million. Figure For a properly designed and highly-efficient Si/SiN transition taper with low back-reflection, the laser feedback is provided by the SiN grating, enabling highcoherence lasing and the laser fundamental linewidth is sub-kHz or kHz. In this case, the SiN grating is part of the external cavity and needs to be low-loss to provide enough feedback to facilitate the SiN grating based lasing. However, as the grating length is limited by its physical length (the grating effective cavity length is always shorter than physical length) this approach cannot be extended beyond the physical cavity length limit. As a comparison, resonant structures like ring resonators offer optical length enhancement depending on Q-factor and the bus waveguide to ring resonator coupling ratio. To further reduce the laser linewidth, one solution is to self-injection lock the laser to an ultra-high-Q ring resonator on the same SiN platform. Both E-DBR and FP laser operation worked well with external resonator feedback in self-injection locked operation; the E-DBR providing the best frequency noise results (Fig. Another capability with this integration platform is optical frequency comb generation, as the laser output power exceeds the high-Q SiN ring parametric oscillation threshold. Figure In summary, we have demonstrated high-power, low noise lasers heterogeneously integrated with SiN photonic integrated circuits. The laser also enabled Hertz-level linewidth laser output and optical frequency comb generation on the same platform, paving the way for the next-generation ultra-low-noise integrated photonics for a wide variety of applications. Moreover, our integration platform can be extended to other material systems by re-placing either the gain medium (e.g. quantum dots Device fabrication Laser fabrication starts from a thermally grown SiO 2 (8 μm thick) on a Si wafer with 100-mm diameter. 90-nm thick stoichiometric Si 3 N 4 is deposited by low pressure chemical vapor deposition (LPCVD). SiN waveguide patterning together with SiN grating fabrication are performed using 248-nm DUV lithography followed by inductively coupled plasma (ICP) etching using CHF 3 /CF 4 /O 2 gas. Deuterated SiO 2 of 900 nm is deposited on top of the SiN waveguides forming the first layer of the waveguide cladding. This cladding layer is planarized by chemical-mechanicalpolishing (CMP) and the resultant cladding thickness is around 600 nm. A large silicon on insulator (SOI) piece (> 50 mm x 50 mm) is bonded on the wafer covering device areas using oxygen-assisted plasma-activated bonding. Si substrate removal is done by a combination of mechanical lapping and Si Bosch etching. The buried oxide layer is removed with buffered hydrofluoric acid (BHF). Si waveguide patterning is done by DUV stepper and C 4 F 8 /SF 6 based reactive-ion etching (RIE). After the Si waveguide formation, InP multiple quantum well (MQW) epi is bonded on the laser gain area, followed by InP substrate mechanical lapping and HCl acid etching. The substrate acid wet etching stops at the p-InGaAs layer. The InP laser mesa is formed by CH 4 /H 2 /Ar based dry etching and H 3 PO 4 based wet etch for the MQW region. Excess Si on top of SiN photonic circuits is removed by XeF 2 isotropic gas etch. The laser is then passivated by in-total 900-nm thick deuterated SiO 2 Laser self-injection locking The InP/Si/SiN laser is packaged on a ceramic mount and the probe pads are wire bonded to electrical cable outlets so the whole package can be mounted on an XYZ stage for butt coupling to a SiN high-Q ring resonator chip mounted on a separate stage. The laser injection current is tuned to match the laser wavelength with one ring resonance. Self-injection locking state is confirmed from the output power on a photodiode (a dip in the output power when locking state is achieved), together with a fiber unbalanced-MZI based wavemeter for laser frequency stability monitoring, where a locking state shows quiet output power trace in the time-domain after the wavemeter. Laser noise measurement The laser frequency noise is measured using an OEWaves OE4000 laser linewidth/phase noise measurement system. The laser RIN measurement is performed by applying the fiber coupled light into a high-speed photodetector (Discovery DSC30) followed by a low noise amplifier and microwave spectrum analyzer (Agilent E4448A). The noise measurement was taken from 1 to 20 GHz, from which the photodetector and amplifier frequency response are subtracted, plus thermal noise and shot noise (calculated from the photodetector current) are also removed. The laser RIN traces in Fig. 