In this paper, we propose a novel design and fabrication strategy to produce architected core structures for use as the core in composite sandwich structures. A traditional foam core or honeycomb structure is lightweight and stiff, but susceptible to permanent deformation when subjected to excessive loading. Here we propose the use of an architected structure composed of arrays of hollow truncated cone unit cells that dissipate energy and exhibit structural recovery. These structures printed with a viscoelastic material rely on buckling of their sidewalls to dissipate energy and snap-back to prevent permanent deformation. We explore the mechanical response of these conical unit cells in terms of their buckling strength and post-buckling stability condition, and develop design maps for the same, by relating them to non-dimensional geometric parameters {α, β, γ}, where α represents the slenderness of the curved sidewalls, β is the angle of the sidewall to the base, and γ represents the curvature of the sidewall. A validated finite element model is developed and used to investigate the effect of these parameters. We see that the peak buckling load is directly proportional to both α & β, and is not dependent on γ when the load is normalized by the volume of material in the curved sidewall. Interestingly, the post-buckling stability is influenced by γ, or the initial curvature of the sidewall, where a larger radius of curvature makes the structure less susceptible to exhibit structural bistability. The structures presented here are printed using a viscoelastic material, that causes them to exhibit pseudo-bistability, or a time-delayed recovery. This allows the structures to buckle and dissipate energy, and then recover to their original configurations without the need for external stimuli or energy. Composite sandwich structures offer excellent mechanical properties such as high strength and stiffness with minimal weight penalty. Traditionally, these structures consist of a lightweight core such as foams Structural stability is an important design consideration for the design of engineering structures. Buckling can alter the structural configuration leading to sudden collapse and drastically reduce the load carrying capacity of a structure. Most engineering structures are designed to avoid buckling. However, buckling can be beneficial for applications where the structural configuration can be an advantage. For example, in electrical switches where the load does not need to be applied continuously to maintain the switch in the on/off position. Such structures are called bistable structures, and usually involve a component designed to buckle to jump from one stable state to another. Other structures that undergo buckling but return to their original configuration are termed monostable. Upon removing the load, structures are designed to return to their original configuration, for example, clickers, bimetallic thermal cutoff switches, etc. From an energy consideration, the strain energy-displacement diagrams of monostable structures are monotonically increasing. On the other hand, structural bistability is characterized by having two distinct energy wells in the strain energy-displacement diagram. If a structure is pushed from one stable configuration to an other by applying an external load, upon removal of this load, the structure now resides in this new configuration, thus exhibiting bistability. This property has been explored by several researchers for impact energy absorption While both monostable and bistable structures can exhibit snap through buckling instability, only monostable structure recover their configuration upon removal of the external load. During this period of snap-through instability, the structure exhibits negative stiffness. Upon reaching a certain minimum load response, the structure stiffens again due to a variety of reasons including densification in foams from contact or from members that were previously under compression switching to tension after buckling like in von Mises trusses. Other researchers have explored this transition from negative to positive stiffness by creating structures that are stacked together like springs in series. Such structures are used for energy dissipation purposes An intermediate stage between monostability and bistability is a state of pseudo-bistability introduced by Santer In this paper, we present an architected structure with potential application as core in a composite sandwich structure. Leveraging the energy dissipation characteristics of multi-stable structures, the architected core also introduces favorable design characteristics such as resilience due to structural recovery. Unlike other multi-stable structures that require external stimuli to trigger the snap back action, here, material relaxation of a viscoelastic material is used to push the structure back to its original configuration. The architected core structure is composed of stacked conical frusta as shown in Figure The goal of this study is to develop additively manufactured architected structures that can be used as core materials in sandwich composites. Traditional core materials and structures such as foam core or honeycomb structures are good options for designing lightweight and stiff structures. These cores are known to dissipate energy under extreme conditions such as excessive compression or impact loading, where the cores experience permanent deformation that maybe detrimental to the complete structure by reducing its residual strength. In contrast to a traditional foam or honeycomb structure, a multi-layer architected core design proposed in this paper as shown in Figure must be designed to undergo substantial deformation without permanent set and recover their original geometric configuration after the loading is removed. The architected structures presented in this paper consist of unit cells made of thin walled truncated cones and topped with a solid stub that allows for load distribution. Preliminary studies were performed to compare the performance of unit cells made with truncated cones and domes under compressive loading. The load-displacement response typically consists of three regions: 1) an initial linear regions, 2) a softening behavior after critical buckling load, and 3) stiffening due to secondary contact between the sidewalls and facesheets. The results revealed that dome shaped unit cells under-performed in terms of initial stiffness and critical load carrying capacity as compared to their conical counterparts as shown in Figure This section describes the parametric design of the unit cell used in the generation of the architected core structure followed by the fabrication methods used to assemble a composite sandwich structure. The material properties of the 3D printed resin are obtained experimentally for use in a finite element model developed to explore the parameter space and document the load response and stability behavior of unit cells in compression and shear loading for varying parametric combinations. This is followed by the experimental validation of the finite element models, and an evaluation of the sandwich structures in bending. The methods section is followed by results and discussion. A truncated cone is chosen as the basic unit of the architected structure due to its higher initial stiffness compared to the dome structure as described in Section 2. As seen in Figure r b for characterizing the mechanical behavior of the cone unit cell. α captures the slenderness of the sidewall, and β captures the inclination of the cone sidewall to the horizontal. While α and β would be sufficient to describe the behavior of inclined beams like in A composite sandwich structure is designed primarily to carry bending loads. Hence, the cones that form the core of such a sandwich structure locally experience both compressive and shear loads. In this study, displacement controlled loading is used to test and simulate the cone behavior. For this, a non dimensional quantity v = δv H is defined for representing the vertical end-to-end shortening of the cone normalized by the cone's height during compression. Similarly, h = δ h r b -rs is defined for representing the lateral deformation normalized by the projection of the sidewall length during shear loading. The architected core structures were printed using Formlabs Form 3 SLA 3D printer. A flexible resin (manufacturer's code: FLFLGR02) from Formlabs was chosen as the material for the core structure. A layer height of 50 μm was chosen for achieving good quality prints. The printed parts consist of cones (II) and a thin membrane (I) as shown in Figure The flexible resin used to 3D print the unit cells was characterized to obtain input properties for use in finite element analysis discussed next in Section 3.5. For this, dog-bone specimens were printed with dimensions conforming to ASTM D412 die-C where, g R (t) and k R (t) represent the shear and bulk relaxation modulus, respectively. g p i and k p i represent the shear and bulk relaxation parameters of the material, respectively. τ i represent the material time constants A test fixture was fabricated to perform compression and recovery studies on the unit cells as shown in Figure To verify the recoverable nature of the architected composite sandwich structure in bending, 3-point bend tests were performed. Two types of specimens were manufactured to compare the response of single-layer composite structures, and double-layered composite structures. The multi-layered structures, as shown in Figure To simulate the combined shear and compressive response of the unit cells, a displacement controlled method was used in Abaqus. A kinematic coupling constraint was applied to a control point as shown in Figure When simulating the combined loading case incorporating both shear and compression, i.e. when δ h = 0, the axial symmetry of the problem no longer exists. However, a plane of symmetry along the shear loading direction reduces the problem to half symmetry. In Abaqus, C3D8RH -an 8-noded linear brick with reduced integration and hybrid formulation was chosen to mesh the model using the medial axis meshing algorithm. Element edge length of ∼0.5mm was used to satisfy convergence conditions. The simulation was split into two steps: 1. In the first simulation step, a displacement controlled loading was performed at a constant rate of 5mm/min or 12s/mm to simulate quasi-static loading. The target displacement δ = δ 2 v + δ 2 h was used to determine the total loading step time as δ × 12s/mm. The reaction force and displacement were recorded throughout the simulation at the control point. Analyzing the vertical displacement of the control point after unloading the cones allows us to classify the stability of the cones as monostable, bistable, or pseudo-bistable. The architected core structure must retain its characteristic load response and recovery profile when scaled in size to verify that {α, β, γ} are sufficient to characterize the unit cell behavior. To verify this, three cones were chosen for compression analysis -a standard cone with r b = 12mm, r t = 3mm, H = 12mm, t w = 1mm, r s = 3mm and h s = 3mm, and two other scaled models with r b , r t , H, t w , r s and h s scaled as 1 2 x and 2x their original values as described in Table Prior to analyzing the behavior of architected core structures with repeating units, the finite element analysis results were validated at the unit cell level. The results were validated against compression tests performed with the setup described in section 3.4.1. As the material inputs were obtained from experimental tests, the effects of the cone geometric properties were tested by direct compression tests on the unit cell. For this, two cones with r b = 12mm, r s = 3mm, H = 12mm, h s = 3mm and wall thicknesses of 1mm and 2mm, respectively, were used. The simulation results of load-displacement (Figure Figure The parametric space of the unit cell was evaluated by considering the response of the cones in axial compression as well as in combined compression and shear loading. Particularly, three criteria were used for evaluation -critical buckling load, displacement to achieve buckling, and the post-buckling stability. The critical buckling loads for unit cells were obtained by finding the first peak in the load-displacement response graph. The vertical displacement at which this peak buckling load occurs is also noted as it is of interest for a designer. Varying the γ while keeping α, β constant, we see that the peak loads when normalized by the volume of curved shell section (Curved Surface Area × Thickness = π(r b + r s ) H 2 + (r b -r s ) 2 × t w ) of the unit cell are close to each other as seen in Figure Figure The peak displacement to buckle is directly proportional to α and inversely proportional to β. A thicker sidewall (larger α) is stiffer and provides flexural rigidity delaying the buckling of the cones. However, for a shallow cone (smaller β), the applied energy is more directly used for bending rather than for axial compression, making it susceptible to buckle early. After reaching the critical buckling load, the unit cells have a negative stiffness region followed by stiffening due to secondary contact (Figure 2. The cones get locked in their deformed configuration, exhibiting bistable behavior. This occurs when the stored stored strain energy in the system is insufficient to cross the energy barrier required to return to its original configuration. 3. The cones exhibit a pseudo-bistable behavior, where for a certain period of time, they appear to be locked in the deformed configuration due to an energy barrier that cannot be overcome with the stored strain energy. However, as the material dissipates energy through viscoelastic relaxation, the energy barrier that is 'locking' the structure in its deformed configuration reduces until the point when the elastic energy is sufficient to restore the structure to its original configuration. Table With decreasing γ values, we see a tendency of the structures to return to their initial state. Although the volume normalized buckling loads of the structures are similar to each other with varying γ and constant α, β as seen above in Figure Perturbations, such as lateral loading, nudge the structures towards recovering from their deformed configurations. Monostable structures retain their monostability. Pseudobistable structures with {α, β, γ} close to monostability on the parametric map are nudged towards monostability. Similarly, unit cells exhibiting bistability in the non-perturbed ( v = 0 case) but close to pseudo-bistability in the parametric maps are nudged towards pseudo-bistability in the perturbed case. Increasing the perturbation, or the shear loading in this case, further pushes the structures towards monostability. Perturbed unit cells are largely monostable or pseudo-bistable case because of the restoring tensile force that is created on the section of sidewalls on the opposite side of loading direction. This stretching that occurs on the far side of the conic shells is responsible for restoring the structure to its original undeformed configuration. ) but with different radii of curvatures show different stability conditions. This is due to smaller radius of curvature (larger γ) resulting in sidewalls of the cone have an inward collapsing effect that causes the cones to exhibit bistability (or pseudo-bistability in this case). Cones with larger radius of curvature have a less pronounced inward collapse that holds the cone in the second configuration. Three point bend test results for experiments performed at a loading rate of 25mm/min are shown in Figure In this paper, we introduce a method to design and fabricate architected core structures for use as the core in composite sandwich structures. These core structures rely on buckling to dissipate energy during excessive compressive loading. Moreover, due to the use of viscoelastic materials, these core structures exhibit pseudo-bistable behavior that can be exploited to design structures that are not only good energy dissipators, but also show structural recovery without the use of external stimuli. In summary, • The response of truncated cone shaped unit cells were explored as an effect of their geometric properties. Non-dimensional geometric parameters were introduced to characterize the structures, and purely axial ( v = 1, h = 0), as well as combined axial and shear loading ( v = 1, h = 0.1) were investigated. • α = tw L captures the slenderness of the sidewall and determines the buckling load capacity of the structures, where peak buckling load is directly proportional to α. • β = tan -1 ( h r b -rs ) captures the incline of the cone's sidewall with respect to its base. A higher β makes the cone behavior tend to a cylinder's behavior, making the buckling load higher. • γ = L r b captures the curvature of the sidewall in the θ or circumferential direction. This γ parameter is crucial in determining the post buckling stability of the structures. A higher γ, or smaller radius of curvature, tends to create a 'locking' effect in the structure that forces the structure to exhibit bistability, or pseudo-bistability, depending on the other parameters α, β. • Introducing a lateral, or shear, displacement in the loading ( h = 0) makes the structures return to their initial undeformed configurations from their deformed configurations. This is attributed to the restoring tensile force on the far side of the cone to the direction of lateral loading vector. This is also shown experimentally in the form of 3-point bending tests, where the cones near the supports experience combined axial-shear loading, and the cones near the center experience axial loading due to symmetry. • The viscoelastic relation of the 3D printed resin introduces an intermediate state of stability between monostable and bistable response, in the form of time-delayed recovery, otherwise known as pseudo-bistability. Due to this pseudo-bistability, structures that are designed to buckle and collapse to dissipate energy without accumulating permanent deformation can recover on their own after a certain period of time, exhibiting structural resilience. • Increasing the number of layers in the sandwich structure allows us to reduce the size of each unit cell and densely pack the interior region of the core to increase its load carrying capacity or flexural rigidity without accumulating a large weight penalty.