We demonstrate a low noise short-wavelength infrared (SWIR) Sb-based type II superlattice (T2SL) avalanche photodiodes (APD). The SWIR GaSb/(AlAsSb/GaSb) APD structure was designed based on impact ionization engineering and grown by molecular beam epitaxy on GaSb substrate. At room temperature, the device exhibits a 50 % cut-off wavelength of 1.74 μm. The device revealed to have electron dominated avalanching mechanism with a gain value of 48 at room temperature. The electron and hole impact ionization coefficients were calculated and compared to give better pro-spect of the performance of the device. Low excess noise, as characterized by the carrier ionization ratio of ~ 0.07, has been achieved. technology, but it suffers from drawbacks due to bulk and surface instability and higher costs particularly for fabrication. rises with increasing the gain (M), but the rate of increasing noise can be slow down by reducing the k value. Lower k value can improve the performance of the APD devices. There is a great opportunity for introducing a new material capable of low dark current, high quantum efficiency, and single carrier multiplication for use in strategic SWIR range. Antimony (Sb)-based III/V materials (bulk and superlattice) are capable of meeting the bandgap requirements for making APDs in the SWIR spectral range. In order to achieve great characteristics for Sb-based APD with high gain and low noise, the bandgap and its electron and hole ionization coefficients have to be designed carefully. To minimize the excess noise factor, a pure or dominant electron or hole initiated multiplication along with optimized hetero-junction design can be applied via impact ionization engineering. The optical performance of the devices is shown in avalanche mechanism, as seen in similar SWIR APDs. At 300 K, the device shows a unity optical gain dark current of 3.66 × 10 -6 A at -19 V applied bias. The diodes show punch-through effect at the voltage near ∼ -19 V. This effect is considered to be related to the voltage required to achieve a full depletion of the absorption layer, however, more future study is needed to confirm this hypothesis for present work. We illuminated the device from either top p+ contact and top n+ contact to control the dominate carrier injection into the multiplication region. AlGaAs (k= 0.1) In summary, using impact ionization engineering Sb-based SLS material structure was implemented to demonstrate a low noise SWIR GaSb/(AlAsSb/GaSb) superlattice APD device. The multiplication gain of 48 was achieved at room temperature. The structure was designed based on impact ionization engineering by implementing the MQW structure. The device exhibits a 50 % cut-off wavelength of 1.74 μm at room temperature. The electron and hole impact ionization coefficients for the SWIR APD device was calculated and compared with each other to give better prospect of the performance. This leads to extracting the carrier ionization ratio with the value of 0.07 for the SWIR APD. The SWIR APDs revealed promising gain/noise characteristics for low noise applications. 