The validity of two approximative linear tensor models to be used for grating based X-ray or neutron darkfield tensor tomography is investigated in a simulation study. While the dark-field contrast originating from anisotropic microscopic mass distributions has, in a previous study, been confirmed to be in general a nonlinear function of two orientations (optical axis and axis of interferometer sensitivity), linear approximations with a reduced parameter space (considering only one of the orientation dependencies) are highly preferable with respect to tomographic volume reconstruction from projections. By regarding isolated volume elements and systematically exploring the full range of possible anisotropies, direct correspondences are drawn between the respective tensors characterizing the complete model used for signal synthesization and the reduced linear models used for reconstruction. The tensors' dominant orientations are found to agree to a typical accuracy of 1°, with their eigenspectra exhibiting fuzzy, yet almost linear relations among each other. Although modeling only either of two orientation dependencies for the purpose of tensor reconstruction, the data acquisition scheme must nevertheless adequately address both dependencies. The anisotropic nature of X-ray and neutron dark-field contrast allows imaging of directional information within unresolved substructure of a sample and thereby provides the fundamental prerequisite to tensor-valued volume imaging analog to other anisotropic contrast modalities e.g. in the field of magnetic resonance imaging. Following on demonstrations of planar dark-field anisotropy e.g. by Jensen et al. In a recent review, the origination and actual orientation dependence of dark-field contrast for anisotropic mass distributions has been investigated in detail (Graetz et al. Although this additional complexity, and the non-linearity in particular, are highly undesirable with regard to tomographic reconstruction, the derived model allows to synthesize large amounts of anisotropic dark-field signals that will here be used to systematically study the applicability of approximative linear tensor models amenable to classic tensor tomography. As it likewise uses a tensor to parametrize the structural anisotropy of the considered volume element, direct comparisons between the respective tensors of the physically motivated non-linear signal model and the mathematically motivated linear tensor models can be made. The analyses form the basis towards a more detailed and quantitative understanding of X-ray or neutron dark-field tensor tomography. The following minimal model for arbitrarily oriented anisotropic mass density distributions, modeled as Gaussian ellipsoids, has been motivated in for n = (0, 0, 1) where μ DF denotes the dark-field contrast, σ i the ellipsoid's standard deviations along its principal axes and R characterizes its orientation relative to the optical path n and the axis of grating sensitivity ê. v ∈ [0, 1] is the sample-induced visibility loss extracted from grating interferometric images. General orientations of the acquisition system characterized by n and ê other than (0, 0, 1) and (1, 0, 0) can be considered by a respective additional (inverse) rotation transformation applied to T prior to evaluating Eq. 1. The given model derives analytically from the wave optical approach to the theoretical description of dark-field contrast given by Yashiro et al. and Lynch et al. Eq. 1 will be used here to synthesize dark-field signals required for the systematic evaluation of tensor reconstruction techniques based on the mathematically motivated linear signal models addressed in the following Section. A fundamental assumption for volume reconstruction from projections is the linearity of the projection process. I.e., the sum of projections of individual volume elements is expected to be equivalent to the projection of the sum of the respective volume elements. In classic X-ray tomography, this is ensured both by Beer's law of attenuation and the assumption of an isotropic contrast mechanism. Eq. 1 however is clearly non-linear with respect to the tensor T characterizing individual volume elements, and should, with regard to tomographic volume reconstruction, be replaced by a suitable linear surrogate. Classic tensor tomography considers models of the form r U r with U = U T , which are generally linear (i.e., j r U (j) r = r( j U (j) )r ). Given the actual dark-field signal dependence on both the The different orientation dependencies of the physical model of dark-field anisotropy and the linear tensor models considered for reconstruction. Modeled is an elongated object inclined with respect to a rotational axis perpendicular to both the optical axis and the axis of interferometer sensitivity, cf. Fig. and which capture either of the dark-field contrast's orientation dependencies respectively. The designations N and E for the respective symmetric 3 × 3 tensors have been chosen for clear discernibility of both models. They both do represent gross simplifications whose adequacy remains to be justified, and it therefore is the aim of the present article to discuss their relation to the actual contrast mechanism of dark-field imaging better described by Eq. 1. To this end, tensors N and E will be reconstructed from a set of scalar dark-field projections μ (i) DF (enumerated by i) synthesized with Eq. 1 from a given mass distribution tensor T and acquisition geometry (characterized by a set of acquisition system orientations n(i) , ê(i) ), which will be detailed in Section 2.3. The following iterative scheme as proposed in with with k enumerating iterations, i k denoting the particular projection i considered at iteration k, and λ k being a relaxation factor damping convergence. The specific back projection procedure within Eq. 4 can be easily verified to have two important properties: changes to U (k) mn will scale with the residual error between data and model, and the update is performed by means of a pseudo-inverse of the linear tensor model r U r such that immediate consistency of r U (k) r with the considered projection μ DF is achieved for λ k = 1. The continuous reduction of λ k accounts for the expected inconsistency between μ DF and the linear tensor models by gradually reducing the impact of individual projections μ (i) DF and thus their specific order of consideration as convergence to a mean solution progresses. ê n Fig. In total, each individual projection will here be considered 25 times throughout the iterative process, with λ 0 = .2, τ = 3k max /25, and k max being 25 times the number of total projections μ (i) DF (cf. following Section). The reconstruction of individual tensor voxels from scalar projections requires a number of such projections sufficiently covering the parameter space of the signal model, i.e., sufficiently covering variations in both orientations n and ê. Figure The parameter space of the physical dark-field model given in Eq. 1 consists of the to-be-reconstructed tensor characterizing the volume element on the one hand and the parameters n and ê of the considered projection on the other hand. While the coverage of projection parameters, which correspond to the imaging procedure, has just been discussed, an adequate exploration scheme for the space of anisotropic volume elements described by T shall be addressed here. At first it can be easily confirmed that the absolute scale of T does not affect the orientation dependence of μ DF . It is therefore sufficient, without loss of generality, to require trace(T ) = 1 = i σ -2 i for the present purposes, thereby implicitly constraining one eigenvalue and reducing the parameter space to the remaining two. Further, permutations of equivalent sets of eigenvalues correspond to rotations, which are treated separately. Based on these considerations, the following definitions can be made with regard to an exhaustive coverage of the parameter space: ( The eigenvalues of T parametrizing the synthesization model are sampled on a regular grid covering 20 × 20 combinations of σ -2 1 and σ -2 2 within the specified ranges, with σ -2 3 resulting from the given constraints. The particular coverage shown in Figure For each feasible triplet of eigenvalues, 300 randomly oriented instances of a volume element described by T are generated (by means of random rotation matrices constructed according to of the linear tensor models ( DF . The statistical distribution arises both from the range of considered anisotropies and orientations. While the distributions peak at 10-20% NRMSE, values over 100% are still encountered. These deviations reflect the approximative nature of the linear tensor models. Fig. Nevertheless, the principal orientation, which is one of the central concerns of tensor tomography, is reproduced to a typical precision of 0.33 • and 1.0 • respectively for the considered reconstruction models: Figure The observed orientation error distributions are compared to a normal distribution of inclination angles, which, due to integration over the azimuthal angle, takes the form PDF(∆θ, σ ∆θ ) ∝ sin(∆θ)e It can be easily shown to exhibit its maximum at ∆θ = σ ∆θ in the small angle approximation sin(∆θ) ≈ ∆θ. Figure Figure If dark-field anisotropy was actually adequately described by either of the linear models (2) or (3), three orthogonal projection trajectories (Fig. While several proofs of concept plausibly demonstrating tomographic reconstruction of sub-resolution anisotropy based on various heuristic signal models were given in previous literature, explicit validations have been lacking so far. A central assumption explicitly or implicitly shared by all current approaches is that 3D dark-field anisotropy can be described as a function of a single orientation vector. This has been, deriving from planar dark-field anisotropy, the interferometer's direction of sensitivity. A detailed discussion of dark-field origination given recently As expected, the approximative models can exhibit large root mean square errors with regard to the actual signal. When providing input data decently covering both orientation dependencies, both linear models nevertheless manage to reproduce the principal orientation of the original mass distribution tensor up to a typical accuracy of 0.33°to 1°. The normalized eigenvalues, which do encode the actual aspect ratios of anisotropic volume elements, are thereby found to be roughly linear in the normalized inverse variances of the original mass distribution (as opposed to being linear e.g. in its extents) for both models. As this is the scaling behavior expected along the axis of interferometer sensitivity, it is consistent with the observation that model (3) yields slightly better reconstruction results. Although the true complexity of dark-field anisotropy generally mandates a rather extensive data acquisition scheme, the consequences of using only a minimal set of three circular acquisition trajectories has been explicitly considered as well. While the quantitative relation between input and reconstruction is, as expected, notably degraded, principal orientations for isolated volume elements could still be roughly recovered to 5°to 10°accuracy. As it is conjecturable that the additional influences of noise and signal superpositions (in the tomography use case) will further challenge the stability of these reconstructions in practical applications, more comprehensive acquisition schemes as considered initially are highly recommended though. The practical feasibility of dark-field tensor volume tomography depends on the applicability of linear approximations to actual dark-field signal anisotropy, given that highly non-linear dependencies can void the ability to solve the problem of volume reconstruction from projections. Given a previously validated dark-field signal model, an exhaustive exploration of the possible parameter space for anisotropic volume elements has been performed in order to establish the general ability of approximative linear tensor models of dark-field anisotropy to recover central properties of the considered volume elements. While the reconstruction of orientation and aspect ratios is fundamentally subject to statistical variation already in the absence of signal noise, the theoretically achievable precision of 1°and better is highly encouraging with regard to quantitative tensor valued volume tomography. Although linear tensor models (in 3D space) would generally be fully determined with data from only three orthogonal projection trajectories, the data acquisition scheme must however nevertheless be guided by the true complexity of the actual dark-field anisotropy.