In this work, we show that the same theoretical tools that successfully explain other hydrides systems under pressure seem to be at odds with the recently claimed conventional room temperature superconductivity of the carbonaceous sulfur hydride. We support our conclusions with I) the absence of a dominant low-enthalpy stoichiometry and crystal structure in the ternary phase diagram. II) Only the thermodynamics of C-doping phases appears to be marginally competing in enthalpy against H3S. III) Accurate results of the transition temperature given by ab initio Migdal-Eliashberg calculations differ by more than 110 K to recently theoretical claims explaining the high-temperature superconductivity in carbonaceous-hydrogen sulfide. A novel mechanism of superconductivity or a breakdown of current theories in this system is possibly behind the disagreement. Over the last decade, pressurized hydride compounds have led the path to many important landmarks in superconductivity. Notable cases include silane in 2008 Recently, Snider et al. Certainly, it is difficult to measure the crystalline structure of a tiny sample under extremely high pressure, additionally complicated by the small scattering ratio of low-Z hydrogen. Hence, to clarify the mechanism of superconductivity and electronic and phonon properties, it is highly desirable to know the crystalline structure from the theoretical side. So far, there have been two works on crystal structure prediction for C-S-H ternary systems In this Letter, we shed light on different open issues of the RTS. Resorting to structure prediction, we enlarged the chemical composition search and estimated C-S-H ternary systems' formation enthalpy at 250 GPa. We also analyzed the doped phases, from their thermodynamic stability to superconducting properties and found flagrant differences compared to recent theoretical reports on C-doped H 3 S Due to the prohibited computational overhead of calculating a huge number of available compositions in the ternary system, we focus our strategy on exploring only representative sections of the compositional landscape in detail. Fig. space were governed by anticipated trends. The high content of carbon and hydrogen (top left areas of the Gibbs triangle) will form CH 2 and CH 4 . Increasing hydrogen content (H 5-16 ) in these areas will then produce phase separation to H 2 and CH x , which are compositions with formation enthalpy well above 100 meV/atom (not shown). Moving to the middle section of the triangle, for C and S on 1:1 ratio with increasing H; H 3 , H 4 , H 5 and H 6 ; these stoichiometries are highly energetic and unlikely to occur. In these phases, decompositions to H 2 , H 3 S or CH x are seen. CSH 7 and CSH 10 are interesting compositions that become metastable due to their conformation and "poor" metallicity. These compositions are formed by H 3 S and CH x units with weak Van der Walls interaction The region close to the lowest enthalpy (H 3 S) phase is the most relevant in the compositional space. The varying C doping into the matrix of H 3 S (C-substitution in S sites) is the most reasonable solution from the thermodynamical point of view: we report that enthalpy decreases from -2 meV/atom at 25%C to -50 for 12.5%C, to -77 meV/atom for 8.3%C, to -95 meV/atom for 5.5%C, and finally to -105 meV/atom for 3.7%C, and so on until reaching the H 3 S with enthalpy of -130 meV/atom (clearly the dominant composition). Judging by the convex hull of stability, C-doping offers a possible structure model to explain the RTS, which is not new for other systems (see Ref. It has been reported that, at least in the other two major systems (H 3 S and LaH 10 ), the highly symmetric arrangements of atoms in hydrides under pressure display a van Hove singularity (VHS) near the Fermi level (E F ) Let us first examine the effects of carrier doping onto the possible explanation of the RTS. Fig. Besides the discussions above, another shortcoming of the MAD-formula is the Coulomb interaction, which is introduced phenomenologically by a pseudo Coulomb parameter, μ * , with a value set around 0.1. However, there is no reason why these values should be transferred at high pressure. In our case, the Migdal-Eliashberg (ME) calculation used the Coulomb interaction kernel, in which we solved the gap equation directly to get rid of μ * . Thus, the ME calculation is more robust and straightforward, without any empirical parameters involved In addition to the shortcomings of the MAD formula used in Fig. Finally, we reach two contradicting points: on the one hand, doping appears to be the most likely explanation for the RTS. However, a low degree of doping does not alter the electronic structure, and T c is close to the reported T c of H 3 S, as shown in Fig. In summary, from the thermodynamic perspective, substituting carbon in sulfur sites or interstitial space increases the formation enthalpy (it becomes less stable). Introducing carbon in the Im3m phase of H 3 S plays against high-T c , changes the shape of DOS, decouples phonons, slightly modify the lattice and factors down T c . Perhaps the current level of theory is insufficient to reconcile the scenario with the present experimental results. We conclude by asserting that in previous systems (H 3 S 