The superconductivity of a kagome superconductor CsV3Sb5 is studied by scanning tunneling microscopy/spectroscopy at an ultralow temperature with high resolution. Two kinds of superconducting gaps with multiple sets of coherent peaks and residual zero-energy density of states are observed on both half-Cs and Sb surfaces, implying multiband superconductivity with gap nodes. Sixfold star-shaped magnetic vortex is observed with conventional Caroli-de Gennes-Matricon bound states inside. Magnetic impurities suppress the superconductivity, while nonmagnetic impurities do not, suggesting the absence of sign-change in the superconducting order parameter. Moreover, the interplay between charge density waves and superconductivity differs on various bands, resulting in different density of state distributions. Our study provides critical clues for further understanding the superconductivity and its relation to charge density waves in CsV3Sb5. Owing to the special geometry, materials with kagome lattice may possess geometric frustration, flat band and nontrivial band topology, making it an intriguing playground to explore exotic quantum phenomena, such as quantum spin liquid, charge density wave (CDW), Dirac/Weyl semimetal and unconventional superconductivity [1-5]. Recently, a new family of quasi two-dimensional kagome metals AV3Sb5 (A=K, Rb, Cs) has been discovered, consisting of perfect kagome lattice of V atoms coordinated by Sb [6]. Nonmagnetic AV3Sb5 goes through a CDW transition below TCDW ~ 78-103 K, and then enters the superconducting state below TC ~ 0.9-3.5 K As for the superconducting state, unconventional superconductivity is indicated by the possible experimental signatures of spin-triplet paring and an edge supercurrent in Nb/K1-XV3Sb5 devices and double superconducting domes under pressure CsV3Sb5 single crystals were grown by the self-flux method As shown in Figs. The superconductivity in CsV3Sb5 is further investigated by imaging magnetic vortices. Figs. 2(a) and 2(b) show the vortex maps at Vb =0 mV and 0.5 mV in a 500 × 500 nm 2 Sb surface under B⊥ = 500 Oe. The vortices are clearly visible and form perfect Abrikosov lattice; however, a single vortex is spatially anisotropic and reveals a sixfold star-shaped structure. The Abrikosov lattice is along the crystalline lattice direction, while the star-shaped tails at Vb = 0 mV are rotated by 30° away from the lattice direction. Since the vortex structure is strongly related to the Fermi surface structure and the superconducting gap structure, anisotropic vortex core is generally believed to arise from the anisotropic and/or multiband nature of the Fermi surfaces and/or superconducting pairing, as previously reported in NbSe2, YNi2B2C, LiFeAs Figs. To further explore the superconducting gap structure, impurity-induced effects are studied. In general, the response of superconductivity to local impurities depends on the pairing symmetry and the characteristic of the impurities We investigate the impurity effects of the superconductivity in CsV3Sb5 by studying the intrinsic defects, as well as artificially introduced impurities on the cleaved surfaces. The insets of Figs. Overall, the magnetic Cr cluster strongly suppresses the superconductivity of CsV3Sb5; while the nonmagnetic impurities, including the intrinsic Sb vacancy, V defect, step edges, Cs and Zn adatoms, all have no influence on the superconductivity of CsV3Sb5. These intuitively suggest that there is no sign change in the superconducting pairing function of CsV3Sb5. The interplay between the multiband superconductivity and CDWs are manifested in the spatial modulation of the DOS for the two kinds of superconducting gaps. Figs. in Fig. Figs. 4(f)-4(h) show the energy dependencies of these DOS modulations, taken along cuts #5-#7 in k-space (Fig. CsV3Sb5 is a multiband system, containing a circular-like electron pocket contributed by Sb-p orbital at Γ point, multiple triangle-like electron pockets at K points and multiple saddle points with high DOS at M points originating from V-d orbitals In summary, we systematically studied the superconducting properties of CsV3Sb5 by using an ultralow-temperature STM with high energy and spatial resolution. Some direct evidence and critical clues related to the superconducting pairing symmetry are provided, such as the existence of gap nodes, the absence of sign change in the order parameter, multiple superconductivity and its band-dependent interactions with various CDW orders. Our results are informative for further revealing the complex entanglements of superconductivity, topology and charge order in kagome compounds. 