Given the strong dependence of material structure and properties on the length and strength of constituent bonds and the fact that surface adsorption and chemical reactions are initiated by the formation of bonds between two systems, bonding parameters are of key importance for material design and industrial processes. In this study, a machine learning (ML)-based model is used to accurately predict bonding properties from information pertaining to isolated systems before bonding. This model employs the density of states (DOS) before bond formation as the ML descriptor and accurately predicts binding energy, bond distance, covalent electron amount, and Fermi energy even when only 20% of the whole dataset is used for training. The results show that the DOS of isolated systems before bonding is a powerful descriptor for the accurate prediction of bonding and adsorption properties. TOC The molecular and crystal structures and electronic structure of materials are largely influenced by characters of bonding between their constituent atoms. Bond length and strength and their formations play crucial roles in surface adsorption processes and chemical (e.g., catalytic) activities. If the parameters of bonded systems can be predicted from those of the corresponding isolated systems before bonding, some combinations may enable generalization and thus allow one to make predictions for a vast array of other bonded systems comprising combinations of isolated systems. This advantage cannot be obtained using the parameters of bonded systems as explanatory variables. Using isolated systems also effective from the perspective of efficiency since obtaining the parameters of bonded systems requires much higher computational cost than isolated system due to structural optimization. Furthermore, such accurate predictions should facilitate the selection of materials and the design of their functions related to adsorption and chemical reactions. In this study, inspired by the recent use of machine learning (ML) to extract useful information from a large amount of electronic structure data, The DOS is an energy distribution of the states that can be occupied by electrons and is usually used to describe the electronic structure of materials. Previously, the DOS has been used as a ML descriptor to predict the DOS at the Fermi level and other DOS features. Effects of exchange correlation and van der Waals (vdW) force functionals on the simulation of the surface adsorption have been extensively investigated. To obtain basic and important knowledges on bond formations and adsorption, we selected following three types of model systems, viz. 1) diatomic systems consisting of various elements, 2) an atom adsorbed on an ethylene molecule, and 3) an atom adsorbed on a bulk surface modeled by a graphene sheet. Ethylene and graphene were selected because of their technological importance, as exemplified by the production of polyethylene To minimize interactions between mirror atoms, all calculations were performed using sufficiently large supercells, e.g., 15 Å × 15 Å × 15 Å cubic cells for diatomic and molecular adsorption systems and 7 Å × 7 Å × 14.7 Å supercells having a graphene sheet composed of 18 atoms for graphene adsorption systems. An energy cutoff of 500 eV and a 4 × 4 × 1 Γ-centered k-point grid were used for all calculations. The atomic structures were relaxed until their residual forces became less than 0.05 eV/A. Binding energy, Fermi energy, covalent electron amount, bond distance, and total DOS were obtained for all systems except for those without bonding and those with non-converging calculations (possibly due to unstable interactions). The binding energy of diatomic/adsorption systems (Ebinding) was defined as where Ewhole is the total energy of the optimized system containing the adsorbing/bonding atom and the BP, EAtom is the total energy of the bonding/adsorbing atom, and EBP is the total energy of the isolated atom (diatomic system), an isolated ethylene molecule, or an isolated graphene sheet. To validate our simulations, we compared the calculated binding energies and bond lengths with those reported previously. The bond length and biding energy of diatomic molecules were compared with database and confirmed that the present simulation well reproduced the latter values as shown in Fig.S1 The amount of covalent electrons (QC) observed upon going from isolated systems to diatomic/adsorption systems are defined as where QAtom and QBP are the site-projected charges of the isolated atom and the BP (atom, ethylene, or graphene), respectively, while QAtom' and QBP' are the site-projected charges of the adsorbed atom and the BP (atom, ethylene, or graphene) of diatomic/adsorption systems, respectively. The model hyperparameters, number of nodes, number of layers, and activation functions were optimized using Bayesian optimization. The TensorFlow framework, which is a high-level neural network API, To validate the prediction model, we have performed 5fold cross-validation, in which four-fifths of the training set was used to train the models, and one-fifth was used as indicating that all binding energies, irrespective of the system, were accurately predicted using the DOSs of isolated systems as descriptors. Although no constraint was used, the MAE for atom/BP and BP/atom bonding energies was approximately 0.08 eV, indicating that the constructed prediction model correctly grasps the kind of elements and BP from their input DOSs. The data distributions obtained for diatomic molecules, ethylene-X, and graphene-X cases were different. The binding energies for adsorption systems (ethylene-X and graphene-X) were relatively low (close to zero), whereas a broad range of values was observed for diatomic systems, -9~0eV. As graphene and ethylene have similar carbon-carbon π-bonding characters, their isolated atom binding energies can be similar to each other. The similar prediction of the binding energy using DOS has been recently reported, but we have applied this method to predict other adsorption properties, such as bond length, Fermi energy, and covalent electron amount as below In addition to binding energy, the stable bond lengths between atoms and BPs were also correctly predicted (Fig. Similar to the cases of binding energy and bond length, the amount of covalent electrons (Fig. These results commonly indicate that the DOSs of isolated systems before bonding is the powerful descriptors for predicting bonding/adsorption properties, including binding energy, stable bond length, amount of covalent electrons, and Fermi energy. Here, the physics behind the descriptor proposed in this study, the DOSs of isolated system, is discussed. These bonding properties are related to orbital-orbital interactions. The basic molecular orbital theory suggests that the magnitude of these interactions is mainly determined by the difference between orbital energy levels, with orbital overlap depending on orbital type. These two pieces of information can be determined from DOS shape, i.e. DOS position and intensity represent the orbital energy level and type, respectively. Thus, DOSs can be used as descriptors to predict these bonding/adsorption properties. On the other hand, the relationships between Fermi energy and DOS shape have not been explicitly mentioned. However, our results suggest that some buried information on Fermi energy is present in the DOS profile, which can be an indication of relationship between Fermi energy and the DOS profile through orbital energy levels and number of electrons. It is worth noting that our model could predict the properties of stable systems. For two isolated systems separated by a known distance, one can quantitatively calculate the binding state using approaches such as the molecular orbital method. When only the two isolated systems are known, however, even state-of-the-art first-principles techniques require iterative calculations to obtain stable system parameters, which suggests that big data and ML approaches can be effectively used for previously not considered tasks. Even models with a training set fraction of 0.2 yielded R 2 > 0.7 for binding energy (MAE=0.44eV), bond length (MAE=0.17Å), amount of covalent electrons (MAE=0.10e), and Fermi energy (MAE=0.39eV), which suggested the high generalization capability of our model and implied that it can be applied to other systems obtained by combination of additional isolated systems by means of transfer learning. Thus, our study revealed that the DOSs of isolated systems contain abundant information and can be powerful descriptors for predicting bonding/adsorption properties. In summary, a ML approach was used to predict the chemical bonding, binding energy, bond distance, covalent electron amount, and Fermi energy of bonding/adsorption systems from the DOSs of isolated systems before bond creation. The constructed model achieved very accurate predictions of all properties even when the training data amounted to 20% of the whole data set. The pairs of DOSs of isolated systems before bond creation were concluded to contain much useful information on the bonded systems (binding energy, bond length, covalent electron, and Fermi energy) and be powerful descriptors for predicting numerous bonding properties. As the developed approach has a high generalization capability, it can be applied to the bonding of larger molecules such as nano clusters, nanowires, and catalytic molecules, and the adsorption of atoms at bulk surfaces. 