Ammonia (NH3) is commonly used as group V precursor in gallium nitride (GaN) metalorganic chemical vapor deposition (MOCVD). The high background carbon (C) impurity in MOCVD GaN is related to the low pyrolysis efficiency of NH3, which represents one of the fundamental challenges hindering the development of high purity thick GaN for vertical high power device applications. This work uses a laser-assisted MOCVD (LA-MOCVD) growth technique to address the high-C issue in MOCVD GaN. Carbon dioxide (CO2) laser with wavelength of 9.219 μm was utilized to facilitate NH3 decomposition via resonant vibrational excitation. The LA-MOCVD GaN growth rate (as high as 10 μm/hr) shows a strong linear relationship with the trimethylgallium (TMGa) flow rate, indicating high effective V/III ratios and hence efficient NH3 decomposition. Pits-free surface morphology of LA-MOCVD GaN was demonstrated for films with growth rate as high as 8.5 μm/hr. The background [C] in LA-MOCVD GaN films decreases monotonically as the laser power increases. A low [C] at 5.5×10 15 cm -3 was achieved in LA-MOCVD GaN film grown with the growth rate of 4 μm/hr. Charge transport characterization of LA-MOCVD GaN films reveals high crystalline quality with room temperature mobility >1000 cm 2 /Vs. LA-MOCVD growth technique provides an enabling route to achieve high quality GaN epitaxy with low-C impurity and fast growth rate simultaneously. This technique can also be extended for epitaxy of other nitride-based semiconductors. Gallium nitride (GaN) has played an important role in optoelectronics, photonics as well as radio-frequency (RF) electronic devices due to its wide direct band gap (3.4 eV), high electron mobility (>1000 cm 2 /Vs), high critical electric field (3.4 MV/cm), and high thermal stability. As a promsing candidate for power electronic applications, the Baliga's figure of merit (BFOM) of GaN is more than 500X and 3X higher than that of silicon (Si) and silicon carbide Trimethylgallium (TMGa) and ammonia (NH3) are commonly used as the group III and group V precursors for MOCVD GaN growth. At the typical MOCVD growth temperature of GaN (~1000 °C), the pyrolysis efficiency of NH3 is only at ~1% or less It has been suggested that carbon (C) impurity originating from metal-organic (MO) precursors is incorporated preferentially on nitrogen sites (CN) in n-type GaN, giving rise to a deep acceptor level, which is responsible for compensating the n-type doping Carbon incorporation in MOCVD growth of III-nitrides is significantly affected by the stoichiometric balance which relies on the effective V/III ratio on the growth surface. The input V/III ratio is determined by the molar flow of group V and group III precursors, while the effective V/III ratio refers to the active group V and group III species participating during the growth process. Conventional approaches to suppress C incorporation in MOCVD GaN growth include: 1) increasing input V/III ratio via increasing NH3 flow or decreasing TMGa flow Laser CVD (LCVD) is a method that introduces laser as an additional energy source during CVD process. There are two types of LCVD: 1) pyrolytic, in which a laser beam interacts with the substrate to create hot spot locally or globally for thermal-assisted chemical reactions; and 2) photolytic, in which a laser beam interacts with the chemical reactants to break the chemical bonds and thus facilitate the growth In this work, high-quality GaN thin films using CO2 laser-assisted MOCVD (LA-MOCVD) growth technique was demonstrated. The effects of the laser-assisted NH3 decomposition on the GaN growth, impurity incorporation, and electron transport properties of LA-MOCVD GaN were systematically studied. Experimental results indicate that the effective V/III ratio at the growth surface can be significantly enhanced via CO2 laser excitation in LA-MOCVD. C impurity incorporation can be reduced by more than 60% in LA-MOCVD GaN. GaN epifilm with low C (5.5×10 15 cm -3 ) was achieved with a low input V/III ratio of 875 and a growth rate of 4 μm/hr. LA-MOCVD GaN films show superior transport properties with room temperature mobilities over 1000 cm 2 /Vs for films grown on both GaN-on-sapphire templates and free-standing GaN substrates with the growth rate of 4.5μm/hr. LA-MOCVD growth technique provides a new route to achieve high-quality GaN epifilms with low impurities and fast growth rates promising for high power device applications. The schematic of the LA-MOCVD system is shown in Figure CO2 laser power absorption under different controlled chamber conditions was investigated. Figure Typical MOCVD GaN growth is performed under N-rich conditions with the input V/III ratio up to several thousand. Thus, the GaN growth rate is limited by the mass transport of Ga species, i.e., the TMGa flow, and therefore has a linear relationship with the TMGa flow rate Analytical models based on the Langmuir isotherm have been utilized to study the surface reconstructions and carbon coverages in GaN MOCVD under different growth conditions At equilibrium, the fractional coverage θ of an adsorbate can be expressed as where μ gas is the chemical potential of gas species, ε is the absorption energy. For a multispecies absorption process, the fractional coverage of the i th adsorbate can be re-written as: where pi represents the partial pressure of the i th gas species and p 0 represents the reference (atmosphere) pressure. To qualitatively illustrate how the laser-assisted NH3 decomposition influences the carbon incorporation, key absorption processes were taken into consideration in this model. The absorption processes and the corresponding absorption energies cited from prior density-functional theory (DFT) reports are listed in Table Assuming the NH3 radicals (NH2 and NH) are from the direct decomposition of NH3, a two-step decomposition processes are considered: 1) First-step decomposition: NH 3 (g) ↔ NH 2 (g) + H(g); and 2) Second-step decomposition: NH 2 (g) ↔ NH(g) + H(g). Figure For example, a1=1% and a2=1% means 1% of NH3 decomposes into NH2, and 1% of the produced NH2 decomposes into NH. Figure Table Absorption process Absorption energy (eV) Reference NH3(gas)→NH3(ad, T1) 1.17 A series of GaN sub-layers were grown under various growth conditions for quantitative SIMS characterization to probe C impurity concentration. The detailed growth conditions were listed in Table and Group II (growth pressure 200 Torr). Among each group, the input laser power was varied to investigate the impact of laser power on C incorporation and GaN growth rate. Table In addition to the V/III ratio, the absolute flow rate of TMGa or NH3 can significantly impact the background [C] incorporation as well. This factor can be taken into account from the GaN film growth rate, considering [C] is positively related to the GaN growth rate Therefore, [C] is plotted as a function of the input V/III ratio/GR from this work as compared to data reported from literature, as shown in Figure GaN films were grown on 2" (0001) GaN-on-sapphire templates (GaN templates) and ammonothermal Mn-doped free-standing GaN substrates in a commercial vertical rotating-disk MOCVD reactor (Agnitron Technology Inc, Agilis MOCVD R&D System). The temperature of growth surface was measured in-situ via a pyrometer. TMGa and NH3 were used as Ga and N precursors, respectively. H2 was used as the carrier gas. Diluted silane (SiH4) balanced in N2 was used as Si dopant. Impurities of selected samples were characterized by quantitative secondary ion mass spectroscopy (SIMS), with the carbon detection limit (DL) of 1×10 15 cm -3 . Surface morphologies of GaN films were characterized by Huvitz HRM-300 optical microscope, Thermo Scientific Apreo scanning electron microscopy (SEM), and Bruker atomic force microscopy (AFM). Room temperature electron transport properties were measured by Vander-Pauw Hall configuration using the Ecopia HMS-3000 Hall effect system.