Polar van der Waals (vdW) crystals that support phonon polaritons have recently attracted much attention because they can confine infrared and terahertz (THz) light to deeply subwavelength dimensions, allowing for the guiding and manipulation of light at the nanoscale. The practical applications of these crystals in devices rely strongly on deterministic engineering of their spatially localized electromagnetic field distributions, which has remained challenging. This study demonstrates that polariton interference can be enhanced and tailored by patterning the vdW crystal α-MoO3 into microstructures that support highly in-plane anisotropic phonon polaritons. The orientation of the polaritonic in-plane isofrequency curve relative to the microstructure edges is a critical parameter governing the polariton interference, rendering the configuration of infrared electromagnetic field localizations by enabling the tuning of the microstructure size and shape and the excitation frequency. Thus, our study presents an effective rationale for engineering infrared light flow in planar photonic devices. Phonon polaritons (PhPs) are quasi-particles arising from the coupling of photons and optical phonons in polar crystals. As such developing these understandings of highly anisotropic polariton propagation and spatial confinement is anticipated to open a new degrees of freedom for sub-diffraction-limit light focusing and manipulation. Here, through the combination of theoretical calculations and real-space nano-imaging, we demonstrate the engineering of infrared electromagnetic field localization of HPhPs in microstructures constructed from biaxial α-MoO3 crystal. The polariton waves that propagate inside a specific microstructure will encounter and be reflected by boundaries, whereby polariton interference results, generating complex standing wave patterns. We show that such interference is governed by the orientation of the in-plane polaritonic isofrequency curve (IFC) relative to the microstructure edges. This is possible because the energy flow directions of the incident and reflected polariton waves are both normal to the IFC. Therefore, the electromagnetic field spatial distributions within a microstructure can be configured by tuning the size and shape, as well as the excitation frequency. The obtained localized fields are highly anisotropic, irrespective of the symmetric microstructure shapes that are supported within. Moreover, we show that the spatial near-field distributions of a wedge-shape microstructure are strongly dependent on the angles between the bisector of the vertex angle and the [001] axis of the α-MoO3 crystal. Such result further illustrates the combination of inplane anisotropy and boundary manipulation as a paradigm for configuring electromagnetic fields at the nanoscale. α-MoO3 supports anisotropic PhPs throughout the mid-infrared (545 to 1010 cm -1 ) and THz (267 to 400 cm -1 ) spectral range, An analytical model was first developed to calculate the in-plane IFC the HPhPs propagating inside a vdW slab of finite thickness (see note S1). According to the model calculations, the electromagnetic waves in the hyperbolic vdW slab are dominated by the TM polariton modes with a dispersion relation: ; d is the slab thickness; k0 is the free-space wavevector; θ denotes the angle of the propagation direction relative to the x-axis, M represents the order of the different TM modes, and εc and εs are the dielectric constants for air and the substrate, respectively. Using the permittivity of α-MoO3 as the input parameter (see note S1, table bisected by x-axis. As a result, polaritons within the Restrahlen band are forbidden to propagate along y-axis. Similar calculation results can be obtained for the negative-εy-Band (see note S2, Figure (Figure In addition to the fringe shapes, the anisotropic IFCs can modulate the interference patterns in three aspects. First, in negative-εx-Band, the IFCs exhibit a larger φ at a smaller ω (Figure These behaviors can be understood by considering that the evolution of q as a function of γ in negative-εx-Band is opposite with those in elliptical band (Figure The above model calculation results can be verified experimentally. To that end, α-MoO3 microstructures of various sizes and shapes are fabricated by employing the focus-ion beam (FIB) technique (Figure We further corroborate the model calculation results and reveal the complex interference fields by calculating the near-field distributions, Re(Ez), above the micro-disks launched by a z-polarized electric dipole. Such a simulation configuration guarantees that all reflected waves, and not just the back-reflected ones, are included in the interference fields. The simulations are performed using finite element method (FEM, Comsol). The results indicate that unlike other polaritons generating isotropic concentric patterns, (negative-εx-Band) (Figure In negative-εx-Band, the polariton interference at positions b and c are contributed by the polaritons with a large q near the IFC asymptotes and a relatively small q near the qx-axis (Figure Specifically, for excitations in elliptical band (986 cm -1 ), where the HPhPs can spread along all directions with orientation-dependent wavevectors, all boundaries can act as reflectors and generate polariton interferences that are strongly dependent on the microstructure shapes. For square (Figure x-and y-axes (solid and dashed lines, respectively, in Figure The normalizations are done by dividing the calculated or experimental field amplitudes of the microstructures by that of the substrate. Scale bars: 1.0 μm. The interference patterns become even more asymmetrical for the excitation frequency in negative-εx-Band (915 cm -1 ). Both the square and regular hexagon microstructures only exhibit fringes parallel to the y-axis, with the two strongest located next to the edges (Figure As a result, additional fringes parallel to the two edges can be observed (Figure Moreover, due to the forbidden of polariton propagation, no fringes emanating from the rotated edges can be observed in all of the three microstructures (Figure Most interestingly, according to the IFC, the q associated with the polariton waves propagating toward the two oblique edges is much larger than q[100] (Figure Therefore, in the square microstructure, the contributions from polaritons with high wavevectors are neglected, giving rise to discrepancy of interference fringes at the corners between calculation and experimental results. The results above unambiguously demonstrate that the electromagnetic field localizations can be configured by controlling the shape and the size of an α-MoO3 microstructure, and the excitation frequency. We further demonstrate the configurability by fabricating and imaging a set of α-MoO3 micro-wedges with fixed vertex angles at 30°and varied skew angles (β) from 0 to 90°, which is defined by the angle between the wedge bisector and the y-axis (upper panel, Figure Accordingly, polariton wavelength λp associated with Edge II will first increase and then decrease against β (Figure The patterning of photonic materials into micro-and nanostructures has been well established for controlling electromagnetic waves at the nanoscale. Our study demonstrates that by combining in-plane anisotropic polaritons with high spatial confinement, that polariton interference effects inside an α-MoO3 microstructures can be controlled by tuning the excitation frequency (IFC topology), shape (number and type of the boundary), and size (polariton propagation length) of the microstructure. Thus, the configurability of the nanoscale electromagnetic fields can be extended in terms of anisotropic spatial distributions and orientation dependence, which, otherwise, usually requires the design and patterning of complex architectures in isotropic counterparts. It should be noted that very recently two inplane THz polaritonic bands have been discovered in α-MoO3. Fabrication of α-MoO3 Microstructures: α-MoO3 single crystal slabs were prepared using thermal physical vapor deposition method. Numerical Simulations: Numerical simulations were performed using the finite element method (FEM, Comsol). To generate the near-field spatial distributions above the various 2D slabs and microstructures, HPhPs were launched using a z-polarized electric dipole source. Specifically, in each simulation, the dipole was located 200-nm above the sample surface. The near-field distributions, Re(Ez), were obtained on the plane 20-nm above the sample surface. The dipole was scanned across the sample at a step of 5 nm. The thicknesses of the slabs and α-MoO3 microstructures were set as 170 nm. Permittivities of the samples were modeled by fitting their respective experimental data using Lorentzian dielectric models. was illuminated by a mid-infrared laser source with tunable frequencies from 900 to 1240 cm -1 (quantum cascade laser, Daylight Solutions). The tip was vibrated at a frequency of ~270 kHz. The back-scattered light from the tip was directed to an MCT detector (HgCdTe, Kolmar Technologies). The near-field signal was then extracted using a pseudo-heterodyne interferometric method, and the detected signal was demodulated at a third harmonic of the tip vibration frequency. Supporting Information is available from the Wiley Online Library or from the author.