Magnetic impurities in a superconductor induce Yu-Shiba-Rusinov (YSR) states inside the superconducting gap, whose energy depends on the strength of the coupling to the impurity and on the density of states (DOS) at the Fermi level. We consider DOS exhibiting a logarithmic or a power-law divergence at the Fermi level due to Van Hove singularities (VHS) and high-order Van Hove singularities (HOVHS), respectively. We find that the energy of the YSR states has the same functional form as in the constant DOS scenario, with the effect of the singularity being an enhancement of the effective coupling constants. In particular, the critical magnetic coupling strength at which the Shiba transition occurs is always lowered by a factor 1/ρ(∆/Ec), where ∆ is the superconducting gap, Ec is the bandwidth, and ρ(E) is the factor in DOS which diverges at E = 0 for a VHS or HOVHS. Further, since the critical magnetic coupling is significantly reduced, a new regime becomes accessible where the transition point is controlled by the non-magnetic coupling constant. Interestingly, the slope of the Shiba energy curve at the Shiba transition is independent of impurity parameters and purely reflects the band structure. Additionally, we find that our main conclusions remain valid even when the Fermi level is not precisely tuned to the Van Hove singularity, but instead lies on an energy range of order the superconducting gap. Our results show that tuning a superconducting material towards a VHS or HOVHS enhances the possibilities for engineering YSR states, and for characterizing the superconductor itself. The appearance of VHS in the DOS as the system is tuned through a Lifshitz transition enhances electronic correlations which in turn can trigger quantum emergent phenomena such as superconductivity The classical spin of a magnetic impurity embedded in a superconductor is an example of a pair-breaking defect which leads to the formation of localized excitations inside the superconducting energy gap known as Yu-Shiba-Rusinov (YSR) states In the present work, motivated by the recent discovery of superconductivity in TBG Our paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II, we present our model Hamiltonian for the Shiba impurity coupled to a superconductor with a Fermi level tuned near a VHS or HOVHS. Sec. III contains our analytical and numerical results for both types of Van Hove singularities. Finally, in Sec. IV we provide a short conclusion and discussion of our results. The effect of a small perturbation in the chemical potential away from the singularity is discussed in App. A, and some technical details are presented in App. B. We consider a pointlike, isotropic, magnetic impurity on a two-dimensional, s-wave superconductor. The Bogoliubov-de Gennes Hamiltonian (BdG) of the system in the Nambu basis Ψ where k and r designate the electron's momentum and position, ξ k is the energy dispersion of the electrons in the superconducting substrate, ∆ is the superconducting gap, K is the amplitude of the non-magnetic scattering potential and J ≡ JS/2 denotes the coupling strength between the electrons and the magnetic impurity with classical spin S at r imp , and Pauli matrices τ i and σ i act on particle-hole and spin space, respectively. In the present study we disregard any quantum effects associated with the magnetic impurity (e.g. Kondo screening), and comment on the validity of the model in the discussion section. In this work we focus on three expressions for the energy dispersion ξ k defined in the continuum, since the information relevant for the Shiba state comes from the vicinity of the Fermi momentum, and thereby the three energy dispersions are representative of three broad classes of systems: ones with constant DOS at the Fermi energy, ones with a classical VHS, and ones belonging to a family of HOVHS labeled by a parameter ν, as we detail now. Firstly, owing to the toroidal topology of the Brillouin zone, the energy dispersion of two-dimensional systems is always endowed with at least two saddle points, defined as where D the Hessian matrix of ξ k . First discussed in the context of phonons where ξ is the energy measured from the Fermi level. Here the prefactor stems from imposing the normalization condition 1 = Ec -Ec ρ(ξ)dξ, and E c is an energy cutoff which is introduced to delimit the energy range over which Eq. ( which is conveniently normalized with the use of the same bandwidth. Finally, in recent works the notion of Van Hove singularity was extended to high order Van Hove singularities Here -1 < ν < 0, ν ∈ Q, is the parameter labeling the HOVHS, the E c has the same meaning as above, and η ≡ ρ(-|ξ|) ρ(|ξ|) is the particle-hole asymmetry ratio. Note that we include the case of particle-hole symmetric HOVHS at η = 1, and that the previous two dispersions are also symmetric. The exponent ν can take an infinite number of rational values in its range, each value having a corresponding η value; a set of possibilities is tabulated in Ref. Having defined the models, we now calculate the energy of the Shiba states looking for in-gap solutions of the Schrödinger equation in particle-hole space. A logarithmic divergence of the DOS at the Fermi level as in Eq. ( where the existence of two symmetric eigenvalues stems from the particle-hole symmetry constraint of the BdG Hamiltonian, and J = f vh (∆, E S )J and K = f vh (∆, E S )K are effective coupling energies with a renormalizing factor proportional to the density of states in Eq. ( An important consequence is that a Van Hove singularity in the DOS at the Fermi level enhances the effective coupling energies in the Shiba problem, since f const < f vh . In the presence of a magnetic impurity, localizing an electron entails an energy trade-off due to the exchange interaction, therefore the energy of the in-gap excitation E S FIG. 1. Positive branch of the Shiba energy, Eqs. ( decreases as J increases (see Fig. where j ∈ {const, vh} labels the chosen dispersion. In all our calculations we assume K E c , therefore the relation f const (∆, 0) < f vh (∆, 0) implies that a Van Hove singularity in the DOS at the Fermi level reduces J c with respect to its value with a constant DOS. This remains true even when Fermi level is not exactly tuned to the Van Hove singularity but within an interval of the order of the superconducting gap instead, although the expression for J vh c becomes slightly more complicated (see App. A for details). The DOS enhancement at the VHS enables one to access a new regime of the impurity system. Namely, the theory is always applicable in a "small K" regime defined by K 1 fj (∆,0) , which in the case of the constant DOS reiterates the theoretical condition K E c . This regime in the VHS case leads to the critical magnetic coupling J c reduction due to the larger f j (∆, 0) [Fig. We note that the VHS introduces a dependence of the J c on the superconducting energy gap ∆, in contrast to the standard Shiba impurity for constant DOS. Specifically it implies that lowering the superconducting gap enhances the impurity coupling, which may motivate a search for systems with optimal size of superconducting gap given the experimental energy resolution. The general form of the critical magnetic coupling J j c reveals a quantity that is independent on the impurity parameters J, K and instead characterizes the DOS itself. Namely, the slope of the E S (J) curve at the parityswitching point only depends on the DOS and ∆, dE S dJ J=Jc = -∆f j (∆, 0). In the case of a power-law divergent DOS at the Fermi level as in Eq. ( where the renormalization parameters also inherit the structure of the DOS. The seemingly more complicated appearance of the Shiba-energy equation stems from the particle-hole asymmetry of the DOS. Indeed, if the DOS is symmetric around the Fermi level, i.e. η = 1, the factor f 2,ν vanishes and the expression for the Shiba energy simplifies to Eq. ( The effect of a particle-hole symmetric singularity (either a VHS or a HOVHS) in the DOS at the Fermi level is to enhance the effective coupling between the impurity and the electrons in the host. The critical magnetic coupling for the Shiba transition in case of HOVHS takes a slightly more complicated form, For the particle-hole symmetric case, η = 1, this expression has the same form as for the VHS, Eq. ( , i.e. in the large K regime, but then the K 2 term prevails, therefore J c is governed by the non-magnetic scattering amplitude K and it does not depend on the details of the underlying DOS [Fig. Interestingly, we again find a quantity that is independent of the impurity parameters, namely the slope of the E S (J) curve at the Shiba transition point: implying also that the particle-hole asymmetry of the HOVHS divergence would be reflected in Shiba states (see Fig. In summary, we found that tuning the Fermi level to a conventional VHS or HOVHS enhances the coupling between the superconducting substrate and the magnetic impurity, thereby offering a pathway to improve YSR states engineering. These results become particularly significant in the advent of twisted transition metal dichalcogenides and graphene heterostructures which allow to tune the system over large regions of the parameter space. From a practical standpoint one might inquire about the validity of the results in the vicinity of the Van Hove singularity. We explore this matter in detail in Appendix A. The key takeaway is that our main conclusions remain valid even when the Fermi level lies on an interval of the order of the smallest energy scale in the problem, i.e. μ ∈ [-∆, ∆]. If the chemical potential deviates from the Van Hove singularity by an energy of the order of the superconducting gap, essentially the same electronic states are mixed when superconductivity is switched on, hence a similar behavior of the Shiba states is expectable. The robustness against perturbations in the chemical potential strengthens the experimental relevance of these results; nevertheless, it is fair to remark here we only considered an s-wave superconductor while electronic instabilities due to a divergent DOS may yield more exotic pairings Additionally, we showed that it is possible to extract an impurity-independent quantity from the E S -J curves, namely the slope of the curve at the Shiba transition. State-of-the-art experiments have shown that it is possible to continuously tune the exchange coupling constant between magnetic molecules We find that our main conclusions remain valid even when the Fermi level is not precisely tuned to the Van Hove singularity. The enhancement of the effective coupling constants with respect to the constant DOS scenario continues to exist, we can still access a "large K" regime where the non-magnetic scattering potential controls the critical J, and the slope of the E S (J) curves at the Shiba transition remains independent of the impurity parameters. Further, we note that the relative change of the meaningful observables, namely J c and the slope at the transition point, are of the order of few percent for our range of μ. In the following we present the results for the two broad classes of DOS singularities. The Shiba energy now fulfills a self-consistent equation analogous to that discussed in Section III B in the context of asymmetric HOVHS: where the f 2,vh factor stems from the asymmetry induced by the perturbation in the chemical potential. We recall that when the DOS is symmetric around the Fermi level f 2 = 0 for any class of Van Hove singularities and the Shiba energy equation simplifies to the standard form [Eq. ( These expressions justify the insignificant variation of the E S (J) curves: the factor f 1,vh inherits the logarithmic form from the DOS as in the μ = 0 case while the correction characterizing the newly introduced asymmetry is such that f 2,vh /f 1,vh ∼ μ ∆ 1 log(Ec/∆) The approximate factors become most accurate at the Shiba transition where E S strictly vanishes, therefore by expanding them to lowest order in μ ∆ it is possible to capture the behavior of the critical magnetic coupling: where Thus, it becomes clear that the relative corrections to J c are small assuming a realistic bandwidth, i.e. ∆ E c . Interestingly, in the absence of a non-magnetic potential scattering (K = 0) the system is particle-hole symmetric, and therefore electron or hole doping has the same effect on J c [inset (a) in Fig. where Analogously, if the Fermi level is tuned to the vicinity of a HOVHS, the self-consistent Shiba energy equation also takes the form of Eq. with φ = arg(μ + iω). We find that the renormalizing parameters also inherit the power-law dependence from the DOS [cf. μ = 0 case, Eq. ( ) We solve Eq. (B2) by performing the substitution dk (2π) 2 = ρ(ξ)dξ and evaluating where Note that the same Eq. (B2) also follows from calculating the poles of the transfer matrix in the usual T -matrix method. a. Logarithmic DOS (conventional Van Hove singularity) Here In the limit ω Ec → 0, Here with -1 < ν < 0, ν ∈ Q . To calculate the integrals we use result 3.251.10 from Ref. 1 0 dx x p-1 (1-x q ) -p q = π q 1 sin p q π , q > p > 0. (B8) Taking an infinite energy cutoff, E c → ∞, we have where we performed the changes of variables x = ξ ω and t = 1 x 2 +1 , and we identified q = 1 and p = 1-ν 2 (B9a) and p = -ν 2 (B9b). We now allow for a finite chemical potential and the relevant integrals read where a. Logarithmic DOS (conventional Van Hove singularity Substituting Eq. (B4) and in the limit ω Ec → 0, where in integral (B12) we further took the limit μ ω and approximated the term in brackets by μ Ec 4x (x 2 +(ω/Ec) 2 ) 2 . b. Power-law DOS (higher order Van Hove singularity) Substituting Eq. (B7), the integrals (B10) are readily solved using the standard keyhole contour of infinite radius with a branch cut on the positive real axis: where Re iφ = μ + iω.