Material produced by current metal additive manufacturing processes is susceptible to variable performance due to imprecise control of internal porosity, surface roughness, and conformity to designed geometry. Using a double U-notched specimen, we investigate the interplay of nominal geometry and porosity in determining ductile failure characteristics during monotonic tensile loading. We simulate the effects of distributed porosity on plasticity and damage using a statistical model based on populations of pores visible in computed tomography scans and additional sub-threshold voids required to match experimental observations of deformation and failure. We Metal additive manufacturing (AM) is a relatively recent and now widespread manufacturing process that enables new levels of geometric complexity in designs. In its current state of development, issues with uncontrolled porosity and surface roughness In our previous work Although we do not apply reliability methods to the data, the work falls in the general context of design under uncertainty. There is a large body of literature on the probabilistic failure of brittle materials In fact, the uncertainty of the mechanical response of porous metals such as cast iron has long been been a topic of interest They propagated the mean and standard deviation of damage based on a random field of initial damage and demonstrated a reliability-based method with the design of a cast control arm. Gurson-type constitutive models that they, and we, have employed have shown success in representing the complex failure process The associated modelling effort focused on the complex behavior of nearby void coalescence leading to failure. Shakoor et al. In a related effort, we use thousands of realizations of porous AM 17-4 PH specimens to explore the interplay of geometric design features and explicitly modeled pores in this work. With this extensive exploration, which is necessary to sample rare failure events, we also find a transition in failure behavior and location with geometry and stress concentration. We utilize these observations in a statistical model that characterizes the contributions of the stress concentration versus the background of randomly located pores. This model enables estimation of the likelihood of failure, either as expected near a stress concentration versus randomly due to a critical pore not near the stress concentration. This information has significant value in design. We find that a significant likelihood of unexpected failures only occurs in a limited and bounded regime of mild stress concentrations. In Sec. 2 we review the computational model we developed and calibrated in Ref. As discussed in the Introduction, the performance of AM materials can be significantly degraded by uncontrolled porosity. This porosity arises from a variety of physical phenomena active in the AM process, giving rise to distributions of defects of varying size and character. Thus it is difficult to represent the effects of this porosity with a bulk quantity such as overall material density. As in our previous work In the previous study where C is the isotropic elastic modulus tensor with components which depend on Young's modulus E and Poisson's ratio v. Here is the total strain, p is the plastic strain, andp is defined as the elastic strain. The void fraction is denoted by φ, and its evolution effects a reduction of stiffness of the material via Eq. ( The evolution of the isotropic hardening variable κ is governed by: with κ(t = 0) = κ 0 . Here, s = dev σ is the deviatoric stress, σ vm ≡ 3 2 s • s is the von Mises stress, and ̇ p = 2 3 ̇ p • ̇ p is the equivalent plastic strain rate. The model parameters are the yield stress Y , the flow coefficient f , the flow exponent n, the hardening modulus H, and the recovery coefficient R. The damage due to sub-threshold porosity φ also evolves. In the formulation, the implicit void volume fraction φ is related to the void concentration η and the average void size ν by φ ≡ ην/(1 + ην). To model nucleation, the void concentration η, a number density, evolves according to: where p = 1/3 σ • I is the pressure, J 2 = 1/2 tr s 2 = 1/3 σ 2 vm and J 3 = 1/3 tr s 3 . The N 1 component responds to shear, and the N 3 component corresponds to nucleation due to triaxiality p/σ vm . The evolution relation for φ, includes nucleation and growth of voids, where the damage exponent m, and the volume of newly nucleated voids ν 0 , are additional model parameters. Lastly, once the void fraction φ exceeds a threshold φ max the material, as discretized by finite elements, is considered completely failed and acts as a pore. The calibrated parameters are summarized in Table As discussed in the Introduction, we selected the double U-notched tension specimen shown in Fig. We varied the notch radius R in the range 0.05-0. to reproduce the experimentally observed average porosity φ = 0.008 and spatial correlation length ≈ 0.05 mm as described in detail in Ref. Fig. Tensile loading was effected with minimal displacement boundary conditions on the top and bottom surfaces (refer to Fig. A number of dimensionless scales are apparent in this model. The analytic expressions for stress concentration provide a few based on the nominal geometry, shown in Fig. The stress concentration K ≡ σ max /σ induced by notches of this type have been estimated analytically where σ max is the maximum stress, σ is the nominal stress (without the notch), and W is the width of the specimen. Our voids are coarsely discretized and three dimensional, nevertheless the stress concentration due to cylindrical holes where r is radius of the hole, d is the distance from the hole to the surface, and W is the width of the rectangular specimen. Following Fig. While not present in the analytical solutions, the length of the specimen L relative to the dimensions of the notch also plays a role, albeit a less significant one, as the simulations discussed in Sec. 2 will illustrate. With the computational model described in Sec. 2, we ran 1000-10,000 realizations of nominal geometries with different notch depth D and notch radius R to explore the effects of specific porosity configurations on failure. The simulations display a complex interplay between explicit pores and stress concentrations caused by the geometry. We isolate physical effects by: changing notch dimensions to alter the stress concentrations and necking zone; and including or omitting the explicit porosity which engenders random small scale stress concentrations. The behavior of the ensemble of realizations is described in this section and a descriptive statistical model of the behavior in the subsequent section. To determine the baseline effect of pores without stress concentrations we ran 10,000 explicit porosity realizations of the nominal geometry without the double Unotch. Fig. The evident difficulty in devising a simple mechanistic predictor of failure location motivates the statistical treatment developed in Sec. 4. In this section, we survey the influence of varying the nominal geometric features of the U-notch. In contrast to the stochastic nature of the failure processes observed in the nominally uniform specimens of the previous section, we expect to observe effectively deterministic effects of stress concentration due to the double U notch on the failure location. We explored a wide range of the geometric notch parameters R and D, from a true notch R/D 1 with a significant stress concentration factor to a taper R/D 1 that only slightly focuses the stress field. As mentioned in Sec. 2.2, the radius of the smallest notches we examine is comparable in size to the largest explicit voids. Fig. To understand the competition of the nominal geometry and material porosity in driving failure, we use distributions of failure location as surrogates. Intuitively, high variance in the failure location indicates a dominance of the random porosity, while low variance indicates a dominance of the nominal geometry. Fig. notches the damage zone is localized. As the notches widen so does the damage zone but only up to a point, at which the zone remains effectively constant width. This can also be observed in the progression of histograms shown in Fig. However, a wider notch creates a larger damage zone that is sufficient to dissipate the external power supplied by the boundary loading. Consequently, on average there is no excess of power to be dissipated in failures outside this zone, and therefore they are unlikely to arise. In this case, the localization stabilizes in a constant width zone sufficient to dissipate the prescribed external power. Clearly, by adding the notch we impose a background stress field that makes failure more likely at certain pores. Given the non-linearity of the model the effect is not strictly a superposition of the fields due to the notch and to the porosity, as assumed in classical analytical models. Nevertheless it is illuminating to try to decompose the effects by simulating the same nominal geometry without pores. Fig. As expected, the extremes of the stress fields become more pronounced as R decreases. We can also obtain empirical estimates of stress concentration, plotted in Fig. Thus, on one hand it is clear that the pressure is important in determining the global performance of the specimen, while local behavior can be more closely correlated with the von Mises stress. To reconcile these observations, we develop a statistical model for the interaction of the structural geometry-induced stress fields and the material porosity. We relate the statistical model to design parameters for a particular geometry, demonstrating a practical application of the model; and, we use empirical stress concentrations, such as those plotted in Fig. Since the explicit pore locations are unlikely to be available for design, we develop statistical models for a probabilistic characterization of failure location. We reduce the three-dimensional failure location to a one-dimensional random variable representing the axial location of the centroid of the failure region to enable robust statistical analysis with the amount of data collected. Gaussian mixture models (GMM) are widely-used finite mixture models used in capturing the underlying distribution of observed data in various fields of applications However, Gaussian distributions are symmetric and have infinite support. Here, the failure location, normalized by the specimen length, falls within the unit interval, and its distribution is not generally symmetric, as observed from analysis based on kernel density estimation. Thus, we employ a mixture of beta distributions, also known as a beta mixture model (BMM) Finite mixture models Denoting by z the failure location normalized by L = 4 mm to the unit interval, we define the K-component uni-variate BMM as where denote the collection of component weights (or component coefficients), w k , and beta PDF hyperparameters (or component parameters) a k and b k . A beta PDF is given by where beta(a, b) = Γ(a)Γ(b)/Γ(a + b) is the beta function, and Γ(•) is the gamma function. The shape of the beta distribution depends on two hyperparameters, a and b, which determine whether the distribution is symmetric or highly skewed. See Fig. The calibration of the BMM of the z failure locations reduces to estimating W, A and B, subject to the normalization constraint K i=1 w k = 1. We handle this constraint by explicitly expressing the one coefficient w K = 1 -K-1 i=1 w k in terms of the others for K > 1 and w 1 = 1 for K = 1, therefore reducing the number of unknowns by 1 coefficient. We will estimate the unknown parameters from the available n ≈ 10 5 independent samples of failure location, z j , j = 1, . . . , n, using the maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) technique or, equivalently, through maximizing the log-likelihood given by where f is given by Eq. ( In this context of calibrating a beta mixture model, MLE generally results in a non-concave optimization problem with several local maxima Another practical issue with the use of finite mixture models relates to the choice of number of components, K. Akaike information criterion (AIC) Second, for increasingly sharp notches there is a trend for the narrow component to dominate, but with significant contributions from the asymmetric component. Although not as well resolved due to limitations imposed by the mesh size we selected at the outset, this trend is clear for the sharper notches. The stress concentrations at the notch edges are significant drivers for all but the sharpest notch, where the stress concentrations at the notch center becomes entirely dominant. Third, there appears to be a transition regime where the notch is small enough relative to the specimen that failures occur with significant frequency outside the notch. This regime is where R/L is on the order of 1/10-1 for the notch depth of D = 0.05 mm analyzed in this section, which translates to stress intensities ≈ 1.2-1.5. In much of this regime the off-center component is also significant, indicating that the effects of the secondary/shear stress concentrations at the notch edges are of comparable influence to the effects the material porosity. From a design perspective Fig. We performed an extensive statistical study to investigate how a background, uniform porosity interacts with stress concentrations due to as-designed, nominal geometry in a ductile AM metal. Although we focused on our study on a single specimen geometry, the U-notched tension specimen is a commonly employed geometry and we generalized the results using the classical stress concentration concept. The trends in the spatial distribution of failure locations are complex, and exhibit two asymptotic regimes: (a) where the stress concentration is high but the high stress region is small relative to the sample, and (b) where the higher stress region is large but the stress differences are relatively small. In the first case, a significant fraction of the failures are outside the stress concentration region due to the intrinsic stress concentrations of the pores themselves. In the second case, effectively all failures occur in the notch region and the distribution of failure locations appears insensitive to geometry for specimens with well-separated geometric and material length scales. Between these two regimes is an interesting regime where multi-modal distributions arise associated with the primary stress concentration at the notch root as well as secondary stress concentrations at the notch edges. An interpretable statistical model fitted to the data allowed us to make these observations quantitative. We found that the distribution of failures can be accurately described with a mixture of four beta distributions: (a) a broad one associated with the uniform density of pores, (b) a narrow one due to the strongest stress concentration at the notch root, and (c) two off-center, less dominant distributions associated with shear stress concentration regions near edges of the notch. This work clearly demonstrates, for a relevant specimen geometry, the existence and extent of regimes where the likelihood of unexpected failure due to latent material defects is significant, and suggests paths to generalize these results in ways that could be used to establish quantitative design guidelines.