The so-called Fröhlich entropy is the entropy variation of a material under the application of an electric field. This quantity can be calculated, under suitable hypotheses, directly from the measured real part of the dielectric function. Although Fröhlich entropy is defined for a biased sample, a straightforward physical interpretation correlates it to the state of order of the considered physical system in absence of field. When Fröhlich entropy is calculated from experimental results, its trend is able to give several information about the evolution in temperature of the explored compound, especially of its phase transition features. We here provide a comprehensive review of the physical systems (dipolar liquids and nematicons, organic molecular crystals, metallic nanoparticles, inorganic disordered ferroelectrics, etc.) where this approach has been exploited with the aim of evaluating their state of order. The variety of compounds where this method has been applied demonstrates that the estimation of the Fröhlich entropy can be considered The issue of investigating the order/disorder degree of a given physical system has addressed by exploiting several experimental methods. The choice of which method should be employed depends on different features, such as what kind of system is considered, which sensitivity is requested, which temporal and/or temperature range should be detected, what complexity and which cost of the used instruments can be faced, etc. The exploited techniques are quite complicated, being employed to investigate both mesoscopic and microscopic realms. A particular attention is devoted to phase transitions in crystalline systems, where several concepts are involved, such as structural symmetries, stability, critical temperatures and amplitudes of phenomena, anisotropies, etc. Morphology and ordering are usually studied by the well known techniques employed in crystallography, such as X-ray diffractometry Among experimental techniques, on the other hand, dielectric spectroscopy is typically widely employed to characterize a given material behavior. When the dielectric properties are investigated as a function of temperature, such a technique is able to provide detailed information on the phases of the material. Nevertheless, a dielectric macroscopic technique usually is not considered a method to explore the ordering of a system: in fact a description of the order state of a material would seem to be out of its possibilities. An ideal pathway to obtain order information from dielectric physical quantities would be finding a correlation between them and thermodynamic quantities. The issue of bridging dielectrics and thermodynamics was faced for the first time in the context of the electrocaloric effects Since the entropy is a measure of the molecular disorder, an external field creates order in dipolar liquids and gases for which ε s decreases with increasing T . This may be expected because the field will orientate some of the dipoles which in the absence of a 1 Pg. 6, note 7 2 Chapter 1, pages. 12-13 field are at random. In some dipolar solids, on the other hand ε s increases with T , which means that an external field increases the disorder. This too is understandable if one assumes that in the absence of a field the dipoles are in a well-ordered state as may be expected in solids. The field by turning some of the dipoles into different directions can thus only decrease the existing order." 3 Immediately after these sentences, in the same textbook the picture reported in Fig. The recalled Fröhlich statements indicate that information about the state of order of a given system could be extracted, in principle, from its dielectric response. This gives the possibility of obtaining some thermodynamic information by exploiting dielectric techniques. Moreover, it enables to investigate the state of order through an approach which is usually not considered for such a kind of investigation and which is generally simpler and cheaper with respect to those above-mentioned. Despite the significance of this thermodynamic approach was recognized by founders of the physics of dielectrics ferroelectric and glassy perovskites In this review we intend to provide up-to-date landscape of the use of Fröhlich entropy in experimental studies. We analyze the required theoretical and experimental conditions where it can be used and how it has been exploited for describing several different physical systems, especially about phase transitions. The obtained wide outlook will demonstrate that Fröhlich entropy measurements can be accepted in the set of the trustworthy and well-consolidated methods, a further option which can be chosen, in alternative with respect to the standard investigation ways. This approach could be called Fröhlich entropy evaluation or Fröhlich entropy technique. The study of entropy in condensed matter pointed out that different entropic contributions can be inspected in materials. The discussion of these is faced in many works (e.g. Fröhlich equations give the correlation between the electric field E, dielectric displacement field D, static dielectric function ε s , and the total thermodynamic energy U , entropy S, Helmholtz free energy F . Specific hypotheses are assumed to obtain such relationships. First, Fröhlich assumes that the considered material does not change in volume so, in particular, electrostriction effects can be neglected ties can be written as where U 0 , S 0 , F 0 are the change of respectively thermodynamic total energy, entropy, Helmholtz free energy in absence of field, while U E , S E , F E are their respective field-induced variations. The constraint of handling reversible transformations requires that, at each considered temperature, the involved physical variables do not depend on the time When D changes with the temperature T , from Eq. ( When a static field is considered, if the correlation between E and D is linear, we have where ε 0 is the static vacuum constant and ε s is the relative static dielectric constant, as previously hinted. Fröhlich recalls that, when ε s changes with the temperature T , Eq. ( EdD, where Q is the heat exchanged by the system, U is the exchanged energy, S is the entropy of the considered system, all calculated for unit of volume. Then, we define the Helmholtz free energy F as which represents the maximum amount of work which can be extracted from a system in an isothermal process 7 . Eqs. ( Such relationship has a structure similar to that of the state equation which means that a variation of D may be written as the sum of two contributions: a change in the field-strength E at constant temperature, and a change in temperature at constant E. Here it is useful to employ T and E 2 as 7 We recall that Fröhlich considers a system whose volume is maintained constant and the sole varying parameters are the temperature T and the electric field E the independent variables. So we can write the first law of thermodynamics given by Eq. ( A further relation will now be obtained from the entropy law according to which dS, given by Eq. ( Thus it is found that where A and B are both functions of the two variables T and E 2 . The condition that dS is a total differential requires that Inserting dQ from (12) into relationships ( This equation is of the type (15); Eq. ( Integrating with respect to E 2 yields the energy density where U 0 (T ) is independent of E 2 but depends on T , thus it represents the energy of the dielectric in absence of a field. From these relationships, Fröhlich easily calculates entropy S: comparing Eq. ( or integrating where S 0 (T ) is the entropy in the absence of a field. From Eq. (10) one finally finds for the Helmholtz free energy where F 0 (T ) is the free energy in the absence of a field. We can summarize Fröhlich's results by saying that under the above-stressed assumptions, relationships (1) are expressed by which are the Fröhlich's thermodynamic relationships Fröhlich total energy, Fröhlich entropy, Fröhlich free energy (all for volume unit) (1b), i.e., in scalar approximation Therefore, the field dependent part of entropy is Relationship which holds, of course, in the same hypotheses of Eqs. The constraints of linear and scalar dielectric response can be bypassed without specific assumptions on the physics of the considered material, but just through suitable mathematical treatments If an anisotropic dielectric is assumed, the dielectric function must be expressed by a tensor ε, so the relation between E and D has the general for i, j = 1, 2, 3, where the x, y, z components of the field are labeled as If we then focus on the entropy, from relationship (25b) we can evidently extend Eqs. ( and Eq. ( which have, of course, the same physical meaning of their corresponding formulae in the scalar case. We note that the expression (26) giving the field-induced entropy in an anisotropic medium is very similar to the usual expression giving the electric (free) energy density in the same conditions. This similarity can be highlighted by writing relationship This last one can be immediately compared with Eq. ( The physical meaning of relationships ( Then, let's assume that the electric field is applied along the direction 1, where the system response is expressed by ε 11 , i.e. E ≡ (E 1 , 0, 0); so, the corresponding entropy variation will be and analogously for a field along 2 and 3 directions. It is useful expressing Eqs. ( ) ) where E is the strength of the electric field. These relationships show that, if the electric field has strength E and direction given by θ and φ angles, when ε ij has the diagonal form at a given temperature) will be the coefficients for calculating the values of the variations of the considered thermodynamic quantities. On the other hand, they can also be seen as the resulting total energy, entropy, free energy, respectively, due to the application of a unitary field along one of the principal directions of ε ij We note that, once the components of ( are known along the principal directions (i.e. where ε ij is diagonal), relationships If the response of the dielectric to the field is not linear, second and third order nonlinear terms should be taken into account. So the field-dependent terms of (1) can be written in the form ) ) where U (1) E are, respectively, the term depending on linear, quadratic, and cubic susceptibilities, and analogously for entropy and free energy. The fundamental relationship between the dielectric displacement D and the electric field E (Eq. ( where ε ijk and ε ijkl , for i, j, k, l = 1, 2, 3, are respectively the absolute second-and third-order nonlinear dielectric functions. The expression of the total energy, in the form of (1a), for a nonlinear medium is while the entropy and the Helmholtz free energy: These last expressions have the form of (1) and their field-dependent parts have the form of The scalar formulation of ( These equations point out that a not-null second-order nonlinearity makes the thermodynamic quantities depending on the cube of the applied field: this implies that a dielectric system with ε (2) = 0 must be noncentrosymmetric, showing that a material with a not-null static second-order nonlinearity necessarily hosts a breaking of symmetry. We here examine three different interpretations of Fröhlich entropy. The first one is correlated with the simplest model of a dielectric, i.e. a set of dipoles that may be oriented by a measuring field. The second one stresses that FE can be used to check the state of order of a system; namely, it is found very useful to describe the features of phases and correlated transition processes. The third framework highlights the capability to give a measure of the stability within an explored phase. All these views have been practically exploited in the investigation of physical systems where FE evaluation has been carried out. It is worth noting that the original previously quoted Fröhlich's interpretation 8 was also recalled e.g. by Scaife and by Böttcher, with similar sentences, in their classical monograph on dielectrics [32-34] 9 . The relationships involving U , S, and F exposed in the previous sections have deep physical meanings. In fact, Eq. ( Through Eq. ( For our treatise, the most important results involve the entropy as given by Eq. Of course, this picture is not limited to specimens explicitly hosting dipoles (e.g. polar liquids We want here to emphasize that Fröhlich entropy can be fruitfully exploited to finely describe the state of order (or disorder) of a macroscopic system. Moreover, since FE derives from dielectric measurements, it allows to almost continuously follow the evolution of the order/disorder state, which signals the features of the considered phase and correlated transitions. Namely, the powerful of FE evaluation is particularly evident when phase transitions occur. Actually, an order/order transition manifests itself as a variation of the positive slope of the S E curve, since the entropy contribution supplied by the field is positive both before and after the transition. The corresponding values of S E (T ) are in accordance to the degree of order of each phase FE was also demonstrated to be able to provide specific information about the stability of a considered long-range phase. This conceptual approach was developed mainly in works concerning organic molecular crystals is great, this implies that the system is strongly modified by the application of the E. On the other hand, if the corresponding value of |S E (T )| is relatively small, this means that E slightly changes the status of the system. Then, we ca reasonably assume that, in the considered conditions, the system in the first case is in a less stable configuration than in the second case. So, both for ordered (S E < 0) and disordered (S E > 0) configurations, FE is able to provide an immediate quantitative estimation of the stability of a given temperature dependent phase and to compare this feature between different phases. In particular, a nearly constant trend of S E (T ) points out a temperature region with highly stable features, while a steeply changing of S E (T ) is be associated to instability features, which typically become the most marked in correspondence to the phase transition temperature regions. The scheme in Fig. The generality of the relationship that defines Fröhlich entropy and the use of his interpretation in studying very different physical systems raise the problem of practically satisfying its theoretical validity conditions, whose assumptions are listed in section 2.1 (pg. 10). These guarantee that the formalism of relation (21b) (and its extensions (25b) and ( We here provide a comprehensive landscape of the physical systems where FE has been employed as an investigation instrument aimed at gaining specific information about material state and its evolution. We will not discuss investigations where, although Fröhlich relationships are used, experimental conditions determine that the application of the electric field not negligibly modify the structure of the considered physical system. In other words, we will consider those works where the applied E can be considered a probing field. For this reason, we will not discuss the works of the groups of G. Johari Then, we will discuss systems of polar liquids and glasses, where FE has been employed in several works since 2007, mainly due to J. Jadz ẏn et al. of Poznań group. Subsequently, the use of FE for analyzing phase transitions and phase stability in semiconductor molecular crystals is considered. Fröhlich's argument has been fruitfully used in the investigation of disordered ferroelectric crystals also, whose evolution of the order state has been finely described and a directional description has been remarkably provided. Finally, works on FE in polymeric films and diluted enzymes will be discussed. As hinted before, the first class of physical systems where the Fröhlich formalism was applied in the interpretation of experimental results are confined metallic nanoparticles. Specifically, Ga nanoparticles embedded in a SiO x matrix are considered, a paradigmatic arrangement analogous to other confined systems where the interfaces play a key role The issue of phase transitions in nanometric-size metallic particles studied through dielectric spectroscopy had been faced in a preliminary work by Pavia group in 2000 After this work, a specific effort was accomplished towards getting more information about the nanoparticle phase evolution from dielectric measurements. Hence, a new analysis approach exploiting Fröhlich's theory and interpretation was given in 2003, in a work where melting and premelting processes are investigated "through capacitance measurements" The investigated samples containing Ga particle layers may be considered as a system of two capacitors in series, the layer of SiO x and the layer of Ga clusters, following Fig. The features of phase transitions are investigated on two different samples of Ga nanoparticles, whose the most representative are particles of 20 nm radius (Ga20). Preliminary transmission electron microscope (TEM) measurements as a function of temperature, which are reported in Fig. The FE correlated to the dielectric response of Fig. from the solid to a liquid state of Ga. In particular, the shown trend of FE vs. temperature demonstrates that the disorder of the system increases with T until 250 K. We note that the presence of a slope change at 220 K signals the arising of pretransitional features, while the occurring of the specific transition is abruptly pointed out by the change of sign at 185 K. Moreover, when the temperature is increased, the trend of dC/dT (i.e. the FE) indicates the sequence of transitions through several metastable phases, in agreement with those reported in the literature We here discuss more deeply the specific item of melting process. As we hinted before, in low-size systems the amount of surface atoms with respect to the bulk ones can not be considered negligible, so the melting processes in such systems display peculiar features. In these conditions the use of FE analysis, which gives the possibility of continuously following the evolution vs. temperature, enables to carry out a detailed study. This topic was specifically faced in two works about the melting evolution in Ga nanoparticles Among the order/disorder phase transitions, melting is one of the most extensively observed, but achieving a complete microscopic description often is difficult. For instance, it is well known that in the considered Ga metallic nanoparticles thermodynamic properties related to melting show significant deviations with respect to the bulk ones. The key role of the surface in the melting processes was stressed in different experimental investigations Conversely, FE analyses are found to be able to specifically detect surface precursor phenomena. Actually, the dielectric response is closely related to the polarized surface of the nanoparticles: this implies that such a technique selectively gets the signal of first atomic layers of the considered physical system. Fig. The plot clearly points out the sign change at 185 K, assessing the onset of an order-disorder transition. In the interval 220-250 K we compare TEM images with FE analysis results. These are characterized by a progressively more pronounced slope, as one expects, when the instabilities are strongly enhanced and start involving the inner part of the system Summarizing, the investigation of phase transitions on Ga nanoparticles shows that the FE evaluation method is particularly sensitive to the evolution of the low-sized (less than μm) systems, where the surface features are a key ingredient to produce melting and, more generally, phase transition processes. The relationships given by Fröhlich between dielectric function and entropy is demonstrated to be useful in investigating surface phenomena in these nanometric systems in terms of order-disorder transitions and their evolution. The FE estimation, although it is an intrinsically macroscopic measurement, is found to be very accurate in describing the dynamics of surface atoms, allowing to follow the different phases of premelting and full melting. Therefore, the investigation of melting processes by dielectric measurements and related FE estimation was demonstrated to display the strict correlation of the dielectric response with the surface polarization, notably the surface first atomic layers and a high sensitivity for finely following the phase transition evolution. Further wide classes of materials where FE interpretation was demonstrated to be a useful experimental tool is that of polar liquids and glasses. Frohlich's relationships were used to describe both structural liquids and nemoticons, in a series of works mainly carried out by J. Jadżyn and his group. FE evaluation is exploited to describe the arrangement of structural liquids, both organic and inorganic, in suitable solvents. Studies are carried out on polar inorganic pure formamide A meaningful example of such a kind of studies is reported in Fig. where ∆S is the entropy variation for unit of volume which is due to the application of the electric field Such experimental approach was also used to specifically highlight the variation of orientational features as a function of solvent concentration: this was carried out, as hinted above, with mixtures of propylene carbonate and DMSO, a compound of significant application interest x DMSO . It allows to follow the structural evolution of the physical system with a crossed-view between stoichiometry and temperature. A further set of compounds where FE evaluation is fruitfully employed is liquid crystals. In particular, this approach was used in 2008 to describe the dynamics of mesogenic 4-(trans-4'-n-hexylcyclohexyl)isothiocyanatobenzene molecules in prenematic conditions ) in mesogenic solvent of n-hexylcyanobiphenyl In Fig. At higher temperatures, dε s /dT is negative: following Fröhlich's interpretation, this shows a typical disordered polar liquid-like behavior. Lowering temperature a continuous decrease of the disorder is pointed out, also with the change of FE sign, so displaying a further increase of correlation among the molecules. This gradual increasing until the vertical trend of the plots indicates the full I-N transition. It is worth noting that the pure 2C y Ph9 without solvent (which is indicated as x = 1 and 2C y Ph9 in the plots) shows no FE variation. We here note the specific sensitivity of FE evaluation to pretransitional processes, which is able to describe prenematic behavior in these organic compounds. Several organic semiconductors raised great interest in research, due to high charge mobilities making them promising materials for applications in electronics Organic crystalline semiconductors (OCS) typically undergo phase transitions depending on temperature variation From the Plot 13a we can see that for the temperature interval between which is the signature of a stable liquid-like system. It is worth noting that the induced S E value calculated for 4T in its liquid phase is comparable to the value already found in other organic liquids where FE has been evaluated Indeed, we can conclude that in OCS the FE evaluation technique is able to detect the nature and evolution of temperature-induced phase transition with its extent in temperature and to give a measure of the state of order of solid and liquid state. The matter of evaluating the stability degree of a given matter phase has been specifically faced on several physical systems. The usual approach is based on thermodynamic arguments such as Gibbs free energy, entropy, enthalpy and analogous potentials A detailed stability analysis was accomplished in TEN crystals Below and immediately above the instability region, the features of three approximately stable phases, with different levels of order, are evidenced in a near flat FE trend. Above 223 K the continuous increasing with temperature of the FE positive values demonstrates a progressive strong increase of the correlations between molecules. In the heating stroke (Fig. The physical meaningfulness of FE analysis was pinpointed by its application to disordered ferroelectric single crystals, where this experimental approach was also tested to highlight anisotropic features. The analysis was specifically employed for describing the thermal evolution of long-range phases and state of order in inorganic perovskites for photonics applications Compositionally disordered perovskite crystals display a sequence of structural symmetry transformations as a function of temperature Namely, as hinted above, PNRs play a key role both in the phase stability and in transition processes. Their structural symmetry, which are different from that of the surroundings, was explored in the tetragonal and orthorhombic phases and they were found to be rhombohedral Actually, works about KTa 1-x Nb x O 3 (KTN) are focused on this transition (KLTN) Finally, we note that FE oscillations can also be found in such a kind of physical systems (Fig. The description of the order state evolution depending on T was proven particularly valid in describing anisotropy; this approach can be considered quite original. Actually, although the foundation theory is mathematically easy and well established Actually, these materials have temperatures where they behave as ordered systems in one direction and disordered systems in another direction (Fig. global view (d2) and projections along the axes x (disordered, liquid-like, a2), y (ordered, solid-like, b2) and z (ordered, solid-like, c2); the tetragonal phase with one ordered (solid) and two disordered (liquid) directions (disordered, disordered, ordered, "ddo"): global view (d3) and projections along the axes x (disordered, liquid-like, a3), y (disordered, liquid-like, b3) and z (ordered, solid-like, c3). 18). This is found in tetragonal and orthorhombic phases, which display unusual arrangement where the system is contemporaneously solid-like in one direction and liquid-like in another. Congruently, these investigations point out that just the highest (nominally cubic) and lowest (nominally rhombohedral) crystalline phases have the same order state in all directions, i.e. disordered and ordered feature respectively (Fig. It is worth observing that directional FE demonstrates that the rhombo-hedral phase, which is ordered along all directions, is the true stable phase in these relaxors We finally stress that both in KLTN and KNTN a remarkable agreement is found between the distribution of the macroscopic order/disorder state as given by FE with the microscopic arrangement of ions as depicted by the eight-sites model of Comès et al. A further physical system where FE evaluation has been demonstrated to be able to provide useful information are enzymes, namely globular pro- The present review provided the landscape about the exploitation of FE evaluation to inspect the state of order in condensed matter. We have highlighted that this approach, which we call Fröhlich entropy technique, can be considered a reliable experimental approach for the investigation of several physical systems. Summarizing, the presented method allows the following items: 1. observation of the thermal evolution of the state of order in the sample almost continuously; 2. determination of a stability level of the explored phase; we here employ the absolute dielectric function ε ≡ ε 0 ε s , where ε 0 is the vacuum dielectric permittivity and ε s is the static relative permittivity ∆S of Eq. (37) is the same quantity of S E in Eq. below the so-called Burns temperature