A new method for the analysis of the scattering rates from angle-resolved photoelectron spectroscopy (ARPES) is presented and described in details. It takes into account experimental instrumental resolution and finite temperature effects. More accurate results are obtained in comparison with a standard, commonly used method. The application of the method is demonstrated for several examples commonly encountered in new quantum materials. Its usefulness is especially apparent in investigations of systems with strongly correlated electrons. The understanding of electronic correlation effects is one of the great challenges of solid state physics. The reason is that many macroscopic properties such as electronic transport properties, thermal properties, magnetism, or superconductivity are related to these correlation effects. Experimentally the correlation effects can be studied by measuring for example the resistivity, from which one can derive the scattering rates, because they are at low temperatures mainly related to electron-electron interaction. The mass enhancement due to a polarization of the electron liquid can be derived for example from specific heat measurements at low temperatures. This works well for simple metals which have very often just one band close to the chemical potential with an isotropic Fermi velocity. Most metallic materials, however, have a much more complicated electronic structure. There may be several bands close to the Fermi level and the mass renormalization of a band may be momentum dependent. In most cases, the above mentioned methods only provide a momentum averaged information. To obtain a microscopic understanding of the electronic structure of these more complicated systems one needs momentum dependent information. Angle-dependent photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) is a unique method which provides this momentum dependent information. Therefore it has developed to the method to study the electronic structure of solids ARPES measures the photocurrent, which is related to the spectral function A(ω, k, T ) multiplied by a matrix element and by the temperature dependent Fermi function The spectral function corresponds to the imaginary part of the Green's function which describes the propagation of a photo-hole Both, ε and Γ can be related to the complex self-energy Σ = Σ + i Σ ( Σ and Σ are real and imaginary parts of the self-energy, respectively): where (k) is the bare particle dispersion. Γ(ω, k, T ) = -2Z(ω, k, T ) Σ(ω, k, T ) where Z is the renormalization function directly related to the mass enhancement: This is valid for a one-band system for small self-energies close to the Fermi level, i.e., for a Fermi liquid when quasiparticles exist. Both, the imaginary part ( Σ) and the real part ( Σ) of Σ are connected by the Kramers-Kronig transformation. However, one should have in mind that using the Kramers-Kronig transformation in case of a multi-band system is rather complicated due to interband interactions In recent decades, the ARPES method has become a powerful tool in studies of solids. This is because, it delivers information about an electronic structure in a very direct way in the momentum space. Specific methods for analysis and interpretation of ARPES data have been also developed. The ARPES spectrum, i.e., a cut of the spectral weight along high symmetry direction in the momentum space collected at the given temperature T can be analyzed in several ways. The most intuitive approach is to analyze sections corresponding to a fixed momentum k, i.e., energy distribution curves (EDC). EDC profiles are Lorentzian peaks if the scattering rate Γ is constant in energy. Otherwise, one needs to know the explicit form of the scattering rate Γ(E) as a function of energy. The EDC analysis is especially useful in a case of weakly dispersive features in the electronic structure (quasiparticle bands in heavy fermion systems). However, one has to keep in mind, that EDC profiles are affected by the energy-dependent background due to additional scattering processes in photoemission. The other approach is to analyze sections corresponding to a constant energy, i.e., momentum distribution curves (MDC). Assuming that the dispersion can be linearized, MDC profiles can be approximated by a Lorentzian function. Performing Lorentzian fits to MDCs, corresponding to subsequent energies ω, one obtains the dispersion relation (k, ω = ε(k)) from the maximum of the Lorentzian peaks. The scattering rates can be determined multiplying obtained Lorentzian full width at half maximum (FWHM) by the group velocity v = dε dk at a given energy. This method is free from detrimental influence of an energy dependent background and can be applied if the explicit form of Γ(E) function is unknown. However, this method does not work properly if dε dk ≈ 0 (e.g. close to the top/bottom of the hole/electron pocket). If the dispersion consists of several branches then the spectrum is fitted with the linear combination of Lorentzian peaks. This is approximation, which works only if there is no big overlap between both branches. The evaluation of the scattering rates by the MDC method has been first applied to metals such as Be Recently, machine learning techniques have been applied for ARPES data analysis. Some of them are image processing techniques A special approach, which allows to overcome difficul-ties in both, MDC and EDC methods has been described in Refs. The need of accurate analysis of the spectral function of novel materials has boosted us to develop further twodimensional fits of ARPES data. Our "All At Once" fitting procedure (AAO) takes into account the influence of both the Fermi function and the instrumental resolution. The spectral function A (eq. 1) is multiplied by the Fermi function. Some form of the dispersion is assumed (e.g. parabolic). Subsequently, it is convoluted with the Gaussian kernel with fixed parameters representing the instrumental resolution. An energy dependent background is added. Then, the entire two dimensional function is fitted to the ARPES spectrum collected along some direction in the momentum space. The scattering rate is obtained directly as a function of energy. For each energy channel ω i there is one fit parameter Γ(ω i ). Our approach does not demand to know 'a priori' a particular form of the scattering rate, in contrast to some previous attempts of two-dimensional fits to ARPES data The fitting procedure is sensitive to the relative ratio between energy step of a data δω and energy resolution ∆ω. Namely for δω < ∆ω, the derived scattering rate starts to oscillate. To overcome this problem we introduced constraints in our fitting program. We assumed the following general form of constraints: where ε is a small dimensionless number and Γi is a quantity defined by a formula: coefficients w j are weights coefficients. We checked that the best fitting results are achieved for w j of the simplest form, i.e., for w j =const. We aimed on development of some universal constraints, which can be used for any input data. However, we did not succeed, because the proper choice of constraints depends on the scattering rate slope. Therefore, one needs to check carefully that the obtained scattering rates are not distorted by using the constraints. Here, we performed many fits to the same data set using different constraints (i.e., different combinations of n, ε parameters) to ensure that results are really stable. We also analyzed the correlation matrix between fit coefficients. For many systems the spectral function of the form (1) is modulated by the energy dependent amplitude which is proportional to the renormalization function Z(ω). The explicit form can be unknown in many cases. Two approaches can be used in order to take into account this effect. Firstly, one can assume that Z(ω) can be modeled by a polynomial in the considered energy range. Secondly, one can introduce the renormalization function as an independent parameter for each energy channel. However, similarly to the scattering rate, oscillations will appear if one considers data with energy step less than the energy resolution. Additional constraints for Z(ω) should be used then. We would like to admit that we do not discuss matrix elements and final states effects In the subsequent sections we analyze the spectral function for different cases: linear band, Dirac cone, hole pocket, Bogoliubov dispersion, and "kink" anomaly due to electron-phonon coupling. We simulated spectral function and then analyzed it with two methods: our new AAO and the standard MDC evaluation method. Moreover, experimental data of K 0.4 Ba 0.6 Fe 2 As 2 are analyzed. All numerical calculations were performed using Igor Pro (Wavemetrics, https://www.wavemetrics.com/) software. The Levenberg-Marquardt As a first example we chose a one-band system with a linear dispersion close to the Fermi level: where ε 0 is a band energy at momentum k = 0 and v stands for the band velocity. One branch of the dispersion (k ≥ 0) has been used in order to avoid complications. Furthermore, Fermi-liquid like scattering rate Γ(ω) is used: where λ is a coupling constant. Here, the constant term Γ 0 accounts for the contribution of elastic scattering by defects as well as for the thermal broadening Γ th ∼ k B T . The values of used parameters are listed in Table We fit the simulated data using two approaches: the new AAO fitting procedure, and the standard MDC evaluation (each MDC fitted with a single Lorentzian peak). The obtained results are presented in Fig. In Fig. Materials with a dispersion relation described by a Dirac cone in a momentum space, such as e.g. graphene or topological insulators, attracted recently particular attention. We simulated the spectral function of the Dirac material in the same way as described in previous section with the only difference that instead of using eq. 7, we describe the dispersion with: where ε 0 is an energy corresponding to the Dirac point and v is a slope of the band. We assume that the Dirac point is well above E F (ε 0 = -0.4 eV). Thus, the spectral contribution from the upper part of the cone can be neglected in the region of our interest. We assume Fermi liquid-like scattering rates. Similarly as for a single branch of a linear band, here both the MDC and the AAO method determine the dispersion relation correctly (Fig. In this case, the band dispersion is given by: Here, we model a situation with a hole band with its top located 10 meV above the Fermi level. We assume a lifetime broadening consistent with the marginal Fermi liquid theory (MFL) λ is a dimensionless coupling constant and Γ el is an elastic contribution to the scattering rate. Here, we approximate Γ el by a constant and we use a parabola for the renormalized dispersion. We present results corresponding to λ = 0.8, which is close but still below the Planckian limit (i.e., λ = 1) We assume here, that the renormalization function can be approximated by a linear function in energy, i.e., there is an energy-dependent amplitude Z = a 0 + a 1 ω. Such a energy dependence of the renormalization function Z(E), is visible in ARPES spectral function of materials and provides important information about the correlation effects The differences between AAO and MDC methods are visible in the derived dispersion (Fig. The slope of Γ(E) obtained from the MDC evaluation is too large at higher binding energies. Close to E F , the curvature of MDC derived Γ(E) dependency is not correct. The energy-dependent amplitude obtained from the AAO fit is visible in Fig. Pronounced oscillations are apparent close to E F and for ω > 0.12 eV in the AAO result. They appear, because of edge effects, which are difficult to avoid when calculating the convolution, and because of a rapid decrease of intensity caused by the Fermi function. The comparison between the two evaluation methods is summarized in Table Electronic correlations are considered as a crucial factor for superconductivity in iron-based pnictides and chalcogenides. They can lead to the strong renormalization of the band structure which can be studied by ARPES. Here, compared to the previous section, we now present an analysis of experimental ARPES data of K 0.4 Ba 0.6 Fe 2 As 2 (optimally doped BaFe 2 As 2 , T c ≈ 35 K) collected at T=50 K, partially already published in We fitted the AAO derived scattering rates with the dependency predicted by MFL theory (eq. 11). The elastic contribution to spectral broadening was described by the relation where v(ω) is a group velocity, Γ(0) and v(0) denote scattering rate and velocity at the Fermi level, respectively. We obtained a value for the coupling constant λ = 3.03, which is well above the Planckian limit (i.e., λ = 1). Such a large value suggests that a normal state of this material is highly incoherent. This topic and the relation between scattering rates and transition temperature T c are discussed in detail elsewhere Properties of conventional superconductors can be usually explained by the Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) theory. Their electronic structure can be described by the Bogoliubov dispersion close to the Fermi level: where ε(k) is a bare band dispersion and ∆ is the superconducting gap parameter. Here, we simulated the spectral function for a BCS state (Fig. where u k and v k are parameters describing superconducting wave function: We assumed that the bare band is a parabolic hole pocket (cf. eq. 10), and used constant scattering rates Γ. All parameters are summarized in Table where λ denotes a coupling constant, and γ is a small real number that ensures finite value of Σ at energy equal to Ω. We chose γ = 10 -3 eV. The imaginary part of the self-energy operator Σ is usually modeled by the step function: ) However, the sharp jump in Σ at ω = Ω appears only if the renormalization effect in Σ goes to infinity at Ω. Therefore, instead of using eq. 18 , we modeled Σ using a smooth function: where we choose w = 0.01 eV. The spectral function was simulated using a parabolic bare band and assuming parameters similar to those which can be found in other articles and it is well reproduced by the AAO fit (red dashed line). The MDC derived dispersion (magenta dots) agrees well with the input for ω > Ω, while for ω < Ω there is a significant difference between them. We fitted a linear function (blue line) to the MDC derived points between 0.15 eV and 0.01 eV, in order to estimate a bare band velocity necessary to calculate the scattering rates. widths. Correction for finite energy and momentum resolution applied to the MDC result (see the green curve) does not play a role. The overall profile of the input scattering rate is reproduced correctly by the AAO fit, but one should notice that significant fluctuations appear, especially for |ω| > Ω. On the other hand, the MDC result is stable in the full analyzed energy range. It is also apparent that both methods provide a proper estimation of Ω. Systematic difference between the AAO and the MDC derived scattering rates are present for |ω| > Ω, in particular in the region where the spectral function is not properly described by a double Lorentzian, what is visible in the waterfall plot (Fig. In this article we discussed several possible approaches which can be used for the analysis of ARPES data. We briefly reviewed traditional methods focusing attention on advantages and drawbacks of them. A new method (AAO) has been proposed. It allows for accurate evaluation of ARPES data. This was demonstrated for several types of band structures realized in real materials, i.e., for a Dirac dispersion, a parabolic hole pocket, for the Bogoliubov dispersion in a superconducting state, and for a band with a "kink" anomaly due to electron-phonon coupling. The data corresponding to the inner hole pocket around the Γ point measured for K 0.4 Ba 0.6 Fe 2 As 2 were analyzed with the new, proposed method. This method uses the exact formula for the spectral function, taking into account many-body effects. Additionally, obtained results are free from the influence of the instrumental resolution. The advantage of AAO approach is particularly visible for ARPES data close close to the top/bottom of a hole/electron pocket and close to the edge of the superconducting gap. In particular, we emphasize that with our new method, also the energy dependence of parameters, such as the scattering rate, the dispersion (not shown) or the renormalization function ε0 (meV) a (eV Å 2 ) ∆ (meV) Γ (meV) Z ε0 (eV) a (eV Å 2 ) λ Ω (meV) γ (meV) Z