In this paper, we try to create an effective mathematical model for the well-known slayer exciter transformer circuit. We aim to analyze various aspects of the slayer-exciter circuit, by using physical and computational methods. We use a computer simulation for data collection of various parameters pertaining to the circuit. Using this data, we generate plots for various components and parameters. We also derive an approximate equation to maximize the secondary output voltage generated by the circuit. We also discuss a possible method to construct such a circuit using low-cost materials. Our aim throughout this paper, will be to analyze the slayer-exciter circuit, as comprehensively as we possibly can. It can, at times, be quite difficult to keep up with the structure of an academic paper. Therefore, it is our deliberate intention to begin the paper with an overview of the process we shall follow. What does one require, in order to perform an experimental analysis? Some may say we require computers, while others might say we require apparatus. While it is true that we require an apparatus to perform an experimental analysis, and that computational methods can prove very useful in the contemporary scientific scenario, it is also true (in certain scenarios) that we require a theory to test in the first place. Of course, this isn't always the case, but for this paper, it is. Therefore, we shall initiate the paper by a rather brief discussion of the physical theories involved. These include the likes of Lenz's law and the theory of transformers, among some other very interesting theories. The actual analysis lies in the computational model of the circuit, for which, we will use the Falstad circuit simulation applet When an electron is in motion, i.e., if there is some current running through some electrical component (like a wire), then an oscillating electric field is produced ∂ 2 ψ ∂t 2 = 0 Therefore, for an electromagnetic wave, where the speed is the speed of light c, we get, ∂t 2 is known as the d'Alembertian operator, which can be thought of as a four-dimensional Laplacian operator There are really two aspects to Faraday's law of electromagnetic induction. These are formulated in terms of two laws, as follows: Whenever a conductor is placed in a time-varying magnetic field, an electromotive force (emf) is induced in it Here, ε is the emf measured in volts (V), and -→ E is the electric field generated. The electromotive force around a closed path is equal to the negative of the time rate of change of magnetic flux through the surface which the path encloses. For a loop of wire in a time-varying magnetic field, the magnetic flux Φ B is defined by a surface S, whose boundary is given by a loop L. Since, the loop may be moving, we can write S(t)for the surface. Then the magnetic flux is the surface integral given Here, --→ B(t) is the time-varying magnetic field and A is the dot product showing the element of magnetic flux through a small element dA. The magnetic flux through the loop will be proportional to the number of magnetic field components passing perpendicular to the area enclosed by the loop. Subsequently, the magnitude of the emf ε induced in the circuit will be given according to Faraday's law If there are n number of turns, or loops in the wire, then we can just multiply the RHS of equation (3) by n, and the equation will hold true. The magnitude of the induced emf is given by the Faraday's laws of electromagnetic induction. However, emf is not a scalar quantity. It is a vector quantity, and therefore, there is a direction associated with it, which is given by Lenz's law. Lenz's law states that the current induced in a circuit due to induced emf (due to changing magnetic field) is directed so as to oppose the change in magnetic flux, and to exert a force which opposes the motion. Mathematically, this adds "direction" to equations (3) and ( or in the case of n loops, These equations basically imply that the back emf opposes the changing current, which is the cause of the emf in the first place. One of the most interesting features of Faraday's laws is that a time-varying current in one coil can induce an emf in a second coil placed close to it. Suppose that we take two coils, each wound around separate bundles of iron sheets (these help to make stronger magnetic fields), as shown in figure Figure Now, when we connect one of the coils-coil (a)-to an alternating-current generator. The continually changing current produces a continuously varying magnetic field. This varying field generates an alternating emf in the second coil-coil (b). This emf can, for example, produce enough power to light an electric bulb. The current in coil (b) can be larger or smaller than the current in coil (a). The current in coil (b) depends on the emf induced in it and on the resistance and inductance of the rest of its circuit. The emf can be less than that of the generator if, say, there is little flux change. Or the emf in coil (b) can be made much larger than that in the generator by winding coil (b) with many turns, since in a given magnetic field the flux through the coil is then greater. Such a combination of two coils-usually with an arrangement of iron sheets to guide the magnetic fields-is called a transformer. It can "transform" one emf (or voltage) to another. This effect is due to the mutual inductance between the two coils. There are also induction effects in a single coil. In figure The self-inductance L of a loop of wire carrying a time-varying current I (t), is given Here, ε is the electromotive force induced in the loop. Now, for our purpose, we are more interested in the aspect of mutual inductance, because that is one of the main principles of a transformer. Figure Figure Coil 1 consists of a conducting wire wound in the form of a long solenoid. Around this coil-and insulated from it-is wound coil 2, consisting of a few turns of wire. If now a current is passed through coil 1, we know that a magnetic field will appear inside it. This magnetic field also passes through coil 2. As the current in coil 1 is varied, the magnetic flux will also vary, and there will be an induced emf in coil 2. Suppose the current through coil 1 is I 1 , then the emf through coil 1 is given Here, ε 1 is the emf induced in coil 1, I 2 is the current through coil 2, and M is the mutual inductance of the two coils. Suppose we apply a certain amount of output voltage to the primary coil of the transformer (figure We will later verify equation ( There are various kinds of transformers that one can find. One of the most efficient transformers is the resonant transformer. A resonant transformer works on the principle of a resonance in the circuit. In simple terms resonance is basically the rapid pulsating (switching on and off) of the current (or voltage) in the circuit. But how does resonance of the circuit make the transformer more efficient? Well, the resonance helps to maximise the voltage output of the transformer. How? We will see that in a while. First, let's see how resonance functions in AC and DC circuits. Resonance is generally associated with an AC circuit (i.e., a circuit having an alternating voltage source). But the major problem with using an AC source is that the resonance frequency of the source (the frequency at which the AC source switches the circuit on and off) is not the same as the resulting resonance frequency of the transformer (the frequency at which the transformer coils pulsate). In order to gain the maximum output voltage, these two resonant frequencies need to be made equal in a process known as tuning of a transformer. This tuning of a circuit needs to be done manually by adding some form of external resonance generator to the circuit or by adding some extra load to the transformer via a capacitor (see figure Figure We will discuss why the tuning of the transformer is important later in this section. However, in the case of a DC circuit (like the slayer exciter circuit), the resonance can be generated using a transistor (which acts as a switch to rapidly turn on and off the circuit). In this case, the transformer ends are connected to the transistor and the resonant frequency of the transformer coils is equal to the resonant frequency of the transformer coils. In other words, the transformer is already auto-tuned! Hence, there is no need for the extra hassle to manually tune the circuit. This is indeed what makes a slayer exciter circuit unique in its working and distinguishes it from other types of Tesla coils. But why do we need to tune the transformer in the first place? Let's look at a famous analogy to understand this. Suppose we have a simple pendulum (a bob suspended by a string; see figure Figure Our problem here is that we want to create the maximum possible output, i.e., we want the pendulum bob to reach the maximum height possible. Now imagine the pendulum was already oscillating at a certain frequency (but the bob was not reaching the maximum possible height). In order to maximise the height of the bob, we need to apply a force to it. If we think about it deep enough, we will realize that we can't apply the force at any random time. To generate the maximum height, the force needs to be applied when the bob reaches the extreme points in its trajectory (points 1 or 3 in figure One can at least gain an intuition as to why the resonant frequencies need to be equal (i.e., the transformer needs to be tuned) in order to generate the maximum possible output voltage, from the analogy discussed above. This discussion entails all the necessary theory required to move on and perform an experimental analysis of it. 3 Making a Physical Model of the SEC • Gather basic circuit components like n-channel MOSFETs, LEDs, zener diodes, resistors, copper wires, and 9V batteries. • Use a plywood board to establish the base of the set-up. • Take a PVC pipe and wind a single strand copper wire around it (approx. 400 windings). This makes the secondary coil of our transformer. This requires a lot of patience, because the winding needs to be perfect in order to make the circuit function as expected. • Take a thicker copper wire and wind it around the secondary coil (approx. 3-5 windings). Do this as shown in figure • Connect all the components together to form the circuit shown in figure Figure • Switch on the battery source. • Bring a small piece of conducting material close to the transformer. Corona discharges may be observed. Corona discharges are the violet sparks one can see due to the polarization of air surrounding the high voltage transformer. The violet colour is due to the ionization of nitrogen molecules in the air. So, if we bring a conducting material close to the coil, we see a violet spark (corona discharge) between the coil and the conducting material. This step demonstrates the working of our physical slayer exciter circuit. Making the physical model had its own limitations. There was no way we could verify the equation of a transformer (equation 8) using the low-cost physical model, because the measurements would have had a lot of uncertainty, and the results might have been inaccurate. Therefore, we decided to verify the equations graphically using data from an online simulation called Falstad Circuit Applet The first few questions that come in the mind after looking at the schematics is that why have we used a MOSFET Coming to the diodes, the reason we did not use a simple LED is because the input voltage is quite high (almost 14V), and an LED will fuse out or burn out with a voltage supply as low as 4V! In contrast, a Zener diode has a much higher input resistance and can resist higher amounts of input voltage, which is the reason why we used a Zener diode. We have provided a link to the simulation text file in the references 5 Analyzing the SEC Simulation Data Any kind of scientific report would be incomplete if it doesn't provide some tangible results. The physical model of the slayer exciter only serves the purpose of demonstrating its working. But that does not help with any kind of numerical analysis of the circuit. What if we want to know how to maximise the voltage output of the circuit? There certainly isn't any way of doing that by just looking at the physical model or by looking at its applications. Of course, one could get voltmeters and ammeters and all kinds of output meters to get some kind of data. But what if one doesn't have all these resources? Well, for that very reason, we sought out for some technique using which we could perform numerical analysis without need of any kind of voltmeters or ammeters or stop-clocks. The best way of doing so was by using the computer simulation we designed in the previous section. We collected the data from the simulation, embedded it into MATLAB, and generated graphical outputs for better visualization. To serve the purpose of verifying theory, we have decided to plot a graph of how the secondary output voltage varies with time. We will also verify whether the ratio of primary and secondary voltages is equal to the turn ratio of the coil. Barring these, our primary goal is to find an equation that will tell us how to maximise the output voltage by adjusting different parameters in the circuit like resistance, input voltage, inductance, turn ratio and the parasitic capacitance. Lets first see how the output voltage will vary with increasing time. We saw in previous sections that the transistor and the transformer have resonant frequencies, which results in the rapid pulsating of current in the circuit. This means that the current, and therefore the voltage change directions as time passes. If we start at time t = 0s, and observe the change in voltage, we must expect that the voltage traces out a sine curve. One can easily notice, by looking at the data sets, that the time intervals are not uniform. That is owing to one of the drawbacks of the simulation, that the readings need to be taken manually by pausing the simulation every now and then. Figure Here, V S is the secondary output voltage, t is the time elapsed, and k is the proportionality constant, which will be a combination of the other constant parameters listed in table 2. Note that figure According to equation 8, the ratio of secondary to primary voltages of the transformers is proportional to the ratio of the number of turns in secondary to primary coils (i.e. the turn ratio). Table Voltage Ratio The relation between voltage ratio and turn ratio that we get from figure The minor error may be due to the reasons stated before. The analysis uptil this point, helps to verify already existing theory. Now, we will shift our focus towards the main goal of finding an equation to maximise output voltage of the slayer-exciter transformer. As aforementioned, the main purpose of the simulation is to arrive at an equation, which can tell us (approximately, if not exactly) how we could possibly maximize the output voltage for a given input voltage. Apart from time (t; in s) and input voltage (V i ; in V), there are a bunch of other parameters which may or may not affect the output voltage. These are the inductance of the primary coil (L P ; in H), parasitic capacitance (C ; in μF ), circuit resistance (R; in Ω), and the turn ratio n S n P . Let's see how the output voltage varies with each of the above-mentioned parameters, and then we can possibly arrive at an equation that relates the output voltage (V S ; in V) to L P , C , R and n S n P . From equation Combining equation Now let us understand why increasing the primary inductance leads to an increase in the secondary voltage even if the two quantities are not related in any way. Suppose we increase L P in equation ( Secondary Here, V S is the output voltage at secondary and L P is the inductance of the primary coil. As discussed before, a parasitic capacitance C (in μF ) exists naturally between the secondary coil of the transformer and the ground. As we know, a capacitor stores electrical energy; and for doing so, if it needs to keep the charge Q across it's plates constant, it needs to resist any increase in voltage. In other words, capacitance is a ratio of charge and voltage. Therefore, for a given charge, voltage decreases with increasing capacitance. Since the parasitic capacitance is connected to the secondary transformer, it resists any change in the secondary output voltage (V S ) beyond a certain maximum value. Owing to this reasoning, we must expect that V S decreases with increasing C . More the capacitance, more will be the resistance against changing voltage, and hence, lesser will be the secondary voltage. In equation ( We know that the voltage is inversely proportional to resistance. Hence, we expect that the secondary voltage (V S ) will also be related similarly to the circuit resistance (R). Here, V S is the secondary voltage and R is the circuit resistance. n P According to equation ( In other words, the more accurately we measure the different parameters, the more accurate equation (18) gets. Equation ( Before we get too excited by equation ( Combining these we get, Certainly, we can see that equation (18), which we got using the simulation is not a good approximation of the actual equation ( There are a number of logical precautions and potential sources of error, that may occur while preparing the physical model, as well as the simulated model. • The connections may be improper or loose. • Components may be defective. • Circuit might get overheated if kept running for a long time. Due to this, components may get damaged. • The simulation has no means to automatically export data. Hence, data has to be obtained manually by pausing the simulation frequently. This may result in some minor errors while measurement of parameters. • Components in the simulation may be improperly connected. For instance, the Zener diode may be connected in forward bias. • According to the data analysis from simulation, for a given source voltage, the secondary voltage changes with parasitic capacitance, circuit resistance, primary inductance and turn ratio as follows: V S = k n S n P R -0.011 C -0.451 L P • According to theory, for a given source voltage, the secondary voltage changes with parasitic capacitance, circuit resistance, primary inductance and turn ratio as follows: • The output voltage secondary varies as a sine function of the time elapsed. V S = k sin t • The proportionality constant k in the above equations depends on the accuracy of measurement of various parameters. 6 A simple pendulum. The bob (green) will reach maximum height only if we keep applying forces at points 1 or 3. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7 Basic schematic of the slayer exciter. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8 Values for other constant parameters.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9 Data for secondary voltage and circuit resistance. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10 Values of constant parameter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11 Data for secondary voltage and transformer turn ratio. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12 Values of constant parameters. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . shows the data for secondary output voltage (V S ; in V) w.r.t. time (t; in s), and table SEC will be used as a substitute for the Slayer-Exciter Circuit. This method is probably the most preliminary one (or a low-cost one), and can be vastly improved upon, using better instrumentation.