A circuit-simulation-based method is used to determine the thermally-induced bit error rate of superconducting logic circuits. Simulations are used to evaluate the multidimensional Gaussian integral across noise current sources attached to the active devices. The method is data-assisted and has predictive power. Measurement determines the value of a single parameter, effective noise bandwidth, for each error mechanism. The errors in the distributed networks of comparator-free RQL logic nucleate across multiple Josephson junctions, so the effective critical current is about three times that of the individual devices. The effective noise bandwidth is only 6-23% of the junction plasma frequency at a modest clock rate of 3.4 GHz, which is 1% of the plasma frequency. This analysis shows the ways measured bit error rate comes out so much lower than simplistic estimates based on isolated devices. Digital superconducting is a long-standing candidate for beyond-CMOS technology due to high clock rates and unparalleled power efficiency The penalty for such performance is more stringent optimization criteria. The circuits need to be characterized not only by timing design, as with CMOS, but also in terms of parametric operating margins and BER performance. Parametric margins are determined using noise-free circuit simulations, but the more relevant question is to determine parametric margins defined in terms of an acceptable BER. For large scale applications, the acceptable BER for individual gates is on order 10 -24 . These levels are difficult to access in either simulation or measurement. Elevated BER can be measured as a function of a tuning parameter, and extrapolated to the region of unobservable levels. This approach has been widely reported Models of BER exist for only a few simple cases. Analysis of the comparator Simulation methods are also of limited utility. Fokker-Plank simulation has been applied to the comparator We present a new simulation-based method that is a data-assisted multivariate integration. The method repurposes the integral for parametric yield to find BER: • Parametric Yield is the integral of the Gaussiandistributed parameters over the operating region of the circuit. This gives the probability of working circuits. • Bit Error Rate is the integral of the Gaussiandistributed noise currents over the operating region of the circuit. This gives the probability of working clock cycles. A single free parameter, effective noise bandwidth, is determined for each scenario by comparing simulation to measurement. The approach is generally applicable to any circuit schematic and any noise-induced error mechanism associated with Single-Flux-Quantum (SFQ) circuits. The method is deterministic and can calculate arbitrarily small error probabilities with high resolution. The method is efficient in terms of circuit simulations, requiring about 3 N margin calculations for N noise sources. Noise sources are included no more than eight at a time, but a sliding window of inclusion covers larger circuits. BER simulation can be used to improve parametric optimization in the design phase. An important feature here is to ability to calculate individual margins (and BER) as an intersection across global parametric corners. At each corner parameter set, margins are calculated in parallel, and the final number is the most pessimistic result. This approach could be used to calculate the most pessimistic BER across global parameter mistargeting, or across signal input timing. This is adjacent to the statistical timing analysis of advanced-node CMOS, see e.g. The rest of the paper covers simulation-based numerical evaluation of the multivariate Gaussian integral, simulated BER of two representative logic gates, and measured BER and comparison to the simulation. The dataassisted method uses a generic value for effective bandwidth in the initial simulations, and then solves for the measured values. The discussion centers on the physical meaning of the effective noise bandwidth. BER is the probability of failure, which is given by the complement of yield. This is the integral over the tails of the Gaussian distribution, outside the operating region of the circuit. We start with the one dimensional case and generalize to higher dimensions. In the simplest case the upper and lower margins of the circuit are equal. Normalized margin r = m/σ is the circuit operating margin m, normalized in units of the standard deviation. In this case yieldc(r) = erfc r/ √ 2 The upper and lower margins, r a and r b , are likely different. If so, the contributions can be computed separately, normalized, and summed. In N dimensions, analytic results obtain if the operating region is defined by a radius r. where Q(a, x) = Γ(a, x)/Γ(a), is the normalized upper incomplete gamma function as defined e.g. in which is normalized to the total angle Ω N . The mean value of Q for each simplex is Simplexes are indexed by s. For a given simplex, r t[s,i] returns the value of radius, indexed by i, for each of the points. Details of the algorithm are described in Appendix 1. Including calculation of the angle Ω s , the annealing schedule of the adaptive algorithm that adds new points to the operating boundary, and simplex fracturing to create a finer grid. The algorithm does not require the operating region to be convex, which is a fundamental constraint in simplicial design centering In simulation, an auxiliary dc current source is applied across each junction in the circuit. The current through each source is a circuit parameter, with nominal value set to zero and sigma equal to rms noise current, which scales with junction critical current, I c . The expression derives from the Johnson noise, 4k B T B/R us-ing the junction characteristic impedance, R = L J /C J , plasma frequency, B = 1/(2π √ L J C J ), and inductance, L J = Φ 0 /(2πI c ). The bandwidth β is a unitless fraction of the plasma frequency. We will use the effective bandwidth β as a fitting parameter to relate the simulation result to measured data. This expression for noise current does not depend on junction capacitance, C J or shunt resistance. The overall method is 1) choose an initial value for β to simulate BER, 2) compare the simulated result to measured data to find the experimentally-derived effective β for each error regime, and 3) use this value in subsequent simulations. All BER simulations in this paper used the initial value β = 0.25. On the way to evaluating the Gaussian integral, the algorithm reports the critical search vector, directed towards the point on the operating boundary found to be nearest the origin. This indicates which sources contributed most to nucleating the error. The critical vector is suggestive but not definitive. A gate e.g. with symmetric inputs would have equally critical vectors on both, but only one could be reported. However, the algorithm would integrate over all paths to calcualte BER. It is intractable and unnecessary to include all noise sources at once in the BER simulation. Instead, it is enough to include sources that contribute to nucleation of the error. Simulations proceed with inclusion 7-8 noisecurrent parameters at a time, chosen among contiguous junctions. We use a sliding window, meaning that the parameter-inclusion sets overlap. Each window returns a BER. The most relevant window is the one that returns the highest BER. We applied the algorithm to the RQL circuits shown in Fig. The BER calculation at each set point requires a few thousand binary searches across multiple windows. However, simulations can proceed in parallel, so full characterization of the gate requires less than 24 hours of real time using a few large servers running WRspice Simulated BER of the AND gate is shown Fig. In the AND gate, the three error mechanisms may arise in different parts of the circuit. This is illustrated for the three points (a), (b), and (c) called out in Fig. It would be possible-but needlessly intensive-to run and rerun the BER simulations for different values of effective bandwidth in order to match the experimentally measured result. Instead, we develop a functional fit to the simulations that incorporates the bandwidth dependance. For each value of A, the simulation points were partitioned and fit to one of three error functions, using margin and noise coefficients. The total BER is given as the sum of these three terms. The three similar terms fit the (a), (b) and (c) curves. For the first term, the fitting parameter m a (A), corresponds to noise-free margin which determines the offset along the x-axis. The term √ β a n a (A) corresponds to rms noise, with the dependance on effective noise bandwidth, β a , made explicit. All of the curves are well-characterized by a single function using fitting coefficients that are linear functions of A. is a good fit to all of the simulation points, as shown in Fig. We applied the same method to BER simulation of the DFF, shown in Fig. Integrated circuits containing the RQL gate library were designed into a six-metal-layer fabrication process supplied by D-Wave Crosstalk between the clock and signal lines in the pressure-contact LHe dip probe was a challenge, so the output data link was established using differential signals, amplified by a pair of Miteq JSMF4-02K180-30-10P LNAs at the probe head. 3 dB attenuators (50 Ω) at the inputs of the LNAs were used to improve the impedance match. These fed a Marki BAL-0026 balun that produced a single-ended signal for the lab instruments. A Keysight J-BERT M8020A produced the data patterns and counted the errors. This was synchronized to a pair Measured BER of the AND gate at different AC and DC set points, shown in Fig. (3) where x ′ and A ′ are the DC offset and AC amplitude scale for the measured data. These numbers produce good quantitative agreement. The factor of 1.04 indicates a small registration error on DC offset. This could be ac- counted for by a 4% shift in mutual inductance to the control line. The AC amplitudes for the measurement have an arbitrary scale, relative to simulation, but the spacing of 0.5 dB is fixed for both. A single scaling factor, 0.99, aligned the simulation to the measurement. These are small disparities given that the simulation used nominal design values; no attempt was made to incorporate global parametric targeting. The primary result lies in the values for effective noise bandwidth. These numbers were chosen to be 0.25 in simulation, but came out widely divergent-and generally smaller-in measurement. Measured BER of the DFF were similar to the AND gate. This is unsurprising, as simulation indicates that observable errors belong to the JTLs, not the gate itself. However, the DFF comparator produced a BER floor in simulation. To induce comparator errors at observable levels, an additional detuning bias would be needed that directly shifts the comparator threshold. We would expect the effective noise bandwidth for comparator errors to be higher than the other error mechanisms, as the error does not depend on junction switching time per se, but on a shorter time scale when the phase difference between the junctions passes some threshold. Based on a review of previous work Results of the previous section show that 1) operating margins at low BER are generally wide enough to support complex RQL circuits. 2) BER in measurement is less than in simulation, if effective noise bandwidth is taken to be the Josephson junction plasma frequency, and 3) the effective noise bandwidth depends on the error mechanism. AC overbias errors, corresponding to curves (c) in Figs. where k B T is the thermal energy, ∆U is the potential barrier, and f a is the atfrequency. Here we can safely model the noise as purely thermal at 4.2 K, because DC and AC currents are very weakly coupled to the circuit using magnetic transformers. External noise scales as k , where k is coupling coefficient The potential barrier for a single biased Josephson junction is approximately where the total bias current through the junction is the sum of AC and DC components, I b = I DC +I AC . At the nominal value I DC = 2.8 mA, the externally-applied DC offset current produces a bias current of only I b = 0.24I c through the junction. This gives the transfer function I b /I c = 0.086x/mA. The AC current I AC shifts the BER function by an arbitrary offset-for comparing to measured data this is left as a fitting parameter. The resulting Kramers escape rate is (4) where the prefactor α = 10 is the number of attempts per clock cycle. This value does not need to be precise for low BER values. The function corresponds to the asymptotic form of erfc, and is valid in the region of low BER. Fitting the measured data for overbias errors (the steeper curves on the right of Fig. The effective critical current indicated by the Kramers escape rate is about three times larger than the critical current of the individual junctions used in a circuit, suggesting that the error mechanism is distributed across multiple junctions. This result comports nicely with the simulation result shown as curve (c) in Table The normalized effective bandwidth for overbias errors in measurement, β c = 0.23, agrees well with initial simulations with β c = 0.25 and indicates a spontaneousswitching time that is long compared to the plasma frequency. This simply means that junction switching time is longer at low values of overbias, as observed in Annihilation errors, corresponding to curves (a) in Figs. Similar arguments exist for annihilation error corresponding to curve (b) in Fig. Here we have presented a framework to explain, predict, and quantify the BER of RQL gates. The integral of the Gaussian-distributed noise currents associated with the Josephson junctions is evaluated across the multidimensional operating region of the circuit. Measurement determines the value of a single parameter, effective noise bandwidth, for each error mechanism, in a data-assisted approach. All this would apply equally well to the other superconducting SFQ logic families. The BER in combinational RQL gates such as the AND gate is governed by the JTL-based error mechanisms, including spontaneous switching at overbias and pulse annihilation at underbias. The effective noise bandwidth is quite low for pulse annihilation errors, as it is based on the clock rate, not the junction plasma frequency. The distributed nature of the SFQ pulse means that multiple junctions are involved in nucleating the error for spontaneous switching, so the effective device size is that of multiple devices in parallel, in agreement with The clocked comparator of the RQL DFF gate is representative of the other SFQ logic families, including RSFQ and the QFP. BER simulation showed that the comparator produced a noise floor, at about 10 -25 using junctions with 50 μA critical current, as the comparator does involve isolated junctions and higher noise bandwidths. This BER is still quite low, suitable for petaflop-scale computing, but larger junctions would be needed in order to maintain this level while taking the parametric spread of individual junctions into account. For both the DFF and the AND gate, extrapolated BER of 10 -25 or better is maintained across an AC power range of 3.6 dB, equivalent to AC amplitude margins of ±20%. Overall we conclude that the BER in RQL circuits is sufficiently low for large-scale applications, even with junction critical current scaled down to 35 μA minimum in the JTLs, as predicted were wanted, the downhill simplex method could be used. Instead the entire operating region is mapped out with simplexes. The algorithm uses an anneal to first search exhaustively, and then to adaptively apply higher resolution to the regions of interest. The algorithm is as follows: 1. Calculate all 2N 1 D margins and all 2 N corner margins 2. Make the initial simplexes, each using N -1 margins and 1 corner margin Three points require further explanation: A) simplex formation and bisection, B) the algorithm is adaptive based on an annealing schedule, and C) the solid angle subtended by each simplex must be calculated. The first simplexes are formed in steps (1) and (2). The "corner margins" consist of all search vectors for which each dimension has a value of ±1. There is one corner vector centered in each orthant. Many possibilities exist for subsequent iterations. Experimentation indicates that keeping the aspect ratio of each simplex small is important. This explains the conditional in step (6) of the algorithm. The number of simplexes grows exponentially with N and with iteration number, and becomes a limiting factor above 8-D. Integration in 7-D can create upwards of 500,000 simplexes; in 8-D, 5,000,000 simplexes. The problem is not storage per se, but the time spent doing unordered searches in steps (4) and Each term Ω s Q s in the Riemann sum is the product of the solid angle subtended by the simplex and the average value of Q for the points defining the simplex, The schedule computes the annealing weight of each simplex as Ω s Q s w . The schedule moves the value of w from 0 to 1 incrementally. When w = 0, the algorithm bisects the simplex with greatest solid angle; when w = 1, the simplex that is most significant. In this way the algorithm starts by covering the space uniformly, and gradually becomes more adaptive. The anneal could be taken yet further by computing the variance among the values of the points in each simplex, and weight the anneal accordingly. This produced unstable results in our experimentation. However, we do compute and sum these variances in order to estimate the error, as for error estimates in Monte Carlo integration If the anneal proceeds too quickly, the danger is that it will find some local minima, while missing others of more significance. As stated previously, 3 N points may be needed to cover the space. However, we have found via a user-defined annealing parameter that completing the anneal with 2.5 N points can achieve reliable results. We need the solid angle subtended by each simplex, Ω s . (This is the language of three dimensions. For higher dimensions, this generalizes to the volume subtended on the unit hypersphere.) The solid angle is normalized by the whole, Ω N = π N/2 /Γ(N/2+1), where Γ is the gamma function. The procedure for calculating the solid angle of a simplex required some effort, as we invented our own. First we calculate the volume, V s , subtended by simplex s on the operating region boundary surface, by also including the point at the origin. This volume derives from the matrix determinant. In N dimensions where (v 1 , v 2 , ..., v N ) are the unit vectors associated with the vertices of simplex s. The points at the center of each facet of simplex s form a similar simplex. These points (v ′ 1 , v ′ 2 , ..., v ′ N ) are calculated by excluding the points of the simplex one-by-one and finding the center among the remaining points: Here the angle brackets denote the mean value of the vector coordinates. The vertices of the new simplex lie inside the unit sphere. Renormalize them to unit vectors, and calculate the volume of this new simplex, V ′ s , again by including the point at the origin. The method centers on the observation that the volume of the new simplex is smaller by a factor of V f = 1/(N -1) (N -1) , in the limit of small angles. Scale inversely with V f to produce a new solid angle estimate This produces a much better estimate for the original solid angle. Finally, we use both estimates to extrapolate to the best estimate, where the first term produces a correction to V ′ s . The fitting parameter F N was found through experimentation. (F 3 , F 4 , ..., F 10 ) = (0.0000, -0.0997, -0.1106, -0.1057, -0.0978, -0.0888, -0.0808, -0.0711) This method is effective because the correction to V ′ s is small. Typical accuracy was better than 1%, judged by summing the solid angles Ω s and comparing to the known value of Ω N . of Rohde & Schwarz SGS100A sources that powered the clock network with I and Q signals. DC levels were generated by a Stahl BS 1-10.