We describe via simulation novel optimization algorithms for a Hopfield neural network constructed using manufacturable three-terminal Silicon-Oxide-Nitride-Oxide-Silicon (SONOS) synaptic devices. We first present a computationally-light, memristor-based, highly accurate compact model for the SONOS. Using the compact model, we describe techniques of simulated annealing in Hopfield networks by exploiting imperfect problem definitions, current leakage, and the continuous tunability of the SONOS to enable transient chaotic group dynamics. We project improvements in energy consumption and latency for optimization relative to the best CPUs and GPUs by at least 4 orders of magnitude, and also exceeding the best projected memristor-based hardware; along with a 100-fold increase in error-resilient hardware size (i.e., problem size). PTIMIZATION problems have assumed critical importance in both the commercial and scientific spaces (e.g., gene sequencing, scheduling/routing, portfolio and resource optimization, etc.). TCAD simulations of the SONOS device were performed on geometries (Fig. The gate charge increased slightly to 1.64×10 13 cm -2 after 20 ms ramp-up from 1.52×10 13 cm -2 due to electrostatics associated with the trapped charge that tunneled from the silicon channel to the Si3N4 trap-layer. The lower far right schematic in Fig. Similarly to what was observed from ramping VGS up, ramping down from 8 V to 0 V in 1 μs is too fast for the dynamics related to long-term synaptic weight modulation to respond, and thus the charge concentration on the gate is linearly dependent on VGS. An important feature of a three-terminal synaptic device compared to two-terminal RRAMs is that the conductance ratio between a given LRS and HRS, GLRS/GHRS, can be readily adjusted because of the short-term capacitive response, which constitutes the switching of a MOSFET. The conductance ratio, GLRS/GHRS, should be identical to (QCH,LRS -QDEPL)/(QCH,HRS -QDEPL), where QDEPL is the charge in the depletion region and equal to 2.5×10 12 cm -2 in the inversion regime. When VGS= 4 V, QCH,LRS= 7.6×10 12 cm -2 and QCH,HRS= 5.4×10 12 cm -2 so that (QCH,LRS -QDEPL)/ (QCH,HRS -QDEPL)=1.76. Whereas VGS= 2.5 V reduces the number of charges so that QCH,LRS= 4.75×10 12 cm -2 , QCH,HRS= 2.55×10 12 cm -2 , and (QCH,LRS -QDEPL)/(QCH,HRS -QDEPL)=45. The IDS -VGS curves from TCAD simulations in Fig. Fig. Fig. The mobility can vary with different substrate doping levels, where 5×10 17 cm -2 is used in this work. Although the experimental SONOS device of Agarwal et al. In order to take the non-idealities into account, randomly generated noise with a Gaussian distribution in the threshold voltage was imposed with standard deviations σPGM = 20 mV and σRTN = 10 mV, describing the programming inaccuracy and the random telegraph noise (RTN), respectively. 26 Fig. with RRAM, the smallest achievable N×N99% was 480 when N=20. Although the maximum success probability and the saturation cycle depend on the damping rate, all damping rates commonly show that when VGS -Vt crosses ~1.1 V, the success probability saturates. Further iterations with smaller perturbations (VGS -Vt <1.1 V) lead to negligible gains in the success probability. Therefore, setting fixed VGS -Vt conditions at the first cycle (~2 V) and at the last cycle (~1 V) is likely to produce the maximum success probabilities for all cycles (Cai and Kumar applied separate damping conditions for different cycles in Fig. For a direct comparison to RRAM, linear damping as used for Fig. Larger graphs with 80×80 and 100×100 arrays were simulated to confirm the improvement of three-terminal devices over two-terminal devices and the resultant optimal energies to solution are compared in Fig. This work demonstrated the promise of three-terminal synaptic circuit element arrays for highly energy-efficient optimization of a Hopfield network. The third terminal (gate) was used to produce controlled perturbations for optimization problems in three beneficial ways: via non-zero diagonals, via programming inaccuracies leading to asymmetries, and leakage currents being exploited to create perturbations. We project an improvement of ~2× compared to two-terminal RRAMs in terms of energy efficiencies. More importantly, the technological maturity and manufacturability of SONOS transistors, combined with the hardware approaches demonstrated here, could enable rapid commercialization of optimization accelerators.