Three-component fermion beyond the conventional Dirac-Weyl-Majorana classification attracts extensive attentions recently and many efforts have been paid to explore their superconductivity. Based on first-principles calculations, we systematically investigate the electron-phonon coupling (EPC) in the three-component fermion materials WN, WC and TaN. The EPC in pristine and pressured WC and TaN are to small to induce superconductivity. Electron doping can efficiently enhance the EPC strength and the predicted T c s reach the value of experiments. Upon 0.6 electron/unitcell doping, the EPC strength of TaN is boosted by two orders of magnitude and T c can even be as high as 27 K, revealing the crucial role of charge doping in the formation of superconductivity observed in WC and TaN. In stark contrast, pristine WN exhibits overwhelmingly strong EPC and can be a good superconductor with a high transition temperature T c of 31 K. The strong EPC in WN are dictated by a synergistic effect of strong Fermi nesting and large deformation potential. Going down from three-dimension (3D) to three-dimension (2D), WN thin film (i.e. monolayer W 3 N 4 ) is also an intrinsic superconductor with T c of 11 K. Most importantly, monolayer W 3 N 4 host Dirac nodal lines protected by mirror symmetry in the absence of spin-orbit coupling (SOC), Including SOC, the Dirac nodal lines split into three pairs of spinful Weyl rings. These nodal lines lies closely near the Fermi level, they are pure and clean without other nontrivial bands, which is scarce in real materials and making the exotic topological properties easily accessible in experiment. The coexistence of superconductivity with high transition temperature and topological states in WN and its 2D film provide a promising platform for exploring topological superconductivity. Topological superconductors (TSC) which are topologically distinct from conventional Bose-Einstein condensates of Cooper pairs have become a focus of interest due to their potential applications in the fault-tolerant topological quantum computation Weyl semimetals Similarly, TaN also turns to be a superconductor when pressure is larger than 25 GPa, T c increases monotonically with the increasing of pressure accompanying with a increasing of carrier density Worth noting is that the local superconductivity induced by tip contact and non-local superconductivity induced by metal deposition in WC are not sensitive to the magnetism of metals, or the work funtion of different metals. These strongly suggest that the superconductivity in WC is associated with their common effect, i.e. charge doping. Considering that the tip induced and metal deposition induced superconductivity are confined at metal/WC interfaces, it is necessary to explore the properties of their thin films as compared with bulk counterparts. 3D-to-2D crossover are predicted to induce quantum phase transition depending on surface orientation, terminations and thickness of the films. Specifically, Cd 3 As 2 , a typical Dirac semimetals in its bulk form, becomes trivial insulator below seven monolayers In this work, we calculate and analyze systematically the EPC and superconductivity of bulk WN, WC and TaN. While pristine and pressured WC and TaN show negligibly small EPC, electron doping can significantly enhance the EPC and the predicted T c s are the same order with experiments. In contrast, pristine WN host extremely strong EPC and a high T c of 31 K. When WN is thinned down to 2D monolayer W 3 N 4 , unexpected topological nodal lines emerge, they are pure and clean and robust against SOC. The paper is organized as follows: Sec.II describes the details of ab initio calculations, Sec. III presents the results of the calculations and main analysis, and Sec. V summarizes the main conclusions of this work. First-principles calculations are performed with Quantum-ESPRESSO package T c can be determined by McMillian-Allen-Dynes formula where ω log is logarithmic average of the phonon frequencies. The retarded Coulomb pseudopotential μ * in equation (1) measures the strength of electron-electron interaction. μ * =0.10 is used for bulk tungsten, bulk WN and monolayer W 3 N 4 , because this value more accurately fit the experimental data. The λ and ω log can be calculated through isotropical Eliashberg function where α 2 F(ω) is Eliashberg function and N(E F ) is the DOS at the Fermi energy,cumulative EPC is given by The phonon linewidth is defined as: where the double Dirac delta functions restricts the sum of e-ph matrix elements to electronic states at the Fermi level, ε kj is the one-electron band energy with momentum k and band index j, screened electron-phonon matrix element is defined as: k q k eff υ δV δR denotes the change in the total effective crystal potential with respect to the displacement of atom v . The relationship between λ qν for mode ν at vevector q and phonon linewidth are A. Electron-phonon coupling and superconductivity in 3D WN, WC and TaN WN,WC and TaN all crystallize in a noncentrosymmetric hexagonal lattice with space group 62 Pm (no. 187). The metal atoms and non-metal atoms are at the 1d (1/3,2/3,1/2) and 1a (0,0,0) Wyckoff position respectively. The theoretically optimized lattice constants are in good accordance with experiments (given in the parentheses), a = b = 2.806 (2.890) Å, c = 2.841 (2.830) Å for WN present the phonon dispersion decorated with red dots proportional to the partial EPC strength λ qυ , isotropic Eliashberg spectral functions α 2 F(ω) and cumulative frequency-dependent λ(ω) of WC, WN and TaN. The phonon spectra agree well with previous calculations . There are large pieces of Fermi surface of WN that nesting with each other, q 1 represents nesting vector of Γ-H, q 2 , q 3 represent nesting vector of Γ-K and Γ-M. Those nesting vectors coincide with the positions of soft phonons. While for WC and TaN, the Fermi surfaces are small and weakly nest. According to equation ( To explicitly display the strong deformation potential in WN, Fig. Similarly, under the distortion of β phonon, the band degeneracy along Γ-A, K-H and K-M of the supercell are removed. The splitting energy of above bands are The N(E F )=5.56 states/spin/Ry/unitcell of bulk MoP is comparable with N(E F )=6.24 states/spin/Ry/unitcell of bulk WN and its Fermisurface also display strong nesting along Γ-K and Γ-M Next, we strive to get some clues of the observed superconductivity in WC With 1.0 and 0.2 electron/unitcell doping for WC and TaN, the phonon dispersion presents obvious softening (see Fig. The EPC in WN is so abnormally strong that we have to put our predictions on a firm playground. We check the influence of SOC and anharmonicity on EPC. SOC change the EPC significantly in some materials but from different aspects. For instance, SOC in CaBi 2 change the topology and the areas of the Fermi surface, harden some phonon modes and reduce the nesting, leading to a 50% reduction of total EPC strength From the calculated band structures and Fermi surfaces with SOC (Fig. Anharmonicity is another factor that should be treated carefully. For instance, anharmonicity strongly renormalize the EPC and suppress the total λ and T c of H 2 S by 30% at 200 GPa indicating the nodal lines are quite flat. To examine the role of symmetry in protecting the nodal line, we calculate bands of artificially distorted structures. The distortion in Fig. On one hand, SOC always exists in real materials, on the other hand, electronic structures with SOC included are indispensable to classify their topological nature. For mirror reflection symmetry protected nodal lines, depending on the atomic orbitals making up the electronic states and the strength of SOC, SOC can turn a spinless Dirac nodal lines into a spinful Weyl nodal rings within the mirror planes (i.e. InNbS 2 In summary, through exhaustive first-principles calculations, we discover that the three-component fermion candidate WN exhibit overwhelmingly strong EPC and can be a superconductor with relatively high transition temperature of 31 K. Through comparison of Fermi surface, real space charge distribution, phonon dispersion and EPC between WN, WC, TaN, MoP and elemental metal tungsten, we unravel that the unique and extremely strong EPC in WN results from strong Fermi nesting and large deformation potential. In contrast, pristine WC and TaN has a negligible small EPC. Electron doping can efficiently increase the EPC strength of WC and TaN and the predicted T c are in the same order of experiments, suggesting that the superconductivity found in experiments may be explained by electron-doping enhanced EPC. Based on our results, we propose that the Fermi nesting and partial charge distribution at Fermi level, both of which are computationally cheap, can be used as two preliminary criteria for high-throughput screening of novel superconductors. Go one step further, we find that the strong EPC and superconductivity are ubiquitous in WN films. Most importantly, monolayer W 3 N 4 uniquely host topological nodal lines that are flat in energy and momentum space and lies closely near the Fermi level In addition, there are no other nontrivial bands near Fermi level and these nodal lines are robust against spin orbit coupling, which is rare in real materials and making the exotic topological properties easily accessible. Finally, the coexistence of superconductivity (with high transition temperature and full gap) and topological states in WN make it a promising materials for realizing topological superconductivity. As the 2D film of WC and WN are already obtained by experiments, monolayer W 3 N 4 provide a good platform for exploring 2D superconductivity and their interplay with topological states.