Recent advances in topologically robust waveguiding for electromagnetic systems have presented opportunities for improving practical photonic and microwave devices. To bring this rich area of physics within the reach of application, it is critical for such systems to be interfaced with classical, continuous waveguiding and transmission line technology. This Letter presents a compact, highly efficient transition from a classical metallic transmission line to a topologically nontrivial line wave emulating the quantum spin Hall effect. A zero-gap antipodal slot line is used as the starting transmission line, which is then coupled to the topological metasurface via a field matching procedure. Additional modifications to the interface between the two structures to eliminate unwanted edge coupling improves transmission further. A simulated loss analysis isolates the effect of the transitions from the rest of the structure, showing a loss contribution of only 2.1% per classical-to-topological conversion. Using the transition, a quantitative characterization of the robustness of common topologically protected devices is presented. This design lays the foundation to integrate topologically robust metasurface transmission lines to traditional systems, opening the door to future uses of such structures in systems. Photonic topological insulators (PTIs) are an exciting option for advanced manipulation of electromagnetic modes, but there is a present lack of understanding on how such modes interact with traditional (classical) electromagnetic modes. PTIs, generally implemented via metamaterials or metasurfaces, permit the flow of electromagnetic (EM) energy only along a boundary of a nontrivial bulk Previous efforts have been made to couple energy from traditional transmission lines to spoof surface plasmon polariton (SPP) modes 67 , as well as to 1-D line waves A particularly attractive option for practical implementation of PTIs is given in Line waves show surprising robustness, but are limited by their lack of a bandgap. The second property, the pseudospin degree of freedom of photons, is where the connection to PTIs comes in. As demonstrated in The spatial variation in the unit cell of the PTI gives rise to rapidly varying mode profiles, as depicted in Fig. Combining this choice of transmission line with the feed point location as determined by the field profile along the unit cell results in a good match. This is shown in Fig. The proposed design uses a balanced transmission line to achieve the field match, and as such is readily converted into many other transmission lines. In such cases, an adiabatic transition is frequently used To determine the efficiency of the proposed transition, the losses can be broken into several parts and analyzed separately via simulation. Namely, the magnitude of the loss is the sum of the dielectric losses, the radiation losses (both in the PTI and the antipodal sections), and the two transitions, Dielectric losses L d can be extracted by setting the loss tangent of the material to zero and subtracting the results. To determine the radiation losses of the PTI section the number of cells is swept while keeping the dielectric lossless. Likewise, the radiation loss from the antipodal sections can be found by sweeping their length. After these are found, adding them to the total loss will give the losses incurred by the transitions themselves. Results of this analysis are given in Table The current design exhibits a maximum S 21 of -0.833 dB for the entire structure operating at 16.2 GHz, with a corre- sponding S 11 of -21.0 dB. From the loss analysis, the contribution from the classical-to-topological mode conversion L tran is only 0.181 dB (2.1%) per transition. To verify the design, a sample of the structure was fabricated and measured, using the same parameters as given previously (with the addition of the aforementioned exponential taper to microstrip line, shown in Fig. As discussed previously, a chief interest in PTI designs is their immunity to backscattering when presented with a wide class of defects and deformations to their propagation channel. Examples of these are sharp bends, removal of unit cells, and deformations to structure. However, it is often not clear to what extent these robust features present a practical benefit over more common transmission lines and waveguiding technology. With the utility of the efficient transition presented here, it is possible to quantify the performance vs backscatter presented in many implementations. The most common test for robustness in a PTI is the sharp bend, where the waveguide follows along the 60 or 120 degree bends present in the lattice Fig. The other major demonstration of PTI devices is the socalled "magic T," which is a four-way junction of non-trivial waveguides Such a setup is shown in Fig. The coupler presented here compares favorably with similar slow-wave devices. The SPP designs of 6 , 7 , and This Letter presents a compact transition for efficiently coupling energy from a traditional planar transmission line to a topologically protected line wave. An antipodal slot line was used as the initial transmission line, which displays a field profile closely related to the PTI structure. Since the PTI's E-field distribution varies substantially along a unit cell, the exact coupling point is chosen for the greatest match to the antipodal line. Additional alterations to the abrupt transition to account for lattice mismatch and edge coupling effects improve the design further. Use of such a design permits quantitative analyses of many popularly reported structures that rely upon topological phases in waveguiding applications. The resulting transition allows for less than 2.1% /transition of added loss, bringing topologically robust structures closer to integration in practical applications. The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding authors upon reasonable request. See supplementary material for details on the effects of finite bulk sizes, and for extended data on the results shown in Fig. 