Metal atomic chains have been reported to change their electronic or magnetic properties by slight mechanical stimulus. However, the mechanical response has been veiled because of lack of information on the bond nature. Here, we clarify the bond nature in platinum (Pt) monatomic chains by our developed in-situ transmission electron microscope method. The stiffness is measured with sub N/m precision by quartz length-extension resonator. The bond stiffnesses at the middle of the chain and at the connecting to the base are estimated to be 25 and 23 N/m, respectively, which are higher than the bulk counterpart. Interestingly, the bond length of 0.25 nm is found to be elastically stretched to 0.31 nm, corresponding to 24% in strain. Such peculiar bond nature could be explained by a novel concept of "string tension". This study is a milestone that will significantly change the way we think about atomic bonds in one-dimensional substance. Monatomic chains exhibit unique physical and chemical properties that are sensitive to atomic configurations. where e is the elementary charge and h is the Planck constant) during slight mechanical displacement Previously, a specially designed holder for transmission electron microscopy (TEM) studieswhich was equipped with a silicon cantilever The Pt nanocontacts were created by establishing contact with two Pt wires between a counter electrode and the edge of the LER prong (Fig. These chains were free of any contamination because of the ultra-high vacuum conditions in the TEM column. TEM images of the chains were obtained concurrently to the electrical conductance and stiffness measurements. Stiffness values were acquired by the longitudinal oscillation of the LER prong at an amplitude of 27 pm and a resonant frequency of approximately 1 MHz. This small amplitude helped to prevent plastic deformation of the Pt nanocontacts thereby reduced distortion while recording the TEM images. Detail of the experiment method is available in section1 of supporting information. It should be noted that the measured stiffness values contained contributions from the Pt monatomic chains as well as from both bases supporting the chains. Therefore, the contribution from the bases must be removed to obtain the true stiffness of each ideal chains. Figs. 1b and 1c present the typical time evolution of the conductance and stiffness of a Pt nanocontact, respectively; while Fig. However, such variations are not frequently observed in the experiment and the amount of variation is quite small (more data are available in Fig. The stiffness of each chain was estimated by assuming that the stiffness of the two bases supporting the chain ( b k ) was constant, because no change was observed in the configuration of the apex of the pyramidal base with the {111} facets. By considering the dependence of stiffness on coordination number, the assumption that the bond stiffness between the edge atom of the base and the chain atom ( edge k ), is different to that between two neighboring atoms -particularly in the 4 atom ( ) and 5 atom ( ) chains-is made, as shown in Fig. ), where i represents the number of constituent atoms in the chain), can be expressed: It is evident that both chain types show similar stiffness values, confirming the accuracy in the estimation of the stiffness of the base. To further confirm this, the base stiffness was computed using another method in which a cylindrical Pt nano-contact was assumed to be suspended between cone-shaped bases on both sides (section 3 in Supporting information). Therefore, the bond stiffness between two neighboring Pt atoms at the middle of these chains is approximately 25 N/m. The precision of the stiffness measurement is in the order of 1 N/m for the current experimental conditions As mentioned above, the Pt monatomic chains show relatively long plateau in time evolution of the conductance and stiffness (Figs. 2i-2p, Fig Taking into account that the base supporting the Pt chain has also stretched by the elongation, the maximum elongations of the bondedge and the bondchain are almost the same which is estimated to be about 0.06 nm (detail in section 6 of supporting information). Since the equilibrium bond length is 0.25 nm, the maximum elastic strain is approximately 24% for an individual Pt-Pt bond in the chains, which is an extremely large value by considering that the maximum elastic strain in the bulk crystal is less than 5%. Quantitative measurement of the bond stiffness is quite important to understand the physical and chemical properties of one-dimensional monatomic chains in states with higher free energy as compared with the bulk configuration. For its existence, a monatomic chain requires two supporting bulk-like electrodes, from where atoms are extracted during mechanical stretching Remarkably, the free exchange of atoms between bases and chain give rise to an intrinsic string tension , where F (a negative quantity) is the free energy of the wire, N is the number of atoms,  is the cohesive energy (chemical potential, also negative) of an atom in bulk, and L is the length of the wire. Theoretical research has showed that a tip-suspended wire has a stable configuration at the minimum string tension rather than at that of the free energy F Accordingly, the string tension has also been plotted (Fig. Although the actual string tension cannot be obtained in our system, the excellent agreement of the equilibrium bond length, stiffness and maximum bond length (breaking point) with the experimental results strongly support the effect of string tension of a Pt-Pt bond. The present results, combining precise measurements, theoretical calculations, and careful modeling of nanocontact inhomogeneity, represent a first demonstration of the string tension-governed nanowire mechanics. The additional role of nano-magnetism of Pt monatomic chains proposed theoretically In this study, in situ TEM coupled with LER based force sensor measurements confirmed the formation of one-dimensional Pt monatomic chains-consisting of two, three, four, or five atoms-between Pt bases with equivalent shapes. The stiffness and electrical conductance of the chains were measured concurrently during TEM observation; both exhibited plateau-like behaviors throughout each elastic stretching stage. By eliminating the stiffness of the bases, the bond stiffness between two atoms at the middle of the chain was estimated to be approximately 25 N/m; regardless of the chain length and the crystal orientation of the suspended-tips. Furthermore, the bond length of 0.25 nm was found to be elastically stretched to 0.31 nm, corresponding to 25% in strain. Such peculiar bond nature proves that string tension is a key concept to understand the physical or chemical properties of one-dimensional system. The present study provides basic information on the microscopic understanding of friction and the development of monatomic and molecular devices. The errors in the measured stiffness is the standard deviation of the measured data. In the analysis of individual bonds, we assume that the bond between the edge atom the base and the chain atom (bondedge) is different to that between two neighboring atoms-particularly in the 4 atom (bondchain1) and 5 atom (bondchain2) chains, as shown in Fig. The stiffness of the base in the [110]-[110] chains was estimated to be 95.6±5.8 N/m, while that for the [111]-[110] chains was found