Graphene supports surface plasmon polaritons with comparatively slow propagation velocities in the THz region, which becomes increasingly interesting for future communication technologies. This ability can be used to realize compact antennas, which are up to two orders of magnitude smaller than their metallic counterparts. For a proper functionality of these antennas some minimum material requirements have to be fulfilled, which are presently difficult to achieve, since the fabrication and transfer technologies for graphene are still evolving. In this work we analyze available graphene materials experimentally and extract intrinsic characteristics at THz frequencies, in order to predict the dependency of the THz signal emission threshold as a function of the graphene relaxation time and the chemical potential . HE decreasing size of miniaturized components such as physical, biological and chemical sensors leads to an increasing demand for compact and on-chip communication techniques, like wireless data transfer via miniaturized antennas For an experimentally validated assessment of this potential, a closer analysis of the minimum required graphene material parameters is required. Experimental material parameters and dipolar emission characteristics are evaluated, simulating material influences on the threshold of the THz emission. The THz conductivity of the material is a basic parameter for the functionality of an antenna and can be described with a Drude model following the random phase approximation with the elementary charge , the reduced Planck constant ħ, the Boltzmann constant and the temperature . Thus the conductivity of graphene strongly depends on the chemical potential and the relaxation time. In our approach a direct experimental assessment of these quantities is adopted, together with a simulation of the minimum required graphene relaxation time for different values of the chemical potential. Standard THz-time-domain spectroscopy (TDS) measurements are performed to measure the graphene material parameters of the devices. The common thin film approximation for thin conducting layers connects the graphene material parameters with the obtained complex transmission Simulations of the graphene antenna emission are performed by using CST [9] and then increasing the relaxation time progressively until an antenna resonance is visible. These simulations were performed for various values of the chemical potential. The carrier mobility of graphene can be calculated for the evaluated values of and with The simulation results as well as the experimentally obtained values are listed in table The experimentally obtained values of the relaxation time are significantly lower than the minimum required values indicated Christoph Suessmeier Interestingly, the relaxation time has a greater influence on the antenna functionality than the chemical potential. Since the relaxation time is mostly influenced by the growth, transfer and the graphene environment, it is crucial to ensure a good graphene quality during the sample processing. Further considerations clearly indicate that the plasmonic resonance in the experimental graphene samples is strongly overdamped, due to low relaxation times, i.e. fast scattering effects induced by sample imperfections (e.g. grain boundaries). A sufficient increase of or will result in a well pronounced antenna resonance. With an antenna length of = 47 μm and a width of = 5 μm simulations show a well pronounced resonance for higher relaxation times at a frequency of = 0.4 THZ. A gold antenna of same geometry was also measured and simulated for the sake of comparison. Both experiment and simulation show a well pronounced dipole resonance demonstrating the functionality of the model. The resonant frequency of this antenna occurs at = 1.2 THz, which is a factor of 3 higher compared to the graphene antenna. Thus a graphene antenna can be significantly smaller than their metallic counterparts by obtaining the same resonant frequency. In summary we present experimental and simulated minimum required material parameters for a graphene dipole antenna to emit THz radiation. It is shown that the plasmonic resonance strongly depends on the graphene properties. Furthermore a figure of merit is evaluated, which sums up the threshold parameters of and . A reference gold antenna shows a resonance, which is a factor of 3 higher compared to a graphene antenna. This enables a significant downscaling of antennas by obtaining the same resonant frequency. Institute for High Frequency and Quantum Electronics, University of Siegen, 57076 Siegen, Germany Faculty of Electrical Engineering and Information Technology, RWTH Aachen University, 52074 Aachen, Germany NaNoNetworking Center in Catalunya (N3Cat), Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya, 08034 Barcelona, Spain Material-Dependencies of the THz Emission from Plasmonic Graphene-Based Photoconductive Antenna Structures