In this work, we show fundamental low temperature (T) magnetic and Ic responses of a magnetic Josephson Junction (MJJ) S/F/S heterostructure -Nb/ Co56Fe24B20 /Nb. The ultra-thin Co56Fe24B20 (CFB) films (0.6-1.3 nm) were deposited onto two separate buffer layers: 150 nm Nb/5 nm Cu and 150 nm Nb/ (1 nm Cu/0.5 nm Nb)6/1 nm Cu. Both film sets were capped with 5 nm Cu/500 nm Nb. Magnetic results show reduced switching distributions in patterned arrays measured at near liquid Helium temperature (~ 10 K), with the incorporation of the (1 nm Cu/0.5 nm Nb)6/1 nm multilayer. In electrical devices, the critical current (Ic) through the CFB layer decays exponentially with increasing ferromagnetic layer thickness and shows a dip in Ic at 0.8 nm, characteristic of a change in the equilibrium Josephson phase in an S/F/S structure. The rising demand for high efficiency computing has driven development pursuits to identify a "beyond-CMOS" dimensionally scalable logic technology. Superconducting digital technologies, such as reciprocal quantum logic (RQL) In its' simplest form, JMRAM combines superconducting electrodes (S) with a ferromagnetic (F) spin valve to form magnetic barrier Josephson Junctions (MJJs). The write-schemes for JMRAM are similar to conventional field-switched MRAM devices wherein JMRAM utilizes bitand word-write applied magnetic fields to set the magnetization of the free layer in a magnetic spin valve. Contrary to MRAM, readout is not based on magnetoresistance, but rather on the Josephson Effect in the magnetic junctions. Utilizing well-established physics of S/F/S junctions For incorporation into a superconducting memory solution, JMRAM optimization requires that magnetic layers exhibit single domain switching with abrupt magnetization reversal and low switching fields, at cryogenic temperatures (e.g. T ~ 4 K). JMRAM requirements are further complicated as materials selection and thicknesses must allow MJJs to carry a sufficient critical current (Ic), consistent with low error rate operation at 4 K, and the barrier thickness choice must be in one of two possible junction ground states differing in their equilibrium superconducting phase (0 or π). To date, systems comprised of Ni, Ni80Fe20 and (NixFe1-x)1-yMy (where M = a normal metal dopant) have demonstrated the ability to carry a measureable critical current and observable 0-π transition thickness, however, the magnetic switching character of these materials may not be sufficient for incorporation into a final memory solution. Magnetic Josephson junctions (MJJs) containing ultrathin CFB barriers have been fabricated. The ferromagnetic (F), CFB, barriers have been deposited using magnetron sputter deposition in an applied field (~50 Oe) from a single target (>99.9% purity) at ambient temperature with a high purity Ar sputter gas and a base pressure of <3x10 -9 torr. The films were deposited at a 30-degree angle from the wafer normal, producing a gradient in the F layer thickness of 0.6-1.3 nm across a 150 mm wafer. The wedge films allow for a large number of samples to be deposited at the same time under the same conditions, where the only varying component is the F layer thickness. The CFB films have been sputter-deposited onto two separate surfaces: 1) 150 nm Nb/1 nm Cu and 2) 150 nm Nb/(1 nm Cu/0.5 nm Nb)6/1 nm Cu; both film sets have been capped with 5 nm Cu/50 nm Nb. Here, the incorporation of the (1 nm Cu/0.5 nm Nb)6/1 nm Cu starting surface ultimately reduces the Nb surface roughness and its' deleterious impact on magnetic switching. The measured bulk properties for this specific composition of CFB are as follows. For a 100 nm thick film, the saturation magnetization was measured to be 1625 kA/m with a resistivity (R) of ~ 110 u-cm at T = 10 K. Note, the residual resistivity ratio, RRR = R(300 K)/R(10 K) ~ 1. Using patterned Hall bars and high magnetic field resistance values (H > 3 T) to measure the ordinary Hall Effect contribution, the mean free path for both spin channels was determined to be less than 0.1 nm at 10 K, which is expected for an amorphous ferromagnetic metal. Room temperature measurements of magnetic induction (B) vs. field (H) of continuous, single thickness, CFB films were made using a SHB Looper (Mesa600). The continuous films lithographically patterned into bit arrays comprised of 1×2 μm 2 ellipses whose major axis of the shape is parallel to the applied field direction during film growth and the wedge gradient direction. Magnetic characterization of both the blanket films and patterned arrays was carried out at a temperature of T = 10 K, using a vibrating sample magnetometer (Quantum Design, VSM). Magnetic moment (m) vs. H data was collected at a rate of ~1 Oe/second with H applied parallel to the film plane and bit long axis direction; no demagnetization corrections were applied. The resultant hysteresis loops were fit to a standard error function to obtain magnetic coercivity (Hc) and switching field distributions (σ) where, σ is defined as the field range at which 68% of the magnetic moments in a film have switched orientation direction. Separate CFB wedge films were patterned into magnetic Josephson junction (MJJ) devices, comprised of columns of discrete 1×2 μm 2 ellipses which spanned the entire 150 mm wafer diameter parallel to the F wedge thickness gradient, to examine the critical current transparency of the F barrier across the deposited thickness range. Here, 5×5 mm 2 chips were diced from the wafer and mounted on specially designed non-magnetic 84 pin packages, manufactured by Kyocera, to be inserted into custom liquid He dip probes for cryogenic testing. Measurements of the MJJ I-V relationship was obtained at T = 4 K under nominally zero applied field using a standard kelvin-probe technique. The critical current, Ic, was then extracted from a fit to the standard non-hysteretic Josephson junction relationship. These measurements were performed on a selection of chips which comprised a long column parallel to the varying F thickness, providing approximately 350 sample points across the whole F wedge. This high density of samples allows for a more accurate determination of the 0-π phase transition in these films. The topography (AFM) of the 150 nm Nb/5 nm Cu and 150 nm Nb/(1 nm Cu/0.5 nm Nb)6/1 nm Cu films are shown in Fig. Fig. Fig. where J0 is the maximum critical current density for a device of zero ferromagnetic thickness, dF is the ferromagnetic thickness, ξF1 is the pair correlation length, ξF2 is the oscillation period, and φ is a phase offset. Data in the thicker portion of the F wedge range shows increased scatter with respect to the thinner and middle thickness ranges. This increased scatter is believed to be predominantly due to the non-initialized magnetic state of the MJJ, which provides a random "fraunhofer-shift" in the junction critical current that cannot be easily predicted or decoupled when performing the measurements in 0-applied field conditions. Divergence of the theoretical curve from the data can be seen near the edges of the thickness range as well. It is suspected that this is due to the "fraunhofer-shift" effect described above or unintended shadowing effects of the oblique deposition technique near the edges of the wafer. Future measurement of films with overlapping, but different, thickness ranges may provide insight into the exact origins of this deviation from theoretical behavior. Here, we have shown magnetic and electrical properties of ultra-thin CFB films. At room temperature, these films show near ideal soft magnetic switching, making this system of interest for a free layer in memory applications which utilize a magnetic spin valve. When patterned into arrays and measured at low temperature, this system shows an expansion of the magnetic hysteresis loop. Specifically, the incorporation of the (1 nm Cu/0.5 nm Nb)6/1 nm Cu buffer shows reduced Hc and σ of the magnetic hysteresis of patterned arrays, measured at 10 K, relative to the 5 nm Cu seed layer. Electrical data of fabricated MJJs shows a dip in the Ic at 0.8 nm suggesting a 0-π phase shift, at this thckness. A slight reduction in the MJJ Ic is observed with the incorporation of the (1 nm Cu/0.5 nm Nb)6/1 nm Cu buffer which suggests that incorporating additional layers into S/F/S structures may lead to a reduction in Ic transparency, however the 0-π transition thickness remains unchanged in the case of amorphous CFB.