Spin-orbit torque (SOT) is an emerging technology that enables the efficient manipulation of spintronic devices. The initial processes of interest in SOTs involved electric fields, spin-orbit coupling, conduction electron spins and magnetization. More recently interest has grown to include a variety of other processes that include phonons, magnons, or heat. Over the past decade, many materials have been explored to achieve a larger SOT efficiency. Recently, holistic design to maximize the performance of SOT devices has extended material research from a nonmagnetic layer to a magnetic layer. The rapid development of SOT has spurred a variety of SOT-based applications. In this Roadmap paper, we first review the theories of SOTs by introducing the various mechanisms thought to generate or control SOTs, such as the spin Hall effect, the Rashba-Edelstein effect, the orbital Hall effect, thermal gradients, magnons, and strain effects. Then, we discuss the materials that enable these effects, including metals, metallic alloys, topological insulators, two-dimensional materials, and complex oxides. We also discuss the important roles in SOT devices of different types of magnetic layers, such as magnetic insulators, antiferromagnets, and ferrimagnets. Afterward, we discuss device applications utilizing SOTs. We discuss and compare three-terminal and twoterminal SOT-magnetoresistive random-access memories (MRAMs); we mention various schemes to eliminate the need for an external field. We provide technological application considerations for SOT-MRAM and give perspectives on SOT-based neuromorphic devices and circuits. In addition to SOT-MRAM, we present SOT-based spintronic terahertz generators, nano-oscillators, and domain wall and skyrmion racetrack memories. This paper aims to achieve a comprehensive review of SOT theory, materials, and applications, guiding future SOT development in both the academic and industrial sectors. In modern computer systems, nonvolatile memories play an essential role since they can store information for a long time without the need for external power. Magnetic memories, such as hard disk drives and magnetic tapes, dominate the secondary nonvolatile memory market due to high capacity and low cost. However, they are very slow (≈ 10 ms) compared with main memories such as dynamic random-access memory (DRAM, ≈ 100 ns) and thus there is a huge speed gap. The constant data transfer between fast computing units and slow memory units creates energy loss and time delay. To mitigate this issue, high-speed nonvolatile memories such as flash memory (≈ 0.1 ms) have been employed for personal and enterprise electronic devices. In addition, emerging nonvolatile memories, including but not limited to resistive RAM (RRAM), phase change memory, magnetic race-track memory, and magneto-resistive RAM (MRAM), are being intensively investigated to further reduce the gap Importantly, while SOT-MRAM does not consume static power due to its nonvolatile nature, reducing dynamic power is still critical to minimize cell footprint (selector transistor size, write latency). This calls for reduction of writing efficiency, and it is projected that one would need to improve the SOT efficiency to a value larger than one so that the switching current can reach write latency 1 ns with <100 μA in advanced technology nodes. Providing sufficient advantages compared to SRAM memories (primary technology replacement target) requires that the area cost of SOT-MRAM is less than that of Static RAM (SRAM) and that eventually the density of SOT-MRAM should approach that of STT-MRAM. As density strongly impacts yield, the fabrication process needs to be optimized, requiring strong effort on etch methods to avoid vertical shorts and MTJ damage at lower dimensions (30 nm). In the following text, we will briefly introduce SOT and its mechanisms, and explain why it can be potentially more energy-efficient and versatile in its applications. ; the orbital Hall effect is introduced in section 2c; thermal SOTs are introduced in section 2d; strain control of SOT is introduced in section 2e; magnonic SOTs are introduced in section 2f; metals are discussed in section 3a; topological insulators are discussed in section 3b; 2D materials are discussed in section 3c; oxides and magnetic insulators are discussed in section 3d; antiferromagnets are discussed in section 3e; ferrimagnets are discussed in section 3f; three-terminal SOT-MRAM and two-terminal SOT-MRAM are elaborated in section 4a and 4b, respectively; SOT memristors are elaborated in section 4c;THz generation using SOT is elaborated in section 4e; SOT nano-oscillators are elaborated in section 4f; and SOTs with domain walls/skyrmions are elaborated in section 4g. In addition to the topics mentioned in the figure, we discuss first-principle calculations in section 2b, low-damping ferromagnets in section 3g, schemes to achieve field-free magnetization switching in section 4d, and industrialization considerations in section 4h. SOT is generated from spin-orbit coupling in a single material or material heterostructure. This is distinctively different from STT, where the spin angular momentum is transferred from one magnet to another magnet. Conventionally, an electric field creates nonequilibrium orbital occupation that leads to SOT through spin-orbit coupling. This process includes the spin Hall effect SOT is attractive because of its potential energy efficiency. The efficiency for generating spin current and transferring angular momentum can be represented by a dimensionless number that characterizes the angular momentum transferred per electron. The STT efficiency has a theoretical limit of one since it originates from the spin polarization at the Fermi level of a ferromagnetic metal, which has a maximum of 100 %. In contrast, SOT efficiencies larger than one have been experimentally demonstrated in some topological materials and Rashba heterostructures. Since the required switching current is inversely proportional to the STT or SOT efficiency, the energy efficiency of SOT could be better. Researchers are investigating many materials for higher energy efficiency, including heavy metals, topological insulators, 2D materials, and oxides. In addition, ferromagnetic, ferrimagnetic, and antiferromagnetic materials are also studied for generating SOTs, in concert with the studies of magnetism and magnetic dynamics in the magnetic materials. SOT-based devices (e.g., SOT memory) usually have separate write and read paths. This increases the reliability of the devices since one does not need to apply a large write current through the ultrathin (≈ 1 nm) tunnel dielectric layer in a magnetic tunnel junction. Furthermore, in some applications, SOT devices do not require a second magnetic layer as in the STT case, making pure spin-based logic and computing units more tangible and providing more flexibility in terms of device structure design. Potential applications include, but are not limited to, MRAM, neuromorphic circuits, race-track memory, nano-oscillators, and terahertz generation. Early reviews of SOT-based devices include refs. In this paper, we review and provide a perspective of SOTs in both the theoretical and experimental aspects of their origins, materials and devices. We begin with the theory of SOT. We introduce various mechanisms to generate SOTs, including spin Hall effect, Rashba-Edelstein effect, orbital Hall effect, strain effect, thermal effect, and magnonic effect. Insights from first-principle calculations are briefly mentioned. Then, we describe materials for generating SOTs including metals and metal alloys, topological insulators, 2D materials, and oxides. Then, we discuss SOTs from magnetic materials, including ferromagnets, antiferromagnets, and ferrimagnets. Finally, we discuss SOT devices. We introduce three-terminal and two-terminal SOT-MRAM, SOT-based neuromorphic devices, nano-oscillators, racetrack memory with domain walls and skyrmions, and terahertz generators based on SOTs. We finish with a discussion of a variety of mechanisms for predictably switching SOT devices without the assistance of external fields, a requirement for scaling SOT-based devices. Two simple models provide the paradigms for understanding SOTs. The first one is that SOTs can arise from the interaction of spin-orbit coupling and magnetic exchange at an interface between a magnetic layer and a nonmagnetic layer, and has been proposed by Manchon and Zhang Theoretical research on SOTs has focused on developing a deeper understanding beyond these two paradigms to see where additional functionality can be achieved and then optimized. One approach is to study the angular dependence of the torque in more detail. For isotropic materials, SOTs with more complicated angular dependencies than the two described above are allowed Another way to break the necessary mirror plane is with an additional ferromagnetic layer that has a magnetization that points in a different direction than the magnetization of interest. For example in a trilayer system with two ferromagnetic layers, the anomalous Hall effect and the anisotropic magnetoresistance in the second ferromagnetic layer can generate spin currents that reach the layer of interest and that have spins oriented in such a way as to generate torques with novel angular dependencies First-principles electronic structure calculations are playing an increasing role in our understanding of SOTs, and that role can be expected to continue to increase. Their impact has been delayed because interpreting the results of such calculations is complicated. One complication is that all mechanisms are mixed together and need to be untangled. One approach for untangling them is to modify parts of the energies, for example by artificially changing the spin-orbit coupling in different regions, to see which region plays an essential role The perturbation that generates spin currents in these bilayers, the electric field, does not couple directly to the spin but rather to the orbital degrees of freedom. Even without the spin-orbit coupling needed for spin currents, a transverse orbital angular momentum current is possible (Fig. The interplay between thermal effects and spintronic effects leads to an emerging area of spin caloritronics In analogy to the SOT driven by electrical currents, thermal SOTs can be decomposed into even and odd components concerning the magnetization direction, and they have the same symmetry properties. The intrinsic even part of the thermal SOT is analogous to the intrinsic anomalous Nernst For many applications, it would be desirable to control the SOT with external means in addition to the current. While sample parameters such as composition and layer thickness of the ferromagnet/heavy metal heterostructures can be adjusted to design the magnitude and the sign of SOTs, they do not allow "dynamical" control in a given system ondemand. One energy-efficient tool for that is electric-field driven mechanical strain Many proposed applications of SOTs are based on systems with perpendicular magnetic anisotropy rather than inplane magnetized materials. Recent experiments demonstrate electrically induced strain control of SOTs in perpendicularly magnetized W/CoFeB/MgO multilayers grown on a piezoelectric substrate Recently, electric field control of SOTs in antiferromagnetic heterostructures, Mn 2 Au/ Pb(Mg 1/3 Nb 2/3 ) 0.7 Ti 0.3 O 3 (PMN-PT), has been experimentally demonstrated The interplay between thermal effects and spintronic effects leads to an emerging area of spin caloritronics The development of SOTs as a viable practical approach for electrically manipulating magnetizations has its origin in the investigation of spin Hall effects in metallic systems While measurements of the spin-torque efficiencies, θ SOT , for platinum have varied considerably in the literature, commonly accepted values are around θ SOT ≈ 0.10 for Pt layers that are a few nm thick As already mentioned, the interfacial microstructure may play an important role in determining the overall effective SOT efficiency. Towards this end, several studies have indicated that the presence of oxygen can change SOTs significantly Another class of metallic materials of recent interest with respect to large SOTs is that of semimetals, in particular, Weyl semimetals Spin-polarized surface states in topological insulators are able to generate SOT on an adjacent magnetization similar to the spin Hall effect and the Rashba-Edelstein effect. Because topological insulators are, in principle, surface conductive but insulating in the bulk, they could potentially provide much larger SOT for the unit applied current than heavy metals due to the spin momentum locking effect. In this regard, topological insulators can serve as promising candidates for magnetic memory devices with lower power consumption. SOT from topological insulators was first experimentally demonstrated simultaneously in (Bi x Sb 1-x ) 2 Te 3 /Cr-(Bi x Sb 1-x ) 2 Te 3 bilayer structure by second harmonic measurements In 2014, two independent groups have also reported the inverse process of SOT using the spin pumping technique Soon after, SOT from topological insulators was demonstrated in various topological insulator/ferromagnet systems and through different measurement approaches, e.g., spin-pumping, loop shift measurement and second harmonic measurement (Fig. For SOT applications, besides the J sw which can be significantly reduced with large θ SOT , the writing power density P W = J sw 2 ρ from Ohmic loss is another crucial factor for consideration. We summarize the resistivity and the normalized power consumption [proportional to ρ/(θ SOT ) 2 ] in a series of representative material systems: topological insulators For SOT-MRAM, two improvements are required for practical applications. One is reducing switching current density, and the other is eliminating the need for a bias field. Two-dimensional (2D) van der Waals materials have shown potential in providing solutions for these two challenges Besides van der Waals topological insulators like Bi 2 Se 3 family, other 2D materials, some of which are topological metals So far, SOT switching has only been achieved through current-induced in-plane spin polarization in nonmagnetic material/magnet heterostructures, which is not as energy-efficient as SOT switching using current-induced out-of-plane spin polarization Recent advances in film growth and synthesis techniques have enabled the growth of high-quality oxide heterostructures with very smooth interfaces. This allows for engineering novel electronic properties at the oxide b a c interfaces The presence of strong Rashba spin-orbit coupling in the d-bands of the 2DEG at the STO/LAO interface has been reported in various earlier studies The direct charge-to-spin conversion at the STO/LAO interface is an essential step for implementation in modern magnetic memory using the spin-orbit torque driven magnetization switching scheme. Using the spin-torque ferromagnetic resonance technique, a giant room temperature charge-to-spin conversion efficiency (i.e., SOT efficiency) of 6.3 was observed in the STO/LAO/CoFeB structure Besides the highly efficient charge-to-spin conversion from 2DEG in oxides, 5d-electron transition metal oxides can generate a large bulk spin Hall effect. It was predicted that large intrinsic spin Hall effect arises in strontium iridate (SrIrO 3 ), thanks to the spin-Berry curvature from the nearly degenerate electronic spectra surrounding the nodal line Besides working as the spin-orbit coupling layer, oxides that are magnetic insulators like ferrites can also work as efficient magnetic layers. Ferrites form a large family, including spinels, hexagonal ferrites, and garnet ferrites, having the general chemical formula of M(Fe x O y ), where M represents non-iron metallic elements. Magnetic insulators have several advantages over magnetic metals for SOT device applications. First, in a heavy metal (HM)/magnetic insulator (MI) heterostructure, the charge current only flows in the heavy metal layer, but not in the magnetic insulator layer. In contrast, in an HM/ferromagnetic metal (FM) structure, the charge current also flows in the ferromagnet, resulting in certain parasitic effects. When the heavy metal layer is replaced by a topological insulator (TI) with high resistivity, the advantage of zero shunting currents in the magnetic insulator film becomes particularly important The above discussion about metallic systems focused just on non-magnetic systems. However, the mechanisms that give rise to the SOTs also exist in magnetically ordered materials and may be influenced by additional symmetry breakings due to the magnetic order. Towards this end, antiferromagnetic metals are of large interest, since their magnetic order due to their vanishing net magnetic moment is typically robust against externally applied fields. An early experimental and systematic theoretical study of different CuAu-I-type antiferromagnets revealed that in Mn-based alloys the SOTs increase systematically for alloys that included heavier elements, with the largest spin-orbit torque efficiencies observed for epitaxial c-axis oriented PtMn with θ SOT ≈ 0.086 The symmetry breaking in antiferromagnets may also have more profound consequences than just generating an anisotropy for spin Hall conductivities; it may also generate profound new opportunities for coupling electric charge to spin degrees of freedom Given that the magnetic structure has a profound effect on the SOTs generated with metallic antiferromagnets, the natural question arises, whether exchange bias also has any influence on SOTs. Exchange bias refers to a unidirectional anisotropy that develops in a ferromagnetic layer, when an adjacent antiferromagnet is cooled through its Néel ordering temperature, or more precisely through its blocking temperature while being coupled to the ferromagnet Besides the torques that metallic antiferromagnets can exert on adjacent ferromagnets, some metallic antiferromagnets can also offer a very new way of electrically manipulating magnetic structure. Namely, in antiferromagnets where the individual spin sublattices are associated with crystal lattice sites that have reciprocal local inversion symmetries, electric currents can also generate so-called Néel (or staggered) SOTs, so that the direction of the SOTs has opposite orientation for each sublattice. This was first theoretically predicted for Mn 2 Au While the majority of the research employs ferromagnetic material as the free layer in the study of SOT induced magnetic dynamics, some non-conventional magnetic materials, including antiferromagnet and ferrimagnet, have attracted great interest very recently due to the rich physics and promising application prospects. It is generally believed that the high-frequency dynamics associated with the antiferromagnetic mode in those materials can lead to high-speed magnetic switching from SOT. Moreover, the zero or reduced net magnetic moment will decrease the stray magnetic field generated from each device, minimizing the magnetic cross-talk among neighboring bits. Meanwhile, the low magnetic moment also provides extra robustness against external field perturbation. The recent progress in antiferromagnetic spintronics has been summarized in a few review articles Ferrimagnets, to a certain extent, combine advantages from ferromagnets and antiferromagnets, which provides more flexibility in material and device engineering. First of all, similar to antiferromagnets, ferrimagnets have antiparallel aligned spin sublattices, which lead to the high-frequency dynamics mode as well as reduced net magnetization. In certain situations, the net moment within a ferrimagnet can be tuned to be zero by compensating the magnetization from the two sublattices through chemical composition adjustment, forming an effective antiferromagnet In terms of writing methods for ferrimagnet-based spintronic devices, SOT provides a convenient mechanism, where spins injected via the spin Hall effect Besides rare earth-transition metals, quite a large number of magnetic insulators belong to the family of ferrimagnets, due to the oxygen atom mediated super-exchange. SOT induced magnetic switching has been demonstrated in these materials Heusler alloys are another important category of magnetic materials, many of which exhibit ferrimagnetic ordering. For example, Heusler alloys with Mn elements usually have antiparallelly aligned sublattices and have reduced saturation magnetization. Interested readers are suggested to refer to review articles of refs. One of the main motivations for the employment of materials with antiferromagnetic coupling is to obtain a faster operation speed. Recently, the speed advantages associated with ferrimagnets are demonstrated in multi-domain ferrimagnets in the domain wall motion regime For the goals that are expected to be reached in the near future, one important topic on ferrimagnetic SOT study is to realize integrated MTJ devices that can be switched by SOT and be detected by tunneling magnetoresistance. As is discussed above, compared with antiferromagnets, ferrimagnets have finite spin polarization at the Fermi surface, allowing for large magnetoresistance ratio. Experimentally, the integration of SOT based ferrimagnet devices with an MTJ structure still faces several material challenges. For example, the active chemical properties of rare earth elements in their metallic state usually determine that they do not form a sharp interface when being in contact with an oxide tunneling barrier such as MgO Besides improving the efficiency for magnetic reading in SOT-based ferrimagnet devices, increasing the SOT efficiency and further reducing the switching current will be another aspect for future study. As is discussed earlier, standard SOT model determines that the effective field scales with the net magnetic moment in a manner of H DL ∝ 1 M s . However, experimental evidence exists that H DL becomes divergent at a rate faster than 1 M s , providing the potential for achieving a higher switching efficiency Finally, demonstrating robust sub-nanosecond magnetic switching or ultra-high frequency magnetic oscillation could be another milestone that will be reached within the next few years. As is mentioned above, the ultrafast magnetic domain wall motion has been observed in multi-domain ferrimagnets. Extrapolating this high speed magnetic switching into the single domain regime will be highly useful for the realization of standard single bit SOT-MRAM cells. While sub-nanosecond switching has been reported in various circumstances in the study of SOT and STT spintronics, it remains to be demonstrated that ultra-low writing bit error rate can be achieved in those devices Loss in magnetic precession, often discussed in terms of Gilbert damping, plays a key role in essentially all types of magnetization dynamics There are also numerous applications where lower damping is desirable, particularly for lowering loss in magnetic precession. Magnetic thin-film media with low damping are therefore in demand for such devices as spin-torque nanooscillators The quest for low-loss magnetic media is further complicated by practical considerations, such as the need for high magnetoresistance signals and the compatibility with commercial device fabrication processes. In this regard, ferromagnetic metals have significant advantages for practical device applications. The magnetization state of ferromagnetic metals can be detected via large magnetoresistance signals (e.g., ≈ 1% for anisotropic magnetoresistance, ≈ 10 to 100 % for giant magnetoresistance and TMR). Thin films of ferromagnetic metals can also be grown readily on Si substrates by sputtering under conditions compatible with standard device fabrication processes (e.g., growth temperature below ≈ 300 °C). Although ferromagnetic metals are often thought to exhibit much higher damping than magnetic insulators, recent experiments point to ultralow intrinsic Gilbert damping in Heusler compounds We identify the following challenges in engineering metallic ferromagnetic media for practical SOT devices with lowloss precessional dynamics: A. Understanding how film structures affect energy loss in precessional dynamics (Gilbert damping, two-magnon scattering, inhomogeneous broadening, etc.): Ultralow intrinsic damping parameters of ≈ 5  10 -4 have been reported in sputter-grown polycrystalline CoFe alloy films A possible drawback of CoFe is its high saturation magnetization FeV have ultralow intrinsic damping, SOT applications require the ferromagnetic metal to be in contact with (or in proximity to, via a spacer material) a spin-orbit metal, i.e., the source of charge-to-spin conversion. The ferromagnetic metal must be thin (e.g., <<10 nm), since the critical current density is inversely proportional to the magnetic layer thickness. Fundamentally, this is because the conventional SOT is essentially an interfacial effect, in the sense that spins must be transferred across the interface between the spin-orbit metal and the ferromagnet. The proximity of the ferromagnet to a spin-orbit metal introduces additional sources of loss. Some of these loss mechanisms, such as spin-memory loss A possible route to overcome this thickness conundrum is to go beyond the "interfacial" scheme for SOTs. In particular, a viable solution may be a SOT that originates in the bulk of the ferromagnetic metal a. Three-terminal SOT memory SOT-MRAM, STT-MRAM, Cache memory: SOT-induced magnetization switching can be used for the write method of MRAM. MRAM technology began with a magnetic-field writing scheme. However, because required current for magnetic-field-induced switching is relatively large, typically in the order of milliamperes, and tends to increase with the reduction of device size, focus of researches has shifted to STT-induced magnetization switching Typical cell structures of the STT-MRAM and SOT-MRAM are shown in Figs. There are several structures of actual SOT-MRAM devices that are different in the direction of magnetic easy axis as shown in Fig. Four types of structures of SOT switching devices for memory application (drawn to scale): a) Z type with outof-plane magnetic easy axis, an external magnetic field along the x axis is required for deterministic switching, b) Y type with an in-plane easy axis perpendicular to current direction, c) X type with an in-plane easy axis parallel to current direction, an external field along the z axis is required for deterministic switching, d) XY type with an in-plane easy axis tilted with respect to current direction. Magnetization easy axis directions of the switching layer are indicated by white arrows. Operation of three-terminal SOT devices has been demonstrated by several groups For practical use of SOT-MRAM, SOT-induced switching devices should satisfy several requirements, which are listed below. One of the most important criteria is that the critical current required for magnetization switching be about 100 μA or less. This is mainly because the size of the cell transistor is determined by the write current and a larger write current requires a larger cell size, eventually limiting the memory capacity. A larger write current is also undesirable in terms of lower-power operation, which is particularly critical for internet-of-things (IoT) applications. In addition, the resistance of the write current path should be small enough so that the current required for switching can be supplied with a reasonably small source voltage, typically a few 100 mV or less. Magnetization switching speed is an equally important criterion, as SOT-MRAMs are expected to be used for high-speed memories in integrated circuits that STT-MRAMs cannot access. Switching within a few nanoseconds, or ideally sub-nanosecond, is required. In terms of high-reliability operation that is an important requirement for cache memory applications, low switching error rate, and high endurance are demanded. In addition, since MRAMs attract interest due to their nonvolatility, high thermal stability is also an important factor. Furthermore, for the compatibility with CMOS processes and circuits, materials for the free layer should exhibit a high TMR ratio, and the stack structure should have a thermal tolerance up to 400 o C, the highest temperature of standard CMOS and packaging processes. Besides the commonly employed three-terminal configuration (Fig. To predict the future research directions on two-terminal SOT devices, one important topic is to incorporate the newly discovered high efficiency SOT materials into the two terminal design. As is discussed in this perspective article, groups of materials with large effective SOT efficiency including topological insulators Besides further increasing the SOT efficiency with the usage of new materials and new mechanisms, realizing SOT induced real 'anti-damping' switching will be another important topic to visit in the study of two-terminal SOT devices. In most of the existing studies where SOT is employed to flip a perpendicularly magnetized free layer, the switching is known to be inefficient as the injected spins are orthogonal to the equilibrium orientation of magnetic moments. In this case, the threshold current is roughly proportional to the anisotropy field in the single domain configuration Overall, two terminal SOT devices combine the advantages of high density of traditional MRAM cells and high efficiency of SOT, providing a competitive solution for dense, low power, and non-volatile memory. The future development of this technology will integrate new SOT materials with MTJs, achieving effective SOT efficiency larger than one while maintaining the high tunneling magnetoresistance and strong magnetic anisotropy. Meanwhile, materials and mechanisms which lead to out-of-plane spin generation will give another large boost in the switching efficiency of two-terminal SOT devices. Beside memory applications, spintronic devices can be used for in-memory and neuromorphic computing Proof-of-concept demonstration of artificial neural networks using the SOT memristor as an artificial synapse was reported by Borders et al. In order to make the SOT memristor a viable device in neuromorphic computers, one needs to substantially improve several device properties. One of the most important challenges is a reduction of device size while maintaining the memristive properties. As mentioned above, the memristive behavior of SOT devices is attributed to a separate switching of fine magnetic domains. Therefore, the reduction of device size in principle results in a decrease in the number of levels the device can show Besides synapses, we also need the basic building blocks, neurons, for neuromorphic systems. A biological neuron resembles the leaky-integrate-fire dynamics, which accumulates the membrane potential as the input spikes arrive, with a leak factor. It has been shown that the magnetization dynamics in the SOT-MTJ, as well as the domain wall position in an SOT-based domain wall device, follow the leaky-integrate-fire behavior, thereby directly mapping the desired neuron characteristics to the device While SOT-induced magnetization switching has been extensively studied in the deterministic regime, the stochastic regime also holds enormous potential for application in various fields including neuromorphic systems, unconventional computing hardware, and information security. The usefulness of the stochastic nature of physical systems for computationally hard problems was pointed out by Richard Feynman in 1981 There are two types of approaches to utilize the stochasticity. The first approach (Fig. Deterministic switching of perpendicular magnetization at zero external magnetic field is critical for SOT devices. In a typical SOT heterostructure, the spin-polarization is in the in-plane direction. Therefore, it is applied to both up and down magnetization states of the magnetic memory layer symmetrically. In order to realize deterministic SOT switching of the magnetic layer, this symmetry needs to be broken. In the earlier works, this symmetry was broken by applying an in-plane magnetic field collinear with the current. However, the presence of an external field is not practical for applications as it adds to the complexity of the device structure and operation. In recent years, there have been many efforts to realize deterministic field-free SOT switching of perpendicular magnetization using various approaches. Here, we have grouped these efforts into four categories of symmetry breaking: (i) structural asymmetry, (ii) built-in in-plane fields, (iii) out-of-plane spin polarization, and (iv) hybrid approaches (see Fig. This approach is based on introducing a lateral symmetry breaking in the device structure, typically achieved by using a wedge-shaped layer or by controlling the geometry of the magnetic layer. The wedgeshaped layer has been shown to induce either an effective out-of-plane field-like field (ii) Built-in in-plane fields: This method is based on replacing the external in-plane field for deterministic switching with a built-in in-plane field/magnetic layer. This can be achieved by either an in-plane exchange bias field (through an antiferromagnet interface) (iii) Out-of-plane spin-polarization: Out-of-plane spin-polarization can break the symmetry between the up/down magnetization states, resulting in field-free SOT switching. This has been achieved (1) in crystalline WTe 2 (iv) Hybrid approaches: Spin-orbit torques can also be combined with other voltage-or current-induced effects for realizing field-free switching. Recently, field-free SOT switching has been realized in a ferroelectric/ferromagnetic structure using PMN-PT We compare different aspects for all these schemes of field-free SOT switching in Table Note: Maturity of research stage is defined as four levels, I: Hall bar or Wire (switching device), II: Nanomagnet or micromagnet (pattern on channel), III: MTJ, and IV: MTJ wafer scale. Examples of these schemes: embedded magnet Since ultrafast demagnetization at the time scale of sub-picosecond was first observed using a femtosecond laser pulse in 1996 In the first demonstration of terahertz emission from the Fe/Au bilayer structure (Fig. Since the first demonstration, ultrafast spin-to-charge conversion and the associated terahertz emission has been explored in various magnetic heterostructures Terahertz emission from more complex magnetic heterostructures including nearly compensated ferrimagnetic alloys or antiferromagnet layers were studied. In previous studies utilizing FM/NM bilayer structures, the spin current generation is attributed to the net magnetization in the ferromagnetic layer In the future, terahertz time-domain spectroscopy can play an essential role in the characterizations of novel materials, especially ultrafast spin dynamics f. SOT nano-oscillators Spin Hall nano-oscillators (SHNOs) are microwave signal generation devices where a pure spin current from a material with SOT drives sustained auto-oscillations of the local magnetization of a nearby ferromagnetic layer Nano-constriction SHNOs have very recently also shown a great propensity for mutual synchronization, both in onedimensional chains Future research into SHNOs and their networks should be carried out along a number of different dimensions such as power consumption, frequency range, output power, network size, network topologies SOT driven chiral domain wall motions: Magnetic domains are small magnets that are uniformly magnetized inside. When neighboring domains are magnetized in different orientations, there are boundaries between domains that are named magnetic domain walls. Besides magnetic skyrmions Meanwhile, SOT The asymmetry of domain wall velocities between the domain wall configurations can also be induced by magnetic fields along the wire direction that are collinear with the DMI fields The SOT driven chiral domain wall motions have many advantages over the STT counterpart such as high efficiency, tunability, and additional functionalities for applications. The chiral domain wall based devices that may be of interest are racetrack memory, neuromorphic devices, and logic. The racetrack memory One of the biggest challenges in 1-bit three-terminal racetrack is to reduce threshold current density J C above which a chiral domain wall starts depinning. Typical J C values e.g., in Pt/Co are in the order of 10 7 A/cm 2 [8], The chiral nature of those domain walls can be utilized for logic gate applications. Recently all-electrical logic operations such as NAND, NOR, XOR and full ADDER have been replicated using chiral domain walls, which are based on the inversion of the domain walls, i.e. NOT-gate We have discussed the limitation of the commercialization of chiral domain walls-based devices above. Meanwhile, it has been discovered that composite domain walls can be moved much faster than single-layer and ferromagnetically coupled ones. The two chiral domain walls are antiferromagnetically coupled across a spacer layer such as Ru via the Ruderman-Kittel-Kasuya-Yosida interaction, thus showing that the domain wall velocity is highly correlated with the exchange coupling sign In contrast with the single-layer domain wall case, the velocity versus longitudinal field curves form a broad maximum around zero-field in the fully compensated antiferromagnetic composite domain walls, showing symmetry with respect to zero-field The antiferromagnetic composite domain walls can be extended to ferrimagnetic chiral domain walls that are typically formed from rare-earth and 3d transition-metal alloys or multilayers in which two networks (rare-earth and 3d transition-metal) are oriented in an anti-parallel way When the exchange coupling strength in an AF composite domain wall is weak, while the positions of component domain walls are tightly locked, an exotic domain wall dynamic can emerge antiferromagnetically composite domain walls have many benefits compared with single-layer domain walls for applications to racetrack memory and logic. First, more robust racetrack memory and logic are allowed, since the antiferromagnetic composite domain walls are significantly inert to possible external fields since the stray field is minimized. Second, the access and operation speeds are much higher due to the giant exchange coupling torque as the net magnetization is fully compensated. Third, the domain wall tilting and the asymmetries in domain wall velocity between two domain wall configurations by geometrical broken symmetries or external fields hinder the increase of density of racetrack memory as discussed above. Fourth, the on-off ratio for read-out in an MTJ can be large, since the magnetic layers that sandwich a tunnel barrier can have a large spin polarization. Fifth, the J C can be significantly reduced in antiferromagnetically coupled composite domain walls, due to the absence of domain wall tilting, small net magnetization, and additional room to reduce anisotropy, while maintaining decent thermal stability. The chiral exchange drag anomaly from the weakly-coupled antiferromagnetic composite chiral domain walls can be used to develop a gigahertz range of oscillators that is tunable by external fields We present a roadmap for domain wall-based SOT devices in Fig. Due to their non-trivial topology, skyrmions move under an angle with respect to the direction of the applied current While the Thiele equation of motion The non-trivial form of SOTs in magnetic multilayers requires an extension of this widely accepted picture. While the current-induced dynamics of skyrmions have been explained in terms of deformations of the spin texture Recently DMI and electronic signatures of skyrmions in magnetic insulator-based heterostructures have been shown Therefore, it is essential to consider the overall performances at the single-cell level and at the array size level, which includes the access lines resistance and capacitances parasitic of the control and sensing peripheries. Because the latter is extremely dependent on CMOS node and on end-user targets, assessing the potential of SOT-MRAM with proper benchmarking against SRAM requires compact device models built from large-statistics experimental data and systemdesign power-performance-area-cost analysis. The main difficulty of this assessment is that today's SOT-MRAM is still in the early development phase; the outcomes are extremely dependent on SOT cell performances assumptions. In addition, the work carried out on SOT-RAM design is still very limited compared to STT-MRAM. The outcomes are extremely dependent on SOT cell performances assumptions. The future of SOT-MRAM manufacturability covers etch challenges, stack performances for write, read, and retention optimization, and bit/array-cell design for density and system level. In the following, we provide a first-level analysis and project the potential of SOT-MRAM based on known silicon data and assumed material optimization. Integration challenges: SOT-and STT-MRAMs share the same technological platform, with two additional modules for SOT, such as forming and aligning the SOT channel. Typically, the main integration process steps consist of four main modules Performance challenges: At the beginning of the paper, we have provided some targets for future SOT-MRAM in Fig. In addition, any technology suitable for embedded memory applications must be compatible with an advanced back-end line processing of CMOS chips, which typically requires deposition of the low-k dielectric at 400 °C for times varying from 30 min to hours. Hence, reaching these performances will demand strong stack engineering development efforts to reach a 400 °C thermal budget while maintaining sufficient thermal stability of the free layers (from months to years) and reference layer (years) with new SOT materials (optimized SOT efficiency and conductivity). The TMR is already reaching its targets More critically, implementing commercial SOT-MRAMs requires the reduction of the critical switching current while preserving the device functionality and speed. The most straightforward approach is downscaling. A realistic cell dimension for a sub 28 nm node would consist of an MTJ with a diameter of 30 nm to 35 nm placed on top of a nearlyequal wide SOT-line (32 nm to 40 nm). State-of-the-art perpendicular magnetic anisotropy SOT-MTJ would require a critical current of ≈ 250 μA at a nanosecond time scale with  SOT ≈ 0.4 Care is required when discussing device characteristics before drawing conclusions at the circuit and especially at the application level. Researchers have explored different SOT materials for maximizing array-level read/write performance by considering the parasitic resistances and capacitances of the access lines In order to minimize footprint and be competitive with other technologies in terms of areal density, a 3-terminal MTJ cell should match the power performances of a single CMOS transistor in terms of voltage and current delivery. Typically, a transistor in sub 28 nm nodes can deliver from 0.7 V to 1.1 V, which is already largely achievable Based on such assumptions, system-level evaluation at 5 nm node Overall, spin-orbit torques have proven to be an exciting new opportunity for efficient electrical control of magnetization states. We list a few points of historical and potential developments in Fig. Figure a. Three-terminal SOT memory b. Two-terminal SOT memory c. SOT neuromorphic devices and circuits d. Field-free switching e. Terahertz generation using SOT f. SOT nano-oscillators g. SOTs with domain walls and skyrmions h. Industrialization considerations 5. Conclusion 6. References