The influence of temperature on interfacial fluid slip, as measured by molecular-dynamics simulations of a Couette flow comprising a Lennard-Jones fluid and rigid crystalline walls, is examined as a function of the fluid-solid interaction strength. Two different types of thermal behavior are observed, namely, the slippery and sticky cases. The first is characterized by a steep and unlimited increase of the slip length at low temperatures, while the second presents a vanishing slip length in this regime. As the temperature increases in relation to a characteristic value, both cases converge to finite slip lengths. A recently proposed analytical model is found to well describe both thermal behaviors, also predicting the slippery-sticky transition that occurs at a critical value of the fluid-solid interaction parameter, for which, according to the model, fluid particles experience a smooth average energy landscape at the interface. Fluid-solid interaction is a fundamental topic in several areas of science and engineering. The purpose of this work is to examine the interfacial phenomenon of fluid slip. Although the conventional theoretical framework of fluid mechanics, which relies on the continuum hypothesis, is unable to determine interfacial boundary a) Electronic mail: viscondi@usp.br conditions, they can be readily assessed by employing atomistic simulation methods, such as molecular dynamics. Over the past few decades, plenty of effort has been directed towards understanding the mechanisms underlying fluid slip and the way it correlates with other physical quantities and phenomena. The fundamental concepts and basic procedures employed in our numerical simulations and data analysis are briefly outlined in section II. Section III presents our main results, namely, an atomistic investigation of the fluid-slip thermal behavior for model interfaces. Further discussion on the results, based on the physical interpretation provided by the thermal-activation analytical model, is given in section IV. Section V comprises our concluding remarks and perspectives for future work. Details of the simulation setup are found in appendix A. The slip length, denoted here by λ, is the parameter that quantifies the fluid slip at a point r of a solid surface S by relating the fluid-velocity tangential component u t , in the rest frame of S, to the local shear rate γ = ∂u t /∂n, that is, where n is the direction of the surface's normal pointing into the fluid. Geometrically, λ is the distance one would have to linearly extrapolate the fluid velocity towards the solid surface so that u t vanishes. It is important to note that equation ( The applicability of definition (1) is twofold. In an atomistic simulation, as in the case of the results discussed in later sections, equation ( The adopted interface model consists of a monoatomic fluid bounded by two solid walls whose atoms are kept in a rigid simple-cubic crystal arrangement. Fluid particles have mass m and both fluid-fluid and fluid-solid interactions are described by a pairwise Lennard-Jones potential, where r is the distance between interacting particles. The parameter ε controls the strength of the interaction, while σ sets its length scale. For computational reasons, interactions are turned off for distances larger than a cutoff radius r c , so that forces are actually derived from a truncated and smoothed version of the potential, Ṽ (r) = V (r) -V (r c ) -∂V (r)/∂r| r=rc (r -r c ), thus ensuring the continuity of both energy and force at r = r c . Throughout this work, the values of σ and ε determining the fluid-fluid interaction are considered, respectively, as the length and energy units. That is, a Lennard-Jones system of units is here employed with the parameters of the fluid-fluid potential set as reference. As a result, the temperature unit becomes ε/k B , where k B is the Boltzmann constant. In addition, by taking the mass m of a fluid particle as the unit of mass, it follows that the unit of time is τ = σ m/ε. Note that, as a consequence of the adopted unit system, the Lennard-Jones parameters of the fluid-solid interaction, symbolized by ε f s and σ f s , have their values specified in relation to the fluid-fluid potential. In order to extract slip-length values from an interface model, the fluid must be put in a shearing state. For this purpose, a non-equilibrium methodology based on a molecular-dynamics Couette flow is employed. The simulation box is made periodic in the x and y directions while solid walls constrain the fluid in the z dimension. The walls, symmetrical and placed a distance h apart, move rigidly and uniformly in opposite directions along the x direction with relative speed U . In addition, the walls are made thick enough so that fluid particles are unaware of the solid's finite depth. After a transient period in its time evolution, the system reaches a steady state, which is characterized by a linear velocity profile u x (z) in the fluid's bulk region, that is, in the volume portion sufficiently far from the solid walls. At this stage, the fluid also displays uniform bulk temperature and density profiles. After ensuring that the system is in its steady state, the simulation enters in the production stage, in which velocities are sampled and averaged over several time steps. Once enough data is accumulated, the shear rate γ is evaluated by applying a linear regression to the resulting bulk velocity profile. Finally, the slip length is obtained from equation (1), which yields the relation λ = (U/ γ -h)/2 in the case of a Couette flow. All simulation runs are performed using the same number of particles and box dimensions. In particular, the wall separation distance h is kept constant so that the overall fluid density is fixed. However, as the fluid-solid interaction strength varies across runs, the layering effects at the interface cause slight variations in the bulk density. For the purposes of the intended analysis, each sliplength value must be determined at a well-defined temperature. Since the wall motion gives rise to a net inflow of energy, it is crucial to take measures to keep the temperature at a constant average value. Following previous works, where u is the fluid velocity field, Γ is an adjustable damping coefficient, and S(t) corresponds to a stochastic force satisfying S(t) = 0 and S(t)S(t ) = 2mT b Γδ(tt ), with angle brackets denoting time averages. The imposed dynamics drive the system in such a way as to match the average fluid temperature T to the target value T b , representing the thermal-bath temperature. As shown in equation ( According to previous studies, A point deserving closer examination is the fact that, in the adopted methodology, the walls move rigidly, meaning that solid particles do not respond to the forces acting upon them. This is done mainly for practical reasons, since it makes simulations simpler to implement and computationally cheaper. Hence, solid-solid interactions play no role and, in particular, temperature effects on the walls are disregarded. The question then arises whether this simplification significantly affects the slip length's temperature dependence. A justification for the performed simulations can be found in previous studies, Additional technical details of the performed simulations, such as the values of fixed parameters and the employed algorithm of time integration, are presented in appendix A. In their paper, where T is the interface temperature and μ is the shear viscosity at the fluid's bulk region. The model is based on the idea that fluid particles in the first contact layer are driven by local shear forces and move by hopping over potential-energy barriers. Accordingly, the parameters l and τ 0 represent, respectively, the hop length and time scale. The energy barrier experienced by the fluid particles results from their interaction with both the solid wall and the fluid itself. This is expressed in equation ( In other words, expression ( In its turn, the characteristic temperature T c has a twofold interpretation; its sign determines the overall thermal behavior of the slip length, whereas its absolute value establishes a temperature scale. By comparing equations ( The fact that the combination of physical quantities in the prefactor of expression (4) and the total energy barrier V f s + V f f seem to be mostly independent of temperature, giving rise to the parameters λ ∞ and T c for a Lennard-Jones interface, is quite useful for the purposes of applying such a description to multiscale problems. Without this property, each component of equation ( Figure The shear rate γ is readily obtained by calculating the slope of a Couette-flow velocity profile. Therefore, the values indicated in the legend of figure Figure The coefficient of determination R 2 , also shown in table I, confirms that equation ( In the critical situation of ε f s = 0.6, according to the simulation results, the slip length is practically invariant with respect to temperature. This fact is reflected in the almost null value of the parameter T c , which in turn Table Tc [ε/kB] R 2 0.1 1.9 ± 0.2 -1.98 ± 0.09 0.97 0.2 2.2 ± 0.2 -1.51 ± 0.07 0.96 0.3 2.7 ± 0.3 -1.03 ± 0.07 0.97 0.4 3.0 ± 0.3 -0.63 ± 0.07 0.98 0.5 3.2 ± 0.4 -0.31 ± 0.08 0.96 0.6 3.3 ± 0.4 -0.07 ± 0.08 0.28 0.7 3.4 ± 0.5 +0.24 ± 0.12 0.97 0.8 3.6 ± 0.6 +0.53 ± 0.18 0.98 0.9 3.5 ± 0.7 +0.76 ± 0.26 0.98 1.0 3.5 ± 0.7 +0.94 ± 0.26 0.97 1.1 3.7 ± 1.1 +1.33 ± 0.44 0.98 1.2 3.7 ± 1.4 +1.48 ± 0.72 0.98 implies that expression ( As can be visually inferred from figure According to table I, in both slippery and sticky cases, the value of λ ∞ slowly increases as the parameter ε f s is raised. The increase rate is different for each of the thermal behaviors, being clearly faster in the slippery regime. Therefore, albeit counterintuitive, simulation data does indicate that stronger interface interactions result in larger slip lengths at high fluid temperatures (T |T c |). Simulation Data As expected from equation ( Notice that, in both cases, high agreement between the model function and the numerical simulations is evinced by the coefficient R 2 . By employing the fitted curves of figure As shown in the previous section, both slippery and sticky thermal behaviors were adequately described by a previously-proposed model function, Within the slippery regime, the characteristic temperature T c is negative, meaning that the model's total energy barrier V f s + V f f = k B T c is actually a potential well, promoting the movement of fluid particles along the solid surface. This slip-facilitating mechanism is gradually suppressed by increasing the thermal fluctuations, as they may cause the entrapment of fluid particles in the potential wells. In general, interfacial fluid particles are subjected to a competition between cohesive and adhesive forces. Seeking to maintain cohesion, forces originating from the fluid are responsible for the term V f f = k B β, which is always negative, as follows from the values of β 1 and β 2 presented in section III. On the other hand, the adhesive forces from the solid surface result in the term V f s = k B αε f s , which is strictly positive, as evinced by the obtained values of α 1 and α 2 . Therefore, the slippery behavior occurs when the fluid cohesion at the interface is stronger than the adhesion to the solid surface (|V f f | > |V f s |). In the opposite situation, the sticky behavior arises. The slippery-sticky transition takes place at the criti-cal interaction-strength value εfs , for which the characteristic temperature vanishes or, equivalently, the energy contributions V f s and V f f cancel each other out. In this particular situation, fluid particles experience a smooth average energy landscape at the interface, so that thermal mechanisms of hopping and entrapment are absent, resulting in the slip length's temperature invariance. Consequently, at the transition, the slip-length value is solely determined by other physical properties, such as viscosity and surface density. In section III, by examining the dependence of T c on the fluid-solid interaction strength, the value of εfs was determined to be approximately 0.6ε. Interestingly, in addition to its sign change, the curve T c (ε f s ) also exhibits a slope discontinuity at the transition. Therefore, the characteristic temperature signals the slippery-sticky transition in two different ways, establishing itself as a reliable identifier parameter for the slip length's thermal behavior. By performing molecular-dynamics simulations of a Couette flow, composed of a Lennard-Jones fluid at constant density and simple-cubic rigid walls, the temperature effects on fluid slip were thoroughly examined. As shown in section III, the slip length can present two completely different thermal behaviors depending on the interaction strength between the fluid and the solid surfaces. In the slippery case, corresponding to weak interface interactions (ε f s < εfs ), the slip-length value is upper-unbounded and decreases with temperature. On the other hand, for strong fluid-solid interactions (ε f s > εfs ), the interface displays the sticky behavior, characterized by slip-length values increasing with temperature, but in a restricted interval. From a technological point of view, interfaces capable of operating in the slippery regime are very promising. Assuming that the slippery thermal behavior is not hindered by other effects, the arbitrarily large slip lengths obtainable at low temperatures (T |T c |) could be readily exploited in applications requiring low frictional stress. From a design perspective, the determination of characteristic temperatures, either empirically or numerically, provides a searching path for the development or selection of materials for such friction-reduction purposes. As previously discussed, large-magnitude negative values of T c will make the slippery behavior more appreciable at higher temperatures, ideally far above the fluid's solidification temperature T F . The present work's findings, in conjunction with the analytical model proposed in reference [60], can assist in devising methods for the efficient simulation of continuum fluidic systems in which interfacial boundary conditions are required to be sensitive to nonuniform temperature distributions. By performing a small set of molecular-dynamics simulations, the parameters λ ∞ and T c can be promptly determined for a fluid-solid interface of interest. Upon substituting these values into the slip-length model function (5) and then inserting the resulting expression into equation ( Finally, note that the results of section III are reasonably general. That is, by adopting a system of units based on the fluid's fundamental properties and defining the fluid-solid interaction parameters relative to it, a representative discussion is provided for any interface whose intermolecular forces can be effectively described by Lennard-Jones potentials. However, for more complex interparticle interactions, other effects beyond those considered in the present study could influence the slip length's temperature dependence, so that it would be erroneous to conclude that the slippery and sticky behaviors, as described by function (5) and portrayed by figures 2 and 3, will be observed in more sophisticated interface models. Nevertheless, even in more complicated scenarios, the mechanisms investigated in this work still participate in the system dynamics, and they will have a role in determining the interfacial fluid slip. This is because the repulsive and van der Waals interactions following from the Lennard-Jones potential are essential ingredients of more elaborated force fields, which will typically also include long-range Coulomb forces as well as other terms that account for the internal degrees of freedom of each molecule. Whether the Lennard-Jones contribution has a generally dominant or negligible role in determining the slip length's thermal behavior in such complex systems remains an open question that we intend to tackle in future studies. considering respectively the number, the mean velocity, and the mean thermal-kinetic energy of the particles in each partition. Time averages and their respective standard deviations are then calculated by taking into account all time steps in the period T . Note that, according to this procedure, the standard deviations are proportional to the fluctuation amplitudes of the physical quantities during their time series. In order to properly investigate the slip length's temperature dependence, molecular-dynamics simulations were performed with temperature values between 0.1ε/k B and 3.5ε/k B for each choice of the parameter ε f s . Since part of this range lies below the Lennard-Jones equilibrium freezing temperature, approximately 0.69ε/k B , some of the low-temperature runs naturally resulted in systems displaying no fluidic behavior and, consequently, were discarded from the fluid-slip analysis. In other words, only those simulations presenting a steady-state characterized by a linear and symmetrical bulk velocity profile, as well as uniform bulk temperature and density profiles, after the period T of system preparation, were effectively considered in the slip-length evaluation. Linear regressions, employed in the determination of shear-rate values and the adjustable parameters in expressions ( 