In-volume ultrafast laser direct writing of silicon is generally limited by strong nonlinear propagation effects preventing the initiation of modifications. By employing a triple-optimization procedure in the spectral, temporal and spatial domains, we demonstrate that modifications can be repeatably produced inside silicon. Our approach relies on irradiation at ≈ 2-μm wavelength with temporallydistorted femtosecond pulses. These pulses are focused in a way that spherical aberrations of different origins counterbalance, as predicted by point spread function analyses and in good agreement with nonlinear propagation simulations. We also establish the laws governing modification growth on a pulse-to-pulse basis, which allows us to demonstrate transverse inscription inside silicon with various line morphologies depending on the irradiation conditions. We finally show that the production of single-pulse repeatable modifications is a necessary condition for reliable transverse inscription inside silicon. Ultrafast laser direct writing is a proven technique for in-volume functionalization of dielectrics in a threedimensional (3D), fast and contactless way In this article, we demonstrate contactless femtosecond laser transverse inscription inside silicon employing a triple-optimization procedure which combines beneficial effects in the spectral, temporal and spatial domains. The spectral optimization consists of employing femtosecond laser pulses at ≈ 2-μm wavelength, where the peak in the nonlinear refractive index at this specific wavelength gives rise to enhanced energy deposition The experimental arrangement employed for inducing, detecting and characterizing permanent modifications inside silicon is depicted in Fig. Three-dimensional in-situ monitoring of the lasersilicon interaction is performed by means of two customized diagnostics. The first one is a transmission microscope relying on white light illumination. The light passes through the sample along the x axis, and images of the modifications in the yz plane are recorded thanks to an objective lens (Mitutoyo, M Plan Apo NIR-HR 50×), a tube lens, and an InGaAs camera (Xenics, Bobcat 320). Images in the xy plane are recorded by a transmission microscope relying on illumination at 1.03-μm (Spectra-Physics, femtoTrain) along the -z direction passing through the silicon sample, the focusing asphere, and a tube lens before being collected by a silicon-based camera. This latter microscope is utilized for determining the relative position of the focus with respect to the sample surface by performing surface damage scans at energies near the breakdown threshold. The focusing depth is obtained by multiplying the displacement ∆z of the focusing lens along the optical axis starting from the entrance surface by the refractive index of silicon at 1.95-μm (n 0 ≈ 3.45 Two distinct laser sources have been used in the present study. Both of these sources exhibit similar spectral and spatial features. However, the temporal shapes of the pulses emitted by these laser systems are different. The first laser system (Active Fiber Systems, see details in Ref. Let us first examine the focusing depth allowing to maximize the energy deposition inside silicon, i.e., the spatial optimization. To do so, we have first carried out linear propagation calculations in silicon with our recently developed in-house vectorial model called "InFocus" For simplicity, let us first consider that the propagation is linear, i.e., nonlinear effects such as the optical Kerr effect as well as plasma formation and defocusing are neglected. Under this assumption, the results are independent of the temporal profile of the pulsesand, thus, valid for the two employed laser systems [see Figs. In order to consider the nonlinear propagation inside silicon, we performed numerical simulations based on the unidirectional pulse propagation equation (UPPE) where the first term on the right-hand side describes two-photon ionization, second -avalanche ionization, third -Auger recombination, and fourth -electron relaxation. Here ρ nt = 5 × 10 28 m -3 is the density of neutral atoms, σ 2 = β 2 /(2 ω 0 ρ nt ) is the cross-section of two-photon ionization with the two-photon absorption coefficient β 2 = 2.97 × 10 -12 m•W -1 Figure Additionally, since, in our nonlinear propagation model, the laser energy is only spent on ionization and electron acceleration (heating), by calculating the total laser energy loss and the total energy delivered to free electrons, we can separately find the percent of the initial laser energy spent on ionization and electron heating [see the color bars in Fig. To sum up, both the linear and the nonlinear propagation simulations indicate an optimal focusing depth near 100 μm, which could thus potentially lead to continuous transverse line writing inside silicon. In order to verify experimentally these theoretical predictions, we have first carried out breakdown experiments in the bulk of silicon using the laser source emitting temporally-undistorted pulses [see Fig. Transverse inscription of continuous lines could not be achieved despite the benefits expected from irradiations at 2-μm wavelength where the deposited energy is maximized (spectral optimization), and at 100-μm focusing depth where spherical aberrations of two different origins counterbalance (spatial optimization). These negative results lead us to add a third optimization in the temporal domain. In the nanosecond regime, several studies have shown that the temporal pulse shape strongly influences the initiation In order to investigate the possibility offered by our triple-optimization procedure for inducing internal modifications in silicon, single-pulse breakdown initiation experiments have been first realized at different focusing depths and input pulse energies. The corresponding results are shown in Fig. Besides the statistical aspects related to ultrafast laserinduced breakdown inside silicon, we have investigated the associated material changes. To do so, the morphology of single-pulse modifications has been characterized with different methods. First, in-situ transverse observations reveal that the modifications consist of a few microbubbles along the optical axis z, as shown in Fig. Evolution of the bulk breakdown probability inside silicon with single laser pulses as a function of the focusing depth for various input pulse energies. The pink region indicates the depths for which the modification probability reaches 100% for an input pulse energy Ein ≥ 1.9 μJ. [53], or other polymorphs Establishing the laws governing modification growth (i.e., the increase in the modification size on a pulse-topulse basis) in silicon is a prerequisite for envisioning multi-pulse functionalization processes. While, previously, we have determined the conditions for which spherical aberrations induced by the lens and the airsilicon interface counterbalance, leading to repeatable breakdown (see Fig. where i = x, y or z, and A i and B i are the growth coefficient and the single-pulse modification length along i, respectively. Given that the characterizations in Fig. The relatively small dispersion in the L x,y,z values in Fig. Bx By constantly moving the sample perpendicularly to the laser beam at various writing speeds v, transverse inscription has been endeavored inside silicon at 120-μm focusing depth and E in = 2.5 μJ. As shown by the overview in Fig. Ultimately, we have studied the energy dependence of the three different morphologies exhibited in Fig. We have demonstrated the possibility to contactlessly inscribe continuous transverse lines in bulk silicon with ultrafast laser pulses. While this achievement is usually unattainable due to nonlinear propagation effects, we have proposed a triple-optimization procedure for circumventing these limitations. This approach consists of using femtosecond pulses (i) at the beneficial wavelength of ≈ 2 μm, (ii) exhibiting temporal distortions, and (iii) focused at a depth for which spherical aberrations of different origins counterbalance. The concomitance of these spectral, temporal and spatial optimizations was shown to be indispensable for producing repeatable breakdown-and, thus, transverse inscription-inside silicon. Our methodology first relies on the identification of the conditions that allow obtaining 100% breakdown probability with single-pulse irradiations. Deterministic breakdown was observed for input pulse energies E in ≥ 1.9 μJ and focusing depths ≈ 100-120 μm below the entrance surface. This narrow focusing depth window is in good agreement with point spread function analyses as well as nonlinear propagation simulations. In addition, we have studied the spatial expansion of the modifications on a pulse-to-pulse basis. By applying different numbers of pulses for various input pulse energies, we have determined the laws governing modification growth. In all spatial directions, the growth behavior was found to scale logarithmically with the number of pulses applied, with no strong dependence on the input pulse energy. Finally, lines have been transversely inscribed in the bulk of silicon. Depending on the writing speed and the input pulse energy, the transversely-written lines may show an erratic, steady or discrete morphology. The discrete morphology appears either for input pulse energies leading to single-pulse breakdown probabilities < 100%, or for too high writing speeds. The demonstration of transversely-inscribed lines paves the way to contactless 3D laser direct writing inside silicon. While we have concentrated our efforts on transverse line inscription at a single focusing depth (120 μm), we anticipate that phase-control elements (e.g., spatial light modulator) can be employed for precompensating spherical aberrations at arbitrary depths-thus, allowing ultrafast laser inscription in all three spatial directions. In the future, a broad range of in-chip applications can be addressed, including optical functionalization, wafer dicing, and microfluidics. In order to calculate the laser energy delivered to the free-electron subsystem, we first consider the work W done by the electromagnetic field force F acting on the electrons of total charge q during time interval dt where E and B are the electric and magnetic fields, respectively, and v is the electron velocity. For continuous charge distribution q = ρ dV , with electron density ρ and volume element dV , we obtain where J = ρ v is the current. Thus, the work done by the electromagnetic field force per unit time, per unit volume, that is, the energy delivered to the free electrons per unit time, per unit volume, is given by In turn, we are interested in the energy delivered per unit volume, which we calculate as In our simulations we use this delivered energy, measured in units of J•m -3 , to estimate the breakdown probability inside silicon In order to provide an intuition, Fig. Let us examine theoretically the conditions allowing transverse inscription of continuous lines inside silicon. To do so, we develop a phenomenological model relying on the laws of modification growth established in Sec. III D and geometrical considerations. Intuitively, high writing speeds should lead to a non-continuous (i.e, a discrete) line morphology consisting of individual single-pulse modifications next to each other. The discrete morphology thus solely exists when there is no interplay between individual modifications. In other words, the modification produced by one pulse does not provoke any shielding nor scattering effect during the subsequent irradiation. Without limiting the generality of the model, let us consider a sample movement-and, thus, an inscription-along the y-axis, as schematically depicted in Fig. where A y,z and B y,z are the growth coefficient and the length of a single-pulse modification along y and z, respectively, and N ≥ 1 is the number of pulses applied during the growth sequence. In the case of transverse laser inscription where the focus position is continuously moved perpendicular to the laser, the number of pulses per point can be defined as N = 2w 0 Ω 0 /v, where w 0 is the beam waist. Recalling that tan(π/2 -x) = 1/tan(x), the combination of Eqs. (B1) and (B2) yields The threshold minimum speed v min for discrete line inscription appears in Eq. (B5) when the left-and the righthand sides are equal. In this case, the analytical solution is: Here, the notation W denotes the Lambert W -function Geometrical considerations associated with the phenomenological model for transverse inscription. The modification (in black) is produced by a pulse preceding the current irradiation (in red).