Memory technology has played a pivotal role in the development of semiconductor industry in the past decades, driven by the explosive growth of massive data storage and desire of ultrafast data processing Here, we demonstrate that nonvolatile floating-gate memory devices with exceptional performance verging on an ultimate theoretical limit can be achieved without requirement to modify commercial device architecture by employing 2D van der Waals heterostructures with improved interfacial coupling. In particular, ultrahigh-speed operation with nanosecond write and read times that is limited by instrumentation response, extremely high extinction ratio of 10 10 , and a 10-yr retention time have been successfully demonstrated. Our result represents a leap forward to understand current bottleneck of memory devices as well as future memory and storage technologies. Figure We have employed an aberration-corrected scanning transmission electron microscope (STEM) to thoroughly characterize interfaces between different functional components in as-fabricated devices. Figure Figure We have proposed and defined in Fig. Figure Our InSe floating-gate memory devices are very robust with high endurance and high reliability. We have extracted the threshold voltage of the InSe channel from transfer curves at different time intervals (Supplementary Fig. Importantly, we have demonstrated that our InSe floating-gate memory devices feature ultrahigh-speed operation, which is not available in conventional flash-memory devices. Figure We have fabricated and exemplified emerging nonvolatile floating-gate memory devices based on 2D functional layer materials, exhibiting device performance approaching the theoretical limit of an ideal memory structure and exciting ultrahigh speed operation for the first time, and the key is our achieved atomically clean and sharp interfaces inherent in the as-fabricated memory devices. Our findings and device performances have important implications and opens up exciting opportunities on several fronts. Our device configuration follows the commercial floating gate memory architecture but with a few orders of improvement in the device performance. As a result, it should facilitate adoption of existing industry standards with emerging technology. Although current device fabrication is based on exfoliation method, our finding of roles of atomically sharp interface between functional layers in the performance limit of memory devices should offer a fabrication guideline for future integration with other techniques for the device scale-up In addition, such outstanding performance should allow many new unforeseen operational schemes, including multi-bit ultrahigh-density information storage demonstrated in the present work, which should be crucial for recent development of big data science. All these together offer the ground of next-generation electronic devices based on emerging 2D materials with optimum device engineering. Device fabrication and electrical characterization. InSe, MoS2, hBN, and graphite bulk crystals are purchased from 2D Semiconductors, SPI Supplies, HQ graphene, and NGS Naturgraphit companies, respectively. InSe/hBN/MLG and MoS2/hBN/MLG heterostructures were prepared on a silicon wafer with 300 nm SiO2 using mechanical exfoliation and the dry-transfer approach The floating-gate memory devices were protected by a layer of spin-coated PMMA at once after lift-off 