Superconductivity is significantly enhanced in monolayer FeSe grown on SrTiO3, but not for multilayer films, in which large strength of nematicity develops. However, the link between the high-transition temperature superconductivity in monolayer and the correlation related nematicity in multilayer FeSe films is not well understood. Here, we use low-temperature scanning tunneling microscopy to study few-layer FeSe thin films grown by molecular beam epitaxy. We observe an incommensurate long-range smectic phase, which solely appears in bilayer FeSe films. The smectic order still locally exists and gradually fades away with increasing film thickness, while it suddenly vanishes in monolayer FeSe, indicative of an abrupt smectic phase transition. Surface alkali-metal doping can suppress the smectic phase and induce high-Tc superconductivity in bilayer FeSe. Our observations provide evidence that the monolayer FeSe is in close proximity to the smectic phase, and its superconductivity is likely enhanced by this electronic instability as well. Electronic liquid crystal phases are correlation-induced intermediate states between the weak coupling Fermi liquid and localized electronic crystals FeSe is a good material to investigate the electronic liquid crystal phases because it has the simplest structure among iron-based superconductors and, unlike others, shows large separation between nematic and long-range antiferromagnetic (AFM) states in phase diagram Scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) is a powerful tool to investigate the electronic structure of quantum materials in real space. It can capture the surface topography in atomic scale, and measure the local density of states (DOS) of quasiparticles by scanning tunneling spectroscopy (STS or dI/dV spectra), and has been used to study the electronic liquid crystal phases in high-Tc systems In this letter, we present our low-temperature STM study on few-layer FeSe films grown on STO. We find a unique smectic electronic phase in 2 UC FeSe/STO, which manifests as incommensurate long-range stripe pattern as seen in STM dI/dV mapping. This stripe pattern, reminiscent of the checkerboard structure in cuprate superconductors, is rarely found in iron-based superconductors, except for uniaxial strained LiFeAs Incommensurate smectic phase in 2 UC FeSe/STO. Figure Smectic domains are formed on the surface. The stripe patterns in adjacent domains are perpendicular to each other (see the double-headed white arrows in Fig. Figure The energy dependence of the stripe pattern is also investigated. The main panel of Fig. Previous study demonstrates that the long-range stripes are absent in 30 UC FeSe Intriguingly, the long-range stripe pattern disappears in 3 UC FeSe as well. Fig. These findings demonstrate that the long-range smectic phase is suppressed, while the nematic phase still persists in 3 UC FeSe. The nematicity-induced splitting of dxz and dyz bands in 3 UC and 2 UC FeSe has been detected by ARPES the STO substrate is one of the key parameters that controls the electronic liquid crystal phases and superconductivity in different layers of FeSe. To investigate the doping effect, we deposit Rb atoms on the surface of a 2.5 UC FeSe sample (Supplementary Note 8), in which 2 UC and 3 UC films are coexisted. Figure Actually, superconductivity in 2 UC FeSe starts to emerge at the Rb coverage of 0.0265 ML. We also carry out systematic study of the Rb doping effect on superconductivity in 2 UC and 3 UC FeSe films (Supplementary Note 10). Figure The dI/dV spectra taken at each doping level are sorted into two groups on the basis of their superconducting gaps (see Supplementary Note 11). The good superconducting group contains the spectra that show clean and symmetric (with EF) superconducting gaps. The averaged spectra for good superconducting groups in 2 UC and 3 UC FeSe are shown in Fig. Here, we define a good-superconductivity ratio as the proportion of the dI/dV spectra showing good superconducting gap at each Rb coverage. The good-superconductivity ratios are counted and shown in Fig. On the other hand, the superconducting gap sizes of each dI/dV spectra of the good superconducting groups are extracted and taken into statistics. The doping dependence of gap size is shown in Fig. By comparing the two key aspects of superconductivity that we mentioned before, the homogeneity and the gap size, we demonstrate that the dopant-induced superconductivity in 2 UC FeSe is even better than that in 3 UC FeSe. Given the fact that the main difference between 2 UC and 3 UC FeSe is whether the long-range smectic phase exists, the relationship between the superconductivity and the semetic phase in FeSe is clearly revealed. Although the long-range stripes compete with the superconductivity in undoped 2 UC FeSe, as the stripes are suppressed by electron doping, the residual smectic fluctuations provide additional enhancement of superconductivity. The electronic structures in different layers of FeSe films are schematically shown in Fig. Their influences spread to different length scales along the z-axis and generate various electronic structures. On one hand, the effect of charge transfer decays rapidly and only shows significant influence in 1 UC FeSe, giving rise to the enhancement of superconductivity The unique smectic phase in 2 UC FeSe may arise from a delicate balance between lattice and charge degrees of freedom. Firstly, the tensile strain in 2 UC FeSe is larger than that in 3 UC FeSe, giving rise to stronger nematicity and electronic correlation. Given the fact that short-range stripe patterns are observed in the vicinity of the defects in multilayer FeSe/STO, where larger strength of electronic anisotropy (nematicity) is also expected, the smectic transition thus could be promoted in 2 UC FeSe. Meanwhile, based on the ARPES data A promising way to decouple the charge and lattice degrees of freedom is to grow FeSe film on a substrate with even larger lattice constant. BaTiO3 (BTO) could be a good candidate. Since the strength of tensile strain can be gradually tuned by the thickness of FeSe film, systematic study of FeSe/BTO may provide sufficient information to understand the role of strains for the formation of smectic phase. We are still working on the growth of FeSe films on BTO, however, it is challenging due to the large amount of defects on BTO substrate, which could be significantly improved by Oxide-MBE We now turn to discuss the microscopic origin of the smectic ordering. Since the stripe patterns are incommensurate, it is straightforward to relate them with the nesting of the Fermi surface. However, the smectic wave vector q0 = 0.19qSe cannot match with any two bands in k-space of 2 UC FeSe (see details in Supplementary Note 12). Moreover, the q0 shows thickness-independent behavior (if we compare it with that of the short-range stripes in multilayer FeSe film Instead, the strong electronic correlation needs to be considered. The electronic correlation in bulk FeSe is weaker than that in FeSe/STO, fully demonstrated in ARPES results by comparing the dorbital band widths. Thus, even the short-range stripes are absent in bulk FeSe. While, in multilayer FeSe/STO with stronger strength of nematicity and correlation, short-range stripes are observed. Finally, in 2 UC FeSe/STO, which is at the strong limit of nematicity and electronic correlation, smectic phase emerges. We therefore demonstrate that the development of the long-range smectic phase derives from the largely enhanced electronic anisotropy and correlation in 2 UC FeSe (induced by STO substrate). It is still an open question how to generate the correct smectic wave vector q0 in FeSe/STO. Previous results demonstrate various frustrated spin fluctuations with different wave vectors of twofold symmetry, such as q(π, 0) The uniaxial strained LiFeAs shows similar smectic phase, in which incommensurate spin excitation is attributed as a possible origin We summarize the phase diagram of FeSe/STO as a function of temperature, thickness and electron doping in Fig. Considering the geometry of FeSe/STO, the newly observed smectic phase is physically located in between the high-Tc superconducting phase (1 UC FeSe with electron doping) and nematic phase (3 UC and thicker FeSe). Two smectic phase transitions occur in 3 UC and 1 UC FeSe, respectively. On the multilayer film (nematic phase) side, the short-range stripes (smectic fluctuations stabilized by defects) compete with superconductivity and lead to a wide-range non-superconducting phase Low-Tc superconductivity of FeSe (SC-II region in the phase diagram) reemerges as lattice constant relaxes to the bulk value Sample preparation. FeSe thin films were grown by molecular beam epitaxy method. The Nb doped (0.05% wt) STO(001) substrates were degassed in ultra-high vacuum chamber (base pressure is better than 3 × 10 -10 Torr) at 500 °C for several hours and subsequently annealed at 1150 °C for 20 min to obtain TiO2 terminated surface. Then, high purity Fe (99.995%) and Se (99.9999%) sources were coevaporated by two Knudsen cells to grow FeSe films on STO. During growth, the substrates were kept at 430 °C by applying DC current. The as-grown samples were annealed at 480 °C for hours to improve sample quality. The Rb deposition was performed in-situ by using a rubidium dispenser (SAES Getters). In-situ STM measurements were carried out at 4.2 K in a commercial low-temperature STM (Unisoku). A polycrystalline PtIr STM tip was used and calibrated using Ag island before STM experiments. STS data were taken by standard lock-in method. The feedback loop is disrupted during data acquisition and the frequency of oscillation signal is 973.0 Hz. 