The concept of exceptional point of degeneracy (EPD) is used to conceive a degenerate synchronization regime that is able to enhance the level of output power and power conversion efficiency for backward wave oscillators (BWOs) operating at millimeter-wave and Terahertz frequencies. Standard BWOs operating at such high frequency ranges typically generate output power not exceeding tens of watts with very poor power conversion efficiency in the order of 1%. The novel concept of degenerate synchronization for the BWO based on a folded waveguide is implemented by engineering distributed gain and power extraction along the slow-wave waveguide. The distributed power extraction along the folded waveguide is useful to satisfy the necessary conditions to have an EPD at the synchronization point. Particle-in-cell (PIC) simulation results shows that BWO operating at an EPD regime is capable of generating output power exceeding 3 kwatts with conversion efficiency of exceeding 20% at frequency of 88.5 GHz. The capability to generate significant power at millimeterwave and terahertz (THz) frequencies using vacuum electronics sources has motivated many investigations due to the their high demand on applications such as imaging, spectroscopy and communications Exceptional points of degeneracy (EPD) are points in parameter space of a system at which two or more eigenmodes coalesce. Despite most of the published work on EPDs are related to parity time (PT) symmetry In Works on BWOs operating at millimeter-wave and THz have reported a generated output power not exceeding tens of watts with power conversion efficiency around 1% A simple model for the interaction between the e-beam and the EM wave in vacuum tube devices was provided by (b) EPD-BWO where the power is extracted in a distributed fashion to enable the occurrence of the degenerate synchronization regime when working at an EPD Pierce in Here, we show how to implement the EPD regime in a BWO that uses a folded waveguide and operating at millimeter wave and THz frequency through introducing DPE along the waveguide as illustrated in Fig. We perform PIC simulations to assess the performance and features of the proposed EPD-BWO using a folded waveguide and operating at millimeter wave frequency. The PIC simulations uses a pencil e-beam with dc voltage V 0 = 7.5 kV and an axial dc magnetic field of 2 T to confine the e-beam. We start first by studying the starting (threshold) current of oscillation to see how much increase in starting current we obtain with the EPD-BWO with respect to a STD-BWO without DPE. Results show that the EPD-BWO exhibits a much higher starting current of oscillation with respect to a STD-BWO without DPE. Indeed the increase in starting current is an advantage here because it enables to push up the saturation power level of the BWO to much higher levels and therefore leads to a high level of power extraction. The output power for a STD-BWO is extracted from the main port at the left end of the waveguide, whereas the output power of the EPD-BWO is extracted from the left waveguide port in addition to all DPE waveguide ports as shown in Fig. To assess the occurrence of an EPD, we verify the unique scaling trend of the starting current in (4) by repeating the previous study for different SWS lengths. Such scaling trends for the starting current for both STD-BWO and EPD-BWO are shown using black dots in Fig. where α is a constant. From the fitting shown in Fig. Later on in the next section, we show that the use of a current close to this value will lead to the degeneracy of two hybrid modes in the dispersion of the hot structure, using data extracted from PIC simulations. We calculate the output power for STD-BWO and EPD-BWO when the e-beam is 10% above the starting beam current for each case, i.e., I 0 = 1.1I st , where the starting currents for both the EPD-BWO and STD-BWO are shown in Fig. We then show in Fig. efficiency at much higher level of power extraction. Note that we sweep the current for a larger range for the STD-BWO case to be able reach the level of currents that is used for EPD-BWO to be able to have a fair comparison. Maximum output power is achieved for EPD-BWO case when the used current is I 0 = 2.6 A which is about 22% higher than the starting current of oscillation and 24% higher than the EPD current I 0e estimated from Fig. STRUCTURE BASED ON PIC SIMULATION The goal of this section is to show the degeneracy of the wavenumbers of the modes of the interactive system (i.e, the hybrid modes) using PIC simulations. Previously the degenerate dispersion has been shown only using the approximate analytical method based on the Pierce model in The wavenumber-frequency dispersion describing the complex-valued wavenumber of the hybrid eigenmodes in the hot SWS is determined by running multiple PIC simulations for a SWS made of 11 unit-cells, at different frequencies and at different beam dc currents, and then determining the transfer matrix of the unit-cell at each frequency and current combination using Eq. ( We have conceived a degenerate synchronization regime to increase the output power and power conversion efficiency of BWOs operating at millimeter wave and THz frequencies. The degenerate synchronization regime is achieved through altering the folded waveguide by adding periodic power extraction ports. This allows the interactive system to work at an EPD which implies a maintained synchronism designed for any desired level of power extraction. PIC simulation results shows that a millimeter wave BWO operating at degenerate synchronization regime is capable of generating output power exceeding 3 kwatts with conversion efficiency of exceeding 20% at a frequency of 88.5 GHz. The unique quadratic starting current scaling law with waveguide interaction lengths observed from PIC simulations demonstrates the EPD-based synchronization phenomenon, compared to that in a STD-BWO that has a starting current law that vanishes cubically. The complex-valued wavenumber degeneracy is confirmed by elaborating data extracted from PIC simulations which All the considered beam dc currents to generate the results are lower than the starting current of oscillation which is estimated to be 2.175 A when using 11 unit cells. The plots show a modal degeneracy when the the beam dc current is about I 0 = 2.055A, which is very close to the EPD current value of I 0e = 2.09 estimated using the fitting in Fig. implies the existence of EPD in the interactive system. This new degenerate synchronization regime may pave the way to the realization of very high power sources at millimeter and submillimeter waves, with high power conversion efficiency. This material is based upon work supported by the Air Force Office of Scientific Research award number FA9550-18-1-0355. The authors are thankful to DS SIMULIA for providing CST Studio Suite that was instrumental in this study. MODES USING DATA FROM PIC SIMULATIONS We provide the basic steps of the retrieval method used to generate the dispersion relations for hot SWSs based on time domain data obtained from PIC simulations. The reader is addressed to We define a state vector that describes the EM and spacecharge waves, defined at discrete periodic locations z = z n = nd as where V n and I n are equivalent voltages and currents representing the EM mode in the SWS, and V bn and I bn are equivalent voltages and currents representing the charge wave modulating the e-beam. We assume that the EM field in the folded rectangular waveguide is dominated by a TE 10 . Thus the (locally-) transverse field at the rectangular cross section is in the form of The coordinates used here do not described the waveguide folding, we just use them to describe the field at cross sections of the rectangular waveguide at discrete locations z = z n . We use an equivalent transmission line model that has voltage and current V n and I n representing the EM field in the periodic SWS. The voltage and current are calculated as the projection of the transverse electric and magnetic fields in the SWS on the electric and magnetic transverse eigenvector basis proper of a TE 10 mode as explained in The the voltage and the current of the equivalent transmission line are calculated from the transverse electric and magnetic fields at the center of the rectangular waveguide cross-section by projecting fields in (3) on those in (5) Although a PIC solver calculates the speeds of the discrete large number of charged particles, we represent the longitudinal speed of all e-beam charges as one dimensional, i.e., as a scalar function. The beam total equivalent kinetic voltage at the entrance of the n th unit-cell is defined in time domain as v tot bn (t) = 2ηu tot bn (t), where u tot bn (t) is the average of the speed of the charges at each z-cross section (see In the phasor-domain, we model each unit cell of the interacting SWS as a 4-port network circuit as shown in Fig. ) . . . where Ψ n+1 and Ψ n are the input and output state vectors of the n th unit-cell, respectively, with n = 1, 2,.. N. Since the state vectors are calculated using data from PIC simulations, the relations in The system in The column of the matrices W 1 and W 2 are the state vectors at input and output, respectively, of each unit-cell and they are written in the form W 1 = Ψ 1 , Ψ 2 , . . . Ψ N and W 2 = Ψ 2 , Ψ 3 , . . . Ψ N +1 . An approximate solution that best satisfies all the given equations in Eq. ( 2 , is determined similarly as in The hybrid e-beam-EM eigenmodes are determined by assuming a state vector has the form of Ψ n ∝ e -jknd , where k is the complex Bloch wavenumber that has to be determined and d is the SWS period. Inserting the assumed sate vector z-dependency in (8), we define the eigenvalue problem and we find the four Floquet-Bloch mode wavenumbers, determined as e -jkd = eig(T u ). ( The above equation lead to four Floquet-Bloch modes wavenumbers k m , where m = 1, 2, 3, 4, with harmonics k m, + 2πq/d, where q is an integer that defines the spatial harmonic index.