In the most studied family of organic superconductors κ-(BEDT-TTF) 2 X, the BEDT-TTF molecules that make up the conducting planes are coupled as dimers. For some anions X, an antiferromagnetic insulator is found at low temperatures adjacent to superconductivity. With an average of one hole carrier per dimer, the BEDT-TTF band is effectively 1 2 -filled. Numerous theories have suggested that fluctuations of the magnetic order can drive superconducting pairing in these models, even as direct calculations of superconducting pairing in monomer 1 2 -filled band models find no superconductivity. Here we present accurate zero-temperature Density Matrix Renormalization Group (DMRG) calculations of a dimerized lattice with one hole per dimer. While we do find an antiferromagnetic state in our results, we find no evidence for superconducting pairing. This further demonstrates that magnetic fluctuations in the effective 1 2 -filled band approach do not drive superconductivity in these and related materials. Correlated-electron superconductivity (SC) continues to be one of the most challenging problems in condensed matter physics. Even as the large majority of investigators in this research area have focused on cuprates and iron-based superconductors (and more recently, ruthenates), it is now widely recognized that there exist many other unconventional or correlated-electron superconductors, although with lower superconducting critical temperature T c The common theme among many (though not all, see below) correlated-electron superconductors is the proximity of SC to spin-density wave (SDW) or antiferromagnetism (AFM) . This property is shared by organic superconductors based on the cation TMTSF as well as some κ-phase BEDT-TTF compounds. Unlike in the cuprates, though, transition from the insulating magnetic phase to the superconducting phase is driven by the application of moderate pressure as opposed to doping. Both TMTSF and BEDT-TTF based superconductors (hereafter (TMTSF) 2 X and (BEDT-TTF) 2 X) are characterized by cation:anion ratio of 2:1, with closed-shell monovalent anions X -, the implication being that each individual cation monomer has charge + 1 2 . In both families, the cation lattice is highly dimerized, such that the overall charge on a dimer of cations is exactly +1. This has led to various effective half-filled band theories of organic CT superconductors, within which the dimer of cations is considered as a single site in a lattice described within anisotropic triangular lattice Hubbard models (we emphasize that these theories are therefore not applicable to nondimerized (BEDT-TTF) 2 X families, such as those belonging to the θ-family, which also exhibit SC; we revisit this issue later). Within meanfield and dynamic mean field theory (DMFT) calculations on the half-filled band anisotropic triangular lattice Hubbard model, pressure increases the lattice frustration, causing thereby a bandwidth-driven transition from the AFM insulator to the superconducting state (or in the case of a lattice that is already strongly frustrated, as in κ-(BEDT-TTF) 2 Cu 2 (CN) 3 , from a quantum spin liquid (QSL) to SC) Conceivably, one possible origin of disagreement between the mean-field theories of organic SC and numerical calculations is that retention of the explicit dimeric structure of the Hubbard lattice sites is essential for superconducting correlations to dominate. That is, even as intra-dimer charge fluctuations are precluded within the effective 1 2 -filled band models (since that would make the effective 1 2 -filled description invalid and can even destroy the AFM in the weakly frustrated region of the Hamiltonian), the superconducting singlets should be defined such that they span over a pair of dimers, as opposed to a pair of effective single sites. Needless to say such a numerical calculation is far more involved than where dimers are replaced with single sites, as the required lattice sizes needed are twice that in the previous calculations We consider the Hubbard Hamiltonian, In Eq. 1 c † i,σ creates an electron of spin σ on molecule i and n i,σ = c † i,σ c i,σ . U is the onsite Hubbard interaction. It is important to note that this U is the Coulomb repulsion between carriers on each monomer site and is not the same as the effective dimer U d . The lattice we consider is a rectangular lattice of dimers (see Fig. We measure dimer spin-spin and pair-pair correlation functions. The dimer spin operator is , where the sites i 1 and i 2 make up the dimer i. We calculate the dimer spin-spin correlation function ) . In Fig. To define superconducting pair-pair correlations in the effective 1 2 -filled representation, we first define an operator creating an effective particle on dimer i with equal monomer populations, as required within effective 1 2 -filled band theories, The ∆ † i,i+δ operator creates a singlet pair between nearest-neighbor (n.n.) dimers separated by δ: Note that Eq. 3 involves four different lattice sites. We consider two kinds of n.n. pairs with δ taken as the n.n. distance between dimers in the x and y directions, In the effective dimer model pairing is expected to have d-wave symmetry. Because of the small transverse dimensions of our lattice we do not define full d x 2 -y 2 pairs involving four n.n. singlets, but instead calculate only single singlet-singlet correlations. To check if the pairing has the expected d-wave sign structure we calculate two different correlation functions, P || (r) ≡ P(r) δ=x,δ =x and P ⊥ (r) ≡ P(r) δ=x,δ =y . P || (r) corresponds to correlations between two singlets both oriented along x, while P ⊥ (r) corresponds to one singlet oriented along x and one along y. For d x 2 -y 2 pairing P ⊥ (r) should be negative. In a 2D superconductor long-range order should be present in P(r) at zero temperature. Because of the quasi-one-dimensional nature of cylindrical geometry of the lattice that we can solve in DMRG long-range order in P(r) is not possible even in the limit x → ∞. If such a quasi-one-dimensional system showed a tendency to SC however, the system would behave as a Luther-Emery liquid In Fig. As seen in Fig. In Eq. 5 N p is the number of terms in the sum, and the sum is over r greater than 2 in dimerdimer units but less than a maximum distance r max . The upper cutoff is necessary because of the open boundary conditions along x in our lattice and is chosen so that the maximum pair-pair distance along the chain is 4 (one half of the lattice length of 8 dimers). Fig. 4(e)-(f) are harder to interpret. We believe that the unusual U dependence here is due to shorter range correlations, for example as in Fig. The conclusions of our work are, (i) SC is absent within the model, and (ii) the presence or absence of AFM order is not related to the tendency towards SC. In κ-(BEDT-TTF) 2 X with X = Cu[N(CN) 2 ]Cl where AFM order is found under ambient pressure, estimates for t /t vary between 0.44 and 0.53 Our results on the absence of SC in the effective 1 2 -filled Hubbard dimer model is in complete agreement with our previous results on the 1 2 -filled Hubbard monomer model 