A series of recent experiments have demonstrated robust superconductivity in magic-angle twisted trilayer graphene (TTG). In particular, a recent work by Cao et al. (arxiv:2103.12083) studies the behavior of the superconductor in an in-plane magnetic field and an out-of-plane displacement field, finding that the superconductor is unlikely to have purely spin-singlet pairing. This work also finds that at high magnetic fields and a smaller range of dopings and displacement fields, it undergoes a transition to a distinct field-induced superconducting state. Inspired by these results, we develop an understanding of superconductivity in TTG using a combination of phenomenological reasoning and microscopic theory. We describe the role that that an in-plane field plays in TTG, and use this understanding to argue that the re-entrant transition may be associated with a quantum Lifshitz phase transition, with the high-field phase possessing finite-momentum pairing. We argue that the superconductor is likely to involve a superposition of singlet and triplet pairing, and describe the structure of the normal state. We also draw lessons for twisted bilayer graphene (TBG), and explain the differences in the phenomenology with TTG despite their close microscopic relationship. We propose that a singlet-triplet superposition is realized in the TBG superconductor as well, and that the ν = -2 correlated insulator may be a time reversal protected Z2 topological insulator obtained through spontaneous spin symmetry breaking. A remarkable series of developments have brought twodimensional graphene-based Moire materials to the spotlight of condensed matter physics. Many of these systems host a fascinating array of strongly correlated insulating and magnetic states We begin with a discussion of some of the salient experimental results on superconductivity in near magic-angle TTG 1. The 'normal' state out of which the superconductivity emerges has a carrier density that is set by the deviation from ν = -2. This normal state has a Landau fan degeneracy of 2, rather than the 4fold degeneracy naively expected on the basis of the available flavor degrees of freedom (spin and valley). Furthermore the strength of the superconductivity does not seem to correlate with the sin-gle particle density of states inferred from indirect measurements. 2. The superconductivity occurs even without the external perturbations of the perpendicular displacement field D or the in-plane magnetic field B . Weak D and B have contrasting effects on the superconductivity -the former enhances it while the latter suppresses it. Strikingly Ref. 3. Near optimal doping and displacement field strength, the superconductivity is seen to exhibit a "re-entrant" phenomenon at large magnetic fields, with a phase transition that separates two distinct superconductors occurring at a field B re-entrant ∼ 8 T. Interestingly, while the temperature T BKT at which superconductivity occurs goes to zero at B re-entrant , the temperature T onset at which the resistance reaches a fixed fraction of its normal-state value is smooth across the transition, and decreases monotonically with B. In what follows, by combining the input from experiments with a Ginzburg-Landau analysis, together with the insights from simple microscopic theory, we will provide an understanding of these phenomena, and make predictions for future experiments. We will be naturally led to the conclusion that the pairing in the superconductor is neither spin singlet nor spin triplet, but rather a linear combination of the two. We examine the role that the B and D fields play in the physics of TTG, and highlight differences with TBG. This will enable an explanation of the striking differences in the stability of the superconductor to in-plane fields in the two systems. We propose that interpreting the re-entrant transition as arising from a Lifshitz critical point, where one or both components of the superfluid stiffness vanish and where the pairing in the high-field phase occurs at finite momentum, is particularly natural in light of the existing experimental data. Along the way we also discuss the nature of the normal state near filling ν ≈ -2. We propose that at ν = -2 the ground state is a time reversal protected topological insulator (obtained through spontaneous spin symmetry breaking) coexisting with the massless Dirac fermions corresponding to a decoupled graphene sector. At D = 0, B = 0, the physics of TTG is very closely related to that of TBG What we do not attempt to do in this paper is a full-blown microscopic theory of TTG superconductivity. The questions we are interested in involve very complicated strongly interacting systems where the understanding from theory is only partially complete. Thus we view our semi-phenomenological approach as the safest way of proceeding, since it allows us to avoid committing to any particular calculational schemes of specific microscopic models, both of which come with uncertainties at present. Let us first review the basic theoretical description of TTG To proceed it is most convenient to work in a basis of fields that have definite eigenvalues under the action of mirror M where the Zeeman energy H Z = -μ B g 2 B • s. Here v D is the monolayer Dirac velocity, T is the hopping matrix familiar from the bilayer problem (see appendix E), V ≡ U/2 -v D σ v • A, and we have used the notation σ v ≡ (τ z σ x , σ y ), with τ a , σ a , s a Pauli matrices for valley, sublattice, and physical spin, respectively. For simplicity we have also ignored a rotation of the σ v on layers 1 and 3 by the twist angle, since its effects are small We note in passing that the Hamiltonian (1) is the correct starting point only when the top and bottom graphene layers are not displaced relative to one another in the xy plane. A nonzero relative displacement r breaks mirror symmetry, and can have strong effects on the flat band physics From (1), we see that in the absence of U or B, H 0 decouples into a TBG Hamiltonian for the mirroreven fields ψ + , ψ 2 , which form a set of flat bands near the magic angle, together with a decoupled Dirac cone formed by the mirror-odd field ψ - The mirror symmetry of the U = B = 0 Hamiltonian has other important consequences for how B affects the single-particle physics, as both U and B orb are odd under mirror (here B orb denotes the orbital field). In particular, at U = 0 the spectrum at each momentum must be an even function of B orb . This means that unlike in TBG, at U = 0 there will be no field-induced de-pairing of intervalley Cooper pairs due to misalignement of the Fermi surfaces in the two valleys One observation from Ref. where ∆ is the superconducting order parameter and L SC [ψ + , ψ 2 , ∆] is some unknown Lagrangian capturing the physics of the U = B = 0 superconductor, together with the Zeeman energy for the mirror-even fermions. The term proportional to λ arises from a mean-field decoupling of an interaction of the form ψ † +/2 ψ † +/2 ψ -ψ -+ h.c. Such a term does not arise from a standard densitydensity interaction, but as it is allowed by symmetries we will keep it. Importantly, the modifications to the superconductivity by U, B orb can be reliably addressed by integrating out the ψ -fermions perturbatively, as it is only through the mixing with these fermions that these perturbations have any effect. Before attempting to obtain an effective action for ∆ by integrating out the fermions in Existing experiments on TTG presumably would be insulating in the absence of the ψ - Dirac cone). Additionally, the doped state at ν = -2 -δ is seen to possess a Landau level degeneracy reduced from that of the charge neutrality point by a factor of two. The simplest way to produce a ground state in accordance with these observations is to polarize a flavor, and then to open an interaction-induced gap in the remaining polarized subspace. We will be making the assumption that the superconductor pairs fields related by time reversal, implying that both K, K valleys participate in the superconducting state. We will also be assuming (at least at small B, T ) that the superconductor inherits the flavor polarization of the ν = -2 -δ normal state. This implies that the normal state is not valley polarized, and in what follows we will assume that the polarized flavor is spin. Spin polarization here means that the ground state is spin-valley locked (SVL), with the spins in a given valley fixed to lie along some (valley-dependent) direction. The assumption of spin-valley locking is reasonable from a theoretical point of view, as polarizing spin (as opposed to valley) allows the system to take advantage of the intervalley Hund's coupling. This assumption is also motivated by experiment, as SVL allows the superconductor to achieve the strong Pauli limit violation observed in Ref. The simplest way to open up a gap is to give some fermion bilinear c † α Q αβ c β a nonzero expectation value, where the indices α, β run over the states in the lowenergy SVL subspace. To determine what we should take for the form of Q, we will borrow results from the strongcoupling picture proposed for twisted bilayer graphene in Refs. where the matrix written out explicitly is in valley space and where the phase φ is arbitrary. A nonzero expectation value for c † α Q αβ c β breaks time reversal symmetry T = s y τ x K unless the spins in each valley are antiferromagnetically aligned. At zero magnetic field, the relative orientation of |ξ , |η is dictated by the sign of the intervalley Hund's coupling J H . The sign of J H is not known a priori, and is determined by a delicate competition between various effects, e.g. Coulomb interactions and coupling to phonons There are two important things to note about Q. The first is that it is invariant under time reversal symmetry, as the spins are aligned antiferromagnetically. Given that the zero-field state at ν = -2 contains two filled bands with Chern numbers ±1, this antiferromagnetic SVL state is, remarkably, therefore a topological insulator protected by the unbroken U (1) and T symmetries. 3 The second is that SO(2) s rotations of the spin about ẑ act on Q in the same way as the group U (1) o of opposite phase rotations in the two valleys. Therefore the order parameter manifold of the insulator is (U (1) o × SO(3) s )/U (1) o+s = SO(3). As π 2 (SO(3)) = 0 there are no skyrmions in this state (only Z 2 vortices), complicating a skyrmion-driven mechanism for superconductivity along the lines of that proposed in Refs We now turn to discussing the general features that we expect any Ginzburg-Landau (GL) free energy for the observed superconductor should satisfy. As mentioned above, we are operating under the assumption that ∆ is off-diagonal in the valley index. Interaction effects similar to those mentioned above then mandate where the matrix on the first line is in valley space, and the d four-vector has components Note that in writing down this form for the order parameter, we have assumed that the pairing occurs in an even angular momentum channel. None of the analysis to follow is affected by this choice, and odd angular momentum pairing can be treated simply by interchanging τ x and τ y in the above expression for ∆. A general expression for the GL free energy in the SVL subspace can be written in terms of ∆ and the vectors ξ = ξ|s|ξ , η = η|s|η as where -r, u, κ > 0, the coefficient w determines whether the spins in each valley prefer to align ferromagnetically or antiferromagnetically, and where all of the coefficients in the above expression contain implicit dependence on U and B, with this dependence determined from the Lagrangian (2) (to be discussed shortly). Suppose first that w < 0, so that the spins in each valley prefer to align ferromagnetically along some direction n, which is chosen spontaneously when B = 0. The order parameter is then invariant under the combined action of U (1) g gauge rotations and SO(2) s spin rotations about n. The order parameter manifold for the zero-field superconductor is therefore (U (1) g × SO(3) s )/U (1) o+s = SO(3). Consequently, this phase does not have a finite-T BKT transition at B = 0. Furthermore, since this phase only has Z 2 vortices, the critical current in zero field vanishes When w > 0 on the other hand, the spins align antiferromagnetically in the plane normal to the field direction at small B, and then gradually cant to point along the field at larger B (see Fig. Then there are vortices with integer-valued charge that cost logarithmic energy, leading to a nonzero T BKT at zero field. All of these features are in agreement with experiment. We are therefore forced to conclude that the zero-field superconductor favors antiferromagnetic alignment. This provides the justification for our assumption in the previous section that the normal state has antiferromagnetic spin-valley locking (see Ref. It now remains to understand the mechanism producing the re-entrant phenomenon seen in experiment, as well as to understand the dependence of T onset and T BKT on the applied fields. This can be done by understanding the U, B dependence of the coefficients appearing in the free energy, which we now turn to discussing. As mentioned in the introduction, a particularly noteworthy aspect of the experiment is that T onset decreases more or less smoothly all the way until superconductivity is completely killed, while T BKT shows non-monotonic behavior in B A natural explanation for the observed re-entrant phenomenon is therefore that ρ decreases monotonically with B by a factor ∝ √ 1 -B 2 , while K decreases faster with B, and goes to zero when B = B re-entrant , where the phase transition occurs (see the schematic phase diagram in Fig. The IR physics of the superconductor is dominated by the phase mode φ, where ς > 0 is included for stability. The proposed reentrant transition is a Lifshitz point, where K vanishes. Whether or not a Lifshitz transition can occur is determined by the field dependence of the coefficients in the GL free energy, which can be calculated by integrating out the ψ -fermions in the Lagrangian (2). The important point here is that U, B only enter (2) in the coupling of ψ + to ψ -, and since ψ -is simply a free Dirac cone, the field dependence of the terms in the free energy can be calculated in a perturbatively controlled way. We find that to quadratic order in U and B, the coupling between the ψ -, ψ + fermions result in the parameter r and the stiffness K appearing in the free energy where a, b, c, d are all positive coefficients, whose detailed form is not important for the present discussion. The upshot is that (at least at small fields), the displacement field tends to promote superconductivity, while the orbital field leads to a suppression in both the condensate fraction and spin stiffness. The fact that the orbital and displacement fields have opposite effects on the superconductor (at least at small U, B) originates from the different ways in which they couple the ψ + , ψ -fermions together. Importantly, this is exactly the behavior seen in experiment, with the superconductivity strengthened (suppressed) with increasing U (increasing B), at least in the range of displacement fields for which the re-entrant transition occurs. The details of the calculation leading to (9) are standard, and are relegated to appendix A. A rough estimate of the critical in-plane field for the superconductor at U = 0 in terms of the mircoscopic parameters which enter the coefficients appearing in ( Note that due to the rotational symmetry breaking by the in-plane field, it is possible that the stiffnesses along and normal to the field direction differ, so that where ∂ (∂ ⊥ ) denote derivatives along (normal to) the field direction. One could therefore consider a situation in which only one of K , K ⊥ is driven to zero at the Lifshitz transition. However, the isotropic case where K , K ⊥ go to zero simultaneously seems more likely to be realized. Indeed, consider the case where only one component vanishes at B re-entrant . The critical point is an anisotropic Lifshitz model. In appendix C we show that this model orders at T = 0, and displays QLRO up to some non-universal nonzero temperature. Thus in this scenario we would not expect the observed T BKT to go all the way to zero at B re-entrant (although the temperature at which the anisotropic model looses QLRO is likely very small, and may well be below the current experimental resolution). On the other hand consider the isotropic case, where both K and K ⊥ vanish at B re-entrant . In this case the critical point has no QLRO at any temperature On the other side of the Lifshitz phase transition, the pairing occurs at finite momentum. Note that this scenario is very different in spirit to the usual FFLO mechanism The first indications from Ref. As was emphasized above, in the absence of external fields the ψ -fermions decouple form the mirror-even sector, rendering the system nearly identical to TBG together with a decoupled Dirac fermion. In particular, this means that the physics of the superconductor and the normal state near ν = -2 are likely to be the same in both TBG and TTG. As we have argued that at D = 0, B = 0 the superconductor near ν = -2 in TTG has antiferromagnetic spin-valley locking and pairing which involves a superposition of spin singlet and spin triplet, the same should be true in TBG (see also How should we reconcile this conclusion with the striking differences between TBG and TTG in the presence of a nonzero in-plane magnetic field? In TBG, the critical in-plane field in the superconducting state at optimal filling is B ,c ≈ 1T Turning to the normal state of TBG, a striking consequence of the antiferromagneic spin-valley locking is that, within the strong coupling theory, the correlated insulating state at ν = -2 is an interaction-driven Z 2 TI. This state will have time reversal protected edge states which will be interesting to look for in future experiments. Finally, a puzzle which we do not resolve is that the insulating state at ν = -2 in TBG is also suppressed by an in-plane magnetic field In this paper we have used a combination of phenomenological and microscopic theoretical reasoning to build a coherent picture of the superconductivity and related phenomena in TTG. We argued that the superconducting state is a superposition of spin singlet and spin triplet pairings. We showed how this explains the contrasting effects of small displacement and B fields, even though both break mirror symmetry. We also showed that the mirror symmetry explains the striking difference between the stability of TTG and TBG superconductors to in-plane fields despite their close microscopic relationship. We proposed that the re-entrant superconductivity recently observed in twisted trilayer graphene A possible test of our proposal for the re-entrant superconductor in TTG is to measure the Josephson current between two neighboring TTG regions maintained at different displacement fields. Due to the dependence of B re-entrant on the displacement field D, it is possible to tune between the low-field and high-field phases in constant magnetic field, by varying D alone. Therefore one could imagine engineering a Josephson tunneling experiment between the low-and high-field superconducting states simply by varying the applied electric field in space. If the high-field state has finite-momentum pairing, the Josephson current should vanish, due to the spatially oscillating phase of the high-field phase's order parameter In the case which the high-field state is obtained through an (anisotropic) Lifshitz transition, one could also simply measure whether or not the critical current is direction-dependent, as near the phase transition the critical current should be highly direction-dependent (see appendix C). Finally, the conclusion that the normal state near ν = -2 is a Z 2 TI is also interesting from an experimental perspective, as it will have symmetry protected gapless edge states in a single domain sample. In TTG, this TI coexists with the massless Dirac fermions of the mirror-odd sector. Complications caused by the mirrorodd Dirac cone could potentially be avoided in a setup where the sample edge is mirror symmetric and electrical contact is made only with the middle layer, enabling the transport properties of the mirror-even sector to be isolated. It may also be interesting to study the effects of induced spin orbit coupling in this system, along the lines of Ref. The proposed Z 2 TI at ν = -2 may be more readily accessible to experiments in TBG, where there are no extra gapless mirror-odd fermions. We begin by examining the orbital effects of the magnetic field. The only place where the orbital coupling enters into the above Lagrangian is in the L ± term, which couples the symmetric and antisymmetric sectors. This allows the effects of U, B to be treated within a controlled perturbative expansion. Integrating out ψ + produces the term where G + is the ψ + propagator. Since we are remaining largely agnostic about the physics of the symmetric flat bands, we do not know what G + looks like, other than that it involves ∆s on the off-diagonals. In what follows we will simply assume that the most important effects of δL can be captured by the term where h is a constant. Here and below, the notation A ⊃ B is to be read as "B is a term appearing in A". We now integrate out ψ -and examine the structure of the resulting terms generated in the effective action S[∆] for ∆. Thus the remaining task is to compute the functional determinant where and where the particle / hole Greens functions are We will assume that integrating out ψ + leaves the ψ -fermions as continuing to be well-described by a Dirac cone, albeit one with a renormalized (possibly anisotropic) Dirac velocity and a nonzero chemical potential. Therefore we take ε to be (ignoring for now the Zeeman coupling) so that (A9) In the following we will use the notation with L 2n containing 2n powers of ∆. We will first turn to examining the quadratic piece a. Quadratic terms We will work at μ = 0 for now, as the effects of a small nonzero μ do not qualitatively modify the structure or field dependence of the terms that are generated. We will also only focus on the behavior of L 2 [∆] in the zero-frequency limit, by taking ∆ = ∆(0, q). After re-scaling momenta by To perform the trace, we can use the explicit expression for V to write where in this appendix |∆| 2 = Tr[∆ † ∆], we have defined and have used σ v ∆ = -∆σ * v as well as The fact that A and U enter in Γ with opposite signs is important for the physics of the Lifshitz transition, and is a consequence of the fact that ∆ pairs opposite valleys, and hence anticommutes with the τ z contained in σ v . Note that this physics is independent of our assumption of even angular momentum pairing, since it only relies on the fact that ∆ is off-diagonal in the valley index. Performing the trace, we then find Introducing a Feynman parameter x (integrated from 0 to 1), where y = x(1 -x). Doing the sum over Matsubara frequencies, (A17) The exact expression for this integral is not so important for the present purposes, as we are mostly just interested in the signs of the order q 0 , q 2 terms. We find where C 1 , C 2 are positive (temperature-dependent) coefficients. Selecting out the contribution which depends on the displacement and magnetic fields U and A by using the definition of Γ, and dropping terms of order A 4 , we then have We now examine how the orbital field affects the the quartic terms u, v in the GL free energy. Using V † ∆V * = Γ∆, we have (now restricting to zero momentum transfer) To understand the consequences of the terms derived so far, consider the simplified free energy , where the phase stiffness K is related to c as K = |∆| 2 c. The effects derived in (A19), (A20) lead to renormalizations of K, r, u by amounts where we have assumed v x = v y ≡ v for simplicity. The condensate fraction |∆| 2 = -r/u is renormalized by where r 0 , u 0 are the values of r, u in the absence of any coupling between the mirror-even and mirror-odd fermions. The exact field dependence of δ |∆| 2 depends on the magnitude of λ and the sign of hλ, which are not things that can be derived microscopically within the current approach. First consider the case where λ is small enough so that terms of order λh may be dropped compared to those of order h 2 , and the contribution from the δu term can be ignored. This very well may be the case microscopically, as the interaction which produces the λ term does not appear in the (presumably dominant) density-density interaction (see the discussion following (2)). In this case we have Therefore the displacement field increases the condensate fraction, while the magnetic field decreases it. The same dependence also holds for K. Note in particular that in this limit, the condensate fraction is unchanged by the magnetic field when U = 0 (at least to order B 2 ), implying that to this order the critical in-plane magnetic field B c is infinite. When λh is not small compared to h 2 , it is possible to engineer a situation where the behavior of the condensate fraction is reversed from the discussion above (provided that λh < 0). This however can be ruled out from experiment, given that the condensate fraction is seen to increase with U at B = 0 (at least for the range of displacement fields we are interested in). Therefore in this case the leading shifts of the condensate fraction and of K are both proportional to U 2 /4 -v 2 D A 2 , with positive constants of proportionality. Note that this gives a finite value of B c even when U = 0, as in experiment. This could either be because the experimental system has a nonzero (though possibly small) value of λ, or because the mirror symmetry is not perfect. Summarizing, we conclude that the displacement field and (orbital) magnetic field have opposite effects: the displacement field U increases both the condensate fraction and the superfluid stiffness, while the magnetic field decreases both the condensate fraction and the superfluid stiffness. Because K and r are renormalized by different amounts, it is reasonable to consider a scenario where the superfluid stiffness goes to zero with increasing B before the condensate fraction does. We now turn to examining contributions to the effective action for ∆ arising from the Zeeman coupling of the magnetic field to the microscopic fermions. These contributions come from the term where for brevity we have defined g ≡ μ B g/2. Modeling the mirror-even fermions as a Fermi liquid as described at the beginning of this appendix, we can incorporate the Zeeman effects they induce by using the propagators where ξ k is the energy measured relative to the Fermi energy. This then provides the term At linear order in B, this gives the contribution where we shifted the momentum integration and used that the response will only be a function of q 2 , so that ξ k-q can be replaced with ξ k+q . Evaluating the trace, we find where as before M = d 1 × d 2 , and where For simplicity we will only explicitly evaluate the O(q 0 ) term. In the limit where we can replace k with N (0) Λ -Λ dξ, this term vanishes due to particle-hole symmetry about the Fermi level. The leading contribution is thus proportional to N (0) Due to the smallness of N (0) in a generic Fermi liquid scenario, this term would normally be neglected. However, it is possible that the displacement field modifies the density of states significantly enough to make this term important at moderate U . Before moving on, we note that the above B • M term was derived by performing an expansion in powers of ∆, using the normal state form of the fermion propagators. In the limit where T ∆, we should instead perform an expansion about the B = 0 superconductor. In this case the B • M term simply vanishes, as there is no magnetization for the field to couple to. Now we look at effects from (A26) which enter at order B 2 . Using where the second term in the first line comes from the expansion of the B 2 s in the denominators of the propagators, and we have again used that the response is only a function of q 2 when going to the second line. The general expressions that appear after doing the frequency sum are rather complicated. For our purposes it suffices to expand in q 2 , and write where the F i , G i , H i are all positive functions of T , with all but F 1 , H 1 vanishing in the limit where we may perform the k integrals as N (0) ∞ -∞ dξ. We now compute the Zeeman effects induced by the mirror-odd Dirac fermion ψ -(these are expected to be smaller, but we include the discussion for completeness). To do this, we need to compute the propagator for ψ -in the absence of hybridization with ∆. To this end, consider the matrix One can show that the inverse is If we apply this to the case of a = -iω -μ, b = -gB, c = k, we expand to order B 2 and get where ω ± = ω ± iμ. We then use these propagators to integrate out ψ -and compute the resulting terms in the effective action for ∆, following the same approach as when considering orbital effects. The contribution linear in gB vanishes if μ = 0 due to particle-hole symmetry, but is nonzero otherwise. To leading (linear) order in μ, where L is a positive constant. Contributions at order (gB) 2 give the term (now dropping the chemical potential for simplicity) where as usual P i , Q i , R i are positive (temperature dependent) constants. 1. Fully spin-valley locked limit We will first consider the case where the spin is fully locked to valley, so that the order parameter is allowed to be nonzero only in a subset of the Hilbert space. As was discussed above near (B22), in the case of full SVL, we have det(∆ KK ) = 0 and may write the order parameter as where as before |∆| = Tr[∆ † ∆], the matrix written out explicitly is in valley space, and where ξ, η are normalized spinors which determine the directions along which the spins in the K, K valleys are polarized. By decomposing the outer products appearing in ∆ in terms of Pauli matrices, we may write (assuming even angular momentum pairing for concreteness, as in the main text) where the d four-vector is defined in terms of |ξ , |η , and has components where we have defined the adjoint spinor In what follows it will be helpful to define, for any spinor |ς , the three-vector Taking the adjoint in the manner above simply reverses the direction of the 3-vector, so that ς = -ς. This notation lets us write the magnitudes of d and d 0 as The norm of the full d vector is thus |d μ | 2 = 1, giving Tr[∆ † ∆] = |∆| 2 as required. Also as expected for a spinpolarized state, we see that the weight of the triplet part |d| 2 is always nonzero, being minimal for antiferromagnetic alignment between the valleys and maximal for ferromagnetic alignment, with the opposite being true for the weight of the singlet part |d 0 | 2 . 7 The adjoint of a given spinor is obtained by inverting the spinor through the Bloch sphere and changing the handedness used to define its overall phase. In terms of the Euler angle parametrization |ξ = e iγ/2 e iφ/2 cos(θ/2) e -iφ/2 sin(θ/2) , (B4) the adjoint |ξ can be obtained by by sending γ → -γ + π, φ → φ + π, θ → -θ + π. When deriving the coefficients in the GL free energy microscopically, SVL can be taken into account simply by replacing the particle and hole propagators by where we have defined the projector with the ⊕ in valley space. Note that P satisfies The form of terms not involving the Zeeman coupling of the magnetic field are not modified by the projection. For terms involving the Zeeman coupling, we simply make the replacement The structure of the Zeeman terms quadratic in the magnetic field are determined by following the analysis of appendix A, and using the traces For example, for a spin-valley locked Fermi liquid, the contributions to the free energy from the Zeeman couplings are, to quadratic order in ∆ and B, where ζ is small in N (0)/N (0) and κ > 0 (see appendix A). As expected, we may avoid Pauli suppression of the pairing either by having the spins in each valley align in the plane normal to B, or by having the two spins ferromagnetically align along B, both of which prevent pair-breaking by the field from occurring. The free energy in general may be written as a function of |∆|, ξ, η as (ignoring derivatives of ξ, η for simplicity) where the coefficient w determines whether the spins in each valley prefer to align ferromagnetically or antiferromagnetically. The explicit B dependence arises from the Zeeman coupling terms, while the orbital effects of the field provide implicit dependence of the various coefficients on B 2 in the manner described in appendix A. As discussed in the main text, the system observed in experiments likely has w > 0. When B = 0, the minimum of f occurs for ξ = -η. ∆ is now invariant under SO(2) rotations about ξ, and hence the order parameter manifold is (U (1) × S 2 )/Z 2 . Now we will examine what happens to this state at nonzero B. Taking B to lie along ẑ in spin space, upon minimizing f we find where R z (φ) represents a rotation by an arbitrary angle φ about ẑ, and where Thus for 0 < |ζB|/2w < 1 the spins are partially magnetized and there is an U (1)s worth of degenerate minima, and as in the partially polarized phase of the following subsection the order parameter manifold is (U (1) × U (1))/Z 2 . For |ζB|/2w > 1 the spins are ferromagnetically aligned and fully magnetized, and the order parameter manifold is U (1). Given this solution for ξ, η, the magnitude of the order parameter is consequently determined to be The condensate fraction and its first derivative with respect to B are continuous across the transition into the highfield ferromagnetic state, and (∂ |∆| /∂B)| B=0 = 0, implying that unlike in the non-locked case to be discussed in the next subsection, T SC will not increase linearly with B at small B. Figure Now we consider the slightly simpler case in which there is no spin-valley locking (SVL), with the order parameter allowed to have components in the entire fermionic Hilbert space. This discussion will therefore only be germane for the problem considered in this paper at values of T and / or B large enough to eliminate any SVL which occurs in the T = 0 normal state near ν = -2. We start by breaking the order parameter up into triplet and singlet parts as where d μ = (d 0 , d) is a complex four-vector. Up to quartic order in the order parameter, the free energy can be written as where we have used the standard notation d = d 1 + id 2 . As usual, the terms which depend explicitly on the magnetic field arise from Zeeman effects, while orbital effects are responsible for giving the remaining coefficients implicit dependence on B 2 . When minimizing f in the presence of of the couplings to the magnetic field, it is often helpful to write the d vector in terms of components which diagonalize the B • (d 1 × d 2 ) coupling In this representation, the f t and f ts components of the free energy are now The effects of the p term can be understood as a way of softly implementing SVL. Indeed, if we write the order parameter as (where the 2×2 matrix is in valley space) we see that we may write Therefore large positive p enforces that the determinant of ∆ KK vanish. In this case we may write for two spinors |ξ , |η , which have the interpretation as the directions along which the spins in the K, K valleys are polarized. For simplicity of the analytical results, and because the fully spin-valley locked case was discussed in the last subsection, in what follows we will simply set p = 0. Extremizing the free energy for uniform solutions then gives One can show that when κ > 0, which is the case we are interested in, when B = 0 the global minima of the free energy always have d z = 0, while when B = 0 we have SO(3) spin symmetry and may fix d z = 0 without loss of generality. Setting d z = 0 then, when d 0 = 0 we just have to solve where and There are now two types of solutions. The first is with d + = 0 or d -= 0, corresponding to fully spin-polarized triplets. Choosing ζB > 0, the favored solution will be the one with d -= 0. This gives the fully polarized solution where φ (γ) shifts under U (1) g gauge transformations (SO(2) s spin rotations about ẑ). This order parameter is therefore invariant under combined U (1) g and SO(2) s rotations. As a result, when B = 0 the order parameter manifold is M = (U (1) g × SO(3) s )/U (1) g+s = SO(3) which is only a solution provided that the field is less than the critical value B c , where which only implicitly determines B c due to the implicit B 2 dependence of the coefficients on the RHS. When B = 0, d pp is invariant under SO(2) d spin rotations about d, but unlike the fully polarized case the only SO(3) rotation which acts in the same way as a gauge transformation is a spin flip, which acts in the same way as a gauge rotation by π. The order parameter manifold when Since π 1 ([U (1) × S 2 ]/Z 2 ) = Z, the B = 0 phase has vortices and a nonzero T BKT Figure Note that for any nonzero magnetic field, the transition into the fully polarized state always occurs before superconductivity is killed altogether (T P < T SC in figure We first review the isotropic case, where the Lagrangian at the T = 0 critical point contains no quadratic derivative terms: A complete discussion of the finite-temperature physics of this model can be found in The spatial correlator φ(x)φ(0) calculated from (C1) is logarithmically divergent in the IR at T = 0, and the model has QLRO. At nonzero T the divergence is power law, so that the correlation functions of e iφ are ultra shortranged. This latter fact does not mean that the model is necessarily disordered at all T > 0 however, since as stressed in Accounting for these effects at T > 0 is done by starting instead with the Lagrangian where the marginally irrelevant η term is responsible for generating a nonzero stiffness at T > 0, and K 0 is a counterterm ensuring that the renormalized stiffness K vanish at T = 0. The renormalized stiffness K can be computed within the framework of an RPA (large-N ) approximation. In this approximation, K is given by the bare value K 0 in addition to a contribution coming from a geometric sum of 1-loop diagrams involving the η interaction. Writing the renormalized φ propagator as (ω 2 + Kk 2 + ςk 4 ) -1 , we have where we have used the requirement that K y = 0 at T = 0 to solve for K 0 y . Performing this integral and solving for K at low T gives so that K/T √ ς 1 at low T . The value of K determines T BKT by way of the Kosterlitz-Thouless criterion Kπ/2 = T . Since in the present case K/T → 0 at low T , there will not be a BKT transition at finite T , and the theory is disordered for all non-zero temperatures Let us now apply a similar analysis to the anisotropic case, where only one component of the stiffness vanishes at the T = 0 critical point. At T = 0, we may work with the Lagrangian where ς is needed for stability. We take φ to be dimensionless, with the dimensionful factor of λ out front having dimensions of ∂ y . At zero temperature the φ correlator along e.g. the x direction goes as which is IR finite. The theory therefore orders at T = 0, unlike in the isotropic case which diverges as √ L, with L the system size. As in the isotropic case, this divergence does not rule out the existence of a finite-T phase with QLRO, as we must account for the presence of other terms which generate a nonzero y component of the stiffness at T > 0. At T > 0, the correct starting point is therefore instead, analogously to (C2), The renormalized y stiffness K y can be computed using the same 1-loop diagram as before. We have Assuming K y √ ςT , we can ignore the K y dependence of the third term in the integral. We then solve for K y , finding where C ≈ 11. At small T we indeed have K y √ ςT , justifying our earlier assumption. Note that unlike in the isotropic case, here we are not in the upper critical dimension of the T = 0 theory, and the term η which generates K y is not marginal. Therefore there is no logarithmic dependence of K y on T , and the dependence of K y on the value of η can not a priori be neglected at low T . In the anisotropic case, the stiffness which determines the location of a possible BKT transition is set by K eff = λ K x K y . Since K eff ∝ T 3/4 , K eff will always be larger than 2T /π at low enough T , meaning that there will always be a finite-temperature BKT transition. Explicitly, in the present approximation the transition occurs at The value of T BKT is of course non-universal, and depending on the microscopics may very well be small enough to be essentially indistinguishable in experiments from zero. In this section we compute the critical current in the region of parameter space near the Lifshitz transition. First consider the normal phase where the pairing occurs at zero momentum. In this case we may examine the free energy density where γ x , γ y , u, -r > 0. To determine the critical current, we follow the standard procedure Therefore Minimizing over ρ gives Maximizing the RHS, we then see that the critical currents along the x and y directions are given by Now we consider a situation which favors finite-momentum pairing along the ŷ direction. We consider the free energy density with γ y , κ > 0. We then consider an FF state, with and assume that φ varies on scales much longer than 1/q 0 . We can then consider the approximate free energy Repeating the same steps as above leads to critical currents of Consider finally the scenario where both quadratic derivatives in the free energy density have negative coefficients with all coefficients except r positive. Consider again an FF state Ψ = √ ρe iq0y+iφ , with finite momentum in the ŷ direction. Assuming γ y κ xy /κ y -γ x ≥ 0 and making the same approximations as above, this leads to the critical currents where the energy scale E is defined as We now need to estimate the quantities appearing in E. The coupling h is associated with the pairing terms for the mirror-odd fermions that arise upon integrating out the mirror-even sector (see (A4)), and has dimension of inverse energy squared. While we are not in a position to calculate h exactly, on general grounds we expect h ∼ 1/ε 2 F , where ε F is the Fermi energy of the mirror-even bands which become superconducting. ε F is not known exactly and its determination depends on knowledge of what happens to the correlated insulator at ν = -2 upon hole doping, but a value in the ballpark of a few tens of mev seems appropriate. C 2 can be read off from an expansion of (A17), giving where x is integrated from 0 to 1 and y = x(1 -x). For the present purposes of estimating B c , we will take T → T BKT,0 ∼ T onset in the above. The appropriate value to take for ∆ (equal to the superconducting gap in our mean-field treatment) is not currently known experimentally. We will leave ∆ as a free parameter for now, and note only that due to the strong-coupling nature of the problem and the energy scales involved, a value of ∆ ∼ 1 mev does not seem unreasonable. Finally, we need to estimate the dimensionless parameter λ, which appears in our Lagrangian as λψ -∆ † ψ -+ h.c. and originates from a mean-field decoupling of interactions of the form ψ † -ψ † -ψ + ψ + + h.c. (all indices suppressed). These interaction only conserve the number of mirror-even and mirror-odd fermions modulo 2, and they do not appear directly in the regular density-density interaction, as the total fermion density is δρ = δρ even + δρ odd which separately conserves the number of mirror-even and mirror-odd fermions. These interactions furthermore do not arise at first order upon projecting the density-density interaction to the active bands, since at D = 0, B = 0 the form factors of the active bands do not mix the mirror-even and mirror-odd sectors (by symmetry). Therefore after projecting the interaction to the active bands, λ can only arise from an interaction corresponding to a second-order process involving tunneling to remote bands. The strength of these higher-order interactions is roughly U 2 /∆E, where ∆E is the gap to the remote bands and U is the Coulomb interaction strength; λ is accordingly λ ∼ (U 2 /∆E)/U = U/∆E. Estimating U ∼ e 2 /(4πε 0 ε r √ A moire ) ∼ 30 mev (with the relative dielectric constant ε r ∼ 5) and ∆E ∼ 50 mev (based on a naive reading of the band structure With the above estimates in hand, we may plug in numbers and write The value of B c at zero displacement field and optimal doping is experimentally determined to be around 12 T where the RHSs are the matrices which appear in the adjoint action on the ψ l fields and K is complex conjugation. Here R φ is a rotation through φ acting in the xy plane, R y implements a reflection of the y coordinate, and the mirror symmetry M acts in layer space as When written in terms of fields which diagonalize M , the above expression for H 0 in (E1) reduces to the form given in the main text Turning on a nonzero U breaks M and C 2x , and turning on a nonzero B breaks C 3 , T , M, and C 2z , and breaks C 2x unless B x. Any direction of field preserves C 2z M, C 2z T , and M T . The combination of C 2x and one of T , M, C 2z is also preserved if B ŷ. Like in the bilayer case, C 2z T is unbroken for any choices of U, B, and prevents the innermost bands from separating from one another We now briefly discuss the band structure obtained from (E1). For concreteness we will fix θ = 1.57 • , w AB = 110meV, and w AA = 0.8w AB . Since we are mainly interested in the orbital effects of the field, we will ignore the Zeeman energy. Similarly to U , the main orbital effects of B on the band structure are to hybridize the mirror-odd Dirac fermion ψ -with the mirror-even flat bands. Examples of the band structure in the graphene K valley for various values of U, B x are shown in figure The orbital effects of the magnetic field are rather different than in the case of TBG In this section we adopt the approach used in As in the analysis of the analogous bilayer problem, there are two zero modes in this simplified 14-band problem. Let ψ ↑ 2 = (1, 0) T and ψ ↓ 2 = (0, 1) T . We will then have a zero mode provided we take and that j (T j h -1 j T † j -T † j h -1 j T j )ψ σ 2 = 0, (E11) with this last equation trivially satisfied as our T j matrices are Hermitian. For simplicity we will now work perturbatively in A. At A = 0, the zero modes |ψ zm;σ have norm After correctly normalizing the wavefunctions, the effective Hamiltonian in the zero-mode subspace near the K point then reads with the Fermi velocity out front confirming that when U = 0, θ 3 1 = √ 2θ 2 1 , with θ l i the ith magic angle for twisted l-layer graphene We note however that a subsequent experiment For nonzero field strengths which are not strong enough to fully lock the spins along B, there is an additional neutral spin mode coming from U (1) spin rotations about the field direction. It however is not important for the following discussion, and will be ignored. The cubic term ∂xφ(∂xφ -√ 3∂yφ)(∂xφ + √ 3∂yφ) also renders the critical point first order, but is not invariant under the C 6 symmetry of the theory, which sends ψ(x) → τ x σ x e 2πiτ z σ z ψ(R π/3 x) and B → R π/3 B When the RHS of (B28) becomes negative, the minimum of f has d 0 = 0. The solutions in this case are obtained simply by replacing r, u with r, u. Note that we are ignoring contributions to the stiffness which arise from Zeeman effects. Within the framework of appendix A, Zeeman effects in the mirror-even sector do not contribute to the stiffness at leading order, while contributions from the mirror-odd sector are small (being suppressed by a factor of λ(μ B /v D δ) C 2x is technically only a symmetry in the limit where the ±θ/2 rotations of σv can be ignored.