The singlemode condition is one of the most important design rules for optical waveguides in guided-wave optics. The reason following the singlemode condition is that higher-order modes might be excited and thus introduce some undesired mode-mismatching loss as well as inter-mode crosstalk when light propagates along an optical waveguide beyond the singlemode regime. As a result, multimode photonic waveguides are usually not allowed. In this paper, we propose the concept of silicon photonics beyond the singlemode regime, developed with low-loss and low-crosstalk light propagation in multimode photonic waveguides with broadened silicon cores. In particular, silicon photonic waveguides with a broadened core region as wide as 2-3 μm have shown an ultra-low-loss of ~0.1 dB/cm for the fundamental mode even without any special fabrication process. A micro-racetrack resonator fabricated with standard 220-nm-SOI (silicon-on-insulator) MPW-foundry processes shows a record intrinsic Q-factor as high as 1.02×10 7 for the first time, corresponding to ultra-low waveguide propagation loss of only 0.065 dB/cm, which is ~20 times less than that of regular 450-nm-wide SOI strip waveguides. A high-performance microwave photonic filter on silicon is then realized with an ultra-narrow 3-dB bandwidth of 20.6 MHz as well as a tuning range of ~20 GHz for the first time. An on-chip 100-cm-long delayline is also demonstrated by using the present broadened SOI photonic waveguides with compact 90° Euler-curve bends, and the measured propagation loss is ~0.14 dB/cm, which is higher than the loss estimated for the micro-racetrack resonators due to some defects in chip scale. The proposed concept of silicon photonics beyond the singlemode regime helps solve the issue of high propagation loss and also significantly reduces the random phase errors of light due to the random variations of waveguide dimensions. In particularity it enables silicon photonic devices with enhanced performances, which paves the way for new-generation silicon photonics realizing the large-scale photonic integration. The concept of silicon photonics beyond the singlemode regime can be extended further for any other material platforms, such as silicon nitride and lithium niobite. This brings numerous new opportunities for various applications such as nonlinear photonics, large-scale photonic integration, quantum photonics, microwave photonics, etc. Silicon photonics is one of the most widely explored platforms for photonic integrated circuits (PICs) because of its compatibility with the complementary metal-oxide-semiconductor (CMOS) process. Various passive and active silicon photonic devices have been demonstrated with impressive performances in the past two decades As it is well known, optical waveguides are usually required to be singlemode according to the singlemode condition in order to avoid the excess loss and the crosstalk due to the excitation and interference of higher-order modes. For silicon photonic waveguides with a 220-nm-thick top-silicon core-layer, the core region is usually narrower than 450 nm, in which case the singlemode condition is satisfied for TE polarization. For the popular 450-nm-wide singlemode silicon photonic waveguides with an ultra-high ∆, the propagation loss is mainly from the scattering at rough sidewalls and is usually much higher than those low-∆ photonic waveguides. Great efforts have been made to reduce the loss of silicon photonic waveguides by e.g. improving the fabrication processes since silicon photonics was proposed in 1980s In order to reduce the propagation loss, some special fabrication processes have been introduced for silicon photonics to smoothen the waveguide surfaces, such as thermal reflow Previously, the introduction of an ultrathin core layer had been proposed as an effective approach to achieve very low-loss photonic waveguides In this paper, a silicon photonic waveguide enabling an ultra-low-loss of about 0.1 dB/cm is proposed with a core region broadened to beyond the singlemode regime according to the comprehensive analysis of the light-matter interaction behavior, even without any special fabrication process. The micro-racetrack resonator fabricated with standard 220-nm-SOI MPW-foundry processes has a compact footprint of ~0.17 × 0.9 mm 2 with the help of Euler-bends and shows a record intrinsic Q-factor as high as 1.02×10 Figures where L is the curve length, A is a constant given by A = [ltotal /(1/Rmin-1/Rmax)] 1/2 , in which ltotal is the total length of the Euler-curve bend. As shown in Fig. Figure Figure In addition, here the racetrack-resonator with different core-widths are also demonstrated, and they have similar FSRs of 0.325 nm, as predicted theoretically. For those resonators with different core widths of wco = 0.45 μm, 1.6 μm, and 2 μm, the estimated Q-factors are respectively 1.93×10 5 , 2.73×10 6 and 3.95×10 Here, we proposed and demonstrated a 100-cm-long silicon photonic delayline that is laid around the chip with a footprint of 15×3 mm 2 , as shown in Figure Figures Material. All the devices were designed for the transverse-electric (TE) polarization. The SOI wafer with a 220-nm-thick silicon core-layer and a 2-μm-thick buried-oxide layer. The operation wavelength is around 1550 nm, and the corresponding refractive index of silicon and silica are nSi = 3.455 and nSiO2 = 1.445, respectively. Fabrication. All the devices demonstrated in this article were fabricated by the MPW foundry with the standard process of deep-UV lithography technologies and inductively-coupled plasma dry-etching. A 2 μm-thick silica thin film was deposited on the top as the upper-cladding. Characterization. In order to characterize the loss of the fabricated silicon photonic delayline, the setup with an ASE source and an OSA was used.