Compact coherent x-ray sources have been the focus of extensive research efforts over the past decades. As a result, several novel schemes like optical and nano-undulators for generating x-ray emissions in "table-top" setups are proposed, developed, and assessed. Despite the extensive efforts in the past decades, there exists no operational FEL based on optical or electromagnetic undulators. By combining the particle confinement capability of optical cavities with wiggling motion inside an optical undulator, this paper proposes a new concept for making a compact coherent x-ray source. The full-wave solution of first-principle equations based on finite-difference time-domain and particlein-cell (FDTD/PIC) is performed to simulate inverse-Compton scattering (ICS) off both free and confined electrons. It is shown that the strong space-charge effect in a low-energy electron beam (5 MeV) is the main obstacle in acquiring coherent gain through the ICS mechanism with a 10micrometer laser. Subsequently, it is shown that by confining the electron beam at the field nodes of an optical cavity, the space-charge effect is compensated, and additionally, the ultrahigh charge density enables high FEL-gain at confinement spots. The full-wave numerical simulations predict enhancement of about three orders of magnitude in the radiation efficiency when ICS is carried out with confined electrons compared to free electrons. These theoretical results show promising potential as a new scheme for implementing a compact coherent x-ray source. Conventional compact x-ray sources include bremsstrahlung tubes In an FEL setup, x-ray radiation is produced from interactions between relativistic e-beams and an undulator The ultimate goal in compact accelerator research is to boost the average accelerating gradient. The use of the plasma environment for particle acceleration engendered the research field of laser-plasma wake-field acceleration (LPWA) Techniques for the realization of compact undulators include cryogenic undulators In addition to the aforementioned schemes, researchers have explored novel approaches for generating coherent x-ray radiation. Wiggling a modulated electron beam to enable intense superradiant x-ray generation is one example. The electron modulation can be produced either by field-emitter arrays combined with emittance exchange All techniques described for the realization of compact x-ray sources are based on the radiation equation in the wiggling motion, namely where λ x , λ u , K, and γ are the radiation wavelength, undulator period, undulator parameter, and Lorentz factor of the electron beam, respectively. This equation changes to for ICS interactions with a counter-propagating laser of wavelength λ 0 and strength parameter a 0 . Some techniques elaborate to reach the required Lorentz factor γ in a small setup, others to reduce λ u so that the Lorentz factor required for output radiation λ x is decreased. Nonetheless, accounting for the 3D dynamics of FEL radiation, it can be shown that there are strong fundamental challenges in achieving coherent gain Numerical simulation of a x-ray FEL in a full-wave fashion based on first-principle equations was for a long time impossible due to the involvement of dramatically multidimensional EM effects. For instance, the undulator wiggling period is around 1-3 cm with a total undulator length of 10-100 m, whereas the radiation wavelength of the radiation source is 0.1-100 nm. As a result, very high computation costs are needed to resolve all the involved physical phenomena, which is not practical even with the existing supercomputer technology. In 2007, the breakthrough theory of simulation in a Lorentz-boosted framework was pioneered by Jean-Luc Vay Typical finite-difference time-domain particle-in-cell (FDTD/PIC) codes like WARP and OSIRIS employ the Yee algorithm to solve Maxwell equations and a symplectic algorithm like Boris scheme to solve for the particle motion. Such a framework is not able to capture the Coulomb forces between the charged particles, i.e. the so-called spacecharge effect. To this end, the Poisson equation needs to be solved in conjunction with the Maxwell and motion equations. MITHRA implements the FDTD/PIC algorithm on potential equations, namely where A, φ, J and ρ are the time-and space-dependent magnetic vector potential, electric scalar potential, current density, and charge density, respectively. The electric and magnetic fields are extracted from potential fields to update the particles' phase-space coordinates. Subsequently, the charge and current densities, J and ρ, are updated according to the motion in the latest time step. The updated values for J and ρ are inserted in ( x-ray sources. In addition to the space-charge effect, the EM recoil and quantum effects also should be addressed. In The Pierce or FEL parameter, ρ F EL describes the conversion efficiency from the electron beam power into the FEL radiation power. In a one-dimensional ideal case, where detrimental effects originating from energy spread, emittance, diffraction, space-charge, and time-dependence of the beam and radiation profile are neglected, the FEL parameter for planar undulator can be derived from where K = K(J 0 (ξ) -J 1 (ξ)) with J 0 and J 1 being first and second order Bessel functions and ξ = K 2 /(4 + 2K 2 ). In addition, n e stands for the electron density in the beam. For an optical undulator, after considering the transformations λ u ↔ λ 0 /2 and K ↔ a 0 , the equivalent FEL parameter is obtained from The main goal in utilizing optical undulators is to achieve a targeted λ x using a smaller λ u and γ. By accounting for a constant λ x , equations ( The laser strength parameter a 0 is often constant and set close to one to procure maximum efficiency on one hand and avoid disadvantageous nonlinear effects on the other. Hence, it can be deduced that obtaining the same coherent radiation efficiency (ρ F EL ) for low-energy electrons requires a proportionally higher electron density (n e ). This requirement is completely contrary to the space-charge effect, which becomes considerably stronger in the low-energy regimes. As a result, an electron density which may be easily achievable for electron beams with GeV energy can be difficult to realize at MeV electron energies let alone the thousand times higher density dictated by equation In addition to the realization of the required electron density, maintaining this high density throughout the whole interaction length is of utmost importance. To demonstrate this hypothesis, an exemplary FEL interaction with parameters tabulated in table I is taken into account. The considered values are chosen based on the state-of-the-art electron gun as well as CO 2 laser technologies. The interaction is simulated using the code MITHRA with and without considering the space-charge effect. The analysis without space-charge effect is performed by setting φ = ρ = 0 in equation ( Fig. It is known that when a particle is exposed to spatially varying EM fields, a so-called gradient force or ponderomotive force influences the particle motion where E denotes the time-varying, i.e. oscillating electric field and ω is the oscillation frequency. This equation suggests that a charged particle in an inhomogeneous oscillating field not only oscillates at the ω frequency but is also accelerated by F p toward the weak field locations. When an ensemble of charged particles resides in the standing wave of an optical or EM cavity, owing to the existence of points with minimum and maximum field strengths, ponderomotive forces reshape the bunch distribution. More accurately, these forces push the particles to field nodes and pull them away from the field antinodes. Similarly, it is expected that when an electron beam traverses an optical cavity, the transverse distribution of the electrons is influenced by the gradient forces in an analogous fashion. Fig. Originated from this confinement effect, three closely interrelated phenomena happen simultaneously, which are advantageous for achieving the coherent-gain. First, the confinement effect prevents the increase in beam transverse size due to the transverse energy spread, thereby minimizing the beam effective emittance. It should be emphasized that the electrons are confined inside a potential well produced by the ponderomotive forces. Athough the intirinsic emmitance of the beam is conserved, since the microbeams are no more free beams the beam divergence is not directly related to the beam emittance. Considering the effective emittance as the product of the beam divergence with its transverse size, this parameter is reduced inside the cavity fields. This dramatic reduction in the effective emittance facilitates meeting the lasing-condition, < λ x /4π, and consequently makes the electron beam a perfect candidate for an FEL mechanism. Second, if confinement is enforced along both transverse directions, the ponderomotive force suppresses the transverse expansion of the beam size due to Coulomb forces. Although this expansion marginally reduces the charge density (see Fig. Third, and most importantly, is the realization of beams with considerably higher charge densities. As shown in Fig. To verify this hypothesis, the same ICS simulation as in table I is performed but with the fields of standing-waves superposed on the field of the counter-propagating ICS laser. Here, two cavities configured along x-and y-axes are taken into account such that the particle confinement happens in both transverse directions. The cavity beam parameters are listed in table II. The cavity wavelength (λ c = 11.8 μm) and the center position with respect to the starting point of bunch undulation (cδt = 8.4 mm) are obtained through optimization sweeps. A physical interpretation of these values will be explained in the next sections. Moreover, the two cavities are linearly polarized with a magnetic field along the beam direction, i.e. B z polarized. This is a critical requirement for the cavity configuration because an electric field along the beam traveling direction disturbs the longitudinal motion of the electrons and consequently the formation of microbunches. The total radiated power at λ x = 37.6 μm as well as the bunch dimensions for simulations with and without space-charge are shown in Fig. Scrutiny of the bunch and radiation profile sheds more light on the radiation mechanism of a confined electron bunch. Figure The obtained results numerically confirm the promising potential for ICS with confined electron beam as a new generation for x-ray sources. In the next sections, the anticipated characteristics of the proposed x-ray source are discussed. The presented visualization of the bunch profile illustrated qualitatively the occurrence of microbunching in each microbeam. Notwithstanding, such a data visualization does not demonstrate the event of coherent gain in the output radiation. To demonstrate the coherent gain in radiation, and thereby theoretically proving the functioning of a compact coherent x-ray source, the maximum radiated power was investigated when the bunch length is varied. By changing proportionally the total number of electrons, a constant average charge density is maintained throughout the sweep. The bunch length is directly proportional to the number of microbunches. Thus, the variation of the saturation (i.e. the maximum) power in terms of the bunch length shows the degree of coherent gain occurring during the interaction. Fig. Note that in the presented simulations, shot noise is added over uniformly distributed electrons as the trigger source for coherent radiation There are two primary reasons leading to the observed effect. First, we know from FEL physics that the microbunch phase is mainly determined during the initial gain lengths ( Coherence time is an important property of any radiation source including the proposed x-ray source. Here, the coherence time (τ ) is approximated as the inverse of spectral bandwidth for the on-axis radiation. In Fig. In the previous sections, the drastic increase in the radiated energy caused by the cavity fields was numerically demonstrated. This section addresses the variation of output energy with respect to the cavity parameters. The first parameter is the beam strength parameter (a 0c ) which determines the ponderomotive force on the particles around the cavity nodes. This parameter is studied in Fig. The next important parameter to be studied is the cavity wavelength, whose influence on the saturation power is examined in Fig. This paper aimed at introducing a new roadmap for realizing compact coherent x-ray sources. A new scheme based on inverse Compton scattering off low-energy electrons transversely confined inside fields of an optical cavity is presented. The transverse gradient forces stemming from inhomogeneous cavity fields are capable of confining and additionally focusing the electron beams close to the cavity nodes. It is shown that the microbeams produced by this effect are more suitable choices for radiation generation compared to a free electron beam. The possibility of achieving fast coherent gain before bunch expansion due to space-charge forces is theoretically demonstrated. As a result, the appropriate design of the total interaction leads to compact x-ray sources that enable efficiencies close to the existing x-ray free-electron lasers. Maximum effort was put into simulating the proposed phenomenon based on first-principle equations in order to capture all involved effects in the interaction between electrons, cavity and counter-propagating beams. Furthermore, the parameters of electron and optical beams were chosen according to the state-of-the-art e-beam and laser technology. This approach theoretically proves that the proposed scheme may be a viable venue for realizing a "table-top" coherent x-ray source. However, the realization of an x-ray source based on the investigated scheme requires a self-consistent start-to-end simulation as well as sensitivity studies. Particularly, the effects of existing experimental limitations on the source performance need to be scrutinized. For instance, fluctuations in the phase front of cavity beams, nonuniform (usually Gaussian) current profile in the electron beams, a non-uniform envelope of the ICS laser beam are parameters that influence the efficiency of radiation generation. In addition, the required synchronization between the electron beam and counter-propagating laser to collide at a certain position with respect to the cavity center needs to be explored. On the other side, this paper presented the design of a soft x-ray source. The potential of ICS off confined relativistic beams to realize a coherent hard x-ray source can be the focus of a future study. Hopefully, the presented analysis and proposal of one possible solution for a compact coherent x-ray source further motivates this field of research. Ultimately, these proposals are necessary to achieve a well-performing x-ray source that can be integrated into small labs for easier access and usage by physicists, chemists, and biologists. To consider the effect of particle confinement in cavity fields during an ICS interaction, the same ICS analysis is performed with cavity fields superposed on the fields of the counter-propagating beam. The fields inside a 2D cavity as shown in Fig. In a (p, s, l) Cartesian coordinate system, the fields of a Gaussian beam that is polarized along p direction and propagates along l are formulated as follows: (b) Figure 2. (a) Radiated power and (b) bunch dimensions, namely length (red) and transverse size (blue), throughout the ICS interaction summarized in table I. The results with (solid lines) and without space-charge (dotted lines) are shown.