New surprises continue to be revealed about La2CuO4, the parent compound of the original cuprate superconductor. Here we present neutron scattering evidence that the structural symmetry is lower than commonly assumed. The static distortion results in anisotropic Cu-O bonds within the CuO2 planes; such anisotropy is relevant to pinning charge stripes in hole-doped samples. Associated with the extra structural modulation is a soft phonon mode. If this phonon were to soften completely, the resulting change in CuO6 octahedral tilts would lead to weak ferromagnetism. Hence, we suggest that this mode may be the "chiral" phonon inferred from recent studies of the thermal Hall effect. We also note the absence of interaction between the antiferromagnetic spin waves and low-energy optical phonons, in contrast to what is observed in hole-doped samples. Just as the discovery of high-temperature superconductivity in La 2-x Ba x CuO 4 When single crystals became available, the soft phonon modes associated with tilts of the CuO 6 octahedra were identified by inelastic neutron scattering Neutron diffraction also led to the discovery of antiferromagnetic order in LCO The early samples of LCO, grown in air, exhibited semiconducting behavior, had T N ≈ 240 K Further investigation demonstrated that this was a consequence of intercalation by excess oxygen The transition to the orthorhombic phase generally results in strong twinning. With the preparation of detwinned crystals, it was discovered that the magnetic susceptibility peak at T N seen with the field along c is also present when the field is along b, the in-plane direction along which the octahedra tilt More recently, a new surprise has been discovered. Grissonnanche et al. With this motivation, we have taken another look at the lattice symmetry and fluctuations in LCO using neutron scattering. While confirming the superlattice peaks previously attributed to a monoclinic phase Our measurements also capture the antiferromagnetic spin waves. We check for a possible interaction between the spin waves and a low-energy optical mode of the type seen in Ba-and Sr-doped LCO The rest of the paper is organized as follows. The experimental methods and initial sample characterization are described in the next section. The main neutron scattering results and analysis are presented in Sec. III. We conclude with a discussion and summary of our results in Sec. IV. Single crystals of La 2 CuO 4 (LCO) were grown at Brookhaven National Laboratory in an infrared image furnace by the traveling-solvent floating-zone method. A large crystal of LCO was annealed in a vacuum at 10 -3 torr with the following temperature profile: heat from 30 • C to 910 • C over 3 h, hold for 1 h, cool to 600 • C over 12 h, cool to 500 • C for 200 h, and finally cool to room temperature over 12 h. The magnetic transition was determined from a measurement of the temperature dependence of magnetization using a commercial SQUID (superconducting quantum interference device) magnetometer on a small piece of the crystal. The resulting magnetic susceptibility is shown in Fig. To discuss the scattering measurements, we will express the momentum transfer Q = (H, K, L) in reciprocal lattice units (rlu) given by (2π/a, 2π/b, 2π/c) with a ≈ b ≈ 5.37 Å and c ≈ 13.1 Å. Initial neutron diffraction measurements were done on a small piece of crystal (∼ 1 mm 3 ) from a separately annealed larger crystal. (That larger crystal was not slowly cooled through the transition from the HTT phase, and the resulting strains eventually, after several months, caused it to shatter, providing many smaller crystals.) Those measurements were performed at the Dimensional Extreme Magnetic Neutron Diffractometer (DEMAND, HB-3A), at the High Flux Isotope Reactor, Oak Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL). Figure Inelastic neutron scattering measurements were performed on a single crystal of 11 g at the HYSPEC spectrometer at the Spallation Neutron Source (SNS) at Oak Ridge National Laboratory. The crystal was aligned with (H, 0, 0) and (0, K, 0) in the horizontal scattering plane; the vertical direction corresponds to [0, 0, L]. A closed-cycle He cryostat with a temperature range of 35-750 K was used to control the sample temperature. The measurements were carried out with an incident energy of E i = 27 meV at T = 35, 332, 420, and 500 K. At each temperature, data were collected as the sample was rotated about its vertical axis in 1°steps over a range of ∼ 155°. For all two dimensional (2D) slices and 1D cuts, shown below, the histogrammed intensities were obtained from the event data using MANTID Density functional theory (DFT) calculations were performed using the projector augmented wave (PAW) method To determine phonon energies and eigenvectors, we used the supercell approach as implemented in the code PHONOPY We used the phonon eigenvectors and energies from the calculations to compute the inelastic neutron scattering dynamic structure factors, S(Q, ω), using the SNAXS software A. Superstructure elastic peaks and reduced symmetry The deviations of the lattice symmetry from the LTO phase are apparent from a study of diffraction peaks in the (H, K, 0) plane. As indicated in Table To further highlight this, Fig. Reflection conditions Symbol No. K odd but not for (H, 0, 0) with H odd. In contrast, our crystal is twinned, so that, for example, we see peaks at both (0, -3, 0) and (3, 0, 0).] In addition, there are also peaks at (1, -3, 0) and (3, -3, 0), that satisfy H + K = 2n; in the absence of the monoclinic reflections, these would be consistent with the low-temperature less-orthorhombic (LTLO) phase observed in the phase diagram of La 2-x Ba x CuO 4 We now take a more systematic look at the LTLO lattice fluctuations, focusing on the (3, -3, 0) wave vector. Figure The dispersions of phonons about (3, -3, 0) in the T and L directions are plotted in Fig. The T mode appears to connect continuously with the acoustic (A) modes from neighboring reciprocal lattice points (although the calculated dispersions suggest some small gaps from anticrossing modes at 8 meV and above). The LA excitations disperse linearly with strong intensity up to ∼ 10 meV, where the intensity suddenly falls off, with intensity reappearing near 15 meV. This behavior can be understood as an avoided crossing (due to hybridization) with an optical mode at ∼ 10 meV (due to a mode involving La motion), so the weight of the branch connecting to the LA mode at (2, -2, 0) is weak. With increasing T , the soft-mode weight shifts upward in energy. For comparison, calculated neutron scattering from phonons is presented in Fig. There is good qualitative consistency between the measured and calculated phonons. One feature that sticks out in the calculated T dispersions is the dip in the acoustic dispersion near 5 meV; inspection of the eigenvector indicates that this feature is associated with La and O motion, with almost no participation from the Cu sublattice. There are hints of related behavior in the 35-K data, but the transverse Q resolution is limited by the orthorhombic twinning that effectively increases the sample mosaic. The temperature dependence of the phonons at (3, -3, 0) is anomalous, and to demonstrate this, we will compare with the behavior of TA phonons dispersing from a neighboring Bragg point. Considering Fig. To quantify the behavior of the soft mode with temperature, we fit the energy dependence shown in Fig. where , ∆ p is an energy gap, v is the average acoustic velocity, the damping factor γ corresponds to the FWHM, and A is the amplitude. The fitted values are listed in Table In studies of antiferromagnetic spin fluctuations in La 2-x Ba x CuO 4 and La 2-x Sr x CuO 4 , Wagman et al. To look for evidence of spin-phonon coupling, we must shift to the magnetic signal at (2, -1, 0), where we can transfer enough energy to reach the energy range of interest. Figure We have provided evidence for LTLO-like reflections in LCO. The elastic intensities are weak, but there is plenty of intensity in the soft phonons at these positions, qualitatively consistent with phonons calculated for the LTT phase. Following on our previous observation of Intensity vs E plot is a 1D cut at the magnetic zone center (2, -1, 0) and the background is similar plot taken away from magnetic zone center. such peaks in LSCO x = 0.07 The temperature dependence of the soft-mode at (3, -3, 0) is clearly distinct from that observed for conventional acoustic phonons. In the latter case, χ is approximately constant with temperature, so that the intensity (obtained by multiplying χ by the detailed-balance factor) grows with T due to weight transferred from the associated Bragg peak. The substantial low-temperature weight of the soft mode is consistent with LTT-like tilt fluctuations that are not going to order, representing significant entropy at low T . Besides the case of LSCO x = 0.07 Of course, there are also peaks present that indicate monoclinic symmetry Another DFT-based study evaluated the phonons in the HTT phase, finding two unstable modes While our phonon calculations were performed on the LTT structure rather than with the experimental symmetry, an examination of the eigenvector for an LA phonon in the [1, -1, 0] direction, shown in Fig. While the in-plane Cu and O atoms exhibit linear displacements, the apical oxygens and half of the La ions exhibit circular motions. (The symmetry between the layers is broken by the orthogonal orientation of the octahedral tilt axes between neighboring layers, as indicated by the semicircular arrows in the middle panel.) The rotations of atoms above and below the planes are equal and opposite. For the experimental structure, the rotations are likely to be much more elliptical. Turning to the magnetic response of the system, the field-induced weak ferromagnetism in LCO is due to the DM interaction, as mentioned in the introduction. The distortions of the octahedra will impact the crystal-field splittings, and these impact the DM interaction through spin-orbit coupling. In zero field, we already have reduced lattice symmetry and associated low-energy fluctuations. In the weakly-ferromagnetic phase, the acoustic phonons can couple to the magnetic response, and this coupling could be relevant to understanding the recent experimental observations of the thermal Hall effect The thermal Hall effect involves a transverse component of the thermal conductivity that results in an anisotropic response in the presence of an orthogonal magnetic field. In the case of LCO The soft phonons in LCO may couple to the weak ferromagnetism in a c-axis magnetic field of sufficient strength. We propose that they may be relevant to the experimental observations of the thermal Hall effect Another complication is that a large thermal Hall effect has been reported in SrTiO 3 Besides LCO, a substantial thermal Hall effect has also been observed in hole-doped LSCO with p = 0.06. Along these lines, it is relevant to note that Balendent et al. Finally, we have found no evidence for interaction of the antiferromagnetic spin waves with phonons in the 15-20 meV range. Our results are consistent with another recent study that found such interactions in superconducting LSCO but not in LCO 