Nb3Sn performance in RF fields is limited to fields far below its superheating critical field. Poor thermal conductivity of Nb3Sn has been speculated to be the reason behind this limit. In order to better understand the contribution of Nb3Sn thermal conductivity to its RF performance, we simulated numerically with Matlab program*(based on SRIMP and HEAT codes) the limiting fields under different realistic conditions. Our simulations indicate that limiting fields observed presently in the experiments with RF fields cannot be explained by the thermal impedance of Nb3Sn alone. The results change significantly in the presence of higher losses due to extrinsic mechanisms. Nb3Sn is a material of interest due to potential in promising performance and cost reduction. It is implemented as a coating of a thin film inside existing Nb cavities, followed by an annealing in vacuum Operating temperatures of interest are 2K and 4K. 2K is the current typical temperature for operation of Nb cavities in accelerators, and 4K is a potential operating condition for Nb3Sn which would significantly reduce operating costs due to cooling Although superconductors are capable of conducting high DC currents without any losses, RF currents in SRF cavities dissipate some heat, typically on the scale of watts, which has to be removed by liquid helium. Heat must go through the wall of the cavity to be dissipated by the helium bath. The goal of this project was to simulate the process of heat flow from the vacuum side to the He side, and show how it is affected by the thermal impedance of the Nb3Sn layer. By varying the thermal impedance, e.g., via the thickness of the Nb3Sn layer, we estimate the RF field at which thermal runaway occurs under different circumstances. For this project, incremental steps are taken to use the existing HEAT model of Nb and modify it to represent Nb3Sn, and then again for a Nb3Sn-Nb bilayer. Nb3Sn is known to have significantly poorer thermal conductivity than Nb A critical aspect of cavity performance is the ability to remove the heat generated on the inside surface of cavity by cooling the other side. Many factors contribute to the ability to remove this heat: the field on the surface, the surface resistance, the conduction of the heat through the cavity wall, Kapitza conduction at the outer wall-bath interface, as well as the helium bath temperature and helium convection. Thermal instability could result from the collective contribution of these factors in hindering the removal of heat from the RF surface. This is important for the simulation as the impact of these contributions may be indirectly compared to how extreme values of each factor impacts the projected performance and to elucidate which factors in which conditions dominate the contribution to thermal instability. Effects of factors such as Kapitza conductance and thickness of Nb3Sn layer were evaluated through the simulation. In our simulation, the onedimensional analysis was done by assuming the Nb3Sn layer is an infinite plane in a lateral direction, limiting heat transfer to only the z direction. Figure Our simulation is of an ideal situation, but defects can further complicate the story. The contribution of defects would be simulated by a two-dimensional model looking for the defectinduced thermal instability. A defect, which is more lossy than the surrounding material, becomes an area of excess heating, and this additional heat contribution greatly increases the power dissipation driving thermal runaway; therefore, defects are of interest to simulate to better understand their impact on thermal conductivity and the successful removal of heat from the material. Figure The following simulations built on the work of Xie and Meng With the program having been benchmarked against the niobium case, separate cases were added to the existing Niobium-based functions to model Nb3Sn. Specifically, Nb3Sn surface resistance and thermal conductivity were added to reflect the new material under study. For Nb3Sn thermal conductivity, a polynomial fit was derived from published data For BCS resistance, SRIMP was first used to calculate RF surface resistance of Nb3Sn in the relevant temperature range One of our first assumptions was that Kapitza conductance is not the main factor limiting Nb3Sn performance, and so we simplified our simulation by excluding it from our simulation. Before removing thermal impedance due to Kapitza boundary resistance from our simulation, we first evaluated Kaptiza contribution to field limits by simulating critical film thickness versus field strength for several different Kapitza resistances. Several different Nb cases were used for this simulation: annealed Niobium, unannealed niobium, and annealed niobium*1000, which means that the Kapitza resistance for annealed niobium was further increased by a factor of 1000. The results of Kapitza resistance variation is that it has negligible effect. High Kapitza conductance means a very low Kapitza resistance and, if Kapitza boundary played a role in the overall heat transport, we would expect different results for different Kapitza resistances. As shown in Fig. To check the impact of thermal conductivity, we simulated the critical thickness for different thermal conductivities at two different helium bath temperatures, 2 K and 4 K. As a baseline thermal conductivity, we used the thermal conductivity from To check how the helium bath temperature affects the critical thickness, we simulated the critical thickness as a function of applied field for three different helium bath temperatures, 2 K, 4 K, and 6 K. As was discussed earlier, thermal simulation for varying Kapitza resistances indicated that Kapitza resistance contribution to overall thermal impendence is negligible, so the same Kapitza The lower outer wall temperature improves the stability of the material. And the effect of the outer wall temperature increases with the applied field. Decreasing the outer wall temperature from 6 K to 2 K improves the critical thickness by almost a factor of three at higher fields. Finally, we simulated the effect of the residual resistance on the critical thickness, Fig 8 . For this simulation four different surface resistances, 1 nOhm, 10 nOhm, 100 nOhm, and 1000 nOhm, were used. For this simulation Kapitza resistance of annealed niobium increased by a factor of 1000 was used. For the highest simulated surface resistance of 1000 nOhm, the critical thickness drops to about 60 μm at the highest fields, which is comparable to the thickest Nb3Sn grown on SRF cavities. At low fields of about 100 mT, the critical thickness is still at or above 1 mm. With the goal to explore how different material properties affect the maximum material thickness, which still allows for the RF surface to be adequately cooled by liquid helium at the outer wall at a given field, we first check the influence of Kapitza resistance. Under the assumption of the thermal resistance value reported in These simulations also showed that the critical thickness for which thermal runaway occurs is, at least, several millimeter even for a the fields as high as 200 mT, which is significantly higher than the highest fields reached in the best Nb3Sn-coated SRF cavities The other factor that has significant impact to the critical thickness is the surface resistance, Fig. These simulations, where we varied potential contributors to GTI, suggest there is an external limitation, not intrinsic to the material. Perhaps defects are the limitation; the next avenue of exploration would be to look into thermal runaway due to defects varying factors such as defect resistance and defect size. A further advancement to be made on these simulations would be to simulate two materials, Nb3Sn film on Nb, and again evaluate where the thermal runaway occurs. We numerically simulated different thicknesses of Nb3Sn films in varying realistic conditions using a temperature dependent thermal conductivity. Our simulations indicate that limiting fields observed presently in the experiments with RF fields cannot be explained by the thermal impedance of Nb3Sn alone. We found that the primary contribution to the thermal resistance was the Nb3Sn thermal conductivity. The results change significantly in the presence of higher losses due to extrinsic mechanisms. At the magnitude of microns thickness, GTI is not a concern for state-of-the-art Nb3Sn films. From this, there is interest in further simulation of defects as a twodimensional case and Nb-Nb3Sn bilayers to gain a better understanding of what that external limitation may be.