We report the superconductivity of a new quaternary compound ThMo 2 Si 2 C, synthesized with the arc-melting technique. The compound crystallizes in a tetragonal CeCr 2 Si 2 C-type structure with cell parameters of a = 4.2296 Å and c = 5.3571 Å. An interlayer Si-Si covalent bonding is suggested by the atomic distance. The electrical resistivity and magnetic susceptibility measurements indicate a Pauli-paramagnetic metal with dominant electron-electron scattering in the normal-state. Bulk superconductivity at 2.2 K is demonstrated with a dimensionless specificheat jump of ∆C/γ n T = 0.98. The superconducting parameters of the critical magnetic fields, coherence length, penetration depth, and superconducting energy gap are given. Since the discovery of high-temperature cuprate superconductors, the exploration of new superconductors has aroused enormous interest in layered compounds, including RNi 2 B 2 C(R for rare earth), Here, we report the synthesis, structure, and physical properties of a new layered carbide The compound is characterized as a phonon-mediated superconductor with considerable electron-electron interaction. A polycrystalline sample of ThMo 2 Si 2 C was synthesized using powders of Th, Mo(Alfa 99.9%), Si (Alfa 99.99%), and graphite (99.95%) as starting materials. The preparation of thorium metal is described elsewhere. Powder XRD was carried out at room temperature on a PANalytical X-ray diffractometer (model EMPYREAN) with monochromatic Cu Kα1 radiation. The crystal structure data were obtained by Rietveld refinement using the step-scan XRD data with 10 • ≤ 2θ ≤ 120 • , and the diffraction data were refined via the Rietveld method using the program RIETAN-2000. This can be understood as an electron-doping effect, as Th 4+ contributes more electrons than Pr 3+ or Ce 3+ . On the one hand, the electron transferred to the Mo 2 C plane expands the a-axis by elongating the Mo-C bond. On the other hand, the charge transfer strengthens the interlayer Coulomb attraction and results in the shrinkage of the c-axis. We note that similar phenomena are quite common in iron arsenide superconductors, where electron doping can cause a decrease in axial ratio c/a. where Θ R is the Debye temperature obtained from the resistivity measurements and matches very closely with that obtained from the specific heat. The best fit appears while the constant The room temperature susceptibility is 1.38×10 -4 emu•mol -1 . The susceptibility increases gradually upon cooling. We fit the susceptibility data using the extended Curie-Weiss law χ = χ 0 + C/(Tθ) over a temperature region of 10 K ≤ T ≤ 300 K. The derived , and θ = -1.9 K. The results suggest that ThMo 2 Si 2 C is a metal with Pauli paramagnetism. The Curie constant corresponds to a tiny effective magnetic moment of 0.12 μ B /f.u., which may be due to a small amount of paramagnetic impurities. Figure We fit the data using the Ginzburg-Landau theory ) and obtain the lower critical field H c1 (0) = 16 Oe. Then the penetration depth and the Ginzburg-Landau parameter are derived as λ = 5280 Å and κ = 15 from the relation ) and κ = λ/ξ, respectively. Also, the thermodynamic critical field at zero temperature H c (0) is estimated as 183 Oe. Figure where μ * = 0.13 is the Coulomb pseudopotential for polyvalent transition metals. The Wilson ratio (R W ) that reflects the electron-electron correlations in a material can be calculated using the formula , where χ P represents the Pauli paramagnetic susceptibility. Another important parameter characterizing Fermi-liquid properties is the Kadowaki-Woods ratio (R KW = A/γ 2 ), which presents the relationship between the electron-electron scattering rate and the electron-mass renormalization. Note that R KW is sometime material-dependent and sensitive to dimensionality, electron density, multiband effect, and the interlayer hopping integral. lists the refined crystal structure parameters. Table ).