We investigate the Josephson current through a suspended carbon nanotube double quantum dot which, at sufficiently low temperatures, is characterized by the ground state of the electronic subsystem. Depending on parameters like a magnetic field or the inter-dot coupling, the ground state can either be a current-carrying singlet or doublet, or a blockaded triplet state. Since the electron-vibration interaction has been demonstrated to be electrostatically tuneable, we study in particular its effect on the current-phase relation. We show that the coupling to the vibration mode can lift the current-suppressing triplet blockade by inducing a quantum phase transition to a ground state of a different total spin. Our key finding is the development of a triple point in the Josephson current parameterized by the resonator coupling and the Josephson phase. The quantum phase transitions around the triple point are directly accessible through the critical current and resilient to moderately finite temperatures. The proposed setup makes the mechanical degree of freedom part of a superconducting hybrid device which is interesting for ultra-sensitive displacement detectors. The tunnel coupling of quantum dots (QDs) to superconducting leads can open Andreev bound-state channels that may carry a supercurrent 1-4 and, thus, realize Josephson-like junctions empty state Fig. We study the DQD Josephson junction in the limit of a large superconducting gap and consider an Anderson-Holstein type where the occupation imbalance, n L σ -n R σ , of the double quantum dot is coupled with the strength λ to a mechanical mode of frequency ω. Here, a † is the creation operator of the bosonic mode, and n α σ = d † α σ d α σ denotes the fermionic occupation operator, where d † α σ creates an electron on the dot α = L, R with spin σ =↑, ↓. The double quantum dot is modeled by where the first term describes the Zeeman splitting of the dot levels with energy ε due to an applied magnetic field B. The second term characterizes the interdot tunneling with tunneling amplitude t. Each dot α can house up to two electrons of opposite spin which are subject to the intradot Coulomb interaction U C . The term ∝ d † α↑ d † α↓ describes the Andreev tunneling of a Cooper-pair with the rate Γ into dot α, where φ is the Josephson phase. We use the convention σ = ± for the spin up/down and α = ± for the left/right dot. The Josephson current through the system, is given by the derivative of the free energy F = -k B T ln Z with respect to the phase φ. Here, Z = tr e -H S /k B T denotes the partition function of the canonical ensemble. Since the Josephson current is 2π-periodic in φ and antisymmetric in φ → -φ, we restrict the Josephson phase hereafter to the regime 0 ≤ φ < π. The Josephson current is furthermore particle-hole symmetric, ε → 2ε 0 -ε, with ε 0 ≡ -U C /2. At zero temperature, T = 0, Eq. (3) reduces to J = (2e/ħ)∂ φ E GS with E GS being the ground state energy of the system. The diagonalization of the system Hamiltonian H S and, therewith, the calculation of the Josephson current is, however, hindered by the coupling to the oscillator. In the following, we will eliminate the oscillator degrees of freedom and derive an effective low-dimensional Hamiltonian for the electronic subsystem. In order to eliminate the electron-phonon coupling term in the system Hamiltonian, Eq. (1), and eventually the oscillator mode, we introduce the polaron transformation The Bose function n B (ω) = exp ħω/k B T -1 -1 in the last term stems from the thermal average a † a osc of the phonon number operator. It vanishes in the limit of zero temperature. With the aid of the identity n 2 α σ = n α σ and the relation D (x)D (y) = D (x + y) exp[i Im(xy * )], the effective Hamiltonian becomes with the renormalized onsite energies ε = ε -λ 2 /ħω, intradot Coulomb interaction ŪC = U C -2λ 2 /ħω, and tunneling rate Γ = Γ D (2λ/ħω) . The thermal average of the displacement operator is given by 86 D (z) = exp -|z| 2 /2 coth ħω/2k B T . Notice the emergence of the nextto-last term in Eq. ( Its application in the opposite direction, B → -B, would just interchange the spin-up with the spin-down states, but leaves the Josephson current unchanged. The effective Hamiltonian, Eq. ( with E 0 S = ε 0 -Ū -√︁ (ε 0 + Ū) 2 + t 2 , see the Appendix. The derivative in φ of the ground-state energy E GS = min{E S , E D , E T } yields, eventually, the estimate of the Josephson current at zero temperature. First, let us consider the case without the coupling to the resonator, λ = 0, and restrict to zero temperature, k B T = 0. In figure 2, we show the Josephson current J in dependence of the phase φ and choose the parameters such that the QD system is in absence of a magnetic field in a singlet ground state (dashed line). As expected, J is positive in the interval 0 < φ < π, but shows deviations from the pure sinusoidal behavior due to a finite occupation of the nonlocal singlet state |S0 . In the limit of vanishing interdot tunneling, t Γ, the nonlocal singlet occupation and, therewith, these deviations cease. At finite magnetic field the lowest eigenenergies of the singlet (s = 0), the doublet (s = 1/2), and the triplet sector (s = 1) are shifted by -|sB|. Hence, for sufficiently large magnetic field, the system will be in a current suppressing triplet ground state. For intermediate magnetic fields, the Josephson current can feature singlet-doublet (dotted line), triplet-doublet (dotdashed line), and singlet-triplet (solid line) quantum phase transitions, whereby the doublet ground state reverses the flow of Cooper pairs, J < 0. In the following, we study the effect of a finite resonator coupling λ and focus on the configuration exhibiting a triplet- doublet transition (dot-dashed line in Fig. We will demonstrate hereafter, that such triple point also manifests in the critical current J c = max φ J (φ), which is experimentally easier accessible. Hence, we depict in Fig. To better understand the nature of these kinks, we inspect for B = 0.8Γ in panel (b) the corresponding lowest eigenvalues of each sector. One sees, indeed, that the left kink is associated to the triple point and that the right kink corresponds to a transition from a mixed singlet-doublet ground state to a pure singlet ground state. In the inset of panel (a), we show the coupling strength λ tri at which, for a given magnetic field B, a triple point emerges. The required coupling strength λ tri increases above B c with the magnetic field B (black solid line). Below B c , however, no triple point is possible. The dashed gray line indicates the estimated condition for the triple point given in the Appendix. It agrees well with the full calculation, but slightly underestimates the critical Zeeman splitting B c . While the phase transitions at zero temperature are driven by quantum fluctuations, thermal fluctuations additionally contribute at finite temperature. Their main effect is to smooth out these phase transitions, which is already observable at typical base temperatures of T ≈ 15-50 mK being small against Γ/k B (ranging from 0.1-1 meV/k B ≈ 1-10 K). The Josephson transport through a carbon nanotube DQD circuit has been investigated. We have shown that the total spin of the DQD system characterizes at zero temperature its ground state and, therewith, the Josephson current through the circuit. For the latter, we have derived an analytical estimate. While singlet and doublet ground states entail a current phase relation of opposite sign, a triplet ground state rather suppresses the Cooper-pair tunneling. We have demonstrated that a finite coupling to the resonator can, indeed, induce quantum phase transitions between these ground states and lift the triplet blockade. A large resonator coupling eventually drives the system into a singlet ground state. In particular, we found that the resonator can induce a triple point in the Josephson current and analyzed under which conditions this happens. Further, we have seen that such triple point also leaves it's footprint in the critical current. For experimentally relevant temperatures, thermal fluctuations occur in addition to the quantum Hamiltonian basis ones. Overall, a finite temperature reduces the supercurrent and washes out the triple point and, hence, the quantum phase transitions. The characteristic transport features, however, still remain. The proposed hybrid device is an ideal platform for accessing the ultimate limit of a mechanical resonator that is coupled to Cooper pairs traversing a Josephson junction. It not only constitutes a quantum hybrid device based on the fundamental coupling between mechanical and electronic degrees of freedom but also paves the way for ultra-sensitive displacement detectors. A future perspective might be to go beyond the approximation of a thermal resonator state and investigate time-dependent dynamics that is controlled by quantum fluctuations. satisfying E 0 2 , E 0 0 > E 0 1 > E 0 S for t, Ū > 0 and ε 0 < 0. Hereafter, we will assume that t where E S (0) ≡ E 0 S . The Taylor coefficients can be related to the characteristic polynomial P( Γ, λ) ≡ det H Γ -λ1 1 4 which, in particular, vanishes at the eigenvalue λ = E S ( Γ). Since also its derivatives have to vanish, one finds from the relation 0 = ∂ΓP( Γ, E S ( Γ)) that E S (0) is zero. Similarly, one finds from the second derivative in Γ of the characteristic equation, 0 = ∂ 2 Γ P( Γ, E S ( Γ)) and under consideration of E S (0) = 0 the relation E S (0) = -P (2,0) (0, E 0 S ) P (0, . (A7) In the last step, we evaluated the derivatives of the characteristic polynomial, exploiting that the prefactor r (λ) ≡ (λ -2ε 0 ) (λ + 2 Ū) -t 2 vanishes at λ = E 0 S . Thus, equation (A6) yields the approximation for the lowest eigenvalue of the singlet sector. Finally, one obtains from the derivative of the groundstate energy E GS = min{E S , E D , E T } with respect to the Josephson phase φ the estimate of the Josephson current Eq. ( which, added up, sin 2 (φ/2) + cos 2 (φ/2) = 1, yield a condition for the triple point. J-D. Pillet, C. H. L. Quay, P. Morfin, C. Bena, A. Levy Yeyati, and P. Joyez, "Andreev bound states in supercurrent-carrying carbon nanotubes revealed," Nat. Phys. 6, 965 (2010). Eduardo J. H. Lee, Xiaocheng Jiang, Manuel Houzet, Ramon Aguado, Charles M. Lieber, and Silvano De Franceschi, "Spin-resolved Andreev levels and parity crossings in hybrid superconductor-semiconductor nanostructures," Nat. Nanotechnol. 9,79 (2014 ). 3 Sun-Yong Hwang, Rosa López, and David Sánchez, "Cross thermoelectric coupling in normal-superconductor quantum dots," Phys. Rev. B 91, 104518 ( 2015).4 Sun-Yong Hwang, David Sánchez, and Rosa López, "Nonlinear electric and thermoelectric Andreev transport through a hybrid quantum dot coupled to ferromagnetic and superconducting