Recent advances in optical magnetometry have achieved record sensitivity at both macro-and nano-scale. Combined with high bandwidth and non-cryogenic operation, this has enabled many applications. By comparison, microscale optical magnetometers have been constrained to sensitivities five orders-of-magnitude worse than the stateof-the-art. Here, we report an ambient optical micromagnetometer operating for the first time in the picoTesla range, a more than three order-of-magnitude advance on previous results. Unlike other ultrasensitive optical magnetometers, the device operates at earth field, achieves tens of MHz bandwidth, and is integrated and fiber coupled. Combined with 60 μm spatial resolution and mi-croWatt optical power requirements, these unique capabilities open up a broad range of applications including cryogen-free and microfluidic magnetic resonance imaging, and electromagnetic interference-free investigation of spin physics in condensed matter systems such as semiconductors and ultracold atom clouds. Cryogenic SQUIDs are the favoured magnetometer for most high precision applications, combining excellent sensitivity with reliability. However, optical magnetometers are rapidly becoming an attractive alternative due to their non-cryogenic operation, ultrahigh sensitivity, low power requirements, and potential for high measurement bandwidth In this article we present a microscale cavity optomechanical magnetometer which uniquely combines picoTesla sensitivity, operation in ambient conditions, bandwidth in the tens of MHz, and the ability to operate at and above earth field. Furthermore, these results are achieved in an integrated all-optical ultralow power device. A peak sensitivity of 200 pT Hz -1/2 is achieved, three orders of magnitude bet- ter than the previous best ambient optical magnetometer of similar size, with nonlinear frequency mixing providing nan-oTesla sensitivity down to frequencies as low as 2 Hz, limited by the bandwidth of the measurement electronics rather than the sensor itself. The six-order-of-magnitude dynamic range achieved is superior to the best NV Cavity optomechanical magnetometers were proposed recently Fig. The sensitivity of the final magnetometer is characterized using the experimental setup shown in Fig. The measured magnetic field sensitivity of the device is shown in Fig. The unique combination of high sensitivity, high bandwidth, and electromagnetic interference-free operation in a microscale device, could facilitate practical applications in areas such as imaging The dynamic range of the sensor was tested by varying the amplitude of the signal field over several orders of magnitude. As shown in Fig. Many significant applications require sensitivity to mag- netic fields in the Hz to kHz frequency regime, including magnetic anomaly detection (MAD) Fig. where x is the offset of the length of the domain pair away from equilibrium, γ is the dissipation rate of mechanical energy, ω m is the mechanical resonance frequency due to the elasticity of the material, and B = B sig cos ωt + B RF cos Ωt is the applied magnetic field with B sig and B RF being the amplitude of the low frequency signal field and radio frequency drive fields, respectively. The right-hand-side describes the forcing due to the magnetic field, and exhibits a linear term with coefficient c 0 , responsible for our linear magnetometry results, and higher order nonlinear terms with coefficients c 1 and c 2 . These higher order terms cause nonlinear mixing between magnetic fields at different frequencies, and have been used previously in magnetostrictive magnetometers to achieve low frequency sensitivity The sensitivity of the nonlinear mode of operation was determined in a similar way as that for the linear mode of operation, but this time using the permanent bias magnet to maximize the nonlinear response of the device. Fig. To conclude, we have developed an optical micromagnetometer that achieves sensitivity in the picoTesla range. The magnetometer is all-optical, requires only microWatts of optical power, and has higher dynamic range and bandwidth than any previously reported precision microscale magnetometer. By leveraging inherent mechanical nonlinearities, we achieve nanoTesla range sensitivity at frequencies as low as 2 Hz. These capabilities provide the opportunity for new applications such as medical diagnosis with microscale samples using microfluidic nuclear magnetic resonance and microscale MRI 