V 3 Si thin films are known to be superconducting with transition temperatures up to 15 K, depending on the annealing temperature and the properties of the substrate underneath. Here we investigate the film structural properties with the prospect of further integration in silicon technology for quantum circuits. Two challenges have been identified: (i) the large difference in thermal expansion rate between V 3 Si and the Si substrate leads to large thermal strains after thermal processing, and (ii) the undesired silicide phase VSi 2 forms when V 3 Si is deposited on silicon. The first of these is studied by depositing layers of 200 nm V 3 Si on wafers of sapphire and oxidized silicon, neither of which react with the silicide. These samples are then heated and cooled between room temperature and 860 °C, during which insitu XRD measurements are performed. Analysis reveals a highly non-linear stress development during heating with contributions from crystallization and subsequent grain growth, as well as the thermal expansion mismatch between silicide and substrate, while the film behaves thermoelastically during cooling. The second challenge is explored by depositing films of 20, 50, 100 and 200 nm of V 3 Si on bulk silicon. For each thickness, six samples are prepared, which are then annealed at temperatures between 500 and 750 °C, followed by measurements of their resistivity, residual resistance ratio and superconducting critical temperature. A process window is identified for silicide thicknesses of at least 100 nm, within which a trade-off needs to be made between the quality of the V 3 Si film and its consumption by the formation of VSi 2 . Quantum technologies based on solid state matter are now spreading from academic laboratories to the most advanced semiconductor foundries In systems where reservoirs of both Si and V are available, the undesired phase VSi 2 is expected to form, which is both the first phase to nucleate Besides causing the buildup of large tensile stresses, thermal processing of V 3 Si on silicon substrates also leads to the formation of VSi 2 . The presence of VSi 2 at the interface between the superconducting V 3 Si and the Si substrate may not be a problem per se. It is imperative, however, that a layer of V 3 Si with a thickness on the order of its superconducting coherence length remains. The simultaneous formation of the two silicide phases after the deposition of amorphous V 3 Si on bulk silicon wafers is discussed in section III. We find that when 50 nm or less of V 3 Si is deposited, no superconductivity is observed after crystallization annealing. For layers of 100 or 200 nm, the superconducting critical temperature of the film is found to initially improve with annealing temperature, until at some point superconductivity disappears when all V 3 Si is consumed by a growing layer of VSi 2 . Sputtering a V 3 Si target leads to the deposition of an amorphous layer of the desired intermetallic compound which presents superconductivity at temperatures of around 1 K, far below that of the crystalline form (measured but not shown). In order to nucleate the crystalline V 3 Si phase, heat has to be applied. During the experiment described in the present section, the V 3 Si was isolated from any potential element (V and Si especially) that would affect the crystallization phenomenon. Thus, depositing the intermetallic compound on oxides (silica and sapphire) offers the possibility to study the isolated film by itself, affected by the substrate only mechanically. The evolution of the stresses in the V 3 Si film as a function of the annealing temperature was monitored by in-situ Xray diffraction (XRD) using a Smartlab Rigaku X-ray diffractometer equipped with a copper (Cu K α ) source, a punctual detector and a DHS 1100 Anton Paar furnace using a nitrogen atmosphere at a pressure slightly above ambient, i.e. 1.25 bar, to avoid atmospheric contamination. Layers of 200 nm V 3 Si were deposited on two types of substrates: oxidized silicon with a 20 nm thick surface oxide, and sapphire. Both in-plane and out-of-plane XRD measurements were performed on different samples of each substrate. For both measurements, a parallel slit analyzer with an angular aperture of 0.114 • for out-of-plane measurement and 1 • for in-plane ones, is positioned in front of the detector in order to be insensitive to peak shift due to the radial displacement of the sample induced by thermal expansion of the sample holder. This way, the observed peak shift is only related to a real d-spacing variation. For both measurements, 2θ -ω scans around the V 3 Si (210) close to 2θ = 43 • were performed. Profiles were acquired while heating the samples from 50 °C up to 860 °C and then during cooling from 860 °C to room temperature. The temperature profile versus time is given in Fig. Peak fitting was performed with the HighScore Plus software from PANalytical, from which the d-spacing and the integral breadth of the V 3 Si (210) peak were considered. The V 3 Si crystallization followed by in-situ XRD is shown as a contour map for the out-of-plane measurements in Fig. where σ is the in-plane bi-axial state of stress, ε ψ and d ψ are the strain and the d-spacing along the direction ψ, respectively, d 0 is the stress-free d-spacing and ψ is the angle between the considered direction and the normal to the surface. and the stress-free d-spacing, d 0 , by In Fig. Indeed, for the in-plane setup, the IB decreased down to 1°a t 650°C and stayed constant during further annealing. This value of 1°is the instrumental width given by a silicon reference powder, which implies that the in-plane crystallite size is very large above 650 °C and can no longer be estimated from IB broadening. As we observe an increase of the crystallite size out of plane up to 860 °C, we may assume that the lateral crystallite size also continues to grow up to this temperature. In the case of the out-of-plane measurements, the setup was more accurate, and the estimated crystallite size is about 30 nm for the highest annealing temperature. It can clearly be concluded that there is a strong anisotropy in grain size on both substrates. On both substrates, the in-plane IB stabilizes at 650 °C due to saturation of the instrument resolution, while the detected out-of-plane crystallite size increases continuously to the maximum temperature of the experiment. During cooling, the stress evolution exhibits a linear behavior, in agreement with a pure thermoelastic stress induced by the TEC mismatch between the film and the substrate. This is confirmed by looking at the in-plane lattice parameter evolution with temperature (Fig In-plane lattice variation (‰) (2) Integral breadth of Si (3.6 × 10 -6 < α < 4.3 × 10 -6 °C-1 in the temperature range 200-800 °C) A second set of experiments was performed to study the stability of the superconducting V 3 Si phase on a silicon substrate. After sputter deposition of V 3 Si on a silicon substrate, an intermixing layer of Si and V can be expected to form where the atomic concentration of vanadium ranges from zero in the substrate to 3/4 within the deposited layer. Above this mixed zone, the precise matching of the deposited atomic ratio to the stoichiometry of V 3 Si will prevent the formation of VSi 2 . Within the mixed zone however, VSi 2 nucleation is likely to occur. Since this mixed zone is interfaced from below by pure silicon, and from above by V 3 Si, its disappearance or consumption by V 3 Si formation would require that V move upwards while leaving progressively purified Si behind. Such movement is prevented by the chemical potential, as the thermodynamically stable state in the presence of excess silicon is for the vanadium to be bound in VSi 2 Once VSi 2 and V 3 Si are both present, competition will arise between the further growth of either silicide. While V 3 Si (V 0.75 Si 0.25 ) has a larger effective heat of formation (EHF) from pure V and Si per mole of atoms involved in total Si Si (V 0.33 Si 0.67 ), of which three times as many molecules can be formed for a fixed amount of vanadium. When V 3 Si interfaces with silicon, it is therefore energetically favorable for the following reaction to occur (EHF indicated below), where an energy of 181 kJ/mol is gained per mole of V 3 Si that is transformed. Scanning electron microscope (SEM) images of the growth of the VSi 2 phase during thermal processing are shown in Fig. To study this interplay, a different set of samples was prepared in addition to those discussed in section II. Layers with thicknesses of 20, 50, 100 and 200 nm of V 3 Si were deposited onto 200 mm (100)-oriented silicon wafers from a compound V 3 Si target using RF magnetron sputtering equip-ment. This target had a measured silicon content of between 22.7±0.2 at.% (WDXRF) and 25.7±0.2 at.% (supplier data), which could further differ from the final Si content in the deposited layer by 1 at.% At 500 °C, the resistivity of the thinner layers (20, 50 and 100 nm) was found to be comparable to that of as-deposited amorphous V 3 Si (180(10) μΩ cm), while it exceeded this value by multiple orders of magnitude for the thicker layer of 200 nm (out of range for our instruments), as shown in Fig. Smaller samples of 4 × 10 mm were then wire bonded for four-point resistance measurements during both cooling and heating between 300 and 2 K in a Physical Properties Measurement System (PPMS). The residual resistance ratio of each sample was calculated as the ratio between the resistances at 260 K and 20 K, shown in Fig. Instead of forming vanadium silicide by reactive diffusion, V 3 Si was directly sputtered from a compound target at the right stoichiometry, giving the advantages of having a sharp interface between the deposited layer and the substrate, and requiring no solid-state reaction to reach the desired phase. However, the interface must be better controlled in terms of impurities, and the V 3 Si is amorphous after deposition. First, the crystallization was studied on 2 types of substrate, oxidized silicon with a 20 nm thick SiO 2 surface layer and monocrystalline sapphire (Al 2 O 3 ). It was clear that no reaction occurred with either of these substrates at any temperature. Earlier work showed that the mismatch in TEC with the substrates strongly impacts the stress built up during the growth of V 3 Si, which can lower the superconducting critical temperature Layer crystallization started at 500 °C, leading to high tensile stress on either substrate up to 650 °C. This stress then relaxed with increasing temperature, both due to atomic diffusion and the relatively low TEC of the substrates. From 650 °C to around 700 °C, an increase in tensile stress together with a decrease in the out-of-plane IB can be explained by grain growth in fair agreement with the model of P. Chaudari Superconducting thin films are of increasing interest as solid-state quantum technologies are scaled up. To facilitate large-scale fabrication, as well as co-integration with classical electronics, it is important that the choice of superconducting material is compatible with CMOS technology. This report addresses two challenges for the integration of V 3 Si, which as a silicide with a superconducting critical temperature of up to 17 K 7,8 is a natural candidate in this context. The first is the reduction in critical temperature due to thermal strain. While V 3 Si is compatible with the oxides of silicon and aluminum, both currently used in VLSI devices, it is necessary to mitigate the stresses induced by the interplay between crystallization, grain growth and TEC mismatch with the substrate. It is found that the final stress obtained on either substrate depends strongly on the thermal budget that the samples are subjected to, identifying annealing as a key process step to control the critical temperature of the film. Second, thermal processing also provides a means of controlling the formation of the undesired phase VSi 2 on HFcleaned silicon substrates. For V 3 Si films with a thickness of 100 nm or more, there exists a process window where it can be crystallized before consumption by the VSi 2 phase, with a temperature range that depends on the thickness of the film. Direct applications of V 3 Si could be in high-frequency resonators on oxides or oxidized substrates, where the impact of a potential stress residual on the quality factor has to be evaluated. A further interest would be to fabricate Josephson junctions, where the weak link could either be an oxide in a vertical geometry, or silicon in a planar junction. In the latter case, a Josephson field effect transistor could be fabricated by forming V 3 Si in the source and drain contacts of a CMOS transistor, in which case one is faced with a trade-off between improving the V 3 Si critical temperature and limiting the growth of the VSi 2 phase.