Periodic or gradient subwavelength structures are basic configurations of photonic crystals and metamaterials. While the numerical simulations predict trivial loss, but the fabricated photonic crystal waveguides by E-beam lithography and standard dry etching shows unacceptable loss beyond 10 dB. Nanofabrication variation introduced geometric inhomogeneity is considered as the primary cause of the deleterious performance. The deep UV photolithography in CMOS foundry is a large-scale parallel processing, which can significantly suppress the fabricationrelated inhomogeneous offsets and thus the optical linear loss. Here we demonstrate ultra-low loss photonic crystal waveguides with a 300 mm multi-project wafer run. For sub-millimetre long photonic crystal W1 waveguides, consistent performance of 2 dB total loss and 40 dB extinction ratio are observed across different dies. The capability of manipulating photons within ultracompact dimensions makes photonic crystal (PhC) an appealing building block for small footprint and energy-efficient photonic components PhC line-defect waveguides (WGs) are compact implementation of slow-light optical delay lines Nanomanufacturing by the foundry processing dramatically expands the scalability of silicon photonics for technical transitions to industrial applications In this work, we demonstrate low-loss PhC WGs manufactured by silicon photonics foundry. The total loss, including both insertion loss and the propagation loss over 0.2-mm-long PhC WG, is measured to be around 2 dB in multiple devices across different dies. The extinction ratio between the pass and stop band is measured to be around 40 dB. The minimal tunneling photons in the stopband indicate excellent geometry homogeneity. Those devices are manufactured through a multi-project wafer run on a 300-mm wafer and post-processed in the local cleanroom for the undercut. With the carefully designed undercut profile, the two-stage three-dimensional coupler between channel WGs on buried oxide and suspended PhC membrane shows less than 1 dB insertion loss. The superior device performance (Table Layout Preparation: The W1 PhC WG is designed by the Finite-difference time-domain method Fabrication: Those DUV photolithography defined PhC devices are manufactured as an MPW passive run at AIM Photonics. The PhC device in Fig. The PhC layout was firstly defined in CSAR 6200.09 positive resist layer by using a Vistec EBPG5200 electron beam lithography system with 100 kV acceleration voltage, followed by resist development and single-step dry etch procedures. Measurement: We measured the transmission spectrum and insertion loss of the PhC WG through the devices by a coupled fiber system. A continuous-wave laser tunable from 1480 nm to 1580 nm (with a spectral resolution of 10 pm) is directed to the input grating coupler by single-mode fibers. The signal from the output grating coupler is connected to a photodetector. Tingyi Gu -Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Delaware, Delaware, United States; *E-mail: tingyigu@udel.edu F. W., Y. X., and D. M. performed post-processing and measurements. T. K. and T. L. prepared the TAPEout. F. W., Y. X., D. M., and T. G. analyzed the device results. Y. X., F. W., and T.G. wrote the manuscript, and all authors discussed the results and commented on the manuscript. † Y. X., F. W., and D. M. contributed equally to this work. The manufacturing process information is not available according to the non-disclosure agreement between the authors' institution and AIM Photonics. 