This paper solves in closed form the system of ODEs ruling the 2D motion of a gravity free double pendulum (GFDP), not subjected to any force. In such a way its movement is governed by the initial conditions only. The relevant strongly non linear ODEs have been put back to hyperelliptic quadratures which, through the Integral Representation Theorem (IRT), are driven to the Lauricella hypergeometric functions. We compute time laws and trajectories of both point masses forming the GFDP in explicit closed form. Suitable sample problems are carried out in order to prove the method effectiveness. The system consists of two point-masses m1 and m2 moving over an horizontal fixed plane, where the distance between a fixed point P (called pivot) and m1 and the distance between m1 and m2 are fixed and equal to l1 and l2 respectively: we can think to a couple of massless beams. In absence of gravity and any other external force, the motion is driven by the four initial conditions only. Assuming the pivot as a pole and as a polar axis the horizontal line passing through it, the planar line Γ referred to such a frame will denote the m2 absolute trajectory given in polar coordinates ρ and μ. The selected lagrangian coordinates are the angle θ (between the polar axis and the first beam), and ψ ( the angle between the first and second beam) both positive counterclockwise. Within the nonlinear systems there is a hierarchy of complexity: the simple pendulum of small amplitude has harmonic oscillations and a period independent from the amplitude; in the case of large amplitudes, such dependence occurs, but the regularity of motion holds. The heavy double pendulum in the case of large amplitudes changes radically with increasing energy and the oscillations become chaotic. In As far as we are concerned, the literature on the GFDP non linear ODE system does not appear to have further items. Let us now do an overview of the main pros and cons of our approach. First, all solutions are formally given in closed form requiring a numerical support only restricted to the Fourier series expansion coefficients, whose only few terms are necessary for an acceptable accuracy. Second, being the solution provided in terms of sines and cosines, it can easy handled for each computational necessity. But the highest score is the inversion, namely to have finally obtained the motion time laws in explicit way. Coming to the cons aspects, we based on Lauricella functions which are not available in software packages. We then used their series expansion based on some our special equivalence relationship we will describe in a next paper. The problem of GFDP is of high interest in the field of engineering and robotics (some advanced techniques are presented in Setting ψ = φ -θ, ν = m1/m2, β = l1/l2 and γ = (ν + 1)β 2 + 1 we get: The conjugate moment relevant to the coordinate θ will be a motion first integral, say A: Since no dissipation occurs, then the hamiltonian H is also constant, say B; the coupled differential equations system is: Solving (3.1) for ψ and θ we obtain the differential equations of motion. The first is: and: Performing the change of variable: 2) becomes: with: Dividing (3.3) to (3.2) and making the same change of variable (3.4), we obtain θ as a function of y = cos ψ: where: Notice that ζ > 1 always; indeed the contrary would lead to: which cannot be true. In order to complete the function θ computing, the further integral has to be carried out: Our main trouble is due to its upper limit y, namely the inverse of the hyperelliptic integral (3.5) which therefore becomes our next step. The three allowed motions The highest possible span of y is of course y ∈ [-1, 1]; nevertheless it will be narrowed in some cases. Furthermore, by its definition δ > 1: then these roots lie outside the y-domain. As a consequence, the only root really influencing all the features of the whole GFDP motion is the non dimensional parameter ǫ. We see 4 cases at all: , so that the angle ψ cannot assume all the possible values. Anyway y is time-periodical and its period will be given by: , namely the angle ψ has some different restrictions and the y time-period will be: 5 First motion: 0 < ǫ < 1 In such a case y ∈ [ǫ, 1] and we have: in order to solve (5.1) with ǫ ∈ [0, 1] in closed form, let us pass from s to u through a first change of variable: i.e. we move to ǫ the origin of the variable of integration; let us now define: with: So that: where: In order to solve (5.2), let us resort to a further change from u to v: u = λv leading to: After some algebraic manipulations we arrive at: The reader (5.3) is referred to the IRT (9.1) for the Lauricella hypergeometric functions. We are faced to a F (4) Many properties of hypergeometric functions can be found in where: What above provides time as a hypergeometric function of four variable-ratios all related to y and then to ψ: this is the required t = t(y). But (3.7) requires y, so that the last outcome has to be inverted. Of course the period T1 could be carried out by means of (5.4), namely F D , nevertheless we preferred the following path employing F D which is simpler and faster. We have: By means of (5.3) we get: The Fourier-approach followed hereinafter has been successfully tested in our previous paper where T is the period of the function to be expanded. The a.m. coefficients have to be computed as: Let us define the function: , -1 To compute a0, we do the change: Proceeding as previously shown we have: Now we define the function: Let it be: t = w(y0), y0 = cos(ψ0) and ẏ0 = -sin(ψ0) ψ0 < 0 Considering a period, the piece-wise defined function which describes the t = t(y) is: Marking as t ′ the prime derivative of t with respect to y, we get: It is easy to see that adding the three equations, the sum of the square brackets is zero. Furthermore: sin(ξnt1(s)) = sin(ξn t) cos(ξnw(s)) -cos(ξn t) sin(ξnw(s)) sin(ξnt2(s)) = sin(ξn t) cos(ξnw(s)) + cos(ξn t) sin(ξnw(s)) sin(ξnt3(s)) = sin(ξn( t + T )) cos(ξnw(s)) -cos(ξn( t + T )) sin(ξnw(s)) But: sin(ξn( t + T )) = sin(ξn t) cos(ξnT ) + cos(ξn t) sin(ξnT ) = sin(ξn t) cos(ξn( t + T )) = cos(ξn t) cos(ξnT ) -sin(ξn t) sin(ξnT ) = cos(ξn t) so that: sin(ξnt3(s)) = sin(ξn t) cos(ξnw(s)) -cos(ξn t) sin(ξnw(s)) By substitution, we obtain: ân = -2 cos(ξn t) ξn 1 ǫ sin(ξnw(s))ds (5.7) Minding that w(s) is the hypergeometric Lauricella function (5.6), the previous formula provides a numerical recipe in order to compute the an coefficients as required. After defining bn = T bn/2, an analogous procedure leads to: bn = -2 sin(ξn t) ξn 1 ǫ sin(ξnw(s))ds so that a link between the coefficients is found as: bn = tan(ξn t)ân The expansion of y(t) in Fourier series therefore results to be: In such a way cos ψ = y has been found as a function of time. By (3.7) we can evaluate the integral I2(y) We get: where: In such a way θ has been computed as a function of time. For the sample problem we assume: Starting from its initial value of y at t0 = 0, the time line is run in the sense decided by the sign of dt arriving to its minimum value ǫ and afterwards grows to unity as already stated as characteristic of the first possible motion. With reference to Figure The gravity free double pendulum, GFDP, has two degrees of freedom, say the functions θ(t) and ψ(t) whose detection led us to hyperelliptic integrals with the critical role of a non dimensional parameter ǫ which holds all the system data. In such a way the GFDP will behave differently according to the ǫ spans. Three possible ranges have been found for it and for only one of them the angle ψ will be free of describing all values of its turn. The a.m. integrals, thanks to the hypergeometric functions IRT, have been expressed in terms of different Lauricella functions. Such a representation is notoriously true if and only if a special constraint on the state variables is met; then, by means of a suitable change of variable, we make sure that such a condition is fully satisfied. Once the function t = t(ψ) has been inverted via the Fourier series, we arrive at cos ψ(t) as a Fourier series of time. The function θ is obtained solving a further hyperelliptic integral by means of a higher degree Lauricella function holding ψ too; in such a way θ comes as function of ψ and -thanks to the a.m. Fourier expansion-of time. These Fourier coefficients have been computed numerically, and mean the only one aspect of our work not expressed in analytic closed form. All kinematic elements of the system are then computable, providing a complete knowledge of the time laws for m1 and m2 and then of their trajectories, Figure Let us analyze the Γ polar plots relevant to the proposed sample problems, obtained by means of the closed form formulae given above and tested by the ODEs numerical treatment. The common value selected for each of the motions is θ0 = π/8. The starting point is redmarked while the last computed is blue. The time duration is 10 seconds for each simulation. Unlikely to ψ, there is no restriction on θ so that the trajectory of the point mass m1 has an angular period of 2π whilst this is not valid for ψ which varies between arccos(ǫ) and 2π in the first motion and between arccos(-|ǫ|) and 2π in the second. Generally speaking, the above periods of m1 (angle θ) and m2 (angle ψ) will not be commensurable each other: so that the global motion will not be periodic almost for a reasonable amount of time of simulation. What we found in this paper is then resembling what happens in celestial mechanics. When to the basic attraction law 1/r 2 is added the bulge effect of the attractor, the original elliptic trajectory of the attracted body is forced to rotate around the attractor, so that its resulting orbit consists of nothing but a sequence of not overlapping ellipses shifted each other, what is called "rosette". But in our cases of motion we do not have any regular micro-orbits such those described above, being the single not overlapped loops quite irregular, so that our rosette appears to be a bit deformed. Anyway, in the third case its aspect becomes more regular when ψ also is free of taking each possible value like θ. Hereinafter an outline of the Lauricella hypergeometric functions. The first hypergeometric historical series appeared in the Wallis's Arithmetica infinitorum (1656), the general expression of 2F1 is: A meaningful contribution on various 2F1 topics is ascribed to Euler in three papers (1 -xu) b du really due to Legendre The hypergeometric functions introduced and investigated by G. Lauricella (1893) The Lauricella functions -in lack of specific SW packages -have been implemented in this work thanks to some reduction theorems which will form the object of a next paper. Here it will be enough to anticipate the following. All the Lauricella series are multi-valued power series whose coefficients are other series nested each other: so that e.g. F (3) D consists of a triple infinite power series. But-by a proper work in re-scaling indices and other manipulations-it can be reduced to a single series whose coefficients are depending on a convenient 2F1 function for which SW packages are by long time available. Furthermore F (5) D has been led to a simple power series whose coefficients depend on 3 computable blocks each of them holds again the a.m. Gauss hypergeometric 2F1. All above really helps such functions management increasing the series convergence speed.