A simple way of simulating transmission lines using a free software is presented. In order to validate the results, the effective value of reflection coefficient for voltage wave in a quarter wavelength line was determined trough a transient analysis, for an incident voltage sin-type continuous wave front. The simulations presented reproduced the results previously found analytically. n this work, a simple method of simulating transmission lines is presented, in such way some basic concepts may be better apprehended by the student of this subject. To validate the results achieved, theoretical results found in Transmission line may be defined at a basic level as the device that transmits electromagnetic energy between two points in a controlled way. This transmission is guided trough a physical medium formed by two conductors separated by an insulator material, from a source energy generator to a load. Ideally, all of the energy generated at the source would efficiently reach the load and be consumed by it. Unfortunately, this is hardly the case. The transmission line always suffers from loses due to the attenuation of the conductors, a topic that will not studied here. Also, the energy reaching the load is generally not totally absorbed, producing unwanted reflections. The energy in a line is transmitted through voltage and current waves. Therefore, an energy reflection means that voltage and current waves are returning back to the generator. It is well known that when two counter propagating waves interact, the result is a stationary wave pattern, which has maximum and minimum amplitude values. These extremes values remain at the same point in space. A stationary voltage wave in a transmission line may origin some problems; one of them is that the maximum voltage value of the wave, which is the sum of the incident and the reflected amplitudes waves, may damage the insulator material trough dielectric breakdown, producing a short circuit in the line. Also, the energy returning back could damage the generator. For these reasons, methods to avoid energy reflections in transmission lines are important topics in textbooks on electric engineering. When these reflections are absent, or were avoided using some technique, it is said that the line is matched to the load. Now, a brief introduction to the basics concepts on transmission lines is presented. In figure 1 a basic schematic is shown. There will be considered sin-type voltage waves, characterized by the amplitude V0, and the frequency f. With the knowledge of the electric permittivity ’üź, and magnetic permeability ’üŁ, of the dielectric (insulator) medium of the line, the wavelength ’ü¼, corresponding to the voltage wave can be determined by ’ü¼ = 1/f(’üź’üŁ) -1/2 which is defined as the impedance calculated as the quotient between the voltage and the current propagating by the line, taking account the waves in just one sense of propagation. The quantity ZL is the load impedance. In this work, there will be considered lines without looses, i.e., Z0 real. The reflection of the voltage wave at the load can be quantified by the reflection coefficient of voltage, defined as the quotient between the amplitude of the reflected to the incident voltage wave Where VR and VI stands for the amplitudes of voltage waves reflected and incident, respectively, measured at the load. It can be seen from Eq. ( In most of the textbooks treating on transmission lines, the quarter wave line, or quarter wave transformer, is presented as one of the main devices used to avoid unwanted energy reflection from a load. The characteristic impedance of such a line is given by The physics length of this line is ’ü¼/4. This line must be connected between the transmission line and the load. Also, this line can be used to match the impedance between two lines of different characteristics impedances. By the other side, the characteristic impedance of the transmission line, Z0, is different from Z0’ü¼/4. Applying Eq. (1) to the junction point between the transmission line and the quarter wavelength line, it can easily seen that the value of ’ü▓V will not be zero and, at a first sight, the original purpose of the quarter wavelength line would not have been fulfilled, i.e., there will be reflected voltage waves returning back to the generator. Textbooks usually used in undergraduate courses One of aims of this work is to clarify this point trough a transient analysis, taking account partial voltage reflections and transmission at the junction point between the transmission line and the quarter wavelength line, and considering also the accumulated phase shift of the voltage wave due to propagation trough the line. This analysis is applied to a particular example of a quarter wave line, given in ref It is also presented a simulation, using the LT spiceIV software [6], in which the transmission line was modeled as a cascade of series resistor and parallel inductors, in which all the results obtained were reproduced. This simulation may be of great interest for students, since the process of modeling the transmission line helps to obtain a deeper understanding of the basics concepts. This work is written in a pedagogical style, and the principal aim is to serve as a complement for undergraduate students of a course on transmission line theory. It will be studied specifically the example given in The transmission of the voltage wave at some interface is quantified trough the transmission coefficient for tension, defined as the ratio of the transmitted voltage amplitude to the incident voltage amplitude, and is given by Now, the calculations of reflection coefficients at interface "A" will be detailed: The expression (1) was used, and the quarter wave line plays the role of "load". The arrow indicates the sense of propagation of the reflected wave. This fact must be considered because, at point "A", part of the wave will also be transmitted. This transmitted part will be partially reflected (and transmitted too) at interface "B". After that, the partial reflection coming from point "B" will be partially reflected at point "A". To take account quantitatively the reflection on "A" of a wave arriving from the right, the reflection coefficient is calculated as: Where, again, the arrow indicates the sense of propagation of the reflected wave. In this case, the 100 ’üŚ line plays now the role of "load". The transmissions coefficients are calculated using Eq. ( Neither the coefficients ’ü┤ were calculated, since it is not expected waves coming from the right at point "B", as the load RL is effectively matched with the 400 ’üŚ line ( 0 ’ĆĮ ’é¼ ’ü▓ at the resistor). Once the coefficients have been calculated, there will be analyzed the values of steady-state voltage values at each side of the quarter wave line. How is the steady-state value of the amplitude voltage wave of at the left of point "A" (i.e., at the 100 ’üŚ line), calculated? This value will be called VFA and is expressed as a series. As there is a continuous wave-front with amplitude V0 coming from the left, V0 is the first term of the series. When this wave-front arrives at point "A", there will be a partial reflection, and the value of reflected amplitude voltage is , this being the second term of the series. At this point, there will be also a partial transmission of voltage wave, whose corresponding amplitude is This wave, arriving at point "B" will be partially reflected and, returning to point "A", partially transmitted (and reflected too). The transmitted part, which is the third term of the series, is , where the exponential term describes the phase shift of the voltage wave going from "A" to "B", and then returning all the way back. The factor ’üó = 2’ü░/’ü¼ represents the propagation constant of the wave. The linear distance is, clearly, 2’ü¼/4. The reflected part is , this wave will be also partially reflected and transmitted at "B" and "A", respectively, and contributes to the final value of VFA with the quantity . From this point on, the same reasoning must be applied, and the stationary value for the amplitude voltage at the left of "A" can be expressed as the infinite series: ...) A closer look to Eq. ( . Where the term in brackets can be easily recognized as the geometric series, 1 + x + x 2 + x 3 +.., which converges to the value given by the expression x ’ĆŁ 1 1 , provided that ’ü╝x’ü╝<1. In our case, x corresponds to and, since the reflections coefficients are lesser than one, the series converge and the expression (7) can be rewritten as: Note that Eq. ( Using the values for the calculated coefficients listed in Table The first term in Eq. ( The second term of Eq. ( Of course, the value of ’é¼ AE ’ü▓ , for the case of quarter wave line, is zero. Note in Eq. ( As already seen, the voltage wave, with amplitude V0 arriving at point "A" from the left, will be partially transmitted (with amplitude ), and then partially transmitted at interface "B", with amplitude , which is the first term of the series. To obtain the second term, we must calculate, from amplitude ’é« A V ’ü┤ 0 , the reflected amplitude voltage at interface "B", then, the reflected voltage at "A", and finally, the transmitted voltage at "B", taking account the phase shift. As a result for the second term of the series, it is obtained . The other terms can be obtained in a similar way, giving: ...) ( It is observed in Eq. ( .. where, once again, the geometric series is recognized and finally, Eq. ( )] 1 Also, Eq. ( For the quarter wavelength line, the exponential term is -1, as seen before, and the result for the steady-state voltage value is: . This is coherent with the result presented in which, for this particular case, takes the value 2. In order to reproduce the results obtained, a simulation using LT Spice IV [6] was performed. As a font of the sin-type voltage waves, it was used an electrical generator, with a frequency, f, of 13,4 Mhz. To simulate the transmission line, a cascade of cells consisting of inductors (connected in series) and capacitors (connected in parallel) were assembled, as shown in the schematic in Fig. Where L and C are the inductance and capacitance per unit of length, respectively. In the particular case simulated here, it was emulated the transmission line with a Z0 = 100 ’üŚ, connecting forty six cells, each consisting in a series inductance of 0.53 ╬╝H and a parallel capacitance of 52.1 pF. In the context of the simulation, this values of inductance and capacitance are actually the values of inductance and capacitance per "unit of length", which can be defined as the longitudinal length of one cell. Assuming this unit of length to be meter, the value of L and C should be chosen also in order to keep the velocity of propagation of the voltage waves to a value physically realistic. This velocity is given by: With the values of L and C used in this example, the velocity calculated using (17) is 1.91x10 8 m/s, which is a realistic value for a transmission line. Of course, it can be assumed another units of length for the individual cells, and the values of L and C should have the appropriate values, in order that (17) continues to give a physically realistic value of v. With the values of v and f, the wavelength, ’ü¼, of the tension wave propagating on this line can be calculated trough the well known relation: and has the value ’ü¼ ’üĆ 14.3 m. Now, the quarter wave line must be designed. As already seen, the characteristic impedance for this line must be Z0’ü¼/4 = 200 ’üŚ. The values of inductance and capacitance per unit of length for this line were chosen to be L’ü¼/4 = 0.93 ╬╝H/m and C’ü¼/4 = 23.32 pF/m, respectively. To calculate the appropriate length of this line, the value of ’ü¼’ü¼/4 must be known. It can be calculated by first estimating the velocity, using the values of L’ü¼/4 and C’ü¼/4 in (17), and then using (18). The result is ’ü¼’ü¼/4 ~16 units of length, or 16 m. Then, to emulate the quarter wavelength line in our simulation, there must be placed four cells of inductances and capacitances with the values L’ü¼/4 and C’ü¼/4. In order to not complicate the simulation, the line of Z0 = 400 ’üŚ, can be replaced by the load, RL = 400 ’üŚ, with no difference in the final results. It was simulated a temporal window of 700 ns. The results of the simulation are shown in fig. In this work, there have been determined the steady-state values of the amplitude voltage waves at the extremes of a quarter wave line, for an incident voltage sin type wave-front with amplitude V0 and frequency f. An apparent contradiction, due to the fact that coefficient of refection for voltage is not zero, when calculated using Eq. ( The expressions obtained can be used as generics formulas, for the case of transmission lines of arbitrary length making a junction between two other lines, or between a line and a load, just substituting, in Eq. (8) and Eq. ( There where also obtained expressions for the effective transmission and reflection coefficients for voltage at the two extremes of the quarter wavelength line. These expressions can also be used for lines of arbitrary lengths. The numeric results obtained were reproduced using the LT Spice IV software, were the transmission lines were simulated as a cascaded of cells consisting inductors and capacitors. The results here presented are not generally detailed in elementary textbooks on transmission line for courses of electrical engineering or applied physics. It is expected that this work can be used as a complement by the students when studying these topics.