Supersonic gas jets produced by converging-diverging nozzles are commonly used as targets for laser-plasma acceleration experiments. A major point of interest for these targets is the gas density at the region of interaction where the laser ionizes the gas plume to create a plasma, providing the acceleration structure. Tuning the density profiles at this interaction region is crucial to LPA optimization. A "flat-top" density profile is desired at the line of interaction to control laser propagation and high energy electron acceleration, while a short high-density profile is often preferred for acceleration of lower-energy tightly-focused laser plasma interactions. A particular design parameter of interest is the curvature of the nozzle's diverging section. We examine three nozzle designs with different curvatures: the concave "bell", straight conical and convex "trumpet" nozzles. We demonstrate that for mm-scale axisymmetric nozzles that, at mm-scale distances from the nozzle exit, curvature significantly impacts shock formation and the resulting gas jet density field and therefore, is an essential parameter in LPA gas jet design. We show that bell nozzle is also able to produce focused regions of gas with higher densities. We find that the trumpet nozzle, similar to the straight and bell nozzles, can produce flat-top profiles if optimized correctly and can produce flatter profiles at the cost of slightly wider edges. An optimization procedure for the trumpet nozzle is derived and compared to the straight nozzle optimization process. We present results for different nozzle designs from computational fluid dynamics simulations performed with the program ANSYS Fluent and verify them experimentally using neutral density interferometry. Laser-plasma acceleration (LPA) is a particle acceleration scheme that uses an ultrafast intense laser pulse to create a plasma wave that can sustain strong acceleration gradients of hundreds of GV/m to achieve electron acceleration over short distances In this paper, we examine three axisymmetric mm-scale nozzle designs with different curvatures shown in Fig. Finally, an optimization procedure is developed for the trumpet nozzle to create desired flat-top profiles. To experimentally verify simulation results, we employ neutral density interferometry, a popular gas jet characterization method This section covers the basic theory behind supersonic nozzle design, the simulated nozzle geometries and the simulation methods employed to model the gas jets produced by each nozzle. The variables shown in the axisymmetric domain in Fig. Eqn. ( Three different curvatures were simulated, with their geometry parameters defined below: To compare the effect of curvature, three of the simulated nozzles, one from each curvature, were constrained to have l d = 9 mm with all other parameters also kept constant. The bell nozzle having d * = 0.6 mm as opposed to d * = 0.8 mm was found to not have significant impact on the qualitative features observed, as shown in Fig. 1. inlet: Pressure BC of 500 Psi. Temperature set at 300 K. 2. outlet: Pressure BC of 1 milliTorr, the ambient vacuum pressure, P amb . Temperature set at 300 K. 3. wall: no-slip condition with no roughness assumed for simplicity. These conditions were chosen to closely represent typical experimental conditions. From each nozzle simulation, the 2D density map along the diameter of the nozzle exit was extracted for the output gas jet plume where z > 0. Density profiles at mm-scale distances from the nozzle exit were then obtained, as are used for typical LPA experiments. Three nozzles, one from each curvature, out of all the simulated nozzle designs were manufactured and experimentally characterized using neutral density interferometry. Nozzle costs were not significantly different from previously manufactured nozzles. All three manufactured nozzles were made of aluminum and had l d = 9 mm and d e = 3 mm. The bell nozzle had d * = 0.6 mm and R c = +31 mm while the trumpet nozzle had d * = 0.8 mm, like the straight nozzle, and R c = -100 mm. A Michelson interferometer was used to characterize the gas jet density field of each nozzle. The setup is shown in Fig. The laser beam passing through the gas flow experiences a phase shift, quantified by fringe shifts on the resulting interferogram compared to the reference. The phase shift distribution is reconstructed from the fringe shifts. Because the nozzles are axisymmetric, an Abel inversion is performed to radially symmetrize the phase shift distribution and extract the the index of refraction distribution, n. The Abel inversion was performed by applying the mathematical algorithm delineated in previous papers where ∆φ is the phase shift, k is the wavenumber and λ is the laser wavelength where α is the mean polarizability, defined as α = 3A 4πN A Index of refraction data for Ar was used to calculated the molar refractivity, A, of Ar using Eqn. ( To maximize interferometry signal, scans for each nozzle were taken at the maximum regulator pressure of 1000 psi. The interferograms were averaged and converted to 2D density maps, outlined in Fig. 2D density maps and radial density lineouts were extracted from each simulation for the manufactured geometries. The qualitative features between the maps and lineouts produced by each curvature were then compared. Test simulations were first done to confirm that d * being altered between 0.6 and 0.8 mm had little effect on simulation results. The simulated 2D density maps for the three manufactured geometries are shown in Fig. While the straight nozzle profiles, shown in Figs. 4(e), (f), the shock diamond is suppressed as the trumpet geometry reverses the focusing effect of the bell curvature. The shock suppression of the trumpet nozzle prevents large density fluctuations at the output, removing the fluctuations at the plateau edges and leading to flatter plateau regions, seen in Figs. 5(e), (f). For LPA applications, the plateau length, plateau uniformity and profile sharpness are all important characteristics of the density profile. The plateau length sets the length scale of the electron acceleration. A uniform plateau is essential for LPA since small density perturbations in the plateau can cause electron dephasing and ruin acceleration The different shock features between the curvatures can also be observed from the density lineouts along the nozzle axis, shown in the inset plots of Fig. These results can be scaled to other density regimes, such as densities with orders of magnitude of a few 10 17 or 10 20 cm -3 , by simply adjusting the backing pressure, P 0 . Changing P 0 only alters the peak density, with the peak density scaling approximately linearly with P 0 , and does not significantly affect the profile shape, as confirmed by results shown in Fig. The experimental measurement results are shown in Fig. The actual pressure delivered to the nozzle inlet is unknown and likely lower than set by the gas regulator due to the lossy connections between the valve and regulator. This explains why the measured density is lower than that from simulation, which treats the inlet pressure as the same as the regulator pressure. We confirmed backing pressure only changes the peak density and not the normalized profile shape as shown in Fig. Multiple trumpet geometries were simulated to optimize the flat-top profiles produced by the nozzle. The optimization procedure was then compared to the straight nozzle optimization process. The trumpet geometry's shock suppression does not automatically guarantee flat-top density profiles. The strength of the trumpet nozzle's shock suppression is inversely related to R c 's magnitude, shown in Fig. This condition can be met by tuning the radius of curvature while keeping all other parameters the same. The calculated half-angles, θ e , corresponding to different radii of curvatures for the trumpet geometry used, where M e = 5.7 and l d = 9 mm, are tabulated in Table On the other hand, for the trumpet nozzle, θ e can be varied while R c is maintained at the optimal value of -85 mm. As observed in Fig. In this paper, we examined three different axisymmetric mm-scale nozzle geometries in the bell, straight and trumpet nozzles and investigated the effect of the curvature variation on the gas jet density field as well as shock features. The trumpet nozzle was optimized to produce consistent flat-top profiles in mm-scale distances from its exit. The trumpet optimization procedure was then compared to the straight nozzle optimization. The study of the diverging section curvature's effect on gas jet density was conducted in two parts. The first part involved simulating various nozzle geometries to study this effect for few mm-scale nozzles. The main result was that the nozzle curvature had noticeable impact on shock formation and the resulting gas jet density field and therefore, is an important parameter for LPA gas jet design. It was found that the trumpet geometry, like the straight and bell nozzles, could be optimized to create consistent flat-top density profiles. The trumpet θ e optimization condition was similar to the Mach angle condition of the straight nozzle although with an added parameter of control in its radius of curvature, which allowed for additional adjustment of the nozzle's shock suppression strength. This added parameter of curvature provided an additional degree of freedom for refinement of the trumpet nozzle geometry, which allowed the trumpet nozzle to create flatter profiles at the cost of slightly wider edges compared to the straight nozzle. Although the bell nozzle has been shown in the past to be able to effectively produce flat-top profiles The results apply to mm-scale axisymmetric nozzles for densities between a few 10 17 to 10 20 cm -3 . If the exit diameter is a different value that is mm-scale, such as 5 mm, one would perform the optimization process by tuning the radius of curvature in the same manner as presented and observing the resulting density profiles. Sub-mm nozzles require additional modeling of the boundary layer as the boundary layer for such a nozzle becomes comparable to the nozzle's geometry parameters The manufactured trumpet nozzle will be applied in ongoing LPA-based MeV Thomson photon source experiments, leading the way to a compact, affordable and narrow bandwidth x-ray source See supplementary material for information on manufacturing costs as well as additional figures referenced in manuscript. Comparison of average exit density ρ e , exit Mach number M e , and throat Mach number M * between simulation results and 1D isentropic flow predictions for all three nozzle geometries Nozzle Sim. ρ e [cm -3 ] 1D ρ e [cm -3 ] Sim. M * 1D M * Sim. M e 1D M e Bell 1.09 ×10 19 1.11 ×10