The recent discovery of AV3Sb5 (A=K,Rb,Cs) has uncovered an intriguing arena for exotic Fermi surface instabilities in a kagome metal. Among them, superconductivity is found in the vicinity of multiple van Hove singularities, exhibiting indications of unconventional pairing. We show that the sublattice interference mechanism is central to understanding the formation of superconductivity in a kagome metal. Starting from an appropriately chosen minimal tight-binding model with multiple van Hove singularities close to the Fermi level for AV3Sb5, we provide a random phase approximation analysis of superconducting instabilities. Non-local Coulomb repulsion, the sublattice profile of the van Hove bands, and the interaction strength turn out to be the crucial parameters to determine the preferred pairing symmetry. Implications for potentially topological surface states are discussed, along with a proposal for additional measurements to pin down the nature of superconductivity in AV3Sb5. The kagome lattice has become a paradigmatic setting for exotic quantum phenomena of electronic matter. This particularly applies to quantum magnetism, where the large geometric spin frustration inherent to the corner-sharing triangles promotes the emergence of extraordinary quantum phases The recent discovery of AV 3 Sb 5 In this Letter, we formulate a theory of unconventional superconductivity in AV 3 Sb 5 . In a first step, we develop an effective tight-binding model suitable for the analysis of pairing instabilities. In order to retain the necessary complexity of multiple van Hove singularities in the vicinity of the Fermi level in AV 3 Sb 5 , we distill a sixband minimal model. In a second step, we specify the interaction Hamiltonian. Due to matrix elements implied by the sublattice interference mechanism Sublattice decoration of kagome van Hove points. As opposed to related hexagonal van Hove singularities such as for the bipartite honeycomb lattice, the kagome bands can host two different types of van Hove singularities which we label as sublattice mixing (m-type) and sublattice pure (p-type), characterized by odd and even parity at the M point, respectively. This is illustrated in Fig. Effective model. The ab-initio band structure of AV 3 Sb 5 matches well with ARPES measurements below the CDW transition temperature, even though the corresponding density functional theory (DFT) calculations are performed neglecting the star-of-David-type structural distortion The layered structure of AV 3 Sb 5 , together with the large transport anisotropy of ρ c /ρ ab ≈ 600 For the effective model, we restrict ourselves to the Fermi pockets (ii) for three reasons. First, the pockets in (ii) carry the dominant density of states at the Fermi level. Second, we preserve the complexity of multiple van Hove singularities of p-type and m-type in our minimal model. Third, upon comparison to the ab-initio band structure, our minimal model manages to correctly capture all irreducible band representations at the high symmetry points in the Brillouin zone. The constituting d xz/yz orbitals belong to the B 2g/3g irreducible representations of the site symmetry group D 2h for the 3f Wyckoff positions [Fig. , where the sublatticeconnecting vectors are denoted by a 1,2 = √ 3/2, ±1/2 T and a 3 = (0, -1) T . The second term represents the intraorbital NN hoppings on the kagome lattice with two distinct amplitudes t α , while the third term describes NN inter-orbital hopping amplitude t . The non-trivial transformation properties of the d xz and d yz -orbitals under the site-symmetry group result in a non-trivial sign structure for the third term, described by s AC = s CB = -s AB and s ij = -s ji . We approximately fit our model to the abinitio band structure (see Sec. IV of SM) and obtain the parameters t xz = 1 eV, t yz = 0.5 eV, t = 0.002 eV, xz = 2.182 eV, and yz = -0.055 eV. The corresponding band structure and Fermi surfaces are shown in Fig. RPA analysis. For the electronic interactions, we consider multi-orbital density-density type interactions up to NNs where n liα = n liα↑ + n liα↓ and l, l is an index for the unit cell. U , U , J, and J denote the onsite intraorbital, inter-orbital repulsion, Hund's coupling, and pair-hopping terms, respectively. V αβ denotes the repulsion between NN sites. In the following we adopt the parameterization U = U + 2J, J = J with J = 0.1 U and V αβ = 0.3 U ∀α, β consistent with our ab-initio cRPA estimates for a target manifold comprising V-3d and Sb-5p orbitals The inset of Fig. Below the critical interaction, superconductivity emerges, triggered by charge and spin fluctuations We further analyze the harmonic fingerprint of the obtained pairings. The f x 3 -3xy 2 -wave pairing is dominated by the sublattice-pure d yz Fermi surface and the corresponding gap function in k-space is shown in Fig. Topological properties of the pairing states. Our minimal-model analysis is dominated by an f -wave state for weak coupling. Combined with the observation that the band renormalization in ARPES appears moderate, f -wave order could be a favored candidate for the nature of pairing in AV 3 Sb 5 . For time-reversal-invariant superconductors, the topological criterion about zero-energy Andreev bound states on edges is determined by winding numbers Experimental signatures. The observation of a finite κ/T for T → 0 in thermal conductance measurements Our work shows the unique principles for unconventional pairing in kagome metals, which promises to unlock a whole new paradigm of electronically-mediated superconductivity.