We study the ground state properties of the doped Hubbard model with strong interactions on honeycomb lattice by the Density Matrix Renormalization Group (DMRG) method. At halffilling, due to the absence of minus sign problem, it is now well established by large-scale Quantum Monte Carlo calculations that a Dirac semi-metal to anti-ferromagnetic Mott insulator transition occurs with the increase of the interaction strength U for the Hubbard model on honeycomb lattice. However, an understanding of the fate of the anti-ferromagnetic Mott insulator when holes are doped into the system is still lacking. In this work, by calculating the local spin and charge density for width-4 cylinders with DMRG, we discover a half-filled stripe order in the doped Hubbard model on honeycomb lattice. We also perform complementary large-scale mean-field calculations with renormalized interaction strength. We observe half-filled stripe order and find stripe states with filling close to one half are nearly degenerate in energy. The Hubbard model is one of the fundamental model systems in the exploration of quantum many-body effect The fate of AF Mott insulator if holes are doped in the * qinmingpu@sjtu.edu.cn Hubbard model on honeycomb lattice is still unknown. Away from half-filling, the infamous minus sign problem emerges which hampers the application of QMC to large system sizes and low temperature Many attempts have been made trying to reveal the properties of the doped Hubbard model on honeycomb lattice. Substantial attentions have been paid to the 1/4 doping case, where the density of states displays a Van Hove singularity and the Fermi surface has a nesting feature. At weak interaction, which is relevant to graphene Experimentally, real materials with honeycomb structure other than graphene In this work we study the ground state properties of the doped Hubbard model on honeycomb lattice in the strong interaction region, i.e., in the AF Mott insulator phase. We employ the Density Matrix Renormalization Group (DMRG) method with which reliable results of ground state are obtained. We discover a half-filled stripe order at 1/16 doping, which is similar as the stripe state on the square lattice The Hamiltonian of Hubbard model is: where c i,σ , c † i,σ and n iσ = c † iσ c iσ are the annihilation, creation and density operators on site i for spin species σ. i, j denotes the nearest neighboring hopping on the honeycomb lattice. U > 0 is the repulsive interaction strength and t is the hopping constant which is set to the energy unit. The total number of electrons with spin σ(σ =↑, ↓) are denoted by N σ . We only consider the spin-balanced case so the total number of electrons is N e = 2N σ . We denote the number of primitive cells in the studied system as N = L 1 × L 2 (see the left panel of Fig. In DMRG calculations, we adopt cylinder geometry, i.e., periodic (open) boundary conditions along L 1 (L 2 ) directions, while periodic boundary conditions in both directions are used in mean-field calculations To characterize the stripe structure, staggered spin density which is defined as (-1) i S i is plotted. DMRG In DMRG calculation, we rearrange the honeycomb lattice into a square lattice with next nearest neighboring interactions (see the right panel of Fig. In Fig. From both Fig. The fast increase of the number of required kept states in DMRG with width of the system prevents us to reach cylinder beyond width 4. In general, the quantum fluctuation is larger for narrow cylinders as shown in the evolution of AF order in Heisenberg model from one to two dimension. The stripe order was found to increase in wider cylinders on square lattice It is worth noting that the stripe order in honeycomb lattice is in the diagonal direction of the underlying square lattice if we arrange the honeycomb lattice in the brick-wall way. The diagonal stripe state was found to be in the low energy manifold of the t -J model on square lattice It is known that for the doped Hubbard model on square lattice, mean-field calculations give stripe order in the ground state Instead of using U = 8 as in the DMRG calculation, we choose a renormalized interaction strength with U ≈ 3 which is above U mf c ≈ 2.23, to ensure the ground state is in the Neel order phase before holes are doped. The effect of interaction strength on the mean-field results is discussed in the Appendix In Fig. From these results, we know mean-field gives an insulator stripe state where holes are nearly localized in one direction of the lattice, while in the real many-body ground state as in the DMRG results in Fig. Other than the half-filled stripe state, we also find stripe state with filling close to 1/2, 1/3 and 2/5 for examples, in the mean-field calculations. However, the energies of these stripe states are nearly degenerate which indicates the wave-length of the stripe order can fluctuate without causing much energy as in the square lattice case We discover the half-filled stripe order in the ground state of the doped Hubbard model on honeycomb lattice in the strong interaction region by studying width-4 cylinders with DMRG. We also carry out complementary mean-field calculations on large systems with renormalized interaction strength and find the half-filled stripe order. In the mean-field calculations, the stripe states in the vicinity of half-filling are nearly degenerate in energy, which indicates the wave-length of stripe can fluctuate freely as in the square lattice case 0.00000 0.00001 0.00002 0.00003 0.00004 0.00005 0.00006 In this section, we check the convergence of results with the kept state m in the DMRG calculations. In Fig. Hence we can diagonalize the block matrix H M F σ (σ =↑, ↓) independently for given n iσ (σ =↑, ↓). The ground state is determined by solving the Hamiltonian selfconsistently. The convergence is not guaranteed if the density calculated from last step wave-function is taken as input for the current step. To improve convergence, we take advantage of a technique called Anderson mixing [65], which has widely usage in electronic structure computations. The wave-function could converge to a local minimum, if we start from random initial densities. To make sure the global minimum is reached, additional strategies are adopted. We try different initial densities and the global minimum is determined as the one with lowest energy. We also add small perturbation to the converged wavefunction, and then use it as new initial densities for the self-consistent iteration. This procedure is repeated several times. 