The multiphase flow of droplets is widespread, both at the industrial and the microscale, for both biological and non-biological applications alike. But the ensemble interactions of such systems are inherently nonlinear and complex, compounded by interfacial effects, making it a difficult many-body problem to understand, especially for theory. In comparison, the selfassembly dynamics of solid particles in flow have long been described and successfully exploited in the field of inertial microfluidics, where particle crystals can be realized from inertial forces and hydrodynamic interactions. Here, we report novel self-assembly dynamics of liquid drops in confined microfluidic channels that contrast starkly with the established paradigm of inertial microfluidics, which stipulates that higher inertia leads to better spatial ordering. Instead, we find that the most commonly used straight wall channel geometry not only fails to achieve regular spatial ordering for drops but actually exacerbates it with increasing inertia. Conversely, an asymmetric serpentine geometry is able to achieve long-range, periodic spatial ordering over length scales that are at least 3 orders of magnitude greater than the drop diameter, particularly at low inertia. Experimentally, we are able to decouple droplet generation from ordering, enabling independent variation of the additional parameters of number density, confinement, inertia, and surfactant concentration. We find the inertia-dependent emergence of preferred drop separations and show for the first time that Marangoni effects can influence the longitudinal ordering of multidrop arrays, with less surfactant being more detrimental at lower confinement. These results present a largely unexplored direction for inertial microfluidics but also show the potential of its unification with the versatile field of droplet microfluidics. In particular, the utility of passively restoring uniform drop spacing on-chip is a key requirement for the streamlined integration of incubation and drop-by-drop interrogation capabilities, which would greatly enhance the many droplet-based biological assays currently in use. The field of inertial microfluidics Investigation into the longitudinal inertial ordering of solid particles has been more extensive, and have documented hydrodynamic forces acting between them Droplet microfluidics has enabled a myriad of biotechnologies In this study, we explore how the parameters of channel geometry, number density, confinement, inertia, and Marangoni effects influence the longitudinal inertial ordering of drops. In particular, we employ high confinement (a/H = 0.8 and 0.64) and particle Reynolds numbers ranging from O(0.1) to O For spacing measurements, fluorescent drops are first made separately using 2% surfactant (see Appendix) and then reinjected into inertial ordering devices. By reinjecting the drops instead of inertially ordering them on the chip in which they are made, drop size, flow rate, and drop number density can all be decoupled and varied independently, thus overcoming a common experimental limitation inherent to most studies investigating hydrodynamic phenomenon with microfluidic drops. These reinjected drops are then respaced using oil but are immediately randomized so as to disrupt the otherwise even spacing that the oil would create (see Fig. Drops flowing through the main ordering channel are measured optically using a laser line to detect the fluorescent drops at set positions along the channel in 1 cm increments. Fluorescence is detected at a photomultiplier tube (PMT) and converted to voltage peaks (see Supplementary Fig. where S is the standard deviation and 〈X〉 is the mean. A lower CoV represents a more homogeneously spaced and well-ordered droplet array. Especially for the practical aspect of identifying suitable conditions for the longitudinal inertial ordering of drops, channel geometry is an important consideration. We tested two geometries: the standard straight wall and the asymmetric serpentine (Fig. The increasing polarization of large and small drop spacings in the straight wall geometry underlies the increasing CoV plotted in Fig. ( 2) where V 0 is the variance of the base time series X of length T, and V k is the covariance of X with its lagged version, given by: ( 3) As expected, the spacing disruptor randomizes the initial drop spatial distribution (Fig. Here, E denotes the expectation value over i, C is a constant, R i (n) is the rescaled range for the i th subset of size n, and S i (n) is the corresponding standard deviation. For a time series X of length T (~1500), n is chosen to be = T, T/2, T/4, ... , T/128. For each n, there are i = 1 ... m subsets, where m = T/n, and R i (n) is defined as: where Z i (n) is the cumulative deviation series given by: and Y i (n) is the i th mean centered series: The Hurst exponent h is found from the slope of the linear fit after log-transforming Eq. 4: Shown in Fig. Although ordering for solid particles is known to be achievable in both channel geometries, our results show that a serpentine geometry is necessary for drops, suggesting a critical role played by the nonlinear Dean flow. Previous studies on neutrally buoyant, solid particles at low confinement showed that the Dean drag force F D , which scales as: where R is the radius of curvature of the channel, induces mixing and can help particles reach equilibrium faster through quicker sampling of their lateral positions The characteristic of buoyancy is also at play in our system due to the different mass densities of the aqueous dispersed phase and the oil continuous phase, which is typical in droplet microfluidics and most systems with two immiscible fluids. Density matching is commonly and easily done for solid particles by slightly adjusting the density of the aqueous carrier fluid. However, this is impractical for drop systems cannot be done without appreciably changing the viscosity ratio and therefore fundamentally altering the system, especially here, where the continuous phase ~1.6x denser than the dispersed phase. We employed CsCl salt to minimize changes to viscosity while increasing the dispersed phase density, but even so, the viscosity was appreciably altered (see Supplementary Fig. where r is the drop radius, g is the gravitational acceleration, ρ out is the mass density of the continuous phase, and ρ in is the mass density of the dispersed phase. F L,empirical is given by: where C L is the empirical lift coefficient, which the authors recommend to be 500 for general estimates, and d is the distance of the drop center from the channel center. For numerical details, see Supplementary Material. But the calculation shows that F L,empirical > F B,net even at the lowest flow rate used and for both drop sizes. Thus, buoyancy here is insufficient to push drops up against the top channel wall, avoiding the complication of friction effects influencing drop behavior. With contrasting duality, we demonstrated aperiodic self-assembly dynamics against the inertial microfluidic paradigm while also showing the longitudinal ordering of droplet crystal arrays on length scales that are at least three orders of magnitude greater than the drop diameter. Furthering this dichotomy, the lack of ordering for the former worsened with higher inertia whereas the spatial uniformity for the latter was best at the lowest R p of 0.139 (60 μL•hr - 1 ), also against the norm of high mL•hr -1 flow rates required for solid particles. Practically, this long-range ordering (h > 0.5) is critical for the consistent, deterministic manipulation of drops, and the low flow rates are necessary for accurate drop-by-drop screening, sorting, and picoinjection. The passive inertial ordering of drops shown here greatly extends the potential of droplet microfluidics by enabling a streamlined integration of on-chip incubation and drop manipulation functions. For the longitudinal interactions themselves, the parameter that most directly modulates their strength, which scales inversely with the distance between the drops, is the drop number density. Shown in Fig. Note that we use number density and not volume fraction because the former allows direct comparison between different sized drops. In other words, if drops in a single-file train have the same number density, their center-to-center distance is the same regardless of drop size. In contrast, the same volume fraction would result in approximately double the number density for 32 μm drops vs 40 μm drops (volume ratio ≈ 0.5), which implies a shorter mean drop-to-drop distance for 32 μm drops. The number density, which is defined by the drops•μL -1 , is estimated using the aqueous flow rate, the total flow rate, and the volume of an individual drop. This estimate assumes that drops are close-packed during reinjection. The close-packing of equal solid spheres implies that the spheres themselves constitute approximately 74% of their occupied volume. Given that the drops are deformable, the number density in flow could be slightly higher. The number densities we have denoted as low, medium, and high are estimated to be approximately ~1900, ~3700, and ~7400 drops•μL -1 , respectively. Using these number density approximations, they are equivalent-inside an idealized infinite 50 μm x 50 μm straight wall channel where the drops are uniformly spaced-to a length per drop of approximately ~210, ~110, and ~50 μm, respectively. Fig. Different from the asymmetric serpentine geometry, the straight wall geometry significantly exacerbates drop spacing in all conditions (CoV ratio > 1, Fig. Our results emphasize the importance of drop number density for longitudinal ordering. Although it is evident that the straight wall geometry systematically fails to improve longitudinal spacing uniformity, the asymmetric serpentine geometry does not just automatically guarantee good ordering. Instead, the number density dictates the ordering capability (Fig. We initially tested drop ordering at a very high confinement (a/H = 0.8), which defines an ordering regime that is both practically relevant to droplet microfluidics as well as being understudied. In this section, we present how confinement alters longitudinal inertial ordering by comparing the same set of experiments using 32 μm drops (a/H = 0.64), where the diameter change corresponds to nearly halving the drop volume. Despite what is known about the effects of confinement on general lateral lift forces, how longitudinal interactions scale with confinement for drops is undescribed, both analytically and numerically. As illustrated in Fig. Drops in the straight wall geometry do not achieve uniform spacing (Fig. A key influence of confinement on longitudinal inertial ordering is the strength and role of the wall force. We confirm that the drops with both confinements sense the wall force. Supplementary Movie S1 shows that a drop (a/H ≈ 0.6) moving in the middle of a sawtooth wall geometry senses the wall pattern through induced deformations that result in an undulating drop interface (Supplementary Movie S1). As the wall force is from all directions, it serves to counter "buckling", which is counterproductive to ordering and has been observed in smaller solid particle trains The question of high confinement, which we have experimentally demonstrated to be a crucial parameter for longitudinal inertial ordering, has not been thoroughly investigated. Numerical treatments of drops moving near walls have not been profuse Marangoni forces stem from surface tension gradients that can arise due to the uneven distribution of surfactants at the interface between two fluids. Given that microfluidic drops are made using surfactant and subject to shear flow, this could induce a rearrangement of surfactant molecules leading to surface tension gradients. These gradients lead to interfacial flows, for which the approximate speed v can be estimated by: Given that μ is of order 1 mPa•s and σ is of order 10 mN•m -1 here (see Appendix), a ~10-50% differential in σ, which simulation has shown can be within that range F f ~ μva , For a drop diameter of 40 μm and the range of v estimated above, F f is of order 40-200 pN, which is comparable to the lift force given in Eq. 11 at the lowest R p (see Supplementary Material), making these forces a non-negligible factor. The influence of such Marangoni effects on the lateral migration of drops has been documented experimentally Our observations suggest that the effects of Marangoni forces on longitudinal inertial ordering are less pronounced at higher confinement than at lower confinement. Fig. For the inertial dependence aspect, the data shows that it is influenced differently by confinement based on the number density. At low number density, decreasing confinement causes the CoV ratio to trend noticeably above 1 at all R p , but the increase is similar and the curves overlap (Fig. The dependence of the deformation parameter on surfactant concentration is further complicated by effects that extend beyond the simple modulation of average surface tension. The degree of drop deformation can change the sign of the normal interfacial stresses We have presented the first experimental evidence of surfactant and Marangoni effects influencing the longitudinal inertial self-assembly of microfluidic droplet arrays. Considering the core usage of surfactants in droplet microfluidics, knowledge of this parameter's effects on selfordering is pivotal for integrating inertial principles into droplet microfluidics. In this study, we have experimentally shown that even when using conventional channel geometries, the unique properties of droplets can yield unexpected results in inertial ordering compared to solid particles, such as the failure of the traditional straight wall geometry to achieve uniform spacing-counter to established paradigm. On the other hand, the asymmetric serpentine geometry was able to restore regular drop spacing over length scales at least 3 orders of magnitude greater than the drop diameter, especially at low inertia. We independently varied the parameters of channel geometry, number density, confinement, inertia, and surfactant concentration to investigate how they can affect the longitudinal inertial ordering of drops. However, many questions have been raised through our work regarding the complex nature of these fluid interactions, which cannot be adequately explained by existing literature. To gain a better understanding of the underlying physics, it seems that new computational efforts will be required to grapple with these multiphase fluid systems. A recent review 