The linewidth enhancement factor (LEF) has recently moved into the spotlight of research on frequency comb generation in semiconductor lasers. Here we present a novel modulation experiment, which enables the direct measurement of the spectrally resolved LEF in a laser frequency comb. By utilizing a phase-sensitive technique, we are able to extract the LEF for each comb mode. We first investigate and verify this universally applicable technique using Maxwell-Bloch simulations and then present the experimental demonstration on a quantum cascade laser frequency comb. Semiconductor lasers are compact, electrically pumped and provide substantial broadband gain. They are recently gaining vast attention due to a wide range of applications that utilize their coherence properties, such as high-precision spectroscopy The physical origin of the LEF is explained through the asymmetric gain spectrum of semiconductor lasers. In interband lasers, this is due to the opposite curvatures of the valence and conduction bands in k-space An established technique for extracting subthreshold values of the LEF is the Hakki-Paoli method by measuring the gain and wavelength shift In this work, we introduce a novel measurement technique, which enables the direct and spectrally resolved measurement of the LEF of a semiconductor laser operating in the frequency comb regime. It builds upon the modulation experiment by Harder et al. Intensity modulation (IM) and frequency modulation (FM) of a single-mode laser and the LEF extraction. (a) Modulation sidebands and their beating signals B± with the center mode in the case of a pure IM or FM (top). The beatings are represented in the complex plane. A mixture of both IM and FM is analysed below for two values of the IM-FM phase shift θ. (b) Time traces of the intensity and frequency. Analytic curves given by Eq. ( lay down the theoretical foundations of our method. The analytic values of the LEF are subsequently compared with the values extracted from a numerical model of both a single-mode and multimode laser. This is followed by the experimental demonstration, where the method is employed on a quantum cascade laser frequency comb. In the presence of a non-zero value of the LEF, a sinusoidal modulation of the bias current results in both an intensity modulation (IM) and a frequency modulation (FM) of the laser output where f 0 is the lasing frequency, f mod is the modulation frequency, m and β are the IM and FM indices, respectively. We include an additional arbitrary phase shift φ with respect to the current modulation and an FM-IM phase shift θ. Following Eq. ( Using the Jacobi-Anger expansion as is derived in the Supplementary Material. Under the assumption of a weak modulation strength (m, β 1), the complex beating signals B ± between the centerline E 0 and its first modulation sidebands E ±1 can be written as: The possible from Eq. ( With the knowledge of the modulation indices, the spectral LEF for each mode can finally be calculated directly as The modulation sidebands of a single-mode laser are sketched in Fig. In Fig. In the following we will discuss how to employ this technique to a frequency comb. The modulation of the current induces modulation sidebands around each comb mode. By finding the beatings B k,± of each mode with its corresponding neighboring sidebands, one can obtain the LEF for each comb mode. Fig. In experiments, the amplitudes and phases of the beatings B k,± can be measured most elegantly using SWIFTS. The experimental setup is shown in Fig. The QCL, which was used in this measurement, is a 3.5 mm long ridge laser emitting at around 8 μm. It consists of a long gain section and a shorter modulation section to efficiently couple RF signals to the laser. This feature, however, is not a necessity for the proposed technique. The laser was operated in a free-running frequency comb state with a repetition frequency of 12.2 GHz. The frequency of the weak modulation was chosen to be sufficiently lower at 9.593 GHz and a demodulation frequency of 9.570 GHz was set on the local oscillator. An RF-optimized quantum well infrared photodetector (QWIP), cooled to 78 K, was used for light detection. The intensity spectrum (Fig. In conclusion, we present a novel technique to directly measure the spectrally resolved LEF of a running semiconductor laser frequency comb. The measurement concept is first verified using elaborate numerical simulations of a modulated semiconductor laser. There, an excellent agreement is observed with the expected spectral LEF from the analytic model. The experimental demonstration was performed on a multimode QCL frequency comb, while the technique itself is universal. It will allow to extract the spectral LEF in frequency combs based on any type of a semiconductor laser. The LEF governs many coherent processes in a running semiconductor lasers among which is the frequency comb regime. Its precise knowledge will provide a better fundamental understanding of the light evolution that will promote further technological advancements. This work was supported by the Austrian Science Fund (FWF) within the projects "NanoPlas" (P28914-N27) and by the European Research Council (ERC) under the European Union's Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme (Grant agreement No. 853014). It is known from literature that the width of the laser line is due to the fluctuations of the phase of the optical field We will start by analyzing the response of a singlemode semiconductor laser biased above threshold with a superimposed weak modulation. The bias current J(t) is modulated sinusoidally as: where f mod is the modulation frequency. Due to the non-zero LEF in semiconductor lasers, a modulation of the current will result in the modulation of both the laser intensity and frequency. The optical field that is emitted by the laser is the defined as: where I 0 is the average intensity, f 0 is the lasing frequency, and m and β are the intensity modulation (IM) and frequency modulation (FM) indices, respectively. We include an additional arbitrary phase shift φ with the respect to the current modulation and an FM-IM phase shift θ. Following Eq. (A2), the frequency is modulated as f = f 0 + βf mod cos(2πf mod t + φ + θ). For the following calculation it is of great use the complex field notation and assume weak modulation (m, β 1): × e i2πf0t+iβ sin (2πf mod t+φ+θ) . Since the modulation of E(t) is a periodic function with frequency f mod , we can expand Eq. (A3) in an infinite Fourier series of harmonic terms that oscillate at frequencies f 0 + nf mod , n ∈ Z. It follows: where the complex amplitudes E n are to be determined. This is feasible by employing the Jacobi-Anger expansion where J n (x) is the n-th Bessel function of the first kind. Combining Eqs. (A3) and (A5), using the identity J -n (x) = (-1) n J n (x) for n ∈ Z, and keeping only the orders n = -2, -1, 0, 1, 2 yields: E(t) = I 0 e i2πf0t 1 + m 4 e i(2πf mod t+φ) + m 4 e -i(2πf mod t+φ) J 2 (β) e -i2(2πf mod t+φ+θ) -J 1 (β) e -i(2πf mod t+φ+θ) + J 0 (β) + J 1 (β) e i(2πf mod t+φ+θ) + J 2 (β) e i2(2πf mod t+φ+θ) . Comparison of Eqs. (A4) and (A6) yields the expressions for the complex amplitude of the centerline E 0 and its first modulation sidebands E ±1 : E 0 = 1 E ±1 = e ±i(φ+θ) ± J 1 (β) + m 4 J 2 (β)e ±iθ + J 0 (β)e ∓iθ . We can now also employ the weak modulation approximation so that J 0 (β) ≈ 1, J 1 (β) ≈ β 2 , and J 2 (β) ≈ 0 holds. By finding the beatings between the centerline and its first sidemodes, we can directly extract the modulation indices m and β. The beating signals B ±1 are defined as: B -1 = E 0 E * -1 = e i(φ+θ) - (A8) The LEF can be calculated from the modulation indices, as is known from literature Combining Eqs. (A8) and (A9) finally yields the LEF as a function of the beating signals: