Topological quantum computation based on Majorana bound states may enable new paths to fault-tolerant quantum computing. Several recent experiments have suggested that the vortex cores of topological superconductors, such as iron-based superconductors, may host Majorana bound states at zero energy. However, quantum computation with these zero-energy vortex bound states requires a precise and fast manipulation of individual vortices which is difficult to do in a scalable manner. To address this issue, we propose a control scheme based on local heating via, for example, scanning optical microscopy to braid vortex-bound Majorana zero modes in a two-dimensional topological superconductor. First, we derive the conditions required for transporting a single vortex between two defects in the superconducting material by trapping it with a hot spot generated by local optical heating. Equipped with critical conditions for the vortex motion, we then establish the ideal material properties for vortex braiding and describe how transition errors resulting from finite speed and/or temperature can be minimized. Our work paves the way toward optical or microscopic control of zero-energy vortex bound states in two-dimensional topological superconductors. a Topological quantum systems utilizing superpositions of quantum states encoded in so-called qubits may enable fault-tolerant quantum computing An alternative route to encoding high-fidelity logical qubits is to utilize topological modes realized naturally in condensed matter platforms. For example, emergent Majorana zero modes (MZMs) possessing non-Abelian exchange statistics are naturally immune to local decoherence effects due to their fundamentally non-local nature The generation and manipulation of individual superconducting vortices has been demonstrated using a range of experimental techniques. Magnetic fields, thermal gradients, and electrical currents have been used to tune the averaged properties of vortex matter In this Letter, we propose a scheme for the use of local heating, based on a scanning laser excitation, to manipulate individual superconducting vortices by picking them up from defects in the material, transporting them across the superconductor, and delivering them to other defects (see Fig. General setup.-We consider a thin slab of type-II superconducting material in a perpendicular magnetic field H. In this geometry, magnetic vortices are present below the lower critical field H c1 . However, for H H c1 , the mean separation between the vortices, R ∼ Φ 0 /H (where Φ 0 = h/(2e) is the flux quantum), is much larger than the penetration depth λ. We assume that, in the absence of optical heating, these well-separated vortices are localized at appropriate "pinning sites" at which superconductivity is suppressed within a region of size r. The pinning sites may be intrinsic defects of the material, such as vacancies or impurities, corresponding to r ∼ a (where a is the lattice constant), or "artificial defects", such as cylindrical voids or electrically gated regions, corresponding to r a. We hypothesize that a single vortex can be moved between different pinning sites by dragging it around with a "hot spot" resulting from localized optical heating. With such elementary control of magnetic vortices hosting MZMs, one can then implement the Clifford gate set on the topological qubits encoded in these MZMs. To understand the feasibility of the vortex manipulation process, we aim to establish the general conditions required for the three important steps depicted in Fig. The three terms on the right-hand side describe a viscous drag force, a stationary pinning force, and a timedependent thermal force resulting from the hot spot, respectively, while the left-hand side is set to zero because the inertial mass of the vortex Using the Bardeen-Stephen model , where μ 0 is the vacuum permeability. This result is also consistent with Ref. To make the subsequent analysis simpler, we introduce a dimensionless vortex position, x = x/d, a dimensionless time, t = vt/d (where v is the hot-spot speed), and dimensionless numbers comparing both the pinning force and the thermal force to the viscous drag force. In terms of these dimensionless variables, the equation of motion can be written as where D = D/d is the dimensionless hot-spot size, while α ∼ U 0 /(dηv) and β ∼ γ∆T /(Dηv) are dimensionless ratios of the maximal pinning and thermal forces to the viscous drag force at the hot-spot speed v, respectively. The dimensionless functions f p,th (z) are antisymmetric, f p,th (-z) = -f p,th (z), have a single zero, f p,th (0) = 0, a single maximum, f p,th (-1) = 1, and a single minimum, f p,th (1) = -1. We take a Lorentzian shape for the pinning potential, corresponding to f p (z) = -16z/(3 + z 2 ) 2 , while the temperature profile of the hot spot is found to resemble a Gaussian shape (see the SM). We emphasize, however, that our main results do not depend on the precise forms of these functions. Critical conditions.-We now establish the general conditions required for the three steps of the vortex manipulation process in terms of the dimensionless parameters α, β, and D. This condition is the simplest for the second step when the vortex is traveling with the hot spot [see Fig. For the first and third steps [see Figs. Therefore, the vortex is necessarily carried away by the hot spot if β > α + 1. We emphasize that the statements derived in this paragraph are completely exact. For the intermediate regime, 0 < δ < 1, the simple analytical arguments above do not determine the fate of the vortex. In this case, we solve Eq. ( For a diffraction-limited scanning laser excitation, the first universal limit with D 1 is the experimentally relevant one. Our results for the critical conditions in this limit are summarized in Fig. Material properties.-To establish the ideal material properties for our scheme, we recognize that the pickup condition β > α and the delivery condition β < α are mutually exclusive. Therefore, we must be able to tune at least one of the parameters α and β. For example, β can be tuned by adjusting the laser power, while α can be tuned in the case of electrically gated pinning sites. Nevertheless, to minimize the amount of tuning and any disruptions it may cause, it is important to keep the two parameters close to each other: β ≈ α. Using the definitions of α and β, and neglecting all O(1) and logarithmic factors, this condition immediately translates to Because of ∆T < T c and the large size of the hot spot, D ∼ 1 μm, we need sufficiently small pinning sites, r ξ, to satisfy Eq. In particular, we need ξ ∼ ξ c to use the intrinsic defects of the material, such as vacancies or impurities, and ξ ξ c to use artificial defects that are much stronger than these intrinsic defects. For a ∼ 1 nm and D ∼ 1 μm, the critical coherence length is ξ c ∼ 10 nm (assuming ∆T ∼ T c ). Diabatic errors.-In addition to satisfying the critical conditions, it is important to make the vortex manipulation process as smooth as possible to maximize the topological protection for the MZMs hosted by the vortices. Generally, the "diabatic errors" For D ∼ 1 μm, v ∼ 1 cm/s, and ρ n ∼ 10 -7 Ωm, we obtain ρ n /(μ 0 Dv) ∼ 10 7 . Therefore, we need to minimize β as much as possible by using an extreme type-II superconductor (λ/ξ 1) with a small normal-state resistivity ρ n . Importantly, however, even for small speeds, v v F , the diabatic errors resulting from finite speed are not exponentially suppressed by any kind of topological protection Conclusion.-We have presented a scheme for the use of local heating by a scanning laser excitation to manipulate Majorana bound states emergent in the vortex cores of topological superconductors. In the practically relevant regime, the conditions required for transporting a single vortex between two defects in the material are universal and surprisingly simple. In particular, the vortex can be moved across the bulk of the superconductor if the maximal thermal force exceeds the viscous drag force, while it can be picked up from (delivered to) a defect if the maximal thermal force is larger (smaller) than the maximal pinning force. We have established the ideal material properties for the implementation of our scheme by considering both intrinsic and artificial defects. Although our formalism does not explicitly account for the Majorana bound states inside the vortex cores, the nonlocal encoding of quantum information guarantees its topological protection. Specifically, the decoherence rate is exponentially suppressed as long as the separation between any two vortices is much larger than the coherence length ξ and the maximum temperature due to local laser heating is much smaller than the bulk gap ∆. While lo-calized states may exist inside the gap, it is known that transitions into such localized states are not detrimental to the quantum information encoded in the Majorana bound states 