We present a novel approach for tailoring the laser induced surface topography upon femtosecond (fs) pulsed laser irradiation. The method employs spatially controlled double fs laser pulses to actively regulate the hydrodynamic microfluidic motion of the melted layer that gives rise to the structures formation. The pulse train used, in particular, consists of a previously unexplored spatiotemporal intensity combination including one pulse with Gaussian and another with periodically modulated intensity distribution created by Direct Laser Interference Patterning (DLIP). The interpulse delay is appropriately chosen to reveal the contribution of the microfluidic melt flow, while it is found that the sequence of the Gaussian and DLIP pulses remarkably influences the surface profile attained. Results also demonstrate that both the spatial intensity of the double pulse and the effective number of pulses per irradiation spot can further be modulated to control the formation of complex surface morphologies. The underlying physical processes behind the complex patterns' generation were interpreted in terms of a multiscale model combining electron excitation with melt hydrodynamics. We believe that this work can constitute a significant step forward towards producing laser induced surface structures on demand by tailoring the melt microfluidic phenomena. During the past decades, materials' micro and nano fabrication using ultrashort laser pulses have emerged as a key technology, which has contributed to major advances in science, technology and industry Laser surface processing is a rapid and scalable chemical-free technique for surface functionalization that can be applied on almost any kind of material. Laser Induced Periodic Surface Structures (LIPSS) is the most common type of morphology that can be produced via irradiation of solids' surfaces by Gaussian beams Apart from LIPSS formation, an alternative laser processing method, namely the Direct Laser Interference Patterning (DLIP), has recently been introduced to fabricate periodic structures on solid surfaces. DLIP is based on the use of two or more coherent laser beams that interfere and the resulting laser intensity profile irradiates the material to fabricate periodic structures on large areas Recently, we have introduced a multiscale theoretical model taking into account the impact of the microfluidic factor as well to interpret the DLIP pattern formation upon double pulse irradiation (DPI) Despite the significant progress to date, the desired level of control of laser induced structures' characteristics including symmetry, size and hierarchical features formation is far from being accomplished. LSFL and HSFL with multiple axis of symmetry have been only reported as a result of polarisation modification or DPI Given the impact of the intensity profile and polarisation in the produced structures, it would be crucial to explore whether appropriate control of the spatiotemporal energy deposition profile would lead to more complex surface morphologies with enhanced application-based functionalities. To the best of our knowledge, no previous study has been conducted on the investigation of the type of topographies that can be produced if double pulses of different spatial intensity are used. In principle, double pulses of Gaussian Of further importance is the investigation of the resultant microfluidic movement derived from the phase transition caused under laser irradiation. The application of delayed pulses is crucial to reveal the impact of melt flow, considering that sufficient time is required for hydrodynamical effects to dominate, prior to the action of the second pulse that arrives at the materials' surface and influences the melt flow. For this purpose, the pulse separation here is kept on the order of ~500 ps, which has been proven to be suitable to highlight the role of the melt microfluidic movement 2 Experimental and simulation protocols a. Laser processing In the experiments, we utilize a DPI irradiation scheme employing two temporally delayed fs pulses with different intensity distribution. Namely, a pulse with Gaussian distribution (Figure . Each laser beam irradiates the material at an incident angle with the vertical axis equal to θ n and azimuthal angle φ n . It is assumed that all laser beams are linearly polarised and the polarisation direction is the same for all DLIP beams (i.e. perpendicular to that of the Gaussian). The total spatial intensity distribution is, then, provided by the formula , where c and ε 0 stand for the speed of light and dielectric vacuum permittivity, respectively. For interference with two (φ 1 = φ 2 =0, and θ 1 = θ 2 = θ) and four beams ( θ), the following total intensities are I 0 , where I 1 is the intensity of each of the constituent laser beams of the DLIP in which a Gaussian envelope is ) with an e -2 Gaussian spot radius equal to R 0 ; similarly, I 1 includes the Gaussian distribution in time, . It is noted that a Cartesian coordinate system is used (x,y,z). It is evident that the choice of To simulate the surface modification processes and reveal the impact of excitation levels and hydrodynamical effects following irradiation with fs pulses, a multiscale description of the underlying physical mechanisms is required to account for the response of the material. Given that the intensity profile changes spatially with the combination of temporarily separated Gaussian and DLIP pulses, a detailed investigation of the excitation, relaxation processes and propagation of the produced hydrothermal waves can be performed through a theoretical framework that comprises modules that model the processes in various temporal regimes. A detailed description of the theoretical model that simulates the physical mechanisms that characterize irradiation of stainless steel with DLIP pulses is presented in Ref. In summary, a three-dimensional Two Temperature Model (TTM) represents the standard theoretical framework to investigate laser-matter interaction and the energy transfer between the electron and lattice subsystems where C e and C L are the heat capacities of the electron and lattice subsystems, respectively while T e and T L are the temperatures of the two systems. By contrast, k e (k L ~0.01 k e ) stand for the electron (lattice) conductivity, g is the electron-phonon coupling parameter while W corresponds to the absorbed laser power density that is related to the laser intensity. It is noted that the wavelength of all laser beams is equal to λ L =1026 nm. As the laser intensity comprises two (temporarily separated with a delay Δτ) pulses, W includes the variation of the total intensity of the laser beam (i.e. αΙ total , where α is the absorption coefficient of the material at λ L =1026 nm). Due to the presence of two pulses, one Gaussian and one DLIP (with either two or four beams), the total laser intensity on the material surface is provided from the following expression (see derivation in the Supplementary Material) , where τ p is the pulse duration of each laser beam and P 1 and P 2 are the two temporarily separated if the DLIP irradiation comes first, (ii) P 1 (or P 2 ) is the (spatial) profile of the Gaussian (or the DLIP) beam. More specifically, for the DLIP beam, P 2 = I 0 It is noted that the values of the energy per pulse used in the experiments (i.e. 40 μJ, 60 μJ, 80 μJ) are found, by the simulations, to result to mass removal (i.e. ablation) It is emphasised that special attention is required to determine the impact of the (absorbed) laser energy given that the pulse separation in the double pulse experiment (Δτ =500 ps) indicates that the second pulse irradiates a material, which is in its molten phase. Results for the maximum lattice temperature T L max evolution with time at various depths are illustrated in Figure and G 1 =0, G 2 =1 (Figure Interestingly, when the Gaussian pulse irradiates the material first, the impact of the second pulse leads also to minimal mass removal that is simulated with the removal of material lattice points with temperatures higher than 0.9T cr [T cr stands for the thermodynamic critical temperature which for stainless steel is ~8500 Κ] 32, 37, 38 (Figure Interestingly, both the values and evolution of T L max are dependent on which pulse irradiates the material first, since the energies of the two pulses are different (Figure On the other hand, to interpret the induced surface modification, the development and evolution of hydrothermal waves and the dynamics of the produced fluid movement as a result for the phase transformation is mathematically described by the Navier-Stokes equations (NSE) where μ and ρ 0 stand for the viscosity and density, respectively, of the molten (uncompressed) material, while P and u ⃑ are the pressure and velocity of the fluid and superscript T denotes the transpose of the vector ∇ ⃑ ⃑ u ⃑ , and 1 is a 3×3 (see Ref [36] and Supplementary Material) where (u,v,w) are the components of u ⃑ in Cartesian coordinates (x,y,z) The solution of NSE is conducted through the employment of appropriate thermocapillary boundary conditions. More specifically, to describe the Marangoni flow, a shear stress balance on the free surface is described by the equation . In Eq.4, σ stands for the surface tension of the material (see As the theoretical model aims to describe both the thermal response and dynamics of the molten material that leads eventually to morphological changes, topography variations should be considered due to consecutive irradiation as a result of increasing the energy dose. Therefore, apart from the aforementioned boundary conditions used to solve NSE (i.e. shear stress balance on a free but nonflat surface), appropriate conditions need to be introduced for the electron and lattice temperatures. More specifically, negligible heat loss from the free surface should be considered while it is also assumed that at large distances from the affected region both the electron and lattice temperatures are ~300 K. Special attention is required to evaluate the lattice temperature resulting from multiple irradiations. While the initial conditions for the velocity and lattice/electron temperatures before the delayed pulse irradiates the material are determined from the combined solution of NSE and TTM at the moment the second pulse heats the material, it is assumed that every consecutive double pulse in the train always irradiates a material at room temperature. The morphology obtained following irradiation with trains of single pulses are illustrated in Figure . The formation of these structures have been reported in a previous work The FFT diagrams corresponding to the aforementioned topographies are illustrated in Figure In this section the result of irradiation of stainless steel with two subsequent pulses, each having a Gaussian or DLIP profile is investigated both experimentally and theoretically. The experimental results together with theoretical simulations are shown in Figure indicates the type of the distribution and the order of the pulses; for example, "G↕+D↔" in Figure Experimental results illustrate (Figure Theoretical predictions show that when the V pulse (i.e. Λ DLIP = 1700 nm, for θ=18 0 ) irradiates the material after Δτ, LIPSS that have been produced from the Gaussian pulse G are not destroyed from V in the region where the DLIP intensity is low; by contrast, shallow ripples are formed along the region where the intensity of V is higher. To explain the produced topography, a theoretical investigation is conducted to evaluate the role of electrodynamics, thermal effects and fluid dynamics that yield those particular morphological features. As the increase of NP affects the morphology, a feedback mechanism is incorporated into the model to derive the absorbed energy and response of the material. To evaluate the influence of the second beam (Figure As a result of the enhanced temperature gradient along the x-axis, melt movement occurs, indicated by respective vectors in the temperature profiles presented in Figure As a result of the temperature gradients induced within the molten material the melt is pushed away from the DLIP valleys along the x-axis (shown for t=490 ps in Figure To emphasise the special role of hydrothermal movement and provide a more detailed picture of the impact of the induced hydrothermal waves, the melt fluid velocity vectors at every lattice point in a region ~3x3 μm 2 are illustrated for G+V at 490 ps and 520 ps respectively (Figure In the case of a double pulse experiment in which the contributing pulses to the DLIP yield an interference pattern parallel to the x-axis, the impact of the DLIP pulse leads to a different surface topography. More specifically, as in the G+V case, it is expected that the first pulse (G) excites surface plasmons and leads to subwavelength LIPSS oriented perpendicularly to the laser polarisation that will lead to a rippled profile. Nonetheless, analysis of the experimental results indicate that only one ripple frequency is observed, that of the DLIP, with a period of Λ DLIP = 1630 ± 14 nm. In Figure shown by the respective simulations shown in the same figure, hydrodynamical movement drives the melt flow parallel to the y-axis before solidification, giving rise to a topography formation that closely resembles the experimental one. It should be noted that Λ DLIP is a multiple of the predicted LIPSS period (Λ LIPSS ~850 nm) and therefore there is no overlap between the patterns produced from the combined effect of G and H. A different profile is induced for the H+G pulse sequence (Figure Interesting morphologies are obtained when a combined G plus a D pulse with Λ DLIP =3100 nm is used (Figure Theoretical results indicate that the action of the G beam leads to an expected surface plasmon excitation and hydrothermal waves, while the D pulse increases further the temperature at points where the DLIP intensity is high. Thus, a periodic profile is produced (Λ LIPSS = 824 ± 46 nm) with the ripples oriented parallel to the x-axis that are interrupted with periodically situated subsided regions due to the impact of the D pulse (Figure By contrast, when D precedes the irradiation to G, a quite different profile, comprising high-aspect ratio asperities, is obtained. The horizontal spacing among those structures is 3163 ± 55 nm, while the vertical one is 3072 ± 67 nm, coinciding with the distance between the craters in the D case of Figure Furthermore, repetitive irradiation with D (at NP>2) will enable excitation of surface plasmons and the subsequent formation of ripples oriented parallel to y-axis. Following irradiation with the G pulse, i.e 500 ps after the impact of the first pulse, the material in the region which is not affected by the D pulse will be excited and surface plasmon waves, before leading to a rippled periodic pattern similar to the one observed in SEM images (Figure In the previous sections, the effect of different pulse intensity profiles and pulse sequences was investigated and evaluated. It is evident that the spatio-temporal intensity distribution significantly influences the hydrothermal melt waves and the subsequent superposition of fluid transport derived from each pulse separately. It was shown that the combined effect of different intensity profiles predominantly influences the behaviour of the produced molten material through variation of its vorticity; this effect has proven to influence the final topography attained, giving rise to patterns of higher geometrical complexity. Two parameters that are expected to tune the surface morphology are the laser energy and the number of pulses; the increase of both parameters leads to higher temperature gradients and therefore to large vorticity changes. A characteristic example of the evolution of surface topography upon increasing NP at specific pulse energy is presented in Figure Results demonstrate the pronounced influence of the first pulse in the sequence in the feedback mechanism, while each subsequent dose of the series enhances the depth of the induced topography. Similar results (not shown here) are derived for the rest of the pulse sequences. On top of that, the role of hydrothermal phenomena and the impact of the topography in the produced temperature gradients that lead to a dynamic evolution of the surface patterns at increasing dose, are very critical. Simulation results indicate that deeper profiles promote larger energy deposition locally that influences the melt movement. In Figure reveals the impact of the DLIP, as the DLIP pattern is clearly visible on the surface surrounded by dotted structures (see also Figure The ability to simultaneously control the two key structure formation mechanisms, namely the inhomogeneous absorption and the microfluidic melt motion, offers potentially endless possibilities in controlling laser induced morphology in the submicron scale. Apart from the complex structures presented above, in the following we show that suitable combination of DPI parameters enable the formation of hierarchical complex structures as well, which in some cases are similar to those observed in natural systems For example, Figure In the previous sections, the characteristics of complex structures' formation upon irradiation of stainless steel with double pulses of a Gaussian and DLIP profiles, were investigated, both experimentally and theoretically. The impact of parameters such as the pulse profile, order of pulses, interpulse delay, pulse energy and energy dose were presented and discussed. A key element of the formation processes is the dynamic variation of the hydrothermal melt movement due to the action of the two irradiation pulses, which depends on the interpulse delay. In particular, at t<500 ps a melt flow is developed by hydrothermal waves created due to induced temperature gradients. Upon the impact of the second pulse the temperature profile changes drastically, as indicated by the pronounced decrease of the reflectivity in areas that are in molten phase A key element is the value of the pulse delay (~500 ps). The choice of such a large value for the pulse separation between the two constituent pulses of the train of pulses was to illustrate the impact of the molten material when the second pulse arrives By contrast, if we allow longer pulse separations, the temperature of the fluid relaxes to substantially lower (but still above the melting point) values and therefore it is easier to reveal the variation in the fluid dynamics that is caused as a result of exposure to the second pulse. The surface relief attained in the early stages of structures' formation will eventually determine the topology of the structures obtained for elevated number of pulses, due to the optical and hydrodynamic feedback mechanisms. Indeed, upon increasing the dose to NP = 5, the temperature gradient of t= 490 ps and t = 520 ps differ mainly in amplitude, but not in topology. The stability of the topology of the structures is evident in the fact that the vector fields, observed in Figure Following the formation of significantly deep valleys and high hills, i.e in NP ~ 50 (see Supplementary Material), the surface morphology will prevail over the pulse profile in the determination of the temperature gradient. It is evident that the laser conditions and selection of NP (i. e. NP ≤ 50) were appropriately chosen to correlate experimental observations with simulations results. Certainly, higher laser fluences or increasing NP are expected to produce deeper profiles and gradually alter the surface topography. This might be the objective of further investigation, however, in the current study we focused on how consecutive pulses of different intensity profiles influence the final topography. On the other hand, it is also important to correlate the value of Δτ with particular characteristics times such as those associated to electron-phonon relaxation and Marangoni flow. The pulse separation is much larger (about two order of magnitude) than the electron-phonon relaxation time. By contrast, it is much smaller than the expression that has been used in some reports The analysis performed in this work demonstrated the impact of the polarisation-dependent process on the LSFL formation for either G or DLIP pulses. Experimental results showed that while periodic patterns were visible at small pulse energy levels or doses, the DLIP pattern imprint became more pronounced at higher pulse energies (Figure In conclusion, the investigation performed in this work indicated that combining Gaussian beams with DLIP in double pulse trains enables the generation of unique sub-micron surface topographies with increased complexity. Results showed that the order of the Gaussian and DLIP pulses in train sequences influences the final surface profile attained. Furthermore, experimental results and multiscale modelling revealed that both the spatial intensity of the two pulses, as well as hydrodynamical effects have a significant impact on the pattern features. Our experiments and results presented here emphasise the capability to actively tailor the microfluidic melt motion that dominates the structure formation process, via controlling the applied temperature gradient's temporal profile. More important, the unique irradiation schemes examined here lead to the generation of novel complex morphologies comprising features in multiple length scales. This demonstrates an unparalleled capacity towards tailoring laser-induced morphology and obtaining complex topographies for a variety of applications. The laser intensity of the Gaussian profile is given by (i=2 or 4 for a DLIP with two or four laser pulses, respectively, as given in Eq.1 in the main text) while B contains the pulse duration and fluence [2], Assuming that there is a temporal separation between the two pulses (equal to Δτ), there are two possibilities for the total intensity that depends on which pulse irradiates the material first if the Gaussian pulse follows the DLIP pulse. We can write Eqs.3,4 in a compact form in which G 1 = 0, G 2 = 1 (Eq.3) and G 1 = 1, G 2 = 0 (Eq.4). Below, the Navier-Stokes equations (for an incompressible fluid ∇ ⃑ ⃑ • u ⃑ = 0) are presented in a matrix form in 3D [3]. We know that 