High resolution angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) measurements are carried out on CaKFe 4 As 4 , KCa 2 Fe 4 As 4 F 2 and (Ba 0.6 K 0.4 )Fe 2 As 2 superconductors. Clear evidence of band folding between the Brillouin zone center and corners with a (π,π) wave vector has been found from the measured Fermi surface and band structures in all the three kinds of superconductors. A dominant √ 2 × √ 2 surface reconstruction is observed on the cleaved surface of CaKFe 4 As 4 by scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) measurements. We propose that the commonly observed √ 2 × √ 2 reconstruction in the FeAs-based superconductors provides a general scenario to understand the origin of the (π,π) band folding. Our observations provide new insights in understanding the electronic structure and superconductivity mechanism in iron-based superconductors. The parent compounds of the FeAs-based superconductors usually have a collinear antiferromagnetic order with a wave vector (π,π) below the magnetic transition temperature In this paper, we performed high-resolution angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) on three kinds of FeAs-based superconductors, CaKFe 4 As 4 , KCa 2 Fe 4 As 4 F 2 and (Ba 0.6 K 0.4 )Fe 2 As 2 . In all these samples, we observe clear signatures of band folding between the Brillouin zone center (Γ) and corners (M) connected by a (π,π) wave vector. From our scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) measurements on CaKFe 4 As 4 , we find that there is a √ 2 × √ 2 reconstruction on the As-terminated surface. Such a surface reconstruction provides a possible way to understand the (π,π) band folding in the measured FeAs-based superconductors. The CaKFe 4 As 4 , KCa 2 Fe 4 As 4 F 2 and (Ba 0.6 K 0.4 )Fe 2 As 2 single crystals were prepared using self flux method High resolution angle-resolved photoemission measurements were carried out on our labbased ARPES system equipped with Helium discharge lamp as the light source, which can provide the photon energy of hν = 21.218 eV (Helium I), and a Scienta DA30L electron energy analyzer In order to resolve the large circle feature around M more clearly and have a direct The position of this γ band relative to M 2 is the same as that of the γ band relative to Γ. They also exhibit identical dispersions as shown by the red solid and dashed lines with the same shape. The same is true when comparing the band structures measured along Cut 3 (Fig. We also found evidence of the (π,π) band folding in KCa In the parent and underdoped BaFe 2 As 2 , spin-density wave (SDW) order plays an important role in determining its electronic structure As layer resolved while the other half invisible (right panel of Fig. • . All the samples were cleaved in situ at 18 K and measured in ultrahigh vacuum with a base pressure better than 5×10 M points with a (π,π) wave vector in all the three kinds of superconductors. Our STM measurements on CaKFe 4 As 4 reveal dominant