An approach to adjusting the conduction band population for tuning the magnetic and magnetocaloric response of EuO 1-δ thin films through control of oxygen vacancies (δ = 0, 0.025, and 0.09) is presented. The films each showed a paramagnetic to ferromagnetic transition around 65 K, with an additional magnetic ordering transition at higher temperatures in the oxygen deficient samples. All transitions are observed to be of second order. A maximum magnetic entropy change of 6.4 J/kg K over a field change of 2 T with a refrigerant capacity of 223 J/kg was found in the sample with δ = 0, and in all cases the refrigerant capacities of the thin films under study were found to exceed that reported for bulk EuO. Adjusting the oxygen content was shown to produce table-like magnetocaloric effects, desirable for ideal Ericsson-cycle magnetic refrigeration. These films are thus excellent candidates for small-scale magnetic cooling technology in the liquid nitrogen temperature range. Magnetic refrigeration based on the magnetocaloric effect (MCE) has emerged as a promising alternative to the less efficient gas compression cycle methods. From a magnetic cooling perspective, exploring magnetocaloric materials in thin film form is of practical importance for small-scale cooling applications such as microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) and nanoelectromechanical systems (NEMS). EuO is a semiconducting ferromagnet with a 4f 7 electronic configuration, yielding a large magnetic moment of 7 μ B with a T C near 70 K. Thin films of EuO1-δ with δ = 0, 0.025, and 0.09 were deposited by magnetron cosputtering of ceramic Eu2O3 and metallic Eu targets on Si substrates with a Pt buffer and capping layer. The polycrystalline samples were deposited at room temperature with a base pressure of 5×10 -9 Torr. Oxygen stoichiometry was controlled by varying the DC deposition current for the Eu target between 0.05 A and 0.15 A while maintaining the RF power at 75 W for the Eu2O3 target. The nominal structure of the films was Si(001)/SiO2(1.4 nm)/Pt(5 nm)/EuO 1-δ (100 nm)/Pt(5 nm). Growth parameters were controlled to obtain samples with 0%, 2.5%, and 9% oxygen deficiency ( δ = 0, 0.025, and 0.09). Magnetic measurements were performed using a commercial Quantum Design Physical Properties Measurement System (PPMS) with a vibrating sample magnetometer. X-ray diffraction scans performed on a Bruker D8 diffractometer show no impurity phases for the sample with δ = 0 (Fig. The temperature dependence of in-plane magnetization (Fig. An examination of H/M vs. M 2 constructs across the temperature region of interest in each sample revealed the absence of negative slopes for any isotherm, satisfying the Banerjee criterion for materials undergoing continuous magnetic transitions. This confirms the second order nature of both the high and low temperature transitions in the EuO 1-δ films, which is preferred in magnetic refrigeration cycles due to the thermal hysteresis that often accompanies first order magnetic transitions. While the proximity of the two transitions in the oxygen deficient samples prevented additional analysis, the critical properties of the single transition in the stoichiometric film were determined based on the Arrott-Noakes equation of state, which predicts a linear dependence of M 1 β ⁄ on (H M ⁄ ) 1 γ ⁄ , where β and γ are the critical exponents governing magnetization (T < T C ) and susceptibility (T > T C ), respectively. where M is the magnetization, H is the magnetic field, and T is the temperature. The temperature dependence of -ΔS M is plotted in Fig. The peak magnitude of -ΔS M (-ΔS M max ) reaches 6.4 J/kg K in the stoichiometric EuO film for an applied field change of 2 T, a significant fraction of the 8.4 J/kg K entropy change in bulk EuO in contrast to manganite systems in which reductions in -ΔS M max as large as ~80% have been observed for thin films as compared to their bulk counterparts. The expected value of n = 0.81 for the δ = 0 sample based on the critical exponents calculated above is confirmed by a linear fitting of ln S vs. ln H. The δ = 0.025 film shows a similar growth of -ΔS M max with magnetic field, however the dependence is close to linear in the δ = 0.09 sample. The refrigerant capacity is given by RC = ∫ -ΔS M dT , where T 1 and T 2 are taken as the temperatures of the FWHM of the -ΔS M (T) peak. The area corresponding to the RC is illustrated in the inset of Fig. In summary, the magnetocaloric properties of thin films of EuO 1-δ with δ = 0, 0.025, and 0.09 prepared by magnetron cosputtering were examined. While the stoichiometric film was observed to show a single ferromagnetic transition, the oxygen deficient samples underwent sequential ferromagnetic transitions, broadening the potential working range of the material. The peak magnetic entropy change in the thin film samples was reduced when compared with that of bulk EuO, however enhanced RC was observed in each of the present samples. For a moderate applied field change of 2 T the RC of 223 J/kg in the film with δ = 0 represents an increase of ~ 31% over the reported bulk values. These excellent properties make the present films attractive for active magnetic refrigeration in the liquid nitrogen temperature range. applied field with previous results for bulk polycrystalline EuO reported in the literature.