Frequency-stabilized mid-infrared lasers are valuable tools for precision molecular spectroscopy. However, their implementation remains limited by complicated stabilization schemes. Here we achieve optical self-locking of a quantum cascade laser to the resonant leak-out field of a highly mode-matched two-mirror cavity. The result is a simple approach to achieving ultra-pure frequencies from high-powered mid-infrared lasers. For short time scales (<0.1 ms), we report a linewidth reduction factor of 3 × 10 -6 to a linewidth of 12 Hz. Furthermore, we demonstrate two-photon cavity-enhanced absorption spectroscopy of an N2O overtone transition near a wavelength of 4.53 μm. The generation, measurement and dissemination of ultra-pure laser frequencies is at the forefront of emerging technologies in atomic, molecular and optical sciences. While many experiments operate at visible or near-infrared frequencies, emerging research in areas like cold chemistry Here we demonstrate a simple QCL frequency stabilization scheme which utilizes weak resonant optical feedback from a highly mode-matched Fabry-Pérot cavity with spherical mirrors. Contrary to all-electronic laser-stabilization schemes like the Pound-Drever-Hall method Early demonstrations of diode laser frequency stabilization by resonant optical feedback used V-shaped or folded resonators to geometrically eliminate unwanted feedback from the direct cavity reflection Alternatively, two prior works have demonstrated diode laser self-locking to resonant optical feedback from a birefringent Fabry-Pérot cavity excited on-axis Neither birefringent cavities nor transmission feedback methods have been applied to QCLs. However, two papers have reported QCL self-locking to the leak-out field of a Fabry-Pérot cavity by mode-mismatching and then spatially filtering the direct reflection We begin with a model for laser frequency stabilization by weak optical feedback from a two-mirror Fabry-Pérot cavity that is excited on-axis by the laser as illustrated in Fig. where ωω = 2ππνν is the laser angular frequency, tt and rr are the reference cavity mirror electric-field transmission and reflection coefficients, respectively, ττ rt = 2LL/cc is the cavity round-trip time, LL is the single-pass cavity length, and cc is the speed of light. Figure where ωω free and gg free are the free-running laser angular frequency and gain at threshold, respectively. In Fig. A dynamic treatment of the QCL self-locking process using laser rate equations is beyond the scope of this work. However, we note that the reference cavity leak-out field will comprise both pumping and resonant frequencies during transient build-up We used the experimental apparatus illustrated in Fig. The distance between the QCL exit facet and the reference cavity was either LL a ≈ 2LL or LL a ≈ LL. Active electronic stabilization of LL a was achieved using a piezo-mounted mirror (PZT1). An error signal was generated by modulating the QCL current driver at a frequency of 1.8 MHz and then demodulating the reference cavity reflection signal at photodetector PD2. The resulting error signal was filtered, amplified, and sent to a servo controller with a 1 kHz bandwidth. Our set-up, without any tight aperture, allows for continuous tuning of the external optical feedback power attenuation factor ββ ext without reducing the optical power at the reference cavity. By adjusting a quarter-wave plate (λλ /4) we controlled the power returning to the QCL exit facet after passing through the polarizing beam splitter (PBS) as depicted in Fig. To estimate the free-running QCL linewidth, we used a singlepass N2O sample cell and a Doppler-broadened molecular absorption feature with full-width at half maximum of 123 MHz as a frequency discriminator. To evaluate the frequency stabilized QCL, we used the measurement scheme shown in Fig 3 . The lockedlaser linewidth was estimated from the sum of the electronic error signal and correction signal sent to an acoustic-optic modulator (AOM) used to close a PDH locking loop, thus locking the frequencystabilized QCL to a second high-finesse cavity of length LL 2 = 1.5 m. Frequency noise analysis is plotted in Fig. Theoretically, the coupled-laser linewidth is equal to the freerunning linewidth scaled by the square of the reduced slope factor pp = ddωω L /ddωω free , i.e., Δνν locked = pp 2 Δνν free Accessing the purity of the polarization state of the QCL and leakout fields with high precision is a non-trivial task in the mid-infrared -and we acknowledge that we have not characterized the birefringence properties of our reference cavity (although it is likely similar to the birefringence previously measured by Fleisher et al. Finally, we performed nonlinear molecular spectroscopy with the frequency stabilized QCL. As noted earlier, our scheme enables high intracavity powers (≥10 W) while maintaining a low feedback power attenuation ratio using the quarter-wave plate and PBS cube. We introduced a gas sample of 20.4 μmol/mol N2O in air Our self-locking scheme would be improved by the inclusion of a low thermal expansion cavity spacer and isolation chamber to reduce vibrational/acoustic noises and enable long-term stability (≥1 s). Alternatively, our length-tunable reference cavity could be further stabilized to a sub-Doppler molecular transition using slow electronic feedback to the piezo-electric transducer (PZT2 in Fig. 