Germanium thin films are an excellent candidate for use as a low-loss dielectric in superconducting microwave resonators, a low-loss inter-layer metal wiring dielectric, and passivation layers in microwave and Josephson junction devices. In Ge/Nb structures deposited at 400 °C, we observe intermixing over as much as 20 nm. The addition of a 10 nm Ta diffusion barrier layer reduces the superconductor/dielectric intermixing to less than 5 nm and enhances the structural properties of deposited a-Ge layers based on Raman spectroscopy. Additionally, superconducting microwave resonators fabricated at room-temperature on crystalline Ge substrates with a Ta barrier layer show marked improvement in total and power-dependent twolevel system microwave losses. Germanium has many properties that make it appealing for use as an insulating dielectric for low-temperature superconductor devices. Germanium can be produced with impurity concentrations as low as 10 8 cm -3 , which is lower than high resistivity float zone silicon where the impurity concentration is ∼10 15 cm -3 , with the majority from Si-O complexes Additionally, high-quality Ge can be deposited directly on Si via sputtering or evaporation with low surface roughness and low dangling bond density. Germanium films grown at T∼30 °C are amorphous while high-temperature growth yields polycrystalline (T>400 °C) and epitaxial films (T>450 °C) Superconducting qubits operating at low temperatures (~40 mK) and near single-photon power are sensitive to losses due to two-level systems (TLS) found at the metal-air, metal-dielectric, and dielectric-air interfaces In an earlier study Tantalum is a likely diffusion barrier layer. It is a refractory metal with a similar body-centered cubic (BCC) crystal structure and nearly-identical lattice constant to niobium (aNb=330.04 pm, aTa=330.13 pm). While the Ta superconducting critical temperature (Tc = 4.4 K) is lower than that for Nb (Tc= 9.2 K), a 10 nm barrier layer (thinner than the Ta coherence length ξTa ~95 nm, ξNb=38 nm) will not significantly degrade the Tc of a Nb/Ta bilayer. In the clean limit where interface reflection is zero, we would expect the Tc of a Nb (200 nm)/Ta (10 nm) bilayer depressed at most from 9.2 K to 8.6 K The interface between sputtered niobium and crystalline silicon is known to have 10-20 nm of intermixing with additional thermal processing resulting in complete silicidation Thin-film deposition (Nb, Ta, and Ge) was performed in a cryopumped (Model CTI-8, CTI, Austin, TX) unbaked UHV vacuum system with a base pressure of less than 2×10 -9 Torr. Floatzone Si (100) substrates were cleaned ultrasonically for 10 minutes each in semiconductor-grade acetone and then ethanol followed by a 5 minute 2 vol % HF aqueous solution etch. Undoped zone-refined Ge (100) wafers with stated resistivity higher than 40 Ω-cm were used as both substrates and the source of evaporation material. Niobium and tantalum were deposited via magnetron sputtering from 5 cm diameter, 99.95% pure targets. D.C. magnetron sputter deposition was initiated after evacuating to the base pressure, then backfilling to 4 mTorr of 99.9999% Ar. Nb and Ta were deposited with a sputtering power of 215 W, corresponding to a deposition rate of ~6 Å/second for Nb and a thickness of ~200 nm, and ~4 Å/second for Ta and a thickness of 10-15 nm. Germanium was evaporated from a Knudsen effusion cell. After the metal sputter deposition, germanium film deposition was started after evacuating the chamber to below 2×10 -9 Torr. The germanium evaporation source was heated to 1400 °C for a deposition rate of ~2.4 Å/second and a total Ge thickness of ~1 μm. Rutherford backscattering spectrometry (RBS) was used to measure the layer thickness and monitor for contaminants. Raman spectroscopy was performed using a 532 nm laser operating at 0.75 mW and 0.5 μm spot size. X-ray Diffraction was performed using a high-resolution diffractometer with an X-ray mirror on the incident optic, and a 0.27° parallel plate collimator on the receiving optics (PANalytical X'pert MRD Pro). Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM) cross-section specimens were prepared using two different methods. In specimens with a top Ge layer, cross sections were prepared by manual "rod and tube" preparation to avoid removal of the upper Ge layer. Specimens were bonded with epoxy inside a brass support structure, diced into thin cross-sections, mechanically polished down to less than 100 μm thickness, thinned to a few μm thick in the center using a dimple grinder, and polished to electron transparency using a Precision Ion Polishing System (PIPS) mill. These specimens were characterized using an aberration-corrected Jeol ARM-200F in STEM configuration with in-situ Energy Dispersive X-ray Spectroscopy (EDS), and an AppFive precession electron diffraction system. Specimens with a Nb top layer were fabricated using the same structures used for the microwave resonator measurements. These cross-sections were prepared by focused ion beam milling using an FEI Helios 660 Dual-Beam FIB/SEM. These specimens were measured using an aberration-corrected Hitachi 2700 STEM. Superconducting co-planar microwave waveguide resonator (SCPW) fabrication used standard photolithography techniques and CF4 reactive ion etching, creating a 5.8 GHz stripline resonator with 4 μm trace width, and 2 μm gap width. The resonator's electric field was concentrated in the deposited dielectric layer by using a narrow trace width and keeping the over-etch to less than 20 nm. Wider geometries are preferred for quantum devices so that more electric field energy is stored in the bulk substrate than the interfaces to maximize total quality. We measure transmission measurements (S21) at ~40 mK as a function of applied power. The resonance is fit using the diameter correction method to extract Qi, the internal quality factor of the resonator and the loss tangent (tan δi = Qi -1 ) The bright-field STEM micrograph in Figure Lattice planes are visible extending across the interface near the right side of the image indicating regions with 5-10 nm of intermixing. Precession diffraction (Figure We quantify the extent of intermixing in structures with high-temperature deposited Ge using energy-dispersive x-ray spectroscopy (EDS) line profiles (Figure The Ta has a uniform thickness and conformally coats the Nb, matching the grain sizes and orientation of the underlying Nb. These results show that Ta is an effective diffusion barrier in niobium-germanium stacks, even at temperatures as high as 400 °C. Figure We infer the relative structural quality of amorphous (room-temperature grown) and polycrystalline (400 °C grown) Ge films deposited onto superconductor layers by comparing the Raman peak shift and full-width half maximum (FWHM) of the Ge transverse optic-like (TOlike) mode (shown in Figure Ge deposited on a Ta diffusion barrier has a narrower peak, as quantified by the full width at half maximum (FWHM), and peak maximum wavenumber closer to the reference peak value in both amorphous and polycrystalline Ge. This indicates that there is less strain in the Ge layers deposited on Ta buffer layers than that when deposited directly on Nb The temperature-dependent resistivity characteristics of a parallel plate structure Nb/Ta/Ge(400 °C)/Ta/Nb/Si substrate, as shown in Figure Low-temperature (40 mK) microwave measurements of Nb (200 nm)/Ta (10 nm)/undoped single-crystal Ge resonators exhibit single photon loss tan δi = 4.92×10 -5 . This loss value is lower than the corresponding loss for Nb directly on crystalline Ge, with tan δi of 7.53×10 -5 . These measurements indicate that a barrier layer can improve the performance of microwave resonators. We have demonstrated that a Ta diffusion barrier between Nb and Ge decreases intermixing, improves microwave loss properties, and improves the structural quality of deposited Ge films. The Ta diffusion barrier reduces interface intermixing between Ge and Nb from ~20 nm to less than 5 nm in structures fabricated at temperatures at 400 °C. Low-temperature (40 mK) and low power measurements of SCPW resonators deposited on crystalline Ge wafers find improved TLS and total microwave loss properties, attributed to the addition of Ta diffusion barrier layer (i.e., tan δi = 4.92×10 -5 with Ta-diffusion barrier, and without a diffusion barrier tan δi = 7.53×10 -5 . The combination of these properties enables the production of high Q, low TLS loss co-planar, microstrip and stripline resonators, as well as low-loss device isolation, inter-wiring dielectrics, and surface passivation layers in passive microwave and Josephson junction circuit fabrication. 