It is known that the contribution of torsion to the equation for the chiral Weyl fermions can be equivalently considered in terms of the axial U (1) gauge field. In this scenario the gravitational field transforms to the U (1) gauge field. Here we show that in chiral superconductors the opposite scenario takes place: the electromagnetic U (1) field serves as the spin connection for the Bogoliubov fermionic quasiparticles. As a result the electromagnetic field gives rise to the gravitational anomaly, which contains the extra factor 1/3 in the corresponding Adler-Bell-Jackiw equation as compared with the conventional chiral anomaly. We also consider the gravitational anomaly produced in neutral Weyl superfluids by the analog of the gravitational instanton, the process of creation and annihilation of the 3D topological objects -hopfions. The gravitational instanton leads to creation of the chiral charge. Topological materials with Weyl fermions provide the possibility to study quantum anomalies, such as the Adler-Bell-Jackiw (ABJ) chiral anomaly. The gravitational anomalies have been also discussed in Weyl materials. These anomalies are produced by the effective gravitational fields acting on Weyl fermions. These fields are represented by tetrads, spin connection and torsion fields. In particular, the analog of the Nieh-Yan anomaly in terms of torsion The Hamiltonian for Bogoliubov quasiparticles in the p-wave homogeneous superfluid 3 He-A in a simplest model, which neglects Fermi-liquid corrections, has the following form 19 Here e 1 and e 2 are the real vectors satisfying conditions e 1 • e 2 = 0, e 2 1 = e 2 2 . For simplicity we do not consider the spin structure, i.e. our quasiparticles are considered as spinless. The Hamiltonian (1) describes the homogeneous system, and μ 0 = p 2 0 /2m is the equilibrium chemical potential. This Hamiltonian contains two Weyl points -topologically stable point nodes in the energy spectrum, which represent monopoles in the Berry phase in momentum space Here τ a are Pauli matrices in the particle-hole space; and e i a = (e 1 , e 2 , e 3 = v F l) are the space components of the gravitational tetrads, where v F = p 0 /m is the Fermi velocity in the normal Fermi liquid. The motion of the Bogoliubov quasiparticles in this effective field gives rise to the analog of the chiral anomaly -the anomalous nonconservation of the chiral current 1-3 . For 3 He-A the ABJ equation has the following form: The prefactor in the ABJ Eq.( A eff (r, t) = p 0 l(r, t) has been created by moving continuous vortices -skyrmions in the l field. Let us now consider the electrically charged p-wave superfluid, i.e. the superconductor with the same order parameter, and consider the role of the real electromagnetic field in the chiral anomaly. Here we are interested in the influence of the electromagnetic field only, and neglect the effective electromagnetic field, F eff μν = 0, i.e. the order parameter is assumed to be fixed. The inverse Green's function of Bogoliubov quasiparticles in the external electromagnetic field is: where A μ is the vector potential of electromagnetic field. This field acts in the opposite ways on particle and hole and hole components of Bogoliubov spinor, that is why the vector potential is accompanied by the matrix τ 3 . Here q = -1 is electric charge. Since , the Green's function can be rewritten in terms of the "covariant derivative": where C ab α are the elements of spin connection, see e.g. Ref. Expanding the Green's function (4) near the Weyl node at p 0 l, one obtains This expansion is not gauge invariant, because we omitted the gradients of the order parameter. When they are included the gauge invariance is restored. The quadratic term (p -p 0 l) 2 /2m can be neglected. Then the resulting Lagrangian can be expressed in terms of effective tetrads e μ a , which in our case are constant fields except for the vector e i 0 = A i /m. This element may produce only the higher order terms in anomaly equation and thus can be neglected. The relevant nonzero elements of the effective spin connection are C 12 α = -C 21 α = (A, A 0 )/2 in Eq.( Since we neglect the effective gauge field, F eff μν = 0, the chiral anomaly comes only from the curvature of the effective gravitational field. For a single Weyl node one has the following equation for the gravitational anomaly (see e.g. Ref. where the curvature is: According to Eq.( Since the elements of spin connections are expressed in terms of the vector potential of the electromagnetic field, the components of curvature tensor are expressed in terms of external electric and magnetic fields: Then from the anomaly equation ( This means that in the superconducting states with Weyl points, the gravitational anomaly becomes the gauge anomaly, but with the extra factor 1/3 when compared with ABJ equation (3) coming from the effective gauge field A eff = p 0 l. This factor 1/3 may have relation to the consistent anomaly In the electrically neutral superfluids, such as superfluid 3 He-A, the vector potential of external field is substituted by superfluid velocity: A → mv s , and the gravitational anomaly becomes Such anomaly can be produced by the instanton, which represents the process of creation or annihilation of the 3D skyrmions -hopfions in the vector filed l. Introducing the current density of the topological charge: one obtains the (non)conservation law for the topological charge: The process of the change of the topological charge represents the π 3 instanton: ∂ μ n μ H = δ(t)δ(r). In high energy physics this is the gravitational instanton, or the so-called torsion vortex. Here we added the factor 2 to take into account the contribution of two Weyl point into the gravitational anomaly. Eq.( Let us consider the gravitational anomaly in case of the higher order Weyl points. The Hamiltonian in Ref. The corresponding spectrum of Bogoliubov quasiparticles near the Weyl points where p = p∓p 0 l is the momentu counted from the Weyl points, and the elements of the effective metric tensor are: For corresponding superconductors the Hamiltonian is: The equation ( For the electric current one has the same expression but the creation of the electric charge is cancelled by the anomaly at the opposite Weyl point with topological charge -N . The electric charge created at one node is annihilated at the opposite node. The chiral currents for two nodes are added to give the total chiral current We demonstrated that in the chiral superconductors with Weyl fermions the external electromagnetic field serves as the spin connection for the Bogoliubov fermionic quasiparticles. As a result the electromagnetic field gives rise to the gravitational anomaly, which is described by the Adler-Bell-Jackiw equation with an extra factor 1/3 compared with the ABJ equation for the conventional chiral anomaly. In neutral chiral superfluids this gravitational anomaly takes place during creation and annihilation of the 3D topological objects -hopfions. The process analogous to the gravitational instanton leads to creation of the chiral charge. This is the gravitational analog of the Kuzmin-Rubakov-Shaposhnikov electroweak baryogenesis. Acknowledgements: This work has been supported by the European Research Council (ERC) under the European Union's Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme (Grant Agreement No. 694248).