Recently discovered kagome superconductors AV3Sb5 (A=K, Rb, Cs) provide a fresh opportunity to realize and study correlation-driven electronic phenomena on a kagome lattice. The observation of a 2a0 by 2a0 charge density wave (CDW) in the normal state of all members of AV3Sb5 kagome family has generated an enormous amount of interest, in an effort to uncover the nature of this CDW state, and identify any "hidden" broken symmetries. We use spectroscopic-imaging scanning tunneling microscopy to reveal a pronounced intensity anisotropy between different 2a0 CDW directions in KV3Sb5. In particular, by examining the strength of ordering wave vectors as a function of energy in Fourier transforms of differential conductance maps, we find that one of the CDW directions is distinctly different compared to the other two. This observation points towards an intrinsic rotation symmetry broken electronic ground state, where the symmetry is reduced from C6 to C2. Furthermore, in contrast to previous reports, we find that the CDW phase is insensitive to magnetic field direction, regardless of the presence or absence of atomic defects. Our experiments, combined with earlier observations of a stripe 4a0 charge ordering in CsV3Sb5, establish correlation-driven rotation symmetry breaking as a unifying feature of AV3Sb5 kagome superconductors. Quantum materials built from atoms arranged on a kagome network are predicted to exhibit unconventional electronic behavior 1-7 due to non-trivial Berry phase effects and strong electronic interactions. Experimental efforts on this front have primarily focused on transition-metal kagome magnets Aside from superconductivity, a common feature identified across all members of this kagome family is a 2a0 x 2a0 charge density wave (CDW) that develops in the normal state above the superconducting transition (TCDW ≈ 80-100 K KV3Sb5 is a layered kagome superconductor (Tc ≈ 0.9 K) characterized by a hexagonal crystal structure (a = b = 5.4 Å, c = 9 Å) In addition to the hexagonal lattice, STM topographs also reveal periodic conductance variations between neighboring unit cells (Fig. To explore this further, we track the evolution of the CDW peak amplitudes in the FTs of dI/dV(r,V) maps (Fig. The experiments discussed thus far have all been performed at zero external magnetic field. Given the proposals of time-reversal symmetry-breaking orbital currents Our experiments reveal a pronounced rotation symmetry breaking in the 2a0 x 2a0 CDW phase of KV3Sb5. Given the reports of unidirectional CDWs Contrasting observations reported here and those in Ref. 23 regarding the dependence of the CDW on external magnetic field pose an intriguing question regarding the dichotomy of the results. We note that subtle STM "tip changes" can dramatically change the apparent CDW amplitudes (Fig. 