In the lithium-ion battery literature, discharges followed by a relaxation to equilibrium are frequently used to validate models and their parametrizations. Good agreement with experiment during discharge is easily attained with a pseudo-two-dimensional model such as the Doyle-Fuller-Newman (DFN) model. The relaxation portion, however, is typically not well-reproduced, with the relaxation in experiments occurring much more slowly than in models. In this study, using a model that includes a size distribution of the active material particles, we give a physical explanation for the slow relaxation phenomenon. This model, the Many-Particle-DFN (MP-DFN), is compared against discharge and relaxation data from the literature, and optimal fits of the size distribution parameters (mean and variance), as well as solid-state diffusivities, are found using numerical optimization. The voltage after relaxation is captured by careful choice of the current cut-off time, allowing a single set of physical parameters to be used for all C-rates, in contrast to previous studies. We find that the MP-DFN can accurately reproduce the slow relaxation, across a range of C-rates, whereas the DFN cannot. Size distributions allow for greater internal heterogeneities, giving a natural origin of slower relaxation timescales that may be relevant in other, as yet explained, battery behavior. Lithium-ion batteries are rechargeable energy storage devices used across the consumer electronics industry due to their long lifespan, high energy density, and a low self-discharge rate compared to other batteries A frequently occurring scenario, both in battery use and in research, is that of relaxation to equilibruim after a period of dynamic (dis)charging. During a (dis)charge, the internal state of the cell is transient with heterogeneities in lithium concentrations, in the electrolyte and the active materials of both the positive and negative electrodes. When the (dis)charge is stopped and the circuit current is switched off, the internal states then equilibriate and relax to a uniform steady state. This relaxation could take several hours, even up to 24 hours 1. The final equilibrium voltage after relaxation; 2. The manner or shape of the voltage relaxation profile. Research on voltage relaxation has been focused mainly on improving the accuracy of open circuit voltage (OCV) measurements, typically done using the galvanostatic intermittent titration technique (GITT), where steps are taken through states of charge (SoC) incrementally, waiting for the cell to sufficiently relax after each step. The measurement of property (1) is then of importance, and strategies have been developed to measure this voltage accurately in a shorter time Battery relaxation has also found uses in the parametrization of physical models. These include recent comprehensive studies by Ecker et al. In this paper, we will give a physical explanation for the slow relaxation phenomenon using an extension of the DFN to include a distribution of active particle sizes. Models with multiple (or distributions of) particle sizes have been considered by several authors, e.g. The structure of the paper is as follows. The mathematical models (MP-DFN and DFN), geometry and notation, are defined in section 2; the parameter set from the literature, and how it was adapted, is in section 3. The methodology is described in section 4, with the model comparisons (and parameter fitting) presented in section 5, followed by conclusions and future work. In this section, we describe the mathematical models considered in this paper, the MP-DFN and DFN. We first describe the geometry and notation used, then state the MP-DFN model as it is the most general, followed by the DFN which is a special case of the MP-DFN. First, we summarise the geometry and notation used within both models. A schematic of the multiscale nature of the geometry is shown in Fig. At each macroscale location of both electrodes, x ∈ Ω k , k = n, p, there is a microscale domain } comprising a collection of spherical particles of solid active material. The range of particle radii R k that are present is modelled as a continuum, taking all positive values between R k,min and R k,max (which could be 0 and ∞), with the fraction of all particles of a given radius R k given by the (normalised) particle-size distribution f k,n (R k ). However, it is more convenient to deal with the fraction of surface area contributed by particles of radius R k , which we denote f k,a (R k ) and refer to as the area-weighted particlesize distribution (aPSD). Particle size can then be interpreted as a microscale dimension, with "coordinate" R k . In this paper we consider the particle-size distribution to be independent of macroscale location x, but one could consider a non-uniform spatial distribution by letting f k,a (R k ) (and also Ω k , R * k,min , R k,max , etc.) depend on x. All active particles of a given size (and at a given location) behave identically, and have a further internal domain Ω k (R k ) = {0 ≤ r k ≤ R k } described (due to spherical symmetry) by the radial coordinate r k . Hence, each electrode consists of a hierarchy of three domains or dimensions ( We use the subscript k ∈ {n, sep, p} to indicate in which subdomain that variable is defined. Then for that subdomain, the phase, either solid or electrolyte, is denoted by the additional subscript s or e, respectively. The variables in the model and their subdomains are Electrolyte phase : where potentials are denoted by φ, current densities by i, molar lithium concentrations by c (with c e,k being lithium-ion concentrations), and molar fluxes by N . We note that all quantities depend on the macroscale coordinate x and time t, but c s,k (and N s,k ) depend additionally on the microscale coordinates: particle radius R k ∈ [R k,min , R k,max ] and the radial coordinate r k ∈ [0, R k ]. The parameters are described in Table 2.2 Many-Particle-Doyle-Fuller-Newman model (MP-DFN) The conservation of charge in the electrolyte and electrode phases is given by The interfacial current density J k represents the total charge transfer, due to electrochemical reactions, between the active material and electrolyte at a given x location. The current densities in the electrolyte and electrode material are given by MacInnes' equation and Ohm's law, respectively, There is continuity of i e,k , φ e,k and i s,k = 0 at the internal electrode/separator boundaries, x = L n , L -L p . At the current collectors, charge only enters/exits the cell via the solid phase, with current density i s,n = i app (time-dependent, in general) imposed at x = 0, but also i s,p = i app at x = L by conservation of charge: Then the solid-phase potentials at the current collectors are Adding the i e,k and i s,k equations in In the electrolyte: with continuity of c e,k , N e,k at internal boundaries x = L n , L -L p , and no-flux N e,k = 0 at the current collectors x = 0, L. In the active solid electrode particles, lithium transport is modelled by Fickian diffusion, with regularity at the particle centres, and a flux condition at the surface, where j k is the interfacial current density representing the charge transfer into the electrolyte, which may be different for particles of different sizes. The total interfacial current density originating from all particles at that macroscale location x is then which appears as a charge source/sink in where the factor of 3 is due to the assumption here of spherical particles. The radius Rk,a is the area-weighted mean radius, or the mean of f k,a (R k )-see section 3.1 for further discussion of aPSD quantities and their relevance. The interfacial current density originating from the lithium (de)intercalation reaction on the surface (r k = R k ) of all active particles in each electrode is modelled by symmetric Butler-Volmer kinetics (transfer coefficients equal to 1/2): Exchange current density : In the above it is implicit that the concentration c s,k is evaluated on the particle surface Initially, at t = 0, we take the cell to be at rest with all variables constant and uniform in space. The initial conditions are which forces the initial potentials to be and all other variables are initially equal to zero. Here we state the standard Doyle-Fuller-Newman (DFN) model, the most commonly used physical porous electrode model of a lithium-ion cell, and the model employed in Chen et al. , and the MP-DFN model reduces to the DFN model, with equation ( Then, only the dynamics of particles of size R k = R k,DF N need to be modelled, and hence all of the remaining equations are identical to that of the MP-DFN, but with all variables (where applicable) evaluated at 3 Parameter values from the literature In order to later compare to the experimental results of Chen et al. The MP-DFN requires not only a mean or representative particle radius for each electrode, but a particle-size distribution. Particle-size distributions were measured in Chen et al. Modified from Reaction rate [A m -2 (m 3 /mol) normalised version, the area-weighted particle-size distribution (aPSD), For the MP-DFN, it is sufficient to specify the function a k (R k ), which we achieve by specifying its integral, a tot,k , and its shape, f k,a (R k ) (which integrates to one). Here we convert the measurements of n k (R k ) in Chen et al. with shape parameters μ k,LN ∈ (-∞, ∞), σ k,LN > 0, related to the mean and variance via Least-square fits of lognormals to the data, using the SciPy optimize package, are also shown in Fig. The determination of several parameters in the set provided in where Rk,a / Rk,n = 1.24, 1.30 for k = n, p, and m Chen k , D Chen s,k are the Chen et al. An important observation is that these updated parameter estimates are not just applicable to the MP-DFN, but also the DFN if the particle radius Rk,a is used. This is because the relevant timescales in the model-the diffusion timescales τ k and reaction timescales τ r,k -are unchanged from Chen et al, which is expected since these are the quantities they directly measured experimentally. As a consequence, the dimensionless DFN model equations are the same for both parameter sets, the original set from Lastly, it was necessary to slightly modify the fitted functional forms of the OCPs, i.e. U k (c s,k ) where cs,k = c s,k /c k,max is the stoichiometry. Analytical fits were preferable to interpolation of the OCP data of and are shown in Fig. The PyBaMM Regarding the particle-size dimensions R k , particular to the present work, it was also numerically necessary to impose minimum and maximum particle radii, R k,min and R k,max , for each electrode k = n, p. We chose values based on the microscale parameters in Table The experimental data that we compare our models to is the validation data taken from Chen et al. Starting from the parameter set given in Table where i corresponds to the experiment C-rate (0.5C, 1C or 1.5C), V data,j are the experimental data (at times t j ), and N i is the number of data points. The objective or loss function that we choose to minimize is then the sum of the MSEs across all C-rates, We employ the mean-squared errors at each C-rate rather than just the squared error to account for the fact that the data at each C-rate are of different lengths. A meaningful measure of the error for each C-rate is given by the root-mean-squared error, RMSE i = √ MSE i , and one across all C-rates is RMSE total = 1 3 i MSE i , which are used in Table In this section, we present modelling results that reproduce the experimentally observed slow relaxation of the voltage after a constant current discharge. First, the key aspects of the relaxation phenomenon are described, and then attempts to reproduce these aspects using the DFN model and the MP-DFN model are made, by fitting a relevant subset of parameters. As discussed earlier, there are two key components of the voltage relaxation for a physical model to capture, which we repeat here: (1) The final equilibrium voltage after relaxation; (2) The shape or "speed" of the relaxation. We first elucidate the difficulties in consistently capturing the final voltage, particularly after a full discharge, and describe one remedy for this scenario, which we employ here. Then, we move on to the shape of the voltage relaxation. The equilibrium voltage after relaxation in our physical models is given simply by the OCV, V eq = U p (c s,p,eq ) -U n (c s,n,eq ), where cs,p,eq and cs,n,eq are the final uniform stoichiometries in the positive and negative electrodes. Thus, predicting V eq amounts to predicting cs,p,eq and cs,n,eq . However, V eq can depend very sensitively on these stoichiometries, particularly, close to 0% and 100% state-of-charge, where the OCPs, U p and U n , are singular with large gradients. Therefore, small errors in the model's internal states can result in significant errors in V eq . This is not an issue if the experiment undertaken is a (dis)charge for a predefined length of time, when the final model stoichiometries are determined straightforwardly and accurrately via charge and lithium conservation, the only error being that made during electrode balancing. It is an issue, however, if the (dis)charge stopping criterion is a cut-off voltage close to 0% or 100% state-of-charge. This is evident in the model validations of, e.g., The experimental data which we consider here (see section 4.2) consist of constant current discharges from a fully-charged cell until the lower cut-off voltage of 2.5 V is reached, followed by 2 hours of relaxation. Fig. Even though the time-specified simulation does not reach the cut-off voltage, its peak error (see Fig. As observed in Fig. Figure These are timescales representative of the entire electrode(s). A model with a single particle size per electrode, such as the DFN, thus has a single diffusion timescale in each. For models with many particle sizes (such as the MP-DFN), there is a diffusion timescale for each particle size, with those larger than the mean radius Rk,a having longer diffusion timescales, and therefore relaxations, than the mean particle. This distribution of diffusion timescales is one method of realistically including longer timescales in a physical model of the battery. We may vary the overall diffusion and reaction timescales (38)-( In this section, we directly compare the DFN and MP-DFN models to the experimental discharge and relaxation data (see section 4.2) across a range of C-rates. By varying the microscale parameters D s,k , Rk,a , σ a,k , k = n, p, best fits of the DFN and MP-DFN to the voltage profiles are presented and analyzed. The relevant parameter values, before and after fitting, are given in Table First, to demonstrate that the DFN model (with a single particle size per electrode) cannot reproduce the slow relaxation phenomenon, we attempt a best fit to the experimental data, varying the four parameters D s,k , Rk,a , k = n, p. Although the parameter set in Table We now present the results of the MP-DFN model compared to the experimental data, including the best fit under the variation of the six parameters D s,k , Rk,a , σ a,k , k = n, p. The same numerical optimization methods were used as the DFN, but now there are six fitting parameters rather than four. Fig. The poor fit near the current cut-off for 0.5C is due to a slow voltage drop at the end of discharge. The fit can be improved considerably if we modify one parameter, D s,n say, for this C-rate only. If this is done, the best-fit value for D s,n is 1.30 × 10 -13 m 2 s -1 and the agreement with experiment becomes remarkable, as shown in Fig. The errors (RMSE) of each model (DFN and MP-DFN), for the parameters from Finally, we comment on the differences between the fitted size distributions and those measured directly in Figure In this paper we explored, using physical models, the voltage relaxation phenomenon previously observed but not physically explained by several parametrization and modelling studies on lithium ion batteries. We focused on the discharge and relaxation experimental data of Chen et al. Here we considered an extension of the DFN model to include a distribution of particle sizes in the active material of each electrode, rather than a single size as assumed in the DFN. This model, denoted the Many-Particle-DFN (MP-DFN), was initially parametrized by modifying the DFN parameter set in The discharge and relaxation simulations of the MP-DFN model were then compared to the experimental data, and contrasted with those of the DFN model. To account for experimental uncertainty in the electrode microstructure properties, the PSDs (i.e., the mean radii and standard deviations) and effective diffusivity of lithium in the active material were also optimized to best fit the voltage data across the full range of C-rates (0.5C, 1C, 1.5C). The numerical simulations were performed using the flexible and robust software package PyBaMM, and the parameter optimization used a derivative-free nonlinear least squares minimizer, DFO-LS, written in Python. The final equilibrium voltage after the relaxation period was able to be consistently captured, by both the MP-DFN and DFN, by matching the discharge time to that observed in each experiment. We found that the DFN always overestimates the speed of the voltage relaxation, even with parameter optimization, showing that a timescale of sufficient length is likely not possible within the model. However, our results show that the MP-DFN can exhibit a relaxation slow enough to match that of the experiments, owing to a distribution of diffusion timescales and greater scope for internal heterogeneities. Even for the experimentally measured microstructure parameters, the MP-DFN better matched the experiments during discharge as well as the relaxation. This can be greatly improved with parameter optimization, where the spread of the PSDs (and hence distribution of timescales) are increased, resulting in remarkable agreement for all C-rates, and an average error of 22.4 mV, or 15.6 mV if the diffusivity in the negative electrode is modified for one value of the C-rate (0.5C). Avenues for future work include the consideration of lithium ion batteries with different electrode chemistries. The cells modelled here have negative electrodes that are a composite of two active materials (graphite and silicon), but only one material was modelled for simplicity. Experiments on cells without composite electrodes, or models extended to account for the composite explicitly, may allow even better agreement without necessitating that, e.g., diffusivities depend on the C-rate. One could also consider (dis)charge relaxation experiments with cut-off chosen at other states of charge, far from 0% or 100% where the OCPs are steep, reducing the difficulties in capturing the equilibrium states. Finally, the MP-DFN is computationally expensive, which motivates deriving reduced-order models that can display the same behaviour-this is currently under way. At x = L n , 1 -L p there is continuity of c e,k , N e,k , and at x = 0, 1 there is no-flux, N e,k = 0. N s,k = 0, at r k = 0, and 1.5 ] 8.053 × 10 -7 -4.443 × 10 -6 D s,k Diffusivity of Li in electrode [m 2 s -1 ] 5.10 × 10 -14 -6.75 × 10 -15 * =0 )F * /(R * g T * ) Electric potential in the electrolyte e i e,k , k ∈ {n, sep, p}, This means the model could be referred to as "pseudo-three-dimensional" or P3D, with particle size interpreted as another pseudo-dimension. In the PyBaMM implementation, the parameter that is rescaled in practice is the exchange current density j 0,k .