Weakly disordered two-dimensional (2D) superconductors can host richer quantum phase transitions than their highly-disordered counterparts 1-6 . This is due to the insertion of a metallic state in the transition between a superconductor and an insulator. Disorders were predicted to show profound influences on the boundaries surrounding this intermediate metallic phase, affecting the existence of a metallic ground state called Bose metal 1,2 and the dynamic processes in a quantum Griffiths state 7,8 . Here we present a study on quantum phase transitions of a clean 2D superconductor, MoS2, under a perpendicular magnetic field as a function of disorder strength that is tuned electrostatically. We found two universal scaling behaviors independent of disorders: a power-law scaling applies for all metallic states, and an activated dynamical scaling characterizes transitions between quantum Griffiths state and weakly localized metal. The phase diagram in this unexplored clean regime shows that a Bose metal ground state is expected only below a critical disorder. Whereas, stronger disorders can stabilize a true 2D superconductivity and enhances the quantum Griffiths phase. These behaviors are diametrically different from the conventional understanding of the clean regime. The disorder has significant influences on macroscopic quantum coherent states of superconductors. Physically, the presence of disorders requires treating the disorder scattering prior to superconductivity, where the electrons in the normal state are described by a diffusive motion. The mean free path lm of the electron, which is determined by the strength of disorder scattering, becomes an important parameter that defines the so-called "cleanness" of a superconductor. Compared with coherence length 0 found in the superconducting state, lm ~ 0 marks the borderline towards the clean (lm >> 0) or dirty (lm << 0) limits. In twodimensional (2D) systems, the increase of disorder can drastically suppress the superconductivity by reducing the transition temperature Tc and increasing the normal state resistance RN. When the disorder reaches a critical strength in many granular films, these highly-disordered 2D superconductors (lm << 0) turn into insulators at a universal resistance close to h/4e On the other hand, two distinct features were observed in many weakly-disordered systems (lm ~ 0) based on 2D single crystals First of all, an intermediate metallic state emerges after suppressing the superconductivity in a magnetic field B, which was theoretically proposed to be a quantum metallic phase. At zero temperature, the ground state of this metallic state was predicted to be a Bose metal Secondly, a quantum Griffiths state, in which the Cooper pairs are isolated in superconducting rare regions under a large B field, dominates the phase transitions from a quantum metal to a weakly-localized metal (normal-metal state) Although the phase diagram in the dirty regime has been studied extensively Experimentally, although having different disorders can lead to zero or non-zero Bc0 values for different ground states, it is an open question whether the intermediate metallic states all belong to a universality class of power-law scaling. In the large B field regime, where the superconducting rare regions dominate the phase transitions, a quantum Griffiths state is theoretically predicted for all systems with non-zero disorders Compared with the extensive studies on universal scaling in the dirty regime To prepare a range of states in the second quadrant of Fig. By grounding the ionic gate and warming the device up to a temperature slightly higher than Tg, disorder states with different strengths can be accessed through sequential thermal releases. It worth noting that the thermally activated ionic motion is limited to the z-direction out of the channel plane. Whereas, the in-plane motion of ions is restrained due to the rubbery state of high viscosity. As a result, different disorder strengths can be accessed in a single device with identical disorder distribution in the xy plane. Compared with different disorders accessed by preparing multiple samples, either by thin film deposition or post annealing The disorder strength can be parameterized as W~l m -1 2 ⁄ 37,38 (section 1 of the supplementary materials). From the band structure calculation of the ion-gated MoS2 When a magnetic field is applied to a highly-disordered 2D superconductor, the superconducting islands gradually lose the long-range correlations. At the zero-temperature limit, transition appears at the quantum resistance, h/4e 2 , where the islands are isolated by insulating regions Instead, the magnetoresistances can be well described by the Bose metal model Consequently, vortexes can move freely, and the Rs shows a linear dependence on the B field: The excitation current can also assist the vortex motion via Lorentz force As shown in Fig. Multiple crossing points can be identified in panels A and B for the states with large and medium disorders, forming a phase boundary in the B-T phase diagram , where Rc and Bc are the critical resistance and critical magnetic field defined by the crossing point of the adjacent Rs(B) curves, and f is an arbitrary function with f(0) = 1, z the dynamical critical exponent, ν the correlation length exponent, TL the lowest temperature of the division. When our system is released to cleaner states with lm > 44.3 nm, determining the crossing points and extract accurate exponent zν becomes increasingly difficult because the magnetoresistance curves merge (Fig. As shown in Fig. Here, the plateau at zν ≈ 0.5 (Fig. where Φ 0 is the magnetic flux quantum In contrast to the strong influence of disorders on the magnetic field dependences shown in Fig for a critical point with infinite randomness In addition to MoS2, the consistent (ψν) eff values also found in different materials strongly support a general universality of activated dynamical scaling in the weakly-disordered 2D superconductors. As shown in Fig. When T > T c 0 = 5.5 K, a deviation was observed from activated dynamical scaling for the data enclosed by the dashed box (Fig. The T c 0 extracted from activated dynamical scaling is also in good agreement with that (5.8 K) derived from the Werthamer-Helfand-Hohenberg (WHH) analysis (Fig. For different disorders, the LORR varies with the disorder's strength. Each disorder state has a LORR that corresponds to a specific Bc value (Fig. ) eff 1 ln(T 0 T ⁄ ) and extrapolating to zν(T0) = 0, turns out to be identical for all accessed states in gated MoS2. As a result, an identical critical temperature T c 0 is obtained for states with different disorder strengths. In the rare region regime, the probability ω of finding a superconducting rare region scales with the rare region size LRR as a Gaussian distribution ω(L RR )~exp (-pL RR d ), where p is the disorder concentration, d the dimensionality of the rare region Consequently, when ( ) eff is universally valid, the fitting parameter T0 is expected to be identical for different disordered states, as long as the disorder concentration holds constant. In comparison, the consistency in T0 values cannot be observed the -W thin films, where the disorder is tuned by varying the thickness of thin films in separate samples Based on the scaling analysis on MoS2 in the clean regime, we could propose a phase diagram of the 2D superconductor as a function of the disorder strength in the clean regime. The phase diagram can be then compared with that proposed 30 years ago by Fisher For the variable disorder states with lm < 0, at finite T = 1.9 samples are measured at finite temperature and finite current excitation (Fig. In the high field regime above the quantum metal states, where BRR <B < Bc, the quantum Griffiths states appear when the locally ordered rare regions are embraced by normal metallic regions. Here, BRR is extrapolated from Fig. Therefore, the quantum Griffiths state (BRR <B < Bc) expands with the increase of disorder in the phase diagram. Towards the clean side, the LORR grows when the disorder strength decreases. Theoretically, an infinitesimal amount of disorder can already cause infinite randomness In conclusion, we've presented a clean 2D superconductor with in-situ tunable disorders. The quantum phase transitions in the unexplored clean regime are characterized by two universal scaling behaviors in a perpendicular magnetic field. In the low field, the superconductor-quantum metal transitions follow a power-law scaling. While, in the high field, the quantum metal-normal metal transition is characterized by an activated power-law scaling. Besides the dual universality, a clean 2D superconductor shows an unconventional phase diagram. The true zero-resistance states appear only at a critical disorder and the 2D superconductivity enhances by the stronger disorders. Below the critical disorder, the system enters the quantum metal state at B = 0; where the quantum Griffiths region diminishes gradually toward the clean limit. These behaviors observed in the clean regime are strikingly different from the widely accepted Fisher diagram. Our phase diagram can act as a guide to both clean and dirty limits. To the clean limit, our result indicates that a super-clean superconductor should have a ground state of Bose metal that is also affected by infinite randomness from even infinitesimal defects. Namely, it is intriguing to study whether the Griffith regime will eventually close if we can go closer to the clean limit. On the other hand, following our phase diagram to the dirty side, variable disorders can also be prepared by strong ionic gating Since applying Vg breaks the equilibrium of ion distribution only along the z-direction, the thermal release of the accumulated ions is also along the same direction to larger z values. Therefore, a smoother potential on the channel surface can be obtained after each thermal release corresponding to the different disorder strengths. Due to the very slow ionic motion near the Tg, new states can be then controllably accessed by freezing the ionic motion again by fast cooling down. The disorder strength stays constant as long as the ions are frozen below the Tg. This disorder-tuning method can ensure a few crucial technical details that substantiate the whole analysis. First of all, the disorder is variable only for its strength. The 2D disorder distribution is kept for all states due to the lack of ionic diffusion in the xy plane because the ions are in a very viscous state close to Tg. Moreover, all states are accessed after one ionic gating on the same device, which maintains the intrinsic disorder and eliminates any possible difference in chemical details accessed by two different gatings. In reality, the sample is chemically inert if gated at 220 K. Identical states can be achieved by applying the same Vg (Fig. from the disorders. The extracted Bc0 decreases from 1.1 T for the most disordered state (lm = 12.4 nm) to nearly zero for the critical state with l m c = 31.7 nm. Above this critical disorder, the vortex motion is collectively pinned. The large pinning energy might not be overcome by the quantum