Si 3 N 4 Resist SiO 2 Si AlN Mo Al % (1.1) ??? % (1.1) ??? % (1.1) ??? % (1.1) ??? Integrated photonics 1 has enabled signal synthesis, modulation and conversion using photonic integrated circuits (PIC). Many materials have been developed, among which silicon nitride (Si 3 N 4 ) has emerged as a leading platform particularly for nonlinear photonics Integrated photonics 1 has enabled chip-scale optical systems with compact sizes, portable weight, and low power consumption, which have been translated from table-top research setups to commercial products. With the advancement of nano-fabrication technology, there have been major achievements in integrated semiconductor lasers Despite of these advances of Si 3 N 4 integrated photonics, non-reciprocal devices, such as isolators and circulators that are widely used in optical communications and datacenters for signal routing, multiplexing, and protecting lasers from reflections, have not been improved via these developments. Conventionally, optical non-reciprocity is realized in magneto-optic materials deposition, though these efforts suffer from significant optical losses and external magnet. In addition, the requirement of large magnetic field bias makes it incompatible with superconducting qubits where optical isolation is needed for blocking reflected noises in optical interfaces for quantum interconnects To overcome these bottlenecks, magnetic-free schemes have been demonstrated to break Lorentz reciprocity or time reversal symmetry, through synthetic magnetic field Spatio-temporal modulation In this work, we demonstrate the first AOM-based optical isolator for Si 3 N 4 integrated photonics. Three AlN piezoelectric actuators are equidistantly placed along a Si 3 N 4 microring resonator, and generate high-overtone bulk acoustic resonances (HBAR) to realize AOM Device principle and design. Our integrated optical isolator consists of three AlN piezoelectric actuators on top of a Si 3 N 4 microring resonator, as shown in Fig. The Si 3 N 4 microresonator is designed to support two optical eigenmodes, a and b, with frequency difference matching a mechanical/acoustic resonant frequency, as shown in Fig. While a single vertical HBAR mode from one AlN actuator carries zero in-plane momentum, an effective acoustic wave rotating along the microring is generated by driving three actuators coherently with phases of (0 • , 120 • , 240 • ), i.e. 120 • phase difference between two adjacent actuators, as illustrated in Fig. where a (b) and κ a (κ b ) are the intra-cavity amplitude and the total loss rate of mode a (b), κ a,ex is the external coupling rate of mode a. These equations of motion are transformed under the rotating wave approximation (RWA) around the input laser frequency ω L /2π, thus is the laser frequency detuning to the resonant frequency of a (b). ω d /2π is the microwave drive frequency which can be slightly detuned from the mechanical resonant frequency ω m /2π. Mode a is probed by the input light with amplitude a in , and its optical transmission/isolation is studied in the following analysis. In the forward direction, the two optical modes undergo interband transition with a scattering rate g = g 0 √ n c , where g 0 is the single phonon-photon coupling rate describing the optomechanical interaction strength, and n c is the intra-cavity phonon number. The optical cooperativity, i.e. the ratio of scattering rate and losses, is C = 4g 2 /κ a κ b . Strong coupling requires C 1, and can leads to Rabi oscillation and mode splitting. The latter results in a transparency window on the resonance in the light transmission, which can be calculated from Eqs. 1 and 2 as follows: In the forward direction, C 1 and T | ∆a=0 = 1. This transparency can be understood intuitively as the impedance mismatch between the bus waveguide and the microresonator, which is resulted from the increasing effective intrinsic loss due to the scattering to the other optical mode. In the backward direction where the threewave phase matching is not fulfilled, interband transition is prohibited, leading to C 1 and T | ∆a=0 = 0 in the critical coupling regime (κ a = 2κ a,ex ). Consequently, the microresonator remains critically coupled and its light transmission is not affected by the presence of the acoustic wave. This non-reciprocal transmission between the forward (T = 1) and backward directions (T = 0) is the basic of our optical isolator. Meanwhile, in the forward direction, a single modulation sideband is generated in mode b which is frequencyshifted by ω d relative to the input laser ω L /2π. The mode conversion efficiency η is: Figure Figure The RF phases are critical for phase matching. Figure sonable matching with experimental data (see Supplementary Note 4). Light transmission of the generated anti-Stokes TM sideband is simultaneously measured as shown in Fig. RF power dependency. The evolution of optical iso-lation with varying applied RF power is studied in Fig. The mode splitting rate, which is two times of the interband scattering rate g, is extracted by fitting the resonance profile using the generalized Eq. 3 from CMT, with g and ∆ω ba being the fitting parameters. Figure With RF power above 20 dBm, the interband scattering rate g saturates, which suggests the efficiency of pumping phonons into the cavity starts dropping. This is likely because ω d becomes red-detuned to ω m , i.e. ω dω m < 0. Therefore, for RF power between 18 to 20 dBm, nearly zero detuning can be derived. In this regime, the single-phonon optomechanical coupling strength g 0 is calculated as 208 Hz, by fitting high RF power data (purple line) with g = g 0 √ n c , where n c is calculated by extracting the electro-mechanical coupling efficiency k 2 t,eff = 0.2% from S 11 . The low RF power region is fitted with ω dω m ≈ 6 MHz blue-detuning (red line). Another consequence of the RF thermal effect is the drift of mode spacing ∆ω ba . Figure Detuning of optical mode spacing. Since there is 380 MHz difference in FSR between the TE 00 and TM 00 modes (see Supplementary Note 2), their frequency spacing ∆ω ba varies from pair to pair for different center wavelengths. Here, the dependence of isolation performance on ∆ω ba is studied in Fig. Isolation of optical pulses. We further evaluated the optical isolator to demonstrate a unidirectional transmission of optical pulse train to mimic (0, 1) data stream, as shown in Fig. Optical power linearity. Dynamic reciprocity has been a well-known limitation for most optical isolators relying on optical nonlinearity, where the isolation degrades dramatically when light transmits simultaneously in both directions with optical power exceeds the threshold In our work, with only an electrical drive, the optical linearity is preserved as long as the intra-cavity photon number is smaller than the phonon number. Since phonon frequency is five orders of magnitude smaller than photon frequency, theoretically it suggests maximum of 6 kW optical power for the 20-dBm RF power in the experiment. However, the optical linearity is finally limited to several Watts due to the Kerr nonlinearity of Si 3 N 4 . The quasi-square waveguide used here has a normal group velocity dispersion (GVD), thus Kerr parametric oscillation is suppressed. The linearity is experimentally verified in microwatt to milliwatt range as shown in Fig. This work has demonstrated an integrated optical isolator achieved by spatio-temporal modulation of a Si 3 N 4 microring resonator via three AlN pieozoelectric actuators. The device has been fully characterized in terms of RF phases, RF powers, optical spectra, and optical powers, showing agreement with theoretical models and numerical simulations. Table Although promising progresses have been made using nonlinear optics In the future, the isolation can be significantly improved by optimizing the bus-microring coupling gap to reach critical coupling or slight over-coupling 114 . Furthermore, it has been theoretically predicted that the RF power consumption can be reduced to a few dBm by reducing the microring radius to 20 μm, which will increase both the electro-mechanical and optomechanical coupling efficiencies Device fabrication: The Si 3 N 4 PIC is fabricated using the photonic Damascene process In the main optical isolation measurement, three RF signal generators (Agilent E8257D) output RF drive for each actuator and are amplified by three RF amplifiers (ZHL-5W-63-S+) before going into the device. The phases between them are controlled by their built-in phase controller after they are synchronized by their internal 10 MHz clock. The same diode laser outputs CW light whose wavelength is continuously swept around the optical resonance. The input polarization is controlled by fiber polarization controllers (FPC561) to align with the TE polarization on chip. The light input direction is selected by a MEMS (microelectromechanical system) 2 × 2 optical switch (OSW22-1310E). The output TE and TM polarized light is separated by a fiber polarization beam splitter (PBC1550SM-FC) and measured by two photodetectors (New Focus 1811), whose signals are recorded by an oscilloscope (MSO8104A). Note the optical axis of the beam splitter is fixed, thus we have to use a polarization controller to align with it. During the measurement, TE polarization is selected by rotating the polarization controller until only TE mode resonance is observed. This process is repeated for both directions. It is worth noting that, although the polarization will change as we switch the MEMS optical switch, the polarization right before the PBS will be the same, since the optical switch itself is a reciprocal device. For testing the isolation of optical pulses, the input light before the optical switch is modulated by an electro-optical intensity modulator (Lucent 2623CSA) and the input pulse is generated by a function generator (Agilent 33250A). In testing of the optical linearity, Erbium Doped Fiber amplifier (EDFA-I-B) is used before the optical switch for optical powers larger than 100 μW. Derivation of coupled mode equations: The three-wave mixing (two optical modes a and b and one mechanical mode c) process can be described by the quantum interaction Hamiltonian as: assuming phase matching is fulfilled and a has smaller frequency than b. Thus, only two processes can be supported: 1. ab † c, annihilation of photon a and phonon c and generation of one photon b; 2. a † bc † , annihilation of one photon b and generation of photon a and phonon c. Following similar approach as Ref 103 , the equation of motion can be obtained by assuming resolved sideband and rotating-wave approximation: where γc and γc,ex are total loss rate and external coupling rate of the mechanical mode, and c in = P in / ω d is input microwave amplitude. Assuming optomechanical back-action (term g 0 a † b in Eq. 8) is much smaller than the microwave drive, the intra-cavity amplitude of c at static state is: By inserting Eq. 11 into Eqs. 6, 7, we will get Eqs. 1, 2 in the main text. Due to the modulation, b is frequency shifted by ω d in the rotating frame of ω L . The slow amplitude and fast oscillation of b can be separated by substitute b with be -iω d t . At steady state, Eqs. 1, 2 can be solved by letting time derivatives to be zero, and after some linear algebra we will arrive at the general expressions for transmission T and sideband conversion efficiency η: where ∆ bω d = ∆ ba + ∆aω d . It can be seen when ∆a = 0, ∆ ba = ω d , Eqs. 13, 14 reduce to Eqs. 3, 4. Eqs. 13, 14 are used for fittings in Fig. where the transmission minima is reached when ∆a = ±g. Thus the mode splitting is 2g. Domain (FDFD) algorithm developed by Yu Shi et al. Similar as the experiment, the modulation wave need to counter-propagate with the optical modes to satisfy phase matching (see Fig. Another device with 950 nm bus-microring gap is measured which shows smaller insertion loss of 0.1 dB. The electro-and opto-mechanical properties are characterized in Fig. The power handling capability of the piezoelectric actuator is also studied by applying even higher RF powers. For RF power under 27 dBm, the piezoelectric actuator can work continuously for a long time (over several hours) without degradation. However, for RF power bigger than 30 dBm, there is gradual roughing of the top electrode surface, as can be seen in Fig. OM [15] Supplementary Table Optical non-reciprocity has been demonstrated in an optomechanical system through optomechanically induced transparency (OMIT) From the Table The recent work using the nonlinearity of Si 12 achieved large isolation (20 dB) and bandwidth (20 GHz). However, the fact it works for small range of optical power (4 dBm-8 dBm) limits the applicable scenarios. In contrast, dynamic modulation, especially with electrical driving, largely preserves the optical linearity by separating driving and sensing in two different domains. The earliest experiments a Non-reciprocal sideband modulation b Optical drive