In recent times, the quantity of wastes generated from industries, hospitals, construction sites etc. is perpetually increasing from year to year. Producing concrete utilizing waste or discarded materials as a partial replacement to fine or coarse aggregates is one among the e ective ways of waste utilization. The disposal of incinerator bo om ash usually produced by the incineration of inorganic constituents of the municipal solid wastes (MSW) in an eco-friendly way is one of the issues of concern, globally. By the way, the present study is related to the utilization of MSW incinerator bo om ash and recycled demolition waste aggregate as partial replacement materials for fine and coarse aggregate, respectively to produce eco-friendly concrete. This study adopted an innovative pretreatment technique for stabilizing the MSW incinerator bo om ash. Five distinct M20 grade concrete mixes were produced with di erent proportions of fine aggregate, MSW incinerator bo om ash, coarse aggregate, and recycled demolition waste aggregate along with cement and water. The incinerator bo om ash was replaced at 5% and 10% quantities with fine aggregate and the recycled demolition waste aggregate was replaced at 40% and 60% of the weight of the coarse aggregate. The strength and durability properties of the M20 grade concrete were analyzed. It was noticed that the strength and durability properties of the eco-friendly concrete specimens produced by incorporating 5% -incinerator bo om ash and 40% -recycled demolition waste aggregate were superior to that of the control mix concrete. Laboratory tank leaching tests showed that the eco-friendly concrete do not pose any significant environmental hazard. Furthermore, the microstructural analysis through scanning electron microscope (SEM) images, revealed dense aggregate paste matrix interfaces with less micro-pores and insignificant micro-cracks due to the incorporation of incinerator bo om ash as a partial replacement to the fine aggregate. Eco-friendly Concrete is a latest terminology given to the variety of concrete produced by incorporating waste/discarded and recycled materials The International Solid Waste Association (ISWA), ranked India in the 3 rd position among several countries of the world in the production of waste, particularly the municipal solid waste (MSW), with about 1.1 kilo tons of waste generated per day The ever increasing urban expansion in cities has led to generation of construction and demolition (C&D) waste due to the renovation and demolition of existing structures or housing units. The demolished concrete blocks, brick masonry units, timber, metals, glass, ceramics, flooring mosaics and rubble constitute a bulk of C&D wastes Over the time, several studies conducted on the usage of the incinerator bo om ash as a partial replacement to fine aggregate It is worth to visualize the reported literature on the usage of MSW incinerator bo om ash in concrete. Over 50 articles were observed in the Scopus database and the major related keywords are displayed using VOSviewer cluster algorithm as shown in Figure Further, the inconsistency in the composition of the incinerator bo om ash makes it an antagonistic material for use in concrete production Based on the chemical composition of MSW incinerator bo om ash, an e icient pretreatment system has to be designed to transform it into a stable, non-reactive (inert) and homogeneous material. Hence, the objective of the present study was to design an innovative pretreatment technique for stabilizing the MSW incinerator bo om ash and therea er utilize it as a partial replacement material to fine aggregate. The recycled demolition waste aggregate was also employed as a substitution material for coarse aggregate to produce eco-friendly concrete. This study adopted an innovative pretreatment technique for stabilizing the incinerator bo om ash. Five distinct M20 grade concrete mixes as per Indian Standard (IS) codal provisions were designed and produced with di erent proportions of fine aggregate (M-sand), MSW incinerator bo om ash, coarse aggregate, recycled demolition waste aggregate along with cement and water. A standard/control concrete mix and four other trial concrete mix proportions containing 5% or 10% of MSW incinerator bo om ash, and 40% or 60% of recycled demolition waste aggregate were designed. The MSW incinerator bo om ash was restricted just up to 10% substitution taking into account of the adverse impacts that may happen such as cavities, micro-pores, micro-cracks, and leaching of heavy metals from concrete at higher replacement percentages The manufactured sand (M sand) having particle size distribution conforming to the zone II grading of Table Crushed granite gravel of 20 mm downsize were used in addition to recycled demolition waste (RDW) aggregate The bo om ash (Figure • Initially, 1M HCl solution of about five times the quantity of ash i.e., 15 liters was taken in a PVC plastic bucket. The MSW incinerator bo om ash was slowly poured into the bucket with constant stirring of HCl solution and therea er the mixture was thoroughly stirred at a uniform rate for about 10 minutes. Further, the mixture was allowed to react under stable conditions for another 20 minutes. • Next, the acid-ash mixture was filtered using a nylon fine mesh filter pad and the filtrate or filter cake was sun dried by uniformly spreading over a PVC sheet. • Secondly, the acid treated bo om ash was subjected to alkaline treatment by stirring and mixing it with 15 liters of 5M NaOH solution. The mixture was again allowed to react under stable conditions for 20 minutes before filtering and later sun dried. • In the next step, the acid and alkali treated bo om ash was washed using 20 liters of deionized water by mixing and continuously stirring it in a bucket. The mixture was thoroughly stirred at a uniform rate for about 15 minutes and allowed to react under stable conditions for another 10 minutes before filtering. The washed water was tested for the concentration of chlorides and sulphates in it by titration methods. • This water-washing process was carried out until the chlorides and sulphates concentration in the washed water came with in the permissible limits Concrete of M20 Grade was designed as per the guidelines of IS:10262-2009 (2009) techniques, namely the Ultrasonic Pulse Velocity (UPV) and Rebound Hammer (RH) tests were conducted as per the guidelines of IS:13311[Part-1]-1992 (2004) The durability of concrete is a direct function of its porosity and hence the Volume of Permeable Voids (VPV) test was conducted on eco-friendly concrete specimens as per the ASTM:C642-06 (2006) The visual examination of internal morphology and microstructure of the hydration products of eco-friendly concrete specimens was carried out by means of Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) images captured at magnifications of 500X -4000X. An a empt was made to study the interaction of MSW incinerator bo om ash with manufactured sand as fine aggregate in concrete made with blended coarse aggregates (recycled demolition waste aggregate and crushed granite gravel). The fresh state concrete properties i.e., the slump and Vee-Bee consistency of eco-friendly concrete mixes are presented in Table One of the reasons for premature deterioration of concrete has been an ingress of aggressive agents and moisture through minute pores or permeable voids within concrete. Figure The concentration of selected elements in the aqueous leachate generated from eco-friendly concrete specimens containing MSW incinerator bo om ash was determined by inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometry (ICP-OES). Table The eco-friendly concrete produced by utilizing MSW incinerator bo om ash and recycled demolition waste aggregates proved to be an excellent alternative to conventional concrete. The increase in compressive strength of eco-friendly concrete even a er 28 days, makes it acceptable for all structural applications. The optimal replacement percentage of MSW incinerator bo om ash and recycled demolition waste aggregates was 5% and 40%, respectively to a ain significant strength and durability properties. The percent volume of permeable voids in specimens of ecofriendly concrete mixes were much lower compared to control mix concrete. The pretreatment of MSW incinerator bo om ash rendered an environmentally stable end-product for usage as substitution material in concrete. Laboratory tank leaching tests showed that the eco-friendly concrete do not pose any significant environmental hazard. Furthermore, the microstructural analysis revealed dense aggregate paste matrix interfaces with less micro-pores and insignificant micro-cracks due to the incorporation of incinerator bo om ash as a partial replacement to the fine aggregate. The determination of sulphates and chlorides in the eco-friendly concrete could be considered as a future scope of work. sieved through 4.75 mm IS sieve with an objective to use it as a partial replacement material for M sand. The most economic way of preprocessing MSW incinerator bo om ash is through Wet Pretreatment. Listed below are steps in the pretreatment procedure implemented to stabilize the MSW incinerator bo om ash. Mortar waste was discarded/eliminated and only coarse aggregates of demolished concrete were considered for recycling The permissible limits of chloride and sulphate levels were < 250 mg/l and 200 mg/l, respectively as per IS 10500: 2012[40] 