The tilted balance among competing interactions can yield a rich variety of ground states of quantum matter. In most Ce-based heavy fermion systems, this can often be qualitatively described by the famous Doniach phase diagram, owing to the competition between the Kondo screening and the Ruderman-Kittel-Kasuya-Yoshida exchange interaction. Here, we report an unusual pressure-temperature phase diagram beyond the Doniach one in CeCuP2. At ambient pressure, CeCuP2 displays typical heavy-fermion behavior, albeit with a very low carrier density. With lowering temperature, it shows a crossover from a non-Fermi liquid to a Fermi liquid at around 2.4 K. But surprisingly, the Kondo coherence temperature decreases with increasing pressure, opposite to that in most Ce-based heavy fermion compounds. Upon further compression, two superconducting phases are revealed. At 48.0 GPa, the transition temperature reaches 6.1 K, the highest among all Ce-based heavy fermion superconductors. We argue for possible roles of valence tuning and fluctuations associated with its special crystal structure in addition to the hybridization effect. These unusual phase diagrams suggest that CeCuP2 is a novel platform for studying the rich heavy fermions physics beyond the conventional Doniach paradigm. As prototype examples of strongly correlated electron systems, heavy-fermion (HF) compounds have been intensively investigated due to their various fascinating properties In proximity to the magnetic quantum critical point (QCP), superconductivity often emerges, mostly ascribed to the spin-fluctuation-mediated pairing mechanism, and shares some common features with other unconventional superconductors such as the cuprate, iron-based and organic superconductors In this work, we report systematic magnetic susceptibility, specific heat and electrical transport measurements of the heavy-fermion compound CeCuP2. Our results are summarized in the P-T phase diagrams of Figs. 1(a) and (b). At ambient pressure, CeCuP2 exhibits typical NFL behavior featuring a quasi-linear temperature-dependent resistivity and divergent specific heat and magnetic susceptibility above 2.4 K. Around 2.4 K, a crossover turns the system into a FL state at low temperatures. Scaling analyses of the magnetic susceptibility and Grüneisen ratio confirm the quantum critical behavior at ambient pressure and zero magnetic field. Under pressure, electrical transport measurements identify multiple quantum phase transitions. For pressure P < Pc1 ~ 0.7 GPa, the system always turns into a metallic Kondo coherent state with lowering temperature. But in contrast to most Ce-based HF compounds, the coherence temperature Tcoh is gradually suppressed with increasing pressure and diminishes at Pc1, where the insulating-like Kondo incoherent state persists down to our lowest measured temperature of 0.3 K. For Pc1 < P < Pc2 ~ 4.0 GPa, the incoherent state is gradually weakened. A second metallic state takes over at low temperatures above Pc2, accompanied by the first superconducting transition. The Tcs for the first superconducting state (SC1) display a clear dome shape with a maximum transition temperature of 4.3 K at 7.8 GPa. At Pc3 ∼ 11.0 GPa, the first superconducting state disappears. With further pressurization beyond Pc3, the second superconducting state (SC2) arises, and spans over a wide pressure range, which is much broader in pressure than that in usual HF superconductors Non-Fermi liquid behavior and anomalous crossover transition. The growth of CeCuP2 was first reported by Chykhrij et al. Phosphorus atoms occupy three Wyckoff positions denoted as P1, P2 and P3. The P1 (4e) and Cu2 (4e) atoms form Platonic solids, and the P2 (4c) and P3 (8j) atoms have distorted cubic co-ordinations. The crystal structure is displayed in the inset of Fig. Single crystals of CeCuP2 were grown from molten Sn flux and demonstrated by XRD measurements (see Supplementary Fig. To clarify the NFL-to-FL crossover around 2.4 K, we have conducted the specific heat measurements. Figure A similar feature has also been found in the arsenic analogue CeCuAs2 around 4 K, where it has been explained as a disorder-driven continuous metal-insulator transition resulting in a gradual loss of density of states (DOS) with decreasing temperature, although the low-temperature downturn in C/T in CeCuAs2 is still not well understood The absence of long-range magnetic order is more clearly demonstrated in Fig. More insight on the NFL-to-FL crossover can be obtained from the Hall measurements (Supplementary Fig. The above anomalous features are also reflected in the field measurements. Figure This coincides with the abrupt change in the carrier concentration. The crossing point shifts slightly to higher temperature with increasing field. Isothermal MR measurements (Supplementary Fig. The field measurements provide crucial information on the QCP in CeCuP2 at ambient pressure. To investigate the origin of the NFL above 2.4 K, we measured the magnetic susceptibility under high fields (see Supplementary Fig. The parameters of c, a, α and ε in this case are 0.024 ± 0.001, 2.743 ± 0.003, 2.80 ± 0.01, and 0.6 ± 0.1, respectively, and ε is again consistent with the experimental value. In contrast to the exponent of x, the parameter α = 2.8 is significantly larger than that expected for a FL phase. To explain this, more theoretical efforts will be required. A T -2.00 This suggests that the coherent-to-incoherent transition at Pc1 is not associated with a usual magnetic or delocalization transition often observed in other HF compounds. Upon further increasing pressure up to Pc2 ~ 4.0 GPa, the resistivity becomes suppressed but the system remains in an incoherent state down to the lowest measured temperature. In this intermediate region, the resistivity responds very differently to the magnetic field compared to the low-pressure region. HF superconductivity has often been observed in the vicinity of magnetic or valance instabilities Inspired by this, we have carried out further pressure measurements on CeCuP2 polycrystal obtained by crushing a single crystal. Figure Surprisingly, a superconducting drop emerges around the same pressure. The superconducting temperature (Tc onset ) defined by the onset of the transition reaches 4.7 K at 14.8 GPa, as shown in the inset. To verify the superconductivity observed in CeCuP2, pressure experiments were repeated in another device with NaCl as the pressure transmitting pressure (denoted as Run2), as displayed in Fig. K the lowest temperature we measured, there is no any indications of superconductivity. The pressure-dependent Tc ranging from 4.0 to 11.0 GPa displays a clear dome shape, as plotted in Fig. Upon further compression beyond 11.0 GPa, the second superconducting state (SC2) arises, it spans over a wide pressure range, which is much broader in pressure than that in usual HF superconductors The first one is the poor grain contact in the polycrystalline sample and an anisotropic superconducting order parameter This could drastically smear out the transition, especially if the order parameter is anisotropic and especially at higher pressures. Determining the reason for nonzero resistance is left for a future study. Previously, the highest transition temperatures reported among all Ce-based HF superconductors are 2.3 K for CeCoIn5 at ambient pressure To understand the pairing mechanism, we plot in Fig. The values are estimated to be 0.050(6) T, 0.0192(9) T, 0.40(2) T, 0.37(2) T, 1.85(5) T and 2.07(7) T for 8.4 GPa, 9.7 GPa, 15.4 GPa, Tc onset at 23.3 GPa, Tc 10% at 23.3 GPa (denoted as 23.3 ́ GPa) and 42.5 GPa, respectively, which are much lower than the Pauli limiting fields HP(0) = 1.84Tc ∼ 7.9, 6.9, 7.7, 8.0, 5.9 and 10.3 T, respectively, indicating that Pauli pair breaking is not relevant Often, superconductivity near an AFM QCP as in CeCoIn5 may be ascribed to a spin-fluctuation-mediated pairing mechanism Putting together, our systematic measurements can be summarized in the overall P-T phase diagram presented in Figs. Since the Ce ions are in a mixed-valence state, we speculate that not only the Kondo hybridization but also the Ce valence is tuned by pressure, which would in turn affect the carrier concentration and the ground state of CeCuP2. As a matter of fact, following previous analysis on CeCu2Si2 and CeRhGe3 Anderson lattice model and the self-consistent renormalization (SCR) theory Sample preparation. High-purity starting materials of Ce powder (99.9%, Alfa Aesar), Cu powder (99.9%, Alfa Aesar), P flakes (99.999 %, Aladdin) and Sn powder (99.99%, Aladdin) were mixed in a molar ratio of 1 : 1 : 10 : 60 and loaded into an alumina crucible, which was sealed under vacuum in a quartz ampoule. The sealed ampoule was very slowly heated to 1150°C and kept there for 3 days, then cooled at a rate of 1.5 °C/h. The ampoule was taken out and the excess Sn flux decanted with a centrifuge at 500°C. LaCuP2 is prepared by an arc-melting method. High-purity starting materials of La chunk (99.9%, Alfa Aesar), Cu lump (99.9%, Alfa Aesar), P flakes (99.999%, Aladdin) in a molar ratio of 1 : 1.15 : 5 were loaded in a water-cooled copper boat, and the mixture was then arc-melted several times. The obtained compound was ground in a glove box, and the powder was pressed into pills. These pills were sealed in a quartz ampoule, and then annealed at 1000°C for 3 days. Chemical composition and crystal structure determinations can be found in the Supplementary Information Electrical transport and thermodynamics measurements. Resistance measurements from 300 to 2 K and below 2 K were performed in a physical property measurement system (PPMS; Quantum Design) and a Pressure measurements. For high-pressure experiments, samples were loaded in a piston-cylinder clamp cell made of Be-Cu alloy, with Daphne oil as the pressure medium. The pressure inside the cell was determined from the Tc of a tin wire. A CeCuP2 single crystal was cut into a bar shape, and the standard four-probe method was used for resistivity measurements, with contacts made using silver epoxy. Higher-pressure measurements were performed on powder samples comprising crushed single crystals using a diamond anvil cell (DAC). For Run1 measurements, no pressure transmitting medium was adopted, while, for Run2 measurements, NaCl was used as the pressure transmitting medium. The experimental pressures were determined by the pressure-induced fluorescence shift of ruby 2 at room temperature before and after each experiment. A direct-current van der Pauw 