On the motion of an evaporating respiratory droplet There has been a large amount of research devoted to biophysical and chemical aspects of the investigation of infection spreading by inhalation of airborne droplets containing bacteria or viruses, which has recently intensified due to the pandemic caused by SARS-Cov-2 Small droplets (say less than 10 μm initial diameter, further decreasing in size due to evaporation) are easily carried by a puff of exhaled air produced by breathing, talking, coughing, or sneezing, with small relative velocity, and can remain afloat for long time; they can be further convected by outside wind or indoor draft or ventilation In this paper, we present an analysis of the projectile motion of an isolated micro-droplet ejected from the mouth at different angles and initial velocities. The air resistance is represented by a nonlinear function of the droplet's velocity, and the rate of decrease of the droplet's external surface area is assumed to depend only on the relative humidity and the ambient temperature. The droplet's initial content is considered to be 98 wt% water, 1 wt% salt (NaCl), and 1 wt% protein (mucus). The change of the average density of the droplet caused by water evaporation is determined, up to the instant when all water evaporates and the droplet reduces to its nucleus (droplet residue), consisting of salt and dry protein only. This also specifies the change of the droplet's mass, which enables numerical solution of the governing differential equations of the droplet's motion, for an arbitrary angle of ejection and initial velocity, corresponding to either soft or loud speaking, coughing, or sneezing. The trajectories of different-sized droplets are determined under different relative humidities. In each case the maximum horizontal distance traveled by the droplet in stagnant air is rapidly reached, which is followed by essentially vertical descent of the droplet. The maximum horizontal reach in soft talking is compared to that in coughing. We also evaluate and compare the time for the droplet to evaporate down to its nucleus size and the time for the droplet to reach the ground when ejected from a given height. The effects of the angle of ejection of the droplet on its maximum horizontal and vertical reach and the entire trajectory are discussed. The wind effects are also included in the analysis and discussed in the context of infection spreading by transmission of viruses and other pathogens via respiratory droplets. 2 Projectile motion of an evaporating droplet with a nonlinear drag force For smaller droplets and for sufficiently small initial velocities, the Reynolds number of an isolated droplet is bellow 1 and the linear Stokes' type drag model can be adopted in the study of such droplet's motion. For larger droplets (say, greater than about 5 microns) and for larger initial velocities (e.g., velocities about 10 m/s as during coughing, or up to 50 m/s as during sneezing), the Reynolds number, at least in the early stage of the droplet's motion, is in the range 1<Re<1000, and the drag force becomes a nonlinear function of velocity. To encompass the entire range of Reynolds number, the drag force in still air is commonly written as where the drag coefficient c d depends on the Reynolds number, in accord to experimental data Below Re = 0.2, the dominant contribution to c d is 24/Re, which gives rise to linear drag force, proportional to velocity (Stokes' flow). Other fitting expressions have also been proposed and used, e.g., (2. 3) The kinematic viscosity of air is νair = ηair/ρair, where ηair is its dynamic viscosity. Typically, the Reynolds number of a relatively large droplet is below 1,000; for example, for νair = 1.516 × 10 -5 m 2 /s and at the instant when v = 10 m/s and R = 100 μm, the Reynolds number is Re ≈ 132. On the other hand, for a small droplet of radius R = 5 μm and current velocity v = 1 m/s, the Reynolds number is Re ≈ 0.66. If the air surrounding a droplet moves with the velocity va, the relative velocity vva should be used in place of the total velocity in the expression for the drag force (2.1) and the definition of the Reynolds number (2.3). Suppose that the droplet having the initial mass m0 and corresponding initial radius R0 is emitted from a mouth at the height h above the ground with the initial velocity v0 at the angle φ0 relative to the horizontal x direction (Fig. The motion of the droplet of initial mass m 0 ejected at the height h above the ground with the initial velocity v 0 at an angle φ 0 with respect to the horizontal x axis. In the position shown at time t, the forces acting on the droplet are its weight mg and the drag force F d , opposite to its current velocity v. The horizontal and vertical components of velocity are v x = v cos φ and v y = v sin φ. (2.4) The average ejection velocity, relative to the droplet, of all particles leaving the droplet due to evaporation is u rel = uv, and g = {0, -g} is the gravitational acceleration. The buoyancy force is ignored as the density of a respiratory droplet is about 1000 times greater than the density of the air. By assuming that u rel = 0, the governing differential equations for the velocity components (vx, vy) of the droplet are where F d = ρairAc d v 2 /2 from (2.1). Upon the substitution of (2.1) and the division by the current mass m = ρV , where ρ is the (average) mass density of the droplet at time t and V = 4πR 3 /3 is the droplet's current volume, (2.5) becomes with the drag coefficient c d defined by (2.2). The accompanying initial conditions are vx(0) = v0 cos φ0 and vy(0) = v0 sin φ0. Equations (2.6) are two coupled differential equations, which require numerical integration, provided that the expressions for R = R(t) and ρ = ρ(t) are determined, corresponding to the rate by which the mass of the droplet evaporates, as elaborated upon in section 3. After the velocity components vx and vy have been determined, the (x, y) coordinates of the trajectory of the droplet follow by numerical quadrature from x(t) = t 0 vx(θ) dθ and y(t) = t 0 vy(θ) dθ, as reported in section 4. At some instant of motion (t * ), all water from a respiratory droplet evaporates and a droplet is reduced to its nucleus (salt and dry protein residue) of the radius denoted by R * . From that instant on, i.e., for time t ≥ t * , the motion of this non-volatile residue proceeds as the motion of a non-evaporating spherical particle of constant radius R * . The initial conditions for this motion are vx(t = t * ) = v * cos φ * , vy(t = t * ) = v * sin φ * , and x(t = t * ) = x * , y(t = t * ) = y * . The quantities (t * , v * , φ * , x * , y * ) have been determined from the preceding analysis of the motion of the evaporating droplet, and correspond to the end of that part of motion, i.e., the instant when the droplet evaporates to its nucleus size of radius R * . The numerical analysis of the motion of evaporating droplet shows that the Reynolds number rapidly diminishes with time, after the droplet's emission from the mouth, because the droplet's velocity rapidly diminishes, as well as its radius. As a consequence, the motion of the droplet's residue is in many cases the motion under linear (Stokes') drag force, F d = cv, where c = 6πηairR * . It then readily follows that the velocity components of the droplet's residue are (2.7) where m * = ρ * V * is the mass of the droplet's residue and V * = 4πR 3 * /3 is its volume. The velocity vt is the so-called terminal velocity, at which the drag force balances the gravity force (cvt = m * g). The corresponding coordinates of the droplet's residue are given by (2.8) By eliminating t -t * in (2.8), the y = y(x) representation of the residue trajectory can also be explicitly given. For sufficiently large times (t ≫ t * ), the residue approaches the vertical asymptote x = x * + (v * /k * ) cos φ * , with the residue's time-dependent position y being given by (2.9) Suppose that a respiratory droplet is exhaled from mouth as a spherical particle of initial radius R0 and the corresponding mass m0. It will be assumed that 98% of m0 is pure water (m 0 w = 0.98m0), 1% a salt (NaCl), and 1% a protein (mucin), i.e., m0 = m 0 w + ms + mp = m 0 w + fsm0 + fpm0 , (fs = 0.01 , fp = 0.01) . (3.1) This initial content of the respiratory saliva droplet is taken somewhat arbitrarily , from a large variety of data found in the literature The objective is to determine the time-dependent decrease of the mass and density of the droplet during its evaporation. The evaporation of a droplet is a complicated physical and chemical process that can be analyzed with various degrees of complexity and sophistication. This may include the consideration of the energy equation and the heat and mass transfer between the droplet and its surroundings, and the effects of the ambient temperature and the temperature of the droplet on its evaporation rate (e.g., (3.3) A possible effect of the velocity of the moving droplet on its evaporation rate s is not included in (3.3). Surface evolution expression of the type (3.3) has also been adopted in the early work by Returning to the rate expression (3.3), to determine the expression s = s(R.H.), we use the results from the analysis of evaporation kinetics of water droplets by (3.4) For other than room ambient temperatures, the expression (3.4) may still approximately apply by adjusting the value of the temperature-dependent coefficient s0 = s0(T amb ). Because the evaporation is more rapid at higher ambient temperature, the coefficient s0 is expected to be a monotonically increasing function of T amb . By integrating (3.3), it follows that These expressions apply until all water evaporates and droplet reduces its radius to the radius of its droplet nucleus. The square-root dependence of R on time t in (3.5) can be compared with the well-know 'radius-square-law' relation between initial and current radius of the droplet R 2 -R 2 0 = kt (k = const.), e.g., The salt is soluble in water up to its weight concentration of 0.357. In this range of concentration the experimental data on the density of aqueous solution of NaCl is well reproduced by a linear fit where ρw = 997 kg/m 3 is the mass density of water at room temperature, and κ = 755 kg/m 3 is the slope of this linear fit. As the water evaporates from a droplet, the salt concentration increases, and after it reaches the saturation concentration of 0.357, the water and salt make a two-phase solution consisting of a solid (crystalline) salt phase sedimented in the aqueous solution with salt concentration of 0.357. Finally, after all water evaporates, only salt remains, which, together with a dry protein, constitutes a droplet residue of mass m * = ms + mp = (fs + fp)m0 . (3.7) As the respiratory droplet looses water by evaporation, its density increases. This affects the motion, as seen from eqs. (2.6) in which the density ρ appears in the denominator of both equations. We therefore proceed to determine the density of the droplet as a function of time. The initial radius of the droplet R0 and, thus, its initial volume V0 = 4πR 3 0 /3, are assumed to be known. If the rate of evaporation is specified by (3.5), the volume of the droplet at an arbitrary instant of evaporation is The density expression will be first derived for the stage of the evaporation process during which the concentration of dissolved salt in water is below the saturation value of 0.357. At an arbitrary instant during this stage of evaporation, the mass of the droplet is Furthermore, the volume of the droplet is taken to be the sum of the volumes of the protein and the aqueous salt solution, i.e., The mass density of the dry protein is ρp = 1, 350 kg/m 3 , as frequently adopted in the literature (e.g., The initial mass of the droplet m0 is still unknown, because we assumed that only the initial droplet's volume V0 is given (as, for example, obtained by the measurement of the initial droplet's radius), although one may reasonably expect that m0 is nearly equal to ρwV0, because of the small initial weight percents of salt and protein. To determine the initial density ρ0, we apply (3.13) to the initial instant when (m aq sol ) 0 = m0 -mp = (1 -fp)m0 = (1 -fp)ρ0V0. Upon solving for ρ0, it follows that By substituting fs = fp = 0.01, ρw = 997 kg/m 3 , ρp = 1, 350 kg/m 3 , and κ = 775 kg/m 3 , the initial density of the droplet is found to be ρ0 = 1, 007.2 kg/m 3 . The corresponding initial mass of the droplet is then m0 = ρ0V0. It is noted that the initial 98 wt% of water content is equivalent to initial 99 vol% of water, which is obtained by multiplying 98 with ρ0/ρw = 1007.2/997 = 1.01. Consequently, the initial 2 wt% of salt and protein together is equivalent to only 1 vol% of their initial volume content. Expressions (3.13) and (3.14) specify the mass m aq sol = m aq sol (V0, V ) in terms of the known V0 and V , and the known all other parameters that appear in these expressions. The density of the aqueous salt solution follows from (3.6) and is where m aq sol is given by (3.13) and (3.14). In particular, it follows that (ρ aq sol ) 0 = 1, 004.6 kg/m 3 . Finally, the total mass of the droplet is obtained by substituting (3.13) into (3.9). This gives m = m aq sol + mp = m aq sol + fpρ0V0 , (3.17) with the corresponding density (3.22) The corresponding radius of the droplet and its bounding surface are Consequently, from (3.5), the time at the instant of the saturation is The parameter s depends on relative humidity as defined in (3.4). As the water continues to evaporate beyond the saturation time t given by (3.22), a portion of the total salt amount ms (denoted by m ′′ s ) settles at the bottom of the saturated aqueous solution. The remaining portion of salt m ′ s = 0.357m sat sol is dissolved in the saturated aqueous solution, and ms = m ′ s + m ′′ s . The total mass of the droplet at this stage of evaporation is, thus, Furthermore, the volume of the droplet is The numerical values for α and β are α = 1, 030 kg/m 3 and β = 7.657 kg/m 3 . Finally, the density of the droplet during this stage of its evaporation is, from (3.29), (3.31) If all water evaporates and only salt and dry protein remain in their original amount, the mass of the droplet's residue is m * = ms + mp, as given in (3.7). (Proteins in aqueous solutions bind some of the water molecules very firmly, but in our model we consider that all the droplet's water can eventually evaporate during the droplet's motion in the air.) According to (3.29), this must be equal to αV * + βV0, where V * is the volume of the droplet's residue, i.e., αV * + βV0 = (fs + fp)ρ0V0 . (3.32) Thus, Figure The times to reach the aqueous salt solution saturation state and the droplet's residue state depend on relative humidity. For relative humidities of 0%, 25%, 50%, 75%, these times are t =2. Figure For the 50 μm initial radius, the droplet evaporates to its 11.5 μm radius residue in about 12.2 seconds. This is followed by essentially vertical fall of a non-evaporating residue toward the ground (Fig. Figures Figure any substantial evaporation takes place. The vertical position (y coordinate) is, however, affected substantially by the change of s0, as the droplet descends vertically by the action of gravity, while its size and weight substantially decrease due to evaporation. The droplet reaches its nucleus size (the kink in the curves shown in Fig. The projectile motion considered in previous sections was assumed to take place under quiescent ambient conditions without any external air flow. The effect of external air flow (wind or ventilation) can be readily included in the analysis. For example, if the wind is horizontal, with a constant speed vw, the equations of motion are given by (2.6), with vx replaced by vx -vw, and v by [(vx -vw) 2 + v 2 y ] 1/2 , while the Reynolds number in (2.3) becomes Re = 2R[(vx -vw) 2 + v 2 y ] 1/2 /νair. Figure Figure Figure We have presented an analysis of the projectile motion of a micro-droplet ejected from the mouth at an arbitrary angle and initial velocity, corresponding to soft or loud speaking, coughing or sneezing. It is assumed that a droplet is ejected as an isolated droplet, outside of the puff of exhaled air. The air resistance is represented by a drag force which is a nonlinear function of the droplet's velocity. The evaporation of the droplet is described by an expression based on the assumption that the rate of decrease of the droplet's external surface area is dependent only on the relative humidity and the ambient temperature. The initial content of the respiratory droplet is taken to be 98 wt% water, 1 wt% salt (NaCl), and 1 wt% protein (mucus). The change of the average density of the droplet caused by evaporation of its water is determined throughout the concentration range, up to the instant when all the water evaporates and the droplet reduces to its nucleus, consisting of salt and dry protein only. The presented density analysis also specifies the change of the droplet's mass during evaporation, which enables the numerical solution of the governing differential equations of the droplet's motion after its emission from the mouth. The trajectories of different-sized droplets ejected at different velocities and under different relative humidities are determined and discussed. In each considered case the maximum horizontal distance traveled by a droplet is rapidly reached, which is followed by an essentially vertical descent of the droplet in a stagnant air. The droplet's maximum horizontal reach is compared in the case of speaking vs. coughing or sneezing. The time needed for the droplet to evaporate down to its nucleus size is compared with the time for a droplet to reach the ground, after being ejected from given height. The effect of the rate of droplet's evaporation on the size and the motion of the droplet is quantified. More rapidly evaporating droplets are lighter and fall to the ground slower, which increases the risk of infection. The effects of the angle of ejection of the droplet on its maximum horizontal and vertical reach and the entire trajectory are also evaluated and discussed, which is of importance for the analysis of the transmission of infection in the cases when a person speaks while sitting near a standing person, or vice versa. The negative ejection angles are also of interest in studying the projectile motion of the droplets that have escaped from a moving puff. The wind effect on the droplet's trajectory and its maximum horizontal reach is also studied. For example, while the maximum horizontal distance of the droplet with 25 μm initial radius in the absence of wind is only about 3 to 10 cm, depending on ejection velocity, in the presence of even a very mild wind the horizontal reach of the droplet extends to several meters. This naturally contributes to the increase of the risk of infection spreading, if the droplets carry viruses or other pathogens. If an isolated droplet is ejected against wind, upon its initial forward motion, the droplet reverses the direction of its motion and it moves backward. If a droplet is emitted by a taller person against the wind, it can easily reach a person standing behind even at distances beyond a meter, particularly at stronger wind. The analysis can be readily extended to include other in-plane wind directions. In the case of an out-of-plane wind (v0 and vw being non-coplanar), the projectile motion becomes three-dimensional, which will be discussed elsewhere. The motion of the droplets that are trapped and carried by exhaled air puff during its forward motion is more involved and not considered in this paper. The motion of small droplets relative to the puff is rather slow, and the model of linear drag may be adopted, but the main difficulty is the kinetic description of the moving and expanding puff which carries the small droplets, as discussed in a recent review by 