Static (DC) and dynamic (AC, at 14 MHz and 8 GHz) magnetic susceptibilities of single crystals of a ferromagnetic superconductor, EuFe2(As1-xPx)2 (x = 0.23), were measured in pristine state and after different doses of 2.5 MeV electron or 3.5 MeV proton irradiation. The superconducting transition temperature, Tc(H), shows an extraordinarily large decrease. It starts at Tc(H = 0) ≈ 24K in the pristine sample for both AC and DC measurements, but moves to almost half of that value after moderate irradiation dose. Remarkably, after the irradiation not only Tc moves significantly below the FM transition, its values differ drastically for measurements at different frequencies, ≈ 16 K in AC measurements and ≈ 12 K in a DC regime. We attribute such a large difference in Tc to the appearance of the spontaneous internal magnetic field below the FM transition, so that the superconductivity develops directly into the mixed spontaneous vortex -antivortex state where the onset of diamagnetism is known to be frequency-dependent. We also examined the response to the applied DC magnetic fields and studied the annealing of irradiated samples, which almost completely restores the superconducting transition. Overall, our results suggest that in EuFe2(As1-xPx)2 superconductivity is affected by local-moment ferromagnetism mostly via the spontaneous internal magnetic fields induced by the FM subsystem. Another mechanism is revealed upon irradiation where magnetic defects created in ordered Eu 2+ lattice act as efficient pairbreakers leading to a significant Tc reduction upon irradiation compared to other 122 compounds. On the other hand, the exchange interactions seem to be weakly screened by the superconducting phase leading to a modest increase of Tm (less than 1 K) after the irradiation drives Tc to below Tm. Our results suggest that FM and SC phases coexist microscopically in the same volume. Coexistence and competition of superconductivity and magnetism is a fascinating and actively studied topic. It is impossible to give even remotely-complete reference list, see for example Refs. When studying complex non-stoichiometric materials it is important to be able to fix the composition and examine the evolution of field and temperature dependencies when some other non-thermal control parameter is varied. One obvious example of such parameter is pressure, which has been used intensely for this purpose. Another is a controlled disorder that provides an important insight into magnetism and superconductivity In the present work, we study the effects of electron irradiation on single crystals of EuFe 2 (As 1-x P x ) 2 and compare with the proton irradiation performed on similar samples. We find that in this particular ferromagnetic superconductor, magnetic and superconducting subsys- tems coexist almost independently. Superconductivity interacts with the internal magnetic field produced by the Eu 2+ sublattice and the ferromagnetism is barely screened by the superconducting phase. The non-trivial interaction is revealed when the artificial point-like disorder enhances both potential and spin-flip scattering channels affecting T c at a much greater rate compared to the nonmagnetic IBS. Remarkably, controlled disorder combined with almost reversible annealing allows examining the properties of both phases in the regimes of T c > T m and T c < T m in a single composition. Figure For comparison, the data in panels (a) and (b) were normalized to extrapolate to χ = -1 at the lowest T, whereas panel (c) shows the calibrated data. All three susceptibility curves clearly show superconducting transition near T c ≈ 24 K and ferromagnetic transition at T m ≈18 K. The microwave-frequency CPWR data show extra features and a detailed analysis of the measurements is given elsewhere where N is the effective demagnetizing factor, R is the effective dimension and λ L (T ) is the London penetration depth without magnetism present. Below T c the μ (T )λ L (T ) term dominates the behavior with two competing trends. Taking the simplest functional forms, in the interval which is, indeed, a non-monotonic function of temperature in this interval which is seen in all three measurements shown in Fig. Figure Normalized magnetic susceptibility of pristine EuFe2(As1-0.23P0.23)2 single crystal from TDR measurements at different DC magnetic fields applied along the c-axis. The inset zooms at the rapid suppression of the peak near the ferromagnetic transition. We now turn to the effects of the artificial disorder induced by the 2.5 MeV electron irradiation. Details of the experiment are described in section IV. The irradiation dose is measured during the experiment as a total charge flux passed through the sample and can be expressed in convenient practical units of coulomb per cm 2 to represent the irradiation dose, 1 C/cm 2 = 6.24 × 10 18 electrons/cm 2 . Figure Of course, the greatest uncertainty is the displacement threshold energy barrier, E d , which varies between 10 and 50 eV for different ions and compounds It is important to note that we studied physically the same crystals before and after the irradiation, so the observed changes are the results of the added disorder. Figure In the previous studies, we found that defects introduced by the electron irradiation can be annealed lead- ing to the recovery towards the pristine state, sometimes almost completely When studying superconductors, it is often needed to reveal the behavior of the normal state "behind" the superconducting response. For example, to estimate the phonon contribution to the specific heat. A common recipe is to apply strong enough magnetic field and suppress superconductivity. However, in ferromagnetic superconductors, with relatively high T m and T c , the specific heat jump at the superconducting transition temperature, is hardly detected/resolved, since the magnetic contribution to the specific heat can be large Finally, we compare the upper critical field, H c2 (T ), in pristine state (black filled circles in Fig. Indeed, the response to any perturbation, irradiation included, should be gauged against the results obtained with other types of materials and irradiations. Here we compare the results with CPWR measurements of proton-irradiated samples. Protons also introduce largely point like defects and, in addition, nanometric clusters, which slightly reduce the efficiency of the overall produced defects acting as scattering centers. Detailed account of the effects of disorder by doping and proton irradiation in EuFe 2 (As 0.77 P 0.23 ) 2 is given elsewhere Figure Figure cross-sections shown in Fig. In summary, we used controlled disorder produced by electron and proton irradiations to induce two states in the same sample: (1) T c > T m and (2) T c < T m . The ferromagnetic transition, T m , is weakly affected by the irradiation whereas the superconducting transition, T c , is rapidly suppressed. We therefore had a unique opportunity to study the same ferromagnetism in normal and superconducting background and, vice versa, superconductivity developing in a paramagnetic or a ferromagnetic background. The ferromagnetic transition temperature increases by less than a degree in the normal state compared to when it is born out of superconducting background signaling of the microscopic coexistence and, perhaps, some weakening of the exchange interaction by the superconducting phase. Furthermore, we conclude that in EuFe 2 (As 1-x P x ) 2 local-moment ferromagnetism of Eu 2+ sublattice does not have a direct impact on superconducting pairing, but it affects the superconducting state via the spontaneous internal magnetic field that creates Abrikosov vortices and antivortices in the neighboring domains. When T c < T m , the superconducting transition becomes significantly frequency-dependent reminiscent of the irreversibility temperature, T irr (H), rather than the true zero-field transition T c (H = 0). It is also possible that the annihilation of vortex-antivortex pairs at the domain boundaries assisted by an AC field at T c < T m can further enhance the frequency dependence due to the dynamic response of shaking-depinned vortex-antivortex lattice, which is different from that of a conventional mixed vortex state. Another effect of Eu 2+ sublattice is to provide the effective pair-breaking "magnetic" defects upon particle irradiation. This leads to even faster T c suppression by disorder than in nonmagnetic 122 compounds. This also means that the pairing state of EuFe 2 (As 1-x P x ) 2 is most likely s ± as in other IBS. Crystal growth, samples. Single crystals of EuFe 2 (As 1-x P x ) 2 , x = 0.23, were grown using self flux method from Eu powder (3N purity), FeAs and FeP precursors, mixed stoichiometrically with nominal x = 0.25 In the experiment, the resonant frequency of the LC tank circuit with the sample inside the coil is recorded as function of temperature or external DC magnetic field, generated by the superconducting magnet outside the cryostat. The shift of the resonant frequency, ∆f = f (H, T ) -f 0 , from its value without the sample, f 0 , is proportional to the sample magnetic susceptibility where χ(H, T ) = dM/dH is the actual magnetic susceptibility of a given sample with volume magnetization M = m/V s , where m is total measured magnetic moment. In paramagnetic samples χ > 1, then the total inductance of the sample inside the coil increases, and resonant frequency decreases, whereas in a diamagnetic sample the opposite is true. In a superconducting sample, the magnetic susceptibility of a superconductor is given approximately by where N is the effective demagnetizing factor where G is the calibration constant. The main source of uncertainty in G is the approximate factor which gives the change in frequency when an ideal diamagnetic sample of the same shape and volume as the sample under study is inserted at base (theoretically at zero) temperature into the coil. The approximate Eq.6 is based on an idealized picture of an infinite solenoid where the sample perturbs the magnetic flux inside. For a realistic finite coil, Eq.6 is only a rough approximation. However, ∆f 0 can be measured directly by mechanically pulling the sample out of the coil at the base temperature. Our cryostat is equipped to do just that, so we determine ∆f 0 directly for each sample. Then, which shows the simplified meaning of constant G as the frequency shift when magnetic field penetrates the entire sample (of size 2R, -from two sides, travelling distance R from each side). The measurement was conducted down to 400 mK using Janis wet Helium-3 cryostat and a DC magnetic field that can be provided by the superconducting magnet ranges up to 9 T. Further details and applications of TDR technique can be found elsewhere Coplanar Waveguide Resoantor (CPWR).The coplanar-waveguide-resonator technique allows determination of the complex permeability of small samples coupled to the resonator, within a cavity perturbation approach where ∆f /f 0 and ∆(1/Q) are the experimental shifts of the resonance frequency and of the inverse of the quality factor induced by the presence of the sample under test, and Γ f and Γ Q are geometrical factors that can be determined by a self-consistent procedure, which takes into account also the finite size of the crystal and the consequent demagnetization effects Electron irradiation. The 2.5 MeV electron irradiation was performed at the SIRIUS Pelletron linear accelerator facility operated by the Laboratoire des Solides Irradies (LSI) at the Ecole Polytechnique in Palaiseau, France. At 2.5 eV electrons are moving with relativistic speed of 0.985c and the total flux of electrons is about 2.7 μA of electric current through a 5 mm diameter diaphragm. The acquired irradiation dose is measured by a calibrated Faraday trap behind the sample and is conveniently expressed in C • cm -2 , where 1 C • cm -2 = 6.24 × 10 18 electrons/cm 2 . Electrons are particularly useful, because unlike heavier particles, they produce well-separated point like defects, called Frenkel pairs (vacancy+interstitial). But even with electrons, the irradiation needs to be conducted at low temperature, in liquid hydrogen in our case to prevent rapid clusterization of newly formed Frenkel pairs. Upon warming up the interstitials leave the system via various sinks, such as surfaces, defects, dislocations etc and a metastable population of vacancies remains. Their concentration is determined by the highest temperature reached -we re-checked the irradiated samples after a year on the shelf at room temperature with no noticeable change. We describe the annealing experiment in the main text. In 122 IBS, we estimate that warming up from 22 K of irradiation run to the room temperature, about 70% of induced scattering centers survives as determined from in-situ resitivity measurements 