In this paper, a one-dimensional non-Hermitian quasiperiodic p-wave superconductor without PT -symmetry is studied. By analyzing the spectrum, we discovered there still exists real-complex energy transition even if the inexistence of PT -symmetry breaking. By the inverse participation ratio, we constructed such a correspondence that pure real energies correspond to the extended states and complex energies correspond to the localized states, and this correspondence is precise and effective to detect the mobility edges. After investigating the topological properties, we arrive at a fact that the Majorana zero modes in this system are immune to the non-Hermiticity. In 1958, P. W. Anderson uncovered that the absence of the diffusion of wave packets is induced by disorder In reality, beyond the 3D systems, in the 1D quasiperiodic systems, known as the Aubry-André-like (AAlike) models (extensions of AA model Non-Hermiticity always brings about some novel quantum phenomena without any analogy to the Hermitian case, such as PT -symmetry breaking The delocalization-localization transition and topological superconducting were originally two different research fields, but now are linked by the p-wave pairings. Kitaev model is a standard superconducting model to interprete the topological transition in topological superconductors It was studied that the topological non-trivial region of the Kitaev model where Majorana zero mode (MZM) exists is independent of the superconducting pairing strength, and is only determined by the hopping amplitude In reality, topological superconductor cannot avoid the exchange of matter and energy with its surroundings, forming the so called non-Hermitian systems, and this exchange is not conductive to the existence of MZMS The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II, we describe the non-Hermitian p-wave superconductor and present its Hamiltonian both under periodic boundary condition (PBC) and open boundary condition (OBC). In Sec. III, we introduce the transfer ma-trix method on the purpose of extracting the Z 2 topological invariant of this system. In Sec. IV, we investigate the MZMs and obtain the topological phase diagram explicitly, and we explore the existence of the real-complex transition and discuss the correspondence between real-complex transition and the delocalizationlocalization transition by means of the IPR. A brief summary is given in Sec. V. We consider a one-dimensional p-wave superconductor with generalized non-Hermitian quasiperiodic on-site potentials, whose Hamiltonian in the real space is expressed as where n is the site index, L is the size of the system, and ĉn (ĉ † n ) is the fermion annihilation (creation) operator. t in the hopping amplitude chosen as the unit of energy, and ∆ denotes the strength of superconducting pairings between nearest-neighbor sites where V represents the strength of the potential, b ∈ (0, 1) is a dimensionless parameter and α = ( √ 5 -1)/2 is the incommensurate modulation frequency which makes the potential quasiperiodic. Such a complex potential can be experimentally realized in a synthetic mesh photonic lattice and experimental proposal has been discussed in Ref. Due to the particle-hole symmetry, we can make a diagonalization on the Hamiltonian in Eq. ( where ξ † j is the BdG operator, j is the energy level index and it belongs to 1, • • • , L and the coefficients u j,n and v j,n are complex numbers, so that the eigenenergy E j of the system can be determined by the following BdG equations (4) To make the above equation a matrix presentation, we introduce the wave function with the following form At n-th lattice site, the probability p n is given as Then, we arrive at the BdG matrix where and C = -t ∆ -∆ t for system with periodic boundary condition (PBC) and C = 0 0 0 0 for system with open boundary condition (OBC). Definitely, H is a 2L × 2L matrix. By diagonalizing H, we can acquire the full energy spectrum E j and the corresponding wave functions |ψ j directly. In the next section, we will discuss the topological properties of the system, such as the Z 2 topological invariant, Majorana zero energy modes and the corresponding states. Moreover, we will quantitatively analyze real-complex energy transition and the mobility edge by the inverse participation ratio. As mentioned that our system belongs to the class D in the topological classification, the topological properties of the system is directly reflected by a Z 2 topological invariant M . We determine M by the scattering matrix method in which the 2×2 subblocks {R, R } and {T , T } denotes the reflection and transmission matrices at the two ends of the system. With the matrix R, the Z 2 topological invariant M is given as where sgn is the sign of the determinant (Det) of R. When M = -1, the system is in the topological nontrivial phase, which supports the existence of the Majorana zero-energy mode (MZM), and M = 1 corresponds to the topological trivial phase where there is no any MZM. The scattering matrix S can be acquired by the transfer matrix scheme. We set the Fermi energy at E f = 0, then Eq. ( in which φ n = (u n , v n ) T denotes the wave function at n-th site, and with tn = -tσ z +i∆σ z and τn = V n σ z . After a recursive process, the waves at the two ends (n = 1 and n = L) of the system depend on the total transfer matrix λ In order to separate the left-moving and right-moving waves, we need to introduce a unitary operators U . After performing a unitary transformation, the total transfer matrix becomes where I is a identity matrix. Accordingly, the relationship between R (R ) and T (T ) is presented as Therefore, we can calculate the total transfer matrix λ to obtain the Z 2 topological invariant M . At the beginning, we investigate the topological properties of this system. For convenience but not losing generality, we take t=1 and ∆ = 0.5 throughout the following studies. Along the above strategy, we numerically calculate the Z 2 topological invariant M with various potential strength V and finally acquire the phase diagram, which is explicitly shown in Fig. where γ A and γ B are Majorana operators, satisfying γ A = ĉ † n + ĉn and γ A = i(ĉ † n -ĉn ) and obeying the relations (γ β n ) † = γ β n and {γ β n , γ β n } = 2δ nn δ ββ with β, β ∈ {A, B}; φ j,n = (u j,n + v j,n ) and ψ j,n = (u j,n -v j,n ). Figures For a normalized wave function, if its IPR tends to zero, then this wave function is extended; if IPR is greater than zero (approaching 1), then this wave function is localized. If we take V = 6t and the system is in the topological trivial phase, then we will observe distinctly different phenomena. Compared to the energy spectrum in Fig. Concrete speaking, the spectrum consists of two small loops and two big loop, as well as two regions of real energy (see Fig. All in all, we have investigated the topological properties, energy spectrum features, and delocalizationlocalization properties of a general non-Hermitian p-wave superconductor. We have known that the system is robust against the non-Hermitian perturbations and preserves the same topological boundary as the original Kitaev model. By calculating the IPR, we have successfully contributed a general correspondence that real energies correspond to the extended states and the complex ones correspond to the localized states. This correspondence will be instructive to detect the unconventional realcomplex transition and delocalization-localization transition in other non-Hermitian systems. Our work directly connects three hot research areas: topological superconductors, real-complex transition induced by non-Hermiticity, and Anderson localization, and will promote comprehensive development of these areas. Unfortunately, it is unknown whether there exists a type of symmetry breaking which results in this unconventional real-complex transition. Therefore, revealing the origination of this unconventional real-complex transition remains an open question.