One-dimensional nanowires with strong spin-orbit coupling and proximity-induced superconductivity are predicted to exhibit topological superconductivity with condensed-matter analogues to Majorana fermions. Here, the nonequilibrium Green's function approach with the generalized Kadanoff-Baym ansatz is employed to study the electron-correlation effects and their role in the topological superconducting phase in and out of equilibrium. Electron-correlation effects are found to affect the transient signatures regarding the zero-energy Majorana states, when the superconducting nanowire is subjected to external perturbations such as magnetic-field quenching, laser-pulse excitation, and coupling to biased normal-metal leads. One-dimensional nanowires may host Majorana zero modes (MZMs) when subjected to a suitable combination of spin-orbit interaction, proximity to an s-wave bulk superconductor, and an external magnetic field The Coulomb repulsion of electrons is present in any real material. While fairly large amount of work has been devoted to, e.g., disorder effects and how they affect the topological signatures It is the purpose of this paper to study the electron-correlation effects and their role in the topological superconducting phase in and out of equilibrium. This investigation is carried out by using the nonequilibrium Green's function (NEGF) approach After the Introduction, the paper is organized as follows. In Section II, the model Hamiltonian for the superconducting nanowire is outlined. In Section II, also the NEGF equations used for inferring both equilibrium and nonequilibrium properties are outlined. The equilibrium and nonequilibrium properties are studied in Sections III and IV, respectively. Diverse signatures of the transient build-up of the MZM are observed, depending on the electronic interaction, when the superconducting nanowire is subjected to external perturbations. Finally, Section V is a summary of the work, together with some prospects for future directions. The studied system is a one-dimensional nanowire in proximity to an s-wave bulk superconductor, see Figure invariance. The nanowire is characterized by the second-quantization Hamiltonian where the sum runs over the nanowire sites i ∈ [1, N ], J is the nearest-neighbor hopping between the nanowire sites, μ is the (equilibrium) chemical potential, α is the strength of the spin-orbit coupling, V Z is the Zeeman splitting (due to the external magnetic field), ∆ is the induced superconducting pairing potential, and U is the on-site electronelectron repulsion (Hubbard type). The fermionic operators, ĉ( †) iσ , annihilate (create) electrons from (to) site i with spin orientation σ ∈ {↑, ↓}. The density operator in the interaction term is defined as niσ = ĉ † iσ ĉiσ . The number of particles in the nanowire is determined by μ. In Equation ( Dynamical properties of the system described by Equation which is an expectation value, with respect to the grand-canonical ensemble, of contour-ordered fermionic operators. These operators are represented in the Heisenberg picture, and the ensemble average can be expressed as a trace over the density matrix. The complex time variables z, z run over the Keldysh contour γ ≡ (t 0 , t)⊕(t, t 0 )⊕(t 0 , t 0 -iβ), where t 0 marks the beginning of an out-of-equilibrium process, t is the observation time, and β is the inverse temperature. Expressed in the one-particle site basis of the nanowire, the Green's function matrix satisfies the equation of motion where h is the one-particle part of the Hamiltonian in Equation ( In practice, the equation of motion ( which is the equation of motion for the reduced one-particle density matrix ρ(t) ≡ -iG < (t, t). In Equation ( for the Hubbard interaction where Σ c is the correlation self-energy. Here, this is approximated at the second-order Born (2B) level, for the Hubbard interaction A closed equation for the one-particle density matrix in Equation ( and the propagators are approximated by their HF form where T is the chronological time ordering. We shall discard the imaginary-time collision integral in Equation ( The nanowire hosts the MZM with, e.g., the following set of parameters: J = 1, α = 0.5, V Z = 0.25, ∆ = 0.1, μ = 0, and when the nanowire is of length N ≥ 50 The equilibrium properties can be studied by evolving the system in time in the absence of external perturbations. In this context, it is useful to evaluate the momentum-and energy-resolved spectral function where x i are the real-space lattice coordinates along the nanowire, τ ≡ t -t is the relative-time coordinate, and T ≡ (t + t )/2 is the center-of-time coordinate. The real-space coordinate system is fixed with a lattice spacing of one, and the origin is set in the middle of the two center-most sites in the nanowire (see Figure When visualizing the spectral functions, it is useful to shift the frequency axis about the band center, ω c , which is set between the two centermost eigenvalues of the HF Hamiltonian. It is worth noting that ω c depends on the interaction strength U , and it is not necessarily equal to μ which is simply a model parameter in this description [cf. Equation ( While the description in Equations ( In Figure where the on-site and nearest-neighbor contributions respectively, are expressed in the spin⊗particle-hole representation. The bands organize in the way of a standard topological superconductor. As the spin-orbit coupling breaks the spin-degeneracy, there are two sets of parabolas around k = 0; these are further duplicated for particles and holes at positive and negative energies, respectively. The Zeeman splitting opens a gap at k = 0, which makes it possible for the superconducting pairing potential to open another gap at k = 0, inducing a p-wave like pairing as long as [1, 2] In this situation, the MZMs emerge in the case of a finite wire, as can be seen by the spectral peak at zero energy in Figure Let us look at the spectrum more thoroughly. The position of the lowest-energy spectral peak is extracted for a wide range of parameters V Z and μ while keeping the other parameters fixed, and the equilibrium phase diagram is shown in Figure As already seen in Figure As the NEGF+GKBA approach with the 2B self-energy has now been shown to capture the essential many-body effects of the interacting nanowire, let us then investigate how the interacting nanowire and the MZM are affected by external perturbations. Again, Equation ( A. Sudden quench of magnetic field Figure Before applying the quench, the system is in the ordinary superconducting phase. Compared to the noninteracting case [Figure The quench is a very strong out-of-equilibrium condition, and the system behavior is crucially altered. In the noninteracting case [Figure While the interacting case [Figure Let us then keep the nanowire characterized by the Hamiltonian in Equation ( where the pulse shape is taken as a gaussian, E(t) = E 0 sin(Ω(t -t c ))e -4.6(t-tc) 2 /t 2 c of amplitude E 0 , frequency Ω, and centering t c = 2πn c /Ω with n c being the number of optical cycles. In all calculations, n c = 3 is used. In Equation ( To investigate how charge is (re-)distributed along the nanowire after the pulse excitation, let us look at the (field-induced) time-dependent dipole moment where x i are, again, the real-space lattice coordinates along the nanowire, and ρ ii is the diagonal element of the density matrix, i.e., the site occupation number. The Fourier transform of the dipole moment, d(ω) = dte -iωt d(t), gives us access to the spectral properties of the nanowire: The dipole spectrum d(ω) is peaked at the excitation energies of dipole-allowed transitions Let us now investigate the time-dependent response of the nanowire in the topological regime (J = 1, α = 0.5, V Z = 0.25, ∆ = 0.1, μ = 0) to a laser-pulse excitation. The field-induced, time-dependent dipole moment and the corresponding dipole spectra are shown in Figure The dipole moment oscillation amplitudes are considerably suppressed by the interactions, cf. Figure Ultimately, let us consider a quantum-transport setup with the nanowire being contacted to two normal-metal leads, cf. Figure respectively, where kλ is the energy dispersion in lead λ and J ikλ are the coupling matrix elements between the i-th site in the nanowire and the k-th basis function in lead λ. Again, like in Equation ( where P denotes the principal value. In order to connect the retarded embedding self-energy with the retarded propagators in Equation ( where Γ ≡ λ Γ λ . It is worth noticing, that the lesser/greater embedding self-energies in Equation ( Finally, after solving Equation ( As shown in Figure The current calculation also includes a comparison between the description of electronic interactions at the HF and 2B level. The interactions smear out the states around the gap edge so that transmission can be obtained with smaller bias voltages than in the noninteracting case. Qualitatively, HF and 2B give very similar results with each other; the zero-bias peak due to the MZM is also broadened similarly. In principle, this effect is not limited by the spectral broadening of the GKBA [cf. Equation It is worth pointing out that the long-time limit of Equation ( The transient current through the nanowire is shown in Figure Electron-correlation effects in superconducting nanowires were studied in and out of equilibrium. The NEGF approach within the GKBA allowed for a simultaneous study of the correlation, embedding and transient effects. Particular emphasis was put on the role of electronic interactions in the topological superconducting phase and the associated MZMs. In equilibrium, the MZMs were found to be protected against electronic interactions, and the equilibrium phase diagram to be extended to a larger chemical-potential window. This finding is in line with the DMRG data of Reference Out of equilibrium, the transient build-up of the MZM was found to be affected by the electronic interactions. This was related to interparticle scattering events, taking place within the nanowire, which are obstructing the electronic signal. The transient charge oscillations excited by a laser pulse were also found to be damped due to interactions. On the other hand, time-resolved transport signatures were found to be qualitatively less affected by the interactions because, in that case, the main transient oscillations resulted from transitions between the biased Fermi level of the leads and the zero-energy states within the nanowire While the experimental verification of the MZMs in these systems is yet to be presented, it is useful to estimate limits for the required temporal resolution for time-resolved transport measurements with the help of the simulations presented here. As the unit system was fixed by the hopping value J = 1, which determines, e.g., the material's bandwidth and is typically on the electron-volt scale, the transient current oscillations lasting for hundreds of J -1 would correspond to the picosecond time scale. While this resolution is at limits of what is routinely achievable, recent development in ultrafast transport measurements with on-chip femtosecond technology has allowed a sub-picosecond temporal resolution to detect the Hall current in graphene The computational effort for the resolution of the out-of-equilibrium simulations is not to be underestimated. Due to the relatively large spin⊗particle-hole basis of the system studied here, the efficient construction of the many-body self-energies is important 