Photoelectron field emission, induced by femtosecond laser pulses focused on metallic nanotips, provides spatially coherent and temporally short electron pulses. Properties of the photoelectron yield give insight into both the material properties of the nanostructure and the exciting laser focus. Ultralong nanoribbons, grown as a single crystal attached to a metallic taper, are sources of electron field emission that have not yet been characterized. In this report, photoemission from gold nanoribbon samples is studied and compared to emission from tungsten and gold tips. We observe that the emission from sharp tips generally depends on one transverse component of the exciting laser field, while the emission of a blunted nanoribbon is found to be sensitive to both components. We propose that this property makes photoemission from nanoribbons a candidate for position-sensitive detection of the longitudinal field component in a tightly focused beam. A consequence of tightly focusing a beam of light is that the beam will become longitudinally polarized near the focus. Photoelectron field emission, induced by focusing femtosecond laser pulses onto sharp metallic tapers with nanometric radii of curvature, Ultralong gold nanoribbons, The DENA methodology results in single-crystalline samples, as confirmed by electron diffraction. Previous studies into the optical damage threshold of similar nanowire samples indicated that single-crystalline gold nanowires could tolerate high laser pulse peak intensities before melting, but that they exhibited long cooling times. A schematic for the system used to characterize tip samples is given in Fig. The experimental chamber, which is detailed in Ref. 17, is maintained at 2 × 10 -7 Torr. The beams are focused within the chamber by an off-axis parabolic mirror (OAPM) to a full-width half maximum of 3.6 μm. A 3-axis stage, coupled to the chamber by flexible bellows, positions tip samples into the focus. Mounted tip samples were biased at -100 V, as this was lower than the threshold for Fowler-Nordheim field emission. Electrons were collimated through two 4 mm apertures before being detected by a microchannel plate (MCP). Electron pulses from the MCP were amplified and discriminated. Discriminator pulses were counted by a multichannel scaler, and used as the start trigger for a timeto-amplitude converter (TAC). The output reference signal from the Ti:Saph oscillator was used as the TAC stop trigger to measure the arrival time of electrons. Timing spectra were obtained by sending the TAC output pulses to a multichannel analyzer (MCA). Nanoribbon samples were prepared using the DENA methodology. In order to distinguish which photoemission properties arise due to the material or geometry of the nanoribbon samples, single-crystal tungsten (W) and gold (Au) tips were prepared for comparison. Samples of W wire (200 μm diameter) were annealed The tip and nanoribbon samples were mounted to SEM pin stubs with silver paste. SEM images of the samples are given in Fig. Pump/probe and single beam experiments with the TAC/MCA configuration revealed the timing features of electron emission. The additive ratio of emission from the samples is plotted in Fig. Normalized time spectra of electron emission from tip samples are plotted in Fig. To further investigate this feature, the pulsed and background contributions to emission from the 11 μm nanoribbon are plotted as a function of λ/2 angle in Fig. Ultralong Au nanoribbons are unique nanostructures for the study of electron, thermal, and plasmonic transport by laser-induced electron emission. Previous work indicated that nanoribbons are resilient to damage by laser intensities on the order of TW/cm 2 , 32 but we found damage can occur with lower intensities. This observation resulted in the 11 μm nanoribbon, which differed from the original 23 μm nanoribbon by having a less defined apex. An immediate consequence of the laser damage to the 23 μm nanoribbon was that the shorter 11 μm nanoribbon required higher incident laser power to emit, which is evident in Fig. 