Ferroelectric field-effect transistors (Fe-FETs) with ferroelectric hafnium oxide (FE HfO2) as gate insulator are being extensively explored as a promising device candidate for three-dimensional (3D) NAND memory application. FE HfO2 exhibits long retention over 10 years, high endurance over 10 12 cycles, high speed with sub-ns polarization switching, and high remnant polarization of 10-30 μC/cm 2 . However, the performance of Fe-FETs is known to be much worse than FE HfO2 capacitors, which is not completely understood. In this work, we developed a comprehensive Fe-FET model based on a charge balance framework. The role of charge balance and the impact of leakage-assist-switching mechanism on the memory characteristics of Fe-FETs with M/FE/DE/S (Metal/Ferroelectric/Dielectric/Semiconductor) gate stack is studied. It is found that the FE/DE interface and DE layer instead of FE layer is critical to determine the memory characteristics of Fe-FETs, and experimental Fe-FETs can be well explained by this model, where the discrepancy between FE capacitors and Fe-FETs are successfully understood. ERROELECTRIC field-effect transistors (Fe-FETs) with ferroelectric hafnium oxide High-performance FE HfO 2 based metal/FE/metal (M/FE/M) capacitors have been demonstrated with long retention over 10 years It is well known that FE HfO 2 has a high P R of about 10-30 μC/cm 2 The different electron transport mechanisms in Fe-FETs and FE capacitors are because of the different structures. FE capacitors discussed here have a M/FE/M structure as shown in Fig. Remnant polarization charge density in FE HfO 2 is about 10-30 μC/cm 2 . For M/FE/M structure, such high charge density can be easily compensated by metal electrodes. However, on the M/FE/DE/S, charge balance conditions cannot be satisfied in ideal case. so that P FE + ε FE E FE = ε DE E DE . (3) Here, P FE is the polarization induced by ferroelectricity, P FE =P R in full polarization condition. Using SiO 2 as DE layer and ε DE =3.9, E DE can be estimated as about 30 MV/cm to 90 MV/cm, which is far above the breakdown electric field (E BD ) of SiO 2 . Therefore, to satisfy the charge balance condition, there must be charge injection to the FE/DE interface as interfacial charge (Q FEDE ) through a leakage-assist-switching mechanism during FE polarization switching process in Fe-FET, as shown in Fig. density in space charge region and Q it is the interfacial charge at DE and semiconductor interface. Therefore, to obtain charge balance in Fe-FET in both polarization up and down states, we need both negative charges and positive charges, such as electrons and holes in channel region for charge balance, which may result in partial polarization switching in FE layer. Therefore, the difference of FE capacitor and Fe-FETs are mainly because of charge balance in Fe-FETs cannot be achieved without introducing non-ideal interfacial charges. In the above section, the necessity of introducing Q FEDE is discussed. In this section, we will furtherly show by simple derivation that the memory characteristics of Fe-FETs considering FE/DE interfacial charge are fundamentally different from without considering Q FEDE . Memory characteristics such as MW, endurance, retention, etc. are determined by DE layer instead of FE layer as commonly understood. The memory window of a Fe-FET is defined as the threshold voltage (V T ) difference between polarization up and polarization down states. The threshold voltage of a Fe-FET without considering ferroelectric polarization (V T0 ) where φ ms is the work function difference between metal gate and semiconductor, Ψ B is the Fermi level from intrinsic Fermi level, ε S is the dielectric constant of semiconductor, N A is doping concentration, C ox is the oxide capacitance, q is the elementary charge. C ox is the capacitance of FE layer (C FE ) and capacitance of DE layer (C DE ) connected in series. V T0 may also depends on the substrate voltage, channel thickness, etc. in fully depleted device and other device structures, but is only used as a reference V T and will not change the essential physics. If considering the ferroelectric polarization and FE/DE interfacial charge, the threshold voltage of a Fe-FET is, Here, P FE is the FE polarization and is positive in polarization up state, which may not reach full polarization to P R . The interfacial charge at FE/DE interface (Q FEDE ) always has the same sign with P FE due to a leakage-assist-switching mechanism. Therefore, assuming a symmetric polarization switching, memory window can be expressed as (P FE here is the positive one), In ideal case without Q FEDE , if P FE =P R and Q FEDE is zero, and assuming the thickness of FE layer (t FE ) is 10 nm with ε FE of 20 and P R is 20 μC/cm 2 , MW of a typical FE HfO 2 based Fe-FET is expected to be 22 V, which is too large to be realistic. Therefore, Q FEDE has to be introduced in the model of Fe-FET, which further confirms the validity of the leakage-assistswitching mechanism. To properly determine the Q FEDE , according to the continuity equation required by charge balance in equation ( According to the leakage assistant switching mechanism Therefore, considering equations ( In this case, assuming t FE of 10 nm, ε DE of 3.9 and ε FE of 20, E eff of 5 MV/cm, MW can be estimated as 2.0 V, which is very close to experimental reported values. The above discussions are based on that P FE is larger than ε DE E eff so that a leakage-assist-switching process must exist. However, P FE may not always reach full polarization or high polarization charge density. For example, if gate voltage is not high enough, only partial polarization switching may be obtained, leading to a small memory window. Note that to achieve high P FE , both positive and negative charges are required for charge balance according to equation ( In this case, if P FE is smaller than ε DE E eff , Q FEDE is zero and MW becomes, Here, according to above new insights, we want to emphasize that there are two key points to achieve a large MW on a Fe-FET. Firstly, the quality of DE layer is critical to enhance the memory window. A low-quality interfacial layer may lead to the diminish of MW because DE layer cannot hold charge. Secondly, to have both high positive and negative charge density, for example high hole and electron density, in semiconductor channel is important for charge balance. Narrow bandgap materials such as Ge An important indication from above model is to understand the endurance characteristics of FE HfO 2 based Fe-FETs. FE HfO 2 based M/FE/M capacitors have been demonstrated with high endurance over 10 12 cycles while endurance on the level of only 10 6 or even below is commonly observed on Fe-FETs with FE HfO 2 gate insulator. This phenomenon can be successfully explained by the above model. According to equation Therefore, to improve the endurance characteristics, there are two possible approaches. First, to develop a FE thin film with FE polarization density less than few μC/cm 2 , so that DE layer does not operate near breakdown. For example, CuInP 2 S 6 has a low P R of 2-4 μC/cm 2 . The retention characteristics are determined by E dep and charge trapping across the DE layer, which both lead to the drift of V T and lose of MW. More than 10 years retention time has been successfully demonstrated on FE HfO 2 based Fe-FETs. The high retention performance is also related with the charge accumulation at FE/DE interface. According The above discussions are based on a one-dimensional (1D) model, but the real Fe-FETs are planar devices with 2D electrostatic potential distribution or 3D devices, such as FinFETs or gate-all-around (GAA) FETs, with 3D electrostatic potential distribution. The impact of 2D or 3D electrostatics is crucial to Fe-FET operation in certain device structures. For example, in a silicon Fe-FETs with n-type channel (pdoped), to switch down the FE polarization, a high positive gate voltage is applied, so that an electron inversion layer is formed. The high-density electron inversion layer terminates the electric field so that the electrostatic potential distribution is similar to 1D case like a M/FE/DE/M structure as shown in Fig However, if without the existence of both positive and negative charges, such as a GaN Fe-FET In summary, we have developed a comprehensive Fe-FET model based on the charge balance framework. The impact of charge balance and the leakage-assist-switching mechanism on the memory characteristics of Fe-FETs with M/FE/DE/S gate stack is studied and the discrepancy between the memory performance of FE capacitors and Fe-FETs are successfully understood. It is found that the FE/DE interface and DE layer are critical to determine the memory characteristics of Fe-FETs. The MW, retention and endurance characteristics of FE HfO 2 based Fe-FET are determined by DE layer instead of FE layer as usually understood. To further improve the memory performance of Fe-FETs, according to the new insights in this model, the following two potential approaches are provided. (i) To reduce the remnant polarization of FE layer down to below few μC/cm 2 , so that FE operation does not involve leakage-assist-switching process. For example, FE HZO with a reduced Hf composition or ultrathin FE HZO. (ii) To remove DE layer and use a M/FE/S structure, such as employing a back-gate Fe-FET with an oxide semiconductor channel. But a high-quality FE and semiconductor interface is still needed in this case. At DE and semiconductor interface, the continuity equation becomes, ε DE E DE = Q ch + Q sc + Q it .