We report the observation of superconductivity in infinite-layer Ca-doped LaNiO2 (La1-xCaxNiO2) thin films and construct their phase diagram. Unlike the metal-insulator transition in Nd-and Pr-based nickelates, the undoped and underdoped La1-xCaxNiO2 thin films are entirely insulating from 300 K down to 2 K. A superconducting dome is observed at 0. 15 < x < 0. 3 with weakly insulating behavior at the overdoped regime. Moreover, the sign of the Hall coefficient RH changes at low temperature for samples with a higher doping level. However, distinct from the Nd-and Pr-based nickelates, the RH-sign-change temperature remains at around 35 K as the doping increases, which begs further theoretical and experimental investigation in order to reveal the role of the 4f orbital to the (multi)band nature of the superconducting nickelates. Our results also emphasize the significant role of lattice correlation on the multiband structures of the infinite-layer nickelates. The resemblance of the high-Tc superconducting cuprates in the nickel-based compounds has made superconductivity in the nickelates to be one of the holy grails in superconducting research in the last three decades. The recent discovery of superconductivity in infinite layer Sr-doped NdNiO2 (1) has now further propelled the importance of nickelates as a route towards understanding and a material platform for searching for new high-Tc superconductors Much effort has been devoted to dope carriers in this LaNiO2, but it failed to obtain superconductivity It has also been shown that hybridization with Nd 4f orbitals is a non-negligible ingredient for the superconductivity in doped NdNiO2, while the f orbitals are far from the Fermi level in LaNiO2 In unconventional superconductors containing the rare-earth element, the substitution of an isovalent ion with a smaller radius causes an increase in inner chemical pressure due to the shrinkage of the crystal lattice. This is considered an important method to enhance Tc, as experimentally demonstrated in cuprates and pnictides Moreover, the lattice constant increases with increasing Sr doping level, and the superconducting dome occurs near the RH-sign-change boundary. It is therefore anticipated to induce superconductivity in LaNiO2 through doping with a smaller ionic radius. Here we present the observation of superconductivity in infinite-layer La1-xCaxNiO2 thin films through Ca doping. The perovskite La1-xCaxNiO3 precursor thin films were synthesized by a pulsed laser deposition technique and reduced to an infinite-layer phase using the soft-chemistry topotactic reduction method. The X-ray diffraction (XRD) θ-2θ patterns of the asgrown La1-xCaxNiO3 thin films can be found in Supplementary Data Fig. Figure Figure Similar to Nd-and Pr-nickelates, the room-temperature RH is negative, and its magnitude decreases with increasing x and then saturates at x = 0.2 (Fig. At the two ends of the dome, the underdoped regime shows insulating behavior upon cooling, and the overdoped regime is weakly insulating at low temperature, different from the Nd-and Pr-nickelates in which both regimes show weakly insulating behavior In addition to introducing charge carriers, the chemical doping in infinite-layer nickelate can cause the change of the multiband structures due to the modification of the lattice environment These suggest the importance of the lattice environment on the superconductivity and normal state properties in the infinite-layer nickelates. The present result also suggests a new route for new superconductors and a unique way for tailoring normal state properties through dopants in the nickelate superconductors. We prepared and characterized our Ca-doped LaNiO2 samples following procedures previously described in The ceramic targets with nominal composition La1-xCaxNiO3 were prepared by the conventional solid-state reaction using high-purity La2O3 (99.999%, Sigma-Aldrich), NiO2 ( 99.99% , Sigma-Aldrich), CaCO3 ( 99.995% , Sigma-Aldrich) powders as the starting materials. The mixed powders were sintered in air for 15 h at 1150, 1200 and 1250°C, respectively, with thorough regrinding before each sintering. On the final sintering, the powder was pressed into a disk-shaped pellet. The perovskite thin films were grown on TiO2-terminated ( 001 ) SrTiO3 substrates using a pulsed laser deposition (PLD) technique with a 248 -nm KrF excimer laser. The deposition temperature and oxygen partial pressure PO2 for all samples were 600 °C and 150 mTorr, respectively. The laser energy density on the target surface was set to be 1.8 Jcm -2 . After deposition, the samples were annealed for 10 min at 600 °C and 150 mTorr and then cooled down to room temperature at a rate of 8 o C/min. In order to obtain the infinite-layer structures, the as-grown films were then embedded with about 0.15 g of CaH2 powder and wrapped in aluminium foil, and then placed into the PLD chamber for the reduction process. The wrapped sample was heated to 340 -360°C at a rate of 25 °C/min and kept for 80 minutes, and then cooled down to room temperature at a rate of 25 °C/min. The transport measurements were performed using a Quantum Design Physical Property Measurement System. The wire connection for the electrical transport measurement was made by Al ultrasonic wire bonding. The X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurement was done in the X-ray Diffraction and Development (XDD) beamline at Singapore Synchrotron Light Source (SSLS) with an X-ray wavelength of λ = 1.5404 Å. The high-angle annular dark-field scanning transmission electron microscopy (HAADF-STEM) imaging was carried out at 200 kV using a JEOL ARM200F microscope, and the cross-sectional TEM specimens were prepared by a focused ion beam machine (FEI Versa 3D). 