For superconducting nanowire with the pairing of extended s-type symmetry, Rashba spin-orbit interaction in a magnetic field, the influence of strong intersite charge correlations on single-particle Majorana excitations is analyzed. This problem is investigated on the basis of the density matrix renormalization group numerical method. It is shown that with an increase in the repulsion intensity of electrons located at the neighboring sites, two subbands emerge in the lower Hubbard band of the open system. Based on calculations of the Majorana polarization and degeneracy of the entanglement spectrum, it was found that a topologically nontrivial phase with one edge state survives at the edge of each of the subbands where the concentration of electrons or holes is minimal. Modern experiments with hybrid superconducting nanowires (SW), characterized by strong spin-orbit coupling and high g-factor values, do not provide a definite answer to the question of the implementation of Majorana modes (MM) at the boundaries of this structure One important issue is the impact of the Coulomb interactions on the Majorana bound states (MBS). Most theoretical studies of these excitations consider quadratic Hamiltonians for which classification of topological superconductivity has been obtained It is worth noting that the action of the gate fields, the number of which can be significant in modern MBS-detection experiments, can considerably influence the intensity of charge correlations in the semiconductor wire. In particular, it was shown in the study One of the factors preventing the MBS detection in the hybrid nanostructure is the suppression of the superconductivity, proximity-induced by the substrate or shell, due to the magnetic field. This problem can be avoided, for example, by assuming that the Cooper pairing in the SW is caused by the coupling with an unconventional superconductor. Then, at a zero magnetic field (preserving timereversal symmetry) a Majorana Kramers doublet, i.e. the MM pairs at both ends of the wire, emerges It is essential that taking into account strong electron interactions encounters fundamental theoretical problems associated with a significant renormalization of effective interactions, a change in the topological classification, as well as the correct definition and construction of the MM operators The importance of the problem of many-body interactions is also related to the implementation of topological quantum computing. Despite the fundamental stability of the MBS against to local perturbations Using the DMRG method the influence of charge correlations on topological phases is most often considered in the Kitaev chain The above-mentioned studies The SW model under consideration takes into account the Rashba spin-orbit coupling, Coulomb repulsion of electrons, proximity-induced superconductivity and Zeeman splitting. In the tight-binding approximation, the SW Hamiltonian of SW with N sites has the form - Here t/2 and α/2 are parameters describing the hopping and Rashba spin-orbit interaction between the nearest neighbors, respectively; ξ σ = -μ + η σ h, where h = 1 2 gμ B H -the Zeeman energy, g -the Lande g-factor; μ B -the Bohr magneton; μa chemical potential; a f σ (a + f σ ) -an operator annihilating (creating) electron with a spin projection σ =↑, ↓ on a site f ; η ↑ = 1, η ↓ = -1. The quantities ∆ and ∆ 1 are amplitudes of the proximity-induced superconducting pairing of the extended s-type symmetry. The terms describing on-site, U, and intersite, V , Coulomb interaction of electrons are also taken into account. The occupation number operator is n f σ = a + f σ a f σ . Henceforth, we consider all energy variables in units of t and t = 1. Equilibrium properties of the model ( The first part of the used DMRG algorith contains the following steps: 1. The left cluster L with N 0 sites and M L eigenstates is considered. The Hamiltonian of such a cluster is given by the formula (1) as . The eigenstates of the Hamiltonian H L can be obtained exactly and form a Hilbert space, {|m L }, consisting of M L = 64 states. Similarly, one can get the Hamiltonian of the right cluster R and construct the corresponding Hilbert space {|m R } of its eigen states: 2. The enlarged cluster S/E (system/environment) is formed by adding the single site to the right/left of the cluster L/R. The Hilbert space dimension of the new blocks are , where M 1 -the single-site Hilbert space dimension. The basis states of the system and environment are acquired as the direct products: The Hamiltonians of the system and environment are given by Here I N is the identity operator in the space of cluster with N sites. The operator H 1 (H int ) can be obtained from the first (second) row of the Hamiltonian (1) for N = 1 (N = 2). The first iteration assumes that H S, int = H S, int 0 = It is essential to note that the adding of single sites in the center of the structure at each iteration step allows to circumvent mock boundary effects 3. The supercluster (S+E) with length 2N 0 +2 and the Hilbert-space size M S •M E is formed. Its Hamiltonian is The eigenproblem for this Hamiltonian is solved employing the Lanczos algorithm The above expressions explicitly indicate that the Lanczos algorithm is used to find two lowest-energy eigenstates (the ground state and first excited one) for each parity sector. Based on these four quantum states the many-body density operator of the supercluster (S + E) is constructed: where In this work we assume p j+ = p j-= 1/4. Next, the reduced density matrices are calculated. The corresponding operator of the cluster S, ρ S = T r E |ψ ψ|, can be found by taking the partial trace over the environment degrees of freedom (cluster E and indexes e ) where the explicit form of ρ s±,s ′ ± is and similar for the other matrices. They have dimensions M S(E) /2×M S(E) /2 = 128×128 for the cluster S (E). Considering further the cluster S, the solutions of the eigenvalue problem for matrices ρ S± • V l± = w l± • V l± (l = 1, . . . , M S /2) determine its effective low-energy degrees of freedom which must be used in the renormalization group procedure. The eigenvalues w l± characterize the occupancy of the quantum state l with the fermionic parity ± and satisfy the condition l (w l+ + w l-) = 1. Wherein the degeneracy of the eigenvalues means quantum entalglement of the system and environment. Similar remarks are valid for the environment density matrix ρ E . 5. Thus, the quantum degrees of freedom of the system S are determined by the eigenvectors V l± with the largest eigenvalues w l± . In order to renormilize the Hamiltonians of the L and R clusters the transition matrices V L± = [V 1± , V 2± , . . . , V M L /2;± ] are built, where w 1± ≥ w 2± ≥ . . . ≥ w M L /2;± . The similar matrices are constructed for the cluster E. The matrices . Finally, the renormilized Hamiltonians and other operators are 6. The procedure repeats starting from the step 2 until the observables cease to depend on the number of iterations. After the convergence the 1D structure corresponds to the one with a vanishingly small influence of the boundary conditions. This means that the described DMRG algorithm is applicable for infinite systems (infinite DMRG -iDMRG). Its precision is characterized by a truncation error: err = 1-M L i=1 w i , where summation is carried out over M L largest eigenvalues w i . In this study calculations err ∼ 10 -5 . Next, one has to additionally fix those choices of effective degrees of freedom for the clusters S and E at each iteration step as they are actually made for the superclusters of size lesser than the final length N. To do it the finite version of the DMRG procedure is used (finite-system DMRG -fDMRG). In this case the iDMRG procedure continues until the number of sites reaches the value of N. Thereafter, the sequence of sweeps is performed in order to achieve the convergence of the algorithm. The idea is to alternately perform the iDMRG procedure only for the left (L) or right (R) half of the system, keeping the structure length. Simultaneously, the operators of the adjacent (R or L) part have to be saved in computer memory and used during the next sweep. As a result of the DMRG algorithm, we recieve the approximate many-body quantum states | Ψ j± , energies E j± and many-body density matrix (2) of the system. The latter allows to study its equilibrium properties. In this section the impact of strong local interactions, on-site (U) and intersite (V ) Coulomb repulsion, on the equilibrium properties of the system (1) is analyzed. During the DMRG numerics we supposed that either U = 5, V = 0 or U = 5, V = 3.5. It is well known that the strong Hubbard repulsion, U ≫ 1, leads to the splitting of the initial electron band into the lower and upper Hubbard ones The energy region between them, which is also called the Mott-Hubbard gap, possesses the zero density of states and increases with the U growth. The strong intersite repulsion, V ≫ 1, causes the additional splitting of each band into two subbands accompanied by the spectral weight redistribution For the model (1) the similar effects, induced by the Hubbard and intersite repulsion, occur. For example, one can observe them in the chemical-potential dependence of the average electron concentration, n = 1 N N f =1 n f . The corresponding curves are displayed in Fig. , where E 0 = min{ E 1+ , E 1-} -the many-body ground state energy ascribed to the positive and negative fermion-parity sector of the Hilbert space. By the definition ε j ≥ 0 and if ε j = 0 the quantum phase transition in the system occurs. The Majorana polarization is where |Ψ 0 is the ground-state wave function; nearby the sums means the summation over the half of the system sites. In this study the entanglement entropy is determined in the following way: where S ρ (l) = ln (d(ρ, l)); d(ρ, l) -a degeneracy of the eigenvalues of the reduced density matrix (3); N it -a number of the iDMRG iterations. We used N it = 400, N s = 300. The above-mentioned quatities allow to distinguish between the different phases. In particular, if the phase is topologically trivial that ε 1,2 > 0, MP 1,2 → 0, D → 0. The topologically nontrivial phase with single Majorana bound state is characterized by Finally, if the nontrivial phase has two Majorana bound states that ε 1,2 → 0, MP 1,2 → 1, D → 2. Note that the iDMRG calculation converges well and the D index can be found unambiguously in the strongly interacting system with the moderately suppressed superconducting pairing. Otherwise, the behaviour of D is highly fluctuating (e.g. see Fig. The influence of the strong intersite repulsion on the excitation energies and electron density in the lower Hubbard band is shown in Fig. The function D (μ) in Fig. Finally, we note that when the chemical potential enters the quasi-forbidden bands induced by the Coulomb interactions a quantum phase transition occurs in the system without changing the topological index (see the dependences ε 1,2 (μ) in Fig. The effect of strong intersite electron repulsion on the topological phases of the nanowire with spin-orbit interaction, superconducting pairing of extended s-type symmetry and placed in the external magnetic field is investigated on the basis of the renormalization group method for the density matrix. The analysis performed is a continuation of the study The topological properties of the described electron subbands in the lower Hubbard band were investigated on the basis of an analysis of the excitation spectrum, Majorana polarization and quantum entanglement spectrum. It is shown that under the strong intersite repulsion the nontrivial topological phases can be found only in the parametric regions characterized by the low concentration of electrons or holes. For the other fillings, the topologically trivial phase with significantly suppressed superconductivity due to the Coulomb interactions is realized. It is noted that the intersite repulsion, as a factor leading to the Cooper pairing destruction, is substantially stronger than the Hubbard interaction.