Non-equilibrium studies of two-dimensional (2D) superconductors (SCs) with Ising spinorbit coupling are prerequisite for their successful application to equilibrium spin-triplet Cooper pairs and, potentially, Majorana fermions. By taking advantage of the recent discoveries of 2D SCs and their compatibility with any other materials, we fabricate here non-local magnon devices to examine how such 2D Ising superconductivity affects the conversion efficiency of magnon spin to quasiparticle charge in superconducting flakes of 2H-NbSe 2 transferred onto ferrimagnetic insulating Y 3 Fe 5 O 12 . Comparison with a reference device based on a conventionally paired superconductor shows that the Y 3 Fe 5 O 12 -induced in-plane (IP) exchange spin-splitting in the NbSe 2 flake is hindered by its inherent out-of-plane (OOP) spin-orbit-field, which, in turn, limits the transition-state enhancement of the spin-to-charge conversion efficiency. Our out-of-equilibrium study highlights the significance of symmetry matching between underlying Cooper pairs and exchange-induced spin-splitting for the giant transition-state spin-to-charge conversion and may have implications towards proximity-engineered spin-polarized triplet pairing via tuning the relative strength of IP exchange and OOP spin-orbit fields in ferromagnetic insulator/2D Ising SC bilayers. Injection and excitation of electrons, typically called Bogoliubov quasiparticles (QPs), in a superconductor (SC) with either external (Zeeman) or internal (exchange) spin-splitting field Our non-local magnon spin-transport devices (Figure [SHE (charge-to-spin conversion) In the plot of its resistance R NbSe 2 versus temperature T (Figure We now focus on how the conversion efficiency of magnon-carried spin to QP charge varies when the 2H-NbSe2 becomes superconducting. Figure Firstly, the enhancement amplitude attained in the 2H-NbSe2 detectors is relatively small ) compared with the t Nb = 15 nm reference device with a similar lateral dimension, even though the 2H-NbSe2 flakes (e.g. t NbSe 2 = 4, 9 nm) possess a higher Tc in thinner layers (Figure and the t NbSe 2 -dependent enhancement is rather weak. To account for these distinctively different conversion phenomena, we consider the layer thickness-dependent Ising superconductivity. Our out-of-equilibrium study highlights the importance of symmetry matching between underlying Cooper pairs and exchange-induced spin-splitting for the giant transition-state enhancement of QP iSHE. Our results may also provide a guideline for the proximity engineering of hybrid quantum materials that allow for exotic quantum phases (e.g. topological superconductivity with spinpolarized triplet pairs and/or Majorana zero modes) Device fabrication. We fabricated the magnon spin-transport devices (Figure based on 200-nm-thick single-crystalline YIG films (from Matesy GmbH, https://www.matesy.de/en/products/materials/yig-single-crystal) as follows. We first defined a pair of Pt electrodes with an area of 1.5 × 50 μm 2 , which were deposited by d.c. magnetron plasma sputtering at an Ar pressure of 4 × 10 -3 mbar These Pt electrodes are separated by a center-to-center distance d Pt-Pt of 15 μm, which is comparable to the magnon spin-diffusion length l sd m estimated from our previous study. We next selected NbSe2 flakes of suitable geometry and thickness, which were mechanically exfoliated from a high-quality single crystal (from HQ Graphene, http://www.hqgraphene.com/NbSe2.php) and first transferred onto SiO2(300 nm)/Si substrates, via optical microscopy inspection. We then picked up the selected NbSe2 flake and transferred it onto the central region of each magnon device (Figure where Φ 0 = h 2e = 2.07 × 10 -15 Tm 2 is the magnetic flux quantum. It is noteworthy that as t NbSe 2 is reduced and reaches the atomically-thin limit (t NbSe 2 ≪ ξ NbSe 2 ⊥ ) , the dominant Cooper-pair breaking mechanism under application of μ 0 H ∥ changes from Abrikosov vortex occupation to Ising SOC as recently discussed. where μ 0 H SO Ising is the strength of Ising SO field. For completeness, we also fitted the μ 0 H c2 ∥ (T) data (violet solid line, Figure On the other hand, for the deposited Nb thin film of t Nb = 15 nm ≤ ξ Nb ⊥ = ξ Nb ∥ , the Tdependent upper critical fields (Figure Note that unlike bulk Nb, the occupation energy of Abrikosov vortices in a superconducting Nb thin film (t Nb ≤ ξ Nb ⊥ = ξ Nb ∥ ) under μ 0 H ∥ is higher than that under μ 0 H ⊥ , differentiating formulas [Eqs. (2a) and (2b)] for the T-dependent IP/OOP upper critical fields. (2a) can be rewritten by Non-local measurements. We measured the non-local magnon spin-transport (Figure Typical R NbSe 2 -T curves measured by applying an external magnetic field either parallel μ 0 H ∥ (b) or perpendicular μ 0 H ⊥ (c) to the interface plane. The T-dependent IP (OOP) upper critical field μ 0 H c2 ∥ (μ 0 H c2 ⊥ ) is determined from the point where R = 0.5RT = 8 K. d) Summary of the μ 0 H c2 ∥ (T) and μ 0 H c2 ⊥ (T) data. The blue dashed line represents the Pauli paramagnetic limit μ 0 H P BCS ≈ 1.84Tc. 1) As outlined in Methods (main text), we first fabricated standard magnon device structures consisting of a YIG channel and two Pt electrodes, along with outer Au/Ru leads for electrical contacts to the central 2H-NbSe2 flake. 2),3) To dry-transfer the 2H-NbSe2 flake, we utilized a polypropylene carbonate (PPC) coated dome shaped polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) stamp. To make the dome shaped PDMS stamp, the PDMS was mixed with curing agent in a ratio of 1:10 (curing agent: PDMS) and baked at 100 °C on SiO2/Si wafer. The baked PDMS was treated with oxygen plasma for 5 min and a PPC layer was spin-coated on the PDMS. Subsequently, the PPC coated PDMS was transferred onto the glass slide. After we aligned the PDMS stamp to a suitable 2H-NbSe2 which was pre-transferred onto a SiO2(300 nm)/Si substrate using a micromanipulator, the PDMS stamp was slowly approached to the 2H-NbSe2 flake and heated up to 100 °C. Next, we cooled the stamp down to 40 °C and picked the 2H-NbSe2 flake up. 4),5) The picked-up 2H-NbSe2 flake was aligned to the pre-patterned magnon device structure by the micromanipulator and released at 100 °C. 6) The remained PPC residue was removed by acetone. for t NbSe 2 = 2.5 nm device (Figure Nb Our magnon spin-transport experiments with 2H-NbSe2 detectors have shown that OOP Cooper pairing of Ising SC, derived by IP inversion symmetry breaking and strong SOC, hinders