In the recent search for unconventional-and topological superconductivity, noncentrosymmetric superconductors (NCSCs) rank among the most promising candidate materials. Surprisingly, some of themespecially those containing rhenium -seem to exhibit also time-reversal symmetry (TRS) breaking in their superconducting state, while TRS is preserved in many other isostructural NCSCs. To date, a satisfactory explanation for such discrepant behavior, albeit crucial for understanding the unconventional superconductivity of these materials, is still missing. Here we review the most recent developments regarding the Re-based class, where the muon-spin relaxation (μSR) technique plays a key role due to its high sensitivity to the weak internal fields associated with the TRS breaking phenomenon. We discuss different cases of Re-containing superconductors, comprising both centrosymmetric-and noncentrosymmetric crystal structures and ranging from pure rhenium, to ReT (T = 3d-5d early transition metals), to the dilute-Re case of ReBe 22 . μSR results suggest that the rhenium presence and its amount are two key factors for the appearance and the extent of TRS breaking in Re-based superconductors. Besides summarizing the existing findings, we also put forward future research ideas regarding the exciting field of materials showing TRS breaking. The combination of intriguing fundamental physics with far-reaching potential applications has made unconventional superconductors one of the most studied classes of materials. Standing out among them are the noncentrosymmetric superconductors (NCSCs) In general, the various types of NCSCs can be classified into two classes. One consists of strongly correlated materials, as e.g., CePt 3 Si Recently, superconductivity with broken time-reversal symmetry (TRS) has become a hot topic in NCSCs. The main reason for this is the discovery of TRS breaking in some weakly-correlated NCSCs using muon-spin relaxation (μSR). Surprisingly, the superconducting properties of the latter largely resemble those of conventional superconductors, i.e., they are clearly distinct from those of the above mentioned strongly-correlated NCSCs. To date, only a handful of NCSC families have been shown to exhibit TRS breaking in the superconducting state, including LaNiC 2 In general, the causes behind the TRS breaking at the onset of superconductivity are mostly unknown. In particular, the α-Mn-type noncentrosymmetric ReT (T = Ti, Nb, Zr, and Hf) superconductors have been widely studied and demonstrated to show a superconducting state with broken TRS In case of binary Re-Mo alloys, depending on the Re/Mo ratio, the compounds can exhibit up to four different crystal structures, including both centrosymmetric and noncentrosymmetric cases. Most importantly, all these alloys become superconductors at low temperatures This short review article focuses mostly on the experimental study of Re-based binary superconductors. In Sec. II, we discuss the basic principles of our probe of choice, the μSR, here used to detect TRS breaking and to characterize the superconducting properties. Section III describes the possible crystal structures and superconducting transition temperatures of ReT binary alloys. In Sec. IV, we focus on the upper critical fields and the order parameter in ReT superconductors. Section V discusses the TRS breaking in ReT superconductors and its possible origins. Finally, in the last section, we outline some possible future research directions. Initially considered as an "exotic" technique, over the years muon-spin rotation, relaxation, and resonance (known as μSR), has become one of the most powerful methods to study the magnetic and superconducting properties of matter. This follows from a series of fortunate circumstances, related to the muon properties as a fundamental particle. Most notably, these include the 100% initial muon-spin polarization, following the two-body decay from pions, and the subsequent preservation of such information through the weak decay into positrons. In the search for unconventional superconductivity, as well as for TRS breaking effects, the very high sensitivity of the μSR technique to tiny magnetic fields is especially important Central to the μSR method is the availability of polarized positive muon (μ + ) beams, obtained by collecting the muons produced in the two-body decay of positive pions, π + → μ + + ν μ (with ν μ the muon neutrino), decaying at rest in the laboratory frame. Since pions have no intrinsic angular momentum and neutrinos have a fixed helicity (relative orientation of spin and linear momentum), the resulting muon beam is 100% spin polarized, with the muon spins directed antiparallel to the linear momentum (see Figure A schematic diagram of a time-differential μSR experiment is shown in Figure Here, the exponential factor accounts for the radioactive muon decay, N 0 is the initial count rate at time t 0 , while C is a time-independent background (due to uncorrelated start and stop counts). As shown in the inset of Figure Clearly, A(t) behaves as a normalized detector "contrast", proportional to A 0 . The parameter α is introduced to take into account the different efficiencies of the positron-detectors and needs to be determined by calibration. Depending on the reciprocal orientation of the external magnetic field B with respect to the initial muon-spin direction S(0), in a μSR experiment, two different configurations are possible. (i) In transverse-field (TF) μSR the externally applied field B is perpendicular to S(0) and the muon spin FIG. precesses around B (see Figure Although, in principle, the TF scheme shown in Figure Since muons are uniformly implanted in the sample, they can detect the coexistence of different domains, characterized by distinct P i (t) functions, whose amplitudes A i represent a measure of the respective volume fractions. In case of superconductors, one can thus extract the SC volume fraction. More importantly, in a TF-μSR experiment one can directly probe the SC flux-line lattice (FLL). In this case, at the onset of superconductivity, the muon-spin precession in a TF field loses coherence, reflecting the magnetic field modulation (i.e., broadening) due to the FLL. The shape of the field distribution arising from the FLL can be analyzed and eventually used to extract the magnetic penetration depth λ and the coherence length ξ More in detail, in a TF-μSR experiment, the time evolution of the asymmetry can be modeled by: (2) Here A i , A bg and B i , B bg are the asymmetries and local fields sensed by implanted muons in the sample and the sample holder, γ μ is the muon gyromagnetic ratio, φ is a shared initial phase, and σ i is the Gaussian relaxation rate of the ith component. The number of required components is material dependent, typically in the 1 ≤ n ≤ 5 range. In general, for superconductors with a large Ginzburg-Landau parameter κ ( 1), the magnetic penetration depth is much larger than the coherence length. Hence, the field profiles of each fluxon overlap strongly, implying a narrow field distribution. Consequently, a single-oscillating component is sufficient to describe A(t). In case of a small κ (≥ 1/ 2), the magnetic penetration depth is comparable with the coherence length. The rather small penetration depth implies fast-decaying fluxon field profiles and a broad field distribution, in turn requiring multiple oscillations to describe A(t). The choice of n can be determined from the fast-Fourier-transform (FFT) spectra of the TF-μSR, which is normally used to evaluate the goodness of the fits. In case of multi-component oscillations, the first term in Equation ( The first-and second moments of the field distribution in the sample can be calculated by: (4) where A tot = n i=1 A i . The total Gaussian relaxation rate σ eff in Equation ( Here, λ 0 is the effective magnetic penetration depth in the 0-K limit, f = (1 + e E/k B T ) -1 is the Fermi function and 〈〉 FS represents an average over the Fermi surface A particular case of LF, is that of zero-field (ZF) μSR, characterized by the absence of an external magnetic field. In this configuration the frequency of the μSR signal is exclusively proportional to the internal magnetic field, making it possible to determined the size of the ordered moments and, hence, the magnetic order parameter. Unlike various techniques, which require an external field to polarize the probe, μSR is unique in its capability of studying materials unperturbed by externally applied fields and in accessing their spontaneous magnetic fields. Due to the large muon magnetic moment (μ μ = 8.89 μ N ), ZF-μSR can sense even very small internal fields (∼ 10 -2 mT), hence probing local magnetic fields of either nuclear or electronic nature. In addition, since the muon is an elementary spin-1/2 particle, it acts as a purely magnetic probe, i.e., free of quadrupole interactions. All these features, make ZF-μSR an ideal technique for detecting TRS breaking in the superconducting state. This corresponds to the appearance (at the onset of SC) of spontaneous magnetic moments, whose magnitude can be very small, often lacking a proper magnetic order. As we show further on, in case of TRS breaking, we expect the appearance of an additional enhancement of relaxation below T c , reflecting the occurrence of these weak spontaneous fields. During the ZF-μSR measurements, to exclude the possibility of stray magnetic fields (typically larger than the weak internal fields), the magnets are quenched before starting the measurements, and an active field-nulling facility is used to compensate for stray fields down to 1 μT. If the amplitudes of the local fields reflect a Gaussian distribution with zero average (a rather common circumstance), the μSR signal consists of overlapping oscillations with different frequencies. While at short times the spin dephasing is limited, at long times it becomes relevant and gives rise to a so-called Kubo-Toyabe (KT) relaxation function Equation ( In case of diluted nuclear moments, σ ZF is practically zero, hence, the TRS breaking is reflected in an increase of Λ ZF below T c , as e.g., in Zr 3 Ir and CaPtAs In this section, we review the different phases of the binary ReT alloys. These are obtained when rhenium reacts with various early transition metals (see Figure For T = Ti 3d metal, the known binary compounds are Re 24 Ti 5 , Re 6 Ti, and ReTi As mentioned in the introduction, due to the mixture of singlet-and triplet paring, some NCSCs may exhibit relatively high upper critical fields, often very close to or even exceeding the Pauli limit, as e.g., CePt 3 Si Transverse-field μSR represents one of the most powerful techniques to investigate the superconductivity at a microscopic level. To illustrate this, in the inset of Figure Figure As discussed in the introduction, the lack of inversion symmetry in the NCSCs often induces an ASOC. This splits the Fermi surface by lifting the degeneracy of the conduction electrons, thus allowing admixtures of spin-singlet and spin-triplet pairing. In general, the strength of ASOC determines the degree of such an admixture and thus the superconducting properties of NCSCs Owing to its very high sensitivity (see details in Section II C), ZF-μSR has been successfully used to search for spontaneous magnetic fields, reflecting the breaking of TRS in the superconducting states of different types of superconductors, as e.g., Sr 2 RuO 4 , UPt 3 , PrOs 4 Sb 12 , LaNiGa 2 , LaNiC 2 , La 7 (Rh,Ir) 3 , and α-Mn-ReT in the relaxation rate. Given the tiny size of such effects, the ZF-μSR measurements are usually performed in both the normal-and the superconducting state with a relatively high statistics, at least twice that of the TF-μSR spectra. As an example, Figure If SOC can be ignored, an alternative mechanism, which can account for the TRS breaking in ReT superconductors in presence of a fully-opened superconducting gap, is the internally-antisymmetric nonunitary triplet (INT) pairing. The INT pairing was originally proposed to explain the TRS breaking and nodeless SC in centrosymmetric LaNiGa 2 In this short review we focused on recent experimental studies of ReT superconductors, where time-reversal symmetry breaking effects are often present and whose superconductivity can, therefore, be considered as unconventional. Due to its high sensitivity to the weak internal fields associated with TRS breaking, μSR represents one of the key techniques in the search for TRS-breaking effects in the superconducting state. Nonetheless, in certain cases, the amplitude of the spontaneous magnetic fields (the fingerprint of TRS breaking) may still be below the resolution of the μSR technique (∼ 10 -2 mT). Hence, the future use of other techniques, e.g., based on the optical Kerr effect To date, as nearly all current studies have focused exclusively on α-Mn-type ReT superconductors (except for the Re-Mo series considered here), the superconducting properties of most other ReT alloys remain basically unexplored. Hence, the synthesis and characterization of non-α-Mn-type ReT alloys, including the study of their electrical, magnetic, and thermodynamic properties, is of clear interest. Similarly, systematic μSR measurements, crucial for detecting the presence of TRS breaking in Re-based superconductors, are in high demand. For instance, although both Re-Zr and Re-Nb alloys exhibit rich crystal structures and superconducting phase diagrams, only their α-Mn-type phase has been explored. In addition, most of the original measurements were performed only on polycrystalline samples. Hence, the synthesis of single crystals will be essential in the comprehensive search for possible superconducting nodes and, thus, for mixed singlet-triplet pairing. Finally, it would be of interest to extend the μSR studies on elementary rhenium from the bulk-to its thin-film form, where inversion symmetry is artificially broken. By checking if the TRS breaking is maintained or not, will help us to further clarify the rhenium conundrum. c /T -1)] 0.51 } [