We report the magnetic susceptibility and the magnetization under pressures up to 1.7 GPa above the critical pressure, P c ∼ 1.5 GPa, for H a, b and c-axes in the novel spin triplet superconductor UTe 2 . The anisotropic magnetic susceptibility at low pressure with the easy magnetization a-axis changes to the quasi-isotropic behavior at high pressure, revealing a rapid suppression of the susceptibility for a-axis, and a gradual increase of the susceptibility for the b-axis. At 1.7 GPa above P c , magnetic anomalies are detected at T MO ∼ 3 K and T WMO ∼ 10 K. The former anomaly corresponds to long-range magnetic order, most likely antiferromagnetism, while the latter shows a broad anomaly, which is probably due to the development of short range order. The unusual decrease and increase of the susceptibility below T WMO for H a and b-axes, respectively, indicate the complex magnetic properties at low temperatures above P c . This is related to the interplay between multiple fluctuations dominated by antiferromagnetism, ferroamgnetism, valence and Fermi surface instabilities. The observation of unconventional superconductivity in UTe 2 is one of the most interesting topics in heavy-fermion physics. One of the most remarkable features in UTe 2 is the huge superconducting upper critical field H c2 . For H b-axis, fieldreentrant superconductivity is observed up to H m ≈ 35 T, at which a first order metamagnetic transition occurs. Single crystals of UTe 2 were grown using the chemical vapor transport method as described elsewhere. Increasing pressure leads to an decrease of χ a , while χ b increases with pressure, as shown in Fig. The pressure evolution of the effective moments are also derived from the fitting, as shown in Fig. At 1.7 GPa, above the critical pressure P c , magnetic anomalies are clearly detected at T WMO and T MO in χ a , χ b and χ c , as shown in Fig. If the anomaly at T WMO corresponds to a ferromagnetic order, the anomaly should be immediately smeared out at high fields for b-axis. However, T WMO is still visible up to 5 T, indicating that it does not correspond to the ferromagnetism. Note that T WMO is also observed in resistivity and AC calorimetry measurements, but the anomaly due to T WMO is rather broad at low fields. At low temperature, another magnetic anomaly is detected around 3 K, as denoted by T MO in Fig. Figures Figure For H b-axis, a broad maximum of the susceptibility around T χ,max ∼ 35 K becomes sharp and shifts to the lower temperature with increasing pressure. The decrease of T χ,max is well scaled with the decrease of the metamagnetic field H m under pressure. Figure The particularity in U compounds is the switch from a normalization of the wave function to the U 3+ configuration toward the U 4+ configuration (see similar discussion on Tm and Sm intermediate valence compounds for Tm 2+ /Tm 3+ and Sm 2+ /Sm 3+ , respectively in ref. 38). On the other hand, the situation is very different from that in Ce compounds, A remarkable point is that crossing P c the magnetic anisotropy between a and b-axes collapses and is even reversed in its sign. At ambient pressure, a ratio χ a /χ b of 7 just above T c has been taken as a possible classification of UTe 2 has an Ising system. The pressure has led to a full undressing of the initial crystal field splitting i. e. in the selection between the j = 5/2 and j = 7/2 angular component of the 5 f electrons. It was already stressed in a theoretical model 3 it has been argued that the pressure will lower the strength of the Coulomb repulsion U and thus modify the strength of the ferromagnetic and antiferromagnetic interactions, as observed in experiment. Despite the Ising character of ferromagnetic fluctuation, the antiferromagnetic fluctuations are predicted to show a moderately quasi-isotropic property (Heisenberg character). In general, the Ising ferromagnetic fluctuations are favorable for spintriplet superconductivity, while the antiferromagnetic fluctuations are favorable for the spin-singlet state. The change to the quasi-isotropic properties with pressure suggests the development of the antiferromagnetic fluctuations, implying the parity mixing. This is also inferred from the experimental results of multiple superconducting phases and H c2 (T ) curves under pressure. was used as a pressure transmitting medium. The pressure was first calibrated in order to know the relation between pressure and force load by detecting the superconducting transition of Pb. After checking the reproducibility of pressure as a function of force load, the sample was inserted in a pressure cell without Pb. The background signal from the pressure cell was subtracted using the data at ambient pressure with/without the pressure cell. Anisotropy of magnetic susceptibility and inverse magnetic susceptibility under pressure Figure First-principles calculation under pressure and discussion on electronic state and magnetism We show the results of density functional theory plus Hubbard U calculations with the experimentally determined lattice constants a, b, and c at P = 1.11 GPa. The calculations are carried out by using the full-potential linearized augmented plane wave+local orbitals method within the generalized gradient approximation in the wien2k package. The Lifshitz transition may play a role in the pressure dependence of magnetic properties. We need further calculations to discuss the magnetic fluctuations and superconductivity based on the obtained band structure. We left them for future study. Our model calculation 