Thermal stealth and camouflage have been intensively studied for blending objects with their surroundings against remote thermal image detection. Adaptive control of infrared emissivity has been explored extensively as a promising way of thermal stealth, but it still requires an additional feedback control. Passive modulation of emissivity, however, has been remained as a great challenge which requires a precise engineering of emissivity over wide temperature range. Here, we report a drastic improvement of passive camouflage thin films capable of concealing thermal objects at near room temperature without any feedback control, which consists of a vanadium dioxide (VO2) layer with gradient tungsten (W) concentration. The gradient W-doping widens the metal-insulator transition width, accomplishing self-adaptive thermal stealth with a smooth change of emissivity. Our simple approach, applicable to other similar thermal camouflage materials for improving their passive cloaking, will find wide applications, such as passive thermal camouflage, urban energy-saving smart windows, and improved infrared sensors. Thermal stealth and camouflage concern the hiding of objects, such as military artillery and soldiers, from remote thermal detection devices like infrared (IR) cameras Electrochromic materials Vanadium dioxide (VO2) is one of the most widely studied MIT materials In this work, we studied the near-room temperature IR emission properties of W-doped VO2 (W-VO2) films prepared on SiO2, quartz, or mica substrates by vacuum evaporation and subsequent thermal oxidation. In contrast to a narrow emissivity transition temperature window, i.e. WMIT ~5°C, observed in the pure VO2 films, the W-VO2 films showed much enhanced WMIT up to 45°C, which is large enough for practical thermal stealth application. A crosssectional transmission electron microscopy (TEM) examination of the W-VO2 films revealed that the W concentration is gradually distributed with the distance from the film-substrate interface within W-VO2 layer. We discuss the implications of this observation in terms of the increased WMIT in the W-VO2 films and the large deviation of the TMIT behavior from that in the pure VO2 films as well. We prepared VO2 and W-VO2 films on SiO2/Si, quartz, and mica substrates in two steps. Initially, V or WO3 layers were deposited by electron-beam evaporation at room temperature at a deposition rate of 0.6 Å/s in a high-vacuum chamber (base pressure of 5×10 -8 torr). For VO2 films, we controlled the thickness of the V layer (tV) from 20 to 100 nm and investigated the effect of VO2 film thickness on IR emission. To form W-VO2 films, a stack of alternating V and WO3 layers (V-W) of 96 nm thick in total were deposited (tV-W) by three V (30 nm) and WO3 (2 nm) deposition cycles, which resulted in a tungsten to vanadium ratio of 0.03:1. Both the deposited V and V-W layers were then annealed in the tube vacuum furnace at 400-430°C for 4-5 h (for VO2) or 480-500°C for 1 h (for W-VO2), respectively. During the annealing, an oxygen partial pressure (PO2) of 0.2 torr was maintained with 99.999% O2 gas flow Crystallinities of samples were checked by high-resolution x-ray diffraction (HRXRD, Smartlab 9kW, Rigaku) and by cross-sectional TEM imaging with chemical analysis (JEM-ARM200F, JEOL). For TEM, we used a Schottky-type field-emission gun (FEG) operated at 200 keV and prepared cross-sectional specimens by conventional cutting, gluing, polishing, and ion milling (PIPS 691, GATAN) at 5 keV. To study the MIT behaviors of the films, we measured four-probe electrical resistances in the temperature range of 20-100°C by using a closed-cycle refrigerator equipped with a nanovoltmeter (Keithley 2182A), a programmable current source (Keithley 224), and a temperature controller (Lakeshore 330) under a vacuum condition (<1×10 -4 torr). An IR camera (FLK-Ti400 (detector resolution 320×240 pixels), FLUKE) was used to measure TIR values of films and bare substrates, while specimens were uniformly heated on a Shamal hot plate (HHP-411, Iuchi Seiei Dou). TIR values of films were determined by comparing them with the temperature of substrates (TS), where TIR values of the hot plate were calibrated with a thermocouple sensor attached to the hot plate for each time. Also, the emissivity was measured by changing the emissivity of the thin films in the IR camera until TIR values of films equals to the hot plate temperature of the samples is because the region is not covered with the films due to clamps during the film growth. Small suppressions in TIR values of the substrates from that of the hot plate (Fig. Hence, the W-doping was found to dramatically improve the thermal stealth effect of W-VO2 films by transforming the sharp MIT in the VO2 thin film into the gradual one for a wide temperature range. Emissivity () of a IR spectrum band can be related a TIR-TS curve via thermal radiance In the meantime, the oxidation of diffused V forms granular structures, supported with the rough surface morphology in Fig. Previous studies on W-VO2 films have revealed that a homogeneous W doping weakens the MIT characteristics of VO2 films and lowers the TMIT of pure VO2 films in a concentration dependent manner First, we choose the TIR versus TS data of a VO2 film (tV = 40 nm) as a reference layer. For simplicity, we assume a stack of four W-VO2 layers with four different tungsten dopant concentration and TMIT values (= 72, 62, 52, and 42°C). Those W-VO2 layers are expected to give four TIR versus TS curves with shifted TMIT values, shown as four dashed gray curves in Fig. Finally, we demonstrated a remarkable improvement of the thermal stealth properties from Wdoping-induced attenuation of MIT in VO2 films. On a flexible mica substrate, we also showed the thermal stealth behavior similar to that on the quartz, brightening application of the films highly feasible to curved surfaces. Combined with passive operation without external electrical power, we believe that our findings may provide a low cost and low energy method for a practical application of MIT materials to the military stealth equipment, and passive smart window devices We fabricated VO2 and W-VO2 thin films by e-beam evaporation with subsequent oxidation and studied the thermal stealth effects of these films by investigating their IR emission properties. The W-VO2 films exhibited the thermal stealth effects at lower temperatures and over a wider range of temperature than the VO2 films, and the microscopic chemical composition analysis revealed that the tungsten dopant was gradually distributed toward the substrate/film interface during the thermal oxidation process. We conclude that the enhanced thermal stealth effects of the W-VO2 films are primarily due to the W gradient doping. Our results suggest a unique solution to overcome the drawbacks of VO2 film stemming from its sharp MIT and large hysteresis characteristics, which may bring the applications of MIT materials to the fields, such as passive thermal camouflage, flexible smart windows, and improved IR sensors, forward.