We demonstrate optical coupling between a single tin-vacancy (SnV) center in diamond and a free-standing photonic crystal nanobeam cavity. The cavities are fabricated using quasiisotropic etching and feature experimentally measured quality factors as high as ~11,000. We investigate the dependence of a single SnV center's emission by controlling the cavity wavelength using a laser-induced gas desorption technique. Under resonance conditions, we observe an intensity enhancement of the SnV emission by a factor of 12 and a 16-fold reduction of the SnV lifetime. Based on the large enhancement of the SnV emission rate inside the cavity, we estimate the Purcell factor for the SnV zero-phonon line to be 37 and the coupling efficiency of the SnV center to the cavity, the β factor, to be 95%. Our work paves the way for the realization of quantum photonic devices and systems based on efficient photonic interfaces using the SnV color center in diamond. Color centers in diamond are promising solid state quantum emitters, of interest for realization of single photon sources To take advantage of the full potential of SnV centers, it is important to realize an efficient spinphoton interface for SnV that can improve the ZPL collection efficiency and enhance the coherent ZPL emission by resonant coupling to color centers In this letter, we report on optical coupling of a single SnV center to a PhC nanobeam cavity in diamond. We use a quasi-isotropic undercut method to fabricate free-standing PhC nanobeam cavities in bulk diamond crystal, featuring Q factors as high as 11,000. Next, we select a cavity (Q ~ 3,000) with a good coupling to a single SnV center, introduced via ion-implantation, and tune the cavity into resonance with the SnV center using a laser-induced gas desorption technique. At resonance, we observe a strong enhancement of the SnV emission intensity by a factor of 12 and a 16-fold reduction in the SnV lifetime (compared to centers in bulk). Due to the significant enhancement of the spontaneous emission rate, we estimate a Purcell factor for the SnV ZPL of 37 and a near-unity cavity coupling efficiency β (probability of emitted photons being channeled into the cavity mode) of 95%. These results provide a step towards the development of quantum information processing devices including efficient quantum light sources For the fabrication of the designed cavity in diamond, a commercially available electronic grade single-crystal diamond sample (Element Six) was etched using argon/chlorine followed by oxygen plasma in order to remove the surface damaged layer caused by polishing. It was then cleaned by immersion into a 1:1:1 boiling tri-acid mixture of perchloric, nitric, and sulfuric acid for one hour Following another tri-acid cleaning, free-standing PhC nanobeam cavities were fabricated using a combination of electron beam (EB) lithography and dry etching processes. We then deposited a 100nm-thick SiN layer on the bulk diamond by plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition. The SiN layer is used as a hard mask for the diamond etch later. We conducted EB lithography to write the cavity structure on a 400nm-thick EB resist (ZEP-520A). After the resist development, we etched the SiN mask layer by induced coupled plasma reactive ion etching (ICP-RIE) with sulfur hexafluoride (SF6) and octafluorocyclobutane (C4F8) gases. After removing the EB resist, the cavity pattern was transferred onto the diamond substrate by oxygen-plasma RIE. A 20nm-thick Al2O3 layer was deposited by atomic layer deposition for conformal coverage of the sample and then etched out by RIE, while keeping the sidewalls of the nanobeam to be covered with Al2O3. In order to realize free-standing cavity structures, we employed a quasi-isotropic undercut technique We characterized the fabricated devices using photoluminescence (PL) measurements at 4K, in a closed-cycle cryostat (Montana Instruments). We excited the sample with a 520nm continuous wave diode laser, and the PL signal from the sample was collected through an objective lens (Olympus MPLFLN, 100× magnification and 0.9 NA) and analyzed by a spectrometer (Princeton Instruments) equipped with a Si CCD camera. Figure Next, we investigated the optical coupling between a single SnV center and a nanobeam cavity with a =196 nm. The measured Q factor of the cavity was ~ 3000. The cavity was tuned in and out of resonance with a single SnV ZPL transition at 624nm using the gas tuning method, discussed below. Figure From the extracted lifetimes, we estimate the Purcell factor of the investigated ZPL (Fp ZPL ) using the following equation Finally, in order to confirm the single photon nature of the investigated SnV emission, we performed second-order correlation measurements for the SnV transition using a Hanbury Brown-Twiss setup equipped with two APDs. We used a laser repetition rate of 77.9MHz with an average pump power of 2.7 mW. Figure Note: During the process of finalizing this Letter, we became aware of a related work 