Near-field thermal radiation transfer overcoming the far-field blackbody limit has attracted significant attention in recent years owing to its potential for drastically increasing the output power and conversion efficiency of thermophotovoltaic (TPV) power generation systems. Here, we experimentally demonstrate a one-chip near-field TPV device overcoming the far-field blackbody limit, which integrates a 20-μm-thick Si emitter and an InGaAs PV cell with a subwavelength gap (<140 nm). The device exhibits a photocurrent density of 1.49 A/cm 2 at 1192 K, which is 1.5 times larger than the far-field limit at the same temperature. In addition, we obtain an output power of 1.92 mW and a system efficiency of 0.7% for a 1-mm 2 device, both of which are one to two orders of magnitude greater than those of the previously reported nearfield systems. Detailed comparisons between the simulations and experiments reveal the possibility of a system efficiency of >35% in the up-scaled device, thus demonstrating the potential of our integrated near-field TPV device for practical use in the future. Thermal radiation transfer between two objects that are separated by a sub-wavelength gap can be orders of magnitude larger than that in free space owing to the increase in the photonic density of states. In this paper, we demonstrate an integrated near-field TPV device that achieves the thermal radiation transfer overcoming the far-field blackbody limit and realize a drastic increase in both the output power and system efficiency. Our one-chip super-Planckian device is based on the realization of a sub-wavelength gap (<140 nm) between a high-temperature emitter (~1200 K) and a room-temperature PV cell without contact over a large area (1 mm 2 ), which is accomplished by designing a 20-μm-thick Si emitter with supporting beams that can relieve the thermal stress of the emitter while maintaining the mechanical robustness. In addition, an increase of the emitter thickness from 2 to 20 μm facilitates the realization of the near-field thermal radiation transfer beyond the blackbody limit owing to the increase in the photonic density of states. Using this device, we demonstrate a large photocurrent of 14.9 mA (density: 1.49 A/cm 2 ) at an emitter temperature of 1192 K, which is 1.5 times larger than the far-field blackbody limit at the same temperature. In addition, we obtain an output power of 1.92 mW (density: 0.192 W/cm 2 ) and a system conversion efficiency of 0.7%, both of which are greater than those of the previously reported near-field TPV systems Figure Because of the relatively strong mechanical strength of the 20-μm-thick Si slab, we can maintain the flatness of the emitter even with such elongated supporting beams. Figure Before the near-field TPV experiment, we measured the in-plane distribution of the gap length of the fabricated three devices by varying the heating power of the Si emitter by laser irradiation (see Methods). We measured the reflection spectra at 5 × 5 points in each device by irradiating it with a broadband infrared light and estimated the gap length and the emitter temperature at each point from the Fabry-Perot interference of the device (the detailed procedure for the gap and temperature measurement is provided in Methods and Supporting Section 4). Figure More importantly, the obtained photocurrent density in Device II exceeds the blackbody limit (black solid line) at an emitter temperature larger than 1050 K; for example, the obtained photocurrent density at 1192 K is 1.49 A/cm 2 , which is 1.5 times larger than the blackbody limit at the same temperature (0.96 A/cm 2 ). This result is supported by the calculated near-field thermal radiation transfer spectrum shown in Fig. Figure To increase the system efficiency, we should further decrease the gap length and increase the emitter temperature to enhance the near-field thermal radiation transfer below the bandgap wavelength of the PV cell. Figure We prepared an SOI substrate with a 20-μm-thick top Si layer and a 1μm-thick SiO2 layer on a 650-μm-thick Si substrate (SOI-A) for the Si emitter, and another SOI substrate with a 50-μm-thick top Si layer and a 1-μm-thick SiO2 layer on a 300-μm-thick Si substrate (SOI-B) for the intermediate Si substrate. The epitaxial wafer for InGaAs PV cells consisted of 400-nm undoped-InP/100-nm n-InP (nd = 2 × 10 18 cm -3 )/300-nm n-In0.53Ga0.47As (nd = 1 × 10 18 cm -3 )/2000-nm p-In0.53Ga0.47As (na = 1 × 10 17 cm -3 )/100-nm p-InP (na = 2 × 10 18 cm -3 )/300-nm p-In0.53Ga0.47As (na = 2 × 10 18 cm -3 )/350-μm InP substrate. We first fabricated a Si emitter (1 × 1 mm) with four L-shaped supporting beams (width:10 μm, length:580 μm) on SOI-A by electron-beam (EB) lithography and cryogenic reactive ion etching (RIE). Next, we created a trench (Device I: 2900 nm, Device II and III: 150 nm) on SOI-B by RIE, in order to leave the gap between the emitter and the PV cell in the subsequent bonding process. For Devices II and III, we also created nine deeper trenches (~2900 nm) with a side length of 100 μm for gap estimation. After hydrophilizing the surfaces of the two substrates, we bonded them using a high-precision alignment and bonding system. The bonded sample was heated to 473 K in vacuum for 1 h and at 1273 K in Ar atmosphere for 1 h to increase the bonding strength. The upper Si substrate and SiO2 layer were then removed by RIE and HF solution, respectively, to bare the 50-μm-thick intermediate Si substrate. The bonding of the intermediate Si substrate and the epi-structure for the PV cell was performed by oxygen plasma activation and 1-h postannealing at 423 K in vacuum. The InP substrate was removed with HCl solution, and a mesatype PV cell structure was formed by photolithography, metal deposition, and a lift-off process. The fabricated PV cell was then fixed on a supporting insulating substrate (Au/Ti/SiO2/Si) by flip-chip bonding using a conductive adhesive (Ag paste). Finally, the Si substrate and SiO2 layer above the emitter were removed by RIE and vapor HF etching, respectively, to bare the 20-μm-thick Si emitter. The schematic of each fabrication process is shown in Supporting Fig. . Near-field TPV experiment: In the near-field TPV experiment, the Si emitters were heated by irradiation with a green laser (λ=532 nm) in a vacuum chamber (<1×10 -3 Pa). The heating power of the device, Pin, was calculated by considering the incident laser power and the theoretical reflectivity of Si at elevated temperatures. It should be noted that no laser light penetrates the emitter owing to sufficient absorption inside the 20-μm-thick emitter. To measure the emitter temperature and the gap length between the emitter and the intermediate substrate, we irradiated the device with broadband infrared light (wavelength range: 1000-1650 nm) and measured the reflection spectra for 5 × 5 points at 225-μm intervals in each device with a near-infrared spectrometer (Ocean Photonics, NIRQuest512). We then estimated the gap length and the emitter temperature at each point from the resonant wavelengths of the Fabry-Perot interference of the device (the details are explained in Supporting Section 4). The current-voltage characteristics of the PV cells were measured with a precision source/measure unit (Keysight, B2901A). The temperatures of the PV cells were kept at room temperature without any cooling system. *E-mail: t_inoue@qoe.kuee.kyoto-u.ac.jp, snoda@kuee.kyoto-u.ac.jp assuming a gap length of 100 nm. Figure The simulation model of our near-field TPV device is shown in Fig. S1-S3, wherein the changes in bandgap energy and intrinsic carrier concentrations at elevated temperatures were considered. The calculation of the thermal radiation spectra transferred from the Si thermal emitter to each layer of the PV cell was performed using a method that combines the fluctuationdissipation theorem and the transfer matrix method. , exp 1 where    is defined as the exchange function between the emitter and each layer of the PV cell for the TE-polarized (TM-polarized) plane wave with an in-plane wavenumber k and a wavelength λ, which can be calculated by using transfer matrix method. The spectral flux of the interband absorption interband () P  , which contributes to the generation of electron-hole pairs, was calculated by taking the sum of   S  for the p-InGaAs and n- InGaAs layers of the PV cell below the bandgap wavelength of the PV cell. The photocurrent density in the PV cell was calculated as follows: interband () / Here, we assumed that each photon absorbed by the interband transition in the InGaAs pn junction generates an electron-hole pair, which is applicable for our InGaAs PV cells. The total near-field thermal radiation power from the emitter was calculated by integrating   S  in the entire wavelength range and taking the sum for all the layers, wherein we also considered the absorption in the bottom Au electrode and the far-field thermal radiation in the opposite direction. 