Analysis of magnetic susceptibility of non-ellipsoidal samples is a long-standing problem in experimental studies of magnetism and superconductivity. Here the quantitative description of the Meissner-London response (no Abrikosov vortices) of right circular cylinders in an axial magnetic field is given. The three-dimensional adaptive finite-element modeling was used to calculate the total magnetic moment, m, in a wide range of London penetration depth, λ, to sample size ratios. By fitting the numerical data, the closed-form universal magnetic susceptibility is formulated involving only sample dimensions and λ, thus providing a recipe for determining the London penetration depth from the accurate magnetic susceptibility measurements. Detailed protocols of the experimental data analysis using the developed approach are given. The results can be readily extended to the most frequently used cuboid-shaped samples. Magnetic susceptibility measurements are widely used to probe magnetic and superconducting materials. Realworld samples have finite volume and come in different shapes and aspect ratios, leading to the distortion of the magnetic field around them. The importance of this demagnetization correction was recognized since the inception of the theory of electromagnetic fields in the second half of the 19 th Century, see Refs. We consider geometry, shown in Fig. Of course, real superconducting samples, especially single crystals, often have platelet shape with two parallel surfaces and polygonal in-plane cross-section, which varies from rectangles and prisms to triangles. It turns out, we can approximately map any such shape onto a cylinder by calculating the radius of an equivalent cylin- der based on the volume penetrated by the magnetic field. For small λ, this volume is given by the surface area of crystal faces parallel to the magnetic field times λ. Of course, this simplification neglects top and bottom surfaces perpendicular to the field. However, for thin samples a renormalized London penetration depth can be introduced in the same manner. In other words, the penetrated volume is proportional to the product of sample thickness, penetration depth λ and the perimeter, P S⊥H , of the in-plane cross-section, perpendicular to the field. Therefore, one can map any cross-section shape onto a cylinder, using P S⊥H = 2πa , where a is the radius of the "equivalent" cylinder. For example, often studied cuboidal sample with a rectangular cross-section, 2a×2b, is mapped onto the equivalent right circular cylinder of radius, and of the same height, 2c, along the magnetic field, as the original 2a×2b×2c cuboid. Therefore, there is a wide applicability of our results for quantitative calibration of the magnetic susceptibility, for example to extract the London penetration depth. The step-by-step procedures are described at the end of the paper. As a starting point, let us review some known analytical solutions of the London equations in different geometries paying attention to the effective dimensionality of flux penetration. For derivations, see the mathematically identical problem of the electric field polarization in conductors of various shapes solved as problems in Chapter VII of "Electrodynamics of Continuous Media", by Landau and Lifshitz (vol. 8) An apparent measured magnetic susceptibility is defined as: where M = m/V is volume magnetization, m is the total magnetic moment and V is the sample volume. Note that using volume-normalized M does not imply spatially-uniform magnetization density. This magnetic susceptibility χ is defined only in the integral sense. For example, two samples of the same volume, but different shapes will produce two different values of m, therefore different χ. A general discussion of the magnetic moment and its evaluation in arbitrary shaped samples is given elsewhere Let us introduce the dimensionality, D, of the magnetic field penetration into the specimen. This is not the geometric dimensionality of the sample itself (such as 1D wire, 2D film or 3D cube), but rather the dimensionality of the propagating magnetic flux front advancing into the sample. Assuming λ R, the geometric interpretation of the magnetic susceptibility is that the value of an ideal diamagnet, χ = -1, is reduced by the ratio of the volume penetrated by the magnetic field to the total volume of the sample: where N is the demagnetizing factor, V is sample volume and ∆V is the volume penetrated by the magnetic field. This equation follows trivially from the exact Eq.13 discussed below. Let us analyze three representative cases for which the analytic solutions of the London equation are known. One-dimensional penetration of a magnetic field along the x-axis into a slab of width 2a and infinite in y and z directions. In this case we can think of a volume of a parallelepiped L × L × (2a) with the side surface L × L parallel to the applied field. The penetrated volume is: where a factor of 2 in front comes from two surfaces located at ±a. Here the dimensionality of flux penetration is determined by the term (a -λ) in the first power resulting in χ ∼ r, therefore D = 1. Equation 3 gives: χ = r -1, where r = λ/a. Indeed, the exact solution is compatible with this small-r limit Two-dimensional penetration occurs in an infinite cylinder of radius a in an axial magnetic field. Following the same logic as above we can write per length L along the cylinder axis: where we only left first order in small parameter, r = λ/a, terms. Here the dimensionality of flux penetration is determined by the (a -λ) 2 term, so to the first order χ ∼ 2r, which implies D = 2. The exact solution of the London equation for the infinite cylinder in an axial field is where I ν (z) are the modified Bessel functions of the first kind. Indeed, it has a factor of 2 in front. It is interesting to note that the transverse magnetic field penetration into such cylinder has exactly the same functional form only adding a factor of 2 = 1/ (1 -N ) from the demagnetizing factor, N = 1/2 and the above arguments about 2D flux penetration hold in this case as well. Three-dimensional flux penetration into a superconducting sphere of radius a is accompanied by the penetrated volume: where we dropped all higher order terms in r. Here, following the same logic as above, the effective dimensionality is determined by the (a -λ) 3 , giving χ ∼ 3r, which means D = 3 in this case. Indeed, the exact solution for a sphere is Similar to the cylinder in transverse field, there is a prefactor (1 -N ) with N = 1/3 in this case. In the first two cases of the infinite slab and cylinder, N = 0. Clearly, the dimensionality, D, of the magnetic flux penetration and demagnetizing factor are not rigidly connected. Figure which modifies the infinite slab case to r → 2r, leaves the 2D case unaffected, and changes the 3D case to r → 2r/3. Figure 2(b) shows that the same curves become much closer to each other when plotted in re-scaled coordinates, Eq.8, and coincide (by design) at small values of r. In all cases, the initial susceptibility is apparently linear in r = λ/R and can be written as: The goal of this paper is to find numerical solutions for the magnetic susceptibility in finite right circular cylinders with rectangular cross-section and present it in the form similar to Eq.9, as where all the effects of finite geometry and deviations from the ideal shape are absorbed in the effective demagnetizing factor, N, and the response to the propagating magnetic flux, including the factor D = 2, are reflected in the dimensionless function η, so that R = ηa can be viewed as the "effective" sample radius. Before we proceed with the calculations, let us estimate at what values of r the non-linearity caused by the hyperbolic functions become important. We calculate the percentage deviation as: This quantity is shown in Fig. This is, indeed, experimentally negligible temperature distance from T c . In fact, the range of realistically important values of r is much less than 0.1. Even a simple estimate of a temperature at which λ increases five fold, λ (t 5 ) = 5λ (0) gives which covers most of the superconducting domain, while this value corresponds to only r = 5 × 0.3/500 = 0.003 where Eq.9 is definitely a very good approximation. Note that sometimes used two-fluid phenomenological function, λ (t) = λ (0) / √ 1 -t 4 ,gives estimates even closer to T c . Therefore, we conclude that practically important values of r are small and the linear approximation, Eq.9 is well justified in most practical situations. This also eliminates the problem of temperature-dependent demagnetizing factor (only for a superconductor!) and allows us to use the demagnetizing factor of an ideal diamagnetic sample of the same shape and volume as the sample under study. In Section II.D we revisit these estimates, because the field penetration parameter can be significantly renormalized, especially in thinner samples. We find that even then linear approximation is applicable. For numerical computations we use the AC/DC module of COMSOL 5.6 software turns it into the London equation when we set the relative electric permittivity = 0. The critical step of the numerical analysis is the construction and optimization of the adaptive mesh that should be fine enough to resolve the exponential penetration of a magnetic field into a superconductor at distances smaller than the London penetration depth, λ, and it has to be done in a threedimensional space. In case of a cylinder the 3D problem of a vector field, B = (B x , B y , B z ) can be mapped onto a 2D problem, (B r , 0, B z ), considering only one component of the vector potential in cylindrical coordinates is needed, A = (0, A (r, z) , 0). Still, full 3D distribution of the magnetic field is obtained numerically exploiting the axial symmetry of the problem. Figure To check the numerical results, different types of the adaptive mesh (e.g. tetrahedral or hexahedral) and its refinement strategies was attempted. Different sample and mesh sizes with and without boundary layers constructed. The reported finding are robust and independent on the particular choice of the mesh or algorithms. In all cases, the extrapolation of the results to the ideal diamagnet limit, λ = 0, was checked for consistency. In that limit, a much simpler (and therefore easier to solve) magnetostatic problem of a linear magnetic material with χ = -1, was calculated. This limit is explored elsewhere Figure A. The effective demagnetizing factor, N The effective demagnetizing factor, N , in arbitraryshaped samples, including finite cylinders, was discussed in detail elsewhere In this paper we calculate the total magnetic moment, m, in the direction of the applied magnetic field, which is only straightforward in the case of free currents of known distribution. However, it is also possible to calculate m integrating the known distribution of B z (r), which is relatively simple numerically, but its proof in general samples is non-trivial Ref. where the coefficient α = 3/2 for the integration over the large spherical domain that includes the whole sam-ple, whereas α = 1 is for the integration domain as a large cylinder with its axis parallel to H 0 . (Yes, the integral depends on the way it is evaluated! Mathematically, this is similar to finding an electric field in a uniformly charged space the effective (integral) demagnetizing factor is defined as, where -1 ≤ χ 0 ≤ ∞ is the material's intrinsic magnetic susceptibility (in a sample without demagnetization). In the case of a perfect superconductor (perfect diamagnet), χ 0 = -1 and It should be noted that historically, two effective demagnetizing factors were introduced: N m,f = H d V,S / M V,S , were index V is for the volume averaging, and index S is for the averaging of these quantities in the middle plane perpendicular to the field. The first kind is called the "magnetometric" factor, N m , and the second is called the "fluxmetric" (or "ballistic") demagnetizing factor, N f , respectively. Yet another approach is to use the total magnetostatic energy, N M 2 /2μ 0 , which can be calculated numerically As a particular case, let us compare the effective demagnetizing factor of a perfectly diamagnetic circular cylinder of radius a with the square cross-section in the r -z plane, 2a × 2a, in the axial magnetic field along the z axis. Our numerical result is N = 0.36569 Unlike the magnetometric factor mentioned above, most often used in literature, the demagnetizing factor used here involves the actual value of the applied field, not the average at the sample location quantity. This uniform magnetic field is set by the external sources far from the sample. Of many previous works, it turns out that Ernst H. Brandt has correctly calculated N in this case for arbitrary aspect ratio where ν = c/a is the aspect ratio. Figure To find easy to use functional form, we used Table-Curve2D software that fits a given set of data points to dozens of different functions and ranks them by type and goodness of fit criterion. The best not too complicated fit of our numerical results for all values of ν is given by: N = a + cν 0.5 + eν + gν 1.5 + iν 2 1 + bν 0.5 + dν + f ν 1.5 + hν 2 (18) from our early work C. Magnetic susceptibility of finite right circular cylinders in an axial magnetic field The next task is to calculate numerically the apparent magnetic susceptibility defined by Eq.2. For each value of the ratio, ν = c/a, the magnetic induction distribution, B (r), in the sample and space outside is calculated for a wide range of different values of the London penetration depth (see, for example, Fig. We note that the alternative description would be to include the finite-λ dependence in the demagnetizing factor, N (λ), defined from the general Eq.15. However, we prefer to separate the ideal demagnetizing factor, N , which depends only on the sample shape from the characteristic field-penetration parameter, η (ν), discussed in the next section. The problem is that at large values of λ/a the equations become non-linear, instead of Eqs.4-7. Yet we can keep using constant χ-independent N and push all the correction to this parameter η (ν). Here we introduce the geometric correction factor, η (ν), that renormalizes the λ/a parameter depending on the sample geometry. As a next step, the initial susceptibility, the slope of each curve in Fig. The calculated geometric correction factor, η(ν), can be well represented by the following numerical approximation (solid red curve in Fig. η ν = c a = a + cν 0.5 + eν + gν 1.5 + iν 2 1 + bν 0.5 + dν + f ν 1.5 + hν 2 + jν 2.5 Please note, that while this equation provides a very good approximation of the calculated numerical values, it is only applicable in the calculated range of ν ≤ 3, which in practice covers all aspect ratios of experimental importance. At ν = 3, Eq.22 gives, η (3) = 0.43963288651773 while the terminal value at ν → ∞ should be η (∞) = 0.5, marked by the blue dashed line in Fig. We also found the simpler fitting function that works quite well for ν ≤ 3 : where the coefficients are: We can now use the calculated geometric correction factor, η(ν), and the demagnetizing factor, N (ν), to plot the scaled susceptibility, χ (1 -N ) versus the scaled field penetration ratio, λ/R = λ/ (ηa). This is shown in Fig. There is another way to analyze our results along the lines discussed at the end of Section II.B. Note that both, demagnetizing factor, 0 ≤ N ≤ 1, and the geometric correction coefficient, 0 ≤ η ≤ 0.5, are limited to the indicated intervals while the aspect ratio, v = c/a ≥ 0 does not have an upper bound. Therefore, we can examine the function, η (N ) and see whether it has some simple representations and trends. Figure The whole curve is described reasonably well by the function: with the coefficients: It will be interesting to perform similar calculations for different geometries and see whether Eq.24 will show some universality or not. The obtained numerical results and analytical approximations can be used for general calibration of precision magnetic susceptibility measurements. Here we give two examples of practical applications. The important utility of Eq.24 is that it gives the simple connection between N and η, bypassing the need to figure out the exact dimensions of the crystal. Considering realistic shapes, calculating volume, V , from sample dimensions is no trivial task. On the other hand V can be often estimated from the weight far more accurately than from the direct size measurements. (Material density is usually known at least from the parameters of the unit cell in crystals). Then, at the lowest temperature (as close to χ 0 = -1 as possible), one can use SQUID (or any other sensitive) magnetometer to measure the total magnetic moment, m, in an external magnetic field, H 0 . Assuming perfect diamagnetism (which is quite accurate already below 0.98T c as described in the introduction), the demagnetizing factor can be estimated from Eq.13 and Eq.14, Now using Eq.24 the geometric correction factor η can be calculated. These two numbers, N and η are unique for each sample and they allow for a complete quantitative description of the magnetic properties in the Meissner-London state. Indeed, one can check the result by evaluating N and η using sample dimensions and compare the result. Whether Eq.24 has some universality or scaling in different shapes remains to be seen. It requires conducting similar calculations for other shapes, for example cuboids. If we compare demagnetizing factor for a cube, N cube (ν = 1) = 0.38919 with the demagnetizing factor for a cylinder with square cross-section, N cylinder (ν = 1) = 0.36569 they are both greater than that of a spheroid (sphere in this case) N sphere = 1/3, but the limiting case of all three for infinite v is the same, N ∞ = 0. For the cylinder with the square crosssection, η cylinder (ν = 1) = 0.35714 and for the sphere, by the definition of the re-scaling discussed in Section I.A, η sphere (ν = 1) = 2/3 = 0.6 Suppose some quantity, f, proportional to the magnetic susceptibility is measured. This can be the frequency of a tunnel-diode resonator or of a resonant microwave cavity, or the AC voltage of a sensitive susceptometer or, the DC voltage of a SQUID circuit with flux transformer. When a sample is inserted into the coil that provides an excitation magnetic field, H 0 , (AC or DC depending on the method) small enough to stay in the Meissner state (no Abrikosov vortices), the measured quantity changes by some amount, ∆f . The maximum possible change, ∆f 0 , is induced when an ideal diamagnet (λ = 0) of the sample size and shape is inserted. Therefore, the actual magnetic susceptibility is where the effective sample dimension, R = η (ν) a. The quantity ∆f 0 can be measured directly by pulling the sample out of the coil at the base temperature. (Yes, one of our cryostats is equipped with a mechanical pulley of a spring-loaded sample holder, thus we can measure ∆f 0 directly and compare with the calculations). Alternatively, it can be calculated using the demagnetization factor described above. For example, in the case of a resonant circuit frequency shift, where V is sample volume and V c is volume of the coil. See Refs. The measured quantity, δ (T ) now gives the change in the London penetration depth, where R = η (ν) a is the effective sample dimension calculated from Eq.20 (or approximately from Eq.22). For example, in the case of a tunnel-diode resonator, f 0 ∼ 10 MHz,∆f 0 ∼ 5 kHz for typical sub-mm sized crystals with R ∼ 100 μm. This gives the calibration constant G = R/∆f 0 ∼ 20 nm/Hz. The smallest frequency changes practically detected are about δf ∼ 0.02 Hz (giving 2 parts per 10 9 sensitivity of this technique!) resulting in resolving ∆λ (T ) ∼ 0.4 Å which is small enough to study the anisotropy of the superconducting gap In conclusion, a systematic quantitative description of the magnetic susceptibility of superconducting right circular cylinders of arbitrary aspect ratio, ν = c/a, in an axial magnetic field is outlined for finite London penetration depth. It includes two independently computed quantities. The developed approach can be used for the quantitative analysis of the magnetic susceptibility data to extract the London penetration depth, λ, and these results can be extended to the cuboid-shaped samples for the approximate estimates.