Ultrawide bandgap semiconductor technologies offer potentially revolutionary advances in the rapidly developing areas of quantum communication, short wavelength optics, smart energy conversion and biomedical interfaces. These strongly demanding technologies can be partly constructed using conventional devices but new hybrid architectures are needed to overpass current performances and add functionalities. Here, we propose a new concept based on the specific properties of a diamond pn junction combined with both an electric and optical control of the depletion region. Using this junction as a gate in a junction field effect transistor, we report a proof of concept of a non volatile diamond photo-switch. A diamond pn junction made with nitrogen deep donors in the n?side is demonstrated to be optically activated thanks to visible light. The n-type diamond gate is almost devoid of free carriers in the dark and thus insulating. Illuminating the device renders the standard electrical gate control of the transistor efficient. Without illumination, the device is frozen, keeping a permanent memory of the current state. This new way of operating the device opens numerous possibilities to store and transfer information or energy with applications in the field of electrical aircraft or aerospace electronics, power electronics, bio-electronics and quantum communication. Because of their exceptional characteristics, ultrawide bandgap semiconductors (UWBGS) like diamond, aluminium nitride, boron nitride, gallium oxide are already in focus for producing devices beyond state-of-the-art semiconductor technologies Diamond's outstanding properties like wide bandgap, elevated carrier mobility, high breakdown field and huge thermal conductivity make it a unique material for high power and/or high temperature and/or radiation-resistant electronics. The long valley-polarization relaxation times of electrons make diamond a good candidate for use as valleytronics transistor In this paper, we report on a diamond-based non volatile photo-switch with a permanent off state having no loss. The concept is demonstrated by using monocristalline p-type diamond deposited by plasma enhanced chemical vapour deposition on a highly nitrogen-doped diamond substrate manufactured using high pressure and high temperature. In the first part, the concept will be described. Then, the active and freeze state of the pn junction will be established and the proof of concept of a non volatile photo-switch will be demonstrated thanks to an electro-optical control of a diamond junction field effect transistor. Then, we will discuss examples of application fields in which this concept can efficiently operate such as power electronics, quantum communication or bio-electronics. For analogue or digital operations, the ubiquitous silicon-based field effect transistors work by using a gate bias voltage to deplete (OFF state) or populate (ON state) the channel. In the hybrid structure proposed here, the external illumination activates or freezes the device. In this way, the device can be driven by a combination of electrical and optical signals, providing a higher degree of freedom. In conventional semiconductors with shallow energy levels associated to donors or acceptors, doping level and carrier concentrations are almost equal at room temperature. The doped material is conducting. In nitrogen doped diamond, nitrogen impurities in substitutional sites create deep donor levels at 1.7 eV from the conduction band. Consequently, at room temperature, electrons remain bound to the dopants. Even at high doping levels (10 18 cm -3 to 10 19 cm -3 ) nitrogen doped (N-doped) diamond samples are completely insulating, and so cannot be electrically driven. This is the freeze state of the device. Thanks to external illumination, the absorption of photons promotes some of the bound electrons to the conduction band, increasing the free carrier concentration. The device thus becomes conducting and prone to be electrically driven. This is the active state of the device. The control of the ON and OFF states of the transistor is still ensured by a gate bias voltage. However, the switch from ON to OFF will only be achievable during the active state. This concept has to be distinguished from photo-conductive semiconductor switch devices A schematic description of the sample structure is shown in Figure As an UWBGS, diamond is expected to be able to sustain an extreme electric field before reaching its breakdown. Hiraiwa et al. A junction field effect transistor device was fabricated on the same sample to demonstrate the first non volatile photo-switch using diamond pn junction. The current flows through the bulk of the p-type layer between the drain and source under bias. Under optical illumination, the gate contact on the back side of the substrate controls the SCR extension in the channel. The drain to source distance is 10 μm and contacts have a 70 μm width. It is remarkable that room temperature transistor characteristics under an optical power of 11 mW/cm? were obtained as shown in Figure A measured commutation cycle at a fixed drain to source bias V DS = -40V (Pinch-off) is shown in Figure The following paragraph describes each step represented in Figure The gate substrate electric command was applied (V Sub = 40V ) to fully deplete the channel (OFF state). However, because the N-doped gate is devoid of free carriers in the dark, no electrostatic modulation can occur in the dark and the channel remains conductive even if the gate voltage corresponds to a OFF state. ( The large RC time constant and, more precisely, the huge resistance R caused by the high substrate's thickness and resistivity meant that the turn-on time was long but the modulation was clearly observed. Effects of traps most likely present at the substrate/epilayer and epilayer/oxide interfaces could not be distinguished. Reducing the turn-on time is a key factor in obtaining an efficient device, but as discussed previously, this could be decreased by orders of magnitude as it directly depends on the N-doped layer resistance. Additionally, in this kind of FET device the optical excitation only has to be present during the short time of the device switching. As well as the previously mentioned ways to increase this simple proof of concept performances, the use of a pulsed light source could provide a stronger optical excitation with limited total power usage. The next challenge to create new devices will be to grow nitride-based light emitting diodes (LED) directly on diamond transistor. Indeed, creating electrically driven visible or sub-band gap UV LEDs on top of the diamond transistors will enable high optical power density excitation to be attained. This would in turn enable the efficient control of the non volatile photo-switch, i.e. to read or write the transistor state (ON or OFF thanks to the FET gate) and store or reset the transistor state (freeze or activate thanks to the LED electrode). This new device paves the way for numerous practical applications where the superior properties of diamond semiconductors can be advantageously exploited. For embedded electronics, non volatile memories, i.e. the association of a switch with a capacitance for example, could be very useful to store and read information in a harsh environments (radiation resistant and high temperature) like in aerospace and aeronautic applications. For power electronics, the gate terminal of classical power transistors is affected by high dV /dt and Miller coupling, causing undesired turn-ON and possible catastrophic shoot-through. Thanks to the perfect galvanic insulation of the gate terminal without illuminating light, the Miller coupling between the Drain and the Gate is completely removed thus offering the strongest immunity to parasitic turn ON. For quantum communication, the LED will make the excitation of a nitrogen vacancy (NV) centre possible but more importantly the diamond FET will also permit control of electrostatics and a non-volatile storage of the NV charge state. Finally, we shall describe a bio-electronics applications in which the unique properties of diamond in the context of this concept are fully exploited. Diamond-based electronic is a perfect candidate for chronic biomedical implants since it provides solution for most of the scientific barriers that prevent most advanced technology to be transferred to clinical applications. Its chemical inertness combined with its carbon nature make it a biocompatible material compatible with all the standard medical imaging techniques including Magneto Resonance Imaging To lower the energy barrier between the top metal contacts and the p-type epilayer, a 200 nm highly boron-doped ([B]> 4 × 10 20 cm -3 ) diamond layer was selectively grown using an aluminium mask. A mesa etching was then performed down to the substrate by reactive ion etching with an oxygen plasma. This enabled the electric separation of each test devices on the sample surface from each other. The top metallic contacts were formed by a Titanium/Platinum/Gold (30 nm/20 nm/30 nm) stack deposited by electron beam evaporation and annealed for 30 min at 500 °C in high vacuum condition (< 10 -7 mBar). An UV ozone treatment was performed on the surface before the deposition of 50 nm alumina layer by atomic layer deposition to passivate the whole surface, followed by post annealing in high vacuum condition (< 10 -7 mBar) at 500 °C for 1 hour 24 . The top drain and source contact consists of a Titanium/Platinum/Gold (30 nm/20 nm/30 nm) stack, deposited by electron beam evaporation on the 50 nm alumina layer. No lithography step has been performed after the passivation oxide deposition. Also the metal oxide metal stack thus formed is electrically broken at the time of the first measurement by applying a few volts bias voltage. The detailed process is given in Ref. The PN diode electrical characterization was performed using a Keithley 2612. The JFET electrical characterization was performed using a Modulab Solartron including the low current module. The electrical contacts were obtained using probes moved by a piezoelectric system with a LINKAM system to control temperature under vacuum. The microscope white LED light beam was used to optically excite the sample from the top. The use of a nitrogen-doped substrate as n-type layer is convenient and greatly simplifies the fabrication process. However it also causes a very large serial resistance R Sub due to its thickness (0.5 mm) and large resistivity. Also the silver paste back contact is probably of poor quality. Capacitance measurements are prohibited by the low cut-off frequency induced by the serial resistance so we only relied on static electrical measurements. This simple design was however found to be well suited to demonstrate this proof of concept. T. T. Pham, M. Gutiérrez, C. Masante, N. Rouger, D. Eon, E. Gheeraert, D. Araujo, J. Pernot, Appl. Phys. Lett. 2018, 112, 102103. C. Masante, N. Rouger, J. Pernot, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys. 2021, 54, 233002.