The design of β-Ga2O3-based modulation doped field effect transistors (MODFETs) is discussed with a focus on the role of self-heating and resultant modification of the electron mobility profile. Temperature-and doping-dependent model of the electron mobility as well as temperature-and orientation-dependent approximations of the thermal conductivity of β-Ga2O3 are presented. A decrease in drain current was attributed to a position-dependent mobility reduction caused by a coupled selfheating mechanism and a high electric-field mobility reduction mechanism. A simple thermal management solution is presented where heat is extracted through the source contact metal. Additionally, it is shown that an undesired secondary channel can form at the modulation doped layer that is distinguished by an inflection in the transconductance curve. Monoclinic β-Ga2O3 based transistors possess fundamental electronic properties that are advantageous for high power devices. proper design, conduction predominantly occurs via the dense twodimensional electron gas (2DEG) that forms in the potential well. Nevertheless, a deleterious secondary channel may form at the modulationdoping location in the (AlxGa1x)2O3 barrier. The supplemental to this article provides general design rules for optimal formation of the 2DEG. The supplemental focuses on mitigating three limitations related to current deposition technology involving the aluminum content in (AlxGa1-x)2O3, modulation-doping concentration, and the persistent tail of dopant atoms. Below, it is shown that residual charge in the (AlxGa1-x)2O3 barrier manifests as a secondary inflection in the transconductance curve. This primary aim of this article is to investigate the coupled relation of on-state selfheating and spatially-dependent mobility reduction, and the resultant alteration of the forward bias response. The mobility decreases significantly at elevated temperature and the low-thermal conductivity of β-Ga2O3 results in self-heating of the device at moderate current density. Approximations to the mobility and thermal conductivity of β-Ga2O3 are presented that can be readily implemented in a TCAD simulation environment. It is shown that selfheating and the electric-field dependence will significantly alter the cross-sectional mobility profile. Significant self-heating can result in a negative differential conductance in the drain current response to increasing drain voltage. A series of electro-thermal simulations, via the Silvaco TCAD environment, were conducted for a modulation doped (AlxGa1-x)2O3 / Ga2O3 structure to provide insight into the device current-voltage relationships as well as the crosssectional profiles of current density, mobility, and temperature. Accurate description of the temperature dependent parameters is necessary for simulation of a transistor based on Ga2O3, which suffers from self-heating related to its low thermal conductivity. For application to a TCAD simulation, the thermal conductivity model given in Mu et al. with the parameters listed in Table with fitting parameters given by μ1 = 1.67938 cm 2 /V•s, μ2 = 264.557 cm 2 /V•s, α= -0.116259, β = -2.29257, γ = 2.64426, and Ncrit = 4.29447×10 18 cm -3 . Figure The base simulation structure consists of 20 nm ALD Al2O3, 30nm (Al0.25Ga0.75)2O3 with a background donor concentration of 1×10 17 cm -3 and modulation doped at 4×10 19 cm -3 with a Gaussian distribution with a characteristic length of 0.5 nm that peaks at 4nm from the layer bottom, 200 nm Ga2O3 with a background donor concentration of 1×10 15 cm -3 , and a 200 μm 2 01 Ga2O3:Fe substrate with a thermal boundary resistance of 0.001 cm 2 •K/W. The source and drain contacts are 50 μm in length and composed of 20 nm Ti and 300 nm Au. The gate contact is 5 μm in length and composed of 20 nm Ni and 300 nm Au. The source to gate spacing is 3 μm and the gate to drain spacing is 12 μm. The remaining structure consists of Si3N4. As shown in Fig. A simulation of the device structure was conducted, with a thermal contact to the substrate base, as described in the previous section. The drain current and peak temperature as a function of forward drain bias are displayed in Fig. Figure In Fig. In contrast, in Fig. A simulation was conducted of the same device structure except thermal heating is neglected, that is, the device is held at 300 °K. Examination of the mobility cross-section, in Fig. The drain current and transconductance at a drain voltage of 5 V show a small deviation in the thermal and iso-thermal simulations for a gate bias greater than -1 V. At this transition point, the current density is sufficiently high that most but not all the Joule heat generated can be effectively dissipated at the base of the substrate. For a drain voltage of 5 V, an inflection is present in the transconductance curve (Fig. As discussed in the previous section, at a drain voltage of 10 V, self-heating can raise the temperature of the lattice, which significantly decreases the electron mobility in and near the channel. This increases the resistance of the device, which is evident in the large difference in the thermal and iso-thermal simulations in Fig. Figure A simple improvement to the thermal design is to place a heatsink material on the surface of the structure near but offset from the source metal. Most transistor test structures have a large source pad above the source region; that is, the source contact is not accessed via a metal finger. As described above, the device surface is covered with a Si3N4 layer. A 50 nm Si3N4 layer is between the top of the source metal and the heatsink material, and the heatsink material is offset 5 μm from the edge of the source contact. To further simplify the analysis, no heat exits the bottom of the substrate. Figure A similar thermal resistance of the overall device is found in a simulation (not shown) for a device formed on a 20 μm substrate with a bottom thermal contact. This result is reasonable as the 20 μm distance to the substrate base is similar to the distance from the drain edge of the gate to the source contact. Hence, thinning the substrate is another approach; however, the propensity for β-Ga2O3 to cleave discourages a post-growth wafer thinning approach. Still, several works have demonstrated devices processed on exfoliated Ga2O3 films with a thickness typically less than 10 μm. Thermal management is an important design consideration in all semiconductor power devices. The presence of residual charge at the point of modulation doping is undesired as this creates a secondary channel that hampers the ability to modulate the primary channel. This charge at the modulation doping point can be confirmed by an inflection in the transconductance curve. Specifically, as this charge is spatially closer to the gate metal, this inflection occurs at more positive gate bias relative to the primary channel, which is deeper in the structure. The supplemental to this article presents design rules for the modulation-doped structure with a goal of maximizing the concentration of electrons in the potential well while minimizing the low-mobility secondary channel at the modulation-doped layer. An emphasis is placed on mitigating three limitations related to the deposition of β-Ga2O3; specifically, the inability to deposit high-quality β-(AlxGa1-x)2O3 with an aluminum mole fraction greater than approximately 0.25, the difficulty to deposit a high concentration of dopant atoms without the formation of its native oxide, and the unintentional dopant atom exponential decay tail. Simulations for an aluminum mole fraction of 0.25 show that proper selection of the barrier thickness and modulation-doping level, including accounting for any asymmetric broadening, can yield a dense electron channel confined primarily to the potential well at the (AlxGa1-x)2O3 / Ga2O3 interface. The wide bandgap and related high critical breakdown field of β-Ga2O3 enables a highvoltage lateral transistor designed for low onresistance as well as operation at high-frequency, which reduces the size and weight of the passive circuit elements in the overall system. the deposition technology for β-Ga2O3-based MODFET is hindered by three issues; namely, the inability to deposit highquality β-(AlxGa1-x)2O3 with an aluminum mole greater than approximately 0.25, the difficulty to deposit a high concentration of dopant atoms without the formation of its native oxide, and the persistent tail or memoryeffect of dopant atoms. Current deposition technology is unable to consistently deposit high-quality alloys of β-(AlxGa1-x)2O3 with a mole fraction, x, greater than 0.25. An early study by Hill et al. into the equilibrium diagram of Al2O3 in β-Ga2O3 found the presence of a stable phase of AlGaO3 (i.e., x = 0.5). This supplemental provides general design rules for a Ga2O3-based MODFET with a focus on maximizing the density of carriers in the triangular potential well formed at the (AlxGa1-x)2O3 / Ga2O3 interface -while eliminating the formation of a secondary channel at the modulation doped layer. A series of simulations based on a coupled Schrodinger-Poisson one-dimensional calculation were conducted for a (AlxGa1-x)2O3 / Ga2O3 to provide insight into the distribution of carriers, conduction band structure, and the wave function in the potential well. 9, 10 custom numerical fitting and comparison procedure is employed to determine the best fit lines from a range of polynomial, exponential, and logarithmic functions. A custom numerical optimization procedure based on gradient descent is employed to find locally optimal device structures. Figure In contrast, Figure Figure Given the current limitations in maximum aluminum incorporation of approximately 0.25, it is important to examine the (Al0.25Ga0.75)2O3 / Ga2O3 structure. Figure In contrast, Fig. Figure FIG. Similar tradeoffs are displayed in Fig. In the modulation-doped structure, the bottom spacer layer separates the twodimensional electron gas in the channel from the delta doped layer. Figure In contrast, Fig. Figures . Initially increasing the spacer thickness increases the primary-tosecondary channel concentration ratio. This trend plateaus and eventually reverses for larger spacer thickness. The counteracting mechanism can be attributed to electrons in the modulation-doping layer are more isolated for a thicker spacer layer. Thus, the modulationdoped electrons more likely to accumulate at a separate potential well formed at the site of the (high) modulation-doping. In terms of peak primary-to-secondary channel concentration ratio, the optimal thickness decreases for increasing doping, e.g., at 4.5 nm for 8x10 19 cm -3 doping (Fig. FIG. The above simulations assume a step function change in the doping profile. In this section an exponential tail of dopant atoms is added in the top barrier layer. The target doping in the modulation layer is achieved and the additional atoms in the top barrier layer arises from a memory or similar effect. An increase in decay rate constant increases the dopant atoms in the upper barrier, which increases the total dose of dopant atoms in the structure. Figure The exponential decay of dopant atom concentration is described by where N0 is the doping concentration [cm where t is the total thickness [cm] of the layer above the modulation-doped layer. The last term accounts for insufficient thickness for complete dopant incorporation. Examination of Fig. Sheet Tail [cm -2 ] 0 8x10 19 4x10 12 4x10 12 0 1 8x10 Figures Figure FIG. S5. Variation in dopant decay rate for a β-(Al0.25Ga0.75)2O3 / Ga2O3 modulation-doped structure where the (Al0.25Ga0.75)2O3 barrier is composed of a 30nm surface barrier, a 0.5 nm modulation-doped layer, and a 3 nm thickness spacer layer. (a, b) Calculation of energy band, electron concentration, and electron wave function for a structure with a modulationdoping of 8x10 19 cm -3 for a dopant decay rate of 1 nm per decade and 5 nm per decade, respectively. (c, d) Comparison of primary channel concentration and the ratio of primaryto-secondary channel concentration for a set of modulation-doping concentration (8x10 19 cm -3 , 5x10 The more likely mechanism is that the dopant atoms in the modulation layer redistributes as an exponential tail into the top barrier layer. The target doping in the modulation layer is not achieved due to dopant preferential spreading in the direction of growth. Table In the first four rows of Table Figure Figures Increasing the aluminum composition in the barrier increases the conduction band offset between (AlxGa1-x)2O3 and Ga2O3, which increases the accumulation of carriers in the potential well. Depositing high-quality (AlxGa1x)2O3 with an Al mole fraction greater than 0.25 has proven difficult. Still, simulations at this mole fraction (x = 0.25) show that proper selection of the barrier thickness (Fig. Depositing high-quality (AlxGa1-x)2O3 with an Al mole fraction of 0.5 will increase in modulation-doping level that can be used without the formation of a deleterious secondary channel. The exploration of AlGaO3 growth conditions, the activation energy of donors in this ultra-wide bandgap material, and the role of strain are an important area of future research. As discussed earlier, in MOCVD of β-Ga2O3 a growth temperature dependent Si dopant decay from 50 nm/decade to 5 nm/decade was observed. For the simulations displayed in Fig. In this current work, the bandgap of β-Ga2O3 was set to 4.8 eV, which is the generally accepted value of the electronic bandgap. The surface states and Schottky barrier height influences the conduction band electron density profile. This current work assumes a negligible density of surface states. The default metal-semiconductor (MS) Schottky barrier height was set qφB = 1.4 eV and the default metal-semiconductor (MIS) Schottky barrier height was qφB = 1.5 eV. This is an approximate average of literature values for Schottky barrier heights for Ni on (010) β-Ga2O3. 