Nanomechanical resonators have applications in a wide variety of technologies ranging from biochemical sensors to mobile communications, quantum computing, inertial sensing, and precision navigation. The quality factor of the mechanical resonance is critical for many applications. Until recently, mechanical quality factors rarely exceeded a million. In the past few years however, new methods have been developed to exceed this boundary. These methods involve careful engineering of the structure of the nanomechanical resonator, including the use of acoustic bandgaps and nested structures to suppress dissipation into the substrate, and the use of dissipation dilution and strain engineering to increase the mechanical frequency and suppress intrinsic dissipation. Together, they have allowed quality factors to reach values near a billion at room temperature, resulting in exceptionally low dissipation. This review aims to provide a pedagogical introduction to these new methods, primarily targeted to readers who are new to the field, together with an overview of the existing state-of-the-art, what may be possible in the future, and a perspective on the future applications of these extreme-high quality resonators. Nano-and micro-mechanical resonators have a broad range of applications, from micro-electromechanical sensors (MEMS) In nearly all applications performance is dependent on the mechanical energy dissipation rate Γ, where a small dissipation rate is desirable to both isolate the resonator from environmental noise sources and to maintain coherent oscillation for an extended time. A more coherent resonator offers better stability and suppression of noise sources, thus allowing for cleaner and more precise readout The quality factor quantifies the number of coherent oscillations of the resonator before it decays to roughly 4% percent of its original amplitude. As also expressed in Equation ( In this review, to provide concrete examples throughout, we consider the case of a string resonator under tensile stress. At the most basic level, string resonators are analogous to guitar strings. They feature two clamping points and are sufficiently thin such that their resonances have roughly sinusoidal eigenmodes (or modeshapes), for the most part unaffected by the presence of the clamping points. The fundamental mode of a string resonator has nodes only at the clamping points, and is labelled by the mode number n = 1, whereas higher order modes have increasing numbers of nodes. An example of a string resonator is shown in Figure where β σ = nπ/L is the wavenumber for the mode n, σ is the stress of the string, I y is the geometric moment of inertia, and E and ρ are the Young's modulus and density of the material respectively. Assuming a string with a rectangular cross-sectional area so that A = w × h, the moment of inertia is given by I y = Ah 2 /12. Micro-and nano-mechanical resonators are simultaneously subjected to various damping mechanisms. The magnitude of each mechanisms contribution to the resonator's total dissipation typically depends on a large number of variables, often interconnected. These include the resonator's geometry, material, vibrational mode, resonance frequency, and surrounding pressure and temperature, among others. Identification and mitigation of these dissipation mechanisms in this multivariate space is a non-trivial task. The dissipation mechanisms can be divided into intrinsic dissipation, Γ int , internal to the resonator itself, and extrinsic dissipation (also termed external dissipation), Γ ext , related to the resonator's interactions with its environment. The total quality factor of the resonator can then be expressed as where are the intrinsic and extrinsic quality factors, respectively A resonator's intrinsic dissipation can be attributed to various processes occurring in the material's bulk and surface Independent of this frictional loss, additional sources of intrinsic dissipation exist in nanomechanical resonators. These loss processes arise from the coupling of the resonator's oscillating strain field to temperature fields or two-level systems Extrinsic dissipation can include gas damping, clamping loss, electrical charge damping and magnetomotive damping among other forms of dissipation where the subscript i labels the different mechanisms. In applications where the resonator must interact with a surrounding medium, such as biochemical sensing Where the application does not depend on interactions with the surrounding medium -such as inertial sensing A range of techniques have been developed to suppress the radiation of acoustic energy at clamping points. Generally, they involve either increasing the impedance mismatch between the wave in the resonator and that in the substrate In the case of a stressed string resonator, clamping loss occurs at each of its rigid clamping points, as portrayed in Figure Previous works deriving clamping loss consider only a single clamped In general, maximizing the impedance mismatch between the substrate and resonator results in greater suppression of clamping loss. This has been demonstrated in trampoline resonators, in which increasing the substrate thickness, relative to the resonator thickness results in an increased Q rad Phononic bandgaps arise from periodic arrays called phononic crystals (PnC), causing acoustic waves with carrier frequency within the bandgap to be unable to propagate. Mechanical modes within the bandgap experience a suppression of acoustic radiation into the substrate that is exponential with the number of unit cells in the crystal and can therefore be quite large Radiation losses in nanomechanical systems have been successfully suppressed by implementing a variety of phononic crystals. For example, Yu et al. Phononic crystals can be implemented as a one dimensional array that isolates specific modes from propagating. For example, Ghadimi et al. demonstrated a 1D phononic crystal that selectively isolates in-plane flexural modes and confines them far away from the clamping points As a final point on acoustic bandgaps, we would briefly note that an alternative method that has recently been developed to achieve such a bandgap, rather than creating a periodic repeating structure, is to utilise a zero-mode acoustic waveguide Nested structures can also be used for clamping loss suppression, emulating analog filters typically used in electronics. A well known macroscopic example of such an approach is the mass-spring stacks that have been implemented as acoustic filters for the vibration isolation of mirrors used in gravitational wave detection This is a second-order low-pass filter, which has a slope of -40 dB/decade above the cut-off frequency. Here, ω m is the angular frequency of the isolated resonator, and ω a and Γ a are, respectively, the angular frequency and damping rate of the ancillary resonator Indeed, once ω m ω a the suppression in amplitude for a single ancilla resonator scales as (ω a /ω m ) 2 , compared for example to more abrupt filters made of four stacked resonator for which the scaling is (ω a /ω m ) 8 Section II introduced the various forms of dissipation relevant to nanomechanical resonators, and showed that extrinsic loss mechanisms can be overcome by controlling the interaction between the nanomechanical resonator and its environment. In this section we explain the method of dissipation dilution, which can be used to improve the quality factor by lessening, or diluting the intrinsic dissipation of a nanomechanical resonator. The concept of dissipation dilution first arose in the context of gravitational wave detection, where the exquisite precision required to detect faint sources necessitated the understanding and mitigation of intrinsic dissipation mech-anisms Following LIGO's findings, the same phenomena of dissipation dilution was rediscovered in the context of nanomechanics when Verbridge et al. found that silicon nitride nanostrings under high-stress have higher than expected quality factors Analogous to other resonators, the energy stored by a nanomechanical resonator oscillates between potential and kinetic energy. The potential energy W of an unstressed resonator is stored in two forms, elongation W Elongation and bending W Bending . This potential energy is converted into kinetic energy during a nanomechanical resonator's oscillation cycle. This conversion between potential and kinetic energy is not without loss. As the resonator oscillates, the induced strain and bending give rise to all the intrinsic loss mechanisms described in Section II A. These can be divided into contributions from the resonator's elongation and bending. We define the energy lost per oscillation cycle due to each of these contributions as ∆W Elongation /2π and ∆W Bending /2π. Using the definition in Equation ( Applying tension to a nanomechanical resonator introduces a third contribution to the potential energy, W Tensile . Unlike the bending and elongation energies, which experience losses due to frictional forces, in the linear regime (u 0 h) the tensile energy is lossless. Thus, the quality factor of a stressed resonator can be written as The term D, usually referred to as the dissipation dilution factor, quantifies the fractional increase in mechanical quality factor due to the tensile stress. The tensile, elongation and bending energy of a nanomechancial resonator can be calculated from its material properties and resonant modeshape (φ n (x) in the one-dimensional limit). Transversal modes are commonly targeted when engineering the dissipation of nanomechanical resonators because they exhibit higher dissipation dilution than in-plane, torsional and breathing modes In this uni-dimensional limit, the tensile, elongation and bending energy are given respectively by and As can be seen, the tensile energy is largely determined by the stress σ but is also influenced by the modeshape On the other hand, the stored elongation and bending energies are not directly dependent on the tensile stress σ. However, since the stress is partly responsible for determining the resonator's modeshape, as we will soon show, it does indirectly affect these two energies. It is worth noting that the tensile and elongation energies are both determined by the first derivative of the modeshape, whereas the bending energy is determined by the second derivative. Or in other words, unlike the tensile and elongation contributions, the bending energy depends on the curvature of the mode. It can be seen from Equation ( Thus for a linear resonator the key to maximising the dilution factor D is to maximize the ratio of tensile energy W Tensile to that stored in bending W Bending . Approximating a string resonator's modeshape using a sinusoidal function is common due to the simplicity and general intuition the generalization provides where β σ = nπ/L represents the wavenumber and β E = σA/EI y accounts for the flexural rigidity. Figure For a more thorough comparison, we plot the energy stored in bending W Bending , elongation W Elongation and tension W Tensile as a function of tensile stress in Figure Neglecting the elongation energy (and therefore using Equation ( It is noticeable that a large aspect ratio L/h is advantageous to increase the dissipation dilution factor, with D scaling as L/h in the high stress limit. This is particularly beneficial since the clamping loss also reduces as the device's aspect ratio increases So far in this section we have discussed the effect of dissipation dilution on the quality factor of a string resonator. However, the intrinsic quality factor depends on both the resonance frequency and intrinsic dissipation rate. While it is clear that increased stress will increase the resonance frequency (ω m ∝ √ σ) [see Equation ( are indiscernible, consistent with the rest of our assumptions and approximations. Both models predict a modest reduction in the dissipation with stress. Using the full analytical expression the reduction in dissipation asymptotes to a maximum of around 20 % in the high stress limit. In Section III we showed that the bending energy is highly confined near the clamping points of a uniform string resonator, and that the contribution of this bending limits the maximum achievable dissipation dilution factor. Following this insight, one might anticipate that a lessening of bending, precisely in this region, could significantly improve the dissipation dilution factor. A technique highly effective in reducing bending at the resonator clamping points is known as soft clamping Soft clamping reduces bending by altering the boundary conditions of the resonator Simple changes to the clamp geometry have shown to be an effective way to enhance dissipation dilution. Small changes such as altering the width of the resonator near the clamping points have demonstrated some degree of soft clamping in string and trampoline resonators Another approach that enables soft clamping is the use of higher order defect modes in phononic crystals. These modes possess the highest amplitude in the center of the resonator away from the clamping points. This amplitude then gradually lessens as the mechanical wave hits additional potential barriers, which form the phononic crystal. With enough unit cells, the bending near the clamps can be greatly reduced. This has proven to be a very effective way to eliminate the storage of bending energy at a resonator's clamping points, thus increasing its dissipation dilution. For instance, it has enabled nearly an order of magnitude enhancement in the quality factor of Si 3 N 4 string resonators Soft clamping via higher order defect modes has similarly been incorporated into membranes Recently an alternative technique, specifically the use of hierarchical structures, has been proposed and experimentally realized to exhibit a large degree of soft clamping Soft-clamping is an effective way to increase a resonator's dissipation dilution by minimizing the elastic potential energy stored as bending. While this has led to orders of magnitude improvements in resonator quality factors As its name implies, the tensile energy is directly related to the tensile stress in a resonator [see Equation Commonly stress is incorporated via the growth process of the film from which the resonator is fabricated. Deposition stresses, σ dep , of up to ∼ 1 GPa are regularly achieved through these growth processes in Si 3 N 4 and SiC The above discussion leads to the question of whether it is possible to achieve stresses beyond the deposition stress by the use of other means. Recent developments in semiconductor and nanomechanical systems have shown the feasibility of locally enhancing stresses by engineering a nanowire or resonator's geometry To motivate how choice of geometry can create local stress maxima we consider the case of a prestressed string with width that is nonuniform, varying along its length, such as that presented in Figure The amount of local stress enhancement relative to the deposition stress is determined by the width and length ratios of the narrow to wider regions. As a general rule, to increase the stress of the narrow region by a factor C above the deposition stress, the wider regions need to be C times wider and longer. This can be seen in the blue trace in Figure The idea of local strain enhancement has been demonstrated with success in several nanomechanical devices While Refs. We see from the above discussion that to fully benefit from local stress enhancement it is necessary to co-locate the mode of the resonator with the region of high stress. This technique is known as strain engineering, and was first demonstrated by Ghadimi et al. Figure The devices presented in Figure Strain engineering has proven to be a powerful technique to enhance the dissipation dilution in nanomechanical resonators. The effectiveness of this technique is contingent on the use of a film which is intrinsically prestressed and has a high yield strength. For this reason, silicon nitride has been largely used to make highly diluted resonators. Highly stressed silicon nitride thin films are commercially available, and can be deposited on silicon, meaning they are compatible with well known nanofabrication procedures and equipment. Indeed, in general, stressed resonators fabricated from Si 3 N 4 (red triangles) have a record of allowing significantly higher quality factors than those fabricated from other materials (black diamonds), as shown in Figure To examine whether alternative materials could allow for better performing resonators in the future, we consider silicon carbide It can be seen from the shaded regions in Figure In addition to providing immediate improvement in nanomechanical performance, a shift towards materials like diamond and silicon carbide could create new research directions. For instance, in addition to their excellent mechanical properties, diamond and silicon carbide have proven to be ideal for integrated quantum photonics and solid-state qubits The utilization of dissipation dilution promises to significantly extend the applications and performance of nanomechanical resonators. Alongside techniques to control extrinsic dissipation, dissipation dilution has already allowed for over five orders of magnitude enhancement in a nanomechanical resonator's quality factor A shift towards other materials will certainly further enhance the quality factors that are accessible in nanomechanical resonators. Materials with low intrinsic dissipation and large yield strengths, such as the crystalline alternatives presented in Figure ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ 141 142 Alternate materials include silicon carbide (3C-SiC), silicon nitride with aluminium, aluminum, gallium arsenide, gallium nitride, graphene, tungsten diselenide, and indium gallium phosphide. The plot considers highly stressed nano-and micro-mechanical string, drum, trampoline and membrane resonators, some of which are at room temperature, others at cryogenic temperatures. Additional references incorporated in the figure, but not in the text include structure, fabrication and film growth of crystalline mechanical resonators presents real challenges. For example, in the growth of crystalline materials even slight defects can create propagating cracks throughout the material, and cause additional material loss 