Integrated photonic sensors can provide large scale, flexible detection schemes. Photonic crystal slabs (PCS) offer a miniaturized platform for wideband, sensitive ultrasound detection by exploiting the photoelastic effect in water. However, poor modal overlap with the sensing medium and non-negligible absorption loss of the aqueous medium have previously limited PCS sensor performance. In this study, we detail the development and optimization of a PCS-based acoustic sensor, by adding to it a low-loss high-index polymer cladding layer. Exploiting a mode-optimized TM-like optical resonance present in a PCS, with high bulk index sensitivity (>600 nm/RIU) and quality factor Q (>8000), we demonstrate real-time ultrasound-sensing at a noise equivalent pressure (NEP) of 170 Pa (1.9 Pa/ √ Hz). The PCS sensor is backside-coupled to optical fiber which, along with its intensity-based ultrasound-sensing architecture, will allow us to scale up easily to a 2D array. This work paves the way to a sensitive compact ultrasound detector for photoacoustic-based diagnostics and monitoring of tissue. http://dx.doi.org/10.1364/ao.XX.XXXXXX There is a need for robust, micron-scale ultrasound sensors that are also broadband and sensitive. Such sensors find uses in photoacoustic imaging, where intense laser light at specific wavelengths can be used to generate broadband acoustic waves in biological tissue; these acoustic signals, when measured, give not only information about the gross anatomy of the tissue, but also allow for functional mapping such as blood oxygenation The requirements above, unfortunately cannot be currently met by conventional piezoelectric transducers, which often have poor sensitivity at frequencies far from their resonant fre-quencies; they must also trade off sensitivity with size. While capacitive micromachined ultrasound transducers (CMUT) alleviate this issue somewhat, both piezoelectric and CMUT devices also suffer from high electromagnetic interference (EMI) and crosstalk In light of the shortcomings of conventional ultrasound sensors, recent work In previous work where r ∼ 1 is the acoustic Fresnel coefficient at the water-PCS interface, dn M dP is the photoelastic coefficient of the overlayer (in this case, water) surrounding the PCS, S = dλ dn is the bulk index sensitivity of the PCS, and dI dλ is a quantity that depends on the sharpness of the resonance (linewidth, γ) and the amount of light coupled out of the resonance I 0 dI dλ ∼ I 0 γ . In this work, we achieve real-time measurement of ultrasound signals by interrogating a TM-like guided mode resonance (NEP) of 1.9 Pa/ √ Hz, 3.8-fold better than our previous work TM-like guided mode resonances in PCS are ideal for indexsensing due to their higher quality factors Q (≡ λ 0 γ , in excess of 10 4 ) and higher S values compared to their TE-like counterparts The layer structure of the PCS is shown in Fig. A polymer overlayer, approximately 1.8 μm thick, is applied to the PCS through spin-coating and soft-baking. Much more of the mode field energy lies in the overlayer of the PCS for the TM-like mode compared to the TE-like mode. The bulk index sensitivity S value of each resonance increases with the fraction of field energy that lies in the overlayer (with index n M ) While in previous work Increasing the S of an optical resonance, however, is not suf-ficient to improve the acoustic sensitivity of our PCS sensor, as the other properties of the overlayer and sensor may also change (Eqn 1), including the acoustic Fresnel coefficient r and photoelastic coefficient dn M dP . Table Taking the direction of the applied stress to be in the z direction (Fig. We then experimentally assess the acoustic-sensitizing properties of the two different polymers on the TM resonance in our PCS. We note that it is not possible to assess the ultrasonic sensing capabilities of the TM resonance when the PCS is directly immersed in water; this is because the center wavelength of the resonance (Fig. Due to the large angular dispersion of the band structure supporting the TM-like optical resonance (Fig. The acoustic sensitivity of the polymer-overlayer PCS is then tested. Gaussian-shaped ultrasound pulses (center frequency 10 MHz, 1 μs FWHM pulsewidth, amplitude varying from 0 Fig. to 80 kPa) are normally incident on the PCS. The signal at the photodiode is then collected with an oscilloscope and averaged over 64 pulses; a bias-tee is used to separate the low-frequency (DC-500 kHz) and recorded high-frequency (> 500 kHz) components. A Gaussian fit is used to extract the amplitude of the signal δI (in V), for the corresponding applied pressure (δP). Similar to previous PCS sensors supported by TE-like resonances In order to properly compare the effect of one polymer to another, we must account for variations in light coupling. By dividing both sides of Eqn (1) by dI/dλ (the reflectance slope of the optical resonance), we can obtain the wavelength shift δλ of the device as a function of the applied pressure δP. Figure We can also measure the minimum detectable pressure of our polymer-overlayer devices. Only the data for the BCB-Fig. overlayer device is shown because it is more sensitive. By reducing the applied pressure δP gradually (Fig. Previous work on silicon-on-insulator (SOI) waveguidebased ultrasound sensors ( Our sensor interrogation topology has several benefits over traditional photonic-integrated circuit (PIC)-based sensors that require either expensive packaging (for grating couplers and edge coupling) or expensive stages (for butt coupling). We can interrogate our sensor from the backside with a free-space beam, or simply backside-couple a small fiber-coupled lens, as we have done here (Fig. In summary, we have used a TM-like resonance in our PCS device to make real-time measurements of ultrasound signals. This was facilitated by applying a high-index low-loss polymer overlayer onto the PCS, whose high Q optical resonance was maintained while its S was increased (Eqn. 1). Additionally, the small beam-divergence of the interrogating lightwave increased the amount of light coupled out of the sensor. These approaches allowed us to improve the sensitivity of our photoniccrystal slab-based ultrasound sensors by almost four-fold over our previous work, down to an NEP of 1.9 Pa/ √ Hz. We expect further improvements in sensitivity (down to 100 mPa/ √ Hz levels) by further optimizing the Q of the resonances. This intensity-based ultrasound-sensing architecture will allow us to scale up easily to a 2D array, and paves the way to a compact sensor for photoacoustic-based diagnostics and monitoring of tissue. Acknowledgments. We acknowledge support from NSERC, the Toronto Nanofabrication Centre (TNFC), and thank Prof Amir Rosenthal for lending us the BCB. Disclosures. The authors declare no conflicts of interest. Data availability. Data presented in this paper may be obtained from the authors upon reasonable request. Water PMMA BCB 