Spintronics-based nonvolatile components in neuromorphic circuits offer the possibility of realizing novel functionalities at low power. Current-controlled electrical switching of magnetization is actively researched in this context. Complex oxide heterostructures with perpendicular magnetic anisotropy (PMA), consisting of SrRuO 3 (SRO) grown on SrTiO 3 (STO) are strong material contenders. Utilizing the crystal orientation, magnetic anisotropy in such simple heterostructures can be tuned to either exhibit a perfect or slightly tilted PMA. Here, we investigate current induced magnetization modulation in such tailored ferromagnetic layers with a material with strong spin-orbit coupling (Pt), exploiting the spin Hall effect. We find significant differences in the magnetic anisotropy between the SRO/STO heterostructures, as manifested in the first and second harmonic magnetoresistance measurements. Current-induced magnetization switching can be realized with spin-orbit torques, but for systems with perfect PMA this switching is probabilistic as a result of the high symmetry. Slight tilting of the PMA can break this symmetry and allow the realization of deterministic switching. Control over the magnetic anisotropy of our heterostructures therefore provides control over the manner of switching. Based on our findings, we propose a three-terminal spintronic memristor, with a magnetic tunnel junction design, that shows several resistive states controlled by electric charge. Non-volatile states can be written through SOT by applying an in-plane current, and read out as a tunnel current by applying a small out-of-plane current. Depending on the anisotropy of the SRO layer, the writing mechanism is either deterministic or probabilistic allowing for different functionalities to emerge. We envisage that the probabilistic MTJs could be used as synapses while the deterministic devices can emulate neurons. Current information processing technologies make use of the von Neumann architecture. While this approach is suitable for performing simple iterative operations, it is not as well equipped for more complex tasks such as recognition and prediction. The brain, however, can tackle these tasks with considerable ease and for this reason, progressively more research is being conducted into brain-like computation. The field of artificial intelligence, for example, has seen great success in developing software that emulate the functioning of brain. However, these software still run on von Neumann hardware, making this approach the subject of several limitations, such as high power usage. Development of novel hardware that can directly mimic brain-like neural networks is therefore of significant interest. The main components of the brain are neurons, which process information, and synapses, which learn and remember by adjusting their connection strength. In particular, neurons are often regarded as stochastic spiking elements that transmit digital signals across analog synapses, whose conductance can take on a range of values ( Spintronics, where information can be stored in a non-volatile way using magnetic states, offers an attractive platform for emulating these brain components in solid-state devices. Here, we focus on systems with perpendicular magnetic anisotropy (PMA), where the magnetization can be either parallel or antiparallel (pointing 'up' or 'down') to the film normal, making them suitable candidates for binary memory elements. PMA systems have various advantages over their in-plane easy axis counterparts, including enhanced the thermal stability of the magnetic ordering, higher data storage density, improved scalability and more facile writing of the states In thin films, magnetization typically prefers to lie in the plane of the film due to the demagnetising energy cost associated with the out-of-plane orientation. Realizing a system with PMA therefore requires a compensation of this energy cost. In ferromagnetic/heavy metal multilayers, for example, the translational invariance lost in the direction of the film normal gives rise to an additional interfacial anisotropy. This can overcome the demagnetizing energy and yields PMA in the ferromagnet. However, this is an interfacial effect and hence limited to ultrathin ferromagnetic films, which can be challenging to fabricate In order to write the magnetic state, it is important to be able to switch the magnetization orientation. When the ferromagnet is placed adjacent to a heavy metal layer, its magnetization orientation can be switched with an in-plane current owing to the presence of spin-orbit torques induced by the spin Hall effect and Rashba fields Systems with perfect PMA are symmetric with respect to these torques, rendering the magnetization switching probabilistic. Deterministic switching, on the other hand, can be realized by breaking the symmetry in the system. The simplest way of breaking this symmetry is via the application of a small in-plane field, but this is not an ideal solution from the viewpoint of technological applications. Other approaches include introducing asymmetry through exchange bias Transition metal complex oxides have the unique potential for controlling their magnetocrystalline anisotropy via relatively straightforward means due to the intimate relationship between their crystal structure and magnetic properties. In this work we illustrate this potential with SrRuO 3 (SRO). SRO is a ferromagnetic metal with a relatively high Curie temperature around 160 K in bulk and between 130-150 K in thin films. It has a perovskite crystal structure accompanied by a slight rotation of the oxygen octahedron, which yields an orthorhombic unit cell with lattice constants of a = 5.5670 Å, b = 5.5304 Å, c = 7.8446 Å. However, with the rotation being very small, the crystal structure can also be described as pseudocubic (pc) with a lattice constant of 3.93 Å. Fig. SRO is well-known for its strong magnetocrystalline anisotropy (anisotropy field ∼10 T) ( Here, we have utilized STO substrates with two different orientations, (001) and (110), where the Miller indices refer to the crystal planes parallel to the surface. As discussed above, the SRO films grown on these substrates are expected to adopt (001) and (110) orientations, respectively. Referring to the relationship between the crystal structure and the magnetocrystalline anisotropy, we would anticipate that the magnetic easy axis to lie along the film normal for the (110) film, while in the (001) film it is predicted to have an in-plane component. Due to the absence (presence) of this in-plane component, we expect the former (latter) to exhibit probabilistic (deterministic) switching. In order to enable current-induced switching of the SRO layer, a layer of strongly spin-orbit coupled Pt has been included in our device structures to serve as a source of spin-orbit torque. The heterostructures with different magnetocrystalline anisotropies and switching properties investigated in this work can potentially serve as spintronic memristive materials. By incorporating them in a three-terminal magnetic tunnel junction design, deterministic switching devices can emulate a spin-synapse whereas probabilistic switching devices can function as neurons. STO substrates with (001) and (110) orientations with small miscut angles were treated with buffered hydrofluoric acid and annealed in oxygen. We deposited SRO films on the STO substrates by pulsed laser deposition (PLD). A KrF excimer laser beam (λ = 248 nm) was focused onto an SRO target at a repetition rate of 1 Hz, with a laser fluence of 1.5 Jcm -2 . The films were deposited at 600 • C with an oxygen pressure of 0.13 mbar. After 1200 laser pulses, we cooled the films down to room temperature under an oxygen pressure of 100 mbar We performed structural and magnetic characterization measurements on the films before fabricating devices. To determine the unit cell orientation of the SRO films on the different substrates we used different x-ray diffraction (XRD) techniques at room temperature. X-ray reflectivity measurements were used to estimate the thicknesses of the SRO layers. 2θ-θ scans were performed to determine the out-of-plane lattice constant. We also conducted reciprocal space mapping (RSM) to infer information about the in-plane lattice parameters of the SRO films. Finally, azimuthal scans, where a diffraction peak appears whenever a reciprocal lattice point is crossed, were carried out and information about the film alignment relative to that of the substrate was inferred from their relative peak positions. For identical alignments, identical peak positions are expected. Temperature and field dependent magnetic measurements were performed using a superconducting quantum interference device (SQUID) magnetometer (Quantum design, MPMS). The different field orientations adopted were 0 • (in the plane of the film), 90 • (along the film normal) or at ∼45 • (diagonal to the film normal). Post structural and magnetic characterization, we sputtered a Pt layer on the SRO films for current-induced switching studies. The Pt/SRO bilayers were etched into Hall bars oriented along different crystallographic axes using UV lithography and ion beam etching techniques. Schematic diagrams of the Hall bars are shown in Fig. The 2θ-θ scans (Fig. The Kiessig fringes of SRO 001 (Fig. The 3D construction of the reciprocal space maps (Fig. For SRO 001 , azimuthal scans were conducted around the (001), (101) (Fig. To probe the magnetic anisotropy of the samples, magnetic measurements were done with the magnetic field directed along different crystallographic axes. Magnetization was measured as a function of the field strength with the field along the film normal, at 45 • to the film normal, and parallel to the film surface. For SRO 110 , two in-plane measurements were conducted as the two primary in-plane axes ([001] and [110]) are inequivalent. Diamagnetic contributions arising from the substrate were subtracted. We conducted these measurements at 10 K, which is far below the Curie temperature (around 150 K as determined from both magnetization-temperature and resistance-temperature measurements (Fig. As seen in Fig. For the SRO 110 samples, the magnetic hysteresis loops were measured with the field aligned with the surface normal, along 45 • and along the two principal in-plane directions ([001] (blue) and [110] (green)). Fig. For both films, the high field saturation magnetic moments are different with the field applied along different directions. This is commonly observed in SrRuO 3 films and this effect has several possible origins. Ziese et al. discussed that the procedure used to subtract the diamagnetic substrate background, done by taking the slope at high fields, does not take into consideration paramagnetic contributions originating from the film itself and hence can lead to different saturation values along different crystallographic directions Ac electrical measurements were performed after Pt deposition and fabrication of Hall bars. In ferromagnetic materials the magnetization orientation contributes to the resistance due to the interactions between the conduction electrons and magnetic moments, giving rise to a collection of magnetoresistance (MR) effects. The MR effects are a convenient tool for understanding various material properties as it is sensitive to for instance the crystalline symmetry, magnetocrystalline anisotropy, defects, domains and domain walls In order to analyze and compare these aspects of the different films, we studied MR effects by applying a 7 T magnetic field while rotating the films from in-(0 • ) to out-of-plane (90 • ). It should be noted that the magnetization does not exactly follow the field orientation but tends towards the easy axes. This allows for further analysis and comparison of the magnetic anisotropies of the SRO/Pt bilayers on the different substrates by studying the first harmonic longitudinal and transverse resistances. The measurements we present here were performed by applying a 1.5 mA current. Further measurements, in which the current amplitude was varied are shown in supplementary section 3, and indicate the onset of discernible second harmonic signals to occur between 0.5 and 1 mA. The longitudinal resistance (R), measured along the current (x) direction, reflects the fact that resistance depends on the angle between magnetization and current. Known as the anisotropic magnetoresistance (AMR), this is described by Eq. 1 or Eq. 2 depending on whether the field is rotated in the xz or yz plane respectively. θ indicates the angle between the in-plane direction parallel (xz) or perpendicular to the applied current direction (yz). Where ∆R represents the change in resistance induced by the AMR. In both cases, the sign of the amplitude depends on whether the resistance is higher or lower when the field is applied in-plane with respect to out-of-plane. The field orientation scans in the xz-plane are shown in Fig. Scanning the field orientation in the yz-plane preserves the perpendicular orientation of the field with respect to the current channel. As shown in Fig. The transverse resistance (R H ) measured perpendicular to the current (y) direction, results from the Anomalous Hall Effect (AHE) and as opposed to AMR, is expected to have a sin θ dependence. Deviations from the expected smooth behavior are typically a fingerprint of strong magnetocrystalline anisotropy. Similar behavior is observed for both SRO 001 and SRO 110 in both xz-and yz-scans (Fig. In addition to first harmonic signals, we studied second harmonic responses. As well as linear effects, the voltage response also contains higher order terms due to the nonlinear current-induced response of the system. The spin-orbit torques, for instance, scale linearly with the current and therefore the SOT-related voltage signal is expected to scale quadratically with current. The effect of current-induced spin-orbit torques on the magnetization direction can therefore be probed with second harmonic component of the voltage The longitudinal second harmonic data when rotating the field in the xz plane are shown for SRO 001 and SRO 110 in Fig. The transverse signals for xz plane rotations are significantly different. Both signals appear to have a 360 • periodicity, but their shapes differ. For SRO 001 there is a peak in the signal at 0 • and a minimum at 180 • . Jumps and cusps are present around a relatively wide range of angles surrounding the situation when the field points in-plane. For SRO 110 , a rapid change in the signal is seen at 180 • and a small jump-like feature appears when the angle is 0 • , given that this feature appears consistently between trace and retrace this is not believed to be an artefact. The transverse signals for rotations in the yz plane yield clear angular dependencies for both samples (Fig. For SRO grown on STO (001) the XRD results showed that for both the substrate and film (in pseudocubic notation) the out-of-plane axes is [001], and the in-plane axes of the film also align with the equivalent axes of the STO. Similar conclusions can be drawn for SRO grown on STO (110), where again the film axes are aligned with the equivalent substrate axes. As a result, the [110] pc SRO crystal axes, i.e. the expected magnetic easy axes, for SRO 001 and SRO 110 lie in different spatial directions. This is confirmed by the magnetic measurements shown in Fig. The non-crystalline AMR dominates in the xz scans shown in Fig. Deviations from the expected cos 2 θ shape are likely the result of anisotropy. In particular, the sharpness of the dips that occur when the field is in-plane indicates this is close to a magnetic hard axis. On the other hand, the broad and flat peaks centred around the out-of-plane directions indicate the vicinity of a magnetic easy axis. The flattened maxima might further indicate that there are multiple easy axes that lie close to, and on either side of the out-of-plane directions with small tilts. Rather than following the field, the magnetization may jump between these axes. For SRO 110 , a more conventional positive AMR is seen, reflecting the fact that the shape of atomic orbitals depends on the direction of magnetization. In particular, the scattering cross-section is larger when the current and field are parallel giving rise to maximum resistance while the cross-section is smallest when the field and current are orthogonal. During the rotational measurements conducted in the yz-plane, in which the angle between the field and current is constant, the AMR is expected to be more sensitive to the crystalline component. For SRO 001 , flat resistance maxima appear when the magnetization lies in-plane, and sharp transitions when the field is ± ∼30 • away from one of the in-plane directions. The rapid jump in resistance suggests a magnetic easy axis lying perpendicular to the angle, namely oriented approximately 30 • away from the film normal. The broad dip spans a similar range of angles as the peaks in Fig. The sharp dips in SRO 110 when the field is in-plane reflect that the in-plane direction is magnetically hard. The easy axis in this case is expected to lie perfectly out-of-plane. The sharpness of the dips in this scan is in contrast to the broad, but flattened peaks, and cannot be explained considering only low order anisotropy terms. Instead, higher order crystalline anisotropy terms should be taken into consideration to fully explain the complex AMR. The transverse resistance measurements for both samples yield similar results, but with some important differences. The expected sine periodicity is observed where the highest resistance is found whenever the field points up (+z) and the lowest resistance when the field points down (-z). This indicates that for both substrates the AHE resistance is positive, consistent with the out-of-plane field scans shown in Fig. The longitudinal second harmonic data for xz scans (Fig. The transverse signals for xz plane rotations have a 360 • periodicity. The yz plane rotations yield clear angular dependencies with a period of 180 • . These signals could originate from SOT, but there can also be a contribution from a vertical thermal gradient. The high signal-to-noise ratio of the second harmonic signals likely originates from spin-orbit torque in both Pt/SRO/STO samples. Section 2 in the supplementary information utilizes the four-direction method proposed by Park et al. Finally, we discuss potential applications of these SRO/STO systems in the field of neuromorphic computing. When the easy axis is along the film normal, as is found for SRO 110 , an in-plane magnetic field in the direction of the applied current is needed for the magnetization switching to be deterministic. In SRO 001 , where the easy axis is tilted, on the other hand, the symmetry is broken with respect to the in-plane SOT; this makes it possible to achieve field-free deterministic switching in this case. When current is applied through the Pt layer, a spin accumulation will be induced through the spin Hall effect. This, in turn, exerts a spin-transfer torque on the magnetic moments of SRO. With a sufficiently high current density this torque can force the magnetization to align with the spin accumulation direction Memristors are circuit elements that can show several resistive states controlled by the amount of electric charge. These devices are deemed particularly useful for realising neuromorphic computing, because their behavior is reminiscent of that of synapses, and they have also been used to emulate neurons. The magnetization state in these SRO films is continuously tunable and can be used as memristors when included as the free layer in a magnetic tunnel junction (MTJ). Here the state of magnetization can be read by tunnel magnetoresistance. A proposed device structure for a three-terminal spintronic synapse consists of two transistors and one MTJ device (2T1MTJ) The isolation of the read and write paths requires two transistors which may be disadvantageous, it enables fast and reliable operation. A useful benefit of utilising spintronic devices is that the possibility of magnetization control through both magnetic field as well as current allows both individual devices to be addressed (by current) in addition to all devices to simultaneously be set to the same state (using magnetic field). Based on this, we propose a three-terminal synaptic MTJ device in which different non-volatile states can be written by applying an in-plane current. The memory can then be read out by a small out-of-plane current. Introducing the third terminal has several practical advantages. Firstly, it is more energy efficient to separate the read and write paths as writing through the tunnel barrier would require large amounts of current to be passed though an insulating layer, resulting in heat generation. Secondly, by passing large currents through the tunnel barrier it is possible that over time damage occurs, leading to limited endurance. The right side of Fig. Similarly when STO (110) is used and the easy axis is oriented fully out-of-plane, the probabilistic nature of switching can be utilized to get different functionalities out of the device. Probabilistic behavior is becoming increasingly important as stochastic systems are being used for unconventional computing In order to use such a device utilizing SRO as a free layer, an oxide tunnel barrier and a second ferromagnetic PMA layer as the reference layer is needed. Using SRO for the latter as well would be advantageous as again no additional layers are needed to induce an out-of-plane easy axis. Such MTJ stacks have been demonstrated by Herranz et al. consisting of uncoupled SRO/STO/SRO stacks on STO substrates in which both SRO layers exhibit PMA In this work, we demonstrate the ability to control magnetic anisotropy of SrRuO 3 ferromagnetic layers by the choice of substrate. The tailored anisotropy can potentially allow both probabilistic and deterministic current-induced magnetization switching when a Pt layer is added. In light of neuromorphic applications, this gives the possibility to realize two different spintronics memristive devices where the anisotropy controls the device functionality. With perfect perpendicular anisotropy, a device with probabilistic switching could be made which can serve the role of an artificial neuron. By tuning the easy axis to have a slight tilt, the switching can be deterministic and provide synaptic functionality. 8 Current Dependence of Second Harmonic Signals 