The discovery of the Meissner (Meissner-Ochsenfeld) effect in 1933 was an incontestable turning point in the history of superconductivity. First, it demonstrated that superconductivity is an unknown before equilibrium state of matter, thus allowing to use the power of thermodynamics for its study. This provided a justification for the two-fluid model of Gorter and Casimir, a seminal thermodynamic theory founded on a postulate of zero entropy of the superconducting (S) component of conduction electrons. Second, the Meissner effect demonstrated that, apart from zero electric resistivity, the S phase is also characterized by zero magnetic induction. The latter property is used as a basic postulate in the theory of F. and H. London, which underlies the understanding of electromagnetic properties of superconductors. Here the experimental and theoretical aspects of the Meissner effect are reviewed. The reader will see that, in spite of almost nine decades age, the London theory still contains questions, the answers to which can lead to a revision of the standard picture of the Meissner state (MS) and, if so, of other equilibrium superconducting states. An attempt is made to take a fresh look at electrodynamics of the MS and try to work out with the issues associated with the description of this most important state of all superconductors. It is shown that the concept of Cooper's pairing along with the Bohr-Sommerfeld quantization condition allows one to construct a semi-classical theoretical model consistently addressing properties of the MS and beyond, including non-equilibrium properties of superconductors caused by the total current. As follows from the model, the three "big zeros" of superconductivity (zero resistance, zero induction and zero entropy) have equal weight and grow from a single root: quantization of the angular momentum of paired electrons. The model predicts some novel effects. If confirmed, they can help in studies of microscopic properties of all superconductors. Preliminary experimental results suggesting the need to revise the standard picture of the MS are presented. was supported by experiments performed with a shortcircuited coil and rings carrying the superconducting current (see Recall that the hallmark of perfect conductors is the irreversibility of their magnetic properties, which means that thermodynamics is inapplicable to describe the properties of superconductors However, the jump in heat capacity discovered by Keesom with collaborators indicated that this picture may actually be incorrect. Namely, that the S/N transition can represent a phase transition associated with yet unknown alteration of the electron structure, as it has been suggested in number of occasions before 2 . Keesom's results served as a powerful call to study magnetic properties and corresponding experiments were set up in Berlin, Kharkov, Toronto and Oxford. The first convincing results were obtained in Berlin (Meissner's group) Meissner and Ochsenfeld coil cross-sectional area and the induction B in the coil location, thus allowing to find an averaged field over the coil volume. As the main sources of error, the authors indicate insufficiently accurate knowledge the spacial distribution of the coil winding and the imperfection of the cylindrical shape of the samples, especially of the singlecrystalline tin. In the first arrangement the field distribution near one sample was measured after it was cooled below T c in H 0 ≈ 5 G. According to the Faraday law, the field should stay undisturbed since there is no e.m.f. induced and the magnetic permeability of the sample materials μ m negligibly differs from unity. However, it turned out that below T c the field pattern near the sample changed almost to that which would be expected if μ m of the superconductor is zero or the magnetic susceptibility χ = -1/4π (the authors used cgs units, which will be also used throughout this paper). In the second arrangement two parallel either tin or lead samples were cooled in the same transversely applied field. It was found that below T c the field between the tin samples increased for a factor 1.70; for the lead samples this factor was 1.77. The increase factor for the field in the location of the search coil calculated coming from zero permeability of the S state was 1.77. These data support the statement above about zero permeability of the sample material in the S state. Note that no eddy currents can be induced under conditions of these experiments unless the Faraday Law is broken. In the third arrangement the sample was a hollow lead cylinder (a tube with the wall 2 mm thick). It was again cooled through T c in the same field as before and B was measured inside the tube and adjacent to it outside. It was found that the outer field changed in about the same way as it was for the solid cylinder. The inner field changed also: it increased for about 5% (Smith and Wilhelm In regard of this arrangement, the authors noted that their observations may look inconsistent with the statement about zero permeability. They suggested that these results can be explained in terms of microscopic or macroscopic currents in the superconductor assuming that μ m = 1 for the current-free regions. Now we understand (see, e.g. After all, in the fourth arrangement two tin samples used in the second arrangement were connected end-toend in series and a dc current of about 5 A was introduced through their other ends. As found, the field between the samples was greater below T c than that above it, although the current was kept unchanged. Smith and Wilhelm noted that the measured field was about the same regardless whether the current was introduced before or after the sample passed through T c , and in both cases the field readings were greater than that calculated assuming the surface superconducting current. This observation is largely ignored in textbooks; we will come back to it later. The main conclusion of Meissner and Ochsenfeld was that B in the S phase is always zero, however not all researchers agreed with that (see, e.g. Rjabinin and Shubnikov It was found that (a) when the sample was first magnetized (i.e. after cooling in zero applied field) B and μ m were zero at H H c ; in a narrow field interval near H c the induction rapidly changed to a magnitude equal to that in the normal metal; at the H > H c μ m = 1. (b) At decreasing H, B = H until H reached its critical value; at H close to H c , the induction experienced a sudden jump down, but it did not become zero; with a further decrease of the field B was also decreasing; at H = 0 there remained a residual induction close to 18% of the maximum B at H = H c . The observed in such a way magnetization loop was reproducible. The authors concluded that "the actual fact that a jump takes place in the induction in falling field strengths we are incline to ascribe to the formation of a new phase with B = 0." The incomplete reversibility of the data obtained was attributed to imperfections of the sample material. As now well known (see, e.g. Fig. The experimental results of Meissner and Ochsenfeld plus Rjabinin and Shubnikov, confirmed in experiments of Tarr and Wilhelm Before discussing the theories, we have to specify the definition of the MS. It is defined as a thermodynamic (and therefore reversible) state at which the induction B throughout the volume V of a massive superconducting body (sample) placed in a static magnetic field H 0 is zero. The MS can be also defined as the S state at which the magnetic susceptibility χ all over the volume of the massive body is -1/4π. The massive body is considered to be as such if its dimensions greatly exceed a so-called penetration depth λ, i.e., the width of a near-surface layer within which the induction of the external field near the sample B ext (= H ext in cgs units) The MS is observed only in sufficiently pure (see footnote ( 2 ) on p. 82 in If H 0 is not parallel to either one of the ellipsoidal axes, it should be broken for components parallel to the axes and η in the formula for the MS field range is the maximum demagnetizing factor for the given sample-field configuration. In particular, for a planar sample in a nonparallel field, the maximum η equals one On the other hand, a sample with η = 0 (referred to as the sample of cylindrical geometry) is in the MS at H 0 < H c1 (= H c for type-I materials). This can be a long cylinder (not-necessarily a circular one), an infinite slab or a wide ribbon-like foil in the field parallel to its generating line In non-ellipsoidal samples H is not uniform and such samples can not be entirely in either one of the equilibrium states 6 . Therefore, the MS can be also defined as the equilibrium S state in which the field intensity H with magnitude less than H c1 is uniform throughout the volume of the massive body. All three definitions of the MS are identical, i.e. each one unambiguously follows from the other. Finally, let us pay attention to one more important circumstance 7 associated with the fact that any equilibrium system (whether it is classical or quantum) have to possess symmetry with respect to reversal of time The two-fluid model of Gorter and Casimir The free energy 9 of electrons per unit volume f (T ) is chosen as where subscripts n and s designate the N and S fractions, respectively. The free energy density of the N fraction is chosen as f n = -αT 2 /2 to fit the liner dependence of the electron heat capacity in normal metals. The power 0.5 in the first term is chosen to fit an observed quadratic temperature dependence of the thermodynamic critical field H c (T ) which, as it was shown by Kok At equilibrium (∂f /∂x) T = 0. From that with the use of condition x(T c ) = 1 it follows that and After substituting Eqs. (1a) and (1b) into Eq. (1) and 9 Since the system (sample) is in zero field, there is no difference between the Helmholtz, Gibbs and total free energies. On the same reason the free energy does not depend on the sample shape. Since the sample is not magnetized, the free energy density can be used regardless of the sample shape using the same condition x(T c ) = 1, Eq. ( Therefore, the electron specific entropy is Hence, in spite of zero entropy of the superconducting electrons, the entropy of the S fraction is not zero due to the temperature dependence of (1-x), which is a relative number density of the superconducting electrons in the London theory. Next, the specific heat capacity is This justifies the chose of the power 0.5 in Eq. ( where H c0 is the critical field at T = 0. Therefore, β equals the condensation energy density at T = 0, which implies that the second term in Eq. ( The Keesom formula for the latent heat and the Rutgers formula for the specific heat difference at the S/N transition (see, e.g., Overall, so broad list of successful formulae leaves no room to question the correctness of the both fundamental assumptions of the two-fluid model, namely of the assumption about the interpenetrating fluids and of the zero-entropy postulate. Hence, there are three "big zeroes" characterizing superconductivity, i.e. properties of the superconducting electrons: zero resistivity, zero induction and zero entropy. Respectively, a theory which does not lead automatically to all these three zeros cannot be complete. In fact, the incompleteness is the only disadvantage of the two-fluid model, but it has never pretended to be considered as a complete theory. A description of the electromagnetic properties of superconductors in the MS is given in the theory of Fritz and Heinz London The London theory is based on two equations. The first one follows from Newton's acceleration equation for a free and spinless electron, which is assumed to be applicable to the superconducting electrons, i.e to the charge carriers not experiencing resistance. This equation reads where m and e are the mass and charge of one of these electrons, respectively, v is the time derivative of its velocity, and E is the electric field acting on it. Coming from Eq. ( This is the first London equation, where c is the electromagnetic constant of the cgs unit system equal to the speed of light and λ L is a temperature dependent material constant referred to as the London penetration depth, which is defined as The second London equation is where H is the magnetic field intensity acting on the superconducting electrons where μ m and ε e are the magnetic permeability and dielectric permittivity of the superconducting material, respectively. In Two other assumptions are where subscript ∞ designates the quantities in the sample interior or at the depth much greater than λ L . The first of these two assumptions is a postulate based on the Meissner effect, and the second one is justified by a never published theorem ascribed to Bloch. F. London formulates it as "in the absence of an external field the most stable state of any electronic system is a state of zero current" The assumptions of Eq. ( Here H ∞ = 0 because μ n = 1 (Eq. ( From Eq. (2a) using of the Maxwell equations c∇×B = 4πj and ∇ • B = 0 along with conditions μ m = 1 (Eq. ( Analogically, with the use j ∞ = 0 and taking into account that no external current is fed into the sample (i.e. ∇ • j = 0) one obtains Eqs. So far, the theory may appear as a rather strange construction 13 , the sole purpose of which is to fulfill deliberately introduced (Eq. ( Another form of the London equation ( where A is the vector potential defined as To restrict multiplicity of A, the theory imposes supplementary conditions 15 ∇ • A = 0, where A ⊥ is a component of the vector potential inside the sample normal to its surface. Given Eq. ( Eq. ( After all, Eq. ( where p is a generalized linear momentum Eq. ( Here are some consequences of Eq. ( 2. Since in magnetic field de Broglie's wave length is λ DB = h/ p, Eq. ( 3. Since the London theory is not restricted by any particular area of the phase diagram of the MS, Eq. ( 4. For multiply connected bodies the concept of rigidity led F. London to prediction of the magnetic flux quantization in superconductors To summarize, we see that the London theory has an impressive list of achievements and it cannot be denied that this theory served as the basis for understanding superconductivity (a) The magnetic moment of a sample in the MS [the sample has the ellipsoidal shape and H 0 is parallel to one of its axes 19 , demagnetizing factor with respect to which Simplicity is the doubtless merit of any theory. Citing Feynman, "Nature has a great simplicity and therefore a great beauty" (b) The magnetic energy of the sample in the MS is In magnetostatics, E m represents the work done by the magnetic field (executed by an electric field generated while the magnetic field is changing) to magnetize the sample. By virtue of the energy conservation, it is equal to the variation of the kinetic energy of electrons ∆T plus the energy of the outer field produced by the magnetized sample. In diamagnetics ∆T = E k , the latter being the kinetic energy of the field-induced motion of electrons. In diamagnetic samples of the cylindrical geometry E m = E k because the outside field caused by the sample is absent A schematic of the massive sample in the MS in the London theory is shown in Fig. FIG. surface layer with an effective width 21 λ L . Behind this layer all magnetic characteristics are zero (Eq. ( More specifically, in the London theory a long circular cylindrical sample in the longitudinal field H 0 is identical to a solenoid of the same shape and in the same field with the current per unit length g = cn × H 0 /4π 22 , where n is the unit vector normal to the surface and directed outward; the moment M produced by this current is the 21 The effective width of the penetration layer is defined as , where z is the depth from the surface and B(z) is the depth's profile of the induction. Inside this layer 0 j(z)dz, where j(z) is the depth's profile of the current. In the cylindrical sample of the London theory λ ef f = λ L , B ef f = H 0 and j ef f = g/λ L = cH 0 /4πλ L , where g is the linear current density. 22 This current is calculated from the boundary condition for the tangential component of the induction Bt, which stems from the condition of continuity for Ht same as that in Eq. ( On the contrary, inside samples in the MS the induction B = 0, but the field intensity H is not. In the cylindrical sample, e. g., like that shown in Fig. Another difficulty of the London theory can be seen from the following. A sample with η = 0 can be an infinite plate in the parallel field, like the film in Fig. if they are constantly pushed sideways by the magnetic part of the Lorentz force? How can they make a U-turn at the ends keeping the constant speed, without canceling the law of inertia and following from it Newton's acceleration equation Eq. ( Even clearer picture is as follows. Consider the cylindrical sample in Fig. where is the sample radius As mentioned, according to the energy conservation law, the magnetic energy of this sample E m (= H 2 0 V /8π) equals the field induced kinetic energy of electrons E k . However, in the London theory, as has just been calculated, E k E m which clearly contradicts the law After all, we mention a dilemma one more time demonstrating the inconsistency of the assumption of the circumferential screening current. Another dilemma stemming from this assumption is discussed in the Appendix. Consider a spherical sample in the MS. The external field H ext is parallel to the sample surface (as mentioned, it bends around the sample in accord with the continuity of B n ) and its magnitude decreases down to zero with the polar angle θ as H ext = (3H 0 sin θ)/2, what was confirmed experimentally (see Any one of the listed inconsistencies (this list can be continued) is sufficient to cast doubt on the London theory. However, still one more very strange thing is that the theory does not mention the necessary condition of the existence of persistent current: quantization of the angular momentum of its carriers. Below we will see how these issues can be resolved. As known, diamagnetism of non-superconducting materials, being essentially a quantum phenomenon cal significance of the used concepts allowing to visualize processes underlying and determining properties under question. At the same time one should not forget that a comprehensive description of superconductivity is not possible without a full scale quantum-mechanical theory. We start from the Bohr-Sommerfeld quantization condition, which ensures the dissipation-free electron motion over a closed path. At the same time, we understand that in magnetic field the linear momentum and, hence, the angular momentum and the action, should be taken in the generalized form In superconductors electrons responsible for persistent current(s) are coupled in Cooper pairs where p cp is generalized linear momentum of the pair, R is radius of an orbital motion of paired electrons (the fact that the paired electrons are in the orbital motion will be seen slightly lower), h is the Planck constant, and n is a non-negative integer (n = 0, 1, 2, ...). In the ground state (i.e. at zero T and H 0 ) n takes the lowest value n = 0. Hence, the quantization condition Therefore (since in Eq. ( This is the London rigidity principle written, however, for the paired electrons. In zero field the generalized linear momentum of the pair ( p cp ) 0 equals its kinetic linear momentum (p cp ) 0 . Then from Eq. ( where p 10 (≡ mv 10 ) and p 20 (≡ mv 20 ) are the kinetic linear momenta of each electron in the pair at zero field. This is identical to the definition of Cooper pair On the other hand, Eq. ( Due to symmetry, in zero field the total magnetic moment of all pairs (the magnetic moment of the sample) is zero, i.e. where summation is taken over all pairs. In view of uniformity of the bulk properties of the MS, Eq. ( The condition Eq. ( where t is time, A is the vector potential of the magnetic field H(= ∇×A) acting on electron, and v is the electron velocity, which magnitude is slightly less than the Fermi velocity v F due to condensation In Eq. ( Here we need to make a brief stop. As known (see, e.g., One more thing: since inside real bodies, including samples in our model, B and H are different, one has to distinguish the vector potential for H and for B. So in our notations A is the vector potential of the field H inside the sample. Below we will see how A is related to the vector potential A B defined by the relationship B = ∇ × A B . As usual, we presume the supplementary condition Eq. ( The first term in the right-hand side of Eq. ( The force F E (existing while the magnetic field is changing) does the work resulting in the change of kinetic energy of electrons and in the appearance of the induced magnetic moment in each pair. This is pretty much the same as the familiar phenomenon of magnetization in regular diamagnetics (see, e.g., When the vector potential changes from zero to A, which corresponds to the change of the field intensity from zero 35 to H, the force F E changes velocity of electrons in the pair from v 0 to v . The difference v i = v -v 0 (the velocity induced due to the applied magnetic field), according to Eq. ( In the London theory the applied electrostatic field penetrates the superconductor following the same law as that for the magnetic field. An experimental attempt undertaken by H. London to reveal this effect yielded zero result We choose A = 0 at H = 0. Note that v i in this formula is identical to v in the London theory (Eq. ( The second term in the right hand side of Eq. ( To answer this question, we note that, (i) since the uniform magnetic field cannot change position of the pair's center of mass, F M 1 = -F M 2 (those are the magnetic forces acting on the 1st and 2nd electron in the pair), and (ii) F M 1 and F M 2 are non-central forces. Hence, they make a couple resulting, due to non-zero ι 0 , in precession of μ 0 relative to the vector H, as schematically shown in Fig. The angular velocity of precession, referred to as Lar-FIG. mor frequency, is where γ is the gyromagnetic ratio and g L is the Lande factor. In superconductors γ was measured in the experimental masterpiece of I. Kikoin 37 and Goobar As follows from the Larmor theorem, if magnitude of the induced electron velocity v i is much less than v 0 , precession of the electron orbit is equivalent to undisturbed orbital motion in the field absence (i.e. with fixed μ 0 ) plus an additional (field induced) circular motion with the angular velocity o and radius r proportional to R 0 , which leads to appearance of the diamagnetic moment μ i results from the changing magnetic field, in full accordance with the Faraday law. On the other hand, the invariability of μ 0 means that condition Eq. ( where A 1 and A 2 are the vector potentials experienced by the first and second electron in the pair, respectively. Thus we see that, as predicted by F. London for superconducting electrons, p cp = 0 regardless on the presence or absence of the magnetic field. Q.E.D. Now let us calculate magnetic proprieties of samples in the MS, i.e. of the ellipsoidal bodies in which p cp of the paired electrons is zero. For that we have to choose an appropriate form of A and to link it with H 0 . A uniform field H = Hẑ (ẑ is unit vector along the z-axis) can be described by A of the following forms or gauges (see, e.g., and where x and ŷ are unit vectors in the x-and y-direction, respectively; and r is the radius vector lying in the xy plane perpendicular to H with an origin in an arbitrary point of this plane. The vector potentials Eqs. ( In our case the choice of A is quite obvious: due to uniformity of H, all directions in planes perpendicular to H are equivalent, so an appropriate A is that in Eq. ( currents and lines of the vector potential A must make closed loops. The later is consistent with the condition ∇•A = 0. The lines of the vector potential of the circular gauge are shown in Fig. After turning on the applied field H 0 , the field intensity and the vector potential inside the sample after a short relaxation time become H and A, respectively. Then, using Eq. ( In the scalar form, taking into account that e < 0, Eq. ( where e is the absolute value of electron charge. Hence, magnitude of the angular velocity of the induced circular motion is We see that the angular velocity is equal to the classical Larmor frequency (g L = 1). This confirms that we really deal with the precession of paired electrons with zero total spin, since non-paired electrons (as any other charges) in a magnetic field circulate with a so called cyclotron frequency ω c = (e/mc)H The induced current per one electron in the pair J i is H. From Eqs. An average induced magnetic moment per one electron in Cooper pairs is For simplicity, let us consider a sample of cylindrical geometry (η = 0). For this geometry (i) the demagnetizing field H d (= 4πηI) is zero and therefore H = TABLE I: The root mean square radius ri of the induced current in conventional diamagnetics calculated from Langevin's formula for χ (ii) the outside magnetic field produced by the magnetized sample is absent and therefore, as was already mentioned, the sample magnetic energy E m equals the field induced change of kinetic energy of the paired electrons ∆T Since magnetic moments induced in all Cooper pairs are parallel, the magnetic moment of our sample is where n cp (= n s /2) is number density of the pairs. Referring Eq. ( Hence we see, that our model meets thermodynamics and the experiment provided the radius r i (≡ r 2 ) of the induced circular motion of the coupled electrons is Since r does not depend on the field, r i does not depend on the field either. Hence, as was assumed in the London theory, λ L in our model does not depend on the field at constant temperature. 41 As mentioned above, this also follows from the boundary condition for the tangential component of the field H and from the Poison theorem Next, one can show that like in regular diamagnetics where cp = 2 i is the average kinetic energy of the induced motion of electrons in one pair. Using Eq. ( Thus, the change of kinetic energy of the paired electrons is In our sample H = H 0 and, according to the energy conservation, ∆T = E m = H 2 0 V /8π (see Eq. ( Next, we calculate the gyromagnetic ratio coming from its definition. Using Eqs. ( where M i and L i are magnitudes of the induced magnetic and angular momenta of the sample, respectively; and ι i is an average field-induced angular momentum per one electron. We see that γ is fully consistent with the experimental result of I. Kikoin and Goobar After all, let us calculate the induction in the sample interior. Using Eqs. Correspondingly, the magnetic permittivity μ m ≡ B/H and susceptibility per unit volume χ of the S phase are zero and -1/4π, respectively, as it should Naturally, due to microscopic character of the induced currents, there is no problem in establishing the Meissner condition (B = 0) in samples/domains of any shape, as soon as the field H is uniform. The latter is indeed so in ellipsoidal samples the mixed state of type-II and in the intermediate state of type-I superconductors. This explains why the Meissner state is observed only in the ellipsoidal bodies and, on the other hand, a vast variety of (never spheroidal!) shapes of the S-domains in the intermediate state The above consideration applies to the samples cooled in zero field, whereas the Meissner effect is about the field-cooled (FC) samples. So, what happens with the FC samples? Upon lowering temperature below T c (H 0 ) in the fixed field H 0 < H c1 (1 -η), a temperature dependent fraction of conduction electrons condenses forming stable Cooper pairs. This means that speed of these electrons drops from v F to v 0 , each pair starts orbiting its center of mass and, being in the field, the pairs precess 43 . Like in regular diamagnetics, the latter leads to establishing magnetization I, the field intensity H = H 0 -4πηI and the induction B = h = H + 4πI, where h is the average microscopic field. Hence, after the short relaxation time needed to establish the field H, the environment inside the FC sample becomes the same as that in the ZFC sample. Thus, this model meets the Meissner effect 43 Recall that precession is the motion occurring without inertia. indeed 44 . One more remark. As mentioned above, radius of the electron orbit R 0 in precessing Cooper pairs is fixed (i.e. it does not depend on the field) or the Larmor theorem is exact if v i v 0 Coming from symmetry, one can expect two options: either complete chaos or complete order. Thermodynamics suggests that the second option is more preferable since the system of the ordered currents has lesser free energy. This is consistent with experimental facts that entropy of the sample in the S state is less than that of the N state (see So, the induced currents of the MS can be modeled as an ordered 2D structure of cylindrical micro-whirls (similar to the quantized vortices in superfluid helium Note that the picture of ordered currents corresponds to the long-range ordering of superconducting electrons, which follows from the postulate of zero entropy of the two-fluid model of Gorter and Casimir and was expected 44 In the London theory the Meissner effect is achieved by postulating B∞ = 0 (Eq. ( by F. London, based on his discovery of the rigidity principle. On the other hand, the fact that r 2 i is the average quantity (over possible angles θ) means that electrons in precessing Cooper pairs experience action of the vector potential averaged over a space with dimension on the order of the pairs' size ξ = 2R 0 . This corresponds to the Pippard/BCS non-locality principle Consider the cylindrical sample in the Meissner state in the field H 0 (like, e.g., one shown in Fig. where J is the surface current and L is the length of our cylinder. Since I = μ i n s , we write where J cp = 2J i is the induced current per one Cooper pair, and A c and V are the cross-sectional area and the volume of our sample, respectively. Let us denote the number of loops in the sample cross sectional area A c (perpendicular to H) as N ⊥ = A c /πr 2 i and the number of loops along L (parallel to H) as N . The total number of the loops is equal to the number of pairs N cp , which is The last fraction is the number of the loops per unit length. Denoting N /L = n and using Eq. ( So, the loops are very tightly packed and ∆ is a universal number, about three times the size of a proton (1.7 fm). In terms of λ L the spacing is 47 Unlike the surface current in the London theory, in our case this current is formed by electrons bound in stationary Cooper pairs, so there are no either electrons or pairs running along the surface. Next, what is the penetration depth λ (the width of the surface layer with B = 0) in this model: is it λ L , 2λ L or something else? It should be a combination of r i and R 0 each of which is proportional to λ L , but this question is so far open. However, in any case one can state that λ is proportional to λ L . On that reason, since λ L does not depend on the field, λ does not depend on the field either, in accord with results of the microwave measurements of Pippard 48 [67] and our LE-μSR data [68] (see Sec. VI). All what was discussed so far is related to the samples at T = 0. But if T = 0, how will this affect the considered properties? The short answer is nohow. Indeed, like in regular diamagnetics (see problems 2.2 and 2.3 in Referring back to the zero-entropy postulate of Gorter and Casimir, we see that the MW model justifies the validity of this postulate and shows that it stems from the quantization condition Eq. ( However, it is obvious that T cp = 0 does not mean that the sample temperature has no effect on the properties of the paired electrons, since otherwise T c would be infinite. Indeed, changing T changes n cp 49 , as it was shown in the two-fluid model (Eq. (1a)). Therefore, the change of T leads to the change of λ L and, correspondingly, to the change of r i , the rms radius of the field induced motion of electrons in the pairs. On the other hand, r i is proportional to R 0 with the proportionality coefficient determined by the superconducting material, which does 48 In not depend on T due to the constancy of T cp (= 0). Thus, both r i and R 0 depend on the sample temperature in the same way (similar as ξ 0 and λ L in the nonlocal theory of Pippard Below we will use a slightly different ratio: the parameter א (aleph) defined as where R ⊥ is the root mean square projection of R 0 on the transverse plane or this is the rms distance (averaged over all possible angles θ) of the orbiting paired electrons from the axis passing through the pair center of mass and parallel to H. Important that r i and R ⊥ are radii of concentric circles laying in the same plane. In Langevin's theory , where R a is the rms radius of the electron orbits in atom One more thing. According to thermodynamics, ∆S = S s -S n (= (V /8π)(dH 2 c /dT )), a difference of entropies of the sample in the MS (S s ) and in the N state (S n ), does not depend on the field Completing this section, we note that in the MW model the penetration depth λ is the distance in direction perpendicular to the axis of the whirls, i.e. to the field H. Therefore, in non-cylindrical ellipsoidal samples in the MS the penetration depth in the direction perpendicular to the surface (i.e. to the external field near the surface H ext ) is equal to λ sin θ, where θ is the angle between H and the normal to the surface n (see Fig. Take a sample in the MS, e.g., a cylinder in the parallel field H 0 ≤ H c1 , and consider the quantization condition Eq. ( where l is the loop length. Now, open p cp and take into account that in the MS n = 0. Then, Eq. ( The first two integrals are zero due to mutual compensation of the induced kinetic liner momenta of electrons in neighboring pairs, like it takes place in the regular diamagnetics. Now, what is A , the average of the vector potential of the H-field? To answer, we apply Stokes' theorem; then Eq. ( here F l is the area of a surface bounded by the loop l and df is a vector element of this surface. From Eq. On the other hand, inside our sample the induction B and therefore its flux is zero (Eq. ( where Φ is the magnetic flux through the area F l . Now, take a tube-like hollow thick-wall long cylinder, apply the field H 0 (< H c1 ) parallel to its longitudinal axis and cool the cylinder below T c . Next, consider the closed loop l encircling the cylinder's opening and laying inside the wall far (compare to λ) from the inner and outer surfaces of the cylinder. The induction inside the wall is zero, implying that, as in Eq. ( Hence, the magnetic flux passing through the opening (plus surrounding it penetration area) in a multiply connected superconductor is This is the famous London's flux quantization but for the paired electrons. Hence, the origin of the superconducting flux quantization is the quantization condition Eq. ( As well known, the flux quantization ( Thus, inside the S phase the vector potential A B = A , where A is the vector potential of the field H. Now, what is the value of A B inside the sample in the MS? In the plane perpendicular to H we have uniformly distributed identical induced circular currents, i.e. in-plane currents with the same magnitude J cp and the same rms radius r i circulating clockwise relative to H. Therefore, exactly as it takes place in regular diamagnetics Thus, in the MW model all but one (the incorrect assumption H ∞ = 0) assumptions of the London theory (the assumptions in Eq. ( The Hall effect. In one of the first experiments on superconductivity, Onnes and Hof revealed a non-existence of the Hall effect in Sn and Pb samples In the MW model the absence of the Hall effect naturally follows from the fact that the only action of the external magnetic field on the superconducting (paired) electrons (exerted through the field H) is the change of magnitude of the angular velocity ω of their induced circular motion caused by precession of the pairs, regardless on specific path of the transport current. Therefore, the magnetic field cannot affect this path. Interesting to note that discussing Onnes' experiments Hall raised what he called a "heretical" question: "Is there conclusive evidence that the persistent currents which Onnes and others have observed are anything more than the aggregate of microscopic electric whirls within the metal?" Paramagnetism of the Abrikosov vortices. As known, the magnetic moment of type-II superconductors in the mixed state 52 being negative increases (decreasing in magnitude) with increasing applied field (see, e.g., The standard picture of the Abrikosov vortices is shown in Fig. Schematics of the Abrikosov vortex in the MW model 51 Lorentz: "...motion of the electrons is to a great extent insensible to the transverse forces exerted by the field". Hall: "... electric currents have in one respect less freedom of motion in the supraconductive state than in the normal state." 52 Recall that the mixed state is an equilibrium (thermodynamic) state One can also note that due to symmetry, in sufficiently pure samples the first Abrikosov vortex (the vortex at H = H c1 ) should appear close to the sample geometrical center in the plane transverse to H. This has indeed been observed On the other hand, in the case of a multi-flux-quantum N domain in type-I superconductors or a set of the singleflux-quantum vortices in type-II ones, the total flux passing through the sample is an integer of the flux associated with one hole, i.e., Φ 0 . This is an alternative justification of the flux quantization in superconductors. Surface tension. The most important equilibrium properties of superconductors in the states other than the MS are associated with the energy of the S/N interphase boundaries inside the sample, also referred to as the S/N surface tension. As known In Eq. ( For simplicity, we will again consider the cylindrical sample. Cross sections of the current structure of the MS in the MW model for samples with א < 1 and א > 1 are schematically shown in Fig. The field can pass through the sample via the hole in the network of the induced micro-whirls. An elementary hole (the one carrying the single flux quantum Φ 0 On the other hand, in the absence of a hole its space is taken by the cylinder, which magnetic energy Θ s (the subscript s stands for "superconducting') at Therefore, the difference Γ of the magnetic energies of the non-superconducting hole and the superconducting "insert" into this hole is where δ = R ⊥ -r i , the radial width of the space between the pink and blue cylinders, is the wall energy parameter is the length of a notional S/N interphase boundary in the plane perpendicular to H; and A b = bL is the area of this boundary. We see that Γ is the excess energy caused by the presence of the S/N interface at the hole boundary and therefore γ b = Γ/A b , the excess energy per unit area of this boundary, is the surface tension. Note that this is close to that how the S/N surface tension was for the first time introduced by H. London where F (T, H c1 ) is the total free energy of the sample without the hole at H 0 = H c1 , i.e. of the sample in the MS, and N ⊥ is the number of micro-whirls (see Eq. ( The same steps as above for the case depicted in Fig. To create the second hole, the applied field H 0 (= H in our sample) should be increased so that the total flux passing through the sample equals 2Φ 0 , and so on. At the same time, it is easy to show that separate holes with the flux Φ 0 passing through each are thermodynamically more profitable than one hole with the total flux in it Therefore, above H c1 the number of holes (Abrikosov vortices or the flux lines) gradually increases with increasing H 0 and the transition to the N state is continuous (second order) phase transition occurring at Thus, we see that materials with א > 1 represent type-II superconductors and the significance of the parameter א is similar to that of the GL parameter κ. We remind that the range of applicability of the GL theory is limited to the close vicinity of the critical temperature Applying thermodynamics and taking into account that the governing field inside superconductors is the field intensity H one can extend the above consideration to arbitrary ellipsoidal samples, i.e., to both homogeneous (Meissner) and non-homogeneous (intermediate and mixed) states. Type-I to type-II conversion. As known, the addition of an impurity to a flawless elementary type-I superconductor (e.g., alloying with another metal) converts it to a type-II superconductor and, correspondingly, leads to an increase of the critical field of the S/N transition denoting in this case as H c2 Pippard explained the type-I/type-II conversion by decreasing the coherence length ξ(= (1/ξ 0 + 1/l m ) -1 ), assumed to be a function of the mean free path l m . Recall that according to Pippard δ = ξ -λ L , and ξ is a spacial scale over which a change of F. London's ordering of the electron structure with the rigid p can take place ("spreading tendency of the state of order" For the thin films an alternative explanations of the increase of the critical field was given by H. London In the MW model ξ(= 2R 0 ) is the size of Cooper pair, a temperature-dependent constant of material determined by a polarization ability of its ionic lattice. At alloying, atoms of the other metal locally disturb the polarization of the lattice of the host material thus preventing the formation of pairs, which otherwise would exist at that locations. Apart from these places, the polarization stays unchanged. Correspondingly, the number density of Cooper pairs n cp decreases, but ξ is not altered. This leads to increase of λ L , r i and א. The latter, being originally lesser than unity, at sufficient alloying (in PbTl alloy it can be as small as 0.8% of Tl This picture is consistent with Pippard's observation of the increase of penetration depth at the alloying and with the fact that pure type-I superconductors can be converted to type-II ones, but not vice versa A similar in its essence process leads to an effective type-I/type-II conversion of the film material at decreasing the film thickness d. When d becomes less than about 2R 0 only Cooper pairs oriented so that 2R 0 sinφ < d, where φ is the angle between μ 0 and the normal to the film surface, can survive. Respectively, the lesser d the lesser n cp and the greater א. This implies that at a definite thickness א becomes larger than unity and therefore the film behaves as though it is made of a type II superconductor. Correspondingly, with a further decrease of the thickness the critical field becomes progressively greater than H c . The outlined interpretation is consistent with the well known fact that even very thin films of type-I materials remain superconducting and that these films always behave as type-II superconductors, as for the first time was revealed in the classical experiment of Shalnikov Total current. Finally, let us briefly consider one more very important property of superconductors not directly related to the MS, a so called total current. In the MW model the equilibrium magnetic properties of superconductors are qualitatively similar to the properties of conventional diamagnetics. In both cases these properties are due to magnetization arising from precession of the microscopic magnetic moments caused by the orbital motion of electrons bound either in atoms (conventional diamagnetics) or in Cooper pairs (superconductors). A colossal quantitative difference in the magnetic susceptibilities in these materials (up to 5 orders of magnitude!) is due to the differences in the size of the orbits and correspondingly in the radii of the induced microscopic currents of the bound electrons. However, there is also an important qualitative difference in these induced currents. Namely, in conventional diamagnetics the orbiting electrons are bound in motionless atoms (fixed in the crystal lattice), while in superconductors -in movable Cooper pairs. Therefore, since the pairs have electric charge, they can form an electric current, referred to as the total current The total current in superconductors plays a role similar to that of the transport current in conventional metals, where it is executed by conduction electrons. The latter obey Fermi-Dirac statistics and their energy equals the Fermi energy E F . This implies that the carriers of the transport current in normal metals, or in the N phase of superconductors, are "very hot": their temperature (the temperature of the ensemble of conduction electrons) equals the Fermi temperature T F = E F /k B ∼ 10 4 K, where k B is the Boltzmann constant In striking contrast, the charge carriers (Cooper pairs) of the total current in the S phase are "deadly cold". Since their spins are zero, the pairs obey Bose-Einstein statistics and, since the temperature of the ensemble of the paired electrons T cp is zero, they form the Bose-Einstein condensate (BEC). This (zero temperature) naturally leads to the disappearance of the thermoelectric effects, as observed in experiments (see Therefore, the total current in superconductors represents the transport current in BEC, known on the properties of superfluid helium (see, e.g., Thus, in the MW model the electromagnetic properties of superconductors associated with the total current 58 resemble the properties of hypothetical perfect conductors. As mentioned, the hell-mark of the perfect conductors is irreversibly of the sample magnetic moment induced by the changing applied magnetic field However, it should be stressed that even in the presence of the total current, magnetic properties of superconductors in the MW model are different from those of the perfect conductors. Since the total current is accompanied by its own magnetic field, it represents a combination of the whirl and translational motion of the paired electrons regardless of the presence or absence of the applied field. So in the MW model the total current is, in fact, similar to the superfluid current in He-II Above we have already mentioned sufficiently many experimental facts supporting the MW model. Some of them, being known for many decades, are explained in the new model for the first time. In this section we will briefly stop at yet preliminary results of our recent Low Energy muon Spin Rotation (LE-μSR) experiment This experiment was targeted to verify a possible field dependence of the penetration depth near the sample surface. Such a possibility follows (i) from the GL theory, where the field dependence of the order parameter is the main feature distinguishing the electromagnetic properties of the MS from those in the London theory; (ii) from reported μSR and SANS (Small-Angle Neutron Scattering) data obtained on the samples in the mixed state and treated using the GL and London theories; (iii) from the standard diagram of the Abrikosov vortices; and (iv) from a thermodynamic argument of H. London following from the assumption of the circumferential screening current of the London theory (see Appendix). Earlier λ(H 0 ) was measured by Pippard using a microwave resonator; Pippard concluded that λ can be considered as independent of H 0 So we set up an experiment to verify the field dependence of the penetration depth near the surface of samples in the MS with η = 0 using the LE-μSR spectroscopy. The samples were very pure In and Nb films 61 with the thickness about 3 μm each in the field H 0 applied parallel to the films. Data for the induction near the samples surface obtained at temperature near 2 K are shown in Fig. Important to stress that in both samples for all H 0 (but 30 Oe) B measured with high-keV muons is zero (it is not so in Nb at 8 K). Specifically, in the In sam- 61 See On the other hand, if it is so, the spectra of the microscopic fields probed by these muons (again, like in the N state) should be Gaussian. In Fig. After all, the Gaussian spectra of the microscopic fields implies that the Gaussian approximation, which was used to fit the spectra, is completely adequate and therefore the high-keV muons deliver correct information not only on B (as they always do Data for the induction B and for the rate σ in the pure S phase (i.e. at the depths where B = 0) for In sample are shown in Fig. The point is that, as was just shown, in both our samples at low temperature a statistically significant fraction of muons with E = 24.6 keV stop beyond the penetration layer. According to the standard theories, at these depths the superconducting material is totally inert (no fields, no currents). If so, the muon depolarization rate must be the same as σ(0), the rate in the S phase at H 0 = 0. The latter should be close to σ N , the rate in the N state, since σ(0) and σ N are mostly determined by the nuclear damping. Indeed, as seen from Fig. On the other hand, according to the standard theories at 0 < H 0 < H c1 the rate should be the same as σ(0), i.e. it should not depend on H 0 because the latter is supposed to be completely screened at that depth. The situation is right opposite in the MW model: the greater H 0 , the greater H(= H 0 in the given geometry) and therefore the greater the induced currents J i circulating all over the sample volume. Correspondingly, inhomogeneity of the microscopic fields increases with increasing H. If so, the depolarization rate of muons stopped at the depths where B = 0 should be increasing with increasing H 0 . This is exactly what we see in Figs. Historical experiments of Meissner and Ochsenfeld and of Rjabinin and Shubnikov, in which the Meissner effect was established, are reviewed. Theories of Gorter and Casimir and of F. and H. London addressing, respectively, thermodynamic and electromagnetic properties of superconductors in the Meissner state are reviewed as well. It is shown that due to significant difficulties in Londons' theory, the standard description of the electromagnetic properties of superconductors is inadequate and requires revision. A novel semi-classical micro-whirls model targeted to address this issue is developed and presented. The model is based on the concept of paired electrons obeying the Bohr-Sommerfeld quantization condition. Accordingly, each Cooper pair represents a microscopic circular current like the current due to orbiting electrons in atoms. The model is valid in the whole range of the superconducting state for samples of any shape and at any orientation of the applied field. A fundamentally new prediction of the model is that the S phase of superconducting ellipsoidal bodies in a static magnetic field is filled with ordered microscopic whirls of field induced currents caused by precessing Cooper pairs. The model is free from disadvantages of the standard theories, simultaneously reproducing their achievements. All properties predicting by the model can be verified experimentally. The model consistently describes equilibrium properties of superconductors, which includes the Meissner effect, persistency of induced currents, zero entropy of "superconducting" electrons (i.e. of the ensemble of Cooper pairs), the London rigidity principle for Cooper pairs, the flux quantization, the S/N interface energy of two signs and hence two type of superconductivity, and others. Some well-known experimental facts, such as the Meissner state in non-spheroidal samples and paramagnetism of the Abrikosov vortices, are consecutively described in the new model for the first time. Non-equilibrium properties of superconductors, e.g., the non-existence of the Hall effect and other properties associated with the total current are explained by the model as well. According to the new model, there are two kinds of non-dissipating currents in superconductors. There was a long lasting discussion about what is the prime property of superconductors, i.e. of the superconducting fraction of conduction electrons or the ensemble of Cooper pairs, either it is zero resistivity or zero induction Contrarily to the standard theories, the model predicts a strong field-dependent inhomogeneity of the induced microscopic currents in the bulk of the samples in the Meissner state. The existence of such currents follows from the requirement of the First law of thermodynamics and were foreseen by Hall One more way to verify the model can be as follows. According to the model, the sample in the Meissner state is filled with the ordered and parallel to H whirls of the field-induced microscopic circular currents with a frequency ω = eH/2mc, where H is the field intensity inside the sample (Eq. ( Note that a possible existence of such a diamagnetic resonance can be traced from measurements of the gyromagnetic ratio in superconducting samples by I. Kikoin and Goobar Regarding the model itself, its story is not complete yet, of course. One of remaining questions is the penetration depth at the surface of the samples in the MS and at the S/N interphase boundaries within the samples in the intermediate and the mixed states. Perhaps the main feature of the new model is its striking simplicity. As cited above, a model of such kind was anticipated by Fritz London based on his discovery of the rigidity principle. On the other hand, being semiclassical, the model can not and does not address specifics of the lattice polarization responsible for Cooper pairing. Finishing, we cite one more excerption from the book of F. London Thermodynamic argument of H. London. In 1947 Heinz London suggested a thermodynamic argument according to which the London penetration depth λ L should depend on the applied field H 0 Consider a long superconducting (for definiteness type-I) rod of radius λ L in a parallel field H 0 , i.e., a cylindrical sample in the MS. A strict thermodynamic relationship reads for this sample where S and M are the entropy and magnetic moment of the sample, respectively, and T is its temperature. In the London theory the magnetic moment of the chosen sample is (see footnote ( where V p and A sm stand for the volume of penetration layer and the sample surface area, respectively. Note that V p represents a kind of "excluded" volume possessing pretty peculiar properties: it does not contribute into the sample magnetic moment, but the current in this very volume sets this moment. Next, neglecting thermal expansion and taking into account that λ L depends on T , from Eq. ( Therefore, since (∂λ L /∂T ) H0 = 0 According to the two-fluid model, the entropy of a superconductor in the MS is caused by the change of n s 66 . Hence, the field dependence of S implies that n s depends on the field at constant temperature. Therefore, λ L (∼ 1/ √ n s ) depends on the field. This is the essence of H. London's argument. Recall that the fieldindependence of λ L is one of the base assumptions of the London theory. So, H. London's argument poses one more dilemma in this theory. This argument was discussed by Pippard By definitions of the condensation energy E c (T ) and the thermodynamic critical field H c (T ), the difference between the total free energies of the sample in the superconducting ( F s ) and the normal ( F n ) states in zero field is 68 where subscript 0 designates zero field; for the normal state F n0 = F n since the magnetic permeability in the normal state is unity by definition. Next, by definition of the total free energy 66 Actually, as we have seen, this is not quite a lawful extension of the two-fluid model, where ns changes only with temperature. 67 Those are the data at 1.5 K T 3 K. At these temperatures the reported variation of the effective penetration depth δλ L = ∆λ L /λ L at H 0 changing from zero to Hc decreases from about 0.023 at 1.5 K to 0.002 at 3 K. Above 3 K δλ L increases up to 0.027 near Tc. From Eq. (61) (after two more steps) it follows that δλ L increases with increasing temperature starting from zero at 0 K. On that ground Pippard concentrated on the data at T > 3 K. 68 In zero field F (T, H 0 ) = F (T, H) = F (T, B), where the last two functions are the Gibbs and Helmholtz free energies, which are appropriate for samples of the cylindrical and transverse geometries, respectively. The total free energy F is suitable for all geometries Since none of the terms on the right hand side depend on the field, the entropy of the superconducting sample in the MS does not depend on the field (like in all other diamagnetics). This implies that n s and therefore λ L are independent of the field. The same conclusion can be drawn immediately from Eq. ( Thus, thermodynamics applied to the London theory requires the field dependence of λ L , the agreement of which with experiment is, at least, questionable. On the other hand, in accordance with experiment, the pure thermodynamic approach excludes such a dependence. However, it may look like that the latter approach ignores the presence of the penetration layer where B = 0, which is confirmed in countless experiments. Let us now turn to the MW model. As one can see, contrarily to the London theory, there is no excluded volume. The currents induced in a unit volume just next to the sample boundary (at z near 0 and d) make the same contribution to the sample magnetic moment as the induced currents in the unit volume in any other part of the sample. Therefore, the magnetic moment per unit volume χ is the same everywhere inside the sample. Then, the sample magnetic moment is where H is the field intensity, η is the demagnetizing factor, which equals zero for the samples of cylindrical geometry, and V is the entire sample volume as it was in the pure thermodynamic approach. Hence, taking into account that r i is the root mean square value, implying that the currents in Fig. Finishing our discussion of H. London's argument or the second dilemma of the London theory, we see that its erroneousness, as in the case of the first dilemma, stems from the assumption of the screening current, which, in particular, leads to the appearance of an apparently nonphysical excluded volume in this theory. In general Hext = H 0 but it is always parallel to the surface of the sample in the MS due to continuity of the normal component of B at the sample boundary, i.e. the external field bends around the sample. Strictly speaking, a phrase like "superconducting samples with η = 1" has no sense because I in this case in not uniform and, therefore, η is undefined. As was first shown by Maxwell, superconductors with η = 1 do not exist Note that if the superconducting electrons are combined in Cooper pairs λ L remains unchanged. Recall that H is a magnetic field acting inside a body on a "native" (i.e. belonging to the body) charge. H does not include the field due to the charge in question, whereas the induction B (the average microscopic field caused by all native charges) includes it. On that reason a "foreign" (probing) charge always experiences the action of B, but not H The idea of the field induced circumferential surface current appeared well before the Meissner-Ochsenfeld effect was discovered and the London theory proposed. E.g., it was used by Lorentz This follows from the Poisson theorem and in this case also from the continuity of Ht A statement of such kind can be found in some textbooks, however it is incorrect because it contradicts to the boundary condition for Ht (continuity) which is used to calculate g This formula can be obtained without any calculations since in the theory superconducting electrons are active only in the penetration layer. The zero spin of paired electrons follows from the requirement of thermodynamics, since the system of units with zero spin has lesser free energy. The same provides the thermodynamic justification of the profitability of the paired state of conduction electrons since the pairing makes possible to null the spin. At zero temperature ξ corresponds to the Pippard/BCS coherence length ξ 0 , which is close to the GL coherence length at this temperature stable. diamagnetic response. This can be also viewed as follows. In the uniform magnetic field all pairs precess synchronously because precession is a motion (the only one of a kind) occurring without inertia. Then, since μ 0 stays unchanged, orientations of the pairs' magnetic momenta with respect to each other stay unchanged either, meaning that μ 0 remains zero. This follows from the validity of Eq. (19) at H 0 = 0 and the uniformity of the field H within the sample. Note the exact match with the classical definition of A B as a macroscopic mean of the vector potential The flux associated with each elementary hole is the flux passing through an "empty" blue cylinder plus an area around it where B decays from B = H to zero. Eq. (54) is derived assuming that superconductivity vanishes completely at H c2 , i.e. neglecting the filamentary state occurring at H c2 < H 0 < H c3 In this work the type-II superconductivity was solidly established for the first time. Type-I to type-II conversion can be also achieved by introducing structural defects. In such case the opposite conversion is possible by annealing. A perfect discussion of the latter is available in Interpreting the magnetization curve of the ring Shoenberg distinguishes the total current and what he calls "surface" current. In both works the gyromagnetic ratio was measured using a resonance technique, in which the sample oscillates in resonance with the oscillating applied field. In general case, i.e., for any ellipsoidal sample in an arbitrary oriented field this relationship is (∇ H S) T = (∂M/∂T ) H . This is another strange property of Vp, which is excluded from the production of magnetic moment.