We clarify universal critical properties of delocalization-localization transitions in threedimensional (3D) unitary and orthogonal classes with particle-hole and/or chiral symmetries (classes AIII, BDI, D, C and CI). We first introduce tight-binding models on cubic lattice that belong to these five nonstandard symmetry classes respectively. Unlike the Bogoliubov-de Gennes Hamiltonian for superconductors, all the five models have finite areas of Fermi surfaces in the momentum space in the clean limit. Thereby, the scaling theory of the Anderson transition guarantees the presence of the delocalization-localization transitions at finite disorder strength in these models. Based on this expectation, we carry out extensive transfer matrix calculations of the Lyapunov exponents for zero-energy eigenstates of the disordered tight-binding models with quasi-one-dimensional geometry. Near the Anderson transition point, the correlation length diverges with a universal critical exponent ν. Using finite-size scaling analysis of the localization length, we determine the critical exponent of the transitions and scaling function of the (normalized) localization length in the three non-standard unitary symmetry classes: νAIII = 1.06 ± 0.02, νD = 0.87 ± 0.03, and νC = 0.996 ± 0.012. Our result of the class C is consistent with a previous study of classical network model [M. Ortuño et al, Phys. Rev. Lett. 102, 070603 (2009)]. The critical exponents of the two non-standard orthogonal classes are estimated as νCI = 1.17 ± 0.02 and νBDI = 1.12 ± 0.06. Our result of the class CI is consistent with another previous study of a lattice model, while the exponent of the class BDI is at variance with the previous evaluation of nodal Dirac ring model [X. L. The quantum interference of two counter-propagating waves form a standing wave that does not move in space, suppressing particle diffusions completely in random media. After Anderson's seminal proposal of the localization of electron wavefunctions in disordered solids The classification of Hermitian random matrices leads to ten symmetry classes known as the Altland-Zirnbauer (AZ) classes. They consist of standard Wigner-Dyson symmetry classes (A, AI, AII), three chiral symmetry classes (AIII, BDI, CII) * indicates the values estimated in this paper, whereas -indicates yet to be determined. cle wavefunctions in disordered superconductors In this article, we clarify the universal critical exponents and scaling functions associated with the localization length in the 3D Anderson transition of the symmetry classes AIII, BDI, C, D and CI, using transfer matrix method. The chiral class AIII has topological phases classified by integer winding number in d = 1, 3 dimension(s). The study of the class AIII was rather established both numerically and analytically in 1D In this paper, we propose two-band tight-binding models on the cubic lattice that belong to symmetry classes AIII, BDI C, D and CI respectively, which enable precise simulation studies of the 3D Anderson transition. Critical exponents of the Anderson transition in the 3D classes AIII and D are estimated for the first time, whose values are distinct from those of the other known symmetry classes. Our estimates of exponents for the classes C and CI agree with previous works of a classical network model Let us first introduce the following two-orbital tightbinding model on the cubic lattice that is shared by all the three unitary models studied in this paper: Here i ≡ (i x , i y , i z ) specifies the cubic-lattice site; e x ≡ (1, 0, 0), e y ≡ (0, 1, 0), and e z ≡ (0, 0, 1). The lattice constant is taken to be the unit length. a and b are the two orbitals: d, d = a, b. The nearest neighbor (NN) hopping within the x-y plane is an inter-orbital hopping t ⊥ , and the NN hopping along z direction is an intra-orbital hopping t . ±∆ is an onsite energy for the a, b orbitals respectively, and i is a random potential independently distributed on each lattice site. In numerical simulations, we choose the distribution of the random potential to be uniform: i ∈ [-W/2, W/2], i j = δ ij W 2 /12. The tight binding Hamiltonian has the following chiral symmetries (Eqs. (2,3)) and particle-hole symmetries (Eqs. (4),(5)): with are the Pauli matrices in the a, b orbital space and σ 0 is the unit matrix. The combination of particle-hole symmetries and chiral symmetries gives the time-reversal symmetries, e.g. ) ix+iy iσ z commutes with H 0 , where the tight-binding Hamiltonian can be block-diagonalized in a basis of the real-valued eigenvectors of P 1 P 2 . Since P 1 C 1 and P 1 C 2 commute with P 1 P 2 , P 1 C 1 and P 1 C 2 are block-diagonalized in the same basis, too. Accordingly, the two blocks of the tightbinding Hamiltonian are time-reversal symmetric. Since (P 1 C 1 ) * (P 1 C 1 ) = +1, H 0 belongs to the orthogonal class. On the basis of such H 0 , we will next introduce other parts of the hopping terms, which lead to the three unitary models belonging to the three non-standard symmetry classes one by one. To break the two particle-hole symmetries, we add the following nearest neighbor hoppings within the x-y plane; The model respects the chiral symmetry in Eq. ( where the two bands are particle-hole symmetric under the translation of the momentum by (0, π, π). The upper (lower) energy band forms an electron (hole) pocket at E = 0 around the zone boundary (center) axis of (k y , k z ) = (π, π) ((0, 0)) (Fig. To break the chiral symmetries and one of the two particle-hole symmetries (Eq. ( The model respects the particle-hole symmetry in Eq. ( A finite t closes the band gap at E = 0, where electron and hole pockets appears at k z = 0 and π, respectively, as shown in Fig. To construct a class C model from Eq. ( The model respects the particle-hole symmetry Eq. ( The Fermi surface at E = 0 is shown in Fig. The above models respect only one of the four (particle-hole or chiral) symmetries, Eqs. ( In this chapter, we introduce two-orbital tight-binding models that belong to two orthogonal classes CI and BDI with chiral and particle-hole symmetries. The two models are real-valued and symmetric, hence chiral and particle-hole symmetries are equivalent. In the following two models, the random potential i takes the same uniform distribution as in Eq. It has only the following particle-hole (chiral) symmetry, with Note that there is no other particle-hole symmetries. Namely, C 3 must be diagonal with respect to the cubic-lattice site index, because of the on-site random terms. From the on-site term, it has to take a form of either σ 2 or σ 3 in the orbital space. From the nearestneighbor hoppings within the x-y plane, it comes with a U(1) phase of (-1) ix+iy e iθ (iz) . From the hopping along z, such C 3 is uniquely determined by (-1) ix+iy σ 2 , hence the model belongs to the symmetry class CI. In this paper, we take ∆ = t ⊥ = t = 1, t = 2. The Fermi surface at E = 0 is shown in Fig. The class BDI model is given by It has only the following chiral (particle-hole) symmetry; with P T 3 = P 3 . Namely, from the first two terms of Eq. ( The scaling theory is at the heart of studying quantum criticality of the Anderson localization. On approaching the critical point, various physical quantities diverge according to a power law with the universal critical exponent ν. One of them is the correlation length ξ ∼ |x -x c | -ν , which in a localized phase, characterises a decay length of a density-density correlation function in disordered medium. Here x represents the coordinate in a certain parameter space of the system and x c stands for the critical point. To determine the critical exponent, we calculate a quasi-one-dimensional (Q1D) localization length λ of a single-particle wavefunction amplitude, using transfer matrix method In such geometry, all the eigenstates of the disordered Hamiltonian are localized in z direction, |ψ| ∼ exp(-|z -z 0 |/λ), with the localization length λ. The scaling argument around the critical point suggests that the localization length normalized by the linear dimension of the cross-section, Λ ≡ λ/L or Γ = Λ -1 , must be scale-invariant (independent of L) at the critical point (see Fig. where f (x) is a universal scaling function for the normalized localization length. ξ(W ) is the correlation length that depends on disorder strength: In practical calculations, one often encounters deviations of the data sets from the single-parameter scaling form. The deviations are attributed to finite-size effects associated with irrelevant scaling variables around the critical point in the framework of a renormalization group (RG) theory of general critical phenomena. In the RG theory, generic continuous phase transition is characterized by a saddle-point fixed point of RG equations for a certain effective theory with multiple system parameters. When high-energy degrees of freedom are integrated out, lowenergy system parameters run away from the fixed point only along one direction in the parameter space, while they flow into the fixed point along all the other directions. The unstable direction around the fixed point is characterized by relevant scaling variable, while its complementary directions are characterized by a number of irrelevant scaling variables. Scaling dimension of the relevant scaling variable is positive and it defines the universal critical exponent, 1/ν. Scaling dimensions of the irrelevant scaling variables are all negative, where the irrelevant variable with the largest negative scaling dimension is the least irrelevant. Empirically, we attribute the deviation of the numerical data from the single-parameter scaling to the least irrelevant scaling variable The scaling argument that includes the effect of the least irrelevant scaling variable modifies the single-parameter scaling function form into where w = (W -W c )/W c , and 1/ν > 0 and -y < 0 are scaling dimensions of the relevant scaling variable u 1 and the least irrelevant scaling variable u 2 , respectively. The omission of the irrelevant scaling variables with smaller negative scaling dimensions are justified a posterior by large y obtained from the fitting (see TABLE To obtain the exponents ν, y as well as the scaling function f (x) ≡ F (x 1/ν , 0), we expand the scaling function F as Taylor series of its arguments When the system is close to the critical point, the scaling variables can be also expanded in small w To fix the ambiguity of fitting, we at a 1,0 = a 0,1 = 1 Here Λ i , σ i , F i are the numerical mean value of Λ, numerical standard error of Λ, and a fitting value of Λ from the polynomial fitting function. They are given at every data point specified by L and W with the data point in- The numbers after ± sign are the standard deviation determined from 1000 fittings of synthetic data sets. The values of the evaluated critical exponents in the three non-standard symmetry classes with broken timereversal symmetry are distinct from each other and also from previously evaluated critical exponents in other symmetry classes. The symmetry class C in 3D has been studied by network model of both quantum systems In Fig. In conclusion, we have clarified the universal critical exponents and scaling functions associated with the Q1D localization length of the 3D conventional localizationdelocalization transition in three non-standard unitary symmetry classes (the chiral unitary classes AIII, the BdG class D and C), and in two non-standard orthogonal classes (the chiral orthogonal class BDI, the BdG class CI). We introduced two-orbital tight-binding models on the cubic lattice that belong to these symmetry classes. In these models, the particle-hole degrees of freedom in usual BdG Hamiltonians for superconductors On the contrary, our exponent of the class BDI model is significantly different from a previous evaluation in the nodal Dirac semimetal (NDS) model 