Despite decades of research, no frequency tunable sources span the terahertz gap between 0.3 -3 THz. By introducing methyl fluoride (CH 3 F) as a new gain medium for a quantum cascade laser-pumped molecular laser (QPML), we demonstrate continuous-wave lasing from more than 120 discrete transitions spanning the range from 0.25 to 1.3 THz. Thanks to its large permanent dipole moment and large rotational constants, methyl fluoride (CH 3 F) as a QPML gain medium combines a lower threshold, larger power efficiency, and wider tuning range than other molecules. These key features of the CH 3 F QPML, operated in a compact cavity at room temperature, pave the way to a versatile THz source to bridge the THz gap. As terahertz (THz) technologies mature and create exciting applications in radio astronomy A new source of widely tunable THz radiation has been recently demonstrated: the Quantum Cascade Laser (QCL) pumped molecular laser (QPML) We have previously demonstrated the widely tunable QPML concept by using an external cavity QCL as a pump source and nitrous oxide (N 2 O) as a molecular gain medium, achieving low power continuous-wave laser emission for 39 transitions with discrete line tunability from 0.25 to 0.95 THz Here we introduce methyl fluoride (CH 3 F) as the most promising gas-phase QPML molecular gain medium to date, by demonstrating lasing from more than 120 of the 315 possible lines, spanning the frequency range 0.25 -1.3 THz, always producing at least 10 times more output power than from the N 2 O QPML operating at the nearest emission frequency. Laser emission beyond 1 THz is reliably achieved thanks to larger rotational constants and lower lasing threshold at the optimal working pressure. The low lasing threshold and the high power efficiency of the CH 3 F QPML permitted by the molecule's large permanent dipole moment makes it suitable for applications even with the QCL pump emitting as little as 50 mW. Thanks to its compactness, efficiency, wide tuning range, and room temperature operation, the methyl fluoride QPML has the potential to become a key technology to bridge the THz gap from 200 GHz up to 2 THz for applications in imaging, security, or communications. Methyl fluoride is a prolate symmetric top molecule (see Fig. total angular momentum, and K, representing the projection of the angular momentum along the main symmetry axis. The energies of the rotational states within a given vibrational energy band, up to the 4-th order in J and K, are given by 17 where B and A are rotational constants, and D J , D JK , and D K are centrifugal distortion constants, unique for each vibrational energy band. A more thorough polynomial development is given in the supplementary information (SI). As methyl fluoride is a prolate symmetric top molecule, its rotational constant A (≈ 150 GHz) is larger than B ( ≈ 25 GHz) Our QCL frequency can be tuned across the lowest energy ν 3 vibrational band of CH 3 F 16 , whose IR spectrum is shown in Fig. ). P-branch IR transitions could have been pumped too, but they are so similar to R-branch transitions, except for their frequency, that they were not considered here. The number of allowed IR transitions between a given J L → J U increases with increasing J L , spanning K = 0, 1, ...J L with frequencies that separate quadratically with K because of centrifugal distortion (equation 2), as can be seen in Fig. for R-branch transitions and to K 2 J(J+1) for Q-branch transitions A rotational population inversion can occur within the ν 3 = 1 vibrational state between levels with quantum numbers J U and J U -1. Because the emission frequency from equation 2 depends on K, for a given J U there are J U possible laser transitions (K = 0 to J U -1) for R-branch pumping and J U -1 (K = 1 to J U -1) for Q-branch pumping. It is this increasing number of discrete laser lines with increasing J U , coupled with the ability to pump either R-or Q-branch transitions with a single QCL to maximize power, that makes CH 3 F an attractive gain medium for high tunability, achieved by selectively pumping ro-vibrational transitions of different K values. The THz emission power and lasing threshold of the CH 3 F QPML, which can be estimated using a comprehensive model Although actual laser power and threshold sensitively depend on cavity geometry and loss, the simple model thereby indicates that one may ascertain the relative efficacy of the allowed laser transitions when pumped by P, Q, or Rbranch transitions by comparing their relative IR absorption strengths. For thermally populated rotational energy levels (i.e.F(J, K) < kT ) in ν 0 , these can be easily calculated (see SI) using equation 1 and the known degeneracies to estimate the fractional occupation of J L , K L , multiplied by the branching ratio for the considered IR pumping branch (P, Q, or R). Likewise, the relative power efficiency may be estimated by multiplying the relative IR absorption by J U to account for the frequency dependence of the laser transition, while the relative lasing threshold may be estimated by multiplying the relative IR absorption by the branching ratio for the lasing transition. For the CH 3 F QPML, the efficiency and the lasing threshold for many of these lines are compared for both R-and Q-branch pumping in Figs. Figure The QCL pump beam was coupled into the THz laser cavity through the pinhole in the output coupler using an antireflective coated ZnSe lens to focus the beam into the pinhole. A 2 mm thick ZnSe window mounted at the Brewster angle was used to maximize the amount of QCL power injected into the vacuum-tight gas laser cavity. A wire grid polarizer mounted on a rotational stage was used as a variable attenuator for the linearly polarized QCL beam. The injected IR power was measured by replacing the QPML rear tuning mirror with a ZnSe window and measuring the pump beam power transmitted through the THz cavity. After passing through the coupling optics, the maximum power transmitted through the cavity was measured to be about 150 mW at 1065 cm -1 . The off-axis parabolic mirror (OAP) used to collect the generated THz laser radiation had a hole drilled along the focal axis through which the pump beam was coupled into the THz laser cavity. A polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) lens blocked any residual IR signal and focused the collected THz beam onto a Schottky diode detector, a Golay cell, or a heterodyne receiver. The THz output power was measured using a calibrated calorimeter-style power meter (VDI PM5B). The theoretically predicted output power of a CH 3 F QPML pumped by a 150 mW QCL with a gas pressure of 30 mTorr is plotted in Fig. Laser emission was obtained experimentally by tuning the QCL into coincidence with a Q-or R-branch ro-vibrational transition of the gain medium, and then by tuning the cavity resonance into coincidence with the lasing rotational transition by adjusting the cavity length with a differential micrometer screw (Newport DM17-4, 100 nm fine sensitivity) of a translation stage. Emission was achieved on lines between 0.25 THz to 1.3 THz by pumping ro-vibrational transitions of CH 3 F originating from a level with quantum number J L spanning from 5 to 25, and various K numbers. Of the 315 possible lasing lines over this range, pumping was attempted and emission was observed for at least 120 of them (shown as red lines on Fig. The output power of the THz laser emission depends on a combination of many parameters, including the choice of the gain medium, the IR pumping efficiency, and the laser cavity design Comparing different laser transitions, the largest THz output power occurs when the highest population inversion is obtained, determined primarily by the absorption strength of the pumped transition and the lasing frequency to pump frequency ratio. Consequently, the output power will vary significantly with THz emission frequency, as shown in Figure The laser power collection efficiency through the ZnSe Brewster window, the off-axis parabolic mirror, and the PTFE lens was experimentally estimated at most at 10%, which corresponds to a total emitted power of at least 130 μW at 604 GHz and at least 95 μW at 1.055 THz. The normalized power efficiency (defined by the power efficiency divided by the ratio of the emitted photon energy by the pump photon energy) is 4.7% at 604 GHz and 2% at 1.055 THz. These power efficiencies compare favorably with the performance of commercial OPFIR lasers, and greater efficiency approaching the theoretical maximum of 50% is possible with improved cavity design and alignment The estimated emitted THz power as a function of pump power for the 1.055 THz transition is plotted in Fig. In summary, we have shown that by using a widely tunable external cavity quantum cascade laser to pump gaseous methyl fluoride, a prolate symmetric top molecule with a large dipole moment and rotational constant, created a widely tunable THz lasing over many lasing lines can be achieved. It is this wide tunability, coupled with its low threshold, ability to pump either R-or Q-branch transitions to maximize power, good conversion efficiency, high operating frequency, and compact size, that make QPML's in general, and the CH 3 F QPML in particular, a leap-ahead source technology for gen-erating THz radiation See Supplement 1 for additional details about the experimental and theoretical work presented in this manuscript. in K quantum number, while the change in J number ∆J must be 0, -1 or 1 The Equation 1 and 2 of the main text simply approximate the rotational energy levels of the CH 3 F molecule. For the sake of simplicity we only introduced in the main text the development up to the 4-th order in powers of J and K. However the rotational constants for methyl fluoride have been experimentally fitted up to the 8-th order in power of J and K 2 . Sextic and hexic constants are required to properly calculate the vibrational transition energy for the molecules. The following equation is used to calculate energies of rotational states within a vibrational energy band up to the 8-th order in J and K 1,2 : where J and K are rotational quantum numbers, B and A are rotational constants, D J , D JK , and D K , H J , H JJK , H JKK , H K , L J , L JJJK , L JJKK ,L JKKK and L K are centrifugal distortion constants. Rotational and centrifugal distortion constants are unique for each vibrational energy band. As methyl fluoride is a prolate symmetric top molecule its rotational constant A (≈ 150 GHz) is always larger than B ( ≈ 25 GHz) A more complete schematic of the experimental setup than the one shown in Fig. The pressure in the laser cell is controlled similar to the way described in our previous work In order to achieve laser emission, first the laser cavity is filled with CH 3 F at the desired pressure, then the QCL is tuned to a desired gas absorption line by setting the correct drive current, grating position, and laser temperature in the QCL controller. The precise drive conditions of the QCL are achieved by monitoring the transmission of the QCL through a reference gas cell containing 50 mTorr of CH 3 F. A table of all individual line frequencies measured with the hetereodyne mixers is given in Table When the back mirror of the cavity is removed and replaced by a vacuum-tight, anti-reflection coated Zinc Selenide window, one can study how much light is absorbed by the gas as a function of the infrared absorption that is due to the narrow linewidth of the QCL relative to the bandwidth of the IR transition (the Doppler broadened full width half maximum at 1050 cm -1 is 67 MHz, the QCL linewidth is estimated around 1 MHz). This strong pump saturation prevents our laser cavity for reaching higher output power at low pressures. This limitation can be overcome by using a better optimized cavity geometry and different pumping conditions, something that will be an objective of future work. The mid-infrared QCL can be continuously tuned around the peak absorption of the gas IR transition. Tuning of the QCL into the transition is typically achieved by tuning the laser temperature The laser linewidth can be measured experimentally, using the same heterodyne receiver that was used to recover each line frequency. In practice the linewidth stability seemed limited by the mechanical stability of the cavity. The smallest measured linewidth was recovered for one of the lowest frequency lasing lines measured (around 402.9 GHz, the J = 8 → 7, K = 4 transition). The The laser line can be tuned within the molecular gain bandwidth by a cavity pulling effect, as shown in Fig. At 604 GHz, the mirror travels by 250 μm, corresponding to half the wavelength, as the cavity is scanned between two consecutive longitudinal Fabry-Perot modes. Therefore, at this frequency, a mirror positioning accuracy of 1 μm results in a frequency accuracy of the cavity resonance of about 300/250=1.2 MHz. Manual cavity length tuning was performed with a differential micrometer screw (Newport DM17-4) with a 100 nm sensitivity of the fine adjustment range, thus corresponding to 120 kHz frequency sensitivity for a 600 GHz laser emission. As the laser frequency increases, the frequency accuracy offered by the mirror tuning technique decreases due to a shorter laser wavelength. A 1 THz, the sensitivity offered by the differential micrometer screw now corresponds to a 200 kHz frequency range. The tuning range presented in Fig. In the main text, the THz emission power has been estimated using a enhanced model ? that incorporates effects of pump saturation, dipole-dipole collisions and mutiple passes of the infrared the pump in the laser cell. In comparison, the previously reported simple model expression where α IR is the IR absorption of the gain medium at the pump frequency ν IR , α cell represents the total THz losses of the laser cavity, T is the output coupling fraction, P QCL is the QCL pump power absorbed by the gain medium (which corresponds to the injected IR power minus the power absorbed by THz cavity walls), and P th is the threshold power as expressed below: where R cell is the radius of the THz cavity, u is the average absolute molecular velocity, and J L |μ|J U is the transition dipole matrix element of the lasing rotational transition. The lasing transition dipole element can be expressed as a function of the molecular permanent dipole moment μ 0 and the J and K quantum numbers 1 : In the simple model given in equation S3, the THz power is expressed as a function of the absorption coefficient α I R, which can be calculated as follows: where L is the cavity length, and α 0 is the IR absorption coefficient for a given roto-vibrational transition and is proportional to the square of the transition dipole matrix element 4 : In the case where either the cell is short or the absorption strength is small, we have α 0 L 1, which leads to α IR ≈ α 0 . The absorption coefficient α 0 strongly depends on the population of energy levels, which is determined by the Boltzmann distribution and the molecular degeneracy. The value of the dipole matrix element of an IR roto-vibrational transition depends on the type of the transition (P, Q, or R) and the initial and final quantum numbers 1 : 4 × (2J + 1), if K > 0 and K is a multiple of 3 2 × (2J + 1), otherwise (S13) The normalized power efficiency is then calculated as follows for Q and R branch, respectively: the relative IR absorption line strength is multiplied by the relative lasing frequency as a function of the pumped quantum number J L and K η Q (J L , K) = (J L )L(J L , J L , K) η R (J L , K) = (J L + 1)L(J L , J L + 1, K) The normalized lasing threshold is calculated for Q and R branch respectively, by taking the inverse of the line strength and the lasing matrix element as a function of the pumped quantum number J L and K P. Chevalier, A. Amirzhan, F. Wang, M. Piccardo, S. G. Johnson, F. Capasso, and H. O. Everitt, "Widely tunable compact terahertz gas lasers," Science 366, 856-860 (2019). P. W. Atkins and R. S. Friedman, Molecular quantum mechanics (Oxford university press, 2011).