Fermi liquid theory forms the basis for our understanding of the majority of metals, which is manifested in the description of transport properties that the electrical resistivity goes as temperature squared in the limit of zero temperature. However, the observations of strange metal states in various quantum materials , notably high-temperature superconductors 1-10 , bring this spectacularly successful theoretical framework into crisis. Distinct from the quadratic temperature dependence of the electron scattering rate (1/τ) for ordinary metals, strange metals exhibit resistivity that scales linearly with temperature, indicating that the independent quasiparticle approximation in existing theoretical treatment is no longer valid. When 1/τ hits its limit, kBT/ħ where ħ is the reduced Planck's constant, T represents absolute temperature and kB denotes Boltzmann's constant, Planckian dissipation The conventional theory of metallic transport predicts that the electrical resistivity ρ(T) at low temperatures should vary as a function of T due to the dominance of electron-electron scattering. However, this common understanding has encountered formidable conceptual challenges in accounting for some recent discoveries. One emerged soon after the discovery of high-temperature superconductors, in the form of a linear temperature dependence of their normal state resistivity over an exceptionally wide range of temperature. Termed by Anderson as one of the central dogmas for condensed matter physics Another challenging discovery is the anomalous metallic state in quasi-2D superconducting materials that appears over a range of magnetic field or normal state resistance Here, in a break with the existing pattern that strange metal states are exclusive to systems of fermions, we show that this unusual metallic behavior emerges in a bosonic host and thus the behavior transcends particle statistics. The observed T-linear resistance in a series of nanopatterned YBCO thin films involves clear bosonic transport as evidenced by the period of oscillations in their magnetoresistance. Near the quantum critical point of their superconductor-anomalous metal transition, the slope of the T-linear resistance α of the current YBCO strange metal reaches a maximum α ≈ h/2e • 1/T . This apparent bound resembles the one in fermionic systems α ≈ h/2e • 1/T which corresponds to the Planckian dissipation limit and defines the strange metal in their phase diagram. Moreover, the magnetoresistance is linear in this regime with a slope that appears bounded by β ≈ h/2e • 1/B * (B* is a characteristic magnetic field), intimating that a magnetic field introduces an independent and distinct scattering process that is not apparent in fermionic strange metals. Interestingly, the ratio of the slopes α / β appears only determined by fundamental constants 2μ /k , indicating scale-invariant behaviors. Our study represents a game-changing step in broadly advancing the conceptual understanding of the mysterious physics of the strange metals. The present studies were conducted on a series of high-Tc superconducting YBCO films nanopatterned with a triangular array of holes. A series of these films with a range of normal state resistances R , measured just above the superconducting transition temperature, were produced using reactive ion etching (RIE) technique As shown by the sheet resistance as a function of temperature measurements R (T) in Fig. Having detected a regime with T-linear resistance, we now turn to investigate its slope. Denoting it as in fermionic systems Information about the charge carriers producing the linear resistance comes from the low magnetic field magneto-resistance. Below T , the magnetoresistances of the nanopatterned thin films (Fig. The T-linear resistance persists in magnetic fields (B > 1 T) beyond the magnetoresistance oscillations, as shown in Fig. The linear dependencies of the sheet resistance on T and B indicates that: over a wide temperature and magnetic field range. Replotting the R (T, B) as (R (T, B) -R (0,0))/T vs. leads to the collapse onto a single curve from 3 K to 30 K as shown for f4 in Fig. To depict the region over which the scaling appears to hold, we plot 1/R • d R dT ⁄ on a color scale on R versus T axes, as shown in Fig. The present work uncovers a distinctive bosonic metallic transport behavior that deviates from the previous boson localization paradigm of the superconductor-insulator transition in which metallic behavior appears with a critical resistance R at a critical point of a tuning parameter like magnetic field or normal state resistance. Like the anomalous metal state, this strange metal state exists over a range of tuning parameters with residual resistances far below R . The primary characteristics that distinguish this bosonic transport behavior are 1) a resistance that changes linearly with temperature with a slope that appears bounded by a quantum of resistance and is inversely proportional to an energy scale characterizing the ground state of the charge carriers, 2) a magnetoresistance that changes linearly with magnetic field as implied by the data collapse in Fig. Because these bosonic transport characteristics are similar to the fermionic strange metals Reminiscent of Planckian dissipation ħ τ ⁄ ≈ k T, it implies a magnetic field damping rate ħ τ ⁄ ≈ γμ B, namely, the type-II Planckian dissipation. This conjecture relies on the experimental observation that γ = * , which is remarkably close to the Landau g factor. Viewing this novel behavior within the context of the natural model for these arrays, the quantum XY model with dissipation provides an explanation for why this novel behavior has not been observed before. The dissipative processes involve the coupling of the bosons to low-lying fermionic excitations of this d-wave system Future measurements of the frequency dependent conductivity show promise for direct insights into the dynamics of this system that could reveal the origins of these linear transport phenomena. A measurement of the Drude width can be particularly interesting as it has been proposed to scale with the entropy in models proposed to apply to matter in many forms including cold atoms, the solid-state materials and quark gluon plasmas. In addition, as dissipation induced decoherence processes are important in quantum computing, our results provide a platform for further study of the dissipative quantum system. The high-Tc YBa2Cu3O7-δ superconducting films were epitaxial grown on (001)-oriented substrates SrTiO3 in a dc magnetron sputtering system. The films were grown in an argon/oxygen (ratio 2:1) mixture under the working pressure of 30 Pa at T ≈ 700°C, with a very low growth rate (~0.8 nm min -1 ). Then, an anodic aluminum oxide (AAO) template of 200 nm thick was transferred to YBCO thin film. By reactive ion etching, the AAO pattern of a triangular array of holes with a 70-nm diameter and 103-nm period is duplicated onto the YBCO films. The etching recipe includes 30 sccm CHF3, 40 sccm Ar, 20 mTorr (1 Torr ≈ 133 Pa) pressure, 200 W rf power, 1800W inductive coupling plasma (ICP). The YBCO films can be tuned from superconducting state to an insulating state by increasing the etching time from 20s to 160s The in-plane resistance and magnetoresistance were measured with a standard four-probe in a commercial Physical Property Measurement System (PPMS, Quantum Design) with magnetic fields up to 9 T. The size of YBCO samples for the measurements is typically 1 cm × 1 cm. For the transport measurements, the excitation electrical current as low as possible (5 nA~500 nA) was applied in the ab-plane while the magnetic field was applied along the c-axis. The sweeping rate is typically 0.04 T min -1 for measuring the magnetoresistance quantum oscillations. The bounding phases are the anomalous metal and bosonic insulator. The blue arrow stands for the SC order parameter. The ordered state (left), which is ordered both in space and time, corresponds to SC state. The quasi-ordered phase (middle), which is spatially ordered but disordered in time, corresponds to AM state. The disordered phase (right), which is disordered both in space and time, corresponds to insulator state. Near the critical point of quasi-ordered to disordered state, there is a quantum critical region where there is exotic T-linear resistance, corresponding to the bosonic strange metal. Supplementary Fig.5|The slope of magnetoresistance β as a function of temperature: f3 (a), f2 (b), f1 (c) and f0 (d).