Magnesium (Mg) has the lowest density of all structural metals and has excellent potential for wide use in structural applications. While pure Mg has inferior mechanical properties; the addition of further elements at various concentrations has produced alloys with enhanced mechanical performance and corrosion resistance. An important consequence of adding such elements is that the saturated Mg matrix can locally decompose to form solute clusters and intermetallic particles, often referred to as precipitates. Controlling the shape, number density, volume fraction, and spatial distribution of solute clusters and precipitates significantly impacts the alloy's plastic response. Conversely, plastic deformation during thermomechanical processing can dramatically impact solute clustering and precipitation. In this paper, we first discuss how solute atoms, solute clusters, and precipitates can improve the mechanical properties of Mg alloys. We do so by primarily comparing three alloy systems: Mg-Al, Mg-Zn, and Mg-Y-based alloys. In the second part, we provide strategies for optimizing such microstructures by controlling nucleation and growth of solute clusters and precipitates during thermomechanical processing. In the third part, we briefly highlight how one can enable inverse design of Mg alloys by a more robust Integrated Computational Materials Design (ICMD) approach. . Furthermore, it has a high specific strength, making it a great candidate for light weight applications, such as aerospace, defense, biomedical, and transportation. However, in its pure elemental state, it is too weak to be used for practical structural applications. This issue is typically addressed by alloying the pure material with small fractions of other elements (< 15 wt%) to Mg. On average, Mg alloys are about two-thirds as dense as aluminum (Al) alloys and only a quarter as dense as steel. Industrial applications of Mg include aircraft fuselage frames, automobiles, light bicycles, and -due to Mg's great biocompatibility-bioabsorbable implants The advantages of manufacturing lighter structural parts from Mg are evident; reducing the weight of aircraft or rockets increases their range or payload; lighter cars correlate directly with reduced fuel consumption; lighter armor plating decreases the weight a soldier must carry in the field, thereby enhancing mobility. Additionally, Mg production consumes less energy than Al production, and Mg's abundance makes it a more reliable long-term resource. However, many challenges remain in making Mg-based materials a viable alternative to Al and steels. In contrast to Al-based materials (and steels), Mg alloys show poor hardening with conventional thermal aging techniques, see Fig. This discrepancy is in part due to fundamental differences in the crystallographic structure between Al and Mg. In comparison to the cubic crystal symmetry of Al, with 12 equivalent slip systems, Mg -which shows a hexagonal close-packed symmetry (HCP) -has four different slip variants: basal a , prismatic a , pyramidal a , and pyramidal c + a (pyramidal I & II). These distinct slip systems have very dissimilar critical resolved shear stress (CRSS) values, which vary independently with temperature, as shown in Fig. Additionally, the lack of five independent slip systems and the inability of basal dislocations to accommodate arbitrary distortions results in Mg alloys not being able to fulfill the von Mises flow criterion Fig. Twinning and slip (as shown in Fig. One alloys Mg with different elements at varying concentrations, while the other subjects the alloys to different techniques and routes of thermomechanical processing The current work focuses on the use of solute atoms, solute clusters, and precipitates to boost a material's resistance to plastic deformation and, more importantly, on our ability to form fine clusters and nanoscale precipitates in Mg alloys by leveraging mechanical deformation. Consider a Mg alloy which was fully solutionized through a thermal process at an elevated temperature. Quenching, followed by aging of this alloy, promotes the formation of precipitates on specific habit planes. The effectiveness of the thermal processing can be measured through aging curves, which show how the alloy's hardness and mechanical strength gradually rise as a function of time at the annealing or aging temperature. The time coinciding with a maximum in hardness or strength is termed the "peak-aged" condition; longer times lead to a decrease in hardness and strength. An examination of the resulting microstructure at the peak-aged condition reveals numerous precipitates. However, we claim that, in general, the size, shape, and distribution of these precipitates can be improved through the use of deformation in order to optimize hardness and strength. To assess the quality of the precipitate (-size) distribution and frequency, we begin by examining how solute atoms, solute clusters, and precipitates strengthen an alloy. Consider a case in which an alloyed sample is being mechanically deformed, resulting in a set of (mostly) basal dislocations traveling in a microstructure that contains obstacles, such as solute atoms, clusters, and precipitates. A moving dislocation encounters the solute atoms routinely within a maze of clusters and/or precipitates. The concentration of solute atoms, and the distribution and alignment of the clusters and precipitates determine how well these obstacles impeded the dislocation glide. Merely considering dislocations bowing around or shearing individual clusters and particles is insufficient. In addition, studies have shown that fine solute clusters and high densities of nanoscale precipitates can strengthen Mg alloys in ways that could not have been easily predicted from our knowledge of the effect of larger precipitates In their reviews of the Integrated Computational Materials Design (ICMD) process, In general, the work to date has sought to draw a straight line from chemistry to phase formation to microstructure to properties. However, In the ICMD vein, an international consortium within the Center for Materials under Extreme Dynamic Environments (CMEDE) has aimed to improve the performance of Mg alloys, among a multitude of other materials, under the paradigm "Materials by design". A variety of strategies were developed to tackle imminent challenges and issues related to the use of Mg, be it for processing, hardening, the improvement of dynamic or static performance, the controlling of twins, precipitation, or approaches related to grain size effects. Experimental and modeling efforts were conducted and shared through the close collaborative network in CMEDE. The publications in this special volume reflect our collective results. 2. Effect of solute atoms, solute clusters, and precipitates on plastic deformation and the evolution of microstructure We start by considering the multiple ways that solute atoms, solute clusters, and nanoscale precipitates improve the mechanical properties of Mg alloys. They can impede the motion of dislocations and twins. They can also influence the generation and motion of dislocations and significantly influence overall texture evolution by suppressing recrystallization via grain boundary segregation The most active slip mode, basal slip, displays typical solute strengthening behavior that is summarized in multiple reviews where c is the solution concentration, b is the Burgers vector, s is the atomic area on the slip plane, v is the solute-dislocation interaction range, f m is the interaction strength, and T l is the dislocation line tension. Other models predict values of the scaling parameter k to be between 1/2 and 1, depending on solute concentration, dislocation tension, and the strength of solute-dislocations According to , if τc(T ) τc0 > 0.5. ) where ∆E b is the solute barrier height, parameter C l is about 0.55, and ̇ 0 is a fitting parameter. Finite temperature leads to some change in the scaling parameter k that is observed in experiments and molecular dynamics (MD) simulations Cross-slip is also essential in c + a dislocation glide, which is arguably the primary deformation mode accommodating deformation along the c -axis of the HCP structure, but which is also the most difficult to activate. Simulations only recently suggested that c + a dislocations double cross-slip between pyramidal I and pyramidal II planes to form Frank-Reed sources that lead to multiplication, as shown in Fig. Understanding the effects of solute atoms on different slip modes enables the design of alloys with more isotropic deformation modes, which may improve the Mg alloys' ductility. For example, prismatic slip softening often reaches a maximum at a specific solute concentration, and, in Mg-Zn alloys, the ductility exhibits a maximum at the same concentration While the addition of solute atoms can alter CRSS values, the presence of dislocations or stacking faults can, in turn, alter solute distributions in important ways for Mg-Al, Mg-Zn and Mg-Y alloys (Fig. Compared to the randomly distributed solute atoms in a solid solution, solute clusters are localized regions with much higher concentrations than the average in the solid solution. Typical solute clusters contain 10 1 -10 2 atoms. They often form in a super-saturated solid solution during thermal processing, as precursors to the second phase precipitates; a well-known example of this is the GP zones. Solute clusters could also form due to interaction with defects, such as the solute clouds segregated around dislocations mentioned in Section 2.1.1. Solute cluster strengthening was recognized in Al alloys as early as in the 1960s, notably associated with the two-stage hardening curves Since solute clusters have much higher solute concentration than the average in the solid solution while still maintaining the matrix crystal structure, they provide a different strengthening mechanism from solid solution strengthening or precipitate strengthening, the latter of which is discussed in Section 2.1.3. As compared to individual solute atoms, solute clusters are much stronger obstacles. Therefore, Friedel statistics are more applicable than the Labusch statistics used for solid solutions E l e m e n t M g I 1 M g I 2 Fig. Deschamps et al. ( where f m is the average obstacle strength of the solute clusters, and c is the concentration of clusters in the system. With a fixed solute concentration, solute clustering increases f m but reduces c. This interplay of these two factors leads to the aforementioned two-stage hardening curve observed in their experiments. Zhao (2014) considered clusters' elastic modulus effect and proposed a size misfit strengthening model, where the size misfit of clusters is assumed to be the sum of elementary atomic misfits. The predictions of this model were in good agreement with experiments for small clusters (< 1 nm) in Al alloys. Several of the same authors Starink et al. Precipitates also interact strongly with dislocations in alloys and can impede the dislocations' motion Two limiting cases for precipitate strengthening have been identified depending on whether dislocations can penetrate the precipitates. For impenetrable precipitates, the dislocation bypasses the obstacles and leaves loops around the particle. This is the so-called Orowan mechanism. Penetrable precipitates, on the other hand, act like solute clusters, and therefore Friedel statistics apply, as introduced in Section 2.1.2. The CRSS, as originally proposed by Orowan where r 0 is the core radius of the dislocation where n s denotes the number of precipitates per unit area. Let f denote the volume fraction of the precipitates, and assume that r 0 = b. The Orowan CRSS for basal plates, prismatic plates, and c-axis rods, are, respectively, given by and where the meanings of parameters d t and t t are illustrated in Fig. strength, but also enhance ductility The value of this critical precipitate size depends on a number of factors, like matrix-precipitate interface coherency and applied stress. But the critical value generally falls into the range of 50-100b, or 15-30 nm Twinning is common in Mg because dislocations that can accommodate c-axis deformation, including c + a and c dislocations, are difficult to activate Although twins are three-dimensional (3D) defects, most studies, with few exceptions In general, precipitate-twin interactions are less understood than precipitate-dislocation interactions Crystal plasticity models have been adopted to model the interplay of Mg's slip and twin systems. Unlike dislocation slip, which is well understood and captured in crystal plasticity and phase field models, modeling deformation twinning still presents challenges, and a variety of models exist for slip and twinning in HCP metals. A simple way to include twinning is the introduction of additional slip systems (often referred to as pseudo slip systems) Reduced-order models sacrifice microstructural details for computational efficiency. In the materials by design approach, we aim to obtain critical information about the link between process conditions and the resulting microstructures of Mg alloys. Consider a Mg alloy undergoing a thermomechanical processing such as rolling or extrusion. In this case, both deformation and temperature are being simultaneously imparted to the sample. The microstructure continuously evolves, and we often obtain information about the microstructure as well as the presence and distribution of precipitates after processing. By feeding the initial texture data into a polycrystal simulation, we can simulate the texture evolution and deformation mechanisms in the polycrystalline sample during the processing step. We can then attempt to identify connections between the local state of deformation as predicted by simulations and the observed precipitate distribution in experiments, with the goal of identifying causal mechanisms for precipitation. This can enrich the model by adding information about, for example, grain size effects The precipitation model by whose parameter C in Mg-Al alloys was identified as 197(M P aX -2/3 ), with X being the atomic fraction of solute in the alloy. The results of Despite much progress on modeling precipitation in Mg alloys (including the above approaches and those mentioned in Section 3.4), an accurate model that predicts the simultaneous evolution of texture and precipitation in Mg alloys during severe plastic deformation processing is an open challenge and requires both improved mesoscale plasticity models and detailed insight into the microscale processes leading to precipitate nucleation and growth and these processes' interactions with crystal defects. Understanding the strengthening mechanisms as discussed in Section 2 provides guidance on how one can improve the strengthening effects in Mg alloys, which are otherwise weak compared to other metals (Fig. An effective way to overcome this limited strengthening is to introduce deformation before or during thermal processing to reduce the size and spacing of the precipitates and to improve their morphology. We term this method Deformation-Induced Precipitation (DIP). Several studies in the last decade have shown that the DIP process can produce Mg alloys with finer precipitates than conventional thermal heat treatments. For example, Fig. A comparison of precipitate characteristics such as aspect ratio, inter-particle spacing, and areal number density between conventional processing and DIP processing of Mg-Al, Mg-Zn, and Mg-Y alloys is shown in Fig. Minárik, Jozef Veselý, Jakub Čížek, Mária Zemková, Tomáš Vlasák, Tomáš Krajňák, Jiří Kubásek, Robert Král,Daniel Hofman, Jitka Stráská, Effect of secondary phase particles on thermal stability of ultra-fine grained Mg-4Y-3RE alloy prepared by equal channel angular pressing, Pages 207-216, Copyright 2018, with permission from Elsevier. A 9 The enhanced nucleation shown in Fig. To understand the higher rate of precipitate nucleation during DIP, we turn to the classical nucleation theory (CNT) that is reviewed extensively in In brief, the nucleation rate can be expressed as where ∆G * is the change in free energy required to form a precipitate of the critical size in a matrix and, hence, the energy fluctuation required to overcome the nucleation barrier. This free energy barrier to nucleation is given by where ∆g v is the free energy difference between the precipitating phase and the matrix per unit volume; ∆g s is the misfit elastic strain energy of the precipitate nucleus in the matrix; σ is the interfacial energy, and V and A are the volume and surface area of the nucleus respectively. The chemical driving force ∆g v can often be extracted from accurate first-principles calculations. The elastic strain energy ∆g s for a coherent precipitate nucleus is given by where G m is the shear modulus, ν is Poisson's ratio, and is the misfit parameter defined as (v p -v m )/3v m , where v p and v m are average atomic volumes of the precipitate and the matrix, respectively. The interfacial free energy is the hardest to determine, and its value varies significantly (∼ 0.1 -1J/m 2 ) depending on whether the interface is coherent, semi-coherent, or incoherent. Due to the large concentration difference between the initial solid solution and the precipitate phase, the barrier to nucleation, ∆G * , is high in Mg. Furthermore, the diffusion of solute atoms in Mg is low compared to Al. Both these factors lead to low nucleation rates and a low number density of precipitates in Mg during conventional aging. Next, we explore how one can introduce defects through deformation during processing to overcome these two limitations and enable higher nucleation rates and more effective strengthening in Mg alloys. Heterogeneous nucleation is far more common than homogeneous nucleation in real materials because of impurities, defects, and boundaries that serve as nucleation sites One viable way to boost nucleation kinetics is through DIP at low temperatures, as mentioned in Section 3.1. When polycrystalline samples with multiple grains are deformed, the load distribution results in varying levels of strain within the grains and along grain boundaries. The plastic deformation results in the creation of several types of defects (vacancies, dislocations, stacking faults, twins). The propensity to form these defects and the defects' density are dictated by the temperature, amount of deformation, and activation of specific slip and twinning systems. The key idea behind DIP is that by controlling the motion, density, and heterogeneity of defects generated through thermo-mechanical treatments, the solutes and solute clouds resulting from these defects can be utilized to form desired precipitate microstructures, such as those illustrated in Fig. As Solute atoms segregate near edge dislocations to reduce the elastic strain energy in the system, forming a solute "cloud" or Cottrell atmosphere, as seen in Fig. where ω is the atomic volume of the matrix; α is the compositional strain coefficient; and M is the diffusion poten-tial of the matrix, which is the derivative of the Gibbs free energy with respect to solute concentration. The subscript 0 in ( ∂M ∂c ) -1 0 indicates the value of ( ∂M ∂c ) -1 in the stressfree solid solution far away from dislocations and other sources of stress. The values of ω, a, and M are all calculated at an average concentration, c 0 . The pressure field, P , in the atmosphere, and used in Eq. ( where Dislocations also interact with precipitate particles by contributing additional terms in the formation energy where w 1 and w 2 account for dislocation-precipitate interaction energies. w 1 represents the interaction of the dislocation's stress field with the strain field of the nucleus, and w 2 the so-called modulus effect, in which, for example, a region of higher elastic modulus increases the dislocation's self-energy where K is the bulk modulus; b is the Burger's vector, and superscripts m and p represent the matrix and the precipitate, respectively. Variables θ and r are the cylindrical coordinates of the center of the precipitate nucleus on the plane normal to the edge dislocation. The origin of the plane is located at the dislocation core. The w 2 term becomes significant when the shear modulus difference is considerable, like the order of magnitude difference in the Nb-N system Assuming a spherical shape, the critical nucleus radius R * and the nucleation barrier ∆G * can be obtained by minimizing ∆G in Eq. ( and All energy terms above are functions of the solute concentration and are affected by solute segregation around Vacancies are another type of defect produced extensively during deformation that may facilitate precipitate nucleation. Although studies of vacancies in Mg are rare, it was demonstrated that the vacancy concentration in Mg alloys under severe deformation can be as high as those of other metals, reaching concentrations of 10 -4 , as observed in experiments Besides enhancing the formation of solute clusters and precipitates kinetically by enhancing diffusion, vacancies can also thermodynamically promote the formation of solute clusters and precipitates by acting as heterogeneous nucleation sites when they agglomerate and form vacancy clusters and voids. Examples of such aggregation into voids were first reported in radiated materials As we discussed above, solute clusters and precipitates predominantly form around heterogeneous nucleation sites like dislocations and vacancy clusters. Therefore, the number density of these heterogeneous nucleation sites, which controls the spacing between solute clusters and precipitates, becomes an important tuning parameter during processing. While equilibrium densities of dislocations and vacancies are relatively well-known (the number densities of dislocations can vary from 10 10 -10 12 m -2 and the equilibrium vacancy concentration is about 10 -6 Strain hardening models offer a direct connection between the number densities of dislocations and/or twins and the strain. A review of dislocation-based strain hardening models can be found elsewhere where the first term is dislocation nucleation and multiplication due to impenetrable obstacles (grain boundaries, incoherent precipitates, dispersion particles) and is proportional to the density of these obstacles. This term is normally assumed to be a constant during the processing, but in reality, both the grain and precipitate microstructures will change. The second term is dislocation multiplication by forest dislocations, and the third and fourth terms are dynamic recovery (i.e. dislocation annihilation due to cross-slip) and climb, respectively. The other two models mentioned above only include two or three of the terms used in the Lukác-Balík model. Correspondingly, the work hardening rate is where σ y is the yield stress, and parameters A, B, C, and D are proportional to K i (i=1,2,3,4), respectively: Then, authors predicted the evolution of dislocation density for ECAE processing of two Mg-Al alloys, A6 and A9. Strain rate was chosen to be 10 -4 s -1 and 0 was used as normalization parameter. The stress exponent n is on the order of 10 2 The resulting evolution of dislocation density is shown in Fig. Integrating the twin fraction into the strain hardening model could be important when considering twin-induced precipitate nucleation. In addition, the strain hardening model applied here is a phenomenological model where the state of micro-structure is contracted to one parameter, density of dislocations More sophisticated crystal plasticity models can be used to consider the state variables' spatial and orientation distributions. Vacancy evolution is more complex to model because both the generation and annihilation of vacancies depend on other defects like dislocations. The difficulty of observing vacancies and vacancy clusters in experiments adds an additional challenge. In terms of vacancy clustering, quantitative models are under development to predict the lifetime and size distribution of vacancy clusters/voids by MD simulation Single vacancies have a short lifetime, as they diffuse to sinks like grain boundaries quickly. Their lifetimes have often been studied using the PAS method, which has long been applied to probe lattice defects, including vacancies and small voids in metallic materials Future experiments are planned to explore the density of vacancies and vacancy clusters in these model binary Mg alloys, and in Mg-Zn alloys in particular. Various models have been proposed to predict the formation of precipitates in metallic alloys, many of which are based on CNT where R stands for the mean radius, D is the diffusion coefficient, X P the molar composition of the precipitate (which is often assumed to be stoichiometric and constant), X is the equilibrium solute molar fraction in the matrix, and X i is the equilibrium molar fraction at the precipitate/matrix interface. The conditions for the validity of the LSW treatment of coarsening are strict; notably, there is no elastic interaction, diffusion is seen as the rate-limiting process, and the volume fraction of particles is negligible. A complete picture of precipitation also necessitates accounting for the interplay of slip and twinning with precipitates after their formation. To this end, Although the study was limited to a single twin variant and simple precipitate configurations, it gave interesting insight into the microstructural mechanisms leading to hardening by precipitates in the presence of slip and twinning in Mg. Our current work focuses on including a precipitation model within the crystal plasticity framework on the mesoscale in a two-way coupled fashion: the local mechanical state of deformation affects precipitation, while precipitates impact mechanical hardening through the effects discussed in Section 2 and Section 3. Nucleation, growth and coarsening of precipitates, as described by The findings and the corresponding data presented in the above described studies contribute to an understanding of process-structure-property relationships required to lay the groundwork for a more robust ICMD approach. In Section 1, we briefly discussed the origin of this approach and some recent applications of it to Mg alloy design. At the heart of this design cycle is the canonical relationship between processing, structure and properties illustrated in Fig. The least developed aspect of this grand vision has been the processing-structure connection. In many respects, Fig. Clearly, this integrated material-by-design strategy for Mg alloys will require improved accuracy and completeness in the data, obtained both by experiments and simulations, upon which we base our models of the processing-structure interrelationship. While we have revealed some of the governing mechanisms of this interrelationship and revisited the modeling techniques for individual mechanisms (e.g., MD for vacancy and solute clustering, crystal plasticity for slip and twinning, nucleation theory for precipitation), the dramatic separation of these mechanisms in spatial and temporal scales still poses a serious challenge. We have discussed three main strengthening mechanisms in Mg alloys: solid solution strengthening, solute cluster strengthening, and precipitation strengthening. In particular, we have showcased how these mechanisms manifest in Mg-Al, Mg-Zn, and Mg-Y alloys. We have further highlighted how to manipulate the microstructure of Mg alloys using thermomechanical processing to improve mechanical properties. The main conclusions of the paper are the following: 1. Dissimilar slip systems and hexagonal crystal symmetry make the design of Mg alloys for structural applications a challenging exercise. To overcome this, we propose focusing on structure-property and processing-structure relationships for three Mg alloy systems (Mg-Al, Mg-Zn, Mg-Y). 2. For structure-property relationships, it is important to understand the interaction of solute atoms, solute clusters, and precipitates with dislocations, twins, grain boundaries, and texture. Each of these interactions is strongly influenced by solute chemistry, solute concentration, temperature, and loading direction relative to the slip and twinning planes. 3. For processing-structure relationships, we have shown that homogeneous nucleation is insufficient to generate rich solute clusters or high densities of nanoscale precipitates. We showcased a new processing strategy based on heterogeneous nucleation called DIP (Deformation Induced Precipitation), through which one can inject atomic-scale defects such as dislocations and vacancies at low temperatures to boost nucleation kinetics and produce fine precipitates. Furthermore, we have discussed approaches to quantify the defect density evolution in Mg alloys through experiments and modeling. 4. We have highlighted relevant modeling approaches to describe slip, twinning, and other deformation mechanisms during thermo-mechanical processing conditions. In addition, we have also discussed how these deformation events can influence solute clustering, In the conventional design process, different processing methods (such as casting different compositions, and thermomechanical processing treatments) to alloys produces different structural features in the alloy such as grain and twin size and properties, dislocation densities, and solute cluster or precipitate formation, which in turn result in measurable properties, which can inform future iterations of processing to achieve improved properties. In the inverse design method, desired properties determine the target microstructure of the alloy, which in turn can be used to design or select an appropriate processing method. nucleation and growth of precipitates. These provide valuable information to atomistic and mesoscale modeling frameworks such as MC, MD and DD to unravel interactions of solute atoms, point and line defects, and solute cluster and precipitate formation. 5. We have outlined an integrated material-by-design approach, which combines the "structure-property" and "processing-property" approaches into a unified design scheme. We argue that inverse design can be facilitated by high-throughput data collection and a more robust ICMD approach. Robust and predictive frameworks are critical for under-standing the complex microstructural evolution during thermomechanical processing. Through this article, we have aimed to convey how modeling and experimental approaches can be used to design advanced Mg alloys by maximizing the alloys' strengthening by solute atoms, solute clusters, and nanoscale precipitates. alloys . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13 Preprint submitted to Mechanics of Materials May 13, 2021 arXiv:2105.05354v1 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci] 11 May 2021 4 