We perform a detailed calculation of the various contributions to the fluctuation conductivity of a granular metal close to its superconducting transition. We find three distinct regions of power law behavior in reduced temperature, η = (T -T c )/T c , with crossovers at Γ/T c and E T h /T c , where Γ is the electron tunneling rate, and E T h is the Thouless energy of a grain. The calculation includes both intergrain and intragrain degrees of freedom. This complete theory of the fluctuation region in granular superconductors is then compared to experimental results from boron-doped nanocrystalline diamond, using the assumption of a constant phase breaking rate, τ -1 φ . We find a semi-quantitative agreement between the theoretical and experimental results only in the case of large phase breaking. We argue that there may be a novel phase breaking mechanism in granular metals worthy of further experimental and theoretical investigation. Electronic transport in granular materials has been studied both theoretically and experimentally in great depth since the 1960s, with earlier works focussing heavily on the behavior near the metal insulator transition In contrast, Lerner et. al. Two recent papers by Klemencic et. al. As T increased, the power law behavior, σ f l ∼ η α , changed from α = -1/2 (close-to-T c region), to α = -3 (intermediate region), and back to α = -1/2 (far-from-T c region). This matched Lerner et. al.'s prediction for the close-to-T c and intermediate regions, but not the far-from-T c region, where they predicted a power law with α = -2. In this paper we combine the approaches of Beloborodov et. al. This enables us to consistently treat the various temperature regimes: the external DOFs are needed to consider the close-to-T c to intermediate crossover; the internal DOFs are needed to consider the intermediate to far-from-T c crossover. We first tackle the problem analytically for a general granular metal, and obtain power laws for the different contributions to σ f l in each region. We then use the material parameters obtained by The rest of the paper is structured as follows: Section II outlines and extends the granular diagrammatic formalism to include both internal and external DOFs. The three regions of behavior in σ f l emerge naturally, with simple power law relations appearing deep inside each region due to the changing energy scale set by the pole of the pair propagator. In Section III we perform the main diagrammatic calculation, which includes both internal and external DOFs. We analytically consider the limiting power law behavior of the Aslamazov-Larkin (AL), Maki-Thompson (MT), and density of states (DOS) contributions in each region, and summarise these in table I. In Section IV we discuss the different power laws produced by each contribution in each region, and their relative sizes. This allows us to make experimental predictions for superconducting fluctuations in granular metals. In Section V we compare our theory to the experimental measurements of fluctuation conductivity in BNCD by Klemencic et. al. We assume a very general form for the Hamiltonian of a granular system with superconducting correlations, (1) The first term is the single grain free-electron Hamiltonian, where ξ k = k 2 /(2m)μ is the electron energy relative to the Fermi surface; the second term describes the random scattering from impurities in a single grain; the third term accounts for tunneling between grains with the matrix element t kp ij being associated to tunneling from state p in the j th grain to state k in the i th grain. The last two terms describe electron-electron interactions. The fourth term is the Coulomb repulsion, V ij , where we neglect dependence upon intragranular momenta, q ∼ a -1 , since these are much larger than the intergranular momenta, Q ∼ L -1 , where L = N 1/3 a is the typical system length, and N is the number of grains. Finally, the fifth term is the standard s-wave BCS interaction. We may assume that the BCS interaction acts within a grain, so that our system forms a Josephson junction array for T < T c . In this paper we focus on the corrections to the electrical conductivity due to superconducting fluctuations. Our methodology differs from the previous granular diagrammatic literature where standard rules of diagrammatics 1. Each electron line receives a grain index, denoted by a Latin character (e.g. the j th grain). All internal grain labels are then summed over. 2. Each tunneling vertex, represented by a crossed circle, only allows for nearest neighbor hopping. The tunneling matrix elements are Gaussian distributed Each pair of correlated tunneling events then carries a factor of t 2 a d , analogous to the homogeneous disorder factor (2πN(0)τ 0 ) -1 , and conserves intragranular momentum. 3. Each current vertex carries a factor of t kp ij ea/ √ N . The averaged tunneling matrix elements can be related to Γ via Fermi's golden rule, where N(0) is the single spin density of states per unit volume at the Fermi surface, and d is the dimensionality of the system. The electron Green's function for granular systems maintains the same form as in the homogeneous case, However, τ -1 now contains scattering rates due to both impurities within a grain, τ -1 0 , and tunneling back and forth between nearest neighbor grains, where z is the coordination number of the lattice. This is represented by the Dyson series shown in fig. We now define the granular diffuson for the system, Γ ph (Q, q, iε + iω, iε), via the series shown in fig. In the above, λ Q = z(1γ Q ), where γ Q = z -1 α e iQ•aα is the structure factor, the a α are the lattice vectors connecting nearest neighbor centres, and the sum is over nearest neighbors. This provides an alternative derivation of the same granular diffuson obtained by Beloborodov et. al. The cooperon, Γ pp (Q, q, iε + iω, iε), is also obtained in a similar manner, and has the same form as eq. 6 with an additional phase breaking rate, τ -1 φ , in the denominator In general we will use capital letters to denote the external momenta, Q, and lowercase letters to denote the internal momenta, q. From the granular cooperon we now obtain the granular pair propagator, where ψ(x) is the digamma function, T c,0 is the bare transition temperature, and T c is the observed transition temperature with suppression due to phase breaking. The latter are related via where τ -1 φ,c is the phase breaking rate at T c . In general, following Lerner at. al. We write this in a more convenient notation as where and Here we have used the subscript c on α 0,c (0) to denote that it is evaluated at the transition temperature. It is worth noting that ǫ(0) ≃ η = (T -T c )/T c when η ≪ 1 and the phase breaking rate is small. This is true in all regions of behavior, except the extreme part of the far-from-T c region where T approaches 2T c . Moving onto the sub-case, E T h ≪ T c , we may further expand the denominator of the pair propagator to yield As in previous literature Considering small Q, we see that Γλ Q ≃ Γa 2 Q 2 , allowing us to identify D T = Γa 2 as the granular diffusion coefficient. Finally, we note that the internal momenta are quantized according to the Neumann boundary condition corresponding to zero current normal to a grain's surface, where φ is the electron wavefunction. We shall assume, without loss of generality, that the grains are cubic with side length a, so that the internal momenta are quantized as where n i = 0, 1, 2, .... Clearly the above is for a three dimensional system, but the d dimensional equivalent is trivial to deduce. Since we have quantized our internal momenta according to eq. 16, we may analyze the singular nature of the pair propagator to understand the existence of three regions of behavior as one approaches T c from above. We begin by identifying the physical energy scales in L(Q, q, iω) as D 0 q 2 and Γλ Q , which are associated with the internal and external DOFs respectively. These appear as the dimensionless combinations D 0 q 2 /T and Γλ Q /T . The smallest non-zero value of D 0 q 2 is E T h , so the dimensionless internal energy scale is Similarly, λ Q is, at most, of order unity, so Γ/T c is the dimensionless external energy scale. Looking at the most singular contributions that arise from the pair propagator, we see that when ǫ(0) ≃ η ≪ Γ/T c , any non-zero q gives a significantly less singular function. However, we may consider small non-zero Q which give rise to small changes in the denominator of eq. 13, that are equally singular to the zero lattice momentum piece. We may therefore treat Q as being continuous in this region. It follows that only the external DOFs are physically relevant here, and so the system appears to be d dimensional. This is the close-to-T c region. , where again any non-zero q leads to less singular contributions, and hence the internal DOFs again play no role here. However, no choice of Q will generate a notable change in the propagator, so that the external DOFs are effectively unseen in this region. Therefore, neither the internal or external DOFs are physically relevant in this regime, and so the system appears to be quasi-zero dimensional. This is the intermediate region. Finally consider E T h ≪ η ≤ 1. As in the intermediate case, the external DOFs are effectively unseen. However, non-zero q can give equally singular contributions to the zero momentum term. The internal momenta can then be treated as continuous, leading to the system appearing to be d dimensional again. This is the far-from-T c region. The above gives a concrete definition of the dimensional crossovers described in the introduction and the works of Lerner et. al. By analogy to the homogeneous system, the complete set of diagrams describing the leading order fluctuation corrections to conductivity are shown in fig. The new features arising in the granular diagrams of fig. These are the leading order contributions at O(t 4 ) after averaging over the tunneling matrix elements. Other choices of event placement or correlation pairing either contribute nothing or generate higher order corrections. We now focus on the explicit calculation of the density of states (DOS), Aslamazov-Larkin (AL), and Maki-Thompson (MT) diagrams, in that order. We assume that the system is in the granular metallic limit, δ ≪ Γ ≪ E T h ≪ T c , so that 1 ≪ g T ≪ g g . We first consider the DOS contribution in detail, constructing the electromagnetic response function in lattice real space, transforming to lattice momentum space, and treating both the internal and external DOFs simultaneously. This yields the most general form of the DOS contribution, after which we begin to consider the three limiting regimes that occur naturally in the pair We then summarise the expected temperature dependence of the DOS correction to the electrical conductivity deep inside each temperature region. We then move on to the AL and MT diagrams in turn, presenting fewer mathematical details here, as the same ideas and methods are used as in the DOS calculation. In each case we first present the most general form of the response function with both sets of DOFs, before considering the different limiting behaviors. We finally summarise the temperature dependences of all corrections in each region. A complete set of our results is presented in table I at the end of this section. To the diagram in fig. where ε is a fermionic Matsubara frequency, whilst Ω and ω are bosonic Matsubara frequencies. The functions C ij (q, iε+iω, iε) = 2πN(0)τ Γ pp,ij (q, iε+iω, iε) are the closed cooperons at either end of the pair propagator. The labels i and i ± α belong to the electron propagators, whilst l and m arise from the closed cooperons allowing for tunneling to a new grain, from which the pair propagator begins or ends. The associated electron lines are not seen explicitly in the diagrams, however, as their Green's functions have already been summed over in deriving the closed cooperon. These cooperons lead to two possible sign choices for the frequencies ε and ωε -Ω. We first focus on the case where ε + Ω > 0, ωε -Ω < 0, and ε < 0. Before obtaining the conductivity from K(iΩ), we need to move to the lattice momentum picture. We start by performing the intragranular momentum sums of the electron Green's functions at the Fermi surface, leaving the sum over the small intragranular momenta, q. We then introduce the granular spatial Fourier transforms of the remaining functions via, where R ij = R i -R j is the relative position vector connecting the centres of grains i and j, located at R i and R j respectively. Now we perform analytic continuation of the Matsubara frequency iΩ to real frequency Ω + iδ, where δ is a positive infinitesimal, to find the retarded electromagnetic response function, K R αβ (Ω). The conductivity tensor is then found using Given that the O(Ω 0 ) terms cancel, we expand K R αβ (Ω) to O(Ω) to find the DC conductivity corrections. We further simplify the problem by only retaining the ω = 0 piece of the Matsubara sum to neglect dynamical effects, as in the homogeneous calculation. Doing this leads to Given that Γ ≪ T c , we may neglect the Γλ Q term appearing in the digamma derivative, We may replace the Q sum by an integral, use the granular diffusive limit to replace all occurrences of Γλ Q with Γa 2 Q 2 in the integrand, and take the upper limit to be 1/a. At this point we focus on the d = 3 case in order to compare to the experimental results of We are thus left with σ (1) We note that the alternative sign choice, ε + Ω < 0, ωε -Ω > 0, and ε < 0, produces an identical contribution, and so we find the correction due to the DOS to be twice that of eq. 21, This is as much progress as can be made with exact analytics. We now consider the different temperature regions by taking the appropriate limits of eq. 22. In the close-to-T c region, η ≪ Γ/T c , only the q = 0 component gives any significant contribution. All non-zero internal momentum contributions are less singular than the zero momentum piece due to the quantized nature of q and the fact that the Thouless energy is much larger than the tunneling rate. We therefore reproduce the expected behavior analogous to homogeneous case, which is approximately constant for η ≪ Γ/T c To obtain the correction in the intermediate region, Γ/T c ≪ η ≪ E T h /T c , we again note that only the q = 0 term gives any significant contribution, so that eq. 23 is still valid. The argument of the arctan is now small, so we may expand this to leading order to obtain In the far-from-T c region, E T h /T c ≪ η ≪ 1, we need to consider the q = 0 terms. Since η ≫ E T h /T c , the summand will be slowly varying for small q values, and so we may approximate the sum by an integral with an appropriate upper cut-off at q = q c . A natural cut-off arises from the diffusive limit, so it appears that D 0 q 2 c = τ -1 . However, we need to remember that the digamma derivatives decay quickly and so become small when D 0 q 2 ≥ 4πT , and so we define the cut-off via D 0 q 2 c = 4πT . As the most singular behavior occurs for D 0 q 2 ≪ 4πT , we expand the digamma functions and their derivatives so that Before performing the q integral, we are able to expand the arctan again, noting that ǫ(q) ≫ Γ/T c in this case. We therefore arrive at the integral, where q = 4πT /E T h , and we noted that ln(T /T c ) ≃ η when η ≪ 1. This leads to the result This correction has the same form as the close-to-T c region, albeit with a few changes to the constants appearing alongside η. We see that for η ≪ 1, the DOS contribution will again be approximately constant. This behavior can be attributed to the fluctuating Cooper pairs being much smaller than the typical grain size, and hence the system again appears homogeneous. We have therefore shown that there are three temperature regions with different power law relations between σ DOS and η, The Aslamazov-Larkin diagram of fig. B α,ls (q, iω) B β,nm (q, iω)L ml (q, iω + iΩ)L sn (q, iω) , (29 where the functions B α,ls (q, iω) represent the triangular blocks either side of the diagram. These may be written explicitly as Noting that only the pair propagator and cooperons have explicit dependence on the grain indices, we may move easily to the lattice momentum space picture, so that where As in the homogeneous case We analytically continue the ω sum in the usual manner where L R (Q, q, z) is the retarded form of the analytically continued pair propagator. By approximating sinh[z/(2T )] ≃ z/(2T ), we perform the z integration, and replacing the Q sum by an integral, we find At this point we consider the behavior of σ AL in the different temperature regions. In the close-to-T c region, η ≪ Γ/T c , we take the q = 0 term of eq. 35 to obtain and hence we recover the standard d = 3 result. In the intermediate region, Γ/T c ≪ η ≪ E T h /T c , we again consider just the q = 0 component, but expand in terms of α 1 (0)Γ/(4πT η) to obtain the leading order correction. This results in and we see that the AL term has the quasi-zero dimensional behavior, σ AL ∼ η -3 , reproducing the result of Finally, for the far-from-T c region, E T h /T c ≪ η ≪ 1, we find This is to be expected given the lack of a q 2 factor in the integrand due to the current vertices. In review, we see that the AL term also has three distinct regions, each with different dependences upon the reduced temperature, Here we are interested in the diagram shown in fig. (40) Within the granular diffusive limit cos(Q α a) can be approximated by unity. There are two types of contribution to the MT term according to the different sign choices of the Matusbara frequencies of the electron Green's functions. The three possible configurations, starting from the bottom left Green's function and moving clockwise in fig. 3b, are + + --, --++, and -+ -+. The + + -and --++ terms together produce a result, σ M T , that is identical to σ DOS /2; the -+ -+ term produces a contribution, σ (identical to σ DOS /2 in the absence of phase breaking and when E T h ≪ T c , but differs otherwise), and a more singular (anomalous) piece, σ M T . Focusing on the ω = 0 component, the second regular (non-anomalous) part can be written as, where we have not yet assumed anything about the size of E T h . Considering d = 3, we perform the Q integral to yield, where In the absence of phase breaking, S φ = 0 and eq. 42 collapses to half of eq. 22 when E T h ≪ T c , as expected. The major new feature we see in the granular σ The close-to-T c behavior is given by the q = 0 piece of eq. 42. To find the intermediate behavior, we expand the arctan containing η in eq. 42 to third order in its argument, and then take q = 0, Finally, the far-from-T c behavior is found by performing the q sum numerically in the case that we are unable to perform an expansion in D 0 q 2 . If, however, E T h is sufficiently small to allow this expansion, instead of taking the q = 0 piece to obtain the intermediate result, we may expand ǫ(q) to first order in D 0 q 2 , whilst setting q = 0 in α n (q), and replace the q sum by an integral. This integral has the usual cut-off, and so yields, where S φ will have to be handled numerically. It is clear that σ will only be singular in the intermediate region, similar to the DOS contribution. In the close-to-T c and far-from-T c regions, the behavior is approximately constant for small phase breaking rates. For larger phase breaking rates, the temperature dependence of τ -1 φ may become important. Moving onto the anomalous contribution, we consider only the ω = 0 component to yield Taking d = 3, we perform the Q integration to give For simplicity we initially set τ -1 φ = 0, and return to the discussion of a non-zero value later. In the close-to-T c region (η ≪ Γ/T c ), we recover the analogous d = 3 homogeneous result TABLE I. Summary of the regional dependences of the DOS, AL, and MT corrections upon η and the energy scales Γ, E T h , and T c , when In the intermediate region which has the same power law form as the DOS term, but with a prefactor of order unity as opposed to Γ/T c . Finally, in the far-from-T c region (E T h /T c ≪ η ≪ 1), we obtain In summary, we see that the Maki-Thompson correction has the following dependence upon the reduced temperature, σ The complete set of the DOS, AL, and MT corrections, and their temperature dependence in the three regions of behavior are summarised in table Having demonstrated the existence of three distinct temperature regions in a granular system, we will now discuss the relative magnitude and temperature dependence of the various contributions, to determine which power law behaviors we expect to see experimentally. Including a phase breaking mechanism, τ -1 φ = 0, suppresses the anomalous MT term. If the suppression is large enough, then the anomalous MT and DOS terms may cancel almost perfectly, as they have the same intermediate behavior and are opposite in sign. In this case, the η -3 power law of the AL term may be able to dominate in the intermediate region and therefore be observable. The exact temperature dependence of the phase breaking mechanisms present in granular systems is currently not known, and is beyond the scope of this paper. We therefore cannot rule out the possibility of a novel phase breaking mecha-FIG. nism that alters the temperature dependence of the anomalous MT term, such that it now produces an η -3 power law in the intermediate region. In what follows, we make use of eqs. 22, 35, and 47 with the parameters T c , E T h , Γ, a, and δ being taken from the works of Klemencic et. al. In the absence of phase breaking mechanisms, we plot the theoretically expected fluctuation conductivity in fig. al. This prediction matches the experimental data shown in fig. Let us consider a simple mechanism of suppression in the form of a constant phase breaking rate. In real systems, τ -1 φ will also have a temperature dependence, but that is beyond the scope of this paper. Phase breaking is often neglected in 3D systems, and only used as a momentum cut-off in the 1D and 2D cases to avoid infrared divergence issues. In reality, however, phase breaking processes exist in all dimensionalities and so we should not neglect them. In fig. In order to truly compare the theoretical and experimental results, one would need a model of the temperature dependence of τ φ , which has not been fully addressed in the literature. In particular, one would need to determine how the granularity of a material influences τ φ in the fluctuation region. We are left with two possibilities: either the anomalous MT term is suppressed such that the AL term dominates in the intermediate region, or the phase breaking rate has a novel temperature dependence that gives the anomalous MT correction an η -3 power law. In either case, we can attribute the close-to-T c behavior to the AL and anomalous MT terms, and the far-from-T c behavior to the anomalous MT term. To fully understand the intermediate region, further study of the phase breaking rate in granular systems is required both theoretically and experimentally. In this paper we have demonstrated that in a metallic superconducting granular system close to and above T c , three regions of behavior exist within the fluctuation conductivity. This was shown by including both internal and external DOFs into the theoretical analysis, to reflect the character of a Cooper pair's varying size compared to the typical grain size. This can be understood in terms of the existence of two coherence lengths in the granular system, where ξ g is the intragrain coherence length, and ξ T is the intergrain coherence length. These can be obtained from the prefactors of q 2 and Q 2 , respectively, in the pair propagator of eq. 13. The close-to-T c region occurs when ξ T a, the intermediate regime occurs when ξ T a ξ g , and the far-from-T c region occurs when ξ g a. In order for the η -3 power law, which is seen experimentally, to be observable, we found that the inclusion of a significant phase breaking rate was required, τ -1 φ ∼ T c -such values have been seen experimentally 