Versatile nanoscale sensors that are susceptible to changes in a variety of physical quantities often exhibit limited selectivity. This paper reports a novel scheme based on microwave-dressed spin states for optically probed nanoscale temperature detection using diamond quantum sensors, which provides selective sensitivity to temperature changes. By combining this scheme with a continuous pump-probe scheme using ensemble nitrogen-vacancy centers in nanodiamonds, a sub-microsecond temporal resolution with thermal sensitivity of 3.7 that is insensitive to variations in external magnetic fields on the order of 2 G is demonstrated. The presented results are favorable for the practical application of time-resolved nanoscale quantum sensing, where temperature imaging is required under fluctuating magnetic fields. Sensing local temperatures with the high spatiotemporal resolution is an important techniq ue that can be utilized in a wide range of fields, including electronics and biology. For example, pulse sequences such as the thermal echo, thermal Carr-Pucell-Meiboom-Gill se quence, and D-Ramsey sequence have been developed for high-temperature sensitivity. The limited temporal resolution is an obstacle when thermal gradients of the nanodevices are the object of interest, since the thermal conductance in nanoelectric devices tend to be high in line with the high electrical conductance which is usually required for these devices. This makes it difficult to image the local thermal distribution of the device because of the fast heat dissipation. To resolve the local heat sources on the device before the thermal distribution reaches its steady state, a measurement technique with high temporal resolution is required. Therefore, for measurement of the local current and temperature using the same probe, it is important to develop continuous measurement-based thermometry sequences that can be applied in non-zero external magnetic field environments. Here, we propose and demonstrate an NV-center-based micron-scale time-resolved thermometry method using microwave-dressed spin states, which is applicable to even non-zero external magnetic field environments. In a dressed spin space, Temperature information can be obtained by measuring up to six frequency components within the ODMR curve, making the proposed method applicable to real-time or time-resolved measurements. We demonstrate time-resolved temperature measurements with 10-μm spatial resolution and 50 ns temporal resolution using NV centers in nanodiamonds with natural tolerance to the varying magnitudes and directions of external magnetic fields. presents a schematic of the proposed quantum sensing setup, where the NV centers in diamonds are subjected to microwave power-induced Joule healing of the coplanar waveguide (CPW), as well as an external magnetic field of arbitrary magnitude and direction. By ignoring the effects of the nitrogen or is the gyromagnetic ratio of the electron spin, B is the external magnetic field, E is the off-axial strain, and Si, i=x,y,z (S) is the i th component (vector) of spin-1 matrices with their NV axis set as the z-direction. Since this work is focused on using continuous wave ODMR measurement, where microwave powers that are stronger than the energy level splitting from the hyperfine interaction induced by the nitrogen or We address this issue by changing the eigenbasis to microwave-dressed spin states defined where  is the Rabi frequency of a single microwave, are reduced by a factor of 3γeBx / D(T). Additionally, when the dressed spin state is used under an intermediate external magnetic field (E ≪ γe B ), the energy levels become robust to changes in E. In Supporting Information S1, we describe this theoretical analysis in greater detail. We first validated the robustness of the dressed state to changes in the external magnetic fie ld at a constant temperature using a single NV center in a type-Ib bulk diamond (See Supporti ng Information S2 for details). For this experiment, we applied a variable external magnetic fi eld in a fixed arbitrary direction. The upper panel of Figure The robustness to external magnetic fields inherent in the Hamiltonian in Equation where  is the linewidth of the DS-ODMR Lorentzian curve, and B p , E p and 0 p are the measured photon counts at the center microwave frequencies B avg , and the 0 f that corresponds to the background photon counts (see Figure The middle panel in Figure We applied the dressed-state sensing method to ensemble NV centers to demonstrate time-resolved thermometry. Figure / 2 3 / 2 3 where d = 1 MHz is a fixed value used and the linewidth of the DS-ODMR used in Fig. We used the same two main points that were used for the center frequency calculation in The temperature change can be extracted as (see Supporting Information S4 for details) with a shot-noise-limited sensitivity of where C0 is the luminescence contrast of the DS-ODMR curve and R is the measured photon count per second (cps). To combine the six-point measurement method and the pump-probe type time-resolved measurement, we used the frequency modulation mode of the signal generator to change the center frequency of the two microwaves applied to the NV center stepwise while continuously reading out the emitted fluorescence. A total period of 60 μs was used, with a 10 μs time range allocated for each center frequency, as shown in Figure This result shows that the transient temperature imaging induced from heat generated by electronic devices, even ones with high thermal conductivity, may be measured using this method. We developed a novel thermometry method based on DS-ODMR measurements and pump -probe measurements, which provide high spatiotemporal resolution while maintaining robust ness to external magnetic field environments. By using a dressed spin state basis for thermom etry, we obtained a broad range of initial external magnetic fields that exhibited attenuated re actions to magnetic field fluctuations within the range satisfying B  ≪ 2 . Additionally, the applicability of this basis to the cw-ODMR-type measurement scheme enables temperature measurement with high temporal resolution. By combining the DS-OD MR method with a pump-probe temperature measurement sequence and by adopting the sixpoint measurement method with time-tagged measurements for a reasonable total measureme nt time, we were able to resolve the transient temperature inducted by a microwave pulse appl ied to a gold CPW with a time resolution of approximately 50 ns and temperature precision of 0.6 K. The insensitivity of the dressed spin state to external magnetic fields facilitated the ap plication of this method to arbitrarily dispersed nanodiamond particles and allowed us to dem onstrate spatiotemporally resolved temperature measurement using several nanodiamonds on the CPW surface. Thus, our thermometry method can be applied to the measurement of timeresolved temperature using nanodiamonds in complex environments such as living cells, whe re aligning an external magnetic field to the NV center axis of each independent nanoparticle is difficult. In addition, because a continuous microwave is used, it is easy to measure the sa mple temperature as a function of microwave power before the experiment, and one can avoi d damage to the biological tissue by setting the initial temperature of an incubator considering microwave heating. The Hamiltonian of the NV center under arbitrary external magnetic field is given by, cos( ) , the total Hamiltonian in the doubly rotating frame becomes, In the time-resolved measurement, both the green laser and the microwaves from the two signal generators are applied continuously as shown in Figure The PL at each frequency can be approximated as, To confirm the measured time-resolved temperature measurement, we conducted a numerical simulation of the temperature change. Based on the optical microscope image of the CPW, we replicated the geometrical structure. To describe the temperature change at the shortedend of the CPW, the power losses attributed to the conductor and dielectric losses can be considered. We first calculated the power generated from the tapered and shorted