Buckling strength estimation of architected materials has mainly been restricted to load cases oriented along symmetry axes. However, realistic load scenarios normally exhibit more general stress distributions. In this paper we propose a simple yet accurate method to estimate the buckling strength of stretch-dominated lattice structures based on individual member analysis. As an integral part of the method, the yield strength is also determined. This simplified model is verified by rigorous numerical analysis. In particular, we efficiently compute the complete buckling strength surfaces of an orthotropic bulk modulus optimal plate lattice structure and isotropic stiffness optimal plate and truss lattice structures subjected to rotated uni-axial loads, where the ratio between the highest and lowest buckling strength is found to be 1.77, 2.11 and 2.41, respectively. For comparison, we also provide their yield strength surfaces, where the corresponding ratios are 1.84, 1.16 and 1.79. Furthermore, we use the knowledge gained from the simplified model to create a new configuration of the isotropic plate lattice structure with a more isotropic buckling strength surface and buckling strength ratio of 1.24, without deterioration of the stiffness or yield strength. The proposed method provides a valuable tool to quickly estimate the microstructural buckling strength of stretch-dominated lattice structures, especially for applications where the stress state is non-uniform such as infill in additive manufacturing. Architected materials with ultimate stiffness and strength are pushing the limits for high performance light-weight structures. In particular, exploiting architected materials as infill for additive manufacturing has shown to vastly increase macroscopic buckling strength while decreasing stiffness very little compared to equal volume solid counterparts. For instance, Clausen et. al. The classical approach to studying microstructural buckling is to analyze the buckling strength of individual plate or truss members, where the geometry and boundary conditions are approximated as known analytical solutions While the classical approach is simple, it is based on strict assumptions which in reality might not be appropriate. Furthermore, the joints created by intersection regions could affect the stress field and therefore have an impact on the estimation accuracy of the buckling strength. This effect is amplified in high volume fractions. On the other hand, the more sophisticated models provide higher accuracy but require significantly more development efforts and computational cost. All these studies have mainly focused on the particularly well-defined load cases with the loading directions oriented along the principal axes. However, to the best of our knowledge, no investigation has been carried out for directional buckling strength surfaces of 3D architected materials due to computational cost. Hence a cheaper buckling strength estimation method is highly desired to systematically investigate the material buckling strength under arbitrary loads. In this paper, we propose a simple yet quite accurate method to estimate the elastic buckling strength of plate and truss lattices based on individual member buckling analysis, where the topology of the lattice is accounted for. The proposed simplified method is validated with linear material buckling analysis The proposed simplified model provides a valuable tool to quickly estimate the buckling strength of lattice structures, especially when the loading is complex such as when used for infill in additive manufacturing. Additionally, the method provides insight into the overall performance by identification of the critical failure members of the lattice structures. The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 first briefly summarizes linear material buckling strength analysis and then present the proposed simplified modelling approach and corresponding validations. Section 3 employs the proposed method to study the buckling strength of the investigated lattice structures under rotated uni-axial loads and the yield surface. Furthermore, the results and the accuracy of the buckling strength estimations are verified with linear material buckling analysis. Finally, conclusions are drawn in section 4. Buckling modes of lattice structures can be local, global, or in-between In the following section, we first briefly summarize the linear material buckling analysis in The material buckling strength of a lattice structure subjected to a global stress state is calculated by linear material buckling analysis using the finite element method. First, the homogenized elasticity matrix, D H , is calculated using a computational homogenization method where D e is the elasticity matrix of the material in element e. A subsequent linear buckling analysis is performed to calculate the material buckling strength, where instabilities on the short-and long wavelength are captured by employing Floquet-Bloch boundary conditions where the material unit cell has unit size, K 0 is the initial stiffness matrix, K σ is the stress stiffening matrix and λ is the eigenvalue with the associated eigenvector Φ. The eigenvector is supplemented with the Bloch function e ik , where i = √ -1 is the imaginary unit, Γ are the faces of the unit cell and k = [k 1 , k 2 , k 3 ] T is the wavevector, which modifies the boundary conditions of the unit cell, enabling capturing of local and global buckling modes. The material buckling strength is defined as σ c = λ min σ 0 , where • represents the 2-norm and λ min is the lowest eigenvalue over all wavevectors k. The lowest eigenvalue is determined by sweeping k along the irreducible Brillouin zone edges. The irreducible Brillouin zone is determined by shared symmetries in the geometry and loading Linear material buckling strength analysis in Before the simplified model is presented, the local member stress calculation is described. The global stress σ 0 is converted to the local stress state in each truss or plate member using the homogenized elasticity matrix D H The global strain (converted to a matrix as indicated by the subscript m) is then projected to each local member coordinate system using where T is a rotation matrix describing the local member coordinate system. Finally, the projected strain is converted to the local member stress by where D loc is the local elasticity matrix. It is noted that σ loc is a stress vector for PLSs and a scalar for TLSs as plates provide planar stiffness while trusses only provide uni-axial stiffness. Note that parallel members in one group (see the colored members in figure where σ vm,max is the maximum von Mises stress of all members under the given load case, σ 0 is the yield strength of the base material and σy denotes the normalized yield strength. Utilizing normalized strength properties is beneficial as different base materials can be inserted into eq. ( The simplest material buckling strength estimations consist of approximating the truss and plate members as known analytical solutions, i.e. simple column or plate buckling with simply supported or clamped boundary conditions. However, as the individual plate or truss members are connected to varying numbers of adjacent members that provide rotational stiffness, neither simply supported nor clamped boundary conditions are appropriate but may only be used as lower or upper bounds. We propose a simple and flexible method based on elastic boundary conditions where the adjacent members determine the rotational stiffness. Several approaches may be envisioned to account for adjacent members, but the proposed method comprises applying simple supports with the addition of rotational springs to the boundaries/ends to approximate the rotational stiffness contributions from neighbor members. Herein, the spring stiffness of adjacent members, i.e. for both plates and trusses, are approximated by beam theory, where plate stiffeners are treated as wide beams (see figure where φ is the rotation angle around plate edges or truss ends. This equation has the same form as a cantilever beam subjected to an end moment, which is where I is the second moment of inertia of the adjacent stiffener with ν 0 = 0 allowing for analytical expression and treating plates as wide beams, L eff is the effective length defined as L eff = Lt/2, where L and t are the member length and thickness, respectively. The effective length is used to account for shortening effects from intersecting members. This assumption is grossly simplified but is used here for the sake of simplicity and keeping identical assumptions for both types of lattice structures. Furthermore, adjacent parallel members do not add rotational stiffness as they are subjected to the same local stress and therefore buckle in a continuous wave. Consequently, the rotational stiffness of a non-parallel adjacent stiffener is split between the connected parallel members. The resulting moment summed up from adjacent members is where N indicates the number of adjacent non-parallel members. Based on Timoshenko beams or Mindlin plates with quadratic finite elements, linear buckling analysis is performed to determine the buckling strength of the i'th member, given as where λ i 1 and Φ i 1 are the fundamental eigenvalue and associated buckling mode of the i'th member. The material buckling strength is determined by the minimum eigenvalue among all the members, given as where the normalized buckling strength is defined as σc = σ c /E 0 . The flow chart of the proposed simplified model is presented in figure 1. Identify plate or truss member sets (figure 2. Calculate the local stress for each member set and apply it as pre-stress (Eqs. (3)-( 3. Calculate rotational stiffness from adjacent non-parallel members for each member set and apply them as moments (Eq. ( 4. Perform eigenvalue buckling analysis for each member set. The lowest eigenvalue determines the overall material buckling strength (Eqs. ( This planar FE analysis is obviously significantly cheaper than a full 3D Floquet-Bloch analysis. In this subsection, we first illustrate and verify the proposed simplified model using buckling analysis of a truss and plate member with stiffeners (figure A truss and a plate example with stiffeners are considered to illustrate and verify the proposed simplified model. Specifically, one and two adjacent stiffeners per truss end or plate edge are compared to the corresponding simplified model, where the rotational stiffness from adjacent stiffeners is converted to moments. The truss example is shown in figure x-axis (see figure The truss example is a simplification of the red SC truss of the Iso-TLS (see figure The results from truss stiffeners and rotational springs are identical for both one and two adjacent stiffeners. This confirms that the simplification to rotational stiffness proposed here is effective. Rotational springs Member stiffeners Error % Iso-TLS: 1 stiffener (Figure Furthermore, the planar stress applied to the base plate is σ loc = [-7.168, -1, 230, 0] T . Figures Note that the gap seen in the figures are enlarged for visual purposes, whereas they are much smaller in the numerical simulations. In summary, the simplified model accounts for the lattice structure topology by converting rotational stiffness from adjacent members into moments. This is significantly cheaper than for example a full 3D Floquet-Bloch analysis, however still a more consistent approach than simple analytical column or plate buckling calculations. The simplified model is employed to estimate the material buckling strength of the investigated lattice structures subjected to a uni-axial load aligned with the Cartesian x-axis. Figure For SC-PLS and Iso-PLS, it is clearly seen that the simply supported and clamped boundary conditions under-and overestimate the buckling strength, respectively. In contrast, the boundary conditions with rotational springs provide much improved estimations. In the case of Iso-TLS, the clamped boundary condition is appropriate due to the large number of truss members overlapping and thus stiffening the ends of trusses. However, for other load cases that triggers different critical buckling modes or TLS topologies with fewer overlapping trusses, this might not be true. Nevertheless, the boundary conditions with rotational springs provide a sufficiently accurate estimation of the true buckling strength. This observation promises that the effective buckling strength of the whole lattice structure can be predicted by the buckling behaviour of individual members. Figure In summary, the simplified model yields sufficiently accurate estimations of the material buckling strength with a significant improvement compared to the simply supported and clamped boundary conditions. Furthermore, it is shown that the simply supported and clamped boundary conditions may only be used as lower and upper bounds. In this section, we employ the simplified model to investigate the performance of the lattice structures under rotated uni-axial loads. Figure The SC-PLS has the highest and lowest directional stiffness when the load is aligned with two SC plates and is furthest away from all plates, respectively (figure 7D). For comparison, the lowest yield strength arises when the load is aligned with any single plate. In order to get a comparison of the strength anisotropy of the lattice structures, a ratio of the highest to the lowest strength is calculated by σy,max / σy,min = 1.84. Furthermore, the highest buckling strength angle arises when the stresses are evenly distributed among all the plates (figure The Iso-PLS has isotropic directional stiffness, visualized by a perfect sphere (figure The Iso-TLS also has isotropic stiffness (figure Based on the knowledge gained from the simplified model and the critical member plots, the isotropy of the buckling strength surface of Iso-PLS can be improved. Specifically, this can be achieved by splitting single SC plates into two parts by keeping one half of the thickness in the middle and distributing the other half to the outer faces of the unit cell, which creates a boundary box (see figure Isotropic stiffness does not necessarily result in isotropic strength. Nevertheless, Iso-TLS and SC8-BCC3 have yield strength surfaces that resemble their buckling strength surfaces. In contrast, SC-PLS and Iso-PLS have vastly different strength surfaces. Similar and more isotropic strength surfaces result in more predictable failure mechanisms based on the volume fractions and the base material, whereas dissimilar surfaces also depend on load orientations. In general, the highest yield and buckling strength of the lattice structures arise when the stresses are equally distributed between the members, for instance when the load is furthest away from the members or when a majority of members are aligned with the load direction. Furthermore, low slenderness of a member also provides high buckling strength. Interestingly, Iso-PLS has higher stiffness and yield strength for all load directions than Iso-TLS, but conversely, Iso-TLS has higher buckling strength for all load directions. The buckling strength surfaces from the simplified model are verified by investigating two load angles of interest per lattice structure, besides the load aligned with a principal axis (figure For the SC-PLS, the investigated angles are the minimum strength angle where the load is aligned with only one SC plate as well as the maximum strength angle where the load is furthest away from all plates. For the Iso-PLS and SC8-BCC3, the investigated angles are the minimum strength angle where the load is aligned with only the green BCC plates and the high strength angle where the load is perpendicular to the blue BCC plates. For the Iso-TLS, the investigated angles are the high strength angle where the load is aligned with the cyan BCC truss set and the maximum strength angle where the load is furthest away from all truss sets. For the maximum strength angle, the simplified model overestimates the buckling strength by -26.78%, while the simply supported and clamped boundary conditions lead to underestimation of 47.92% and overestimation of -69.93%, respectively. Here, the reason for the overestimation of the simplified model is that the applied stress triggers a critical buckling mode which has rotation at the ends of the trusses and hence clamped or close to clamped boundary conditions result in an overestimation. We remark that the reported errors are from the extreme cases of maximum and minimum strengths often associated with peaks and dips in the buckling surfaces and hence extra susceptible to errors. The average errors are much smaller. The errors resulting from the simplified model are partly from the simplification of the effective length, which is especially pronounced for the isotropic lattice structures as they have non-perpendicular overlapping members and thus the shortening effects are greater. Furthermore, the inter-connectivity between the stiffeners of the PLSs is not considered, which again is especially pronounced for the isotropic PLSs as they have many overlapping members. Despite obvious errors, the simplified model provides an overall much better estimation compared to the simply supported and clamped boundary conditions. On the other hand, it is infeasible to create microstructural buckling strength surfaces based on numerical results on single unit cell analyses. For example, for the investigated lattice structures (figure We propose a simplified model for predicting the strength of stretch-dominated TLSs and PLSs, which yields good accuracy compared to very costly Floquet-Bloch wave analysis. The model is used to create directional buckling strength surfaces showing the strength anisotropy of the considered lattice structures. The findings reveal that isotropic stiffness does not necessarily result in isotropic (both yield and buckling) strength and that yield and buckling strength surfaces can also be widely different. It is by now known that PLSs have higher stiffness and yield strength, while TLSs have higher buckling strength. However, here we show that the PLSs can have vastly different directional buckling strength surfaces compared to their yield strength surfaces. For specific combinations of the base material and volume fractions, either buckling or yielding could dominate the critical failure mode depending on the load directions. In contrast, (isotropic) TLSs have very similar buckling and yield strength surfaces, resulting in more predictable failure modes, which are almost purely based on the base material and volume fractions. We use the knowledge gained from the simplified model to create a new configuration of the isotropic plate lattice structure to improve the isotropy of the buckling strength surface. Furthermore, the yield and buckling strength surfaces are also very similar for this configuration. Future studies include investigation of the sensitivity and determination of the worst-case scenario of lattices subjected to arbitrary loads following an approach such as 