Quantum materials with layered kagome structures have drawn considerable attention due to their unique lattice geometry, which gives rise to flat bands co-existing with Dirac-like dispersions. The interplay between strong Coulomb correlations and nontrivial band topology in these systems results in various exotic phenomena. Recently, vanadium-based materials with layered kagome structures are discovered to be topological metals, which exhibit charge density wave (CDW) properties, significant anomalous Hall effect, and unusual superconductivity at low temperatures. Here we exploit high-resolution angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy to investigate the electronic structure evolution induced by the CDW transition in a vanadium-based kagome material RbV3Sb5. A remarkable band renormalization in the CDW state is observed, which is consistent with first principles calculations based on an inverse star-of-David superstructure. The CDW phase transition gives rise to a partial energy gap opening at the Fermi level, a shift in the band dispersion, and most importantly, the emergence of new van Hove singularities associated with large density of states, which are absent in the normal phase and may be related to superconductivity observed at lower temperatures. Our work would shed light on the microscopic mechanisms for the formation of the CDW and superconducting states in these topological kagome metals. A kagome lattice, which is composed of a twodimensional network of corner-sharing triangles, provides a unique playground for electrons' correlations and nontrivial band topology. For example, spin systems with antiferromagnetic intersite coupling on a kagome lattice are proposed as promising candidates for realizing quantum spin-liquid states Depending on electron's filling number, a variety of novel quantum states have been theoretically proposed to exist in the kagome lattice systems, including charge fractionalization Recently, a new family of materials AV 3 Sb 5 (A = K, Rb, Cs) with layered kagome lattice structures have been discovered In addition, by measuring the zero-frequency joint density of states at the Fermi surface, we find significant charge fluctuations at wavevectors connecting two of the M points. We further calculate the phonon dispersions in the normal phase, and find unstable modes at both M and L points in the Brillouin zone. These results imply that both the charge fluctuations at the Fermi surface and the phonon instabilities in the pristine structure are important in driving the system into the CDW state. RbV 3 Sb 5 crystallizes in a layered hexagonal lattice structure with space group P 6/mmm (No. 191). As shown in Fig. We first focus on the normal phase of RbV 3 Sb 5 (T > T CDW ). According to the detailed photon energy dependent ARPES measurements, we found that the inner potential V 0 = 15.6 eV, based on which the value of k z , as well as high-symmetry planes and points in the Brillouin zone (BZ) [Fig. In Figs. Normal phase CDW phase We then turn to discuss the electronic structure in the CDW phase of RbV 3 Sb 5 . When T < T CDW , the system forms a 2 × 2 ISD type superstructure as shown in Fig. Besides, the CDW phase transition gives rise to significant change of spectra around M point, as shown by the direct comparison of the photoemission intensity plots measured in the normal and CDW states [Figs. Evidently, nearly the whole VHS1 in the normal state is pushed downwards in binding energy, while only a small region of the higher VHS2 close to the M point is gapped, resulting in the 'M'-shaped band dispersion along K-M -K path in Fig. Figs. In order to better understand the microscopic mechanism for the formation of the CDW state, we calculate the zero-frequency joint density of states (DOS) contributed by the Fermi surface: , where A(k, E F ) is the spectral function at E F at k point in the BZ, and Ω 0 is the volume the primitive cell. C(q) describes the phase space for the scatterings of electrons from the states at k to those at k + q at the Fermi surface, which is a characterization of the Fermi-surface charge fluctuations with wavevector q. Therefore, it is expected that C(q) would show a peak at the corresponding ordering wavevector if there exist any charge instability induced by charge fluctuations at the Fermi surface. This autocorrelation of ARPES spectra in the normal state has been demonstrated to give a reasonable count for charge-ordering instabilities of various compounds To summarize, we have studied the electronic structures of a kagome topological metal RbV 3 Sb 5 both in the normal phase and in the CDW phase. Our APRES measurements indicate strong band renormalization effects due to the CDW phase transition. These include partial gap opening at E F , orbital-selective energy shift of the dispersion, and most importantly, the emergence of new VHSs near E F induced by the CDW transition. The band renormalizations around the K and M points, as well as the emergence of new VHSs, can be fully captured by first principles calculations based on a 2 × 2 ISD supercell. The new VHSs in the CDW phase contribute to large DOS near E F , which may be relevant with the emergence of superconductivity at lower temperatures. We further investigate the microscopic mechanisms for the formation of the CDW state, and find that the sys-tem exhibits strong charge fluctuations at wavevectors connecting two adjacent saddle points at the Fermi surface. The Fermi-surface charge fluctuations would cooperate with a soft mode at the same wavevector, eventually driving the system into the CDW state observed in experiments. Our work is a significant step forward in understanding the mysterious CDW phase in the Vbased topological kagome metal systems, and will provide useful guidelines for future experimental and theoretical studies. The RbV 3 Sb 5 crystals were grown by using a mixture of RbSb 2 and RbSb precusors as the flux. The pre-reacted RbSb 2 , RbSb and VSb 2 were mixed in a molar ratio of 2 : 2 : 1, placed into an alumina crucible, and then sealed into a quartz tube. The assembly was heated up to 1000 • C in 10 h in a weel-type furnace, maintained at the temperature for more than 30 h, and then slowly cooled down to 450 • C at a temperature decreasing rate of 1.5 • C/h. Then the furnace was shut down and naturally cooled to room temperature. Crystals with black shiny metallic luster were obtained in the aluminium crucible. The crystallographic phase and quality of the crystals were examined on a Bruker D8 VENTURE powder diffractometer using Cu Kα radioactive source (λ = 1.5418 Å) at room temperature. During measurement, the crystals were aligned along the (001) plane. The resistivity of the crystals was measured by using a standard four-wire method in a commercial DynaCool physical properties measurement system from Quantum Design. Angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy. ARPES measurements were performed at both 03U beamline of Shanghai Synchrotron Radiation Facility (SSRF) First principles calculations of the bulk electronic structure. Density functional theory (DFT) calculations are performed with the Vienna ab initio simulation package (VASP) which adopts the projector-augmented wave method 