We present a comprehensive review of recent advances and developments in the field of chiral plasmonics. Chiral plasmonic systems exhibit tailored chiroptical properties vastly outperforming their molecular counterparts. In gaining insight into the working principle, the chiroptical response has become fully tailorable via composition and arrangements of the individual subunits or by shape and size. With advances in micro-and nanofabrication techniques many of these intriguing systems have also been realized in experiment. Here, we focus on bottom-up synthetics methods which do not only allow for rational design and fabrication of structures but most intriguingly in many cases also for post-fabrication manipulation and tuning. Apart from purely plasmonic systems we will also discuss so-called induced chirality, that is, the interaction of chiral molecules with plasmonic excitations which renders achiral plasmonic systems chiral. Chiral plasmonics systems are very promising candidates for investigating conformations and conformational changes on the nanoscale, similarly as in molecular circular dichrosim spectroscopy. The significantly larger signal strength promises few-structure sensitivity. We thus expect the field of chiral plasmonics to attract further widespread applications and attention. Man is eager to understand the properties of matter and also strives to manipulate matter at will. For centuries, alchemists and scientists have endeavored to control and tailor the properties of matter. A large number of sophisticated techniques have been invented over time, including deposition, etching, doping, synthesis, self-assembly, and many more. One of the most striking material properties of matter is visual appearance, that is, its reflectivity, absorptivity, and most importantly its color. Among the earliest examples of tailored visual appearances is colored glass. Some of the colored glass was later discovered to contain nano-sized gold (Au) particles. Such glass, coined cranberry glass, represents one of the earliest manmade nanostructured materials -obviously unknown at the time. The origin of the colors lies in the absorption and scattering behavior of the metal nanoparticles in the glass. When light impinges on a metal particle of a few tens of nanometers in diameter, collective oscillations of the quasi-free conduction electrons are excited with respect to the ionic background. One terms this resonant excitation, a plasmon resonance. What makes plasmonic resonances so special? On one hand, the metal particles can be good scatters and absorbers of light. On the other hand, the resonance position, that is, the position of the most efficient scattering and absorption, can be tuned via the size, the material, and the surroundings of the particle. Thus, metal nanoparticles can be tuned to exhibit bright and vivid colors, given their plasmonic resonances are in the visible wavelength range. What makes plasmonic resonances more interesting is the ability to couple to one another. The harmonic oscillations of the conduction electrons give rise to plasmonic near-fields, which are regions of strong local electromagnetic fields within sub-wavelength volumes. When the local fields of adjacent nanoparticles overlap, coupling among the particles is mediated. In direct analogy to molecular hybridization and the formation of shared orbitals, the plasmonic resonances of adjacent particles can mix and hybridize, giving rise to collective resonant modes spanning the entire structure. The extraordinary number of possible coupling scenarios offers an additional degree of freedom in creating plasmonic nanostructures with interesting optical properties. In recent years, advances in micro-and nanotechnologies have enabled unprecedented opportunities to manipulate and tailor the optical properties of plasmonic nanostructures according to a designer's wish. Top-down techniques such as electron-beam lithography, focused ion beam etching, direct laser writing, etc., excel in creation of structural arrays and layered interfaces, whereas bottom-up techniques such as self-assembly, chemical synthesis allow for more arbitrary structural geometries and richer biochemical functionalization possibilities. A plethora of complex plasmonic architectures that draw direct analogies to natural molecules have been designed and explored over the years. As a matter of fact, one may argue that significant research on plasmonic nanostructures has taken inspirations from natural molecules due to the beautiful physics and chemistry involved. One of the most fascinating molecular motifs is chirality. A chiral or handed structure cannot be superimposed with its mirror image. Every chiral object therefore may exist in two distinct handednesses, called two enantiomorphs or enantiomers. Chiral objects are ubiquitous in nature, ranging from macroscopic systems such as seashells to molecular systems such as carbohydrates. Interestingly, many chiral biomolecules are found only in one handedness. For instance, the essential amino acids are all L-enantiomers, meaning the Denantiomers are absent. This phenomenon is called homochirality, which has intrigued researchers for a long time but a conclusive interpretation remains elusive. Apart from the structural aspect, chirality can also manifest itself optically. A chiral structure that is optically active can absorb left-and right-handed circularly polarized light (LCP and RCP, respectively) differently. This phenomenon is called circular dichroism (CD). Moreover, a chiral structure can also cause the rotation of linearly polarized light, called optical rotatory dispersion (ORD), resulting from different refractive indices for LCP and RCP light when interacting with the chiral structure. CD and ORD are therefore Kramers-Kronig related. Chirality is a structural property and closely correlated with the spatial arrangement of the individual constituents in three dimensions. The optical responses of chiral structures are thus widely used in structure-related studies. For instance, CD spectroscopy can be used to reliably report the handedness and even subtle conformational changes of chiral molecules. CD spectroscopy is thus a standard tool in biology and life sciences for chiral discrimination. One major hurdle, however, lies in the weak chiroptical responses of natural chiral molecules. For most chiral molecules, their CD bands are located in the UV spectral region and the asymmetry factors, which characterize the strength of optical chirality, are very small. Even concentrated solutions result in polarization rotation of light by only a few millidegrees, rendering sensitive detection and investigation of chiral molecules with low amounts very difficult. The aforementioned findings and challenges have motivated scientists to enhance the strength of molecular chirality as well as to achieve pronounced and tunable chiroptical responses using artificial plasmonic structures. Some studies transfer the intriguing concept of molecular chirality to the realm of plasmonics, whereas others indeed combine the two fields altogether. It has been demonstrated that chiral pure plasmonic structures can exhibit large chiroptical responses, orders of magnitude stronger than those of chiral molecules. These experiments have stimulated further research on the interaction of plasmonic nanoparticles and chiral molecules, with the hope to enhance and possibly to spectrally manipulate optical chirality, rendering the detection of a few chiral molecules possible. In this article, we will present a comprehensive review of recent advances and developments in the field of chiral nanoplasmonics. We will focus on bottom-up technique related strategies to create chiral plasmonic nanostructures following the outline of (i) plasmon-induced chirality: chiral molecules in the vicinity of achiral plasmonic nanoparticles, (ii) intrinsically chiral colloids: plasmonic particles that are chiral objects themselves, and (iii) plasmonic chirality: achiral plasmonic particles arranged into handed configurations on static and active templates, respectively. Theoretically, the CD responses of a hybrid system containing a chiral molecule and a metal nanoparticle (Figure where CDmolecule and CDplasmon-induced are the CD signals from the differential dissipations of LCP and RCP light inside the molecule and the metal nanoparticle, respectively. The molecular CD modified by the plasmonic near-fields can be written as Here, E0 and 0 are the incident electric field and matrix permittivity, respectively. The molecule is described by its electric and magnetic transition dipole moments, denoted by 12 and m21, respectively. The initial absorption line shape of the molecule is described by the energy, 0  , and broadening Г of the molecular transition. The operator P is the matrix of the near-field enhancement at the position of the chiral molecule. The plasmonic near-field enhancement decreases as the distance between the molecule and metal surface increases. In the dipolar limit of the molecule-plasmon interaction, the plasmonic enhancement matrix is proportional to a 3 / d 3 , where a and d are the nanoparticle size and the separation between the molecule and the metal surface, respectively. It can be explicitly expressed only for simple cases, such as for small spherical nanoparticles with dipolar approximations. In general, this term can be written as Here εmetal is the dielectric function of the metal. The operator K describes the interactions between the molecule and the plasmonic near-fields. The resonant factor, fresonant, which strongly depends on the size and shape of the nanoparticle, describes the plasmonic enhancement in the metal. Hotspots generated between two metal nanoparticles can be exploited to amplify the plasmonic field enhancement. Figure Specifically, compared to the molecular CD line, the plasmon-induced CD responses shift to longer wavelengths and are much stronger. It should be noted that the direction of the electric dipole of the molecule considerably influences the amplitude of the plasmon-induced CD in an anisotropic system. In this case, the strongest plasmon-induced CD occurs, when the molecule dipole 12 is perpendicular to the metal surfaces. The plasmon-induced CD drops to approximately one quarter of the strongest value, when averaged over the dipole orientations. The above theory of the plasmon-induced CD can be applied to the cases, in which the metal particles are small compared to the wavelength of light, so that the retardation effects are negligible. However, retardation effects have to be taken into account for large metal structures, which are comparable to the wavelength of light. In this case, the CD response has to be calculated by solving Maxwell's equations. For a chiral medium, Maxwell's equations can be written as where = ( , r) is the permittivity, c( , r) describes the chiral property of the medium, and is the permeability. For nonmagnetic materials, such as Au, Ag, and chiral biomolecules, we have = 1. In general, the CD signal linearly increases with the chiral medium thickness (when the thickness is less than the wavelength of light) for the far-field induction model. Attaching chiral molecule ligands on the surfaces of achiral metal nanoparticles has recently become an efficient and convenient route to chemically acquire optical chirality in the visible spectral range reported Ag nanocubes capped with glutathione, which possessed drastic CD changes upon slightly lowering the pH from 5 to 4.5 as shown in Fig. Plasmon-induced chirality can be effectively enhanced when the chiral ligands are in close proximity of the particle surface demonstrated a similar approach with Ag shell coating on DNA-capped Au nanorods. In these morphologically diverse core-shell structures, the induced CD was readily manipulated over a broad spectral range by simply controlling the shape anisotropy of the building blocks . One challenge lies in the fact that the metal particle assembly itself may give rise to plasmonic chirality, resulting from the handed arrangements of the metal particles. The CD responses associated with plasmonic chirality in general are much stronger than plasmon-induced CD and also spectrally overlap with the latter The chiroptical responses were induced by the cysteine molecules attached to the ends of the nanorods. In another example, Markovich et al. reported nanostructures composed of crosslinked cholate-coated Ag nanoparticles, illustrated in Figure Chiroptical responses can also be generated from plasmonic nanoparticles, which are intrinsically chiral. The excited plasmonic modes span in the entire chiral object. The CD strength and line shape thus can be readily controlled by tuning the geometry of the particle. Figure The mode formation is complex and sensitively depends on small geometrical perturbations. In general, the observable chiroptical responses are quite small. One can increase the chiroptical responses with larger deformations of the particles. In Figure It has been reported that enantioselective control of lattice and shape chirality could be achieved in inorganic nanostructures made of tellurium as shown in Figures 3c. The chiroptical responses of these tellurium nanocrystals were controlled at two hierarchies, atomic lattice and mesoscale shape. Firstly, the tellurium nanocrystals are of a chiral atomic space group, either P3121 or its enantiomorph P3221. Secondly, the overall chiral shapes can be synthesized and controlled with chiral biomolecules, for example with glutathione. Figure Figure Templating is one powerful strategy to organize metal nanoparticles into chiral plasmonic assemblies Rosi et al. reported peptide-templated chiral assembly of Au nanoparticles and constructed a series of helical superstructures Au and Ag chiral superstructures and large-scale films templated by the gels were formed by subsequent in situ reduction of the ions. In addition, CMS, a more rigid template The as-synthesized metal nanoparticles can also be directly absorbed onto the chiral templates. In particular, liquid crystalline polymers offer a broad family of such templates that can be used to efficiently guide the construction of chiral plasmonic assemblies Cellulose nanocrystals are considered as representative materials among them, which show twisted rod-like morphologies Moreover, ultra-long silver nanowires were used as building blocks Nanocubes containing octahedral Au cores and Ag shells were integrated in these chiral films as well. Apart from cellulose nanocrystals, other cholesteric liquid crystals were also utilized as chiral templates. Chung et al. reported a Au nanorod/CTAB/lipid, a chiral hybrid superstructure, in which the Au nanorods were well dispersed on a CTAB/lipid supramolecular template (see Fig. Expanding the scale of the plasmonic assemblies has proved to be an efficient approach for acquiring stronger CD as more intense coupling effects can take place between the numerous metal nanoparticles. As shown in Fig. Among a variety of materials for self-assembly, DNA represents one of the most attractive candidates largely owing to its unprecedented programmability and sequence specificity. Structural DNA nanotechnology takes the unique advantage of highly sequence-specific interactions between complementary DNA strands to create DNA nanostructures that can be programmed in a rational manner. The breakthrough in structural DNA nanotechnology came with a concept called DNA origami, which involves the folding of a long DNA scaffold strand by hundreds of designed short oligonucleotides The essential ingredients for achieving strong plasmonic chirality were studied in detail by Shen et al Compared to spherical nanoparticles, anisotropic Au nanrods possess stronger resonant diploe moments and more efficient spectral tunability. In addition, it is possible to create a 3D chiral nanostructure using only two identical Au nanrods. Nevertheless, assembly of Au nanrods on DNA origami with a high yield is considerably more challenging than assembly of isotropic nanoparticles, which are not orientation dependent. Lan et al. Efforts have been made to control the position and orientation of single stranded DNA on Au nanoparticles When designing dynamic nanoscale devices, three prerequisites are of paramount importance. First, an efficient energy source for triggering conformation changes at the nanoscale is crucial. Equally important is the reversible control over conformation of individual nanostructures. Last but not least is the ability to report such nanoscale conformation changes and translate them into tunable functionalities. Kuzyk et al. In a study by Zhou et al. We have reviewed the current trends and directions in chiral nnaoplasmonics. Due to the wealth of research, it is not possible to give credit to all the interesting work conducted, in particular as this review has focused on bottom-up technique related strategies. Firstly, chiral molecules, which are surprisingly abundant in nature, can interact with achiral plasmonic structures and render the overall composite chiral and lead to chiroptical responses. While the observed signal strength is comparably small, the effect is interesting for several reasons. On one hand, the interaction between entities with remarkably different size scales and dipole strengths is per se interesting, as partially unexpected. On the other hand, the induced CD from the composite is generally observable centered at the resonance positions of the plasmonic nanoparticles, which can effectively shift the observation window for molecular CD from the UV towards the visible region. Moreover, researchers have the hope to achieve stronger chiral effects from the composites than from pure chiral molecules. Secondly, we discussed in detail how to use achiral plasmonic building blocks and assemble them into handed geometries. Templates, such as peptides or PDMS, can be used to organize nanoparticles of different sizes and shapes with high efficiency. These assemblies of nanoparticles normally take the structure of the underlying template. While the control over structurally parameters is comparably limited, the technique can be straightforwardly scaled to large quantities. The DNA self-assembly techniques offer tremendous control over the geometry and placement of nanoparticles. A long DNA strand is folded with the help of stable strands into nearly arbitrary structures, depending on the design of the DNA strands. These origami templates, which can for example take the shape of a sheet, can be dressed with additional capture strands that extend from pre-programmed position of the template. With these strands nanoparticles can be selectively placed on the origami with excellent yield. What is even more fascinating is the possibility to manipulate the structures after assembly by appropriate design of the capture sides. So called fuel strands can unbind particles and rebind them to other position, changing the conformation of the molecules. While all these aspects are very intriguing, the scalability of the technique is limited at this time and design and fabrication are challenging and costly. Lastly, there is also the possibility to create intrinsically chiral colloids. In these cases the particles take the shape of helices or similar handed structures. Depending on the degree of asymmetric, the chiroptial response can be comparably small. However, true solid metal helices have shown huge CD responses, even in the visible wavelength range. A significant portion of the reported research has been motivated by the importance of chirality and CD spectroscopy in general and the overall fascination of the concept of chirality. One of the most striking properties of chirality is its unique ability to report three-dimensional information. Chirality is in fact a truly three-dimensional property. CD spectroscopy has consequently extensively been used to analyze molecular conformation and observe conformational changes. There is still large interest in utilizing plasmonic structures for enhanced CD spectroscopy or for conformational analysis. This strategy is mostly motivated by the very efficient light scattering and absorption of plasmonic structures which largely outperforms molecular systems. Whether or not this goal can be reached and to what degree it can be exploited remains to be seen. However, the research conducted and reported here has unambiguously shown that chiral structures are uniquely suited to report nanoscale arrangements in form of far-field scattering, as for example in case of the plamsmonic walker. The authors are not aware of any affiliations, memberships, funding, or financial holdings that might be perceived as affecting the objectivity of this review.