Resonance is instrumental in modern optics and photonics for novel phenomena such as cavity quantum electrodynamics and electric-field-induced transparency. While one can use numerical simulations to sweep geometric and material parameters of optical structures, these simulations usually require considerably long calculation time (spanning from several hours to several weeks) and substantial computational resources. Such requirements significantly limit their applicability in understanding and inverse designing structures with desired resonance performances. Recently, the introduction of artificial intelligence allows for faster predictions of resonance with less demanding computational requirements. However, current end-to-end deep learning approaches generally fail to predict resonances with high quality-factors (Q-factor). Here, we introduce a universal deep learning strategy that can predict ultra-high Q-factor resonances by decomposing spectra with an adaptive data acquisition (ADA) method while incorporating resonance information. We exploit bound states in the continuum (BICs) with an infinite Q-factor to testify this resonance-informed deep learning (RIDL) strategy. The trained RIDL strategy achieves high-accuracy prediction of reflection spectra and photonic band structures while using a considerably small training dataset. We further develop an inverse design algorithm based on the RIDL strategy for a symmetry-protected BIC on a suspended silicon nitride photonic crystal (PhC) slab. The predicted and measured angle-resolved band structures show minimum differences. We expect the RIDL strategy to apply to many other physical phenomena which exhibit Gaussian, Lorentzian, and Fano resonances. As one of the most fundamental building blocks of the physical world, resonance is ubiquitous, ranging from daily phenomena such as musical instruments to cutting-edge science and technologies like the Fabry-Perot resonator in quantum systems The ability of a resonator to store energy can be represented by the ratio of the initial energy stored in the resonator to the energy lost in one radian of the cycle of oscillation, i.e., the quality factor (Q-factor). Thanks to its utmost importance in science and engineering fields, resonances have been studied by generations of scholars. Galileo Galilei developed the Lorentzian formula for the resonance effects in musical strings in 1602. Three hundred years later, Ugo Fano reported a more universal resonance model in 1961, now known as Fano resonances With their infinite Q-factor, optical BICs can harness a large amount of energy and enhance light-matter interactions significantly The resonances of optical resonators are very sensitive to their geometry and material parameters. Understanding their relationship is crucial for the design of resonators, especially high Q-factor resonators. Numerical simulations including the finite element methods (FEM) and finite-difference time-domain (FDTD) methods are capable of calculating resonances with given sets of parameters. These simulations, however, usually require a relatively large amount of time (spanning from several hours to several weeks) and substantial computational resources, thereby limiting their capacity to provide a thorough understanding of the underlying relationship between resonance parameters and design targets. For critical simulation tasks like inverse design, such methods become insufficient In this article, we report a RIDL strategy for accurate ultra-high Q-factor resonance prediction and inverse design. Inspired by physics-informed machine learning For the forward direction, resonances that exhibit Fano, Lorentzian, or Gaussian peaks are treated as the most fundamental components and imposed into the deep learning neural network. With the prior-acquired information, such as the equation of a Fano peak, a resonance can be decomposed from the whole spectrum by a decomposer and transformed into a set of analytical parameters. The decomposed resonances are classified into categories with the assistance of resonance field information (electric-fields, magnetic-fields, etc.) to separately train regression neural networks for resonance parameters predictions. Finally, resonances are regenerated from predicted resonance parameters and combined into predicted spectra with resonances. We chose a suspended silicon nitride (Si3N4, refraction index 2.02) photonic crystal (PhC) slab with C4 symmetry as the optical resonance platform (Figure (a) The training dataset is only about 4,000 cases, about 10% of a typical machine learning approach for photonic crystals (Comparisons see Supplementary Figure Resonance-informed deep learning (RIDL) strategy. Rather than relying on the end-to-end approach to establish a direct connection between the inputs and reflection spectra, the RIDL strategy decomposes each Fano peak from the reflection spectra and describes the Fano equations accurately with the Fano equation: where E is the energy of light, q = cot δ is the Fano parameter, δ is the phase shift, Ω = 2(E -E 0 )/Γ, where Γ and E0 are the resonance width and resonance energy respectively, and D 2 = 4 sin 2 δ. The Fano equation allows RIDL to directly recognize resonance peaks of different Q-factors without high order complexity. In comparison to the end-to-end approach, the RIDL strategy compressed redundant degrees of freedom of the training dataset and allowed for an efficient and integrated description of the Fano lineshape. The Fano resonance information, serving as the latent information in the RIDL strategy, helped regularize the neural networks' parameter space, allowing for much faster computational times and only requiring a very small training dataset. The spectrum shown in Figure The decomposition algorithm first separated the Fano peaks (Figure The electric fields in the normal direction (Ez) at the top surface of the PhC slab unit cell are simulated using COMSOL at each Fano peak. Figure The trained CNN classification network was validated with 100 Fano peaks from each category (500 in total) and tested by 300 Fano peaks for each category (1,500 in total), yielding a 96% validation accuracy and 95% test accuracy after 5,800 iterations (more details see Supplementary Information). The parameters of the four different Fano peaks were then used to train four parallel regression neural networks where r, h, and β are treated as the inputs and E0, Γ, and δ as the outputs. The predicted Fano parameters were used to reconstruct Fano peaks with high accuracy and low computation resource consumption. The background spectrum that is predicted by the background end-to-end regression network (Figure Once the RIDL is well-trained for forward prediction, this network can be used for the inverse design of photonic crystals with specific band structure requirements. As previously mentioned, a symmetry-protected BIC vanishes in the reflection spectrum with infinite Q-factor because no reflected light can escape. The best way to design a PhC with BIC is relying on its adjacent Fano peaks with increasing Q-factors in the angle-resolved reflection band structure. By sweeping the input incident angle in the trained RIDL, a series of reflection spectra of the same PhC can be predicted to form an angleresolved reflection band structure. Different from the numerical simulations, the angle-resolved resolution of the reflection band structure generated by the RIDL has almost no resolution limit, thanks to the small amount of computation time in generating predictions. The inverse design algorithm is developed based on a non-linear multivariate optimization method. To demonstrate the inverse design algorithm, the following constraints were imposed while inversely designing a PhC with BIC: 1) The radius of the PhC is larger than r min = 80 nm. (For fabrication yields) 2) The thickness of the PhC slab ranges from h min = 200 nm to h max = 300 nm. 3) The first BIC is located at λ TM1 = 700 nm with a tolerance of 3nm. 4) The second BIC is located at λ TM3 = 750 nm with a tolerance of 3nm. The objective function and constraint functions of the inverse design algorithm were defined as follows: ( ) ) where C1 and C2 are weights for the two BIC, h is Planck's constant, c is the speed of light in vacuum, and β0 = 0 for on-Γ BIC. This optimization problem is solved with an interior-point algorithm in MATLAB. Other optimization algorithms including genetic algorithms (GA) With relatively high tolerances, the inverse design algorithm can provide a design with integer numbers to satisfy the fabrication yields: r = 101 nm, and h = 238 nm. Figure A real device following this set of parameters was fabricated and the SEM image is shown in Figure The device is 100 pitches by 100 pitches (50 μm by 50 μm) of suspended PhC slab supported by an undercut silicon wafer (for more fabrication details see Methods). The band structure was measured via angleresolved reflection spectroscopy (See Method and Supplementary). Two desired BIC modes (gradually vanished points) located at 700 nm and 750 nm can be clearly observed. Transfer learning. While the current RIDL is developed with varying geometric parameters, other variabilities in design and even material of the PhC can be easily incorporated with transfer learning The transferability of RIDL is demonstrated here with the change of the refractive index of Si3N4. Depending on fabrication protocols, the refractive index of Si3N4 can vary between 2.0 and 2.4. The trained RIDL using 2.02 as the refractive index was transferred to predict PhC with a refractive index of 2.23. The transfer learning was achieved by floating only the last several layers of each of the regression networks on TE1, TM1, TM2, TM3, and the background spectra, and re-training these networks with only a very small set of training dataset that was numerically simulated with the refractive index of 2.23. Similarly, transfer learning of RIDL can allow the network to be trained to predict other geometric and material variations including pitch size, hole shape, material properties, etc. More information on transfer learning of RIDL is included in the Supplementary Information. In light of the unsatisfactory prediction and inverse design of ultra-high Q-factor resonances using end-toend deep learning approaches, we demonstrated here a Resonance-informed deep learning (RIDL) strategy. This strategy introduced the prior-exist knowledge of resonance equations as a regularization agent into the deep learning algorithm, allowing the deep learning neural network to better understand and predict resonances with ultra-high Q-factors. This RIDL strategy significantly reduced the required size of the training dataset, i.e., only approximately 10% of the typical amount of data is needed to guarantee high accuracy compared to traditional end-to-end deep learning algorithms. The predicted reflection spectra from RIDL accurately match their corresponding ground truths. An inverse design algorithm was further developed with the RIDL strategy to generate PhC slab designs that satisfy multiple constraints. A PhC slab with BIC modes at 700 nm and 750 nm was designed with this inverse design algorithm, validated by a device fabricated on Si3N4 following the inverse design result. The angle-resolved band structure of the fabricated PhC slab unambiguously follows both the ground truth and predicted band structure, satisfying all constraints imposed in the inverse design. Besides Fano resonances, the RIDL strategy also applies to other physical resonances such as Gaussian and Lorentzian resonances. A Si3N4 layer of 300 nm thickness was deposited on commercial Si substrates by low-pressure chemical vapor deposition (LPCVD). The periodic PhC pattern with the pitch of 500 nm and hole radius of 101 nm was written on ZEP-520 photoresist and followed by the RIE-ICP cyclic dry etch strategy to transfer the pattern into the Si3N4 layer Angle-resolved reflection spectroscopy was performed by a Fourier transform system to project the back focal plane of a 20X Mitutoyo Plan Apo Infinity Corrected Long WD Objective. A slit spectrometer (Princeton Instruments SP300) was placed at the K-plane for the band structure. The white light came from a halogen lamp and the illumination pattern in real space was cut by a pinhole to fit the device which has a limited size (see Supplementary Fig. Since the spectra of the PhC with BIC have a wide range of peak widths, equal-spaced wavelength sweeping could not balance the need for precision and computational efficiency. Therefore, an adaptive data acquisition (ADA) method is developed in this paper to automatically refine the sampling mesh where a Fano resonance may exist. The refined criteria are based on interpolation error e(E), which is defined as e(E i ) = (R 0 (E i ) -R I (E i )) 2 (3) where R I (E i ) is the interpolated reflection coefficient with neighboring reflection coefficients of E i using piece-wise cubic interpolation. The detailed ADA structure is described here: , where E is uniformly sampled from Emin to Emax. In this paper, 301 points (1nm/point) were sampled for each initial spectrum. Output: Refined spectrum R(E). With this ADA method, the numerical simulation achieved an immense reduction in computational time: the computational time of a spectrum with ADA is reduced by ~98.5% when compared with a uniform sampling of E with the same resolution for Fano peaks. The spectrum numerically calculated with COMSOL was decomposed with the decomposition algorithm described here. While this paper adopts an optimization-based decomposition algorithm, other methods including 1D CNN and RNN could also potentially be applied. The initial spectrum calculated from a numerical simulation can be expressed as Since this spectrum consists of a series of Fano resonances and a background reflection, R can be expressed as R(E) = ∑ σ̄( i) (E; E 0 (i) , Γ (i) , δ (i) ) + B(E) n i=1 The decomposition is performed one Fano resonance at a time. For the i th Fano resonance, the arc length of the residual spectrum is minimized with optimization algorithm: where R (i) (E) is the current spectrum after i -1 iterations of decomposition. In the discrete form, the objective function can be written as The reason this decomposition algorithm minimizes arclength instead of mean square root residue is due to the existence of background reflection. The arclength minimization is also much more sensitive to ultrasharp peaks than the mean square root. The decomposition algorithm can be summarized as follows: Input: Spectrum R(E) with Fano resonances Output: Fano parameters E 0 (1) , E 0 (2) , ... , E 0 (n) , Γ (1) , Γ (2) , ... , Γ (n) , δ (1) , δ (2) , ... , δ (n) and background reflection spectrum B(E).