The noncentrosymmetric transition metal monopnictides NbP, TaP, NbAs and TaAs are a family of Weyl semimetals in which pairs of protected linear crossings of spin-resolved bands occur. These so-called Weyl nodes are characterized by integer topological charges of opposite sign associated with singular points of Berry curvature in momentum space. In such a system anomalous magnetoelectric responses are predicted, which should only occur if the crossing points are close to the Fermi level and enclosed by Fermi surface pockets penetrated by an integer flux of Berry curvature, dubbed Weyl pockets. TaAs was shown to possess Weyl pockets whereas TaP and NbP have trivial pockets enclosing zero net flux of Berry curvature. Here, via measurements of the magnetic torque, resistivity and magnetisation, we present a comprehensive quantum oscillation study of NbAs, the last member of this family where the precise shape and nature of the Fermi surface pockets is still unknown. We detect six distinct frequency branches, two of which have not been observed before. A comparison to density functional theory calculations suggests that the two largest pockets are topologically trivial, whereas the low frequencies might stem from tiny Weyl pockets. The enclosed Weyl nodes are within a few meV of the Fermi energy. In the past years extensive studies have been performed to investigate and unveil the chiral massless Weyl fermions in the transition metal monopnictides MX (M=Ta, Nb) (X=P,As) and other proposed Weyl semimetal (WS) candidates In all members of this family, small Fermi surface pockets evolve along the nodal ring and quantum oscillation experiments are able to determine the precise shape and nature of the pockets. Depending on the distance of the Weyl nodes to the Fermi energy in the given electronic structure, either pockets enclosing zero total Berry flux or integer non-zero Berry flux occur. The latter situation occurs when separate Fermi surface pockets enclose each Weyl node of a pair, in which case we name them Weyl pockets. Combined quantum oscillation and density functional theory studies were able to indirectly prove the existence of Weyl pockets in TaAs Here, we present an experimental study of quantum oscillations in NbAs. Via magnetoresistance as well as magnetization and magnetic torque experiments in combination with DFT calculations, we are able to draw a more detailed picture of its Fermi surface. The main findings are that it consists of at least one further type of small pocket, additionally to the two known larger ones, with frequencies down to F ≈ 0.7 T. The two large pockets are crescent-shaped topologically trivial electron and hole pockets whereas the small pocket represents a candidate for Weyl pockets with nodal points that are extremely close to the Fermi level. Crystals of NbAs were grown by chemical vapor transport (CVT) using iodine as transport agent. The polycrystalline material has been synthesised in a first step by a direct reaction of micro-crystalline powders of the elements niobium (Alfa Aesar 99.99 %) and arsenic (Alfa Aesar 99.9999 %). Starting from this microcrystalline powder, NbAs crystallised in a temperature gradient from 940 °C (source) to 1060 °C (sink) and a transport agent concentration of 13.5 mg cm -3 iodine (Alfa Aesar 99.998 %). Crystals obtained by CVT were characterised by electron probe micro analysis and using X-ray diffraction techniques. Laue spectroscopy was used to confirm the single crystalline structure and orientation. Magnetisation measurements were performed on a Quantum Design SQUID vibrating sample magnetometer between T = 2 K and 20 K in magnetic fields up to B = 7 T. For each angle, the sample was glued in the required orientation with an angular accuracy of ±5 • . Transport measurements were carried out in an Oxford Instruments dilution refrigerator at T = 0.035 K in fields up to 15 T using a rotation stage. Data acquisition via National Instruments PXI cards and digital Lock-In procedures were used in this setup. The magnetic torque τ = m × B was measured using CuBe foil cantilevers with a capacitive readout similar to the design in Refs. The magnetic field was rotated in the (001), (100) and (110) planes. The field angles are defined with respect to the high-symmetry axis as indicated in Figure The electronic structure of NbAs was calculated using the Vienna ab-initio simulation package Quantum oscillations appear, when electron energy levels are quantised in the presence of a magnetic field. With changing magnetic field, they pass through the Fermi energy and cause oscillations in the density of states which themselves lead to oscillations of resistivity or magnetisation. The oscillations are analysed using the standard Lifshitz-Kosevitch theory In our calculations, the W1 Weyl points in the k z = 0-plane are located at (±0.0026, 0.4817, 0) in units of the conventional reciprocal lattice vectors while the W2 Weyl points off the k z = 0-plane are at (±0.0198, 0.2811, 0.5847) (and symmetry related) positions as shown in Figure Let us start by looking at the magnetization at T = 2 K along the main crystallographic high-symmetry directions in Figure This yields a total magnetic moment of J = 3.5, an impurity concentration N = 80 ppm and the diamagnetic susceptibility χ = -2.1 emu/mol. The strong quantum oscillations of high frequency are analysed by subtracting the background signal and taking the FFT of the oscillatory part in inverse fields (see Figure Additionally, our measurements reveal a smaller frequency in all directions that appears clearly at fields of F ≈ 1 T. A zoom on this field range is given in Figure A small quantum oscillation frequency indicates a very small Fermi surface pocket, that will reach its quantum limit at a magnetic field of the order of the quantum oscillation frequency. Above this field, the Fermi surface pocket is depleted and the charge carriers redistribute to other pockets in a multiband system. In accordance with this, the oscillation with the small frequency stops after a final kink in the data. In a second step, we analyze the temperature dependence and determine the effective masses in The resulting temperature dependence of the amplitudes and the Lifshitz-Kosevich fits with corresponding effective masses are depicted in Figure Figure Figure The resulting angle dependent frequencies are shown in Figure In the following, we compare the experimental angle dependence with the DFT predictions. Comparing the bandstructure obtained with different functionals allows to give a lower-bound estimate on the error bar of the DFT: We find that the bands near the Fermi energy can be shifted in energy by a few meV with respect to each other for different functionals. Because some of the Fermi surface pockets are so small this can not only result in different Fermi surface shapes but also in Lifshitz transitions, i.e., the appearance or disappearance of entire small pockets. Fermi surfaces with cross sections of the order of 1 T in certain field directions are therefore at the limit of resolution. In principle, all members of the TaAs family should be compensated systems and have an equal number of electrons and holes. Previous work claimed the materials to have small intrinsic doping (probably from impurities), as the best fit of the angular dependent quantum oscillations and the Hall effect corresponded consistently to a shift of the Fermi energy to the electron doped-side for both TaP and TaAs For this solution, there are nested electron pockets E1 and E2 and nested hole pockets H1 and H2. Compared to TaAs, the inner nested pockets appear because of a smaller SOC. The E1 pockets are predicted to host the W1 Weyl point pairs, resulting in pockets with zero Chern number. Additionally one finds pockets H1' and E1' arising from the same bands as H1 and E1. The pockets W2 individually enclose single W2 Weyl nodes and are thus predicted to be Weyl pockets. In the angular dependence, E2, H1',W2 and E1' have frequencies in the range of the observed low quantum oscillation frequencies. In TaAs, both H1' and W2 pockets also exist and are larger. Note that the E1' pocket by symmetry should result in one more branch lying close to the lowest one in the angular dependence for all directions. This is however beyond the resolution of our calculations. The agreement of the calculated H1 and E1 pockets with the experiment is rather good (Figure It would be interesting to investigate further the quantum limit of the smallest Weyl pocket compared to the other pockets in light of the differences expected for the quantum limit magnetisation of trivial and Weyl electrons We investigated quantum oscillations appearing in the magnetisation, magnetic torque and resistivity in NbAs. Summarizing the above findings, the Fermi surface of NbAs consists of at least 3 pockets, one of which was not experimentally observed before. Comparing the angular dependence of the quantum oscillation frequencies with the calculated electronic structure reveals a reasonably good agreement without shifting the Fermi energy. The smallest pocket showing quantum oscillations of the order of 1 T most probably stems from Weyl pockets around the W2 Weyl nodes which are only 4 meV below the Fermi energy. Hence, NbAs likely hosts topological Weyl pockets.