Control over plasmonic colors on the nanoscale is of great interest for high-resolution display, imaging, and information encryption applications. However, so far very limited schemes have been attempted for dynamic plasmonic color generation. In this Letter, we demonstrate a scanning plasmonic color generation scheme, in which subwavelength plasmonic pixels can be laterally switched on/off through directional hydrogenation/dehydrogenation of a magnesium screen. We show several dynamic plasmonic color displays with different scanning functions by varying the number and geometries of the palladium gates, where hydrogen enters the scanning screens. In particular, we employ the scanning effects to create a dynamic plasmonic quick response code. The information cannot be decrypted by varying the polarization states of light or by accessing the physical features. Rather, it can only be read out using hydrogen as decoding key. Our work advances the established design concepts for plasmonic color printing as well as provides insights into the development of optical information storage and anticounterfeiting features. Color generation has been a perpetual pursuit through art exploration and scientific advancement along the history of humankind. Compared to conventional coloration methods based on pigmentary, structural colors possess many advantages, such as high spatial resolution, material simplicity, environmental friendliness, and long-term durability. In this Letter, we demonstrate scanning plasmonic color displays, taking inspiration from macroscopic scanning devices. Scanning control over subwavelength plasmonic pixels, i.e., aluminium (Al) nanoparticles is enabled by introducing an underlying magnesium (Mg) layer as scanning screen. Such a microscopic screen can be refreshed by laterally erasing or restoring plasmonic colors, when the Mg layer is transformed between the metal and dielectric (magnesium hydride, MgH2) states through directional hydrogenation/dehydrogenation. We show several dynamic plasmonic color displays with versatile scanning effects. The potential of this scheme for information encryption is also demonstrated using a scanning plasmonic quick response (QR) code, which contains highly secure information. Figure We first investigate the lateral diffusion process of hydrogen in Mg (see Figures The experimental data (red curve) in Figure x (see Figure which has the same dimension (m 2 s -1 ) as a diffusion coefficient. Fitting of the experimental curve gives rise to K = 0.949 × 10 -8 m 2 s -1 and t0 = 326 s (see the black-dashed curve in Figure shown in Figure Fitting of the experimental curve gives rise to K = 1.037 × 10 -8 m 2 s -1 and t0 = 2398 s (see the black-dashed curve in Figure Next, color generation from the Al nanoparticles on such a scanning screen is examined. Figures 3a and 3b present the reflection bright-field microscopy images of the palette, when the screen is in the Mg and MgH2 states, respectively. When it is in the Mg state (color state, see Figure The interesting ability to laterally erase and restore plasmonic colors enables the realization of scanning plasmonic color displays. As a demonstration, a Sichuan opera facial mask has been employed as blueprint to design a dynamic plasmonic color display. Face-changing is an important subgenre of Chinese Sichuan opera. The SEM images in Figure Along the diffusion route, the plasmonic colors are switched off laterally. Upon oxygen loading, dehydrogenation also starts from the Pd gate. Desorption of hydrogen in MgH2 leads to the formation of Mg, therefore laterally switching on the plasmonic colors and restoring the color microprint from the left to the right (see the blue arrows). Our scheme can be extended to generate a variety of scanning effects by tailoring the Pd gates, where hydrogen enters Mg. For instance, when a Pd disk is placed in the center of a firework display, the isotropic diffusion of hydrogen in Mg leads to a radially propagating effect as shown in Figure Figure The scanning functions enable novel information encryption and cryptography concepts using plasmonic colors. Traditional anticounterfeiting features with plasmonic nanostructures often utilize polarization control to switch between two pre-defined images. In conclusion, we have demonstrated a novel scheme for the realization of dynamic plasmonic color displays with scanning functions. Such scanning functions are enabled by lateral hydrogenation/dehydrogenation of the microscopic screen through metal/dielectric transitions. We have shown several examples of scanning plasmonic color displays with different dynamic effects by tailoring the number and geometries of the Pd gates. In addition, we have demonstrated a highly secure encryption approach using a single scanning plasmonic QR code, which contains switchable dual information. Our samples show no significant degradations in switching performance under ambient conditions after three months. For practical applications, gaschromic or electrochromic loading of hydrogen can be utilized for enhanced switching speed and durability. 