In the past few years, we have witnessed an increased interest in the use of 2D materials for the realization of hybrid photonic nonlinear waveguides. Although graphene has attracted most of the attention, other families of 2D materials such as transition metal dichalcogenides have also shown promising nonlinear performances. In this work, we propose a strategy for designing silicon nitride waveguide structures embedded with MoS2 for nonlinear applications. The transverse geometry of the hybrid waveguide's structure is optimized for high third-order nonlinear effects using optogeometrical engineering and multiple layers of MoS2. Stacking multiple monolayers, results in an improvement of 2 orders of magnitude in comparison with standard silicon nitride waveguides. The performance of the hybrid waveguides is then investigated in terms of four-wave mixing enhancement in micro-ring resonator configurations. A -6.3 dB signal/idler conversion efficiency is reached around 1.55μm wavelength for a 5 mW pumping level. Silicon photonics is a very promising platform in many aspects, and especially due to its possible CMOS compatibility. However, integrated silicon nonlinear optical applications at telecom wavelengths e.g 1530 nm -1560 nm (C-band), are met with a few difficulties. Although silicon is itself a very non-linear material (Kerr index ≃ 5.10 [1]), its band structure induces two photon absorption (TPA), thus strongly counterbalancing the optical Kerr nonlinearity of the material. Moreover, the choice of directly compatible materials for photonics is limited. A classical alternative to silicon is silicon nitride (SiN). The absence of TPA in the near IR and the low propagation loss of SiN waveguides (below 1 dB/cm in the near infra-red) make them interesting. Impressive demonstrations of supercontinuum generation , effective nonlinear coefficient γ ≈ 1 W -1 m -1 Once nonlinear waveguides are properly designed, the performances of a frequency conversion scheme by considering a ring resonator configuration is chosen as a reference configuration to estimate the nonlinear photonic platform performances effective index, group index) and nonlinear properties (nonlinear coefficient γ). Introducing new materials, even ultrathin 2D-materials, may affect the linear dispersion properties of the waveguides. It is important to know if this is the case and to be able to quantify it. Moreover, a detailed study of the waveguide dispersion is critical for the design of the optimized structures because of the phase matching requirements in nonlinear optical processes like FWM A commercial finite difference eigenmodes (FDE) mode solver was used and applied to a TMD-SiN hybrid waveguide in various configurations (see Fig. The complex surface conductivity was then extracted from the dielectric function using the following expression: Related results are shown in Fig. Transverse electric (TE) like polarization was considered for maximum interaction between the 2D material and the mode However, once this has been accomplished, other operations can be undertaken. The deposition of an oxide layer such as Al2O3 or HfO2 on top of the 2D material can be beneficial as it can act as a protective layer. A shift in the dispersion profile obviously appears, pushing the mode anomalous dispersion widely in the C band. Furthermore, the spatial overlap factor of the guided quasi-TE mode changes and comes from 0.03% in the absence of HfO2 cladding, to 0.10 %, the high index top layer indeed pulling the mode in the vertical direction. To quantify how this affects the nonlinearities, further studies were performed. Estimation of the third order nonlinear waveguide performances was achieved as follows Here, A0 is the waveguide core area, ANL is the cross section made of all the materials participating to the waveguide effective nonlinearity related to the standard n2 and TPA coefficient (βTPA) through the following relationship: TPA was further ignored since it is absent from SiO2 and SiN. Concerning MoS2 monolayers, the absence of TPA at λ≈1.55 μm was further recently confirmed by theoretical studies , with ε0 being the permittivity in vacuum and vg the group velocity of the propagating mode. This methodology was used to compare different approaches for the realization and optimization of nonlinear waveguides embedding MoS2 layers. The main line of the waveguide design was to consider the integration of a variable number of MoS2 monolayers. In order to guarantee a realistic technological approach, the same planarized SiN waveguides as in previous studies were considered. To ensure the MoS2 monolayer character, and thus the large bandgap of the material and the absence of TPA In the continuity, we draw our interest in an emblematic application with the enhanced waveguide nonlinearity. Our choice fell on the wavelength conversion mechanism by degenerate FWM in a ring resonator structure based on the previously optimized hybrid waveguides. The device is an all pass resonator device as presented Fig , with α are the propagation losses, L the waveguide propagation length, P0 is the pump power, PC is the power of the converted (idler) frequency, PS the power of the signal frequency (as presented Fig. , κ being the phase mismatch. Now, considering a ring resonator and 3 frequencies, _ , . and ` i.e. the pump, the signal and the converted (idler) respectively, the feedback due to the cavity gives rise to the appearance of Field Enhancement coefficients (FEi) in the conversion efficiency: , with k and r the cross and pass coefficients of the coupling area respectively: This conversion efficiency was made for two devices with identical cross sections but different settings: one for a straight waveguide and the other for a regular micro-ring with a 100 μm radius, the considered unfolded propagation lengths being set to the same values to enable the comparison between the designs. Those results are presented in Fig The γ≈1 W -1 m -1 case corresponds to a standard reference SiN buried strip planarized waveguide without further active material. The three other values are for the low, middle ground, and high values of the showcased structure of Fig. What appears clearly is that a strong transmission coefficient is required from the coupling area of the waveguide in order to make the effect of the ring interesting. This is expected when considering that a high-quality factor can be linked to high photon lifetime in the cavity. Moreover, for a ring with a high coupling transmission, the conversion efficiency remains higher for the ring than for the straight waveguide even for very high losses. However, as the propagation losses increase, the overall quality factor is reduced, hence reducing the conversion efficiency faster than in a straight waveguide. In any case, using a proper design (high coupling transmission) allows a conversion efficiency as high as -6.3 dB conversion efficiency for an injected input power of 1mW (PL(0)=1mW) (see Disclosures. The authors declare no conflicts of interest.