An optical rotary sensor based on laser self-mixing interferometry is proposed, which enables noncontact and fullcircle rotation measurement of non-cooperative targets with high resolution and sensitivity. The prototype demonstrates that the resolution is 0.1μrad and the linearity is 2.33×10 -4 . Stability of the prototype is 2μrad over 3600s and the repeatability error is below 0.84°under 9-gruop full-circle tests. The theoretical resolution reaches up to 16nrad. Random rotation has been successfully traced with a bionic hand to simulate the tremor process. Error analysis and limitation discussion have been also carried out in the paper. Although the accuracy needs further improvement compared with the best rotary sensor, this method has its unique advantages of non-cooperative target sensing, high sensitivity and electromagnetic immunity. Hence, the optical rotary sensor provides a promising alternative in precise rotation measurement, tremor tracing and nano-motion monitoring. Rotation measurement plays a crucial role in industrial applications and frontier scientific research, such as automatic control, robotics, precision machining, mask aligner and gravitational wave detection As to optical metrology, it has attracted increasing attention due to its nondestructive detection, tracking to the wavelength source and strong electromagnetic immunity. Normal interferometric methods need two beams or more to decouple the motions in multi-degree-of-freedom for the angle measurement Recently, laser self-mixing interferometry(LSI) has been successfully applied in many fields, including displacement/velocity measurement, laser eavesdropping and biological imaging where  is the effective reflection coefficient of the external target, 01  and 02  are the initial phase of  and 2 channel, respectively. G is the gain function. In microchip lasers, the modulation gain G can reach up to 10 6 , which means that the reflectivity of the measured target is as low as 10 -12 when a relative amplitude of a 100% modulation is achieved Clearly, the rotation of the target will lead to the frequency shift for the two sensing beams, namely the Doppler effect. Thereby it will cause the phase variation where 0 f is the laser frequency and c is the light velocity in the vacuum. The rotation can be deduced without the incident angle 1  as  can be calibrated in the experiment as the foreknown parameter and  is the laser wavelength A. Prototype There are three main parts of the optical rotary sensor, including optical sensing head, signal processing and host computer. A solid-state microchip Nd:YVO4 laser is employed for its high gain under frequency-shifted feedback modulation. The laser output beam is linearly polarized and 10.4mW of power in a TEM00 mode. The wavelength stability is 2×10 -8 /h and the power stability is 0.1%/2h The laser output is separated by a beam splitter (BS1, 0.96:0.04). A lens (L, f=50mm) is placed after BS1 for beam collimation. The key designs of the ORS lie in the beam separation and heterodyne modulation, as introduced in the Part 2. The reflective beam of BS1 is detected by a siliconbased photodetector, which contains the modulated signals and the relaxation oscillation To test the rotation measurement performance, the stability results of the prototype have been firstly obtained. Fig. As to long-time stability, we conduct 3600s stationary angular displacement measurement in four days. The Amplitude Spectrum Density(ASD) results are also given, as illustrated in Fig. To determine the resolution of the proposed sensor, step/ square-wave tests through a high-precision rotary stage (PI P-562.6CD, 0.1μrad resolution) have been performed. The corresponding results are shown in Fig. The obtained results are presented in Fig. Repeatability is defined as the standard deviation of the measured position error between the starting position and the final position Hand/wrist tremor may indicate Parkinsonism in the early stage. The ORS can be employed to trace wrist tremor and recover the rotation information during the tremor process. In the experiment, the rotary stage produces a random rotation motion of a bionic hand, as shown in Fig. Compared with the reference results from the capacitive sensor in the PI stage, the ORS can measure the random rotation at the micro-motion level. In this case, the proposed ORS exhibits an excellent traceability for the simulated tremor of the robotic hand, which may provide a precautionary diagnosis method for some tremor diseases. A. Error analysis In the prototype, the sensing beams are assumed as parallel to the rotation plane. However, there is a misalignment (incorrect pitch angle) between the rotation plane and two sensing beams. Thus, the final calculation should be modified as follows:   where  devotes the pitch angle. Based on the designed prototype, we bring out the uncertainty analysis of the rotation measurement. More details can be found in the Supplemental document. The results in Fig. Doppler shift caused by the rotation can not exceed the signal processing bandwidth, thus imposing a limitation on the rotary velocity range. According to the Equation 2, the Doppler shift of the two sensing beams can be deduced as: When the rotary radium is constant, the highest angular velocity is determined by the sampling bandwidth and the incident angle 1  . To obtain a higher rotary velocity and a better SNR, the incident angle 1  is set zero in the experiment. The experimental bandwidth is set to be 2kHz, as broader bandwidth means more low frequency noise. In this case, the rotation velocity is allowed to be measured below 1.64°/s. The measurable angular velocity range can be improved by increasing the demodulation bandwidth to megahertz level with a phasemeter (PT-1313B). To better conclude this method, a performance summary of the proposed ORS is given in Table . 1. The comparison with other methods of rotation measurement are also presented in Fig. Angular velocity range 0-1.64°/s (R=50mm ) An optical rotary sensor of non-cooperative targets with high sensitivity, full-circle range and nanoradian resolution has been proposed and tested. Experimental results demonstrate that 360° rotation sensing with a measured 0.1μrad resolution and 2.33×10 -4 precision has been achieved in the laboratory condition. The theoretical resolution can be as low as 16nrad calculated from the stability data. Preliminary attempt has been made to trace the hand/wrist tremor with the proposed ORS. The main error sources during the rotation sensing process are assumed to be from the uncertainty of the rotary radius and the angle of two sensing beams. We also discussed the various sensing performances of targets with different materials and the sensing speed limitation of the present prototype. At last, a summary and comparison have been given, indicating that this method possesses unique advantages and thus promising application potential. Although having a lot of work to optimize, we will focus on the ORS promotion of sensing precision and rotary speed limitation in the future research, hoping to breakthrough in the field of robot gesture sensing, tremor tracing and nano-motion measurement. Funding 