Three-dimensional metallic microstructures find applications as stents in medicine, as ultrabroadband antennas in communications, in micromechanical parts or as structures of more fundamental interest in photonics like metamaterials. Direct metal printing of such structures using three-dimensional laser lithography is a promising approach, which is not extensively applied yet, as fabrication speed, surface quality, and stability of the resulting structures are limited so far. In order to identify the limiting factors, we investigate the influence of light-particle interactions and varying scan speed on heat generation and particle deposition in direct laser writing of silver. We introduce a theoretical model which captures diffusion of particles and heat as well as the fluid dynamics of the photo-resist. Chemical reactions are excluded from the model but particle production is calibrated using experimental data. We find that optical forces generally surmount those due to convection of the photo-resist. Simulations predict overheating of the photo-resist at laser powers similar to those found in experiments. The thermal sensitivity of the system is essentially determined by the largest particles present in the laser focus. Our results suggest that to improve particle deposition and to achieve higher writing speeds in metal direct laser writing, strong optical trapping of the emerging particles is desirable. Furthermore, precise control of the particle size reduces the risk of spontaneous overheating. Direct laser writing of metallic micro-structures (MDLW) emerges as a fabrication method The underlying effects that determine the above mentioned phenomena have individually been investigated in depth, both experimentally and by computer simulations, e.g., plasmonic heating We set off from an idealized source of particles, located at the laser focus. Since most commonly silver is used in MDLW, we only consider silver structures and nano-particles in this paper, though our model is not restricted to silver and can be applied to other materials straightforwardly. This paper is organized as follows: After revisiting optical trapping of nano-scale particles, we introduce our simulation model. Then we present results for the convection velocity of the photo-resist and the temperature increase as a function of laser power. We analyze the effect of the particle size on the heat generation within the fluid. Then, we derive the laser powers corresponding to the overheating threshold and compare them to experimental findings. In the last section, we demonstrate, how optical forces can improve the deposition of particles in MDLW, and the analysis of experimentally measured particle production rates is shown. We conclude with a few remarks concerning possible refinements of the simulations and improvements of the MDLW process. Trailing is a method section where experimental methods and simulations FIG. are described in further detail; numeric values of the model parameters are given and boundary conditions are specified and motivated. Laser particle trapping. Reduction and nucleation of silver starts in the focus of the laser beam, where the generated nanoparticles are subject to the electrical field E ext of the incident light. The fields induced in the particles by E ext interact with the latter, resulting in a net force on the particles. Most important is the induced dipole moment p which causes a force proportional to the gradient of the irradiance I. Here c 0 is the speed of light in vacuum. The polarizability α = 3V i m 2 -1 m 2 +2 depends on the particle's volume V i and the ratio of refractive indices m = n/n liq of particle and surrounding media, 31 respectively. Eq. ( For the cross-section σ pr corresponding to the force due to radiation pressure (a.k.a. phase gradient force, scattering force), we use the result obtained from Mie-theory. where Φ denotes the total phase and ω is the angular frequency of the electrical field. Radiation pressure becomes more and more important with growing particle size; eventually it surmounts the attractive gradient force (1), so that larger particles cannot be confined but are ejected from the focus along the beam axis. For the total optical force we write Model equations. In case of equilibrium and a conservative force field, any initial particle distribution will relax into the corresponding Boltzmann-distribution. In our case, however, the laser moves through the photo-resist and continuously produces silver particles. This requires to solve the transport equation for the local particle concentration c. The term (u + μF opt )c captures advection of particles due to optical forces F opt and the local velocity u of the surrounding photo-resist, taken in the reference frame of the laser. Here, particle diameter d and fluid viscosity η determine the mobility μ = (3πηd) -1 . Diffusion is assumed to be Fickian with diffusion constant given by the Einstein-Smoluchowski relation 32 D = μk B T 0 where T 0 is the ambient temperature and k B the Boltzmann constant. In a reference frame centered around the moving laser focus, particle production is represented by the spatially steady source term where w 0 is the beam waist at the focus and z R the Rayleigh length. The half widths of S c correspond to those of the squared irradiance I 2 that typically governs two-photon processes (c.f. ref. 14, figure in the Boussinesq approximation, Heat propagation within the fluid is described by the heat equation where k and c p denote the thermal conductivity and the heat capacity, respectively, of the photo-resist. As the photo-resist is transparent at the laser wavelength, we consider particles to be the only substance to accumulate heat as they partially absorb incoming light. Thus we put the heat source term cσ abs I as product of local particle concentration c, their absorption cross-section σ abs and irradiance I. This very slightly overestimates the total heat input as it does not account for particles up the beam axis shading those further down. Strong shielding, however, would interrupt the laser writing process and thus is ruled out by experience. Convection and heating. In order to quantify the impact of buoyancy on the MDLW process, we simulate the influence of varying laser power on the motion of the photo-resist and the peak temperatures in the vicinity of the focus. We assume a particle diameter of 45 nm which is a size typically found on SEM images of our samples and is already large enough to be efficiently trapped and heated. Depending on the laser power and particle diameter, simulations show that steady state is reached after 50 -200 ms. We observe a non-linear increase of the peak temperatures with growing laser power P 0 , which is attributed to the combined action of increased irradiance and trapping (i.e. higher particle concentrations exposed to higher light intensity), see figure As shown in figs. 4 and 3, the fluid velocities are negligible compared to the advection μF opt of particles by optical forces; the Peclet numbers which relate diffusion to fluid velocity u are much smaller than unity, see table I. Despite particles are permanently produced and spread diffusively from the focus, they do not present a heat source large enough to cause a problematic amount of buoyancy. The generality of the maximum convection velocities obtained from our simulations is supported by two important characteristics inherent to the MDLW process: First, the temperature is naturally limited by the boiling point. Second, the spatial extent of the heat source only The Peclet numbers Pe T , Pe c are given with respect to both fluid velocity u and laser scan speed v; only for the latter they approach or surpass unity. covers the laser focus, outside the focal region, the temperature decays reciprocally. Both limit the total momentum input due to buoyancy into the fluid. Furthermore, this analysis shows that transport of particles due to the scanning movement of the focus can be important and impact their local concentrations, whereas heat diffusion is not expected to be affected by advection, neither of scanning nor fluid motion. It follows that the back coupling of the fluid velocity u into eqs. ( Silver structures larger than 60 nm are rarely observed on SEM-images (see fig. In simulations, overheating is considered to occur if the temperature T increases to or beyond 100 °C. Experimentally, the situation is not as explicit since no clear damage threshold power exists. Rather, microbubbles increasingly disturb the writing process with increasing laser power. From microscopy images we therefore define the damage threshold power as the power at which a written line is no longer connected at at least one position. Figure reach the threshold temperature. This supports our choice of dismissing particles smaller than 30 nm from the outset. The presence of 60 nm particles significantly lowers the threshold powers which then match the values obtained from experiments. Accordingly, the lowest threshold is observed for a system consisting of 60 nm particles only. Mixtures containing both 60 nm particles and one of the smaller diameters in equal shares show increased thresholds that differ only very slightly from each other. Hence, the biggest species present in the system determines the thermal sensitivity. This is attributed to both the better trapping of bigger particles and the strong increase of the absorption cross section σ abs in this size regime. Together, this results in higher concentrations of particles in the laser focus and a much increased total absorbance. Deposition efficiency. In the following, we examine the influence of optical forces on the deposition of particles onto the substrate in order to investigate a possible increase of fabrication speeds. In simulations, this is carried out by integrating the vertical flux of particles j onto the substrate, i.e. on the bottom face of the simulation domain. Normalizing this result to the total particle production rate S c yields the deposition efficiency q depo (see methods section for definition and determination thereof) which, since j ∝ S c , is independent of the model input parameter S c . This dimensionless quantity represents the physical efficiency of the MDLW-process and gives the fraction of particles that adsorb at the structure, its inverse represents particles that diffuse away and appear as debris on the substrate. Note that the total efficiency of MDLW comprises the quantum-yield of the 2-photon process, the chemical reactions induced by the latter and nucleation and re-dissolution of silver. These processes are not included in the deposition efficiency q depo and are generally beyond the scope of this paper. Small particles show a low deposition efficiency (q depo (d= 30 nm) 0.5) and respond insensitively to variations of optical forces by means of laser power P 0 and NA, see figs. 6 and 7. This is attributed to their higher diffusivity combined with the relatively small susceptibility to optical forces, leading to small Peclet-numbers and diffusion-dominated behavior (c.f. table Larger particles are more affected by changes to the optical setup; switching from NA=1.2 to NA=0.3 which comes along with much smaller optical force, halves the deposition efficiency of 60 nm particles uniformly for all scan speeds under consideration (c.f. fig. AFM height maps of silver lines fabricated at different scan speeds provide the cross-sections A and the surface roughness of these lines (not shown here). Multiplication with the scan speed yields the net volumetric silver production rate S V = Av. 4 Parameters obtained from error-weighted least-square fits of eq. ( For a given diameter, the numeric particle production rate S c , which is fed into eq. ( The parameters g and b are subject to optimization by the fit routine, see table II for results. We compared the residuals of fits of eq. ( These modifications yield the parameters g, b corresponding to the gross particle production in consideration of the associated theoretical deposition efficiency. Fits of eq. (8a) describe experimental data very well and yield residuals practically identical to those obtained from the unmodified fit function. Eq. (8b) fails to describe experimental data at scan speeds above 60 μm s -1 . Hence, the baseline production b and associated deposition are insensitive to the scan speed; we suggest that the baseline-production is promoted by the substrate and these particles aggregate immediately. We introduced a model for the simulation of direct laser writing of metallic structures (MDLW) and discussed its results concerning convection, heating and deposition. Convection of photo-resist does not affect the deposition of particles. Since rapidly increasing velocity with growing heat source has been reported, The comparison of maximum feasible laser powers obtained from simulations and experiments, respectively, suggested that to disturb the MDLW process critically, the onset of evaporation is already sufficient, before permanent boiling occurs. The impact of clusters of particles which potentially promote heat absorption could be investigated using molecular dynamics simulations which resolve individual particles and solving for the electric fields at the same time. Our simulations suggest that the deposition of particles improves with increasing trapping strength. This could also mitigate losses due to increased scan speed, especially for large particles. AFM measurements of silver structures produced via MDLW delivered the required input parameter for the model equations, as well as the surface roughness (not shown here). The increase of the latter towards slower scan speeds indicates that the growth of larger particles then is promoted. Hence a better understanding of growth mechanisms and time-scales is desirable. Model parameters. For the investigation of convection, we set the scan speed v x = 10 μm s -1 . Unless indicated otherwise, we assume an effective numerical aperture of NA=1.2 which accounts for the lowered refractive index of the photo resist compared to immersion oil. For the refractive index of silver particles, we use the values published by Johnson and Christy The remaining parameters appearing in eqs. ( For the fluid dynamics (5), we consider a reference frame that moves with the constant scan speed v of the laser. Consequently, the initial fluid velocity is set to that of the laser: Correspondingly, we assume the substrate, that is the bottom face Γ - at z = 0, to correspond to a no-slip boundary that moves with -v: At the same time, side and top walls Γ , Γ + , respectively, shall be as "transparent" as possible for the fluid, which we achieve by applying homogeneous Neumann boundary conditions both for pressure and velocity: Thereby we do not constrain the size of convection eddies. The reference pressure is set at the top face Γ + at z = 8 μm via a homogeneous Dirichlet condition: We assume the substrate to function as heat sink and, in order to avoid an unphysical accumulation of heat within the system, fix the boundaries T Γ = T 0 (13) to the ambient temperature for the heat equation (6). Due to the sufficient size of our simulation domain, this hardly affects temperatures at the laser focus. The set of coupled equations (3), ( Laser beam. Laser beams are modeled as paraxial Gaussian beam. respectively. Albeit the laser emits short pulses, we use the forces of the averaged laser power since pulsed lasers show at least equal trapping efficiencies as the equivalent CW laser. where s d represents the net fraction of deposited particles with diameter d within the system and the relation holds. Such a superposition yields the temperature T (s, P 0 , v) for all laser powers P 0 and scan speeds v considered in the parameter space. We obtain the threshold powers by means of a greedy search for P 0 s.t. T (s, P 0 , v) = 100 °C. For determination of the dependence of temperature on scan speed and laser power, simulations were run with P 0 = 4 . . . 20 mW, while the scan speed was sampled non-uniformly at v x = 1, 5, 10, 15, 30, 50, 75, 100 μm s -1 in order to capture all features at lower velocities. Deposition efficiency. In order to measure the fraction of particles that adsorb to the line being written, we integrate the vertical flux of particles j z = (μF opt c -D∇c) z (18) on the substrate (i.e. on the bottom face of the domain) over a square of 2 μm edge length, centered around the beam axis. Normalizing this result to the total particle production rate S c yields which, since j ∝ S c , is independent of the model input parameter S c . Structure fabrication. Silver lines are fabricated using a commercially available direct laser writing system (Nanoscribe). This system uses a tightly focussed laser beam (80 MHz, 780 nm) to locally initiate photo-reactions. In our experiment, a liquid photosensitive material consisting of 0.4 M silver perchlorate, 0.05 M trisodium citrate, 20 v% ammonia water and water, is sandwiched between two BK 7 glass substrates using 50 μm tape spacers. Structures are fabricated on the bottom facet of the top glass substrates. Thus, radiation pressure points towards the substrates. AFM measurements and evaluation. AFM height maps of the fabricated silver lines are taken using a JPK Nanowizard 3 AFM. Eleven parallel lines are fabricated with a separation of 2 μm. A Matlab script is used to automatically derive the averaged line widths, line heights and RMS roughnesses from these height maps.