We present a comprehensive overview of chirality and its optical manifestation in plasmonic nanosystems and nanostructures. We discuss top-down fabricated structures that range from solid metallic nanostructures to groupings of metallic nanoparticles arranged in three dimensions. We present the large variety of bottom-up synthesised structures. Using DNA, peptides, or other scaffolds, complex nanoparticle arrangements of up to hundreds of individual nanoparticles have been realized. Beyond this static picture, we give also an overview over recent demonstrations of active chiral plasmonic systems where the chiral optical response can be controlled by an external stimulus. We discuss the prospect of utilizing the unique properties of complex chiral plasmonic systems for enantiomeric sensing schemes. We present a comprehensive overview of chirality and its optical manifestation in plasmonic nanosystems and nanostructures. Most generally, chirality refers to the symmetry properties of an object. Mathematically speaking, a chiral object does not possess mirror planes or inversion symmetry. The object and its mirror image can thus not be made to coincide by simple rotations or translations. One calls the object and its mirror image two enantiomorphs, or, in molecular systems, two enantiomers. As our own hands are chiral themselves, a chiral object is also termed "handed". While this terminology sounds fairly technical, chiral objects are quite ubiquitous in nature. Apart from our own hands and feet, a large number of objects show chirality: The essential amino-acids, carbohydrates, nucleic acids, proteins, seashells, and the tendrils of climbing plants are examples from nature. In art and architecture chirality is an often seen feature in towers, columns, and staircases, to name a few. Also, a lot of daily objects are handed, such as corkscrews or keys. In fact, nature itself has been called chiral as many important and central aspects lead us to the so-called asymmetry of life: a large number of biomolecules only exist in one handedness, e.g., all 21 essential amino-acids are L-enantiomers, indicating that the associated physiological processes show 100 % stereoselectivity. Accordingly, chirality has been the subject of intense research investigations along the route to unravel the basic origin of life itself Apart from the purely geometrical considerations, chirality can also manifest itself in physical properties. In fact, symmetries are at the basis of the properties of nearly every physical system as they dictate the electronic structures, crystallographic ordering, chemical bonds, etc. (2). Chirality can for example manifest itself optically via a different response to right-or left-handed circularly polarized light (RCP and LCP), being the "chiral state" of light. A chiral medium exhibits different complex refractive indices for those two polarization states CD and ORD spectroscopy are powerful tools in biology, medicine, chemistry, and physics for studying chiral molecules of different kinds and sizes, especially for analyzing the secondary structure and conformation of macromolecules Additionally, by virtue of the strong near-fields, resonances of individual particles can be coupled together and form collective modes that extend over the entire nanoparticle arrangement. In analogy to molecular physics, where the electronic wavefunctions of individual atoms mix and hybridize to form molecules, such plasmonic nanoparticle groupings have been termed plasmonic molecules in which plasmons from individual nanoparticles mix and hybridize. The related theory is called plasmon hybridization. The field of chiral plasmonics can in fact be seen as an extension of these efforts. As described above, chirality is a very intriguing property in its very own right. In recognizing the weak chiral optical responses of natural systems on the one hand and the strong light-matter interaction in plasmonic systems on the other hand, the idea of enhanced and tailored chiral optical responses in chiral plasmonic systems holds great promises Most research in the field can be understood and classified following the same rules as in molecular systems. Nature offers a large variety of chiral molecules, with very distinct working principles. A hexahelicene molecule consists of a ring of six benzene units. Six such units constitute a full 360° turn. However, for such a hexahelicene molecule the ring is not closed in-plane, but cut and bent open. Depending on an upward or downward bending, the molecule can either be left-or right-handed. The molecule possesses delocalized electronic orbitals that extend over the entire structure. Another prominent example is the so-called chiral center in which the tetravalent bonds of a central carbon atom are dressed with four different atoms or molecular groups, rendering the structure chiral. One can imagine the structure as a symmetric three-sided pyramid whose four corners are each dressed with a different object. The unhanded symmetric pyramid therefore becomes chiral. Again, such a molecular structure is rendered chiral by the nature and symmetry of the interaction as well as the bond formation in the molecules. Therefore, they also exhibit a strong chiral optical response due to the handedness not only of the structure but also of the collective wave functions. As soon as the molecular entities become more complex and more individual subunits and compounds are involved, another very different working principle can be observed. For example achiral chromophores can be arranged in a handed fashion, e.g., helically attached to a central backbone. These chromophores can either have degenerate or nondegenerate energies (3). In the latter case the collective wave functions or orbitals of the subgroups only interact very weakly with the neighbouring ones, so that crosstalk is mainly mediated by Coulomb interaction between the charge clouds. A chiral optical response is in this case not caused by a collective handed orbital, but rather by an additional interaction between individual subgroups that are arranged in a handed fashion. The aforementioned chiral center is another example of this working principle: Many biomolecules do actually consist of several chiral centres which do not necessarily all share a collective orbital Chiral plasmonic structures can be classified in a very similar fashion, mainly depending on whether or not a collective plasmonic mode of handed character is formed along the entire structure. Collective plasmonic modes can form either in metallic nanoparticles which are themselves handed or in handed groupings of individual resonant nanoparticles. These two cases exhibit the strongest chiral optical responses and in fact represent the vast majority of chiral plasmonic structures in literature. Both concepts have been used in top-down fabricated systems, e.g., utilizing two-photon direct laser writing or electron-beam exposure, as well as in bottom-up synthesized structures, for example using DNA self-assembly. In analogy to biphenyl, one can also create handed arrangements of non-resonant (non-degenerate) plasmon modes. In such systems no collective modes of handed character are formed. However, a scattering type interaction is still possible which can lead to a chiral optical response One crucial difference between natural molecules and artificially created plasmonic molecules should be noted: a molecule is a bound system of individual atoms or molecular subgroups. Its structural symmetry and properties are determined by the interaction of the individual orbitals as well as by the symmetry and properties of the bond formation. Such a molecule therefore necessarily reflects its symmetry in the optical properties. A plasmonic molecule, however, is an artificially created entity that is not bound by the plasmonic interaction but by a physical scaffold that can be, e.g., a dielectric medium or DNA origami, among others. Thus, even though a plasmonic molecule might be handed from a geometrical point of view, there is no guarantee that the molecule will exhibit a chiral optical response. That said, a similar effect can be observed in molecular systems, in the extremely large size regime: As soon as a molecular system becomes so large that opposite ends are only weakly bound to each other they do not share a common electronic wavefunction. As a result the handed information of the structure is lost and the molecule shows extremely weak or no chiral optical response. The following sections are structured as follows: first, we will discuss chiral plasmonic systems that are created using top-down fabrication methods, such as direct laser writing or lithography techniques. Subsequently, we will review the efforts of bottom-up synthesis using peptides or DNA-scaffolds. Different from natural molecules, it is fairly straightforward to manipulate the structure and arrangement of elements in artificial plasmonic molecules. This has led to the realization of active and tuneable plasmonic chirality, both in top-down and bottom-up structures, which we will discuss afterwards. We will end the review with a discussion on the potential applications of chiral plasmonics, particularly in view of the recent efforts in chiral sensing, that is, the ultimate goal of discriminating the handedness of single (or few) chiral molecules utilizing appropriate chiral plasmonic sensing platforms. An archetype chiral structure is a helix or a spiral, an object exhibiting a distinct twist and is well-known from daily life and from nature. Gansel and co-workers have demonstrated plasmonic helices, which were fabricated by two-photon direct laser writing and a subsequent electroplating step that filled the helical voids in the photoresist The resulting free-standing helices exhibited plasmonic modes that extended over the entire structure, as can be seen in the simulated mode profiles shown in Figure The same authors have studied the influence of pitch and diameter of the helices in great detail With impressive advances in fabrication technology the helices could be further optimized by nesting several helices into one another, as shown in Figure Apart from direct laser writing other techniques have been used to create chiral plasmonic structures. Frank and co-workers used colloidal nanohole lithography, a technique at the boundary of top-down and bottom-up techniques, to create gold spirals or ramps The aforementioned structures are real spirals, some of them even exhibiting several pitches. Another possibility is to create structures that are not directly reminiscent of a spiral but do still possess a handed character, such as staircases or a Mö bius strip Conceptually, it is possible to arrange achiral constituents to form a superstructure that is chiral. The most straightforward design consists of two individual nanorods that are stacked on top of each other and are twisted with respect to each other, see Figure 2A Other than nanorods, basically every plasmonic element can be utilized as a fundamental building block. Over the years a variety of structures have been demonstrated, using gammadions of different shapes If one uses nanospheres or nanodisks as simplest building blocks, one has generally two possibilities to render an arrangement chiral, as illustrated in Figure For large scale and solution-based synthesis of chiral plasmonic structures self-assembly has been a particularly powerful route. In general two different strategies have been used: Metallic nanoparticles can be organized with the help of molecular scaffolds that take the form of fibers and possess either an intrinsic twist or are applied in twisted layers. The other option uses self-assembly via self-terminated interaction that lead to chiral clusters, that is, individual plasmonic molecules. Due to the tailorability of the molecular interaction this route tends to show a larger degree of structural control over the end products. Guerrero-Martinez and co-workers used anthraquinone based oxalamide fibers infiltrated with gold nanorods The resulting chiral nanoparticle chains reached considerable length with densely spaced nanoparticles facilitating coupling between the individual particles. The overall system showed a strong chiral optical response, similarly to the previous study, in the visible wavelength regime, see Figure Shen and co-workers assembled a similar helical structure, yet with an intriguing strategy using an origami sheet Shen and co-workers also assembled chiral structures composed of two nanorods aligned tip-to-tip under an 90° angle, schematically illustrated in Figure 4D The position, orientation, and relative angle between the nanorods can be precisely controlled by the attachment sites on the nanosheet (62). Lan et al. used DNA nanosheets to create stacks of rotated gold nanorods The strands were both complementary to the ssDNA used to assemble the gold nanorods. Mixing both entities led to the formation of nanorod stacks, exhibiting a chiral optical response around 700 nm. A distribution of finite stacks forms, as indicated by the TEM images in Figure Drawing inspiration from molecular physics, the analogy to a chiral center, as introduced above, has been studied extensively as well. Here, four different particles are arranged in a symmetric frame in order to form a chiral entity. First results were demonstrated by Mastroianni and co-workers Shen and co-workers could indeed show how to increase the chiral optical response in such a four-particle self-assembled geometry In this structure, the handedness was induced due to the geometrical placement of the particles (configuration) rather than by size (conformation). In the experiment, depicted in Figure The handedness of a molecule is a fixed and well defined property. Fundamentally speaking, this is the reason why CD spectroscopy is an important tool for structural investigations as the spectral response is uniquely related to a certain handedness or to a single enantiomer of a system. In chiral plasmonics, have demonstrated excellent structural control, both using top-down and bottom-up techniques. With such control, systems with switchable chirality can be realized, i.e., systems that show different chiral optical responses under a certain external stimulus. In molecular physics a change in the chiral optical response is always related to a real change in the 3dimensional arrangement, hence, the geometry of a system. In artificial structures it is not straightforwardly possible to change the arrangement of the structures postfabrication. However, changing the chiral optical response is still possible by any manipulation that suitably influences the plasmon modes of the system, even if the geometrical handedness of the structure stays unchanged. Zhang and co-workers demonstrated a highly sophisticated top-down structure which showed a photoinduced optical handedness change A similar tuning concept was introduced by Duan and co-workers In all the aforementioned systems, the change in the chiral optical response is enabled by sophisticated designs and is a consequence of the superposition of different signals. Schreiber et al. demonstrated a switchable system that relies on the fact that the excitation of plasmon modes strongly depends on the orientation of the nanostructure Beyond these methods to manipulate the plasmon modes, the post-fabrication tunability of bottom-up structures additionally allows for actively and reversibly changing the geometrical arrangement and configuration of a chiral plasmonic molecule, that is, its handedness, and consequently fully inverting the chiral optical response. The first fully switchable system has been shown by Kuzyk and co-workers: The authors constructed an origami template which consisted of two intersecting twisted bundles held together, shown in Figure As shown, one of the main striking features of plasmonic chirality is its strength compared to naturally occurring chiral molecules. Even dense solutions of chiral molecules might show a CD response of only a few milidegrees. Accordingly, the socalled dissymmetry factor is only in the range of 10 -7 to 10 -5 . Plasmonic molecules and structures, on the other hand, can exhibit CD responses of tens of degrees for structures less than a wavelength in thickness. In the extreme case, this can result in responses where one handedness is fully absorbed while the other is transmitted In contrast to molecules, plasmonic structures are excellent scatters and absorbers for light. It is an intriguing question whether it is possible to combine plasmonic and molecular systems such that the chiral optical response of the chiral molecule will be increased. Such hybrid chiral systems could result in novel chiral optical spectroscopy techniques with largely increased sensitivity, similar to plasmonically enhanced spectroscopy techniques for achiral molecules such as SERS or SEIRA Many studies rely on the interaction of an achiral plasmonic resonance with chiral molecules. The plasmonic resonance can either result from one single achiral nanostructure or in an achiral assembly of several nanostructures. In the following, we will discuss some important findings. More comprehensive reviews can be found in Ref. In such a hybrid chiral system, two distinct features can be observed: Firstly, the intrinsic CD of the molecule itself is modified. Secondly, an additional feature in the CD spectrum appears at the plasmon resonance wavelength. This second effect shifts the CD response from the UV, where it generally occurs in molecular systems, more into the visible wavelength region around the plasmon resonance. Using plasmonic nanostructures with resonances in the UV or blue wavelength region increases the strength of the effect Abdulrahman and co-workers have further shown that induced chirality can also occur in a far-field coupling scheme, similar to the coupling of purely plasmonic systems More complex geometries of the nanostructure result in even more sophisticated chiral interactions, which cannot be fully described by the aforementioned dipolar coupling schemes. Tang and Cohen introduced a measure for the chiral interaction strength of an arbitrary electromagnetic field, which they termed optical chirality Complex plasmonic nanostructures were optimized to generate near-fields with high optical chirality An important conclusion is that the CD of a nanostructure cannot be used as a measure when designing a structure with strong a structure with strong chiral near-fields and vice versa Although the concept of optical chirality offers a powerful tool to quickly check different designs regarding their potential usefulness for plasmonically enhanced chiral sensing, the theory assumes no back action of the chiral molecule on the nanostructure and, therefore, cannot fully predict the response of such hybrid systems. Rigorous numerical simulations that include the chiral medium close the gap because they take all electromagnetic interactions into account. The results of such simulations indicate that strong field enhancement and the correct alignment of the enhanced fields with respect to the incident field is more crucial than the chirality of the nanostructure (99). Some experimental investigations have been performed by Hendry and co-workers, who used a gammadion-shaped nanoparticle to study the interaction of such complex nanostructures with chiral molecules (100). They claimed a sizable resonance shift of the chiral optical response of the metallic nanostructure when adding the chiral analyte. Molecules with different handedness resulted in different signs of the shift. The strength of the response could not completely be explained by theoretical considerations, indicating that the interaction mechanisms in such complex hybrid systems have not been fully revealed yet. However, a different approach for ultra-sensitive detection of chiral molecules has been discussed in literature during the last years. It utilizes the strong CD response of chiral plasmonic systems, which has been extensively discussed in this review, in a highly ingenious way. In this approach, the addition of the analyte triggers a self-assembly process which results in coupled plasmonic structures that exhibit a CD response. The emergence of the plasmonic CD response, which can be traced with standard CD spectrometers, therefore reports the presence of the analyte. Several systems have been studied. For example, Wu and co-workers used the formation of nano-particle dimers for the detection of microcysteine-LR and a cancer biomarker (101). Similar mechanisms have been used for the detection of silver ions(102) and bisphenol A (103). Zhao et al. used shell-engineered systems for DNA detection (104). In all these cases, the analyte molecules link the nanoparticles which results in a plasmonic chiral optical response due to the prolate shape of the nanoparticles. This concept, however, relies on random defects of nominally highly symmetric nanoparticles for the generation of plasmonic chirality. The sensitivity can be largely increased if either particles of lower symmetry, such as rods, or intrinsically chiral assemblies are used. Ma and co-workers used the DNA triggered assembly of twisted chains of gold nanorods for DNA detection (105). The importance of the orientation of the nanorods has been pointed out by Han and collaborators, who showed that the side-by-side arrangement leads to stronger responses than an end-to-end configuration (106) . Wen and collaborators detected copper ions in L-cysteine and gold intrinsic three-dimensional structure, that is, a pyramidal grouping of four nanoparticles. In the first study the presence of the target DNA molecule triggered a structural alteration and thus an increase in the chiral optical response. In the study of Oh and collaborators, a helical arrangement of gold nanoparticles was achieved (107). Li et al. used a combination of gold nanoparticles and luminescent particles that even allowed for a double detection, monitoring CD as well as the luminescence. It has to be mentioned that this indirect detection scheme is, in contrast to the previously discussed interaction of plasmonic and molecular resonances, not generally applicable. Only analytes that trigger the corresponding self-assembly process can be detected. However, if such a process exists, the resulting enhancement is beyond reach for any other method known thus far. Chirality, in a very general sense, refers not only to a geometrical property but also to the optical response of a particular system. While the handedness of a system, from a purely geometrical point of view, constitutes a per se intriguing concept, a chiral optical response is a highly desirable property. While those two concepts are inextricably connected in molecular systems, chiral optical responses of plasmonic systems result from the handedness of the underlying plasmon modes, which not necessarily follow the structural symmetry of the plasmonic system. Advances in micro-and nanofabrication techniques have enabled the realization of sophisticated chiral plasmonic systems. Direct laser writing, multi-layer lithography, selfassembly via scaffolds or DNA, and many more have been used to study the working principle of plasmonic chirality. In order to truly benefit from the strong light-matter interaction of plasmons collective mode formation has been identified as a key feature. Resonant interaction between adjacent nanoparticles enables a strong chiral optical response, much larger than in molecular systems and even large enough to create circular polarizers. Sophisticated materials and designs have furthermore lead to active chiral systems where the chiral optical response or even the handedness of the structure itself could be switched. The combination of plasmonic systems with chiral molecules shows promising prospects for enhanced enantiomer detection. With this rich set of fascinating results, chiral plasmonics has lived up to many of the original promises and hopes and will most definitely remain an interesting and fruitful field of research for the years to come. None, review paper.