We explore the tunneling transport properties of a quantum dot embedded in an optical microcavity and coupled to a semiconductor-superconductor one-dimensional nanowire (Majorana nanowire) hosting Majorana zero modes (MZMs) at their edges. Conductance profiles reveal that strong light-matter coupling can be employed to distinguish between the cases of highly nonlocal MZMs, overlapped MZMs and MZMs with less degree of nonlocal feature. Moreover, we show that it is possible to access the degree of Majorana nonlocality (topological quality factor) by changing the dot spectrum through photon-induced transitions tuned by an external pump applied to the microcavity. Over the past decade, a huge effort in both theoretical and experimental fields has been performing in the quest for an unquestionable signature of exotic 'half-fermionic' states, the so-called Majorana zero-modes (MZMs) in quasi-one dimensional hybrid semiconductor-superconductor nanowires with strong spin-orbit coupling subject to external magnetic field, termed as Majorana nanowires In tunneling spectroscopy measurements performed through a Majorana nanowire The emergence of a trivial zero-energy ABS can be mathematically described as resulting from two half-fermionic states with some spatial separation between them. In this scenario, a quantized ZBP may arise if one of these half-fermionic states couples to a tunneling spectroscopy probe stronger than the other From the perspective of Majorana-based qubits In the present work, we show that light-matter coupling can be employed as an alternative to probe the degree of Majorana nonlocality through tunneling conductance experiments. We consider the system schematically shown in Fig. To the best of our knowledge, experimental setups which combine optical and electrical methods to explore the underlying physics of MZMs have not been considered previously. However, QDs in microcavity quantum electrodynamics (QED) devices are routinely studied in optical experiments In what follows, we analyze the conductance through the QD [Eq. ( Fig. For a finite photon occupation ν = 500 [solid blue line, Fig In Fig. The colormap of Fig. It is worth noticing that the quantized ZBP Majorana amplitude of 0.5e 2 /h Fig. In Fig. The behavior of the conductance through the QD as a function of eV and photon occupation ν is shown in Fig. Similarly, in the geometry considered by us, one can also extract the information about the degree of Majorana nonlocality from the photon-induced conductance profile of Fig. Once we cannot extract the information about the wavefunctions of the Majorana nanowire within the effective model employed here, we are not able to do a detailed numerical analysis of the degree of Majorana nolocality as done by Prada et al In summary, we have theoretically explored the effects of strong light-matter coupling on transport properties of the hybrid device, consisting on quantum dot embedded inside a single-mode optical cavity and coupled to a Majorana nanowire. Conductance profiles as functions of the biasvoltage and mean photon occupation number controlled by an external pump revealed distinct shapes for the cases of highly nonlocal MZMs, overlapped MZMs localized at opposite nanowire edges and MZMs which are not perfectly nonlocal. This makes possible to access the degree of Majorana nonlocality (topological quality factor) all optically, by means of the tuning of the polariton energies in the dot. The full Hamiltonian which describes the system of Fig. where H ph = ω 0 c † c, is the Hamiltonian of a single-mode optical cavity, with c † , (c) being creation and annihilation operators of the cavity photons with energy ω 0 . The Hamiltonian of the QD reads H QD = ω c d † c d c + ω v d † v d v , where d v and d c describe the spinless electrons in the valence and conduction levels of the QD with energy ω c and ω v , respectively, and Ω = ω c -ω v is the energy difference between these levels. The spinless situation can be reached in the regime of large magnetic fields, where only either the spin up or down channel is accounted. In this regime, only single occupancy is allowed at each QD level and therefore the onsite Coulomb repulsion can be safely neglected in H QD . Otherwise, the assumption of both spin degrees of freedom with Coulomb interaction between electrons at each QD level lead to the appearance of extra peaks in the QD energy spectrum, known as Hubbard peaks The interaction between the cavity and the QD is given by where Ω R is the Rabi splitting strength. The source (S) and drain (D) metallic leads and their coupling with the QD are described by where c † k, α (c k, α ) creates (annihilates) an electron in the lead α = S/D, with wave-number k, energy ε α k = ε k -μ α and chemical potential μ α . The bias-voltage through the QD is defined as eV = μ S -μ D . The parameter V l represents the coupling strength of the conduction (l = c) and valence (l = v) levels of the QD with the leads. Once we are considering the situation in which the valence level is far below the Fermi level (ω v E F , E F = 0) [Fig. , the odd states become decoupled from the dot, and the Hamiltonian of Eq. (3) transforms into The effective Hamiltonian which describes the 'halffermionic' states corresponding to MZMs at the ends of the Majorana nanowire coupled to the QD reads where γ L,R = γ † L,R represent the MZMs at the opposite ends of the Majorana nanowire with ε M being the overlap strength between them The Hamiltonian of Eq. ( 2, where f obeys the standard fermionic anticommutation relations. Hence, Eq. ( The application of a bias-voltage eV between source and drain leads, leads to the onset of the current through the system, and, according to the Landauer-type formula where e 2 /h is the quantum of conductance and Γ = 2πV 2 ρ represents the effective broadening introduced by the coupling between the QD and the even conduction operator of the leads [Eq. ( where d c ; d † c ω ≡ G c (ω) is the retarded Green's function in the spectral domain ω where g 0 (ω) = 1/(ω + ıδ -ω c ) is the bare Green's function of the QD conduction level is the self-energy associated to the valence-to-conduction band transition induced by the photonic field of the optical cavity, with ν = n c + N ph being the mean photon occupation, which depends on the number of excitations ( n c ) in the QD and photons (N ph ) in the microcavity, which can be tunned by an external optical pump. The part of the self-energy associated with the direct coupling between the QD conduction level and MZMs reads: where , K (ω) = κ 0 (ω)/(ω + ıΓ + ω c -Σc ph (ω) -κ1 (ω)), with Σc ph (ω) = Ω 2 R ν /(ω + ıδ + ω 0 + ω v ) . If the QD is decoupled from the optical cavity (Ω R = 0), Σc ph (ω) = 0 and Eq. ( The presence of Σc ph (ω) in the expression for K (ω) in the self-energy defined in Eq. ( with t c = (λ L -λ R )/ √ 2, Δ c = (λ L + λ R )/ √ 2 and f = (γ L + ıγ R )/ √ 2 is a complex fermionic operator built from combination of left (γ L ) and right (γ R ) MZMs wherein we considered the one-electron assumption d † c d c + d † v d v = 1 valid for all times Without loss of generality, in the truncation scheme of Eqs. (A6) and (A7) we turned the high-order Green's functions of Eq. (A5) into the conduction level Green's function d c ; d † c ω modulated by the associated mean number of excitations in the QD d † c d c = n c and the mean number of photons within the optical cavity c † c = N ph , respectively. Thus, Eq. (A5) reads Considering that the n c + N ph = ν gives the mean photon occupation in the cavity, Eq. (A8) turns into Substituting Eq. (A9) into (A2), we find where ω-ω 0 -ω v +i δ [Eq. ( At this point, the Green's function of Eq. (A10) that mixes the even conduction operator c k,e from the leads with the operator d c from the dot should be calculated. According to the EOM procedure, this Green's function reads Substitution of the expression above into Eq. (A10) yields where ω+ı η-ε k is the self-energy due to the coupling between the QD and the even conduction operators of metallic leads [see Eq.(4) of main text]. In the wide-band limit, Re[Σ lead (ω)] → 0 and this self-energy is reduced to -iΓ, which is independent of ω, with Γ = 2πV 2 ρ Fig. 