We investigated the nature of the quasi-particle state in the vortex core by means of the flux-flow Hall effect measurements at 15.8 GHz. We measured the flux-flow Hall effect in cuprate superconductors, Bi2Sr2CaCu2Oy and YBa2Cu3Oy single crystals, whose equilibrium B-T phase diagrams were different. As a result, we found that the Hall angle is independent of the magnetic field, and reaches an order of unity at low temperatures in BSCCO. However, in YBCO, the angle increases with increasing magnetic field even at low temperatures. We understood that this difference in the magnetic field dependence of the Hall angle is due to the difference in the influence of the pinning, which originated from the difference in the vortex state (liquid vs. solid) between the two materials. However, as a common feature, both materials showed a large tangent of the Hall angle at low temperatures, which was larger by an order of magnitude than those obtained in the effective viscous drag coefficient measurements. We discussed the origin of the discrepancy both in terms of the possible nonlinearity of the viscous drag force and possible hidden dissipation mechanisms. The unexpectedly large Hall angle of the vortex motion in cuprates revealed in our flux-flow Hall effect study poses a serious question on the fundamental understanding of the motion of the quantized vortex in superconductors, and it deserves further investigation. In type II superconductors under magnetic field, the magnetic field penetrates as a quantized flux, which is accompanied by the surrounding rotating currents. Thus, it is called as a magnetic vortex. In the central part of the vortex, called the vortex core, quasi-particles (QPs) are confined. The confined QPs form quantized energy levels Another approach for investigating the electronic structure in the core is to investigate the vortex motion to an external driving current, the flux flow where u = (x, y) is the displacement of the vortex, κ p is a pinning constant, η and α H are the viscous drag coefficients in the longitudinal and transverse directions, respectively, ẑ is the unit vector in the magnetic field direction, and Φ 0 ≡ h/2e is the flux quantum. If the pinning can be neglected, the direction of the motion can be expressed in terms the Hall angle θ as (see supplemental material for details). Thus, if we measure the flux flow in the longitudinal direction and transverse direction, namely, flux-flow Hall effect (FFHE), we will find the parameter r = ω 0 τ . Alternatively, an effective viscous drag coefficient, also provides information on r = ω 0 τ . Indeed, η ef f can be obtained by the surface impedance measurement by using a cylindrical cavity However, no work has experimentally investigated the FFHE study, except in the very vicinity of T c In this study, we investigate the microwave FFHE in cuprate superconductors, by using the recently developed method, and attempt to discuss the above mentioned mystery. We measured two different superconductors; Bi 2 Sr 2 CaCu 2 O y and YBa 2 Cu 3 O y . The former has the very strong anisotropy and exhibits vortex-liquid behavior in the wide region of the B-T phase diagram, whereas the latter exhibits vortex-solid behavior in the major part of the B-T diagram. In fact, both materials exhibited very contrastive behavior for the magnetic field dependence of the Hall angle. However, more importantly, both materials showed a large r = ω 0 τ at low temperatures, different from the effective viscous drag coefficient measurements. Although we try to interpret the results in terms of the nonlinearity in the viscous drag coefficient or novel dissipation mechanisms not well understood yet, results poses a serious question on the fundamental understanding of the motion of the quantized vortex in superconductors, and it deserves further investigation. The tangent of the flux-flow Hall angle can be expressed as , where E denotes the electric field vector. Since E = σ-1 J ∝ ZJ , the tangent of the fluxflow Hall angle is given by where σ denote the conductivity tensor; Z L and Z H are the longitudinal and transverse components of the surface impedance tensor Z, respectively. Thus, we can obtain the Hall angle from the measurement of the longitudinal and off-diagonal component of the surface impedance tensor. The off-diagonal component, Z H ≡ R H -iX H is obtained as follows, by using the cross-shaped bimodal cavity where R L and X L are the longitudinal components of the surface resistance and the surface reactance tensors, which are obtained in the ordinary cylindrical cavity measurement, R H and X H are the off-diagonal components of the surface resistance and the surface reactance tensors, G L and G H are the geometrical constants, which depend on the shape of the bimodal cavity and sample, respectively, ∆ represents the difference between the data of the same sample in the superconducting state and those in the normal state, which is understood very well. Therefore, together with the cylindrical cavity measurement, whose detail is described in supplemental material, we can obtain flux-flow Hall angle. we performed the measurement using the cross-shaped bimodal cavity, operating in the two orthogonal TE 011 and TE 101 modes at 15.8 GHz, which had the quality factor Q ∼ 3×10 3 . First, the microwave response was measured in the zero magnetic field. Then, along with the surface impedance data obtained in the cylindrical cavity, the geometric factors were obtained as G L (= G H ) = 3.5 × 10 -6 Ω -1 for BSCCO and G L (= G H ) = 1.3 × 10 -6 Ω -1 for YBCO. Since the geometrical factors were obtained, we could evaluate R H and X H from Eqs. ( First, we discuss the latter feature. We believe that the difference in the magnetic field dependence of the low-temperature Hall angle between BSCCO and YBCO is because of the remarkable difference in the equilibrium B-T phase diagram. In BSCCO, where the anisotropy is extremely strong, the vortices are in the liquid state for the most part of temperature and magnetic field where tan θ indicates that it is the observed value un-der the presence of pinning, whereas tan θ is for the one without pinning. Generally, the pinning becomes less effective with increasing magnetic field. We represent the strength of the pinning by a parameter K ≡ B 1 2 ω p /ω, where ω p = κ p /η is the crossover frequency from the reactive motion to the dissipative motion and ω is the angular frequency, respectively. For example, high-T c cuprate superconductors in vortex solid state have ω p ∼ 50 GHz Next, we discuss the most remarkable but puzzling feature of the present experiment; the large Hall angle. The observed large Hall angle is considered to be a common feature of the flux flow of high-T c cuprate superconductors since both BSCCO and YBCO show a similar number, instead of the fairly different features of vortices themselves. First, the temperature dependences are similar to those observed in the effective viscous drag coefficient study There have been long-term extensive discussions on the forces acting on the vortex and the resultant equation of motion. However, the exact descriptions of the forces acting on the vortex in superconductors have not been obtained On the other hand, we find the effective viscous drag coefficient as As above, the factor C disappears in the measured fluxflow Hall angle tan θ * ; however, it remains in the measured effective viscous drag coefficient η * ef f . Thus, ω 0 τ estimated from the effective viscous drag coefficient is smaller than that evaluated from the FFHE measurements, and this result is consistent with the experimental results. Then, the central issue to be solved is the origin of C. One possibility for the reduction of the viscous drag coefficient is the nonlinearity, namely, velocity dependence of the viscosity drag coefficient. Larkin and Ovchinnikov showed that a high velocity results in the decrease in η as η(v) = η(0)/[1 + (v/v * ) 2 ], where a characteristic in with an inelastic electron-electron scattering time τ in Another possibility is the existence of a hidden mechanism of dissipation; some dissipation mechanisms which cannot be represented in the simple equation of motion, but they do contribute to the vortex motion. Possible candidates might be the dissipations at the core boundary, which has not been understood well even now In conclusion, we investigated the nature of the QP state in the vortex core by means of the FFHE measurements at 15.8 GHz. We measured FFHE in cuprate superconductors, BSCCO and YBCO single crystals. Both materials showed a large tangent of the Hall angle at low temperatures, which was larger by an order of magnitude than those obtained in the effective viscous drag coefficient measurement. We discussed the origin of the discrepancy both in terms of the possible nonlinearity of the viscous drag force and the possible hidden dissipation mechanisms. The unexpectedly large Hall angle of the vortex motion in cuprates revealed in our FFHE study poses a serious question on the fundamental understanding of the motion of the quantized vortex, and it deserves further investigation.