We use electromigration (EM) to tune the oxygen content of YBa2Cu3O 7-δ (YBCO) nanowires. During EM, the dopant oxygen atoms in the nanowire are moved under the combined effect of electrostatic force and Joule heating. The EM current can be tuned to either deplete or replenish nanowires with oxygen, allowing fine tuning of its hole doping level. Electrical transport measurements and Kelvin probe microscopy corroborate good homogeneity of the doping level along the electromigrated nanowires. Thus, EM provides an effective method to study transport properties of YBCO in a wide doping range at the nanoscale in one and the same device. The discovery of copper oxide-based High-critical Temperature Superconductors (HTSs), more than 30 years ago, ranks among the major scientific events in solid state physics and has given a tremendous boost to the field of superconductivity. The strong electron-electron correlations of these compounds lead to a plethora of symmetry breaking orders, such as charge and spin density waves, which strongly depend on the doping level of these materials Typically, nanowires with different doping levels are obtained by nanopatterning of thin films having the corresponding doping level, i.e. oxygen content, in the case of YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7-δ (YBCO) Tuning the doping of YBCO ex-situ would solve the limitations inherent to fabrication. One way to tune the material's electrical properties is via electric field effect or gating. Although moderate success has been achieved, most gating techniques require either the use of ferroelectric materials Another promising route to modify the doping level in one and the same structure is to use electromigration (EM) In this work we use EM to tune the doping level of YBCO nanowires. We find that the doping can be increased or decreased depending on the waveform of the applied bias current. By applying a DC current we can replenish the oxygen in the nanostructures, while an AC current can be used to deplete it. The effect of the EM is studied by measuring the resistance versus temperature of the nanowires before and after the process. The resulting curves generally show a single sharp superconductive transition, which indicates homogeneity of the doping distribution. Successive steps of EM on a single nanowire are used to recreate most of the phase diagram of YBCO, covering a wide range of doping. Finally, Kelvin Probe Force Microscopy (KPFM) preformed on nanowires after EM confirms the homogeneous doping distribution along the wire. The quality of the pristine YBCO nanowires is of paramount importance since defects are affected by the electromigration process and may worsen the quality of the nanowire with each EM step. The YBCO nanowires used in this work have been fabricated from thin films (close to the optimal doping) with thickness of 50 nm. The thin films were first deposited by pulsed laser deposition (PLD) onto (110) oriented MgO substrates, and then covered by a hard layer of carbon, also deposited by PLD. Electron beam lithography and oxygen plasma etching are used to define the carbon mask, which is then used to etch the thin films in the final shape of the nanowires through Ar ion milling. Finally, the carbon mask is removed by oxygen plasma etching. This fabrication has been shown to yield high quality nanowires, both for optimally- A scanning electron microscope (SEM) image of a nanowire is shown in Fig. The electromigration is typically performed at room temperature, although it can be done also at lower temperature, T , without significant changes. We perform two types of electromigration: DC-EM, where the AWG is maintained at a DC bias value during the whole process, and AC-EM, where the AWG output is an ambipo- lar square wave signal, i.e. a pulse train. These two types of EM waveforms have different effects on the nanowire doping as will be discussed below. An example of DC-EM is shown in Fig. The bias current is further increased until it is sufficiently high to start the EM of the dopant oxygen atoms, which happens for j DC 7 MA/cm 2 . In this regime, with j DC kept constant, the nanowire resistance slowly decreases over time. A reduction in R indicates that the doping level of the nanowire is increased However, the bias current used for DC-EM cannot be increased indefinitely. We observe that if j DC is raised above a certain threshold (> 15 MA/cm 2 ), the DC-EM causes a depletion of the oxygen atoms within the wire. This means that at high bias, DC-EM lowers the nanowire doping instead of increasing it. Moreover, when the oxygen is reduced by DC-EM, the resulting nanowires show inhomogeneous transport properties, e.g. multiple superconducting transitions (data not shown). Therefore, in this work DC-EM is only used for increasing the doping of YBCO nanowires. To achieve homogeneous reduction of the doping level one can instead use AC-EM, which results in a controlled depletion of oxygen in the nanowires. The bias current waveform used for AC-EM is a square wavefunction centered around zero, with peak to peak current density j AC and frequency f AC = 1 kHz. At this frequency the effect of electromigration is negligible due to the relatively long oxygen diffusion relaxation times In Fig. DC-and AC-EM can be used to increase or to decrease the doping of our nanowires, respectively, and therefore fine tune the doping level. To confirm the homogeneity of the nanowires we can first extract the superconducting transition width, ∆T c , which is defined as the temperature range in which the wire resistance changes from 90% to 10% of the normal state resistance Of particular interest are the various characteristic temperatures, which can be extracted from the R(T ) curve of a YBCO nanowire. These temperatures can be compared to those extracted from YBCO thin films In Table By performing AC-EM on a single nanowire we reproduced the phase diagram of YBCO shown in Fig. Moreover, comparison, the values of T * , T * * and T c extracted from measurements performed on YBCO thin films Two nanowires, one slightly overdoped (as-fabricated, p = 0.175) and one underdoped (p 0.05, obtained through AC-EM), have been imaged. In order to obtain absolute values of the work function in YBCO, Φ YBCO , we have performed a calibration of the AFM tip work function, Φ tip , using a highly oriented pyrolytic graphite sample (HOPG): Φ tip = eV CPD + Φ HOPG , where V CPD is the measured potential difference between the AFM tip and the HOPG surface, and Φ HOPG = 4.48 eV is the work function of HOPG. The work function of the YBCO nanowire can then be obtained as Φ YBCO = Φ tip -eV CPD , where V CPD is the measured surface potential difference between the tip and the YBCO nanowire. The measured KPFM maps of Φ YBCO of the YBCO nanowire before and after EM treatment are shown in Fig. We have presented an electromigration technique which can be used to fine tune the oxygen content, and thus the doping level, of YBCO nanowires. Depending on the bias current waveform used for the EM we can increase (DC-EM) or decrease (AC-EM) the nanowire doping. We used EM to reproduce most of the phase diagram of YBCO with a single nanowire. We used KPFM imaging to asses the effect of the EM on the morphology and work function of the nanowires after EM. This confirmed that the doping distribution in electromigrated nanowires is homogeneous over a consistent area. The ex-situ control of the doping level in YBCO nanowires is a milestone towards an in-depth study of the phase diagram of cuprates on the nanoscale and opens the way to investigate transport properties in the proximity of putative quantum critical points * , T * * , and ∆Tc (see text for details) extracted from a single electromigrated nanowire (see Fig.