Two-dimensional metal particle focusing is an essential task for various fabrication processes. While acoustofluidic devices can manipulate particles in two dimensions, the production of these devices often demands a cleanroom environment. Therefore, acoustically excited glass capillaries present a cheap alternative to labour-intensive cleanroom production. Here, we present 2D metal micro-particle focusing in a round glass capillary using bulk acoustic waves. Excitation of the piezoelectric transducer at specific frequencies leads to mode shapes in the round capillary, concentrating particles towards the capillary centre. We experimentally investigate the particle linewidth for different particle materials and concentrations. We demonstrate the focus of copper particles with ∼ 1 μm in diameter down to a line of width 60.8 ± 7.0 μm and height 45.2 ± 9.3 μm, corresponding to a local concentration of 4.5 % v/v, which is 90 times higher than the concentration of the initial solution. Through numerical analysis, we could obtain further insights into the particle manipulation mechanism inside the capillary and predict the particle trajectories. We found that a transition of the acoustic streaming pattern enables us to manipulate particles close to the critical particle radius. Finally, we used our method to eject copper particles through a tapered round capillary with an opening of 25 μm in diameter, which would not be possible without particle focusing. Our novel setup can be utilized for various applications, that otherwise might suffer from abrasion, clogging and limited resolution. Acoustophoresis, the manipulation of particles utilising acoustic forces, is one of the most popular techniques for particle manipulation because it is non-invasive, label-free, and biocompatible. An approach involving less expensive equipment and reduces manual labour is the application of glass capillaries in combination with bulk acoustic waves. Here, a piezoelectric element (piezo) is glued to an off the shelf glass capillary. On excitation of the piezo with an AC signal, the capillary can vibrate in specific modes that lead to beneficial acoustic potentials inside the capillary. This procedure has been used for various applications such as biomedical analysis, Finally, we employed our setup for the stable ejection of highly concentrated metal particles using a nozzle with an opening diameter of 25 μm. Given that the nozzle's aperture is only ∼ 23 times bigger than the particle diameter, a continuous ejection without clogging would not be feasible without sufficient particle focusing. Our investigations and novel setup are relevant for a wide variety of industrial applications that rely on particle ejection out of small nozzles, including, e.g., metal 3D printing and waterjet cutting. The acoustofluidic device consists of a round glass capillary with two piezoelectric elements (piezos) attached to it (Fig. with the density of the fluid at equilibrium ρ 0 and the dynamic viscosity η, viscous effects need to be considered when computing the ARF, since these could even lead to an inversion of the stable particle positions. with the Gor'kov potential with the incident acoustic pressure field p 1 , the incident acoustic velocity field v 1 , the fluid speed of sound c 0 , and the monopole f 1 and the dipole f 2 scattering coefficients. denotes time averaging dt with any point in time t 1 and the period of oscillation T = 1/ f . Another nonlinear time-averaged effect that needs to be considered in our system is acoustic streaming. The force exerted on particles by acoustic streaming is the Stokes' drag with the particle velocity v prt , the background flow v 0 and the streaming velocity v str . The latter is usually determined using numerical methods, with the geometry dependent factor ψ = 3 8 for a standing wave parallel to a planar wall in which relative compressibility κ = κ p κ f and equilibrium den- reflect the ratios between particle ( ) p and fluid ( ) f properties. In case of PS particles dispersed in water Φ ≈ 0.17 and for copper particles dispersed in water Φ ≈ 0.75. In commonly used rectangular acoustofluidic channels, with an excitation frequency of ∼ 1.75 MHz, the critical radius evaluates at around 0.37 μm for a copper particle in water and around 0.78 μm for a PS particle in water. Our system, however, appears to have a lower critical radius since particle focusing is feasible with r ∼ 0.5 μm for PS particles in water, which might be based on the different channel geometry, leading to a different ψ. As mentioned beforehand, the acoustic effects inside the fluid cavity become significant when the system is close to a resonance. The latter can be pinpointed by the analysis of the average acoustic energy density E ac , which is given as 19 with the fluid's compressibility κ and volume V . Two piezoelectric elements (10 mm length, 2 mm width, 1 mm thickness, Pz26, Meggitt Ferroperm, Denmark) were glued to the bottom and side of a round glass capillary (0.5 mm inner diameter, 1 mm outer diameter, 76 mm length, 1B100-3, World Precision Instruments, Germany) using conductive epoxy (H20E, Epoxy Technology, Switzerland). Copper cables (0.15 mm diameter) were attached to the piezo with conductive silver paste and glued to the capillary with instant glue to increase the mechanical stability. For the particle ejection experiments, glass nozzles were fabricated by pulling thin-walled borosilicate glass capillaries (1 mm outer diameter, 0.75 mm inner diameter, TW100-4, World Precision Instruments, Germany) using a pipette puller (P-97, Sutter Instruments, USA) equipped with a 2.5 mm x 2.5 mm platinum/iridium box filament. The nozzle size was tuned by varying the number of pulling cycles, which was achieved by changing the velocity of the puller bars at which the filament heating stops. Nozzle outer diameters in the range from 10 μm -50 μm were achieved by repetitive pulling cycles until the capillary separates into two identical nozzles. The capillaries' tips (nozzles) were dipped into a fluorophilic polymer (NovecTM 1700, 3MTM, Switzerland) to render it hydrophobic, enabling water ejection as a thin jet by avoiding wetting of the nozzles' surface, which would eventually lead to droplet formation. Bulk acoustic wave (BAW) devices are based on the generation of ultrasonic standing waves in a fluid cavity. The waves were coupled into the devices by exciting the piezoelectric elements with an AC signal. The signals were generated via a wave generator (AFG-2225, GW INSTEK, Taiwan). The impedance of the piezo varies with its excitation frequency. Since the piezo voltage depends on its impedance, it was verified using an oscilloscope (UTD2025CL, Uni-Trend Technology, China). Water flow inside the capillary was controlled by a syringe pump (neMESYS 290N, Cetoni, Germany). Two syringes were used for the particle ejection experiments; one containing metal particles diluted in distilled water and stabilised with Tween 20 and the other containing solely distilled water. First, the capillary was filled with distilled water. Then, the metal particle flow was slowly increased to achieve the desired concentration and flow rate. If the metal particles were directly inserted into the syringe, the nozzle clogged immediately due to unavoidable particle clumps. A self-built syringe mixer was utilised to increase the homogeneity of the ejection. The mixer consists of five copper coils linearly arranged along with the syringe, each controlled with a MOSFET (IRF540 nchannel, Infineon, Germany) and a micro-controller (Arduino Nano, Arduino, USA). A cylindrical iron piece was used as a stirrer by moving it up and down inside the syringe. This procedure was essential for copper particles since they sediment much faster due to their higher density and then tend to form big clumps inside the syringe, impeding a proper ejection. For the optical visualisation, a self-built microscope kit (Cerna®, Thorlabs, Germany) was utilised. A green LED (M505L3, Thorlabs, Germany) excites the particles via a dichroic mirror (MD515, Thorlabs, Germany). Before entering the camera (UI-3180CP, IDS Imaging Development Systems GmbH, Germany), the light is filtered by an emission filter (MF535-22, Thorlabs, Germany). To visualise the side of our glass capillary, individual parts from the company Thorlabs were combined. A camera (UI-3180CP, IDS Imaging Development Systems GmbH, Germany) was connected to a camera tube (WFA4100, Thorlabs, Germany), which is attached to a filter cube housing (WFA2002, Thorlabs, Ger- many) with a filter cube (MDFM-MF2, Thorlabs, Germany) carrying a dichroic mirror (MD499, Thorlabs, Germany) and an emission filter (MF525-39, Thorlabs, Germany). The fluorescent filter sets were removed and two white LEDs were added as background lighting for the top and side view to improve the visibility if metal particles were flown through the capillary. A high-precision zoom housing (SM1ZM, Thorlabs, Germany), crucial for adjusting the focus, was mounted to the filter cube housing with a combination of three parts (CSA1003, ER1-P4, LCP02/M, Thorlabs, Germany). the particle focusing was observed 2 mm away from the capillaries' exit to ensure a maximal time for the particles to focus. Due to their long working distance, Mitutoyo objectives with a 5x magnification were connected to the microscopes. For the device characterization, green fluorescent polystyrene (PS) particles (microParticles GmbH, Germany) with 5.19 ± 0.14μm diameter (PS5) and 1.14 ± 0.04 μm diameter (PS1), and copper particles (Nanografi Nanotechnology, Turkey) with 1.16 ± 0.61 μm diameter (Cu1) were used.The initial concentration was achieved by diluting the particles in distilled water. The local concentration after focusing was determined by deriving the ratio of the inner diameter area and the elliptical particle stream area and multiplying it with the initial particle concentration. A 2D numerical model of the cross-section of the device (including piezo) was built in COMSOL Multiphysics version 5.4. After studying the device's frequency response, the capillary's displacement as well as the Gor'kov potential and streaming velocity close to the resonance frequency was analysed exposing the highest acoustic energy density in the system f res ≈ 1.75 MHz. Further, particle dynamics were assessed through the streaming velocity and the ARF, which was computed from the Gor'kov potential (Eq. 2). A user-controlled mesh with several mesh refinements was chosen, especially at the interfaces between different domains, to correctly incorporate streaming into our numerical model. Please refer to Figure S-1 in the Supplemental Material at [URL will be inserted by publisher] for a more detailed mesh analysis. A frequency domain study was used to solve (I) the Thermoviscous Acoustics interface applied to the water domain, (II) the Solid Mechanics interface applied to the capillary, glue and piezo domain, and (III) the Electrostatics interface applied to the piezo domain. Further, a stationary study of the Creeping Flow interface applied to the water domain was carried out using the acoustic fields from the frequency domain study in the source terms of the streaming equations. This study returns the streaming velocity field as a direct result. Finally, a time-dependent study of the Particle Tracing for Fluid Flow interface was carried out by taking the acoustic and streaming velocity fields into account. Please refer to the Supplemental Material SI-1 at [URL will be inserted by publisher] for a more detailed description of the numerical model. A self-written Matlab script was used to analyse the device's performance by estimating the width of the focused particle line. The script takes a video as input and averages 20 frames to account for flow instabilities. After adjusting the region of interest, a concentration profile is created by extracting all pixel brightness values in this region. The brightness values along the flow direction are summed up to receive the brightness distribution along the channel's width. The brightness distribution is fitted with a Gaussian curve and the particle linewidth is determined with the fitted curve by measuring the width of the Gaussian fit after two standard deviations, i.e. ∼ 70 % of the particles are within this region (see Fig. We experimentally investigated the acoustofluidic device's performance. First, we varied the excitation frequency and chose the frequency that yielded the thinnest particle line by visual inspection. A frequency between 1.67 -1.78 MHz results in the best particle focusing, which is close to the resonance frequency of our numerical model, despite its simplicity (2D geometry). To qualitatively examine the ability of our device to focus particles of different sizes and material properties, we analysed the linewidth of the focused particles by evaluating videos with a self-written Matlab code (Section III D, Fig We measured the particle linewidth of polystyrene (PS) particles with 5.19 ± 0.14 μm (PS5) and 1.14 ± 0.04 μm (PS1) in diameter and copper particles with 1.16 ± 0.61 μm (Cu1) in diameter to characterise the device performance. The particles were dispensed in water with a concentration of 0.5 % v/v and pumped through the device at flow rates in a range of 5 μl min -1 (0.11 mm s -1 average velocity) to 900 μl min -1 (19.14 mm s -1 average velocity). Already at 20 V PP the acoustic radiation force in flow direction was strong enough to trap particles close to the piezos below flow rates of 100 μl min -1 (2.13 mm s -1 average velocity). Therefore, we were not able to analyse the linewidth below a flow rate of 100 μl min -1 for PS5 and Cu1 particles. PS1 particles did not get trapped even at low flow rates since the acoustic radiation force is approximately 125 times lower (Eq. 2). Despite the small size, which would usually impede a focus of these particles using acoustic effects, we were able to focus the PS1 particles at a flow rate of 5 μl min -1 to a line of width 80.6 ± 6.9 μm (top view) and height 65.0 ± 3.9 μm (side view) -see Supplemental Material video 1 at [URL will be inserted by publisher]. The ability to focus below the critical radius might be due to a minimum acoustic streaming velocity, discovered by the numerical analysis (Fig. Following the experimental focusing of PS1 particles, we inserted the PS5 particles into the system. At a flow rate of 100 μl min -1 , the PS5 particles could be focused down to a line of width 62.6 ± 1.1 μm (top view) and height 59.5 ± 2.6 μm (side view), corresponding to a local concentration of 34 % v/v. With a linear increase of the flow rate, the linewidth also increases linearly as the time available to manipulate the particles inside the device is reduced. Even at a flow rate of 900 μl min -1 , we were able to focus the PS5 particles Next, we inserted Cu1 particles into the device. Due to significantly larger density and compressibility difference to water(∼ 4.4x bigger acoustic contrast factor (Eq. 6)), copper particles experience a larger ARF compared to the PS particle of the same size. This leads to similar particle linewidths for Cu1 and PS5 particles despite their difference in size. At a flow rate of 100 μl min -1 , the copper particles could be focused down to a line of width 168.0 ± 9.4 μm (top view) and height 169.1 ± 40.8 μm (side view), corresponding to a local concentration of 4.4 % v/v -see Supplemental Material video 2 at [URL will be inserted by publisher]. Even at high flow rates of 700 μl min -1 , we achieved a line of width 320.4 ± 4.2 μm (top view) and height 262.3 ± 6.4 μm (side view). All particle linewidths for the tested flow rates and particle materials are given in Fig. Finally, we evaluated the influence of the initial copper particle concentration on the particle linewidth. We tested three different concentrations (0.05 % v/v, 0.1 % v/v, and 0.5 % v/v) and found an increase in particle linewidth for increasing flow rate regardless of the concentration (Fig. We utilised the numerical model described in Section III C to study the underlying physical phenomena that lead to two-dimensional particle focusing. A frequency sweep from 1 MHz to 2.5 MHz (0.1 kHz step) revealed a strong resonance of the system at 1754.1 kHz, indicated by a peak in the av-erage acoustic energy density (E ac ) and average streaming velocity (v str ) (see Fig. The streaming velocity at f = 1742.1 kHz is low compared to the streaming velocity at the nearby frequencies. This can be attributed to the transition of the streaming pattern that appears to weaken the overall acoustic streaming (see Fig. For the precise ejection of focused metal particles, as e.g. needed for metal 3D printing, a tapered round capillary is connected to the already characterised round glass capillary (particle focusing capillary) with a combination of silicone and heat-shrink tubing (see Supplemental Material Figure S-3 at [URL will be inserted by publisher]). We tested various nozzle diameters ranging from 10 μm -50 μm. Nozzles with a diameter below 20 μm are clogging even at low initial Cu1 concentrations of 0.05 % v/v, regardless of prefocusing in the particle focusing capillary. As can be seen in Fig. With the combination of our particle focusing capillary and a tapered round capillary, we were able to prove that twodimensional particle focusing within a round glass capillary can be utilised to impede the clogging of a thin nozzle. In this work, we showed for the first time two dimensional focusing of micron-sized particles and their stable ejection through an about twenty times larger nozzle. We carried out numerical investigations to improve our understanding of two-dimensional particle focusing inside round glass capillaries. We found an excitation frequency at which the influence of the acoustic streaming is weak compared to the acoustic radiation force, explaining our ability to focus particles sized close to the theoretical minimum. Through experimental evaluations, we were able to determine our device's performance. At a flow rate of 5 μl min -1 , we were able to focus polystyrene particles with 1 μm in diameter into a line with width 80.6 ± 6.9 μm and height 65.0 ± 3.9 μm. Additionally, at a 20 times faster flow speed, we focused five times bigger polystyrene particles into a line of similar size. Copper particles with 1 μm in diameter were observed to behave similarly to 5 times bigger polystyrene particles due to the significantly higher acoustic contrast. Finally, we demonstrated the ejection of a 2 % v/v concentration of 1 μm copper particles through a nozzle of 25 μm diameter, which was unattainable without prior acoustic focusing. With our novel approach, the reliability of systems that rely on particle ejection through a small nozzle and are subject to abrasion could be significantly increased. Therefore, our investigations are expected to be relevant for a wide variety of industrial applications including water jet cutting and metal 3D printing. To account for the piezoelectric effect, the Electrostatics interface was applied to the piezoelectric element and coupled to the Solid Mechanics interface through the Piezoelectric Effect Multiphysics interface. Charge conservation was implemented for the whole domain and an electric potential amplitude of 10 V was applied to one side of the piezoelectric element, resulting in a 20 V peak to peak excitation. The water was modeled with the standard material parameters provided by the software. For computing the acoustic fields inside the capillary, the Thermoviscous Acoustics interface in its adiabatic form was applied to the water domain, and the Thermoviscous Acoustic-Structure Boundary interface was introduced to couple the Solid Mechanics interface and the Thermoviscous Acoustics interface at the water-glass interface. To simulate the acoustic streaming, we followed a procedure described by Muller et al., with the time-averaged second-order pressure p 2 , the streaming velocity v 2 , the bulk viscosity of the fluid η B , and the acoustic fields that are resolved beforehand, with the Thermoviscous Acoustics interface, namely the acoustic velocity v 1 and the acoustic density ρ 1 . The terms combining the acoustic fields (subscript 1) in equations 1 and 2 act as source terms for the streaming. In addition, following Baasch et al., is applied at the water-glass interface to enforce the no-slip boundary condition at the second order while accounting for the first-order (acoustic) oscillations of the interface. To imple-ment the described formulation in COMSOL, the Creeping Flow interface was assigned to the water domain. Source terms were enforced through Volume Forces across the domain, while the negative Stokes drift was applied through a Wall boundary condition. Finally, the second-order pressure field was constrained by setting a Pressure Point Constraint to zero at an arbitrary point of the domain. due to the particle velocity v prt relative to the acoustic streaming velocity v 2 , and the acoustic radiation force with the Gor'kov potential U . The time that an individual particle spent in the focusing region of 20 mm, along the two piezoelectric transducers, was estimated assuming a Poiseuille flow in the capillary with a circular cross-section. Under these assumptions, the velocity in the centre of capillary along its axis follows as with the inner radius of capillary a and the flow rate Q. Based on the minimal and maximal flow rates in experiments, 100 μL min -1 and 900 μL min -1 , the velocity in the centre of the capillary follows as 0.0170 m s -1 and 0.1528 m s -1 , respectively. The maximal and minimal times for particle focusing resulting from these velocities follow as 1178 ms and 131 ms, respectively.