We describe a simple AC susceptometer built in-house that can be used to make high-resolution measurements of the magnetic susceptibility of high-temperature superconductors in an undergraduate physics lab. Our system, cooled using liquid nitrogen, can reach a base temperature of 77 K. Our apparatus does not require gas handling systems or PID temperature controllers. Instead, it makes use of a thermal circuit that is designed to allow the sample to cool on a time scale that is suitable for an undergraduate lab. Furthermore, the temperature drift rate at the superconducting transition temperature T c is low enough to allow for precise measurements of the complex magnetic susceptibility through T c , even for single-crystal samples with exceedingly sharp superconducting transitions. Using an electromagnet, we were able to apply static magnetic fields up to 63 mT at the sample site. By measuring the change in susceptibility as a function of the strength of an applied of static magnetic field, we were able to estimate the lower critical field H c1 of a singlecrystal sample of optimally-doped YBa 2 Cu 3 O 6.95 at 77 K. We also investigated the mixed state of a sintered polycrystalline sample of YBa 2 Cu 3 O 6+y . AC susceptometry is an experimental technique widely used in research We describe a simple apparatus for the undergraduate laboratory designed to make sensitive measurements of the complex AC susceptibility of high-temperature superconductors at temperatures of 77 K and above. Thorough reviews of AC susceptibility measurements applied to high-temperature superconductors already exist in the literature One unique aspect of our apparatus is the use of a thermal circuit to cool the superconducting sample from room temperature to 77 K. The thermal circuit is designed to cool the sample to a stable base temperature within about 2 hours. Furthermore, at about 1 K/min, the temperature drift rate through the superconducting transition temperature (T c ≈ 93 K for YBa 2 Cu 3 O 6.95 ) is low. This allows for a detailed measurement of the temperature dependence of the AC susceptibility χ + iχ through the superconducting transition. Because the sample temperature is determined by the physical properties of the sample stage, our apparatus does not require a gas handling system, PID temperature controller or sample heater. As will be discussed, we access the full temperature range from room temperature to 77 K using only a liquid nitrogen bath, radiation shield, and vacuum chamber. Because our apparatus is compact, the vacuum chamber can be inserted into the bore of an electromagnet enabling a measurement of the complex susceptibility as a function of static magnetic field strength at a fixed temperature. In our experiments, we use an electromagnet, also submerged in the liquid nitrogen bath, to apply static fields up to 63 mT at the sample site. This arrangement allows for an investigation of the mixed state of type-II superconductors in which there is a mixture of superconducting and normal state domains in the sample. Furthermore, when working with high-quality single-crystals of YBa 2 Cu 3 O 6.95 , the onset field of the mixed state can be identified which allows for a reasonable an estimate of the lower critical field H c1 . A schematic diagram of the apparatus is shown in figure The susceptometer primary and secondary coils were hand wound using 34 AWG insulated copper wire. The primary coil is 40 mm long and was wrapped around a narrow groove that was machined into a plastic tube with inner and outer diameters Figure The pair of counter-wound secondary coils were wrapped onto a 2.05 mm diameter brass rod. Before winding the coils, the rod was wrapped with copper foil tape to ensure that entire length of the rod maintained a uniform temperature. Each of the secondary coils has 20 turns. The superconducting sample is located in the bottom coil closest to the diode used to monitor the sample temperature. First, a fine file was used to make a recess in the brass rod. The sample was then held in place using a small amount of Dow Corning silicone vacuum grease. After the sample was in place, the copper tape was wrapped around the recess in the brass rod and the wire was wound such that the sample was centred in the resulting coil. The samples used in our experiments were typcially 2 × 1.5 × 1 mm 3 in size and irregular in shape. By wrapping one of the secondary coils directly around the sample rod, we achieve a high filling factor and a to drive the primary coil of the susceptometer; the amplifier, filter, phase shifter, and lock-in amplifier used to detect the signal from the secondary coils; and the current source and voltmeter used with the diode thermometer. (b) Detailed view of the primary and secondary coils of the susceptmeter. For scale, the outer diameter of the plastic tube onto which the primary coil was wound is 9.50 mm. The male connector pins visible in the photograph are connected to the secondary coils. Not visible in the photograph is a second connector used for the diode thermometer. correspondingly high sensitivity. Of course, the drawback is that the bottom secondary must be rewound every time the sample is changed. One could alternatively wind the secondary coils onto a nylon or polyimide tube that is a close fit to the sample rod. Such a design would maintain a relatively high filling factor while also allowing the coils to be temporarily removed when exchanging samples. To monitor the sample temperature, an inexpensive surface-mount diode (IN914) was used as a thermometer. The diode was attached to the to the copper foil-wrapped brass rod using Stycast 2850FT. As shown in figure As shown in figure where κ (T ) is the temperature-dependent thermal conductivity, T s is the sample temperature, T b ≈ 77 K is the base temperature set by the nitrogen bath, and A and are the cross-sectional area and length of the brass rod, respectively. The copper block of the thermal stage is a 2.5 cm diameter copper cylinder that is 3.3 cm tall. The brass rod is a length of #6-32 threaded ready rod and has a nominal diameter of 3.3 mm. The length of brass rod between the copper base plate and the copper cylinder at temperature T s is ≈ 6 mm. Because both the thermal conductivity of brass and specific heat of copper are temperature dependent, the thermal time constant τ = R T C T changes as the sample cools from room temperature to 77 K. Table The bottom of the vacuum chamber is a solid copper plate that is submerged in liquid nitrogen during the measurements. Using Stycast 2850FT, a paper Bakelite tube was epoxied to a step that was machined around the circumference of the copper plate. Paper Bakelite was chosen for the walls of the vacuum chamber for its low thermal conductivity allowing it to support a large temperature gradient along its length. It also has a thermal expansion coefficient that is reasonably well matched to that of copper which prevents the tube from cracking when submerged in liquid nitrogen. The tube has an outer diameter of 7.6 cm, a wall thickness of 1.3 mm, and a length of 12 cm. The top of the tube is epoxied to an acrylic ring which mates with an acrylic plate. The vacuum seal between the acrylic surfaces is made using an o-ring cut from a 0.13 mm thick Kapton sheet. A thin layer of Dow Corning vacuum grease is used between the Kapton and acrylic surfaces. A mechanical pump is used to evacuate the vacuum chamber. A valve attached to the acrylic plate allows the pump to be disconnected after the chamber has been evacuated. Near the top of the paper Bakelite tube, a hole was drilled to accept a hermeticallysealed electrical feedthrough. The nine-pin feedthrough, which accommodates the wiring for the primary and secondary coils and the diode thermometer, was installed using Stycast 2850FT epoxy. All wiring inside the vacuum chamber was done using a pair of four-wire ribbons of 36 AWG phosphor-bronze wire purchased from Cryogenic Contol Systems, Inc. Before making connections to components on the sample stage, 20 cm lengths of each ribbon were wrapped around copper heat-sinking posts attached to the copper base plate. The ribbons were thermally anchored to the heat-sinking posts using GE varnish. Finally, a polished copper can securely bolted to the 77 K base plate was used as a radiation shield. The shield completely surrounds the thermal stage supporting the sample and susceptometer. Its purpose is to suppress radiative heat transfer from the warm walls of the vacuum chamber to the sample stage. This heat transfer is proportional to T 4 vc -T 4 s where T vc is the temperature of the vacuum chamber wall. Figure Our electromagnet was made from 600 m of 18 AWG wire. We found that, after cutting out the spindle, our vacuum chamber fit within the inner diameter of the as-purchased spool of wire. At room temperature, the resistance of the electromagnet was 12.5 Ω and at 77 K it dropped to 1.7 Ω. To energize the magnet, a parallel combination of an Agilent 6655A (120 V/4 A) power supply and a Hewlett-Packard 6632A (20 V/5 A) power supply was used. When the magnet was cold, this combination allowed us to supply 8 A of current with 13.6 V. To calibrate the electromagnet, a Texas Instruments DRV5055A2 Hall effect sensor was used. The sensor was itself first calibrated against an F. W. Bell model 5070 Teslameter. At the sample site, a 8 A current resulted in a 63 mT static field along the axis of the susceptometer coils. The field strength perpendicular to this axis was over 200 times weaker. The magnet power supplies were controlled via a simple LabVIEW program which allowed us to automate the static magnetic field sweeps when collecting data. To drive the primary coil of the AC susceptometer, a function generator in series with a resistance R was used. The value of R was chosen to be much greater than the resistance R p of the primary coil. This choice ensures that the primary coil current remains approximately constant as both the coil temperature and R p decrease. As shown in figure The signal from the counter-wound secondary coils was amplified using a differential amplifier and then passed through a narrow band-pass filter. Finally, the signal from the filter was phase shifted before being passed to the lock-in amplifier. The amplifier, filter, and phase shifter were all built into a TeachSpin signal processing unit. The output of the signal generator was set to 3 kHz which coincides with the top end of the signal processor's bandwidth. Both Refs. Finally, we note that the in-phase and out-of-phase signals of the lock-in amplifier were monitored using a pair of Keysight 34401A multimeters. A third multimeter was used to monitor the forward bias voltage of the diode thermometer. The data from the multimeters were logged using the same LabVIEW program that controls the DC current of the electromagnet. When T > T c , the magnetic field due to the primary coil completely penetrates the superconducting sample such that the same magnetic flux passes through the pair of secondary coils. Because the secondary coils are counter-wound and in series, the net induced emf is zero and a null signal is detected corresponding to χ + iχ = 0. For T < T c , the magnetic flux is expelled from the interior of the sample due to the Meissner effect. The flux expulsion results in a non-zero net induced emf that is detected by the lock-in amplifier. Because superconductors exhibit perfect diamagnetism deep in the superconducting state, the measured signal from the susceptometer can be calibrated by setting χ = -1 when T T c . In this state, magnetic fields penetrate a depth λ(T ) into the samples. For YBa 2 Cu 3 O 6.95 , the low-temperature penetration depth λ(0) ≈ 100 nm which is typically many orders of magnitude smaller than the sample dimensions As temperature approaches T c from below, flux quanta begin to penetrate the sample in the form of vortex lines resulting in the onset of hysteresis losses associated with the alternating magnetic field We investigated both single-crystal and sintered polycrystalline samples of YBa 2 Cu 3 O 6+y . The high-quality single-crystal sample was grown by UBC Superconductivity group in yttria-stabilized zirconium oxide (YSZ) crucibles by the BaO-CuO self-flux method The polycrystalline measurements of figure In general, the χ temperature dependence exhibits both an intrinsic loss peak and a coupling loss peak Figure This section describes a set measurements used to estimate the lower critical field H c1 of the YBa 2 Cu 3 O 6.95 single crystal at 77 K. The strategy was to look for small changes in χ due to a static magnetic field H applied parallel to the ab-plane. As a measure of the fraction of the sample volume penetrated by magnetic vortices, ∆χ (H) is expected to zero when H < H c1 and to increase monotonically with H above H c1 . At 2.3 Oe (0.23 mT), the AC field strength was chosen to be much smaller than H c1 while simultaneously maintaining a signal-to-noise ratio sufficient to measure changes in χ at the level of a few hundredths of a percent. Due to demagnetization effects, magnetic flux can penetrate into the sample at sharp edges and corners at fields less than H c1 Liang et al. have made accurate measurements of H c1 on optimally-doped and underdoped YBa 2 Cu 3 O 6+y single crystals. They polished the samples into ellipsoids which ensures that the samples are uniformly magnetized when immersed in a uniform magnetic field For static fields below ≈ 10 mT, ∆χ was found to be zero. It then increased linearly with the field strength such that 0.5% of the sample was penetrated by magnetic vortices when H = 63 mT. Although small in magnitude, figure 8 also shows a linear change in χ as function of H. It should be noted that the observed field dependence of ∆χ could, in part, be due to an improperly set phase angle which would contaminate the channel of the lock-in amplifier used to monitor χ with a small fraction of the χ signal. After the measurements at base temperature, we verified that there was no systematic change in χ and χ as a function of field strength when the YBa 2 Cu 3 O 6.95 sample was in its normal state (T > 100 K). The solid line in figure Because our apparatus did not allow the sample temperature to be regulated above the system base temperature, we were unable to reliably measure the temperature dependence of H c1 between 77 K and T c . However, by sweeping the static field strength quickly while allowing the sample temperature to drift from T c towards 77 K, we were able to measure the temperature dependence of the slope of the ∆χ versus H data. These results are presented in the supplementary material (available online). We found that, at a sample temperature of 84 K, dχ /dH was more than double its value of 0.091 T -1 at 77 K. This analysis is useful because, despite being unable to determine the temperature dependence of H c1 , it allows students to deduce that the superconducting state is more susceptible to penetration by magnetic flux as T c is approached. As shown in figure of the single-crystal sample. This observation indicates that even the superconducting grains of the polycrystalline are far more susceptible to penetration by magnetic vortices than the single-crystal sample of YBa 2 Cu 3 O 6.95 . ∆χ exhibits a low-field peak and becomes negative at high fields for both the increasing-and decreasing-H datasets. These effects are presumably due to nonnegligible zero-field losses associated with the weakly-superconducting intergranular material. As the field strength is increased, T c of the intergranular material is diminished and the losses increase (see figure We have described a simple, yet sensitive, AC susceptometer designed for the undergraduate laboratory. The system base temperature is 77 K and it does not require temperature regulation via a PID controller. Instead, materials are chosen to set the thermal time constant of the sample stage such that the cooling time is suitable for a three-hour undergraduate laboratory. We used the susceptometer to study single-crystal and polycrystalline samples of the high-temperature superconductor YBa 2 Cu 3 O 6+y . By wrapping one of the secondary coils directly onto the sample support rod we achieved a high experimental sensitivity. The measured superconducting transition of the singlecrystal YBa 2 Cu 3 O 6.95 sample was very sharp and relatively robust against changes to the strength of AC magnetic field supplied by the primary coil. On the other hand, the polycrystalline sample exhibited two distinct transitions separated by an inflection point. The broad transition associated with the intergranular material was very sensitive to the strength of the AC field. To go beyond a relatively straightforward characterization of the superconducting transition, the vacuum chamber enclosing our compact susceptometer was inserted into the bore of an electromagnet used to expose the samples to a static magnetic field. Using this setup, we were able to estimate the lower critical field H c1 of the single-crystal sample. By tracking dχ /dH as a function of the sample temperature, we were also able to demonstrate that the superconducting state is more susceptible to penetration by magnetic flux as T c is approached. For these measurements, the temperature of the YBa 2 Cu 3 O 6.95 sample was initially just below T c and cooling. The cooling rate was set by the thermal circuit described in section 2.2 and table 1 of the main manuscript. We then repeatedly cycled the static magnetic field between zero and a set of nonzero values as the sample towards its base temperature. This sequence of measurements was automated using a simple LabVIEW program which allowed us to track ∆χ (H) as a function of temperature. The raw data collected is shown in figure Because there was no temperature control, it was necessary to sweep through the set of H values quickly to limit the temperature change during each sweep. For example, the slope of spike in χ at 84 K in figure Figure 