Understanding diffusion of large solutes such as hydrogen and lithium in solids is of paramount importance for energy storage in metal hydrides and advanced batteries. Due to its high gravimetric and volumetric densities, magnesium is a material of great potential for solid-state hydrogen storage. However, the slow hydrogen diffusion kinetics and the deleterious blocking effect in magnesium have hampered its practical applications. Here, we demonstrate fast lateral hydrogen diffusion in quasifree magnesium films without the blocking effect. Massive concomitant lattice expansion leads to the formation of remarkable self-organized finger patterns extending over tens of micrometres. Detailed visualization of diffusion fronts reveals that the fingers in these patterns follow locally the direction of hydrogen diffusion. Thus, the streamlines of the diffusion process are self-recorded by means of the finger pattern. By inclusion of fast hydrogen diffusion objects or local gaps, the resulting streamlines exhibit a clear analogy to optical rays in geometric optics. The possibility to spatially manipulate hydrogen diffusion opens a new avenue to build advanced hydrogen storage systems, cloaking and active plasmonic devices, as well as prototype systems for computational models. The magnesium-hydrogen (Mg-H) system has constantly fascinated researchers due to its interesting hydrogen storage properties. With relatively high gravimetric and volumetric densities (7.6 wt% and 110 g l -1 , respectively), inexpensive and abundant Mg is one of the most attractive metals for solidstate hydrogen storage Here we demonstrate that the blocking effect is absent, when H enters a Mg film laterally, i.e., parallel to the film plane as indicated in Fig. Each sample consists of a Pd entrance gate or multiple Pd gates (typically 20 nm thick) and a layer of Mg with thickness varied between 22 and 372 nm. In all samples, a 3 nm Ti buffer layer is deposited on a SiO2 (100 nm)/Si substrate to minimize the clamping of the Mg layer to the substrate The samples are manufactured using multiple electronbeam lithography (EBL). First, alignment markers are defined in a double layer PMMA resist (200k-3.5% and 950k-1.5%, Allresist) using EBL (Raith e_line) on the substrate. A 2 nm chromium adhesion layer and a 40 nm Au film are deposited on the substrate using thermal evaporation followed by a standard lift-off procedure. Next, the substrate is coated with a double layer PMMA. Computer-controlled alignment using Au markers of the first layer are carried out to define a structural layer. Subsequently, 20 nm Pd for the hydrogen entrance gates and fast H-diffusion objects (e.g., Pd prisms and lenses) is deposited on the substrate using thermal evaporation followed by the same lift-off procedure. Then, the substrate is coated with a double layer PMMA again, and the alignment Au markers are used to define another structural layer. After development (90 s in MIBK and 60 s in isopropanol), 3 nm Ti, 22-372 nm Mg, and 5 nm Ti are successively deposited on the substrate through electron-beam evaporation (PFEIFFER Vacuum, PLS-500). During hydrogen absorption or desorption optical images and videos of the samples are taken using a bright-field reflection microscope (Nikon, ECLIPSE LV100ND) illuminated by a white light source (Energetiq Laser-Driven Light Source, EQ-99). A digital CCD Camera (Allied-Vision Prosilica GT2450C) is used to capture images with a ×100 (NA = 0.6) objective. The hydrogenation and dehydrogenation experiments are carried out in a homemade optical gas chamber. The flow rate of the gas (hydrogen or oxygen) is 2.0 l min -1 . The temperature of the cell can be varied between room temperature and 100 o C. The topographies of all samples are measured with an AFM instrument (MultiMode 8) equipped with NanoScope V controller, vertical J-scanner, and NanoScope version 8 software (Bruker AXS, Santa Barbara, CA). AFM measurements are performed using Si cantilevers (NANOSENSORS, PointProbe-Plus) with scan size of 40 μm, scan rate of 0.5 Hz, and resolution of 1024 × 1024. The SEM images are taken using an ULTRA 55 system (Carl Zeiss AG) at 15 kV. Cross-sections of the samples are generated by Focused Ion Beam (FIB) system (Raith FEI Multibeam equipped with a gallium ion beam etching function) to check that the topographic finger patterns observed in AFM are not due to delamination or buckling. To observe a fresh surface, the sample is tilted 52o to perform ion milling with a gallium ion beam current of 10 pA operating at 30 kV, in a series of steps across the surface, at increasing depths, until the sample milled into the substrate. We have observed finger patterns in all our samples. Three representative examples are shown in Fig. H enters the sample via a 20 nm thick and 15 μm long Pd strip spanning the entire left-hand side of the Mg patch. The AFM, OR, and scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images are recorded after H loading at pressure of 20 kPa at 353 K. It reveals that the AFM, OR, and SEM finger patterns are strikingly similar. At first sight one might naively associate the formed hills with MgH2 and the plains with Mg, respectively. Reality is, however, quite different. As shown by the OR image in Fig. FIG. For an unambiguous identification of the phases involved in the finger patterns, we have characterized this sample using AFM for two H loading/unloading cycles in Fig. That the entire finger pattern consists of MgH2 is further substantiated by two essential observations: i) after the first unloading, histogram DH1 is almost symmetric and broad, ranging from 20 to 80 nm. This implies, as shown in the AFM images of Fig. For all samples investigated in this work, we have observed well-developed finger patterns exhibiting the same characteristic features. The finger patterns are generated in order to minimize the internal stresses in the Mg-H system that must expand by approximately 30% in volume, while keeping its in-plane dimensions constant. Very important is to realize that the constancy of in-plane dimensions cannot be due to a strong sticking of the Mg film to the substrate, as Mg does not alloy with the Ti buffer layer. It is thus an intrinsic property of the quasi-free thin Mg films The three representative examples shown in Fig. The observed finger patterns in Fig. Mg and optical wave behaviour. Prism (i), convex (ii), and concave (iii) lens-like behaviour is obtained using geometric optics analogues with nobject < nmedium. H circumvents the single gap in iv and diffuses through the two slits defined by three gaps in v. So far, we have only presented the results obtained after H loading/unloading by means of AFM, OR and SEM characterizations. As a matter of fact, we have also recorded the OR videos of the diffusion processes in real time (see Appendix C). As the MgH2 phase is much darker than the metallic Mg phase in OR, the recorded videos contain detailed information about the time dependence of the H diffusion front through a sample. This has led to the striking discovery that the diffusion fronts extracted from snapshots of the OR video at different times are locally orthogonal to the fingers. It is explicitly demonstrated in Fig. All the salient features of the finger patterns in Fig. where t is the time and i D is the amplitude of the H concentration dependent diffusion coefficient. The index i stands for medium (Mg) or object (Pd underneath Mg). The H with 20   derived using a lattice-gas model for H in a metal. The symmetry of   fc is a direct consequence of the observed H loading/unloading symmetry (see Appendix C), which proves unambiguously that all the effects observed in this work result from genuine H diffusion and not from uncontrolled spurious effects. Important is to stress that the simulations involve only one adjustable parameter, Dobject/Dmedium, which is the same for all simulations shown in Fig. An interesting feature of the time dependence of the measured diffusion front positions (see part 1 of Appendix D for details) is that the square root of time behaviour occurs only after a time delay of approximately 140 s at 353 K. This is the characteristic signature of a diffusive process The recorded OR videos used to demonstrate the H loading/unloading symmetry in Fig. and has the same dimension (m 2 s -1 ) as a diffusion coefficient with the prefactor K0 = 1.11 × 10 -9 m 2 s -1 , and the activation energy Ea = 0.389 eV independent of the Mg thickness. kB is the Boltzmann constant. The value of Ea is close to that of H in Mg alloyed L is the characteristic size of the samples and 1/ 2 t is the time necessary to half-fill the samples. Interestingly, the slope of the Arrhenius plot for the nanowire data Using a sample architecture where H diffuses laterally in a Mg film via Pd entrance gates, we have discovered that selforganized finger patterns made of MgH2 can be generated over tens of micrometres. Their front mobility is large at all times and not hampered by the well-known 'blocking effect' generally observed in the published work The variations of the average sample height during the two loading/unloading cycles in Fig. The excellent agreement between the measured and predicted average heights in part 2 of Appendix B is a posteriori confirmation of the validity of the assumption that the volume change upon hydrogenation is entirely accommodated out-of-plane for the Ti/Mg/TiOx samples considered in this work. Another proof of the vanishing in-plane expansion, can be obtained by looking simultaneously at patches with various overall hydrogen contents. The 9 patches in Fig. Cross-sections of the samples generated by Focused Ion Beam (FIB) show that the topographic finger patterns observed in AFM are not due to delamination or buckling. A representative example is given in Fig. The large lattice expansion induced by H absorption in metals can lead to delamination and buckling of metallic films evaporated on low adhesion substrates. This is for example the case for Niobium films evaporated on mica The mechanism responsible for the accommodation of the large volume expansion (approx. 32%) accompanying H absorption in Mg is therefore of a different nature. It is related to the texture of our samples. Our Mg films have predominantly their hexagonal c-axis in a direction perpendicular to the substrate. During hydrogenation, rutile MgH2-d grows predominantly with a (110) direction perpendicular to the substrate. This is schematically indicated in Fig. Snapshots taken from the videos of the H loading and unloading of the five samples in Fig. FRONT MOBILITY Here, we indicate a typical example of parallel measurements. The sharp colour change at the front of the finger patterns makes it possible to monitor accurately the time dependence of the diffusion front position as shown in Fig. Here we find that the front mobility depends on the thickness of the sample as shown in Fig. This expectation is confirmed by measurements of the front mobility for a series of samples with dPd = 20 nm and 22 nm ≤ dMg ≤ 372 nm. The front mobility varies linearly as a function of the inverse Mg thickness. Extrapolation of the data to This is the front mobility of a sample with the same thickness of the Pd entrance gate and the Mg layer. We also find that in contrast to perpendicular diffusion experiments where relatively low H2 pressures must be used in order to minimize the deleterious effects of the MgH2 blocking layer, for lateral H diffusion the front mobility increases with increasing hydrogen pressure as indicated in Fig. The purpose of the simulations is to reproduce all the characteristic features of the finger patterns investigated in this work. To keep the simulations simple, the 3 nm Ti/dMg Mg /5 nm TiOx samples are treated as one vertically homogeneous medium characterized with a hydrogen concentration dependent diffusion coefficient D(c). We do not take into account the different crystal structures of Mg (hexagonal) and MgH2 (rutile) and treat the Mg-H system as a lattice-gas MHc with 0 ≤ c ≤ 1 and a critical temperature much higher than room temperature since the pressure-composition isotherms of Mg-H exhibit clear plateaus at all temperatures investigated here. Within this model the inclusion of objects with fast H diffusion (made for example of Pd) in the Mg layer is taken into account as a local modification of D(c) that depends on the geometry of the inserted object. Excellent agreement with the observed finger patterns is obtained with a local enhancement factor of 100 at the object location for Di in Eq. (1). The symmetry between H loading and unloading illustrated in Appendix C implies that the diffusion coefficient assumes similar values in the limit of small and high hydrogen concentrations. The concentration dependence chosen for all simulations is with 20   , where D0 is a prefactor. Below we show that this relation, which is inspired by a simple lattice-gas model, leads to diffusion concentration profiles with a sharp front that mimics the coexistence of the dilute α-MHc (with typically 0 < c < 0.1) and concentrated β-MHc (with typically 0.9 < c < 1). In the simplest mean-field description of a lattice gas the chemical potential of H in a metal M is where R is the gas constant; T is the absolute temperature; c is the H concentration, c = H/M; H H  is the enthalpy of H solution in M; A is the magnitude of the long-range effective H-H interaction; and SH is the entropy of H in M. The minus sign in front of A, which is assumed to be a positive quantity (i.e., A > 0), corresponds to an attractive H-H interaction. At thermodynamic equilibrium with surrounding H2 gas we have (E3) The chemical potential of H2 gas is where p is the H2 pressure expressed in unit of bar. Equations (E2) and (E4) together with (E3) lead to the pressurecomposition isotherms are the enthalpy and entropy of H solution in M, respectively. The isotherm for the critical temperature Tc, has an inflexion point with zero slope, i.e., the first and second derivatives of ln p as a function of c are both zero at the critical concentration c cc  . From these conditions, we find This equation implies that the diffusion coefficient is strongly dependent on the H concentration c. This is fully in agreement with the detailed measurements on Nb-H discussed extensively by Alefeld et al. Good agreement with experiment is obtained with α = 20. The very small value of D(c) for concentrations 11 1 c     leads to a drastic slowing down of the diffusion process, and thus to a very steep front, in agreement with the experimental data in Figs. Our simulations are based on a diffusion equation. Particle conservation In our numerical procedure, this equation is solved using Euler integration with for hydrogen loading a c = 1 boundary condition at the Pd entrance gate and zero flux boundary conditions elsewhere at the borders of the sample. For unloading, a c = 0 boundary condition is used. For the numerical algorithm, Eq. (E28) is rewritten as The first order numerical derivatives yield values in between the cells that tile the sample and hence are averaged between adjacent inter cell values, thus yielding values at the cells. This (together with a not too large time step) prevents the well-known unphysical generation of checkerboard patterns. The second order numerical derivative automatically gives values at the cells and is adjusted to prevent the generation of rectangular patterns that reflect the cells by a method analogous to that of Oono et al. For a deeper understanding of the H loading/unloading symmetry, we indicate in Fig. We describe here in detail the procedure followed to generate the simulated fronts in Figs. The simulations lead to streamlines that are consistent with the observed finger patterns measured at 353 K if the ratio That the actual ratio in Eq. ( where Pd c is the concentration of H (unit: mol cm -3 ) when the front is reaching the left side of the object. For the samples in This is the H concentration at the entrance of the Pd object when the MgH2/Mg front in the medium hits the Pd object. It is thus the H/Pd at a pressure equal to the plateau pressure of Mg at 353 K which is approximately 0.1 kPa. The low value for the concentration H/Pd in Eq. (E38) is fully consistent with the hydrogenography data of Pivak et al. The purpose of this part is to demonstrate that the remarkable increase of the front mobility with increasing H2 pressure shown in Fig. 