We develop a quasi-normal mode theory (QNMT) to calculate a system's scattering S matrix, simultaneously satisfying both energy conservation and reciprocity even for a small truncated set of resonances. It is a practical reduced-order (few-parameter) model based on the resonant frequencies and constant mode-to-port coupling coefficients, easily computed from an eigensolver without the need for QNM normalization. Furthermore, we show how low-Q modes can be separated into an effective slowly varying background response C, giving an additional approximate formula for S, which is useful to describe general Fano-resonant phenomena. We demonstrate our formulation for both normal and fixed-angle oblique plane-wave incidence on various electromagnetic metasurfaces. Scattering phenomena in all areas of wave physics are well described by the universal S-matrix operator. As the resonant (quasi-normal) modes (QNMs) of a system heavily determine its scattering response and coincide with the poles of S, numerous works The resonant modes of open physical systems are often called "quasi-normal modes" (QNM), as they are not square-integrable and exponentially diverge outside the resonator. The QNM eigenvalues correspond to the poles of physical quantities describing the system response. Based on a pole expansion of a desired such quantity, QNMT is usually concerned with identifying the pole residues/coefficients and any additional background terms. These expansions can allow a fast approximate solution for scattering and emission problems, while providing physical understanding and good spectral accuracy around sharp resonances, in contrast to direct numerical methods using frequency/time discretization In addition to providing a fast computational tool, QNMT (like CMT) has the advantage of offering a simple analytical model for gaining physical insight into resonant systems and for designing practical resonant devices. One interesting example is the case of Fanoresonant shapes We consider a general scattering problem of an arbitrary linear time-independent scatterer, coupled to incoming (excited) and outgoing (scattered) radiation via several physical linear ports. At the frequency ω of excitation, the scatterer has a total of P "coupling port modes" (CPM) of radiation, which can be either single propagating modes of P different physical ports or several propagating modes of fewer ports (while all other port modes are either evanescent, or of incompatible symmetry, or their coupling is simply too small at ω). Let CPM p propagate with wave vector k p (ω) and field φ p (ω, r) = φ ⊥ p (ω, r ⊥ p )e ikpr p , separable in the propagation (r p ) and transverse (r ⊥ p ⊥ k p ) coordinates. In the most common case of reciprocal lossless physical ports, the CPMs at ω are orthogonal under the standard (conjugated) "power" inner product (a cross-sectional overlap surface integral) and can be normalized to carry unit power φ ⊥ p |φ ⊥ q = δ pq Since the scattering system is open (coupled to radiation), its Hamiltonian H is non-Hermitian, so it supports a set of resonant modes [with resonant frequencies ω n and fields ψ n (r) namely H (iω n ) ψ n = iω n ψ n ]. Causality and stability The part of the scattered field not due to direct pathways (s Q -= s --Cs + ) can be written outside the scatterer as an expansion over the complete set of port modes (propagating CPMs and evanescent). QNMT makes the approximation that it can be written also within the volume V of the scatterer as a linear combination of the N QNMs (an assumption also used in CMT a n (ω)ψ n (r); r ∈ V. (1) By inserting the second line into the exact equation for the field inside the scatterer and by mode matching the two lines on the cross-section z p where the p port meets the scatterer boundary, one respectively gets the final two QNMT equations, which, with exp (-iωt) notation, takes the form (for a rigorous derivation see, e.g.,, Ref. 5): where and z p -z p is the distance of the p-port reference crosssection from the boundary of the scatterer. This z p crosssection choice for the calculation of the D overlaps is further justified in Sec. IV C. The P × N matrices K and D quantify the couplings of the QNMs to the input and output CPM waves respectively, and they are generally frequency dependent. Equations. Although a general C (ω) was included in Eqs. ( FIG. low-Q QNMs can be combined to write a general effective background C (ω); in particular, a fully-transmissive C comes from a zero-frequency mode with an infinite radiative rate (Sec. IV B). Shifts of ports' reference cross sections-When S(ω) is a meromorphic function, it is useful to employ the Weierstrass factorization theorem and arguments from causality to write S = e iτ ω S e iτ ω , where τ is a constant diagonal matrix with real positive elements and S is a "proper" rational function (Appendix A). Eq. ( Therefore, hereafter we drop the and consider S to be such a proper rational function that can be decomposed as (5) For other types of CPMs, S(ω) may not be meromorphic, for example when higher-order CPMs have a cutoff frequency, which appears as a branch-point [and frequency dependent D (ω), K (ω)]. Similarly to previous QNMT formulations with constant coefficients, such systems are not investigated in this work. Normalization independence-Recall that measurable physical quantities (such as the S matrix) do not depend on the choice of normalization for the QNM amplitudes a. For example, it is easily seen from the QNMT Eqs. (2) that, for the fixed normalization of s ± , two different sets (a n , K qn , D pn ) and a n , K qn , D pn scale as a n /a n = K qn /K qn = D pn /D pn , hence S pq in Eq. ( For some physical quantities analytically computed via the QNM fields (such as the Green's function), this normalization independence is typically ensured by dividing with the volume-integral norm {ψ n |ψ n } of these fields. However, since they are non-integrable, regularizing this norm is a procedure that adds complexity (e.g., choice of method and dependence on outgoing boundary condition) We now proceed by imposing constraints on S, based on the physical properties of the system. Realness-For many physical systems, real input fields lead to real output fields so that the system response S(t) must also be real. In frequency domain, this realness of S is stated as S * (iω) = S(-iω * ). For such systems, the same relation holds for their Hamiltonian H satisfying H (iω) ψ = iωψ, so every QNM solution (ω n , Energy conservation-In absence of absorption or gain, energy conservation implies that the S matrix is unitary (s † + s + = s † -s -⇔ S † S = I) thus S can be written as In Appendix C, we show that this Eq. ( Reciprocity-Reciprocity implies that the S matrix is symmetric (S = S t ) and therefore for some arbitrary diagonal matrix Λ with entries λ n [with the only restriction that λ n = λ * n = 0, so that Eq. ( For any such choice, as mentioned earlier, the numerator of pole n for S pq in Eq. ( (10) Here again, for each resonance n, either D rnn (for one port r n ) or λ n can be chosen arbitrarily. In practice, this reciprocity condition Eq. ( where f (D, D c ) is some penalty function to ensure that D stays close to D c (note represents the residues of the scattering matrix expansion given in Eq. ( but such a set of D is not guaranteed to exist. When it does exist, directly solving this system of equations has given the best results in our experience with actual 2-port systems. Since many common applications of scattering theory involve lossless reciprocal 2-port systems, we discuss some properties of their S matrix. Energy conservation leads to the unitary S matrix of Eq. ( (12) [If only positive-frequency modes are considered and thus the realness requirement is relaxed-commonly known as a rotating-wave approximation (RWA)-Eq. ( As a consequence, when all σ n are ±1 (as for a symmetric structure, whose modes must be even or odd In the presence of small absorption loss, S is no longer unitary, but it can be calculated perturbatively when all relevant modes have high Q. In particular, the denominators of Eq. ( Our QNMT for the S matrix is applicable to all kinds of wave physics, such as acoustics We now study scattering of an electromagnetic plane wave with frequency f = ω/2π normally incident on the metasurface depicted in the inset of Fig. at the two (left/right for p = 1, 2) external boundaries of the metasurface between the QNM field ψ n = (E n , H n ) and the coupling port modes φ ⊥ p = (E p , H p ) [plane waves in this case, so where, as emphasized earlier, only their ratio σ n is needed. In Appendix F, we provide further details and guidelines for the numerical simulations (mainly how to compute very-low-Q modes), and within the Supplemental Material [35]we give tables with the calculated QNMs (ω n , σ n ) for every structure presented in the paper. For the asymmetric structure of Fig. To quantify the benefits of our QNMT, we calculate the errors associated with not exactly enforcing reciprocity or energy conservation, for the same QNMs of the lossless structure. If the D coefficients are not finetuned with Eq. ( One key advantage of the QNMT method is that it resolves spectra around very-high-Q modes with perfect detail, while a frequency simulation requires a very dense uniform frequency grid to resolve them, being ignorant of their location. This, in turn, leads to a stark benefit in speed for QNMT. For this example, on the same machine and finite-element mesh, the QNMT calculation took an average of ∼ 60 secs per mode (×10 modes in Fig. We now consider the 4-port system described in Fig. In Fig. 2 and again find a good agreement with our QNMT. In the Supplemental Material [35], we show the other components of the S-matrix. In Fig. When a plane wave is incident on a metasurface at an angle θ, its transverse wave vector component at frequency ω is k ⊥ = ω sinθ/c. Phase matching then imposes that this must also be the Bloch wave vector within the metasurface. QNMT modeling with such excitation may seem intractable at first glance, if one tries to obtain a full band diagram to apply QNMT at each fixed real k ⊥ . However, we calculate here the relevant QNMs from a nonlinear eigenproblem, where the phase matching condition is imposed at the complex eigenfrequency by analytic continuation (thus giving a complex Bloch wave vector k ⊥ n = ω n sinθ/c). To find such unusual resonances, we developed software for two-dimensional (2d) dielectric structures, whose geometry can be split into uniform layered sections: at any complex ω, these complex Bloch modes are calculated within each section with a T -matrix formulation, then matched at interfaces between sections, and finally radiation conditions are applied to find the resonances (similar to CAMFR We then study scattering of a plane wave incident at a 30 • angle on a 2d photonic grating with its E-field transverse to the plane [inset of Fig. Transmission is also plotted in the case of strong dielectric losses and it highlights that our perturbative approach works very well, even though now (due to absorption) several modes have decay rates Γn more than an order of magnitude larger than their rates Γ n for the lossless structure (see QNMs within Supplemental Material [35]). In some design situations A. QNMT with background C matrix Consider a lossless system supporting some high-Q resonant modes ( n → ∞ cancel out between M C and the C-denominator poles, leading to a constant C not necessarily equal to -I. In the next subsection, we calculate this limiting C for some simple but useful pole configurations. Now, for the total S-matrix of Eq. ( Here, S has the form of a separate scattering matrix, which itself also satisfies realness, unitarity and the properties of Eqs. through which a finetuned D can be evaluated by an optimization procedure, as before, to obtain the final S. As we discuss in Appendix F, such extremely-low-Q modes are very difficult to locate numerically. Thankfully, in practice, real systems usually have modes with reasonably low Q, which are easier to find. However, the problem then is that their associated C (ω) is slowly varying instead of constant and is not necessarily unitary (as it does not describe a physical system by itself). Nevertheless, we can still use Eq. ( Attempts to symmetrize S (for example, In this subsection, we study some very basic configurations of modes (ω C n , σ C n ) in 2-port systems to build intuition on their influence in shaping the background scattering. (For notational simplicity, here we drop the superscript " C ".) Single zero-frequency mode (-iΓ o , σ o )-Consider a 2-port system supporting a zero-frequency mode ω o = -iΓ o . As explained above, when Γ o → ∞, this mode can be factored out of S into a unitary symmetric background response C. The symmetry of C dictates that the modal ports-coupling ratio σ o is real. Using Eq. (D3) for just this mode, we find M = (1 + σ 2 o )/2Γ o and then which can give any "reflection matrix" in the orthogonal group O(2). A given transmission t is achieved for In particular, we obtain r = 1 for σ o = 0, while r = -1 for σ o → ∞. On the other hand, σ o = ±1 gives a fullytransmissive background with t = ±1. A concrete example which confirms this last result comes from considering a uniform material slab with thickness d and refractive index ñ. Its "Fabry-Perot" modes are an equispaced spectrum given by Consider now appropriately large ñ, so that atanh negligible for all n = 0. In the limit d → 0, indicating the absence of slab, the only relevant n = 0 system mode has Γ o → ∞. Therefore, perhaps counter-intuitively, full transmission can be seen as equivalent to such a mode at 0 -i∞ with σ 0 = 1. This result of t = 1 for a zero-thickness slab is a consequence our initial phase choice C = -I in Eq. ( Equispaced (Fabry-Perot) modes [nω o -iΓ o , (-1) n ]-When the structure has localized resonant elements but does not exhibit very strong overall reflection, the background response is commonly assumed to arise from the averaged geometry. When this is a simple uniform material slab, it corresponds to a Fabry-Perot system with the infinite set of equispaced alternating-symmetry modes given in Eq. ( From the last two examples, note that, although a conjugate-mode pair gives C ≈ -I in the large-Γ limit, when considering many such modes, their small pole contributions (deviations from -I), ∝ i2ω/Γ o from Eq. ( C-matrix description of a port shift In our QNMT formulation, we suggest calculating the coupling coefficient D pn as an overlap between the QNM n and the CPM p at the latter's cross-section z p which first touches the scatterer boundary [Eq. ( A plane wave at frequency f = ω/2π is normally incident on a uniform material slab of refractive index ñs = 3 and thickness d that is attached to another slab of the same thickness but with ñ = 1.05 (Fig. We finally test this formulation on the 2-port electromagnetic structures of Figs. 2 and 4 by using the modes with lowest Qs (much lower than the other modes) to construct the C matrix (see modes in Fig. The 4-port structure of Fig. We have presented an expansion of the system scattering matrix S over non-normalized QNMs, formulated to satisfy the fundamental physical conditions of realness, energy conservation and reciprocity even for a small truncated number of terms. Resonant QNMs with frequencies ω n are computed with a numerical eigensolver. Coupling coefficients D pn are evaluated as surface overlap integrals between normalized-CPM and non-normalized-QNM fields (as only ratios σ r,pn = D pn /D rn are needed). Negative-frequency modes (-ω * n , D * pn ) are included. The D matrix is then adjusted through Eq. ( Our QNMT was mainly developed for linear ports with frequency-independent transverse mode profiles, such as plane waves. However, it could also be extended to finite arbitrary-shape scatterers using a spherical CPM basis. (Note that systems with spherical symmetry studied in previous QNMT formulations The final term, after decomposing into simple elements through and relabelling indices (n and l), becomes: In order to impose S † S = I for every ω, necessary and sufficient conditions are given by K * M = D and . The two relations are actually equivalent, since M = M † , and can be rewritten as finite, thus S 22 must exhibit a zero at -ω o that cancels the pole there (and similarly when switching S 11 and S 22 ). Moreover, if simultaneously S 21 (ω o ) = 0, Eq. (E1c) mandates a pole-zero cancellation also for S 21 at -ω o . (II) If S 11 (ω o ) = S 22 (ω o ) = 0, Eq. (E1c) implies that also S 21 (ω o ) = 0, namely the entire matrix S(ω o ) = 0. In this case, we can consider that all S-coefficients also have another zero at -ω o that cancels a degenerate pole, which usually do appear when the physical system is perturbed. (III) If S 11 (ω o ) = 0 = S 22 (ω o ), Eqs. (E1a) and (E1c) dictate also that S 21 (ω o ) = 0. In the cases above, for any coefficient with S pq (ω o ) = 0, then S pq (ω) ∝ e iφ(ω) = (ω ), a behavior known as an "all-pass" phase filter. Moreover, when S(ω o ) is singular, ω o is called an "S-matrix zero" (for example generalized in Ref. The restrictions (i) on the S 21 zeros imply that its numerator is a polynomial of ω 2 with real coefficients, optionally with multiplicative iω factors. Our QNMT relies on the calculation of the system resonances, including low-Q modes, which may be spread across the complex-ω plane and may include a mode with zero real frequency (ω o = 0 -iΓ o )-required for nonzero background transmission. Accurate numerical solution of the exact field equations for such eigenmodes can be challenging due to issues arising from spatial discretization and from truncation of the simulation domain in open systems, usually implemented with a "perfectly matched layer" (PML) Mesh type-In the computational domain (the cladding) around the scatterer (and in the PML when present), to minimize spurious reflections from changes in discretization one should use a mesh that is periodic (or nearly so) in the direction orthogonal to the boundary (where scattered waves should escape) Boundary condition, computational-cell size and mesh density-The commonly used frequency-independent PML of finite thickness rotates the continuous radiation spectrum in the complex plane and discretizes it into socalled "PML modes" Our QNMT is mostly applicable to CPMs with a frequency-independent transverse field profile. Thus, while computing QNMs, a "scattering boundary condition" (SBC) matching each CPM's profile can be used. As we show in Fig. Combining a PML and a SBC gives an even better result, as the discrete radiation modes are pushed down and then rotated in the complex plane [Fig. Initial guesses for QNMs-Even if the discrete radiation modes have been pushed away, locating the low-Q (and zero-frequency) QNMs initially may require good initial complex-frequency guesses and searching for a large number of modes. In some convenient cases, the initial guesses can be provided by the analytically-solveable modes of an effective average structure. We discussed such cases in paragraphs "Equi-spaced (Fabry-Perot) modes" and "One-sided equi-spaced modes" in Sec. IV B. Number of QNMs needed-Regarding how many modes one needs in QNMT for an accurate enough calculation, one observation is that a (low-Q) mode ω n = Ω n -iΓ n will have an effect at real frequency ω, if ω lies within a bandwidth proportional to the resonance linewidth, namely if |ω -Ω n | /Γ n < some number, which depends on the level of accuracy required. Obviously, when a mode has very large Γ n , it can play a role even if it is very distant and it may be very difficult to locate. In those cases, a background response C can still be estimated via C = S-1 S, with S from a direct simulation and S from QNMT using only the high-Q modes. Appendix G: Group delay for a finite-width pulse For finite-bandwidth signal pulses, the group delay of a system should be computed as the difference in time expectation of flux between the input and output signals In the limit of a very narrowband (δ-function) input frequency spectrum F , this simplifies to the usual τ → φ H . In all QNMT formulations which do not simultaneously satisfy reciprocity and energy conservation (e.g., using Eq. ( Here, we provide all the QNMs computed via finite-element simulations. The computed QNM-to-CPM ratios are indicated by σ c , while the ones finetuned by Eq. ( • Normal incidence on microwave metasurface of Fig. • Oblique incidence on 2d photonic metasurface of Fig. o , -ω o , -ω * o ), real or imaginary pairs (ω o , -ω o ), or at ω o = 0 and (ii) for each zero pair (ω o , -ω * o ) of S 11 , (-ω o , ω * o