Light-matter coupling in excitonic materials has been the subject of intense investigation due to emergence of new excitonic materials. Two-dimensional layered hybrid organic/inorganic perovskites (2D HOIPs) support strongly bound excitons at room-temperatures with some of the highest oscillator strengths and electric loss tangents among the known excitonic materials. Here, we report strong light-matter coupling in Ruddlesden-Popper phase 2D-HOIPs crystals without the necessity of an external cavity. We report concurrent occurrence of multiple-orders of hybrid lightmatter states via both reflectance and luminescence spectroscopy in thick (> 100 nm) crystals and near-unity absorption in thin (< 20 nm) crystals. We observe resonances with quality factors > 250 in hybridized exciton-polaritons and identify a linear correlation between exciton-polariton mode splitting and extinction coefficient of the various 2D-HOIPs. Our work opens the door to studying polariton dynamics in selfhybridized and open cavity systems with broad applications in optoelectronics and photochemistry. Low-dimensional or quantum-confined semiconductors exhibit strong excitonic resonances at room temperatures owing to the weak electric field screening between photo-excited electrons and holes. As a consequence, their optical density of states is focused into narrow spectral resonances. These resonances, when coupled with optical cavity resonances, results in the formation of hybrid states of light and matter termed exciton-polaritons. Polariton states are conventionally formed by coupling semiconductor materials with external optical cavities, either dielectric or plasmonic, that confine photons. Controlling and engineering this optical dispersion has become a frontier topic of research for taming light propagation at the nanoscale. Such possibility has opened new avenues in basic photonic sciences such as generation of artificial lattices of interacting excited quantum states Coupling light into excitonic semiconductors has been the subject of intense study over the past two decades. Until the advent of 2D semiconductors most excitonic semiconductors were sp 2 carbon based or organic in nature (e.g. organic small molecules, polymers, and carbon nanotubes) In this study, we experimentally demonstrate a single-mode hybrid state formation in exfoliated 2D HOIP flakes without the necessity of an external cavity. We observe concurrent formation of multiple orders of exciton-polariton quasiparticles in both reflectance and luminescence spectroscopy at room temperatures in 100-150 nm thick Ruddlesden-Popper Phase 2D HOIPs. We further observe that both the strength of coupling and order number of exciton-polariton resonances are a function of crystal height suggesting thickness tunable DOS. We correlate our experimental observations with electromagnetic wave simulations and report close agreement between the two. We further demonstrate that our results are general across all 2D HOIPs and demonstrate that the exciton-polariton splitting is linearly dependent on the degree of quantum confinement in 2D HOIPs of varying n. Finally, using temperature, pump intensity and time dependent measurements we determine the mechanism of energy transfer from hybrid exciton-polariton states to triplet states and report occurrence of Boser action in 2D HOIPs Our concept of hybrid state formation by strong light-matter interactions stems from exploiting the lossy Fabry-Pérot (FP) like cavity modes present in any material with large losses To demonstrate this concept, we characterize the optical properties of thin and thick flakes of HOIP using reflectance and PL spectroscopy. First, mechanically exfoliated HOIP flakes were directly placed on the template-stripped Au substrate using the wellknown scotch-tape route The experimental attenuance data (solid lines) shows excellent qualitative and good quantitative overlap with the theoretical attenuance spectra from TMM calculations (dotted lines) suggesting the accuracy of dielectric functions and the calculation method. Therefore, the light absorption efficiency from different HOIPs is directly attributed to the dielectric functions of the material. It is notable to mention that the extraordinary optical constants of 2D HOIPs in these thin flakes of RP1 results in nearunity (~97% at the exciton resonance) light absorption for ~15 nm thick semiconductor samples which is similar to prior observations in TMDCs and significant still since 2D A similar phenomenon was also observed in higher-order systems -RP2 (n =2) and RP3 (n = 3). (B) Representative optical image of RP2 showing thin and thick flakes on a Au substrate. Atomic force microscopic images from RP1 and RP2 flakes on Au substrates with approximate thicknesses of 10 nm (C) and 15 nm (D), respectively. The line profile (white dotted line) from the topography is shown below their corresponding images. (E) Attenuance (solid line) from RP1 (10 nm) flake showing near-unity absorption at the excitonic wavelength (520 nm) compared to the different thicknesses from higher HOIP system -RP2 (15 nm) and RP3 (10 nm). Dotted lines are attenuance spectra from the transfer-matrix calculations. HOIPs are direct band gap in nature (A) Transfer-matrix calculation of reflectance spectra for all HOIP systems (RP1 to RP4) with the optical constant obtained from spectroscopic ellipsometry method. The thin flake thickness was ~10 nm for all RP systems. For hybrid states, maintaining almost similar flake thickness leads to constant mode volume for all the HOIP orders (RP1 ~110 nm and RP2, RP3, and RP4 ~150 nm each) for zero detuning condition. See FigureS2, Supporting Information. Reflectance from thick HOIP flakes shows a clear exciton transparency region in the calculated spectra. (B) Theoretical Rabi splitting shows a linear relation with the extinction coefficient of the HOIP (ħΩ ∝ kk). See Supporting Information, Section 1 for details. (C) Experimental observation of reflectance data shows strong Rabi splitting in Au/RP1 (300 nm) with higher-order (HO) modes in the reflectance. Inset shows the electric field distribution for the peaks from 526 nm and 545 nm showing HO mode and LPB peak, respectively, from simulation with RP1 thickness ~365 nm. (D) Experimental reflectance and PL spectra from Au/RP3 thick flakes (~600 nm) -cavity detuned condition showing the upper polariton branch (UPB), HO mode, and lower polariton branch (LPB) with smallest Rabi splitting. The dotted lines in panel (C) and (D) corresponds to the reflectance spectra. Next, we investigate strong coupling in 2D HOIP flakes of varying orders using TMM calculations and correlate our findings with the dielectric functions of the material. First, we will discuss the formation of hybrid states at the zero detuning condition to identify the critical thicknesses of HOIP flakes followed by criteria for HO mode formation. Optical dispersion from different flake thicknesses were analyzed to identify the critical HOIP thickness manifesting in single-mode hybrid state formation. From the simulations, the reflectance spectra for thick flakes (~100-200 nm) show two or more reflectance dips (solid line), in contrast with thin flakes (<20 nm) that only show a single excitonic peak (dotted line) for all HOIPs orders (Figure where Ex is exciton energy, Ec (t) is cavity mode as a function of the thickness (t), and g is the coupling strength. Hopfield coefficients are the value of |αα| 2 and |ββ| 2 that correspond to the exciton and photon component, respectively, from the polariton branch. From our calculation, an equal contribution (or fraction) of exciton and photon was observed at the anticrossing point for all HOIPs (Figure Observing an anticrossing between two modes in the theoretical fitting and a clear exciton transparency region at the excitonic wavelength are unambiguous signatures confirming hybrid exciton-polaritons in thick HOIP flakes. We ascribe these two modes to the upper polariton branch (UPB) and lower polariton branch (LPB). The wavelength for UPB (solid squares in cyan) and LPB (open squares) obtained from the two-coupled oscillator fitting coincides with the reflectance dips in the thick HOIP flakes (RP1 to RP4) (Figure In the absence of an external optical cavity, self-hybridization of the FP cavity modes from the thick flakes in resonance with the excitonic mode facilitates a single-mode hybrid state. Hybrid states formed in flakes with thickness ~100 -200 nm is critical to maintain similar mode volume for comparing among HOIPs possessing different dielectric functions and eliminate any multi-mode dispersions, previously reported for thick HOIP flakes (600-3000 nm) sandwiched in a dielectric Bragg cavity In addition to hybrid state formation, we also observe higher-order modes (HO, marked by solid circles in red) present between the UPB and LPB modes. HO modes appear prominently in RP1 and RP2 systems; however, they disappear for RP3 and RP4 due to their low extinction coefficient for zero detuning condition. With increasing flake thickness (non-zero detuned condition), RP3 and RP4 also shows HO modes as discussed later. This contrasting observation is due to the remarkably peaked dielectric functions in RP1 and RP2, which can confine light in the semiconductor medium (discussed later). Nevertheless, hybrid states were observed in all HOIP systems with thicknesses less than 200 nm as evident from the optical simulation. Rabi splitting is the energy difference between the UPB and LPB at the zero detuning condition (Ecavity = Eexciton), and it was determined for the HOIP systems Here, exciton energy (E x ), exciton damping factor (γγ xx ), free electron mass (εε), the real frequency-dependent permittivity of the material ( εε) , and mode volume ( VV mm ) correspond to the HOIPs used in this study. From equation (2), it is evident that the Rabi splitting should be linearly proportional to the extinction coefficient of the HOIP, as observed in Figure Thick RP1 flakes (300 nm) on Au substrates (Au/RP1) were investigated for hybrid state formation using reflectance and PL spectroscopy at room temperature. The reflectance spectrum for Au/RP1 thick flakes shows hybrid states with UPB and LPB amounting to a Rabi splitting of ~363 meV, almost two-fold (three-fold) higher as compared to previous reports in open cavity (DBR) systems at room temperatures To understand the evolution of a single-mode hybrid state at a critical HOIP thickness, we will focus on thickness-dependent reflectance spectroscopy studies in Au/RP2 and then extend our argument for other HOIP systems. Various thicknesses of RP2 flakes exfoliated on a Au substrate were chosen to record the reflectance spectrum at room temperature (Figure TMM calculations were performed to interpret and correlate our experimental observations. Simulation of thickness-dependent reflectance map from Au/RP2 complements and confirms all our experimental data shown in filled circles (Figure Starting with the RP2 thickness (~15 nm) -exciton and higher exciton states are observed. With an increase in thickness, the exciton mode blueshifts and transitions to an exciton transparency region allowing for the formation of hybrid states in RP2 flakes less than 200 nm thick. Using a two coupled-oscillators model, the fitting obtained from UPB (black line) and LPB (red line) follow closely with our experimental data (filled circles). From the above discussion, we can confirm the formation of a single-mode hybrid state with RP2 thickness less than 200 nm on the Au substrate. In comparison, we investigated similar conditions on a quartz substrate instead of Au. Reflectance and PL spectroscopy from two different flake thicknesses (~30 nm and 232 nm) of RP2 on the quartz substrate were recorded (Supporting Information, Figure Nevertheless, increasing the HOIP flake thickness beyond 200 nm does not strongly modulate either the Rabi splitting (243 meV to 251 meV) or the UPB peak position, owing to a slight increase in the cavity mode coupling. However, the lightmatter interaction manifests into multi-mode LPB from hybridization between the exciton mode and the FP cavity modes in RP2. Similar observations on multi-mode LPB from angle-dependent reflectance and PL was reported upon increasing the HOIP flake thickness in a DBR cavity Another mode emerging within the critical thickness of the HOIP flakes (<200 nm) is the higher-order (HO) mode. Comparing thickness-dependent reflectance spectra shows that the HO mode appears close to the exciton branch (Figure The narrow linewidth of the HO mode, in contrast to the broad linewidth in the hybrid modes, heuristically confirms the signature of exciton-polaritons and the mode assignment. The presence of the exciton-polariton state was also investigated from the PL measurement in thick RP2 flakes. At room temperature, PL emanating from the thick flakes show hybrid emission with dominance in the UPB and HO branch; however, thin flakes show only excitonic emission (Figure We now investigate the temperature-dependent exciton-polariton emission and reflectance spectroscopy from the thick RP2 flakes. We compare our measurements with the exciton behavior from the thin RP2 flake. As we cool down the sample from room temperature (296 K) to 80 K, the PL from thin flakes shows a blueshift around 273 K, due to phase transformation in the butylamine-based halide perovskites used in this study Hybrid states (UPB and LPB) marked in the reflectance spectra were also vivid from the temperature-dependent reflectance data (Figure PL recorded from thin RP2 flakes (<20 nm) shows a broad peak at room temperature, as discussed above. Upon cooling to 80 K, exciton fine-structure emerges as observed in previous studies (Supporting Information, Figure Using biexponential fitting, two decay components, fast (t1) and slow (t2), can be obtained by fitting the decay trace. The amplitude of t1 (>95%) was found to be dominating t2 (~5%) in the decay trace fitting. Therefore, the exciton lifetime was in sub-nanosecond (0.27 ns) scale corresponding to the fast component (t1) as reported previously As the LPB emission is weak for thick flakes compared to UPB and HO mode even at 80 K, we focus our further studies on understanding the emission behavior only from UPB and HO. TRPL measurements were recorded from exciton-polariton emission observed from the thick RP2 flakes at 80 K. Using a biexponential fit, the t1 and t2 obtained from the TRPL trace recorded over different wavelength ranges in the hybrid emission are shown in Figure In the case of photon lasing, triplet state was reported for inhibiting lasing (or lasing death) in lower-order HOIPs. Introducing triplet management strategies to suppress the influence of triplet states towards population inversion have led to photon lasing in quasi-2D perovskites We recorded PL vs. excitation fluence to understand the polariton dynamics in the thick flake at 80 K. At low excitation power (0.25 μJ/cm 2 ), the emission from HO was dominant compared to the UPB emission (inset in Figure5C). With an increase in the excitation fluence, the UPB intensity becomes dominant and blueshifts (558 nm). Collectively, the crossover in dominant peak emission, PL blueshift, and threshold-like PL behavior in UPB emission upon increasing the excitation power are several observations pointing towards a Boser action In summary, our results highlight a simple and effective approach for lightmatter coupling in sub-wavelength thickness (~150 nm) perovskites placed on a gold substrate. This approach led to achieving single-cavity mode polaritons with two-fold higher Rabi splitting than previous reports, which used very thick HOIP flakes Our results highlight that achieving strong Rabi splitting in open cavities will be foundational to leverage our understanding of mapping the polariton dynamics using near-field spectroscopy, provided the photostability of the perovskite is enhanced. Strong emission from UPB and HO mode, compared to LPB, may negate biexciton lasing. Further, direct access to semiconductors (HOIP) for electrode contact will benefit electrically driven polariton lasers, polariton photochemistry, and neuromorphic computing. 2D hybrid organic-inorganic perovskites with Ruddlesden-Popper phase (n = 1 to 3) were synthesized by following the standard route as reported previously Perovskite crystals were grown on a glass substrate from a freshly prepared perovskite solution. 10 μL of the perovskite solution was drop cast on the glass substrate and covered with another glass substrate to allow solvent evaporation overnight at 60 °C. After drying, thick perovskite crystals grown on the glass substrates were used for exfoliation. Template-stripped Au substrates were prepared by depositing two-component epoxy over the 100 nm Au film thermally evaporated on Si substrate. The epoxy was covered with a Silicon carrier wafer and flipped after drying at 100 °C Samples were placed in a Linkam stage and pumped to 10 Samples loaded in a Helium cryostat were maintained at 80 K. PL was recorded from thin and thick HOIP flakes at room temperature (296 K), 223 K, and 80 K with 467 nm excitation. The emitted light was transmitted through a 1200 grooves/mm grating to record the PL. Using tunable filters, the PL was filtered at different wavelengths and fiber coupled into a Micro Photon Devices single photon detector. The signal from the detector and the reference from the laser source was fed into a PicoQuant HydraHarp 400 timing box to record the lifetime. For these measurements, a picosecond excitation source at 467 nm with 100 MHz repetition rate was used to excite the sample. The setup provided an instrument response time of 0.015 ns (t1) and 0.2 ns (t2). TRPL was recorded with increasing excitation power from 6.37 x 10 -2 μJ/cm 2 to 3.95 μJ/cm 2 from thick flakes where the hybrid state is prominently observed. Topography scans performed using OmegaScope Smart SPM (AIST) are used to determine the perovskite flake thickness. The optical constants for all 2D HOIP perovskites obtained from the ellipsometry technique reported in our prior publication was taken for the simulation 