Modern scattering-type scanning near-field optical microscopy (s-SNOM) has become an indispensable tool in material research. However, as the s-SNOM technique marches into the far-infrared (IR) and terahertz (THz) regimes, emerging experiments sometimes produce puzzling results. For example, "anomalies" in the near-field optical contrast have been widely reported. In this letter, we systematically investigate a series of extreme subwavelength metallic nanostructures via s-SNOM near-field imaging in the GHz to THz frequency range. We find that the near-field material contrast is greatly impacted by the lateral size of the nanostructure, while the spatial resolution is practically independent of it. The contrast is also strongly affected by the connectivity of the metallic structures to a larger metallic "ground plane". The observed effect can be largely explained by a quasi-electrostatic analysis. We also compare the THz s-SNOM results to those of the mid-IR regime, where the size-dependence becomes significant only for smaller structures. Our results reveal that the quantitative analysis of the near-field optical material contrasts in the long-wavelength regime requires a careful assessment of the size and configuration of metallic (optically conductive) structures. The best spatial resolution that can possibly be achieved with a conventional optical microscope is fundamentally constrained by the diffraction limit to roughly half of the incident wavelength, prohibiting nanoscale optical characterization The spectral region spanning 0.1-10 terahertz (THz) is commonly recognized as the "THz gap" because of technical difficulties in the generation and detection of intense coherent THz light The deep-subwavelength scale spatial resolution achievable via s-SNOM can be largely attributed to the tight electromagnetic field confinement below the tip apex We first use a home-built s-SNOM setup to perform sub-THz near-field imaging. The system utilizes high-harmonic (12th) generation from a microwave source We first characterize the spatial resolution of our THz s-SNOM setup via imaging a ~90-nm-thick by ~1.5 μm-wide gold bar antenna on a SiO2 substrate. AFM topography and near-field amplitude images demodulated at the first (S1), second (S2), third (S3), and fourth (S4) harmonic orders are shown in Fig. If the disk is not grounded, its potential picks up an extra term due to the presence of balancing charges with opposite sign (to make sure the disk is charge neutral) and becomes In Fig. as a function of disk diameter d for both grounded (blue curve) and un-grounded (golden curve) scenarios. The balancing charge in the case of un-grounded disks is found to be of significant importance for the change of the electric field, which is consistent with the size dependent trend of the averaged S2 signal of the disks (red squares in Fig. As suggested by equation 1 and the blue curve in Fig. Corresponding line profiles across the gold patches and large gold pad are shown in Fig. Besides the above described effect, other effects may be responsible for the observed sizedependent near-field contrast which deserves further investigation. For example, beyond the electrostatic limit, surface inductance is found to be weakened in smaller metallic structures. The decreased inductance leads to a relatively more important contribution from the disk resistance, which leads to a higher eddy current damping in the near-field. This may greatly reduce the electric field intensity thus the near-field scattering signal (this analysis will be reported by S. T. Chui elsewhere). While a full analytical electrodynamic model remains challenging, full-wave simulations of the tip-disk-substrate system are more probable and can be carried out using the finite element method (COMSOL). The scale mismatch among incident wavelength (1.74 mm), tip length (200 μm), and tip-sample distance (0-100 nm) makes a rigorous simulation of the near-field signal computationally expensive The simulation layout and typical electric field distribution are shown in Fig. To extend the generality of the simulation, we test three categories of material by adjusting the disk permittivity W = W 9 + XW < for a good metal (ε 9 → -∞, W < → ∞), a dielectric material (ε 9 = 10, W < = 0.1), and a bad metal (ε 9 = -10, W < = 10). Field enhancement normalized to that of a "vacuum disk" (ε 9 = 1, W < = 0) as a function of disk diameter is shown in Fig. From the simulations, we conclude that the aforementioned size-dependent near-field contrast is most prominent in good metals, which have significant surface charge or current. The THz nearfield signals of dielectrics or bad metals should not exhibit significant dependence for sample sizes at the micron scale (~λ/100). For comparison, we examine the size-dependent near-field material contrast in the mid-IR regime. Near-field imaging at ~6 μm is performed via a commercial s-SNOM (Neaspec GmbH, Germany) equipped with a quantum cascade laser (Daylight Solutions, USA). Fig. To demonstrate that this phenomenon is not limited to a particular frequency, mid-IR broadband near-field spectroscopy is performed on the same disk samples. Indeed a similar trend is observed in the whole frequency range between 400 and 1100 cm -1 (Supplemental materials). Furthermore, we find that demodulation order also has a minimal impact on trend of the near-field contrast (Supplemental materials). Without considering polaritonic or antenna effects, current understanding of s-SNOM suggests that the near-field material contrasts are determined by the local dielectric properties of the sample and data acquisition parameters (tip radius, tapping amplitude, and demodulation order etc.). Therefore, theoretical attempts to calculate the near-field contrast typically model the sample as a homogeneous semi-infinite half-space 