Searching for performant multiferroic materials attracts general research interests in energy science as they have been increasingly exploited as the conversion media among thermal, electric, magnetic and mechanical energies by using their temperature-dependent ferroic properties. Here we report a material development strategy that guides us to discover a reversible phase-transforming ferroelectric material exhibiting enduring energy harvesting from small temperature differences. The material satisfies the crystallographic compatibility condition between polar and nonpolar phases, which shows only 2.5 • C thermal hysteresis and high figure of merit. It stably generates 15μA electricity in consecutive thermodynamic cycles in absence of any bias fields. We demonstrate our device to consistently generate 6μA/cm 2 current density near 100 • C over 540 complete phase transformation cycles without any electric and functional degradation. The energy conversion device can light up a LED directly without attaching an external power source. This promising material candidate brings the low-grade waste heat harvesting closer to a practical realization, e.g. small temperature fluctuations around the water boiling point can be considered as a clean energy source. Waste heat is inevitably generated from a plethora of processes, such as burning fuel, running computers, and solar radiation. The thermal energy that reaches temperatures of around 100 • C is abundant and has drastically increased in recent years from urban and industrial activities. As such, identifying methods to recycle and harvest waste heat is among the most pressing challenges in energy science. While thermal to electricity energy conversion technologies have been advanced by a large margin in thermoelectric devices in recent years, their applications to the energy harvesting from low-grade heat (e.g. < 150 • C) are highly hindered by the low ZT value in the low temperature regime. Electrically polarized crystals naturally exhibit the pyroelectric effect: a change in temperature causes a change in its spontaneous electrical polarization. The earliest documented observation of pyroelectric effect in stones such as tourmaline can date back to ancient Greece. In absent of applied electric bias field, the pyroelectric effect becomes very weak in common relaxor thin films, e.g. 0.055 μC/(cm 2 K) in PMN-0.32PT within the working temperature range for energy conversion In relaxor ferroelectrics, pyroelectric effect is characterized by the pyroelectric coefficient defined as dP/dT , where P is the spontaneous polarization and T is the temperature. Conventionally, searching for a large pyroelectric coefficient underlies the material design strategy. Therefore, it is common to utilize the lead-based ferroelectrics such as PZT and PMN-PT From energetic analysis, the cost of the energy conversion is the heat in the heating half cycle or the work required to cool the active material in the cooling half cycle, while the return is the change of polarization stored as the electrostatic energy. The ratio of pyroelectric coefficient to the heat capacity at a fixed bias field is a natural choice of figure of merit, which is in fact proposed for infra-red sensors, such as where c E is the volume specific heat and 33 is the permittivity along the polarized direction. Across a phase transformation, the effective heat capacity integrated over temperature is the latent heat , while the integrated dP/dT is the jump of polarization where κ is the maximum value of |dP/dT | near the transformation temperature, [[P ]] is the jump of polarization across the phase transformation corresponding to the latent heat . Eq. ( To realize the cyclic transformations in a narrow temperature interval for energy conversion, the thermal hysteresis and functional degradation are unprecedented factors for the material design. It has been theorized that the transformation hysteresis and reversibility strongly rely on the crystallographic compatibility, that is a tensor-metric condition on lattice parameters of both phases. Considering the working temperature regime (about 100 • C), the non-lead toxicity and the firstorder phase transformation, we select three dopants Ca, Zr, Ce to develop barium titanate based ferroelectrics, named as tridoped BT. The reasons are following. The Ca addition at 5 at.% is to ensure a reversible tetragonal (ferroelectric) to cubic (paraelectric) transformation below 120 • C, according to the phase diagrams A series of Ba 0.95 Ca 0.05 Ti 1-x-y Zr x Ce y O 3 oxides were synthesized by solid-state reaction and densification process to obtain homogeneous polycrystalline rods of high density. The powders of CaCO 3 (Alfa Aesar, 99.5%), CeO 2 (Alfa Aesar, 99.9%), ZrO 2 (Sigma Aldrich, 99%), BaCO 3 (Alfa Aesar, 99.8%) and TiO 2 (Alfa Aesar, 99.8%) were weighed and well mixed according to the stoichiometric formulation Ba 0.95 Ca 0.05 Ti 1-x-y Zr x Ce y O 3 , for (x,y) = (0.001, 0.005), (0.005, 0.005), (0.01, 0.005), (0.01, 0.01), and (0.01, 0.001). Then, the powder mixture was dissolved in the ethanol solvent, which was milled by zirconia balls in a planetary ball miller at 630rpm for 24hrs. The ball-milled solution was dried and calcined at 1000 • C for 10 hours to obtain the tridoped barium titanate powder through solid state reaction. Under a 30MPa hydrostatic pressure at room temperature, the powder was hot-pressed for 30 minutes to form a rod-shape green body with size 10mm ×φ6mm. The sintering process is divided into two steps by four-mirror Infrared furnace (Quantum Design IRF11-001-00): 1) densification of feed and seed rods The lattice parameters were measured by neutron diffraction at the general purpose powder diffractometer beamline (GPPD) at China Spallation Neutron Source, suitable for structural characterization of large bulk samples. Stark discontinuity of tetragonality exists in all compositions (Figure where a 0 is the lattice parameter of cubic phase, a, c are the lattice parameters of tetragonal ferroelectric phase. The primary compatibility indexer λ 2 is calculated as the middle eigenvalue of U, directly computed as λ 2 = a a 0 . It has been theorized that the distance of λ 2 to 1 underlies the height of energy barrier of a symmetry-breaking transformation For demonstration, it is critical to fabricate a high quality capacitor with the capacitance sensitive to temperature variation within the thermal fluctuation range. A previous energy conversion attempt Zr0.01 Ce0.001 and Zr0.005 Ce0.005. We selected two of the polycrystalline rods as the seed and feed aligned vertically for the crystal growth by floating zone method at a growth speed 10mm/hr and relative angular speed 25rpm at an increasing lamp power. The molten zone was created and monitored throughout the entire growth period. Finally, the as-grown rod was solidified as the furnace cools down. The rod was sliced along the growth direction followed by mechanical polish. The size of the ceramic slices is about 19.5 × 5.5 × 0.4 mm 3 . After mechanical polishing, both Zr0.01 Ce0.001 and Zr0.005 Ce0.005 slices are semi-transparent in the insets of Figure Since we used polycrystal seeds for the floating zone process, the cutting process of the as-grown rod was done without acknowledgment of orientation information. These values are about twice of the largest reported values in single crystal BaTiO 3 aligned with its polar axis We make planar capacitors using the Zr0.005 Ce0.005 single crystal and the Zr0.01 Ce0.001 coarse-grained slices. The dimensions of the transforming capacitors are 16.5mm 2 × 0.46mm for Zr0.005 Ce0.005 single crystal capacitor and 25.28mm 2 ×0.44mm for Zr0.01 Ce0.001 coarse-grain capacitor. The demonstration apparatus is illustrated in Figure A non-transforming capacitor (10μF) used as charge reservoir is connected to the phasetransforming capacitor. Both are grounded and bridged via a resistor (1 MΩ) to measure the electric signal generated by first-order phase transformation of the active material. The capacitors were initially charged up to hold sufficient initial charges, then detached from the external power source throughout the heating and cooling cycles. The heating/cooling rates mimic the natural pyro-current generated by the Zr0.005 Ce0.005 single crystal capacitor reaches up to 1 μA stably and continuously lasting over 500 transformation cycles. For the Zr0.01 Ce0.001 coarse-grained capacitor, the pyro-current generated in the first few cycles is 0.5 μA. In order to benchmark capacitors with different areas, we calculated the current density, i.e. current per area: 6 μA/cm 2 for Zr0.005 Ce0.005 and 2 μA/cm 2 for Zr0.01 Ce0.001. These results are aligned with our theoretical prediction by figure of merit for material development. This confirms that the FOM in eq. ( As the Zr0.01 Ce0.001 capacitor exhibits larger electric leakage, it suffers electric degradation In contrast, the Zr0.005 Ce0.005 capacitor has no visible electric degradation during the first 135 cycles. After a recharge, the generation of pyro-current sustains for 365 cycles until the second recharge, corresponding to the top panel of Figure The Zr0.005 Ce0.005 capacitor with λ 2 much closer to 1 exhibits magnificent reversibility for We then cut 38 pieces of the similar sizes from several rods of Zr0.005 Ce0.005 synthesized by the same method, and assembled them in parallel in our demonstration setup. The total area of them is 2344.88mm 2 , and the mean thickness is about 0.4mm. In this setting, we used a bigger reference capacitor (140μF) connected to the same load resistor. All capacitors were initially charged up to have 1.2 kV/cm electric field inside, then completely disconnect to the external power to begin the energy conversion cycles. The grid of energy conversion devices generates stably 15 μA electric current in consecutive cycles, in Figure Enabling waste heat harvesting, particularly in relatively low temperature regime is an interdisciplinary and multifaceted grand challenge in energy science. Core material development is a The transferred heat is calculated as c E ∆T for specific heat c E = 0.3J/cm 3 K these five samples compared with typical ferroelectric poly/single crystals reported in literature.