We report the application of a coordination polymer semiconductor, tin(II) thiocyanate [Sn(SCN)2] as an ultrathin anode interlayer in organic photovoltaics (OPVs). Sub-10 nm layers of Sn(SCN)2 with high smoothness and excellent transparency having an optical band gap of 3.9 eV were deposited from an alcohol-based solution at room temperature without post-deposition annealing. Inserting Sn(SCN)2 as an anode interlayer in polymer:fullerene OPVs drastically reduces the recombination loss due to the exciton-blocking energy levels of Sn(SCN)2. At the optimum thickness of 7 nm, an average power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 7.6% and a maximum of 8.1% were obtained. The simple processability using common solvents gives Sn(SCN)2 a distinct advantage over the more well-known copper(I) thiocyanate (CuSCN). The electronic and optical properties of Sn(SCN)2 make it interesting for applications in large-area electronic devices. ammonium hydroxide, Other MSCN compounds also exist, but their applications in opto/electronic devices have not been explored. In fact, the electronic properties of MSCN can be systematically tuned by varying the metal ions. PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1063/5.0055649 Herein, we report the use of Sn(SCN)2 as an ultrathin anode interlayer in OPVs based on a bulk heterojunction (BHJ) of poly [4,8- carboxylate-2-6-diyl)] (PTB7-Th) and [6,6]-phenyl-C71-butyric acid methyl ester (PC71BM). The Sn(SCN)2 layer is processed from an ethanol solution and requires no annealing, allowing for the whole fabrication process to be carried out at room temperature. At an optimized Sn(SCN)2 thickness of 7 nm, a PCE of up to 8% is obtained. Sn(SCN)2 can be dissolved with a variety of solvents as listed in Table The thicknesses of films prepared from solutions with concentrations between 2-20 mg ml -1 were found to be between 3-23 nm by spectroscopic ellipsometry (SE) as shown in To demonstrate the application of Sn(SCN)2, we incorporated Sn(SCN)2 films as the ultrathin exciton blocking layer (EBL) in OPVs as schematically shown in Fig. This is the author's peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online version of record will be different from this version once it has been copyedited and typeset. PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1063/5.0055649 Al as the cathode. The Sn(II) coordination environment and extended 2D network of Sn(SCN)2 from single crystal data are also shown in Fig. The energy levels of the various OPV layers are shown in Fig. This is the author's peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online version of record will be different from this version once it has been copyedited and typeset. This is the author's peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online version of record will be different from this version once it has been copyedited and typeset. To study the electrical characteristics of Sn(SCN)2-based devices further, impedance spectroscopy (IS) was carried out under dark condition with a dc bias of 0.8 V. The Nyquist plot of the data is shown in Fig. Furthermore, hole-only devices with a structure of ITO (90 nm)/Sn(SCN)2 (varying thickness)/BHJ (90 nm)/MoO3 (10 nm)/Au (60 nm) were also fabricated. Their J-V curves in the space-charge limited current (SCLC) regime, plotted in Fig. Fitting the data with the SCLC model (Supplementary Material) indicates that the hole mobility (representing hole transport across the whole device stack) also decreases from 2.5 to 1.5 and 0.7 ×10 -6 cm 2 V -1 s -1 for devices with 3-, 7-, and 10-nm Sn(SCN)2, respectively. The thicker Sn(SCN)2 layer indeed leads to reduced hole transport, this is likely the key factor that currently limits the full potential of Sn(SCN)2 in OPV applications. Further work therefore should focus on improving the conductivity of Sn(SCN)2. This is the author's peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online version of record will be different from this version once it has been copyedited and typeset. PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1063/5.0055649 This is the author's peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online version of record will be different from this version once it has been copyedited and typeset. PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1063/5.0055649 In addition, in order to investigate the energy barriers between the Sn(SCN)2 and BHJ layers in detail, we also performed photoelectron spectroscopy (PES) using synchrotron radiation at Beamline BL3.2Ua, Synchrotron Light Research Institute (SLRI), Thailand. Ev of Sn(SCN)2 and BHJ layers are found at approximately 1.7 and 0.9 eV below the work function of ITO, respectively. Therefore, the hole energy barrier (ΔEv) is around 0.8 eV whereas the electron energy barrier (ΔEc) is much larger at around 1.5 eV. These values are consistent with the simple energy band diagram shown earlier in Fig. eV. This is the author's peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online version of record will be different from this version once it has been copyedited and typeset. PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1063/5.0055649 EBL. One possibility is that there could exist band-bending at Sn(SCN)2/BHJ interface that facilitates hole extraction by lowering the ΔEv. However, a detailed study within several nm of the BHJ would be required to characterize such characteristics. Our results compare relatively thick BHJ layers as the attempt at forming ultrathin BHJ layers yielded inhomogeneous layers. Another possibility is the transport through gap states, which is similar to the mechanism of electron transport through BCP that also has a wide band gap with both electron-and hole-blocking energy levels. band gap of BCP that provide the electron transport path. In summary, we have demonstrated the application of a coordination polymer semiconductor Sn(SCN)2 as an ultrathin anode exciton blocking layer in OPVs. Sub-10 nm layers of Sn(SCN)2 with ultrasmooth and conformal morphology can be deposited by simple spin-coating and does not require a heat treatment step. OPVs based on Sn(SCN)2 as the anode interlayer and PTB7-Th:PC71BM BHJ were fabricated at room temperature. With the optimum Sn(SCN)2 thickness of 7 nm, the resulting OPV cells yield an average PCE of 7.6% and achieve a maximum PCE value of 8.1%. This work shows that Sn(SCN)2 has potential to be developed further for electronic and optoelectronic applications, and this may be extended to other metal thiocyanates as well. See supplementary material for experimental methods and additional data in supporting tables and figures. with an X-ray incidence angle of 0.1°. The diffraction patterns were recorded for 2θ range between 10° and 40° with a step of 0.05°. The chemical states of Sn(SCN)2 were characterized with a Jeol JPS9010MC photoelectron spectrometer. XPS measurements were operated with a monochromated Al Kα X-ray source (1486.6 eV eV) at 12 kV and 25 mA and a base pressure of 10 -7 Pa at room temperature. The system was equipped with a hemispherical analyzer with a multi-channel detector which was calibrated at Au 4f, Ag 3d,and Cu 2p peaks by measuring on standard reference samples. The data were recorded with a pass energy of 50 eV for survey scans and 10 eV for corelevel narrow scans. XPS spectra were averaged from 75 scans and analyzed by SpecSurf software. All spectra were aligned to the adventitious carbon position (C 1s at 284.8 eV). The ionization energies of Sn(SCN)2 films were measured using a Bunkoukeiki BIP-KV216K ionization energy measurement system. The photoelectron yield spectra were recorded as a function of excitation energy which was generated by a deuterium lamp (30 W) with an energy range of 4.0 -9.5 eV. The ionization energies, which correspond to the positions of the valence band edges with respect to the vacuum level, were determined from the threshold of (yield) 1/3 spectra for semiconductors. All measurements were carried out under vacuum (5×10 -3 Pa). (PTB7-Th or PCE10, Ossila) in chlorobenzene (anhydrous, 99.8%, Sigma-Aldrich) at a concentration of 8.4 mg ml -1 . The solution was stirred for 2 h and filtered with a 0.22-μm PTFE filter. Next, 900 μl of the PTB7-Th solution was then pipetted to dissolve 12.6 mg of [6,6]-phenyl-C71-butyric acid methyl ester (PC71BM, purity > 99%, Ossila), resulting in a solution of PTB7-Th:PC71BM blend in chlorobenzene. The blend solution was stirred at 75 °C for 8 h and then added with 30 μl of 1,8 diiodooctane (DIO, 98%, TCI Chemicals). The final solution was deposited under inert N2 atmosphere inside a glove box by spincasting at 1750 rpm for 30 s and treated with methanol (anhydrous, 99.8%, Sigma-Aldrich) as an antisolvent at 4000 rpm for 30 s, resulting in a 90-nm BHJ layer as measured by profilometry. The films were kept in a high-vacuum chamber (< 5.0×10 -6 Torr or 6.7×10 -4 Pa) overnight prior to the next step. Subsequently, 10-nm bathocuproine (BCP, >99.0%, TCI Chemicals) cathode interlayer and 100-nm Al top contact were thermally evaporated through a shadow mask using a KJ Lesker Mini SPECTROS thin film deposition system to complete the solar cell structure. The device area was 0.181 cm 2 for all cells. For reference devices with poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) polystyrenesulfonate (PEDOT:PSS, Clevios Al 4083, Heraeus) as the hole transport layer, the PEDOT:PSS dispersion was spin-coated at 5000 rpm onto ITO, and the resulting films were annealed at 150 °C for 10 min prior to the deposition of the BHJ layer. Current density-voltage (J-V) characteristics of solar cells were measured with a Keithley 2400 source measure unit and a Sciencetech SF300A solar simulator (class AAA with AM1.5G filter) calibrated to 1 sun intensity with an InfinityPV CalCell photodiode reference device. Solar cell devices were not encapsulated, and all measurements were conducted under ambient atmosphere. ). EQE spectra of the solar cells were recorded by a Bunkoukeiki SM-250 measurement system under ambient condition. The irradiation was monochromated light generated with a xenon lamp with the wavelength range of 300 to 900 nm. The measurement step was 5 nm. The irradiation intensity at each wavelength was recorded with a calibrated silicon photodiode. The IQE spectra were then calculated from Equation (S2), where %R is the optical reflectance spectra of the solar cells, separately measured with the UV-Vis spectrophotometer (see above) equipped with an integrating sphere. Impedance Spectroscopy (IS). The complex impedance data of the solar cells were recorded by a Solartron Analytical 1260A impedance analyzer. The measurements were conducted in the dark with a 0.8-V dc bias (open-circuit condition), 50-mV ac signal, and ac frequency range of 10 Hz to 1 MHz. The complex impedance data were fitted with an equivalent circuit for BHJ devices (Fig. Rrec in parallel with a CPE is related to internal charge transfer events. 