We report theoretical results for the stability of half-quantum vortices (HQVs) in the superfluid phases of 3 He confined in highly anisotropic Nafen aerogel. Superfluidity of 3 He confined in Nafen is the realization of a "nematic superfluid" with Cooper pairs condensed into a single p-wave orbital aligned along the anisotropy axis of the Nafen aerogel. In addition to the nematic phase, we predict a second "chiral" phase that onsets at a lower transition temperature. This chiral phase spontaneously breaks time-reversal symmetry and is a topological superfluid. Both superfluid phases are equal-spin pairing condensates that host arrays of HQVs as equilibrium states of rotating superfluid 3 He. We present results for the structure of HQVs, including magnetic and topological signatures of HQVs in both the nematic and chiral phases of 3 He-Nafen. Introduction -The discovery of superfluidity in liquid 3 He infused into a low-density, highly anisotropic porous aerogel called Nafen was the realization of a "nematic superfluid" with Cooper pairs condensed into a single p-wave orbital aligned along the anisotropy axis of the Nafen aerogel Indeed the discovery of HQVs in 3 He infused into Nafen was reported soon after the discovery of the polar phase based on the nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) signature of pairs of HQVs created by rotating the polar phase of superfluid 3 He-Nafen Here we report theoretical predictions for the structure of HQVs, their stability and the pressure-temperature phase di-agram for two phases of rotating superfluid 3 He confined in Nafen aerogels which host HQVs. Our analysis is based on an anisotropic impurity model for Nafen combined with strong-coupling Ginzburg-Landau (GL) theory that quantitatively accounts for the relative stability of the confined equal-spin pairing (ESP) superfluid phases in 3 He-Nafen reported in Ref. For rotating 3 He-Nafen with Ω Ω Ω ẑ we find two distinct vortex phases within the polar and polar-distorted chiral phases. In the polar phase region we find a stable array of pairs of HQVs. The cores of the HQVs are found to be the spin-polarized β -phase. At lower temperatures HQVs with additional internal structure are found embedded in the polar-distorted chiral phase. This HQV phase is the equilibrium state of rotating 3 He-Nafen at temperatures below the polar to chiral phase transition, which is characterized by an anisotropic chiral order parameter and spontaneous supercurrents flowing along the axis of the HQVs and confined near their cores. Observation of these effects would provide key signatures for the identification of HQVs in both the polar and chiral phases of 3 He-Nafen. Order parameter -The GL free energy is a functional of the order parameter, the pairing self energy for the condensate amplitude of Cooper pairs, ∆ σ σ (p) = g ψ σ (p)ψ σ (-p) where g > 0 is the pairing interaction in the p-wave, spintriplet channel. Thus, where d α (p) for α = {x, y, z} transforms as a vector under spin rotations, and can be expanded in the vector basis of l = 1 spherical harmonics, d α (p) = ∑ i=x,y,z A α i pi . Thus, a general spin-triplet, p-wave condensate is described by a 3 × 3 matrix of complex amplitudes, A αi , that transform as the vector representation of SO(3) S with respect to the spin index α, and as the vector representation of SO(3) L with respect to the orbital momentum index i. This 18 dimensional order parameter space allows for a wide variety of topologically stable defects in superfluid 3 He , where a second p-wave orbital develops with m ⊥ n and out of phase by ±π/2. This type of in-plane chiral phase was also found to be a stable equilibrium phase in 100 nm cylindrical pores The orbital axis n of the polar phase is locked along the anisotropy axis of Nafen, i.e. n = ẑ. The direction of the spin quantization axis, d, is weakly coupled to the orbital state via the nuclear dipolar energy which aligns d ⊥ n, i.e. d = cos α x + sin α ŷ. The angle α ∈ {0, 2π} is thus a degeneracy variable for the ESP phase. The other degeneracy variable is the global phase, θ ∈ {0, 2π}, of the amplitude, ∆ = |∆|e iθ for either the polar or chiral phase. where Y (p) is the orbital order parameter, e.g. Y (p) = n • p for the polar state, and Y (p) = ( n + iε m) • p for the chiral phase. The spin-polarized amplitudes depend on the phase variables, θ + = θ + α and θ -= θα. Thus, there are two distinct HQVs with ∆θ = π corresponding to ∆α = +π or ∆α = -π; equivalently ∆θ + = 2π and ∆θ -= 0, or ∆θ + = 0 and ∆θ -= 2π, respectively. Thus, an HQV is a 2π phase vortex in only one of the two ESP condensates, which accounts for mass circulation of half the normal value. It is also clear that the two types of HQVs correspond to spin current vortices with opposite spin polarizations. Equations 2 correspond to the far-field asymptotic forms of the order parameter of the HQVs. The general form for the HQV order parameter is expressed in terms of the full matrix order parameter, A αi (r). We first discuss the stabilization of the polar and polar-distorted chiral phases of superfluid 3 He infused into Nafen aerogel. Impurity Model for 3 He in Nafen -Ginzburg-Landau theory has been formulated to calculate the order parameter and thermodynamic properties of inhomogeneous phases of superfluid 3 He The Ginzburg-Landau free energy functional is expressed in terms of linearly independent invariants constructed from A αi , A * αi and their gradients, ∇ ∇ ∇ j A αi and ∇ ∇ ∇ j A * αi . In particular, the GL functional can be expressed in terms of free energy densities, where the bulk free energy density, f b , is given by one second-order invariant and five fourth-order invariants, the nuclear Zeeman energy, f Z , and nuclear dipole-dipole energy, f d , which are also second-order in A, and the gradient energy, f ∇ ∇ ∇ , which is second-order in gradients of A. These terms, and the pressure-dependent material coefficients that define the strong-coupling GL functional, are discussed in detail in Ref. For our analysis of the effects of Nafen on liquid 3 He infused into the Nafen structure, we model Nafen as an array of non-magnetic line impurities of local areal density n s (r). The effects of the array of anisotropic impurities on the superfluid phases of 3 He is described to leading order in A by the pair-breaking free energy density, where I i j (r) is a uniaxial tensor under orbital space rotations that depends on the local areal strand density, n s (r). In general the nematic axis varies in space. Here we treat the Nafen strands as globally aligned along an axis, ẑ, and neglect fluctuations in the orientation of the nematic axis where is a uniaxial tensor that parametrizes the anisotropic scattering of quasiparticles by Nafen strands with areal density, n s (r). The coefficients σ ⊥ and σ determine the cross-radii for quasiparticle scattering normal to the impurity strands and at grazing incidence along the strands, respectively. This form for I i j is consistent with the pair-breaking energy resulting from scattering by impurities embedded in superfluid 3 He in Refs. is the Fermi velocity, m * is the effective mass of the 3 He quasiparticles, and n = p 3 f /3π 2 h3 is the density of liquid 3 He. All of these Fermi liquid properties, as well as the stiffness coefficients, K 1,2,3 , defining the GL gradient energy, f ∇ ∇ ∇ (Eqs. 4 and 9 of Ref. The second-order impurity contribution given by Eq. 4 is essential, not only because it breaks rotation symmetry, but also because it competes with α(T, p) A μi A * μi , where α(T, p) is vanishingly small in the GL limit, i.e. near the bulk T c . Uniaxial symmetry imposed on 3 He by Nafen allows for additional anisotropic impurity corrections to the the gradient energy density, f ∇ , as well as the fourth-order bulk free energy density, f b . However, the gradient coefficients, e.g. K 1 ∼ N f ξ 2 0 , are finite near T c . Thus, Nafen with mean impurity density, ns = 1/L 2 s , generates perturbative corrections to the gradient energies of relative order s , which varies from 0.06 at high pressure to 0.20 at p = 0 bar. Thus, the transition line T c 2 (p) shown in Fig. Phase Diagram of 3 He-Nafen -Nematic impurities break the orbital rotation symmetry of pure normal 3 He. As a result they split the three-dimensional p-wave representation of SO(3) L into a one-dimensional ( pz ) orbital representation for Cooper pairs aligned with the nematic impurities, and a two-dimensional representation ( px , py ) for Cooper pairs with orbital wave functions normal to the array of nematic impurities. Pair breaking leads to suppression of the orbital components of the p-wave Cooper pairs, and a corresponding loss in condensation energy. In particular for σ ⊥ > σ ≥ 0 there is stronger suppression of the orbital components in the plane perpendicular to the strands, i.e. px,y , compared to that for Cooper pairs in the pz orbital state. In this limit we expect the onset of superfluidity into the polar phase with p-wave orbital pz . The areal density for impurities is given by n s (r) = ∑ N s i=1 δ (2) (rr i ), where r i is the position in the twodimensional plane of the i th line impurity and N s is the total number of Nafen strands. The local density of a single line impurity is reasonably represented by the two-dimensional delta function when the geometric radius of the Nafen strand is small compared to the coherence length, i.e. r s ξ 0 , which is the case for 3 He infused into Nafen aerogel We investigate the pair-breaking effects of Nafen aerogel on superfluid 3 He by embedding 3 He in a square lattice of line impurities with mean areal density ns = 1/L 2 s where L s is the average interstrand distance of Nafen, c.f. Figure to leading order in σ /ξ 0 , where ns ξ 2 0 is the dominant contribution from the Q = 0 mode, while β ≈ 0.19 ln(0.10 L s /r s ) is a correction from the Q = 0 modes (see Appendix). Note that for σ = 0, corresponding to specular scattering along the strands, i.e. p z = p z , there is no suppression of the superfluid transition relative to that of pure 3 He; scattering from the strands leads only to suppression of pairing into the inplane p x , p y orbitals The experimental data (red squares in Fig. For T c 2 < T < T c 1 an inhomogeneous polar phase is the equilibrium phase with order parameter, A αi = ∆ P (r) dα ẑi . The inhomogeneity of the polar phase order parameter, induced by pair-breaking from the Nafen impurities, is shown in Fig. Note that the nuclear dipolar energy (Eq. 5 in Ref. Half-Quantum Vortex Pairs in the Polar Phase -In a rotating cryostat superfluid 3 He co-rotates with the confining cell by nucleating an array of quantized vortices with mean areal density given by the Feynman-Onsager relation, n v = 2Ω/κ 3 , where Ω is the angular speed of rotation and κ 3 = h/2m 3 0.67 × 10 -3 cm 2 /sec is the quantum of circulation for singly quantized vortices. For an array of half-quantum vortices the circulation quantum is κ 3 /2 and thus co-rotation requires twice the areal density of HQVs. In a cylindrical cell of cross-sectional area 1 cm 2 rotating at 1 rev/sec co-rotation requires approximately 1.9 × 10 4 singly quantized vortices with mean spacing d v ≈ 70 μm. By comparison the radial extent of the vortex core is of order 2ξ 0 ≈ 0.16 μm. This separation of length scales allows us to introduce a computational cell that is large compared to vortex-core structures in order to determine the relative stability of different vortex states for fixed areal density per circulation quantum. In particular, for fixed rotation speed we can compare the total energy of an array of singly quantized vortices with an array of HQVs. There are two distinct HQVs, as described in Eq. 2, in which one spin component hosts a 2π phase vortex while the time-reversed spin component is vortex free. The matrix representation of the order parameter corresponding to the HQV with 2π phase winding of the xi ŷ) α ẑi . Superfluid rotation via HQVs involves pairs of these spatially separated HQVs, with φ ±0 = arctan(y/(x ∓ x 0 /2)) where x 0 is the distance between the phase singularities of the HQV pair. Note that ∆ ± (r) have zeroes at ±x 0 /2, and that for x 0 = 0 the pair of HQVs collapse to a singly quantized vortex (SQV) in the polar phase with spatially uniform d = x. We calculated the equilibrium and metastable vortex solutions for corresponding pairs of HQVs, as well as SQVs, per unit cell by numerical minimization of the strong-coupling GL free energy functional for vortex phases in both the polar and chiral regions of the phase diagram shown in Fig. In both regions of the phase diagram we find stable vortex phases that are pairs of HQVs with separation of x 0 1030 nm within a unit cell of dimension d v ≈ 70 μm. Figure Supercurrents and Spin-Polarization -Key signatures of the pair of HQVs in the polar phase are the broken axial symmetry of the supercurrents and the local magnetic moment associated with the two spin-polarized components of the HQV pair. The much denser array of line impurities leads to suppression of the polar amplitude, ∆ P (r), relative to the bulk amplitude, ∆ P , while inhomogeneity of the order parameter induced by local pair-breaking from line impurities leads to weak pinning of the HQV cores at impurity sites. The superfluid mass current in the rest frame of the excitations, i.e. the frame co-rotating with the cell, is where j 0 = 4m 3 K 1 /h with the gradient coefficient given by K 1 = (7ζ (3)/60)N f ξ 2 0 and m 3 is the atomic mass of Each member of the HQV pair is also spin polarized. The resulting zero-field magnetization density for the HQV pair is given by m Ω Ω where m 0 = g z |∆ P | 2 . The GL material parameter g z leads to a magnetization density of order m 0 ≈ n(γ h) ln(E f /k B T c )(∆ P /E f ) 2 The basic structure of HQV pairs in the polar-distorted chiral phase is a simple generalization of Eq. 8 obtained by the replacement, ẑi → ẑi + iε(r) ŷi , where ε(r) defines the local chiral amplitude. Initialization of the HQV pair proceeds similarly to that for HQVs in the polar phase with the additional initialization of ε 1 to that for the equilibrium chiral phase in the absence of rotation. In addition, for A αi with i = x, y, we impose a condition of zero gradient on the computational boundary. Axial Supercurrent-A signature of the polar-distorted chiral phase is the existence of supercurrents flowing parallel to the vortex axis. The existence of the axial supercurrent is easily deduced from the first and third terms of Eq. 9 for the polar-distorted chiral phase with in-plane orbital components. There are two counter-propagating axial currents centered on the two HQV cores as shown in Fig. An idea for observing the axial currents, previously proposed for the D-core vortex in 3 He-B Summary-The theoretical pressure-temperature phase diagram based on strong-coupling GL theory and the lineimpurity pair-breaking free energy is in excellent agreement with experimental results for the normal to polar transition and a second transition identified as a polar to polar-distorted chiral phase by Dmitriev et al. The Ginzburg-Landau free energy functional (Eq. 3) is defined in terms of bulk, gradient, Zeeman and impurity free energy densities. The bulk condensation energy density is given by six linearly independent invariants, where A † (A T ) is the adjoint (transpose) of A. Spatial variations of the order parameter, representing kinetic and deformation energies, are described by three linearly independent gradient terms, where A αi, j ≡ ∇ ∇ ∇ j A αi . The gradient energy contributes to the total energy cost from impurity pair breaking, as well as kinetic and core deformation energies of quantized vortices. In the weak coupling limit the GL material parameters, α, β i and K j are given by with and where ξ 0 = hv f /2πk B T c is the zero-temperature Cooper pair correlation length, N f = m * k f /2π 2 h2 is the singlespin normal-state density of states at the Fermi level, with p f = hk f the Fermi momentum and m * = p f /v f is the effective mass for quasiparticles with Fermi velocity v f . The temperature-dependent GL correlation length, which is the relevant healing length scale for impurity pair breaking and vortex-core size, is given by where ξ GL = (7ζ (3)/20) 1/2 ξ 0 . Strong-coupling corrections enter into the free energy functional through the fourth-order β parameters, where T c (p) is the bulk superfluid transition temperature, and the ∆β i values were calculated in Ref. where the quadratic Zeeman coupling is given by with γ being the nuclear gyromagnetic ratio of 3 He, and F a 0 ≈ -0.75 the ferromagnetic exchange interaction between 3 He quasiparticles. For both the polar and chiral ESP states the quadratic Zeeman energy reduces to f Z 2 = g z ∆ 2 ( d • H) 2 , and takes its minimum value for H||ẑ and d ⊥ ẑ. This is the d vector configuration favored by the dipolar energy for these two states, and is also the configuration that supports topologically stable HQVs in these two phases of 3 He-Nafen. The linear Zeeman energy has a smaller material coefficient, g z = λ (k B T c /E f ) g z g z , where λ ∼ O(1), but is important in that for non-unitary states, such as the β -phase which develops in the cores of HQVs in the two ESP condensates, Eq. 18, is the Zeeman energy associated with the intrinsic magnetization of the non-unitary triplet state, i.e. Stability Analyses -To determine inhomogeneous equilibrium phases in the presence of impurity disorder and under rotation we minimize the strong-coupling GL functional by solving the Euler-Lagrange equations with appropriate boundary conditions, then select the lowest energy state amoung the stationary solutions, e.g. an array of HQV pairs or the SQV array. The computational procedures for 3 He in confined geometries, and under rotation via an array of topologically stable quantized vortices, are described in detail in Refs. The second-order phase transition from the normal state to the inhomogeneous superfluid state is obtained from linear instability analysis applied to Eq. 22. The corresponding stationarity condition, δ F GL /δ A * αi = 0, becomes is an eigenvalue equation for the order parameter and transition temperature to the inhomogeneous superfluid phase of 3 He-Nafen. For 3 He embedded in a periodic array of line impurities we impose periodic boundary conditions in the (x, y) plane, and seek a solution that is translationally invariant along z. This allows us to express A αi (r) in terms of a Fourier series, where Q = 2π L s (n x e x + n y e y ) with n x , n y ∈ Z. Fourier transforming Eq. 23 decouples equations for the orbital components aligned with, and orthogonal to, the nematic axis ẑ. Furthermore, for 0 ≤ σ < σ ⊥ the onset of superfluidity is to the polar phase with where A αz (0) is the amplitude of the polar order parameter at the position of the impurity centered in the unit cell. We include the form factor F(Q) for the short distance structure of the line impurity on the scale of the strand diameter, r s L s , ξ 0 . The form factor regulates the short-wavelength divergence that is an artifact of the delta function representation for the local areal density. Specifically we model the local strand density of a single impurity by a Gaussian areal density distribution, n imp (r) = A e -r 2 /2r 2 s , where A = 1/2π √ π r 2 s . Thus, n imp (r) ---→ r s →0 δ (2) (r). However, in Nafen the strand dimension is small but finite, r s ≈ 4 nm L s , ξ 0 , and thus provides an ultra-violet cutoff to the Fourier sum via the structure factor, The equation for the eigenfunction and eigenvalue (transition temperature) for the normal to polar transition is then given by Eq. 25 For a non-trivial solution, i.e. A αz (0) = 0, we obtain the transcendental equation for T c 1 , where t c 1 ≡ T c 1 /T c -1. The first term inside the square brackets is the contribution from the Q = 0 mode. The contributions from the finite wavelength modes are calculated with the leading term from the Euler-Maclaurin formula. Then Q 1 = 2π/L s provides the long-wavelength cutoff to the integral approximation to the sum, where This long-wavelength scale is set by the GL coherence length at T c 1 . In particular, Q c /Q 1 = L s /2πξ GL (T c 1 ) ≈ 0.08 for p ≈ 4 bar and |t c 1 | ≈ 0.1. Thus, we have this hierarchy of wavelengths, Q c Q 1 π r s , and thus we can drop Q c in the denominator of the integral in Eq. 29, in which case we obtain, which is related to the Exponential integral, where γ E ≈ 0.57722 is the Euler-Mascheroni constant The resulting equation for T c 1 then becomes, which gives near perfect agreement with the experimentally measured transition temperature over the full pressure range with a pressure independent scattering cross section, σ = 2.565 nm. Note that while the Q = 0 modes contribute a measurable correction to T c 1 /T c , the dominant contribution comes from the Q = 0. Polar to Chiral Transition -The second-order polar to polardistorted chiral transition can also be analyzed using linear stability analysis, in this case by expanding the full GL free energy functional about the polar state to leading order in the in-plane order parameter at temperature near T → T c 2 , i.e. write A αi (r) = ∆ P (r) dα ẑi ± i∆ ⊥ (r) dα xi , and expand the full F GL functional to quadratic order in ∆ ⊥ . The expansion of Eq. 10 for the fourth-order terms simplifies considerably for these two ESP order parameters that have orthogonal orbital components where α ||,⊥ = α(p, T ) + 1 3 N f ns ξ 0 σ ||,⊥ . The first term is the condensation energy of the polar state, while the second line are the terms quadratic in the transverse component of the polar-distorted chiral phase order parameter. Since ∆ P (r) is also periodic within the lattice model for Nafen we can express the linear instability equation for ∆ ⊥ in terms of Fourier mode amplitudes. In addition to the form factor for the impurity strand, F(Q), which provides an effective cutoff at Q ≈ π/r s , the polar order parameter varies on the longer wavelength scales, i.e. Q ≈ π/ξ . If we retain only the Q = 0 contribution to the instability equation we obtain the following analytic form for the polar to chiral transition temperature, where β i j...k = β i + β j + . . . + β k . Note that β 245 is the combination of β parameters that defines the condensation energy of the bulk (chiral) A-phase, while β 13 = β P -β A where β P = β 12345 is the combination of β parameters that defines the condensation energy of the bulk polar phase. Note also that unlike Eq. 7, Eq. 38 is a transcendental equation for T c 2 since β 245 and β 13 are functions of pressure and temperature as defined by Eq. 17. The normal to polar transition, T c 1 given by Eq. 7, which includes the Q = 0 correction associated with impurity pair-breaking, describes the experimental data over the full pressure range with a pressure independent cross-section, σ || = 2.565 nm. The exact result for T c 2 (p), obtained by numerical solution of the GL equations shown in Fig. He-B or 3 P 2 vortices in neutron matter