Josephson radiation is a useful signature for detecting Majorana zero modes in topological superconductors. We study the Josephson radiation of the underdamped topological Josephson junction within the quantum resistively and capacitively shunted junction model. We show that the quantum dynamics of the Majorana two-level system induce oscillatory patterns in the Josephson emission spectra. With the Floquet method, we obtain analytical results for these oscillatory patterns and find that they are well described by Bessel functions. We perform numerical simulations to verify the analytical results and demonstrate that these Bessel radiation patterns exist for a wide range of junction parameters. In the recent development of quantum computation, a faulttolerant scheme has been theoretically proposed based on the premises of non-Abelian statistics of quasiparticles In topological Josephson junctions, Majorana zero modes carry a supercurrent which is 4π-periodic in the Josephson phase, known as the fractional Josephson effect Hybridization of Majorana zero modes leads to a quantum two-level system, with its Hamiltonian determined by the Josephson phase We consider the Josephson junction with Majorana zero modes as sketched in Fig. The quantum resistively and capacitively shunted junction model was introduced in Ref [42]. Within this framework, the dynamics of the Josephson junction are reduced to a set of nonlinear equations, which can be interpreted as equations of motion for a classical particle with spin one-half, subjecting a one-dimensional spin-dependent potential energy as shown in Fig. where R is the resistance and C is the capacitance of the junction, θ is the Josephson phase, I is the injected DC current, where E M is the Josephson energy from the coupling of the Majorana zero modes in the junction, and δ is the hybridization energy from the wave function overlapping of the distant Majorana zero modes on the same side of the junction. To simplify, we replace with 1 in the following. The behavior of the model is characterized by the dimensionless Stewart-McCumber number β c = 2eI c1 R 2 C/ . When the capacitance of the junction is negligible so that β c 1, the junction is in the so-called overdamped regime. Then the equation is reduced to a first-order difference equation for θ, and the dynamics are largely simplified. This overdamped regime has been explored both experimentally and theoretically The quantum resistively and capacitively shunted junction model is described by Eqs. ( For an applied dc current that is much larger than the critical current, the voltage across the junction has a dominant dc component V 0 . For the lowest order approximation, we assume that the Josephson phase is purely driven by this dc voltage. Then we have θ ≈ ω J t (ω J = 2eV 0 ) which can be substituted into the Schrödinger equation Eq. ( where we have the diagonal and off-diagonal blocks as, The diagonal part of the Floquet Hamiltonian is built by infinitely many 2x2 blocks, with each block formed by the timeinvariant part of the original Hamiltonian H 0 adding energy quanta nω J /2 associated with integer number of "photons"; any two diagonal blocks with one-photon difference are connected by an off-diagonal 2x2 block given by the amplitude of time-periodic part in the original Hamiltonian. In the parameter regions with δ ω J , E M , the Floquet Hamiltonian H f can be solved with the perturbation method where the Hamiltonian built by H 0 blocks is treated as the perturbation term and the rest of H f is treated as the unperturbed Hamiltonian. The unperturbed Hamiltonian can be diagonalized by solving the original time-dependent Schrödinger equation Eq. ( This effective Floquet Hamiltonian yields a quantum mechanical oscillation for the Majorana two-level system, which is exactly the Landau-Zener-Stückelberg interference. As a result, the expectation value of the parity iγ L γ R in Eq. ( oscillates at a fixed angular frequency (see Appendix A for details), We notice that the frequency of this Majorana parity state oscillation is linearly proportional to the coupling between the distant Majorana zero modes at each side of the junction. This can be understood intuitively as hybridization between the two parity states. On the other hand, the dc voltage V 0 associated with the increase of superconducting phase difference is involved in a nonlinear way and does not influence much the Majorana rotation frequency for large voltage. With the increase of the voltage, the reduced probability for parity flipping at a single passage is compensated by the increasing number of passages. The quantum oscillation of the Majorana two-level system from the Landau-Zener-Stückelberg interference determines the time evolution of iγ L γ R term in Eq. ( where s 1 is a constant decided by the initial condition. Plugging this expression back to Eq. ( , where V n = V (ω n ) determines the radiation power. With this ansartz, we can obtain the time evolution of the Josephson phase as, where θ 0 is the initial phase, a n = (V n + V * n )/2, b n = i(V n -V * n )/2 are Fourier coefficients of the voltage. Plugging this expression for the Josephson phase into Eq. (1), we can obtain constraint equations for V n , and a tedious but straightforward calculation (see Appendix B for details) shows that V n ≠ 0 only in the case of discrete frequencies at, This result gives the emission lines in the Josephson radiation spectrum. We examine the lowest-order ones by taking ( p, q) = (1, -1), (1, 1), (2, 0), and find the results of the Eq. ( We notice that f 3 is exactly the radiation at the Josephson frequency which comes from the Cooper pair tunneling process, while f 1 and f 2 are near to half of the Josephson frequency that comes from the single-electron tunneling process as shown in Fig. The quantum dynamics involving Majorana zero modes, such as the Landau-Zener transitions and the Rabi oscillations have been widely discussed for attempts of achieving quantum manipulations To verify the results obtained from the analytical method, we perform a direct numerical simulation of the quantum re- sistively and capacitively shunted junction model. As shown by the Eq. ( The results shown in Fig. We now examine the analytical results shown in Eq. ( We demonstrate our numerical results in this parameter regime in Fig. The oscillation lines of different orders are connected to form a radiation spectrum with negative slopes. We can analytically explain this feature by revisiting the Eq. ( where l can be any integer. This analytical result shows that the new radiation lines converge to the frequency axis at 4/π (see Appendix B for a detailed derivation), as shown in Fig. In summary, we use the quantum resistively and capacitively shunted junction model to study the Josephson radiation of an underdamped topological Josephson junction with Majorana zero modes. We obtain the radiation spectra with both numerical simulation and analytical solution. Unique to our model, we show that the 4π-periodic Josephson emission presents oscillating patterns which are well described by Bessel functions. We reveal that they are coming from the constructive Landau-Zener-Stückelberg interference of the Majorana twolevel system. In addition, we find that the intersection points of the oscillating patterns form straight lines which converge to the frequency axis. These patterns in the radiation spectra provide features for detecting the Majorana zero modes. with ψ(t) a time-periodic function with the same period as the Hamiltonian ψ(t) = ψ(t + 4π/ω J ), and Q the eigenvalue to be determined. It is natural to decompose the Hamiltonian, and accordingly the wave function, into Fourier components with the Hamiltonian components and all other matrices are zero in the present case. Plugging them back into Eq. ( with Î the 2x2 identity matrix. Defining a vector Ψ = (..., ψ-1 , ψ0 , ψ1 , ...) T , we obtain the time-independent Floquet Hamiltonian which is shown as Eq. ( Therefore, the problem of evaluating the transition probability between two quantum states is governed by a time-dependent Hamiltonian is reduced to a task to solve a time-independent Floquet Hamiltonian, which can be treated by conventional techniques in quantum mechanics. In the case of δ ω J , E M , we can divide the Floquet Hamiltonian into two parts with the perturbation term and H 0 is the rest of H f . The direct diagonalization of the Floquet Hamiltonian H 0 is complicate. However, it can be achieved by reconsidering the original time-dependent problem. We notice that, for δ = 0, the solution of Eq. ( where v(ω) is the amplitude in frequency domain ω. The pure real function V (t) requires that v(-ω) = v * (ω). Assuming that V (t) has a discrete spectrum, we can write down the expansion in the form of where the constant θ 0 is decided by the initial condition. This is the Eq. ( We define A n ≡ 2ea n /(ω n ) and B n ≡ 2eb n /(ω n ). They also can be expressed by V n as Using Jacobi-Anger expansion e iz sin x = +∞ n=-∞ J n (z)e inx and e iz cos x = +∞ n=-∞ i n J n (z)e inx , we arrive at (B9) Up to now, all the formulas are exact. To obtain analytical solutions, now we begin to make approximations. Using the fact that J 0 J 1 • • • , we can discard most of the terms in this polymerization of Eq. (B9). We keep the zero-order term just containing J 0 and the first-order term just containing one J ±1 with all other factors purely J 0 . Then the formula is simplified to where for simplicity we have defined Here we have used the relation J -1 (x) = J 1 (-x) = -J 1 (x) and J 0 (-x) = J 0 (x). We plug it back to the sine function and get sin θ ≈ - ) In the same way, we can expand the sin θ/2 term, and obtain the expression up to the order of J 1 as, sin ) where for simplicity we have defined . Now we look at other terms in Eq. (B1). The time derivative of the voltage is written as Plugging Eqs. (B2), (B5) and (B12)-(B15) into the Eq. (B1), we find the expansion series of, where we have multiplied the equation by 2 and rearrange V 0 to the left hand side of the equation. Using the fact that two Fourier eigenfunctions are orthogonal, we can calculate V n by multiplying both sides of Eq. (B16) with e -i ω m t and then integrate over the full-time range. We find that V n ≠ 0 only for the discrete frequencies of where the lowest order radiation frequencies are explicitly written as Recalling Eq. (A21), finally we get the radiation spectra which is the Eq. ( This gives the final analytical formula for the radiation intensity of the topological Josephson junction which includes the quantum dynamics of the two-level system formed by Majorana zero modes.