This work discusses an extension to conventional low-coherence interferometry by the introduction of dispersion-encoding. The extension facilitates the measurement of surface height profiles with sub-nm resolution. The selection of a dispersive element for encoding allows for tuning of the axial measurement range and resolution of the setup. The approach is theoretically designed and implemented for applications such as surface profilometry, the characterization of polymeric cross-linking and as a tool for the determination of layer thicknesses in thin-film processing. During the characterization of the implemented setup, it was shown that an axial measurement range of 79.91 μm with a resolution of 0.1 nm was achievable in the evaluation of surface profiles. Simultaneously, profiles of up to 1.5 mm length could be obtained without the need for mechanical scanning. This marked a significant improvement in relation to state-of-the-art technologies in terms of dynamic range. It was also shown that axial and lateral measurement range can be decoupled partially. Additionally, functional parameters such as surface roughness were characterized with the same tool. The characterization of the degree of polymeric cross-linking was performed as a function of the refractive index. Here, the refractive index could be acquired in a spatially-resolved manner with an index resolution of down to 3.36 × 10 -5 . This was achieved by the development of a novel mathematical analysis approach. For the acquisition of layer thicknesses of thin-films, an advanced setup was developed which could be used to characterize the thickness thin-films and its (flexible) substrate simultaneously. 4.1. Conclusive representation of key properties measured for polymeric samples . . . . 4.2. List of key properties of an exemplary positive photo-resist before and after processing 4.3. Comparison of technologies for the characterization of the degree of cross-linking characterization in polymers . . . . . . . . . . A 0 , A 1 , A 2 , B stress-thermo-optical coefficients. A 1 , A 2 , A 3 Cauchy coefficients. A j material specific factor of the refractive index. B ij matrix describing the boundary of a material when using the transfer-matrix formalism. D 0 , D 1 , D 2 , E 0 , E 1 thermo-optic coefficients. E * complex modulus of a sample in dynamic mechanical analysis. E storage modulus of a sample in dynamic mechanical analysis. E loss modulus of a sample in dynamic mechanical analysis. E 0 incoming electric field. E 1 electric field in the first arm of an interferometer. E 2 electric field in the second arm of an interferometer. E in incoming electric field. E out resulting electric field of an interferometer. F j strength of the absorption at the resonance frequency. G wild-card function in Fourier-space for Wiener-deconvolution. H impulse response function in Fourier-space for Wiener-deconvolution. I resulting intensity of an interferometer. The electronics industry with all its branches such as semiconductors, organic-electronics and the photovoltaics industry, is continuously growing in terms of its economic as well as its technological influence, while maintaining fast speeds to ensure process-integrated operation. Appropriate metrology has to enable the determination of geometrical parameters like critical dimensions or surface profiles alongside functional parameters such as surface roughness or defect detection. A typical case for the requirements of a process-integrated metrology tool is given by the stack of a modern solar cell module, The characterization and measurement of surface profiles is one of the most basic metrology tasks in industrial manufacturing. What started with mechanical stylus profilometers has developed with ultrasonic transducers towards optical instruments. These are capable of appropriate resolutions to enable nanometrology, • Type I sensors (e.g. laser triangulation) • Type II sensors (e.g. coherence scanning interferometry) • Type III sensors (e.g. phase-shifting interferometry) • Type IV sensors (e.g. deflectometry) As Type I sensors mostly incorporate technologies which measure a lateral perspective shift on local details, the uncertainties are determined by the uncertainty of this shift measurement. This means that the uncertainty scales with the inverse square of the distance to the detail, AFM, although not an optical metrology approach, has become an important and highly precise tool in nano-engineering and science, Another established method for the characterization of surface profiles is confocal laser scanning microscopy (CLSM), In addition to classical confocal microscopy, several developments have been made in order to circumvent some of the drawbacks such as the need for scanning. Chromatic confocal microscopy is one approach. It particularly targets scanning along the z-dimension. While dispersion in the optical system leads to different foci for each wavelength, height information can be decoded in spectral variations, The extension of this method in order to capture areal information normally relies on scanning approaches. Some occurring problems are due to dynamic stitching errors and spherical aberrations from scanning, The method can also be used to measure the profile and thickness of multiple, semi-transparent layers. In this case, the analysis has to take the refractive index of the transparent material at the different wavelengths into account. Faster approaches utilize multi-probe setups in order to parallelize data acquisition. Nonetheless, they are strongly limited in the lateral resolution, Digital holographic microscopy (DHM) is a fast, robust and full-frame-capturing technology to evaluate the surface topography of samples. While surface data from an interferometric approach is captured by a camera as full-field information (spatially, intensity, phase) within the integration time of the device, all aberration correction, exact focusing and surface reconstruction can be done digitally within post-production. Stroboscopic illumination can be used additionally to speed up acquisition from conventional frame rates such as 20 -60 fps to 25 MHz, • recording of a physical reference hologram on a plane sample and by transmission through air, It is quite common to use combinations of both solutions in order to achieve optimal results. The reference wave is used to correct all phase and tilt aberrations as well as for curvature of waves and de-focus correction. In particular, this technique has the advantage that only a single hologram needs to be acquired while the correct focal point can be tuned by numerical propagation. This can also be used to increase the depth of field, A common problem in DHM is 2π/phase ambiguity as it limits the usable measurement range. An efficient method to overcome this problem is the so called multiple-wavelength holography, Phase-shifting interferometry (PSI), is an more elaborate variant of traditional (high coherence) interferometry for the determination of surface information, A common problem in interferometry occurs in PSI is the determination of phase using an arctan function which is only possible in the range of 0 -2π. Surface heights corresponding to multiples 2. Related works and basic considerations of 2π will therefore be calculated within the given range resulting in phase jumps, known as a wrapped phase. Several algorithms are currently being researched, Belonging to so called type II sensors, coherence scanning interferometry (CSI) distinctively deviates from classical interferometry. This approach utilizes light of low temporal coherence not to measure the phase of the signal, but to estimate the correlogram of individual speckles on a surface, According to Noise, e.g. from optical aberrations, the scanning process, diffraction or vibration can significantly influence the sensitivity of the technique. Therefore, more advanced signal processing algorithms use the result of the envelope detection only as a rough estimate of the fringe order and call the result a first topography map. Based on this, a fine estimation using a phase analysis of the fringes results in a phase map . This method increases the accuracy significantly although other problems such as 2π ambiguities on thin film structures, surface roughness or sharp edges occur during phase analysis. Some algorithms take this into account, One of the most advanced technologies for high resolution surface profilometry and tomography is low-coherence interferometry (LCI). Optical-coherence tomography (OCT) is a commonly known implementation, where λ c denotes the center wavelength of the light source and ∆λ its spectral range, assuming that the light source has a Gaussian-shaped spectrum. The typical axial measurement range, using broadband light sources, is a few hundred μm with a resolution of about 1 μm, Other approaches aiming to extend the measurement range and to increase the resolution rely on dispersion compensation and are known by the term dispersion-encoded full-range OCT (DEFR-OCT), In contrast to medical applications, industrial measurement tasks often demand the characterization of relatively large areas (mm 2 instead of μm 2 ). Scanning of samples is therefore necessary, but introduces issues regarding the accuracy and repeatability of results, The control of mechanical, electrical and optical properties of polymers during fabrication is necessary to ensure their performance, Long-term mechanical resistance, temperature stability as well as functional parameters such as refractive index are adjusted with the cross-linking process, Interesting industrial applications of polymers are centered around lithographic processing such as resist coatings and optical waveguides, From the analysis of reaction kinetics of polymers, it is known that the density of a material as well as its refractive index changes during cross-linking, where R m represents the molar refractivity, n the refractive index, M w the mass-averaged molar mass and ρ the density. Although it is known that the Lorentz-Lorenz relation is only an approximation, it has been proven applicable to a variety of polymers and was correlated with other methods such as hardness measurements, Promising classes of polymers are halogenated polyacrylates A very common method to determine the degree of cross-linking is the Soxhlet-type extraction, A method to determine cross-linking in polymers as a measure of thermal features such as heatflow, melting point and reaction enthalpy is differential scanning caliometry (DSC), Dynamic mechanical analysis (DMA) is a well established laboratory approach to characterize thermal and mechanical properties of materials. It is especially well suited for visco-elastic materials such as polymers, 3) From this relation, it becomes clear that the phase difference between excitation and response is crucial for the understanding of certain material properties. While fully elastic materials, such as steel, typically show a phase difference of Φ = 0, fully viscous materials show a phase difference close to Φ = 90°. In the case of visco-elastic polymers any value in between may occur. Another important measure in DMA is the determination of the glass-transition temperature T G . It describes the transition from a state where molecular networks are stiff and allow only elastic deformations to a state where non-elastic deformations are also possible. The T G can be calculated with a variety of approaches, some of which are comparable to DSC measurements, In order to calculate the applied stress to a specific sample, the knowledge of its geometry is important. Usually standard sample sizes are fabricated for the purpose of DMA measurements, The time for a measurement can very significantly dependent on the chosen experimental parameters. Usually, the temperature range as well as the heating rate are subject to changes while the excitation frequency is kept fixed. Typical investigations of polymeric materials work in ranges from -75 -150°C with a heating rate of 2 K /min, One of the main advantages of DMA is the ability to directly measure the degree of cross-linking, Non-destructive measurements of cross-linking can be obtained by using optical metrology such as Raman spectroscopy, As refractometry is a well established method to measure refractive indices, it is also suited to evaluate cross-linking in polymers, For the purpose of these examinations, optical fibers are declad over some probing area and integrated in a to-be cured polymeric matrix in order measure the change in refractive index in terms of a change in transmission intensity, Other interferometric techniques such as spectrally-resolved white-light interferometry, frequency domain interferometry or digital holographic interferometry have been utilized to measure refractive indices with accuracies in the range of 10 -5 -10 -6 , None of the technologies presented so far for cross-linking characterization are inherently spatially resolving. Spatial resolution for chemical methods such as DSC or DMA is usually realized by cutting samples into defined sub-samples, Beside these technologies, some other imaging approaches might be interesting for cross-linking analysis. Singh et al. have shown that corneal cross-linking can be indirectly imaged by using an OCT-based approach, The resolution of NMR is strongly dependent on the natural line width of the molecules that are measured and the magnetic field gradient. The method is primarily suited to characterize samples in a laboratory environment. A different approach would be time-of-flight secondary ion mass spectroscopy (ToF-SIMS) where spatial resolution in the axial domain is achieved. By structuring the sample under test with an ion beam, the cross-linking depth profile is acquired in depths up to a few nanometers, Appropriate metrological tools for in-line characterization have to fulfill different requirements in distinction to classical lab-based technologies. In particular, tools are often required to measure a certain area (≈ some μm 2 ) with high axial resolution in accordance with the speed of the respective processing step and perform measurements autonomously for a large variety of materials. As the amount of data gathered is usually large, appropriate algorithms have to monitor key values constantly and only report on deviations. This applies especially to the production of high volume, complex multi-material systems in roll-to-roll processes as in the production of thin-film systems, State-of-the-art technologies for thin-film characterization most often incorporate variants of ellipsometry, Alternatively, optical and mechanical properties of thin-films have been characterized by interferometric approaches, A common method for the determination of film thickness and material parameters of thin-films in the semiconductor industry is spectrally-resolved reflectometry, In practice, a variety of theoretical spectra can be calculated with an assumed a set of different film thicknesses in order to evaluate the measured film thickness. Usually, the root-mean square error (RMS) is determined between measured and calculated values. Additionally, it is possible to perform calculations for other parameters like the refractive index (real and imaginary parts) in relation to the wavelength on the basis of knowledge of the film thickness. The technique is advantageous because of the low instrumental effort, the lack of sample preparation and the fast data acquisition times. However, the method is tied to the knowledge of the material model of a sample and caution is necessary when handling measurements from samples with changing material parameters which can occur in a production environment. Some research has shown, that the parallel acquisition of data under a range of polarization angles in combination with a camera might enable the usage of spectral reflectometry in process-accompanying for complex multi-layer samples, A widely used method to determine the dispersion properties of thin-films is spectroscopic ellipsometry (SE). This technique evaluates the change of polarization of light reflected from one or more layers of a thin-film of material. In particular, the technique is based on the determination of the complex quotient of the reflection coefficient of both polarization components. Typically, the amplitude quotient Ψ and the phase difference ∆ of s-and p-polarized light are captured as a measure, According to The refractive index, n abs , of a material is a measure of the refraction of light traveling through a material. Since it is defined as the relation of the vacuum light velocity c 0 to the light velocity in the material c and can be described as the optical resistance of the material, As most practical applications are operated in air rather than in vacuum, the term relative refractive index, n rel , is more common. This relative index is defined as the refractive index in relation to the refractive index of air, n air , n rel = n abs n air . (2.6) The dispersion of a material describes the relation of the refractive index, and therefore the phase velocity of the light, with respect to the wavelength. This implies that the refractive index is wavelength dependent n = n(λ). Normal and anomalous dispersion can occur. In the case of glass or most polymers, normal dispersion is present in the visible wavelength range. In this case the material shows comparatively high refractive indices ranging from (300 -500) nm and significantly lower refractive index values in higher spectral regions (e.g. (500 -900) nm). Anomalous dispersion consequently shows an opposing behavior. In materials with relatively low optical density such as glasses or polymers, the dispersion characteristic is closely related to the absorption behavior. In general, the material behavior can be described using a quantum mechanical model. The application of a simplified description utilizing an electro-magnetic model is feasible for materials with low optical density, where N is the number of molecules per unit volume, e and m are the charge and mass of the electron, ε 0 is the vacuum permittivity, F j is the strength of the absorption and γ j is a measure for the frictional force at the resonance frequency. The Kramers-Kronig model takes this relation into account, ) where one can abbreviate the material specific terms with A j which leads to the simplified equation When analyzing real materials like glasses or polymers, the absorption characteristics differ very much from the simplified model. Most notably, multiple absorption peaks exist in contrast to only one single absorption peak at one resonant frequency. Furthermore, these peaks inherit a distinct structure which leads to a complex dispersion characteristic. For this reason, a number of approximation relations exist. These relations are always valid in a well defined spectral range which is most likely far away from a strong absorption band. An extrapolation outside the valid spectral range is not considered valid. Over the years a broad range of approximation relations have emerged for different materials , spectral ranges and achievable accuracies, Tab. 2.2. The measurement of the refractive index of a medium is usually defined in relation to the refractive index of air, Eq. (2.6). For this reason, the conditions of the surrounding air should be well defined in terms of temperature, pressure and humidity. Calculations are based on typical values for laboratory conditions, Tab. 2.3. In order to perform these measurements for refractive indices at defined single wavelengths with high accuracy, methods like refractometry (accuracy ± 10 -6 ) and interferometry (accuracy ± 10 -7 ) are preferred. Measurements are typically performed at one or few defined wavelengths of a gas discharge lamp such as the sodium line at λ D = 589.592 nm. The influence of the temperature T , pressure p and humidity w on the refractive index of air and therefore on the relative refractive index measurements of materials can be described as follows ) (2.12) Where the thermal expansion coefficient is introduced as α. From these equations, it can be calculated that minor changes in the environmental conditions such as a temperature change of dT = ± 5 K or a pressure change of dp = ± 20 hPa can have a significant influence on n air . For comparability, the joint commission for spectroscopy has developed an engineering equation for the determination of the refractive index of dry air (with 0.03 % CO 2 volume content) n air at T = 15°C and the reference pressure p 0 = 760 Torr in the spectral range between (200 -1350) nm, as well as for other temperatures of air under the same pressure in the visible spectral range, Analogous to the behavior of air, the refractive index of a material is dependent on its temperature where the discrete form can be noted For practical reasons this dependency is often evaluated by measuring the refractive index at different Fraunhofer lines λ k at different temperatures of interest T i , As the influence of temperatures on the refractive index is relatively low, it can be described by using a simplified Sellmeier model. Hoffmann et al., which results in after integration. Usually, calculations are performed with a reference Temperature T 0 and a single measurement temperature T in order to fit the values for the thermo-optic coefficients D 0 , D 1 , D 2 , E 0 and E 1 . For a commonly used glasses these coefficients can be found in tables, e.g. in A second important influence on the refractive index and therefore on the dispersion is (mechanical) stress acting on a material. While materials like glasses or polymers are usually showing isotropic behavior, the application of mechanical stress σ can lead to anisotropic behavior of the refractive index. The reason for this is that the refractive index is dependent on the electric field vector in relation to the stress plane in a sample. For a calculation, the relation of the refractive index to the stress plane can be described in parallel, n and perpendicular, n ⊥ orientation, and If the deformation as a result of stress is elastic, Hookes law can be applied. In this case dn/dσ can be written as the stress optical coefficients K and K ⊥ . These coefficients are known for most common materials and are to be determined for example in a 4-point-bending test. In materials like glasses, the refractive index typically changes equally for both directions in relation to the stress plane. In the case of hydrostatic pressure p, not only the refractive index of the material itself but also of its surrounding medium will change. In this case the change is determined as Acousto-optical modulators are applications that make use of this effect. The stress-optical constant K can be found for a variety of materials in tables such as in This can also be written as a phase difference ∆Φ between the two components with Clearly, a material's stress optical constant is also dependent on the dispersion of the material, are relevant for glasses. For most materials, the temperature tends to have a minor influence until the glass transition temperature is reached, The knowledge of the dispersion of materials and optical components plays a significant role in several areas of photonics. For example, the slope of dispersion in optical fibers in communications, due to different mechanisms like waveguide and material dispersion, determines the bandwidth and range of a transmission system, Components such as fibers and mirrors have high demands regarding the determination of their dispersion behavior, In the field of optical communications, methods which utilize the direct measurement of the propagation time of an optical pulse as a measure for the dispersion characteristics are common and known as time-of-flight measurements. As communication lengths are typically very long (tens to hundreds of kilometers), dispersion has a heavy impact on the propagation characteristics. Dispersion can lead to time delays of pulses and to spectral broadening of the optical pulses, As a method of characterization, the direct measurement of time delays between sent pulses is typically used in optical communications to characterize the dispersion behavior. A major advantage of such methods is that it can be used also in already existing fiber transmission installments, The measured delay is a superposition of different dispersion mechanisms such as material and waveguide dispersion. Typical light sources used in this context are Raman lasers, superluminescent diodes (SLDs), erbium-doped fiber lasers and semiconductor lasers. According to A method to cope with the requirements regarding the temporal resolution in time-of-flight measurements is interferometry in the time domain. For this approach, an interferometer (e.g. of the Michelson type) with one fixed and one movable arm is set up, The main disadvantage of this approach is the effort necessary to perform the measurements. Although broadband light sources can be used, the dispersion characterization over a large spectral range with a high spectral resolution takes time. Also, the appropriate filtering for each measurement has to be carried out. Furthermore, the accuracy of common translation stages limits the temporal resolution of the approach. A characterization of small dispersion, i.e. of thin structures (μm to mm) is not possible due to instrumental constraints. Therefore, the approach is mostly used for the characterization of optical fibers with at least a few centimeters of length, Analogous to time-domain measurements, interferometry in the frequency domain uses broadband light sources as well. In contrast, these sources are not spectrally constricted. Furthermore, the interferometer is usually built using two fixed arms. The detection of the signal is performed on the complete spectral bandwidth of the light sources using a spectrometer, Another approach to characterize refractive indices, is to fit dispersive interferometer data from experiments, first model from 1830 based on physical model, very good fit characteristics see also derived from Sellmeier equation; valid over large spectral range and for nearly all glasses Herzberger precision 10 -4 (VIS) based on analytical investigation; λ 0 = 168 nm combination of two functional relations (spectral behavior of a normal glass and abnormal dispersion from that reference) reference λ 0 = 587.6 nm (VIS); α = 2.5 = const. for glasses; fast conversion for ω of j = 2 or j = 3 As outlined in the previous chapter, existing technologies for surface profilometry show certain drawbacks in terms of resolution, dynamic measurement range, three-dimensional measurement capabilities and speed. The following chapter introduces a novel approach to surface profilometry which aims to provide solutions to the problems named. The basic setup for all experiments is centered around a two-beam interferometer of the Michelson type, Fig. source emits a collimated beam which is typically split in a 50:50 ratio by a BS -cube beamsplitter. The reference arm typically consists of a DE -dispersive element with the thickness t DE . Following the transmission through the DE, the light is reflected off of a REF reference mirror which causes the light to transmit through the DE a second time before it is guided by the beamsplitter. In the sample arm, the light is reflected on a sample surface before it is recombined with the reference arm light by the beamsplitter. The optical path difference of both arms δ is fixed as any change in δ is usually measured as a change in the samples surface profile In general, the mathematical model of a two-beam interferometer applies in the case of the setup described in Fig. where the resulting electric field E out is composed of the initial electric field E 0 in combination with the oscillating portion defined by the angular optical frequency ω or the optical frequency f , the time t and the phase φ 0 which consists of the optical path difference δ, the refractive index of the surrounding medium n and the wavelength λ. In an experimental setup, where only the time averaged signal of the electric field can be detected the intensity I is of interest it can be formulated which is composed of the velocity of light c, the vacuum permittivity constant ε 0 as well as the two electric field components of the interferometer arms E 1 and E 2 and is integrated over a given time. As the relative change between the two arms is of interest when measuring surface heights, the phase term holds the relevant information. Therefore, the intensity I(λ) can be written as the spectral dependency of the phase with where I 0 is the initial spectral intensity and γ(λ) is the spectral contrast of the interference fringes. It is dependent of the OPD between the both arms denoted with δ, the wavelength λ and the refractive index of air n air which was assumed to equal one for simplification. These equations are suitable under the consideration that the interferometer is dispersion-free. In this general case, the phase is changing proportionally with the wavelength. Through the introduction of a dispersive medium in one arm of the interferometer, Fig. Assuming that pure material dispersion is the only effective mechanism 2 , the transformation of the interference signal is dependent on the wavelength-dependent refractive index n DE (λ) and the material's thickness t DE . The periodicity of fringes tends to a minimum at the so called equalization wavelength λ eq , which is dependent on δ, Fig. profilometer, every height change in the sample's surface changes the OPD and thus leads to a different equalization wavelength. The equalization wavelength can be calculated from the intensity signal analytically as the minimum of the derivative of the phase signal with respect to the wavelength where n DE g (λ) is the group refractive index of the dispersive element. It can be concluded from this equation that the dispersive element and the path difference δ have the most significant influence on the signal. In this setting, the DE defines the phase slope of the signal and furthermore, the axial measurement range where the equalization wavelength can be observed, Fig. With increasing thickness of the DE of the same n DE , the phase gradient around the equalization wavelength increases which results in a higher frequency intensity signal around λ eq . In practical terms, this signal modification is responsible for the effective axial measurement range. This measurement range ∆z(λ) can be estimated within a spectral range of interest This characteristic of the DE defines the response of λ eq due to change of the optical path difference, Fig. In a system like this, the axial measurement range and resolution are determined by the spectral probing range ∆λ, the center wavelength λ c , the dispersive element and the detecting spectrometer configuration. In order to evaluate the possible axial measurement range as well as the corresponding resolution, the interconnection of the detector properties with the material properties of the DE have been studied. For this purpose, simulations for a system with a defined set of parameters have been performed, Tab. 3.1. As stated before, the center wavelength in relation to the refractive index of the DE and the spectral range have a characteristic influence on the axial height measurement range which follows an e.g. Sellmeier-like slope. This behavior can be used to manipulate the measurement range in a pre-designed setup. According to Eq. (3.9) the measurement range ∆z(λ) = ∆z can be calculated over a given spectral range ∆λ as a function of the group refractive index and the thickness of the DE, Fig. Light sources such as SLDs or swept-source lasers are commonly used in other LCI approaches. With regard to the system design of a DE-LCI, these light sources are considered suboptimal as the spectral bandwidth is usually about (80 -120) nm with center wavelengths in the range of (800 -1300) nm, Clearly, the resolution can change due to dispersion as a function of the center wavelength while the nominal spectral range is constant. Nonetheless, the center wavelength influences ∆z, see also Eq. (3.9). As the detection of spectral interference is usually performed in a spectrometer, its specific resolution properties have to be considered as well. Therefore, the resolution of the system, r sys , can be calculated with Due to the construction of e.g. a grating spectrometer, its resolution r spec is defined by the combination of the slit size, the grating constant, the detector size and its specific pixel size. In consequence, a set of typical values for the measurement range and axial resolution was simulated In order to evaluate the simulations, a temporally controlled experiment was carried out with the setup seen in Fig. The results show that the emulated height steps could be measured with some statistical deviations. Specifically, heights of z meas = (0.497 ± 0.098), (0.998 ± 0.106) and (1.997 ± 0.108) μm could be measured for the nominal emulated steps of ∆δ = 0.5, 1 and 2 μm respectively. The detected deviations were only slightly larger than the calculated resolution of 0.097 μm for the dispersive element of t DE = 2 mm, Tab. 3.2. In reference to the work of Ruiz et al. It can be noted that the signal not only shows a dependency of δ towards a change in equalization wavelength but also towards the signal amplitude at λ eq . In a more advanced analyzing scheme this behavior is the primary component of a two-part process in order to determine height profiles with high-dynamic range. When analyzing the intensity behavior of the signal at the equalization wavelength in a significantly smaller δ-range such as 10 • r sys ≈ 1 μm, an oscillatory behavior becomes visible, Fig. In the setup presented within this work, Fig. In order to qualify the combined influence, an experiment was conducted to characterize the induced noise. For this purpose, the spectral intensity response of the system with a mirror in the reference arm (Thorlabs PF10-03-P01) and a typical sample surface (silicon height standard Simetrics VS, Simetrics GmbH, Germany) was recorded. The recording was performed at gain levels ranging from 0 to 12 dB in steps of 3 dB and with five equally spaced integration times per gain level. The integration time was used to control the relative magnitude of the intensity signal in steps of 20 % starting from 100 % and the path length uncertainty ∆δ is This relation describes the limits for the described profilometry approach, which is also dependent on the spectral range as well as on the relative intensity, Fig. where n is the number of spectral data points used for fitting. Within this work, n = 530 spectral data points were used so that the theoretical resolution was estimated as r f it = 0.029 nm. With a measurement range of ∆z = 79.91 μm and the above calculated minimal resolution, the DR is 2.75 × 10 6 . This value is significantly higher than the initial estimation which was solely based on the evaluation of λ eq which was DR = 1667. As this value is based on the model expressed through Eq. (3.14), the experimentally achievable DR might additionally be limited by other influences such as thermal fluctuations or the data processing routines which are not included in the model. Utilizing this analyzing scheme, the limitation on the axial resolution imposed by the thickness of the dispersive element was minimized. As shown in the previous examinations, signal analysis in dispersion-encoded low-coherence profilometry needs to be based on a combined evaluation of the equalization wavelength λ eq and the amplitude at this wavelength in order to achieve sufficient resolution. This holds especially true for comparatively large measurement ranges. Different approaches to analyze the information in recorded spectra have been developed and assessed within this work. Conventional fitting approaches such as the Levenberg-Marquardt algorithm, converge typically fast for periodical signals with constant phases. In the case where the phase of the data is varying over one dimension as in DE-LCI, fits can converge fast as well but most likely on a local minimum rather than on the global minimum, Fig. One way to circumvent this problem is to compute spectra within a very large range of possible values for the fit parameters. As this approach can be time and memory consuming, strategies like downsampling of the measured data or the introduction of more advanced fitting approaches have to be taken into consideration, In either way, it is desirable to determine the start value δ guess with high precision. It should be emphasized that under the consideration of a precise determination of good start values any established fitting approach such as Levenberg-Marquardt can be used instead of the brute-force approach. In order to evaluate δ guess from measured data, the equalization wavelength λ eq can be used in conjunction with Eq. (3.9) which follows from ∂φ ∂λ = 0, Eq. (3.7) where the value for the group refractive index of the dispersive element n DE g (λ eq ) as well as its thickness t DE are used to calculate the initial estimate for the path length difference δ guess . However, this approach relies on the correct estimation of λ eq from measured data. Although this method describes a theoretical way to gather the necessary data, it is problematic in its implementation for measured data. In order to analyze the phase signal, a cos -1 -operation can be performed which results in wrapped data ranging in [-π, π]. To avoid phase wrapping, the data processing established within this work relied on a frequency-based analysis. The analysis of periodic signals is typically performed by frequency analysis approaches such as Fourier transforms like FFT. This is the standard method in e.g. FD-OCT, where interference at different axial positions can be separated as different frequency components from the spectral domain signal, As described in subsection 3.3.1, the usage of conventional fitting routines on oscillatory data with varying phase can lead to problems. For this reason, the here developed fitting routine was constructed as a two-step process. Using a range of ∆δ 1 = ± 1 μm with a step size of 2 nm centered around the previously calculated δ guess , a set of simulated spectra based on Eq. (3.4) and (3.6) was calculated in a brute-force fashion. The determination of the error sum of squares (SSE) of these calculated spectra with respect to the measured spectrum enabled the estimation of a more precise value for the path length difference δ 1 at the minimum of the SSE curve, Fig. The described method was chosen in instead of other established fitting algorithms to ensure the convergence on the global minimum rather than a local minimum which can be the case due to the oscillating nature of the data. The iterative fitting approach bears further potential for optimizations regarding the processing time. Opposing to doing a fit of the whole spectrum, fitting in a ROI was carried in order to reduce processing time, as only about 25 % of the gathered data had to be processed. The processing time of a whole profile with this spectral ROI was about 2 seconds By using to the slope calculated in Fig. Besides the previously discussed error influences due to the optical setup, the implementation of the analysis algorithm introduces further noise. In order to quantify its influence, a simulation and subsequent analysis were conducted. For this purpose, a simulated height profile with a nominal height of z nom = 0 was constructed. It was represented by 500 spectra per profile and 10 repetitions. Based on a typical equalization wavelength of λ eq = 562 nm, a set of spectra in The analysis was concentrated on two important features, the averaged height z mean as well as its corresponding standard deviation over the length of the 500 spectra per data set ∆z min as an indicator for the resolution. By analyzing the mean height and its standard deviation for the spectra at I 0 = 0.5 arb. units with respect to the added noise levels, some initial insight can be drawn, Fig. It is known from the analysis of the spectral intensity signal of the light source, Fig. where it was compared to the initially simulated noise SN R simu , Fig. In typical measurement scenarios, the characterization of height profiles is desired in one lateral dimension or even in an areal fashion. As other approaches have shown, gathering line profile data either by scanning the beam or by moving the sample relative to the beam is common. In either case, the accuracy of the moving parts has an influence on the accuracy of measurement. In order to evaluate this influence, an experiment with a plane mirror on a translation stage (Z812B, Thorlabs Inc., USA) was conducted, Fig. The estimations of section 3.2 demonstrated the capability to perform high-resolution profilometry with the dispersion-encoded low-coherence approach. But they also demonstrated the scanning mechanism's influence on deviations of the result. In order to avoid these and other unwanted deviations from e.g. thermal or vibrational influences, an imaging approach was developed to gather two-dimensional data without scanning, Fig. Additionally, experiments have been conducted to evaluate the accuracy of the developed system for the determination of small height steps. For this purpose, a Si-based step standard (VS 0.10, Simetrics GmbH, Germany) was examined, Fig. The error of the system can be analyzed by utilizing two measures where one is the repeatability, defined by the standard deviation σ z (x) of multiple profiles z i (x) gathered in a short time frame. The second measure is the resolution, calculated as the standard deviation ∆z min of a feature It can be noticed by analyzing the standard deviation in relation to the lateral dimension σ z (x) that the error significantly increased due to the sharp edges and the diffraction effects, Fig. In order to estimate the repeatability of the setup in this configuration, the standard deviation was evaluated without the data points that were affected by defraction (x = 150 -210 μm and x = 300 -350 μm). A mean value of σ z (x) = 0.13 nm was calculated. The value of σ z = 0.13 nm, measured on a low scattering nm-height standard, is expected to be the lower limit of the setup, as sections of the sample with disturbing influences were excluded from the calculation. In order to characterize the repeatability of the setup further, an experiment was designed where the path length difference was altered with a translatable sample, Fig. The creation and measurement of samples which are close to the proposed resolution of the setup is complex. For the calibration of AFM instruments, height step samples exist which have heights in the size of one atomic layer of silicon, The created sample was analyzed using the setup similar to the measurements on the height standard where N = 10 consecutive measurements were taken and averaged, Fig. The occurrence of edge effect on sharp edges is caused by different sources. While diffraction and scattering play an important role, also filtering effects of the aperture, shadowing from the sample's steep slopes as well as interferometric mixing of components of the different height levels due to the lateral resolution are relevant. A rough estimation of the influence of the aperture revealed that its contribution is neglectable, such that it is assumed that diffraction due to the spatial coherence properties of the light source are dominant. As these influences are mixed with in an unknown ratio, no single model can be used to filter the signal appropriately. For this reason, a deconvolution according to the Wiener approach was found to be suitable, (3.24) Following Wieners idea, a wild-card function G acting on the measured signal is utilized to minimize the error between the ideal, but unknown profile Z and the deconvoluted signal As the response function in the typical use case of the Wiener deconvolution is known, the wild-card function can be constructed of In the case investigated here, a modification has to be performed as H is unknown but Z is known. Hence, in order to perform the deconvolution, a wild-card function Q has to be introduced based on which can be used to compute the response function With the aid of this response function, finally the deconvolution of the original measured signal U can be done using Eq. (3.27) and (3.25) resulting in the filtered signal Z . This computation was performed on the measured data of a single silicon edge, originally presented in Fig. Usually, an approximation can be found by estimating the width of the interferogram at an intensity of 1 /e, As surface quality and roughness in particular can be essential for the function of technical products and components, their in-line assessment is of high interest, It is known that roughness parameters which are based on amplitude values of the height distribution, such as Ra and Rq, are not directly comparable in different measurement techniques, For the comparison of both methods, the respective auto-correlation functions were determined using a Fourier-based approach, Fig. In addition to measurements on a standard, the characterization of an industry-relevant configuration, in particular an aluminum mirror coating on a float glass substrate (Layertec GmbH, Mellingen, Germany), was performed. The coating was applied using magnetron sputtering on one half of the circular substrate for evaluation purposes, Fig. In contrast to other technologies such as AFM, scanning white-light interferometric microscopy and confocal microscopy, DE-LCI is able to capture data for roughness evaluation on a large lateral measurement range of a few mm in one single data acquisition. The lack of the necessity to scan a sample eliminates problems of stitching, vibration and speed. In order to measure the performance of the setup with a high-dynamic range where the measurement range is > 10 μm while the achievable height resolution should still be in the nm-range, a precision-turned height standard (EN14-3, PTB, Germany) was examined. The standard provides grooves of defined heights with steps of 1, 5 and 20 μm which were subject to a series of measurements, Fig. In contrast to the silicon standard, the μm-sized height standard has a significantly higher roughness which leads to scattering. In consequence, the measurements on this sample were affected by noise which led to a number of outlier data points. The implemented post-processing routines took these outliers into account and corrected them. The outlier correction was performed by the detection of rising edges using data of the first derivative of the profile with respect to the xcoordinate in combination with the correction of the difference between the outlier and the mean value of five previous data points. In the analysis of the step heights and its standard deviation it could be detected that the outlier correction scheme influences the profile on a sub-nm level. As outliers occur on different spatial positions for consecutive measurements, a higher standard deviation was measured opposing to measurements where less outliers occurred, as on the silicon height standard. As surface profile evaluation is crucial at different industrial processing steps, tomographic evaluation of structures becomes also interesting. For this purpose, the DE-LCI approach was adapted to the near-infrared spectral range (NIR) to perform tomographic examinations of Si-based structures, Fig. In order to generate spectral power densities in the spectral range of (1000 -1400) nm, an amplified supercontinuum light source (ASC) was used, With its dispersion characteristics, N-BK7 is a very suitable material to be used for DE-LCI in the VIS where typical measurement ranges of 79.91 μm are achieved (t DE = 2 mm). Due to lower spatial resolutions of cameras used for imaging spectrometers in the NIR the covered spectral range is usually low. Furthermore, most materials have a rather flat n(λ) slope in this spectral region. Both factors limit the possible axial measurement range. Using N-BK7 with t DE = 2 mm in the range of ∆λ = (1133 -1251) nm, yields in an axial measurement range of ∆z = 1.12 μm. A possibility to increase the range is the utilization of the sample as dispersive material if its thickness is known. Under the assumption that a sample is a silicon wafer with a thickness of 100 μm, the resulting range would be 7.03 μm. Depending on the application, this range can be suitable to detect buried marks in a wafer. Similar measurement ranges are achievable by substituting N-BK7 for a higher refractive glass. The usage of FK51A would enable a range of ∆z = 1.8 μm while SF11 would lead to ∆z = 5.8 μm assuming a thickness of 2 mm. Significantly higher measurement ranges, which are comparable to the VIS approach, can only be achieved with non-glass materials, Fig. different relation. In this configuration, the phase is transformed in slight variations regarding Eq. (3.20) with an additional component for the samples refractive index n smp (λ) = n smp and its thickness t smp , where n smp is supposed to be a known quantity Consequently, all data captured from the inside of a sample is scaled by the depth-dependent refractive index which has to be corrected, if height information should be obtained. In order to perform this, blind dispersion compensation techniques known from OCT can be utilized, Using the above described setup and configuration of the DE, an experiment for the tomographic imaging of a thinned wafer was conducted to capture the surface profile as well as the backside profile of the sample in a simultaneous measurement, Fig. : Result of the profilometry measurement using a dual channel approach where the VIS channel shows the surface profile on top of a thinned Si -wafer with a coated area and a tomographic profile from the backside of the wafer using the NIR channel of the setup. a partially coated area which was thinned previously. It was mounted on a thin glass substrate. The measurement shows the stepped surface profile where the coating height was determined with 18.70 ± 1.42 μm. By analyzing the interferometric signal in the NIR channel and correcting the measured OPD with the refractive index of silicon, the wafer thickness was determined with 84.71 ± 0.38 μm. The edge of the coating can be identified in the VIS as well as in the NIR signal with some significant noise (x = 110 -140 μm). The refractive index of the coating introduced a dispersion-induced deviation in the NIR measurement. This deviation was not corrected in this measurement as the material composition of the coating was unknown. It is also visible that the VIS signal shows significant overall noise. This is due to the relatively small spectral power density of the used ASC source in combination of the low optical transmission of ZnSe in this spectral range. This led to a reduced SNR of 16.5 dB for the VIS measurement compared to the experiments presented before. Future developments will account for this and develop methods to increase the SNR. Furthermore, the development of automatic dispersion correction for tomographic data according to known approaches will be worked on. In order to gather areal information, different approaches were developed. While two methods were developed only theoretically, one approach was implemented, characterized and tested. In this implemented approach, information was obtained by constantly translating the lens L1 in order to image different parts of the sample on the slit, as already depicted in Fig. The results of this sample also highlight the capability of the approach to decouple the axial resolution from the lateral measurement range as nm features can be detected while measuring over a range of 1.5 mm. For comparison, the height standard was also analyzed using a confocal microscope (Smartproof 5, Carl Zeiss Microscopy GmbH, Göttingen, Germany), Fig. necessary to achieve a comparable resolution. This approach is not only time consuming (approx. 10 minutes per areal image) but also tends to be prone to errors as stitching inconsistencies exist, see inset Fig. In order to gather full areal surface profile data, hence three-dimensional information, without any need for scanning two alternative approaches have been developed. In this approach, the measurement spot is spatially expanded and the single slit is substituted with a set of parallel slits in order to make use of a large area of the grating in the imaging spectrometer, Fig. In a further approach, the encoding of a second lateral dimension is performed in the spectral domain. For this purpose, the measurement spot is composed of different spatial components which inhibit individual, discrete spectral ranges. These spectral slices, which are formed with low coherent light sources, are used to illuminate discrete regions of the sample, Fig. As discussed in section 2.2, the characterization of cross-linking and especially its spatial distribution is crucial for the fabrication of micro optics, MEMS, and semiconductors. Some studies have found that the measurement of the refractive index over the cross-linking process can be used as an indicator for the degree of cross-linking of a sample. According to Kudo et al., Based on the spectral interferometric approach utilized for surface profilometry in section 3.2 of this work, a characterization method was developed, tested and evaluated. It is based on the fact that the wavelength-dependent refractive index n smp (λ) of a sample in correspondence with its thickness t smp determines the spectral output of a low-coherence interferometer, In the most basic configuration a two-beam interferometer with spectral detection is used to analyze a sample, Fig. where I 0 (λ) is the spectral profile of the light source and φ the phase. In the assumed simple case, the thickness of the sample t smp is a constant whereas the path difference δ can be altered with a translation stage. A temporal approach of the aforementioned two-beam interferometer was realized in a Michelson configuration where the sample is a transmissive part of one interferometric arm while the reference arm mirror is translatable to achieve temporal control, Fig. and the path difference between the arms δ. As n smp (λ) and t smp are material constants for a supposed bulk material, the path difference is the only variable which can be used to evaluate the refractive index. A variation of the path difference leads to a deformation of the phase and most notably, to a shift of the phase minimum according to Eq. (4.1), Fig. The measurement can be performed either in a relative or absolute way. For relative measurements, the delay introduced relative to a starting position (noted with λ 0 eq ) is used to calculate the relative group refractive index ∆n smp g (λ). Absolute values of n smp g (λ) can be obtained, if the delay is referenced to the stationary phase point of the interferometer in a dispersion-free status. In an initial experiment, a reference mirror was placed onto a precision stage which was then used to introduce defined delays to the signal in form of path differences δ n . By tuning the delay to reach a certain equalization wavelength λ n eq , repeated measurements to calculate n smp g (λ) were possible. In order to quantify the method, measurements on a set of samples of N-BK7 glass with nominal thicknesses t nom of 1, 3 and 5 mm were performed, Fig. It was found that the root-mean-square error of the fitted data in relation to the refractive index reported in literature was ∆n f it g1 = 2.71 × 10 -4 , ∆n f it g3 = 2.06 × 10 -4 and ∆n f it g5 = 2.30 × 10 -4 for the three nominal sample thicknesses. These results prove the accuracy of the method to determine the refractive index of transmissive samples which in turn can be utilized to characterize cross-linking of polymers as typical cross-linking differences in the range of ∆n = 0.001 -0.02 are expected, The difference in the relative temporal delay is an indicator of the different degrees of crosslinking. The first derivative of the temporal delay τ in relation to the wavelength λ, was used to calculate the corresponding dispersion D = D(λ), Fig. This representation of the measured optical properties focuses on the slope of the dispersion induced delay. The differences between both materials are still evident but much smaller than the relative delay. Especially for shorter wavelengths, the differences are significant which indicates a different absorption behavior, hence a different molecular composition. This results indicates that the two materials are similar in their composition, but show differences in cross-linking. In the spectral region below 600 nm a higher dispersion of SU-8 is visible. A reason for that might be the different mechanism of the cross-linking initiation. While the polymerization of SU-8 is initiated by UV-light radiation, the polymerization of Araldite is chemically initiated. In the wavelength range from 600 nm to 750 nm the dispersion of both materials is approximately the same. In the near infrared region, Araldite shows a slightly higher dispersion. Both curves are significantly different in terms of the measured standard deviation. In order to support the observations made in temporal low-coherence interferometry, an additional material characterization were undertaken by Vickers micro hardness tests. The results were compared to the obtained optical properties, Tab. 4.1. Hardness measurements have been The micro hardness tests support the measurements of the optical properties as only minor differences are to be noted. This corresponds with the fact that both materials have a similar chemical composition. The slight differences therefore have to be caused in a difference of the cross-linking. SU-8 on the one hand is harder than Araldite but on the other hand constantly shows lower refraction over the recorded spectral range. An effect similar to that has been shown in literature, where the refractive index of SU-8 was determined at different baking steps, Here, the samples which were subjected to longer baking have shown higher cross-linkage as well as lower overall refraction. However, it should be noted that the experimental approaches for the mechanical and optical properties are fundamentally different. Since micro hardness is measured at distinct points on the samples' surfaces, it can be heavily influenced by residual stresses and local inhomogeneities. In contrast to that, the dispersion measurements integrate the properties spatially over the sample's thickness as well as over the cross-section (dependent on the spot size of the light setup). Therefore, the hardness measurements are only used as a tool for the classification of the determined optical properties. With the aid of these measurements, it was possible to determine the existence of differences in cross-linkage, These should be observable in optical measurements as well. While the presented results were gathered from samples of slightly different materials, further experiments which only examine one material with defined degrees of cross-linking were carried out. A sample set of ethylene-vinyl acetate (EVA) was used for this purpose. The samples where prepared from sheet material. The sheets were exposed to a temperature of 150 °C in an industrial laminator. The exposure time determined the state of cross-linking. Beforehand, the samples have been analyzed with state-of-the-art methods by Hirschl et al., Especially in the field of photo voltaics (PV), EVA, which are used as encapsulants there, have to maintain their properties over an operation time of 20 -30 years, In order to establish the desired properties of polymers like EVA, it is necessary to develop and control appropriate curing processes. The prepared EVA samples of different cross-linking states were cut from sheets in proper pieces with a thickness of 400 μm. The temporal delay τ of each sample in relation to the white-light point was recorded in repeated measurements with 10 repetitions each. The data was then normalized to the corresponding sample thickness t smp and plotted as an averaged curve in relation to the wavelength, Fig. In order to gather additional information, the dispersion parameter D was calculated as first derivative of the fitted data according to Eq. (4.6), Fig. The most important information, the degree of cross-linking, can be extracted by plotting the differences in temporal delay ∆τ /t smp versus the lamination time, Fig. @ 500 nm @ 700 nm @ 900 nm over a broad spectral range enables the analysis at different wavelengths. For comparison, the relative delay at three probing wavelengths (0.5, 0.7 and 0.9) μm was analyzed. It is visible that the data is equal within the standard deviation of the measurements especially for the spectral probing points of (0.7 and 0.9) μm. The data at 0.5 μm shows a slight deviation. In order to compare the results to other methods, the measurements have been fitted using a pseudo-first order reaction kinetics model In consequence, the temporal approach showed the ability to gather model-free refractive index data over a large spectral range, (0.4 -1) μm, with deviations to literature values in the range of 2.06 × 10 -4 -2.71 × 10 -4 . It could be shown, that cross-linking of polymers for industrial applications can be evaluated on the basis of the refractive index measurements. The results proofed to be comparable and in terms of their standard deviation, more reliable than the results of established technologies such as soxhlet-extraction or Raman spectroscopy. The additional statistical confidence through the measurement over a large spectral range as well as the ability to gather spectrally-resolved refractive index data are advantages of this approach over established methods. 4.2.1. Wrapped-phase derivative evaluation (WPDE) One significant drawback of the temporal approach to estimate the degree of cross-linking with the refractive index is the need for mechanical scanning of one interferometric arm. It possibly introduces additional errors and increases the measurement time. From Eq. (4.2) it is known that the wavelength-dependent refractive index n smp (λ) is contained in the phase of the interferometer output in combination with the sample thickness t smp and the path difference δ. Under the assumption that t smp as well as δ are known, the relevant crosslinking information can be found in the refractive index. By rewriting Eq. (4.2), the measured phase-term φ meas , containing the refractive index, can be extracted Inherent to this approach is the ambiguity of the resulting values as φ is not limited to the range of 0π. Other works have shown methods to perform the correct quadrant selection in order to resolve this ambiguity, the minimum. For this purpose, the raw measured data is analyzed using a STFT where a FFT is performed in one small window of the complete data set which is then slid over the signal successively along the wavelength dimension, see subsection 3.3.2. This approach accounts for the non-uniform frequency of the signal. As a result, the minimum of the extracted frequency slope can be determined from the power spectrum. It represents the position of the phase minimum which also occurs at λ eq . The ROI is defined as a local wavelength range λ loc in the proximity of the detected λ eq where only unambiguous phase data is included. This so called local phase, φ loc , is subject to a phase offset, φ of f , with regard to the absolute phase due to the cos -1 -operation, Eq. (4.12). A second analytical step implements a newly developed approach called WPDE, where φ loc is differentiated with respect to the wavelength, noted with ∂ ∂λ , This eliminates the phase offset φ of f and enables the evaluation of the cross-linking characteristics in terms of the group refractive index n smp g (x, λ) as well as the relative derived optical thickness (RDOT) where φ loc is calculated from the measured data using the difference quotient with ∆λ as interval. This case holds true when experiments, as sketched out in Fig. According to this equation, the derivative in order to access the group refractive index can be noted as which leads to a new description of the group refractive index and the RDOT t OP T for the approach with additional dispersion A detailed derivation of Eq. (4.9) and (4.11) for the sample-only approach as well as for the approach with additional dispersion resulting in Eq. (4.14) and (4.16) can be found in the appendices B.1 and B.2. In order to evaluate the algorithm, the group refractive index of a N-BK7 sample with a nominal thicknesses of 5 mm was determined. The averaged standard deviation of 10 consecutive measurements of the sample was found to be 9.97 × 10 -5 . The averaged group refractive index data of these 10 measurements was fitted using a Sellmeier equation, Fig. All approaches described so far have been based on point-wise measurements of spectra and relied on scanning either one arm of the interferometer to gather wavelength-dependent information (temporal approach) or on scanning of the sample in order to gather information from different locations of the sample (WPDE). The evaluation of the refractive index of a sample and therefore of the degree of cross-linking relied on mechanical scanning of one interferometer arm in order to scan the spectral domain for certain equalization wavelengths λ eq . The underlying principle is the introduction of different temporal delays to the setup. A possible method to introduce the delays all at once, relies on the spatially encoding of them and the appropriate detection, Fig. standard, one-dimensional spectrometer is replaced by an imaging spectrometer with appropriate optics. The imaging setup enables the detection of spectral information in one spatial domain. In the proposed setup, the probing beam is focused in the sample volume and re-collimated onto a mirror. Consequently, the beam of the reference arm is also focused and re-collimated without a sample being present. The mirror of the reference arm is designed to introduce temporal delays to the beam with a spatial distribution. After recombination of both beams and their spectral detection, this distribution of delays can be recorded as spectra with different adequate equalization wavelengths. Analogous to section 4.1, these wavelengths can be used to calculate the refractive index of the sample at these discrete points. Depending on the number and size of the delays as well as the construction of the spectrometer, a large spectral range can be covered. Model-based fits can be calculated accordingly. The introduction of delays can be done by means of a stepped mirror, a deformable micro-mirror array or a transmissive element with a refractive index gradient. In a second approach, the aforementioned implementation of an imaging spectrometer was also used to perform WPDE with spatial resolution using the setup described in Fig. The surface height profile of the sample was characterized with the described setup using the front-surface reflex and the profilometry approach described in chapter 3, Fig. With the knowledge of the surface height profile of the sample due to shrinkage, the correct thickness along the spatial domain, t smp = t smp (x) ∼ z(x), can be calculated. Therefore, the a) surface height profile was measured in relation to the substrate. By the application of either Eq. (4.14) or (4.16), the group refractive index or the relative derived optical thickness can be calculated corresponding to its position on the sample, Fig. By appropriate fitting, the Cauchy coefficients A 1 , A 2 and A 3 were determined which enable the calculation of the refractive index and the group refractive index over any given spectral range where the Cauchy model is valid. The measurement range as well as the accuracy of the cross-linking determination is dependent on the accuracy of the determination of the equalization wavelength λ eq , the sample thickness t smp and the path difference of the interferometer δ amongst other parameters, Eq. (4.1) and Eq. (4.7). While the position of the equalization wavelength depends on the path difference between both interferometer arms, the width of the fringe around λ eq is determined by the amount of optical dispersion. Hence, thicker materials show tighter fringe spacing than thinner samples of the same refractive index, Fig. The different measurement approaches discussed in this chapter demand different signal types for analysis. While the detection of just the equalization wavelength with the temporal approach works with very little dispersion, hence a very wide fringe spacing, the WPDE method requires Figure The estimation of the phase minimum is performed as tracking for the minimal frequency of the component carrying the most power in the spectrogram. An analysis of the frequency content for three distinct wavelengths, λ eq = 0.6 μm as well as 0.5 and 0.8 μm, visualizes the problem of low dispersion, Fig. A detailed description of significant influences and error sources is given in the following section. The curing and cross-linking of polymeric materials results in a change of the refractive index as well as in dimensional changes like shrinkage. As pointed out in Eq. (4.1), both properties influence the measurable signal in low-coherence interferometry. In order to provide a meaningful metrology tool, the influence of both properties on the measured data was to be studied. For this purpose, simulations using an industrial photo-resist material system were performed. The material properties after different processing, e.g. softbake/hardbake and UV-hardening, were determined with the reference techniques tactile profilometry and spectral ellipsometry, [H. Aß- It can be seen, that significant changes in thickness as well as in refractive index occur in a counteracting fashion. In order to calculate the influence of these two properties on the measurement data, two simple simulation cases have been studied. (A) transmissive sample: A transmissive sample with a given thickness t smp and a reflective index n smp is placed in one arm of the interferometer. By changing one of the parameters during simulation while leaving the second fixed, the individual influences can be estimated, Fig. (B) reflective sample: A defined layer of photo resist is spin-coated on a reflective surface (e.g. Si or glass). In this configuration, the expected measurement signal can be composed of the different components such as the front side reflex of a shrinked and non-shrinked sample as well as of the back side reflex from a sample with different states of cross-linking, Fig. When analyzing case (A), a thickness change due to shrinkage of 6.5 % was used to calculate the influence on the phase signal and equalization wavelength by also using a fixed refractive index of n smp (λ) for the sample., Fig. Especially the fit of the measured data in the region of the equalization wavelength, enables high precision in the measurement of both thickness and refractive index of a (polymeric) sample. A more realistic assessment of the signals has been performed by the study of case (B), Fig. The determination of a sample's group refractive index, based on the temporal approach, relies on the translation of the reference mirror in order to capture the path length difference for a number of equalization wavelengths, see subsection 4.1. The final calculation relies on the path length difference δ λ and the thickness of the sample t smp In order to estimate the error for this measurement, an error propagation was performed with respect to both relevant features The calculation of the derivative of the respective terms leads therefore to Based on the parameters used for the experiments, the error limits were calculated for the dispersive elements of t smp = (1, 3 and 5) mm while the measurement accuracy on these thicknesses was ∆t smp = 20 nm when measured with a tactile profilometer, Independently of the kind of WPDE, sample-only or with an additional dispersive element, the accuracy of the refractive index calculation is dependent on the deviation of the measured input parameters such as the sample thickness t smp , the wavelength λ or the thickness of the dispersive element t DE . Therefore, a propagation of deviations of these parameters was performed to estimate their relative influences following the scheme According to this notation the partial derivative of the group refractive index relative to the sample thickness reveals a simple quadratic dependency which is countered by the effective thickness t ef f smp and the relative path difference δ that contribute to the measured phase signal φ loc . In the given range of sample thicknesses the deviation of ∆n g (t smp ) could be estimated at the sodium D1 line (λ = 589.592 nm), Fig. Furthermore, the contribution to the error for a sample of N-BK7 having the thickness t smp = 5 mm was analyzed over a spectral range from (0.4 -1) μm, Fig. was estimated for a N-BK7 sample having the thickness t smp = 5 mm over the spectral range of 0.4 to 1 μm, Fig. As discussed within this chapter, WPDE can be applied in some cases with an additional dispersive element in the setup, 4.7. In this case, the propagation of deviations is based on a different equation for the determination of the group refractive index n +DE g , Eq. (4.12) (4.28) It has to be noted that the calculation of φ loc using the effective thicknesses t ef f smp and t ef f DE is performed only in context of the error propagation in order to simulate the signal which is usually measured. Using the same range of sample thicknesses, with a dispersive element of t DE = 5 mm N-BK7, a thickness-dependent error can be calculated for the sodium D1 line (λ = 589.592 nm), Fig. • ∆t DE This equation is the basis for the calculation of ∂n DE g ∂λ under the assumption that the group refractive index is computed using, By calculating the derivative of the refractive index for glass with respect to the wavelength dn dλ , the group refractive index for N-BK7 can be formulated as In consequence the partial derivative of the group refractive index can be formulated as It has to be noted that the calculation of φ loc is only performed in context of the error propagation with the effective thicknesses t ef f smp and t ef f DE . In an experiment this would be the signal to measure. The wavelength contribution to the error was studied in a spectral range of (400 -1000) nm for a dispersive element of t DE = 5 mm and a sample of N-BK7 with t smp = 750 μm, Fig. N-BK7 and a 5 mm thick dispersive element of the same material has been determined as an absolute combination of all error contributions according to Eq.(4.27), Fig. The third intended application for the proposed dispersion-encoded low-coherence interferometry is the evaluation of thin-film characteristics on substrate materials. Due to the usage of thin-film technologies in high-volume production in e.g. the photovoltaics and semiconductor industry, process monitoring becomes relevant in order to ensure functional parameters such as solar cell efficiency, In order to achieve the goal of scan-free, spatially resolved film-thickness measurements of transmissive samples, a Mach-Zehnder interferometer was combined with an imaging spectrometer analogous to the approaches used in surface profilometry (see chapter 3) and polymer characterization (see chapter 4), Fig. The formalism calculates the electric field components for a forward traveling wave (positive xdirection) E in and for a backwards traveling wave E out in order to account for transmission and reflection at every material interface due to the material properties by using the wavenumber k and the propagation vector x where the propagation coefficients Ξ, Π, Υ and Ω hold information on the materials and interfaces. Considering the fact that the tangential components of the electric field must be continuous at a material interface as a boundary condition and that the matrices of every single layer have to be multiplied, a notation of the electric field component of every material and subsequent material boundary can be found as a matrix describing the electric field when entering, M i , and exiting the material system, M o , e -ikx e +ikx -ike -ikx +ike +ikx which leads to the final transfer matrix notation M T , The description of the electric field in this notation represents the resulting wave in the sample arm. In combination with a notation for the reference arm, the complete propagation of light through the Mach-Zehnder interferometer can be described. In combination with the estimated equalization wavelength, measured data sets could be fitted according to the methods mentioned before, see section 3.3. A detailed derivation of a simple, one-layer sample material which was used for analysis of the majority of measurements presented in this chapter, can be found in the appendix C.1. One important requirement in the practical implementation of this approach is the consideration of the substrate material as it shows incoherent behavior. Otherwise, the calculated signal inhibits higher order interferences which could reduce the signal-to-noise ratio significantly. Methods to minimize the influence of this problem would either be averaging the propagation in the substrate material by applying random phases or utilize a net-radiation method to get rid of the disturbing interference overlays, In order to evaluate the characteristics of the setup regarding its capabilities in thin-film characterization, samples of single-layer ITO coatings on polished float glass substrates (CEC020S, PGO GmbH, Germany) were prepared. The samples were half-sided chemical etched in a ferric chloride bath at 230 K for 3 hrs. The determination of height profiles on substrates with coated thin-films can be performed by classical methods like spectral photometry or tactile profilometry either in a point wise or scanning fashion, Fig. As described above, the transfer-matrix formalism is used as a mathematical basis for the fitting of experimentally acquired spectra. The influence of the substrate material parameters is usually low when analyzing thin-films on bulk substrates. Some applications of thin-films are fabricated on thin, flexible substrates such as polymer sheets, to generate a film-thickness gradient for spatial investigations. From the measured back-reflected interference signal, a Fourier analysis with appropriate x-axis scaling could be performed, Fig. While ellipsometric approaches can be error-prone on e.g. flexible substrates, the demonstrated approach is capable to measure film thickness in this setting with high accuracy. In comparison to spectral reflectometry, another state-of-the-art technology, the developed approach enables comparable resolutions on film thickness measurements while also maintaining a far larger measurement range of about 80μm. This enables the simultaneous capture of the film thickness as well as the thickness of substrate materials. In summary, the DE-LCI approach shows significant advantages regarding accuracy, measurement time and the variety of possible samples, Tab. 5.1. The characterization of features such as geometrical dimensions or functional parameters like roughness or degree of cross-linking plays an important role during production in industries such as semiconductors, organic-electronics and the photovoltaics industry. The ability to gather measurements in a process-integrated fashion is of high interest. The scope of this work, in this context, was the development of an optical metrology tool which is capable to provide information on surface features and material properties in a fast and versatile way. In contrast to existing technologies, a novel approach was developed which delivered information on surface line profiles without the need for mechanical scanning and with higher resolution. Furthermore, in some aspects the approach was also able to gather information which was not accessible in a spatially-resolved fashion before. The developed setup was based on a modified, dispersion-enhanced low-coherence interferometer (DE-LCI). The properties of interest were characterized in the three major applications surface profilometry, polymer and thin-film characterization. In the main part of this work, the DE-LCI approach was designed and implemented for surface profilometry. Here, it was shown how controlled dispersion can be used to encode path length differences in an interferometer and therefore surface height information in the spectral domain. The dispersion was controlled by a dispersive element, i.e. a glass window, which was used as one possibility to adjust the axial measurement range of the setup. Additionally, it was demonstrated how an appropriately designed imaging spectrometer can be utilized to gather the surface height information along a line profile in a single data acquisition without the need for mechanical scanning. The introduction of an additional, movable lens after the interferometric recombination extended the setups capabilities and allowed the acquisition of three-dimensional surface height information. The development of a custom data analysis and fitting routine led to an estimation of the axial measurement range of ∆z = 79.91 μm while a theoretical axial resolution of 0.088 nm was calculated for a selected experimental configuration. With these values, a dynamic range in the axial dimension of DR = 9.08 × 10 5 was estimated. The characterization of a setup with the calculated properties was performed by analyzing the surface profiles of different measured step height standards. Most notably, the determination of the profile and the height of (101.8 ± 0.1) nm on a silicon height standard demonstrated the capabilities of the setup. It could be shown that the setup has a repeatability of σ z = 0.13 nm while the axial resolution was found to be ∆z min = 0.1 nm. In relation to the available measurement range of ∆z = 79.91 μm, the experimentally determined dynamic range was DR = 7.99 × 10 5 . This value is about 6 times higher than comparable, current approaches known from literature, An extension of the the setup with an imaging spectrometer for the NIR spectral range (∆λ = (1133 -1251) nm) enabled tomographic measurements of a silicon sample. Specifically, the front and back surface of a thinned wafer could be investigated. In summary, the developed dispersion-encoded approach to interferometry for surface profilometry proved to be of high resolution in the axial dimension while capturing large measurement ranges in the lateral dimension. Due to the high-dynamic range and fast data processing, an application can be envisioned in process-integrated metrology for industrial production. The determination of the degree of cross-linking is an important criterion in quality assurance of polymer processing. The degree of cross-linking determines important mechanical properties of the fabricated products as well as their long-term durability. Additionally, the cross-linking process bears potential for optimization during production in regard to speed and properties. Therefore, production accompanying monitoring is desirable. Based on these conditions, the DE-LCI approach was adapted accordingly and tested for its ability to characterize polymers. The characterization was based on the measurement of the wavelength-dependent refractive index n(λ) as a measure for the degree of cross-linking. The DE-LCI approach was utilized in a temporal scanning as well as in a scan-free configuration. Using the temporal scanning configuration, n(λ) could be analyzed over large spectral ranges of ∆λ = (400 -1000) nm while a resolution in terms of the group refractive index of σ 5 (n g ) = 2.13 × 10 -4 was achieved. The measurement took several seconds and no spatial resolution could be accomplished. In contrast, the scan-free configuration was capable to measure the refractive index with a resolution of 3.36 × 10 -5 on a profile of 250 μm length in 50 ms. The spectral range was about 20 nm. In context of the scan-free configuration, a novel mathematical method for the analysis of phase data based on wrapped-phase derivative evaluation (WPDE) was developed and qualified. Both configurations were tested using typical samples from the photovoltaics and semiconductor industry respectively. In contrast to existing technologies to determine the degree of cross-linking, the novel approach is fast, non-destructive and capable to perform spatially-resolved measurements with a lateral resolution of about 5 μm. The combination of characteristics is unique to the novel approach. The precise control of single-layer thickness in the production of thin-film systems is crucial for the performance of these systems e.g. in the organic electronics or photovoltaics industry. The DE-LCI setup was adapted as a Mach-Zehnder type interferometer in order to characterize the thickness of single-layer thin-films. By measuring a layer of ITO on a bulk glass substrate, it was demonstrated that the layer thickness can be measured with a resolution of 1.6 nm. The modification of the setup by using a secondary spectrometric detection channel allowed to capture back-reflected light of the sample. This way, it was possible to in-situ evaluate the substrate thickness of a flexible substrate (t sub = 135 μm) while measuring the film thickness of a layer of ITO (t IT O = 151.6 nm) simultaneously. This improved the robustness of the underlying transfermatrix model which was utilized to calculate the film thickness from recorded spectral data. The ability to capture film thickness data with spatial resolution within a single frame acquisition separates the DE-LCI approach from existing technologies and determines its usability as a process-integratable tool in future applications. As demonstrated, the scope of this work was to show a range of possible applications of the developed DE-LCI approach while examining each application in depth. While answering the major questions by experiments and analysis, some additional questions arose which could not be addressed within the scope of this work. Most notably, alternative approaches to analyze the captured data might be addressed in future works. Preliminary experiments have shown that methods of image processing and statistical analysis are promising with regard to resolution, speed and robustness. Furthermore, it can be noted that the analysis of the captured data by means of FD-OCT is possible, After re-sampling and Fourier transformation, the data contains three components, the desired peak in depth space, second the broadened mirror term and third the broadened DC term. Due to the signal construction in an DE-LCI approach, these terms overlap and need more sophisticated compensation in order to perform analysis known from full-range OCT approaches, Nevertheless, this approach bears potential for future work as it will increase the possible axial measurement range of the approach. Additionally, the development of fitting routines which can deal with data where the equalization wavelength lies not within the spectral range of the detector are interesting to enhance with respect to the axial measurement range. Beside these approaches to data analysis, advanced design and construction efforts with regard to mechanical stability and thermal management are interesting to further improvements of e.g. the repeatability of the setup. In terms of hardware aspects, the utilization of the triggerable high-power NIR supercontinuum light source makes the characterization of dynamic surface profilometry of oscillating samples in a stroboscopic acquisition mode possible. The experimental validation of theoretical designed methods to gather three-dimensional surface information in a scan-free fashion is of high interest as well. Furthermore, the characterization of cross-linking mechanisms during actual processes with high temporal resolution as well as the monitoring of internal stresses during cross-linking by polarization enhanced DE-LCI is an interesting topic for future research. The extension of the data analysis in thin-film characterizations towards multi-layered systems can be envisioned. The combination of advantageous features such as the versatility of applications, the high dynamic range in the axial as well as the lateral domain, the capabilities to tune the measurement ranges easily and the high resolution characterize the developed approach. In conclusion, it can be said that the DE-LCI approach was developed and qualified in its main features and bears the potential for interesting applications in research as well as in industry. This sections aims to deliver additional information on the developed imaging spectrometer used for core experiments within this work. As initial experiments showed the necessity of a scan-free approach in order to reach high axial measurement accuracy with out artifacts from translational movements, the design of an imaging spectrometer began with appropriate calculations and simulations. As a starting point, it was assumed to build a system based on a Czerny-Turner design, Fig. A.1 a). In order to choose necessary optical components for the construction of the setup, a simple ray tracing model based on the Czerny-Turner design was derived. For the purpose of this calculation some assumptions were done • a spectral range is considered as given (depending on the desired measurement range in height, determined by the dispersive element used) • a collimated beam with a given width illuminates the grating • the grating constant, which is to be determined, leads to a different diffraction angle for every wavelength • the subsequent element images the different spectral parts on the imaging plane of the camera which has a finite size • the camera chip was considered as a fixed parameter having the dimensions of 2048 x 2048 pixels and physical dimensions of 11.8 x 11.8 mm 2 (Basler acA2040-90um-NIR, Basler GmbH, Germany) Based on this, the core section of the imaging spectrometer, consisting of the grating and imaging part, was modeled, the combination of the grating constant, the focusing optics distant to the grating and its focal length, f i , to the finite size of the camera. For the purpose of calculating variants and finding the most suitable solution, a simulation tool for the ray tracing process was written using the assumptions made here. It has to be noted that for simplicity of the calculations it was considered to have a setup with a transmissive grating and a lens as focusing element. In reality this will rather be a reflective grating and an off-axis parabolic mirror. This assumption has no effect on the calculations whatsoever. The goal was to find a solution where the spectral range (i.e. the measurement range) was maximized while the size of the sensor area was utilized best. The resolution was not set as priority as previous experiments have shown that the resolution is more dependent on the quality of the fitting algorithm than on the physical limitations. Furthermore, the resolution increases with an increase in the grating constant. At the same time, this leads to a larger divergence of the light after the grating. The setup has to be more compact in size in order to detect a large spectral range. At some point, the geometrical conditions limit the spectral range which can be imaged. Therefore a trade-off between spectral range and resolution has to be made, which was done in favor for the spectral range in this application. After the simulation it was chosen to use a grating with a resolution of 300 lines /mm and a focusing element with a focal length of approximately 100 mm. The actual chosen parts are summarized in Tab. A.1. The construction of a spectrometer requires very robust and long-term stable components in order to ensure performance of calibrated values such as the wavelength calibration during operation. Therefore, all components where picked with regard to that. The initial setup was adjusted and calibrated using a well-known gas discharge lamp using the methods described below. The calibration of the spectrometer is most important as the calculation of height information relies on spectral data. The calibration routine was designed to address spectral calibration as well as correction for spherical and chromatic aberrations. In order to reach optimal results, the spectrum of a well known gas discharge lamp was recorded with the imaging spectrometer while a regularly spaced pattern of lines (G391122000, Qioptiq Photonics GmbH & Co. KG, Germany) was imaged in the spatial domain, Using the spectral lines in the vertical dimension (marked in red) and the spatial pattern in the horizontal dimension (marked in green) the intersections between these lines could be acquired. the recorded pixel positions of the peaks p px could be mapped to positions on the spectral range λ calc using the fit parameters a, b and c. It is visible from the recorded calibration image that a chromatic aberration occurs as the spectral lines show slight deviations along the x-dimension where they should run straight. In order to correct for this, the spectral mapping according to Eq. (A.4) was performed for every line in the x-domain individually. The calculated spectral mapping was saved and applied to every data set measured subsequently. As already outlined in Section 3.2, the spectrometer was attached to the complete interferometric system in order to perform an analysis of the noise behavior. The gathered results were used as a basis in order to calculate the noise-induced resolution limit using Eq. Additional to this basic features, the influence of the focus on functional parameters such as roughness and waviness was examined, Fig. A.8 b). It can be seen that analogous to the increase in feature depth the Ra roughness increases linearly with the focus. This is a logical consequence as larger single features will contribute to an overall increase in roughness. However, due to the calculation of Ra as the mean value of all points of the profile, the change depends on the surface structure of the specific sample. Depending on the distribution of peaks and valleys and increase in feature size can keep the Ra roughness constant. In the case of this sample, the slope of the Ra value follows the behavior of the feature depth, Fig. A.8 a) and a slight increase in Ra due to a change of focus was visible. The change in waviness hast to be discussed in correspondence with the FWHM of features examined before. When imaging of the location of best focus, higher frequent surface features will be smoothed which was visible in the increase in FWHM. This leads, dependent on the filter settings applied, to a decrease in roughness and an increase in waviness. For the analyzed sample, this can be observed as the measurements ±∆f away from the zero-focus position show a minor increase in waviness, similar to the behavior of the FWHM. This equation can be rewritten and partially substituted with κ for readability in order to solve for the group refractive index of the sample n smp g which equals Eq. (4.9) and the relative derived optical thickness (RDOT) t OP T which equals Eq. In a general case, it is assumed, that the DE is made of glass, so that the Sellmeier equation according to In this case, δn δλ can be calculated using the chain rule : Simplified depiction of a single thin-film on a substrate which was used to formulate a transfer matrix where an incoming electric field E in is propagated along the axis x using the boundary conditions B ij and the propagators for every material P j . incoming electric field E in is propagated along the axis x using the boundary conditions B ij on the boundaries between the materials air, substrate and thin-film. Additionally, the propagators for every material P j with individual refractive indices (n air , n sub , n tf ) were used to describe the propagation. As the idea of the transfer matrix formalism was expressed in a rather generalized form with Eq. ( can be noted. The propagator which describes the influence of the thin-film material on the incoming electric field can be described with P 1 = e -ik 2 t sub 0 0 e +ik 2 t sub . (C.8) The second material boundary, between thin-film and substrate material can be described with (C.9) Consequently, the propagator of the substrate material is noted as Using the noted components, a so called forward propagator (FWP) can be modeled describing the electric field traveling through the complete material setup following the idea expressed with Eq. (5.3) As a result, the FWP is a square matrix of the type a b c d which can be used in order to calculate the resulting electric field containing the transmission and the reflection components, r and r back in the thin-film system alike where E out describes the transmission through the system which is relevant in the Mach-Zehnder setup used within this work. The incoming electric field E in can be normalized to 1 while the back-reflection at the end of the system, which could be used to model multiple-internal reflections within the material system, is assumed to be 0. This equation was solved for E out as and was used as a model to fit experimentally captured spectra with respect to the thickness of the thin-film under investigation t tf . approach", Proc. SPIE 10925, Photonic Instrumentation Engineering VI, 109250L • Hartmann, P.; Taudt, Ch.; Baselt, T., Optische Anordnung zur Bestimmung von Lageänderungen, Positionen, Verformung, Bewegungen, Beschleunigungen und Geschwindigkeiten, DE102013019774A1, 2019. • Hartmann, P.; Taudt, Ch.; Baselt, T., Scanfreie 3D Oberflächentopograhieerfassung mit einem modifizierten Kurzkohärenzinterferometer, in submission process, 2020. 2.1. Comparison of current LCI approaches . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2.2. Models for the description of material dispersion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2.3. Typical environmental conditions for the calculation of refractive index influences . 3.1. Spectrometric system properties for initial simulations regarding measurement range and resolution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3 to develop a full-field, areal approach to surface profilometry which is capable of measuring large distances with sub-nm resolution as 3.: Typical environmental conditions for the calculation of influences regarding the refractive index according to smp [mm] 3.04 ± 0.01 0.23 ± 0.02 performed on a micro indenter device operating with a force of 0.245 N in 5 indentations per sample. smp (x, λ) -1) t smp ] + n DE (λ) -1 t DE -δ λ + ∆φ . (B.9) x) (B.10) • Taccheo, S.; Schuster, K.; Ferrari, M.; Seddon, A.; Marciniak, M.; Taudt, Ch.; Troles, J.; Valentini, G.; Dorosz, D.; Prudenzano, F.; Jaeger, M.; Dandrea, C.; Ivanda, M.; • Meissner, S.; Cimalla, P.; Fischer, B.; Taudt, Ch.; Baselt, T.; Hartmann, P.; Koch, E., "A new small-package super-continuum light source for optical coherence tomography", Proc. SPIE 8611, Frontiers in Ultrafast Optics: Biomedical, Scientific, and Industrial Applications XIII, 86110K (15 March 2013); doi: 10.1117/12.2004080. Surface profilometry In practical implementations, one of the arms can be equipped with a translation stage for adjustment purposes. In the cases considered within this work, only material dispersion was used as a mechanism to encode surface information as the setup was implemented in free-space. By using a fiber-based setup, other mechanisms of dispersion such as waveguide dispersion might be utilized. In this context, the 100 % reference was defined as the integration time where the recorded intensity maximum was just not provoking overexposure. While this section only discusses the behavior of the camera for a gain of 0 dB, the appendix A.1.4 presents an analysis for the other gain levels. These values were typically used throughout this work. They are dependent on the used DE as well as on the sample to be measured. This value is strongly dependent on the used hardware and the optimization performed with regard towards parallelization. Within this work neither specialized hardware nor software optimizations have been used. This is up to future work. These functions are assumed to be handled in Fourier-space. These aspects were not studied within this work and are subject to further research. In a real measurement setup, the measurement range will be extended by the dispersion on the sample. The amount of increase is dependent on the sample depth to be analyzed. In situations where the amount of cross-linker is small compared to the amount of polymer, the reaction can be described as a first order reaction. In this context, the term pseudo-first order is used,[124].