We report a refractive index sensor comprising of unique T grating on top of periodic nano-cavities. The sensor has two resonant modes sensitive to different regions of the structure with low interregion interference, hence allows simultaneous detection of two different analytes or more accurate detection of a single analyte. The sensor also provides a self-referencing feature for a broad range of refractive index, from 1.3 to 1.5. Using the FDTD method, the sensitivities of 801.7 nm RIU -1 and 1386.8 nm RIU -1 have been recorded for the two modes respectively. The versatility of the structure makes the sensor a prominent candidate for biochemical and other sensing applications. Surface plasmon polaritons (SPPs) involve non-radiative evanescent surface waves excited by the coherent and collective oscillations of the conduction electrons on a metal surface at the metal-dielectric interface Alongside SPR, the incorporation of other resonance modes in a hybrid structure has recently developed a great interest in the field of photonics. These structures supporting multi resonance mode like SPR and (i) Surface Enhanced Raman Scattering (SERS) Over the past decade, a strong interest in plasmonic structures has been grown as extensive research has been conducted on perfect absorber In this paper, we propose a novel plasmonic refractive index sensor with a unique T-shaped grating on top of periodic rectangular cavities. The T-shaped grating and nano-cavities create two active regions enabling simultaneous detection of two different analytes. The grating structure introduces two L-shaped cavities on top of each nano-cavity which entraps incident photon resulting in a better coupling. Two individual resonant conditions couple electromagnetic (EM) field at different regions of the structure at different phase matching conditions allowing the two resonant modes to perform with significantly less inter-region interference than most of the reported multi-analyte and self-referencing bio-sensors. The numerically calculated sensitivities of SPR and FP-like resonant modes are 801.7 nm RIU -1 and 1386.8 nm RIU -1 respectively. The inter-region interference adds 5.8 nm RIU -1 and 0 nm RIU -1 induced sensitivity to the resonant modes respectively between 1.33 to 1.37 RI range which allows performing more accurate multi-analyte detection for relatively broader RI range of interest than the previously reported multi-analyte sensors. For the self-referencing scheme, the sensitivities of the active mode and the reference mode are 800 nm RIU -1 and 2.82 nm RIU -1 respectively considering silicon dioxide as reference. Furthermore, the capability and usability of the sensor for simultaneous detection of multi-analyte and self-referencing modes have been briefly analyzed and verified. The 3D and 2D schematic view of the proposed sensor is shown in fig. The proposed structure can be fabricated by employing the standard top-down method of nanofabrication For a grating coupled configuration, the phase matching relation given by Eq. ( Here, Λ is the grating period, λ is the wavelength of the light, θ inc is the angle of the incidence and n a is the refractive index of the dielectric medium. From the phase-matching condition, it is evident that the refractive index of the dielectric has some direct influence on resonant wavelength manipulation. This specific property can be utilized to construct an SPP based refractive index sensor. For a plasmonic refractive index sensor, two types of interrogation schemes are used: angular interrogation and spectral interrogation The selectivity of the sensor is determined by the ratio of sensitivity to the full-width at half-maximum (FWHM) termed as figure of merit (FOM) In this work, the finite difference time domain (FDTD) method is used with proper boundary conditions to model the sensor structure and analyze the electromagnetic response. To ensure the accuracy of the simulation, the mesh size is selected to be as low as 0.2 nm. The Lorentz-Drude model provided by Rakić et al 4.1 Reflection spectrum and field profile: The reflection spectrum of the sensor plotted in fig. An interesting feature of the proposed structure is that mode 1 and mode 2 are sensitive only to the RI of region 1 and region 2 respectively. It is to be noted that the spectral distance between the modes is high enough to be fairly distinguishable irrespective of the RI of any region. The insignificant spectral shift for one mode due to the RI shift of the neighboring region is defined by the induced sensitivity of that mode. Fig. To have a deeper understanding of the distinctive resonant characteristics of the sensor, a 1D line plot of corresponding normalized electric field distribution from fig. 4(b,ii). Notably, the electric field is confined to region 2 and the field intensity is in good agreement with previously reported intensity profiles within FP cavities, which further confirms mode 2 as an FP-like resonance It is to be noted that the induced sensitivity for a broad spectral region of interest introduces some error in the individual operation of the resonance modes but for our proposed sensor this induced error is significantly lower than previously reported simultaneous multi-analyte and self-referenced sensors Optimizing the T-shaped grating parameters can provide a better spectral response while providing lower induced sensitivities for the two separate modes. To study the influence of grating parameters on overall sensing performance, the grating parameters have been swept each at a time while keeping others fixed. During optimization, the RI of each region is considered 1.33. At first, the effect of h 1 on the reflection spectra is observed. In fig. Where λ FWHM is the FWHM of the FP-like cavity mode and r is the reflectance of that mode. The induced sensitivity for mode 1 in fig. The reflection spectrum for the various h 2 is plotted in fig. The effect of various horizontal slab span (s) on the reflection spectrum in fig. In fig. According to the previous discussion, the T-shaped grating parameters have been studied to find the optimum dimensions of the proposed sensor for further reduction of induced sensitivities with better individual sensing performance and reasonable electric field confinement in both regions. Fig. Furthermore, the resonant modes hold following linear relations with the RI of both regions as plotted in fig. From Eqs. ( Here, Eq. ( Employing the similar calculations, the error in refractive index calculation can also be minimized by using the following relations. Here the variables in denotes similar parameters described earlier. As the two sets of results are in well agreement with each other, the accuracy of the resonant modes for refractive index ranging from 1.33 to 1.37 can also be achieved for gold as a structural material of the proposed sensor. The simultaneous sensing performance comparison of the proposed sensor where Ag is the structural material with other previously reported sensors is included in table 1. (a) (b) Figure The capability of the structure to perform as a biosensor has been studied under three different conditions: (i) simultaneous sensing of two analytes at two different regions, (ii) more reliable sensing of one analyte and (iii) self-referencing detection to eliminate environmental noises. Following performance verification was done with the optimum grating structure with h 1 = 150 nm, h 2 = 50 nm and s = 400 nm. Hemoglobin is an iron-containing protein that resides in red blood cells. It binds oxygen from the lungs and delivers it throughout the body by red blood cells. Insufficient hemoglobin causes deficiency of oxygen inside the body and the condition is known as anemia. A low level of hemoglobin is also an indicator of other complications: iron-deficiency, unusual hemolysis (breaking down of red blood cells) or vitamin deficiency. Pregnant women and newborn infants may suffer from anemia. Low blood oxygen level may have the symptoms of weakness, headache, dizziness, chest pain, pale skin and shortness of breath. Again, a high level of hemoglobin indicates polycythemia i.e. denser blood than usual which can cause blood clots, strokes and heart attacks. So, the concentration of hemoglobin should be monitored reliably. The RI of hemoglobin in an aqueous solution changes linearly with the concentration at room temperature and can be fitted with the following equation where n h and c h denote RI of the solution and concentration of hemoglobin in it respectively Diabetes is a chronic disease that affects the metabolic system of the body. Diabetic patients suffer from hyperglycemia (high blood sugar) as the body cannot produce the required insulin. A long-lasting excess sugar concentration in blood may cause heart diseases, kidney complications and vision loss. Diabetic patients are needed to be under regular supervision for blood sugar level. Excess glucose is spilled into the urine causing frequent urination. So, blood glucose can be monitored by diagnosing urine sugar level. RI of urine (n g ) changes almost linearly with the concentration (c g ) of dissolved glucose For the simultaneous detection of the concentrations of hemoglobin and glucose, the RI of region 1 was altered according to the different concentrations of hemoglobin while the RI of region 2 was varied for corresponding concentrations of glucose in urine. Here is to be noted that, the diameter of a single molecule of hemoglobin is 5 nm With a typical optical spectrum analyzer (OSA) having a spectral resolution of 0.05 nm Sensing the RI of the same analyte simultaneously with two resonant modes provides improved accuracy. With the increase in RI of the same surrounding material, the resonant modes undergo a redshift, but for having different sensitivity, each mode shifts at a different but specific rate resulting in broadening the spectral distance between them. Considering this spectral distance shift for different RI of the surrounding medium as a sensing parameter, two-stage verification, hence more reliable performance can be harnessed. To investigate the reliable sensing performance, the proposed structure has been studied to detect sucrose concentration in an aqueous medium. The refractive index data for five different concentrations of sucrose has been derived from a reported literature Figure Here, p is the spectral distance between the resonant modes in nm and c s is the percentage of sucrose in the solution. This sensor can reliably detect 6.07 × 10 -6 % change in the concentration of sucrose in an aqueous medium. While optical refractive index sensors are powerful and efficient tools for bio-chemical sensing and binding event monitoring To explore the self-referencing capability of the sensor, a set of simulations has been executed under different refractive indices ranging from 1.3 to 1.5 for region 1 while region 2 was filled with SiO 2 . As seen in fig. Refractive index sensor with multi-analyte sensing feature has always been a center of research interest. In this paper, a refractive index sensor based on a novel grating structure on top of periodic nano-cavities has been proposed and numerically analyzed. Due to the generation of two individual resonance modes originating from SPR and FP-like resonant mode respectively, a phenomenal sensing performance with insignificant inter-region interference has been found for a broad refractive index window ranging from 1.3 to 1.5 which is larger than most of the similar reported sensors. Average sensitivities for individual performance were found as high as 801.7 nm RIU -1 and 1386.8 nm RIU -1 respectively. The potential application of the sensor for multi-analyte and self-referenced sensing have been numerically verified. Due to its versatility, we believe, the proposed sensor is a prominent candidate for biochemical sensing application.