Both human-made and natural supply systems, such as power grids and leaf venation networks, are built to operate reliably under changing external conditions. Many of these spatial networks exhibit community structures. Here, we show that a relatively strong connectivity between the parts of a network can be used to define a different class of communities: dual communities. We demonstrate that traditional and dual communities emerge naturally as two different phases of optimized network structures that are shaped by fluctuations and that they suppress failure spreading, which underlines their importance in understanding the shape of real-world supply networks. Community structures are a fundamental trait of complex networks and have found numerous applications in systems ranging from social networks Intuitively, community structures play an important role for the spreading of failures or perturbations in networked systems. The low connectivity impedes spreading processes, such that perturbations can be expected to stay within the community, which is both predicted by theory In particular, it has been shown that hierarchical structures may provide similar features, for instance in vascular networks of plants In this article we provide a unified view on the role of communities and hierarchies for network robustness based on the concept of graph duality. The dual graph is most naturally defined for spatially embedded networks, i.e. networks that are embedded in the plane without edges crossing each other. This class of networks includes a large variety of man-made and biological systems The article is organized as follows. We first demonstrate how different structural patterns impede spreading processes and thus contribute to the robustness of a network. Focusing on flow networks, we formalize the concept of graph duality and establish dual communities. Second, we investigate essential properties of dual communities, in particular their link to hierarchical patterns and the geometry of the community boundaries. Finally, we study the emergence and impacts of communities structures. Using optimization models, we study why networks develop a primal or a dual community structure. We provide a deeper analysis of the link between communities and network robustness by employing different simulation models. Throughout the article we use the terms graph and network interchangeably. The term 'graph' stresses the structural aspects while 'network' stresses the functional aspects of the system. We first highlight how network robustness is related to the presence of communities for selected examples. Robustness is essential for critical infrastructures such as electric power grids. The high-voltage transmission grid of Scandinavia (Fig. Remarkably, a similar suppression of failure spreading is realized by strong connections. We consider the venation network of a leaf, which includes a strong central vein separating the left and right half (Fig. Before we move to a more detailed analysis, we demonstrate the generality of the observed phenomena. We consider a classic model of network cascades A boundary, either by weak (w 1) or strong (w 1) connections, effectively stops the cascade. Only those nodes are infected, which are located in the same half as the initially infected ones. We have shown that strong connections can divide a network and enhance its robustness similarly as weak connections do. Even more, we can establish a full mathematical equivalence of weak and strong connections in the case of flow networks. This equivalence leads to a generalization of the definition of community structures in complex networks. Linear flow networks arise in a variety of applications, including electric circuits power grids , where w ij is the connectivity or conductivity of the edge (i, j). The nodal variable θ i describes the local voltage or potential in an electric circuit, the voltage phase angle in a power grid, or the pressure in a hydraulic or vascular network. The flows have to satisfy the continuity equation (or Kirchhoff's current law, KCL) at every node i of the network, j F i→j = P i , where P i is the inflow to the network. These equations can be recast in a compact matrix notation. Let N denote the number of nodes and M the number of edges the network, which we assume to be connected. We fix w = 10 the median and the shaded region the 25% to 75% quantile for 1000 random initial conditions. For homogeneous lattices (w = 1), the cascade reaches all nodes (ρ ∞ = 1). For both weak (w 1) and strong (w 1) conditions, the cascade stops at the boundary such that ρ ∞ ≈ 0.5 an orientation for each edge to keep track of the direction of flows and define the edge-node incidence matrix I ∈ R M ×N as The edge weights are summarized in a diagonal matrix W = diag(w 1 , . . . , w M ) while all other quantities are summarized in vectors θ = (θ 1 , . . . , θ N ) , P = (P 1 , . . . , P N ) , F = (F 1 , . . . , F M ) . Note, the ordering of the edges in the edge-node incidence matrix I and the weights in the diagonal matrix W have to be consistent such that the weight of edge k connecting nodes i and j is given by w k = w ij . Then the relation of flows and potentials is given by F = WIθ and Kirchhoff's current law reads Equation ( The Laplacian is a central object in spectral graph bisection The above description focuses on the nodes of the network, with the nodal potentials θ being the central quantity of interest. An equivalent description exists that focuses on the edges of the network and the flows F. The starting point is the KCL I F = P. This linear set of equations is underdetermined in terms of F, such that the general solution can be written as the sum of a particular solution and an arbitrary solution of the associated homogeneous equation, namely The vector F hom describes a flow without sources or sinks, that is, a collection of cycle flows. The cycle flows form a vector space (the cycle space) such that we can expand each cycle flow into a suitable basis. A distinguished basis exists for plane graphs, i.e. graphs embedded in the plane, which can be constructed in the following way. A face of a plane graph is a region that is bounded by edges, but contains no edges in the interior. The boundary edges of each face then provide one basis vector of the cycle space. Further details are given in the supplementary information. To keep track of the basis, we introduce the cycle edge incidence matrix with components ( Then we can write the general solution of the KCL as with an arbitrary cycle flow vector f . The actual values of the cycle flows are then determined by Kirchhoff's voltage law (KVL), which states that the potential differences around any closed cycle sum up to zero. In fact it is sufficient to enforce this for the M -N + 1 basis cycles. We can thus formulate the KVL in terms of the flow vector F as Crucially, this equation includes the matrix W -1 which translates flows into potential differences. Substituting Eq. ( Notably, this equation has the same mathematical structure as Eq. ( In the following, we focus on spectral graph bisection because of its direct link to the graph Laplacian -which is the central object in the above analysis. This method relies on the fact that the community structure is encoded in the second smallest eigenvalue of the graph Laplacian λ 2 ≥ 0, known as the algebraic connectivity or Fiedler value, which vanishes if the graph consists of two disconnected components and increases with increasing connectivity between the communities. The graph nodes are then assigned to one of two communities based on the corresponding eigenvector v 2 , the Fiedler vector: two vertices j and i are in the same community if they share the same sign of the Fiedler vector where h ∈ R is a threshold parameter. Here, we choose h = 0. This method can be straightforwardly applied to the dual graph, replacing the primal Laplacian L by its dual counterpart L * . The algebraic connectivity of the dual is measured by the second eigenvalue λ * 2 and the associated eigenvector is used to identify the dual communities. We find that dual communities appear naturally in real-world networks such as the venation networks of leaves (Fig. Applying the same procedure to the Central European power grid, (i,left) and its dual (i,right) show that primal and dual hierarchies provide different, but equally useful information about the network structure. We may conclude that this network represents an intermediate case between primal and dual community structure (see main text for details). The spectral clustering method for community detection can be applied to both the primal and the dual graph, revealing different structural information about the network (Figure Leaf venation networks are archetypal examples of hierarchically organized networks, with a thick primary vein in the middle and medium secondary veins, that supply thin subordinated veins (Figure We conclude that leaf venation networks clearly display a dual community structure, where the boundary of the dual communities coincide with the primary and secondary veins. Hence, dual community detection allows to identify hierarchical organization patterns in complex networks. We will provide a more formal treatment of the relation between strong veins and dual communities below. As a second example, we now turn to another type of spatially embedded supply networks: power grids. Figure Although mathematically similar The algebraic connectivity λ 2 of a graph is closely related to its topological connectivity -the amount of connectivity between the two communities where N 1 and N 2 respectively count the number of nodes in the two communities. The set S contains all edges which are not within one of the two communities but in-between, providing a weak connection of the communities (Fig. If all edges in S are removed, the graph is cut into the two communities. Notably, the bound becomes becomes exact approximation in the limit of vanishing connectivity (μ 2 → 0) as shown in the supplementary information. We derive an analogous bound for dual communities, transferring geometric concepts from the primal to the dual. In particular, we derive an analog to the cut-set S, which contains all edges, which are elements of neither of the two components. Consider a decomposition of the dual graph G * = (V * , E * ), where the dual vertex set V * is separated into two components Two faces c ∈ V * 1 and d ∈ V * 2 are connected in the dual, if they share at least one edge in the primal graph. Hence, we will find a set of primal edges which belong to both of the two components (Fig. constitutes a path p in the primal graph. In the following, we will refer to p as a cut-path as its removal disconnects the graph. The edges along the cut-path essentially determine the community structure of the dual graph and its algebraic connectivity. Given a cut-path p, we find the bound where | counts the number of nodes in the dual communities. Notably, the expression μ * 2 does not only provide an upper bound for the algebraic connectivity λ * 2 , but an approximation that becomes exact in the limit of vanishing dual connectivity. We prove these statements rigorously in the supplementary information. The relation of cut-paths and dual communities is further investigated in Fig. Understanding how the structure of optimal supply networks emerges is an important aspect of complex networks research To interpolate between strongly fluctuating sources and weakly fluctuating ones, we first use a similar model as in Ref. Resources for building the network are assumed to be limited, which translates into the constraint e w γ e ≤ 1. The cost parameter γ quantifies how expensive the increase of an edge weight is and was set to γ = 0.9 for the examples presented in this manuscript (see Supplementary Note 4 for more information). Results for N s = 2 sources are shown in Fig. We find that the optimal network structure changes strongly as the fluctuations increase. For weak fluctuations, σ 2 D ≈ 1, each of the N s sources supplies the surrounding area of the network. Only weak connections are established between the areas to cope with the small residual imbalances. Hence, the optimal networks show a pronounced primal community structure see Fig. For strong fluctuations, σ 2 D 1, a local area supply is no longer possible and longdistance connectivity is required. Remarkably, this connectivity is established in one central vein that links the two fluctuating sources see Fig. We can capture the transition from a primal to a dual community structure in terms of the primal and dual Fiedler values (Fig. Strikingly, an analogous transition is observed for actual power transmission grids when optimizing the network structure for different levels of fluctuating renewable energy sources. We consider the European power transmission grid and optimize its network structure for different carbon dioxide (CO 2 ) emission reduction targets compared to the year 1990 ranging from 60% to 100% reduction using the open energy system model 'PyPSA-Eur' We find that the decarbonization of power generation drives a transition from primal to dual communities in the grid. A reduction in generation-based CO 2 emissions corresponds to an increased share of power being produced by fluctuating renewable energy sources. With increasing penetration of fluctuating renewables, we observe a decrease in the dual Fiedler value λ * 2 and an increase in the primal Fiedler value λ 2 , which indicates a transition from primal to dual communities in the optimized networks (Fig. Primal and dual communities both impede the spreading of failures and thus improve the robustness of complex networks as shown in Fig. We first consider linear flow networks using the theoretical framework introduced above. Robustness is quantified by a sensitivity factor, measuring the response of the network flows F to a perturbation. As a perturbation, we add an inflow ∆P at a node v 1 and an outflow of the same amount at another node v 2 . Here, we focus on the case where v 1 and v 2 are the two end nodes of an edge e = (v 1 , v 2 ) and treat the general case in the supplementary information. The source vector in the Poisson equation (2) then changes as and l e ∈ Z M is the indicator function for edge e, which is equal to one at the positions indicated by the subscript and zero otherwise. Inverting the discrete Poisson equation ( where L † is the Moore-Penrose pseudoinverse of the primal graph Laplacian. We then define a sensitivity factor as the ratio of the flow change at edge and the perturbation strength ∆P as We note that the sensitivity factor is widely used in the context of power system security analysis, where it is referred to as a power transfer distribution factor The sensitivity factor η v 1 ,v 2 , elucidates the relation between primal communities and network robustness Remarkably, we can find an analogous description in the dual graph The sensitivity factor for all edges = e thus reads We see that the dual Laplacian L * contributes to the sensitivity factor η v 1 ,v 2 , in exactly the same way as the primal Laplacian L in equation Here, • ∈C d denotes the average over all edges in a community C at a given distance d to the trigger edge e. To be able to neglect the effect of a specific edge and the distance, we average over all possible trigger edges e and distances d to arrive at the mean flow ratio The mean flow ratio ranges from R ≈ 0 if the other module is weakly affected, i.e. there is a strong community effect, to R ≈ 1 if there is no noticeable effect. We note that R describes flow changes after perturbations in the in-and outflows as well as flow changes as a result of the complete failure of edges (see supplementary information). Figure of each oscillator i = 1, . . . , N evolves according to where M i is the inertia and D i the damping of the ith oscillator. To analyse the impact of community structures, we consider a honeycomb lattice with tunable edge weights, with either low weights w ij ≤ 1 across the boundary or high weights w ij ≥ 1 along the boundary. The weights of all remaining edges are set to w ij = 1 and w ij = 0 if no edge exists between nodes i and j. We now investigate how the steady states of such a network react to a localized pertur-bation near the community boundary (Fig. The response |∆θ i | crucially depends on the location of the oscillator -being strongly suppressed across the community boundary (Fig. This overall response is generally suppressed in the non-perturbed community, for primal as well as for dual communities. The more pronounced the community structure, the stronger the suppression of the response (Fig. We conclude that the impact of community boundaries, both primal and dual, extends to all diffusively coupled networked systems. Our finding can be further substantiated by a linear response analysis Furthermore, we note that related phenomena were observed for models of information diffusion in networks of different modularity We have introduced a way to define and identify dual communities in planar graphs. We demonstrated that both primal and dual community structures emerge as different phases of optimized networks -whether the one or the other is realized in a given optimal network depends on the degree of fluctuations. In addition to that, both types of communities have the ability to suppress failure spreading. They are thus optimized to limit the effect of edge failures or other perturbations. An important difference between primal and dual communities is the fact that the former are based on a weak connectivity, while dual communities require a strong connectivity. This has significant consequences for supply networks such as power grids. Several approaches have been discussed to limit the connectivity of power grids to prevent the spreading of cascading failures. This includes concepts of microgrids Dual communities may be detected using the same techniques as for primal communities once the dual graph is constructed. We here focus on classical spectral methods based on the graph Laplacian, as this matrix naturally arises in the study of graph duality and linear flow networks. By now, numerous algorithms for community detection have been developed that outperform spectral methods depending on the respective application Finally, we note that other approaches have been put forward to generalize the definition of network communities beyond the paradigm of strong mutual connectivity. For instance, communities can be defined in terms of the similarity of the connectivity of nodes (see, e.g. In Fig. This model is iterated until no further changes of the node states occur. We simulate this model on a square lattice with inhomogeneous edge weights. A fraction p e = 0.8 of edges connecting the center nodes of the lattice with its nearest neighbors is selected at random. The weight of these edges is set to w ij = w , where w is a tunable parameter, while all other edges have weight w ij = 1. At time t = 0, we choose a fraction ρ 0 = 0.05 of all nodes in the left part and set them to state 1, while all other nodes are in state 0. For each value of the parameter w , we repeat the simulation for 1000 random initial conditions and record the fraction of nodes in state 1, denoted as ρ ∞ . In this manuscript, we mostly restrict our analysis to planar, connected graphs. A graph G = (V, E) with vertex set V and edge set E is called planar if it may be drawn in the plane without two edges crossing For a plane graph G, it is straightforward to establish a duality to another graph, referred to as the plane dual or simply dual graph and denoted as G * . The dual graph is constructed using the cycles of graph G where a cycle is defined to be a path that starts and ends in the same vertex consisting of otherwise distinct vertices. For a graph with M edges and N nodes, these cycles form the graph's cycle space of dimension For non-planar networks, the basis of the cycle space may no longer be uniquely determined based on the graph's embedding. Different basis choices result in different dual graphs. When calculating the dual graph of the non-planar European topology shown in Figure We assign m hierarchy levels based on repeated spectral bisection of the dual graph using the following procedure: 1. Assign dual communities to the graph by making use of the Fiedler vector v * 2 of the dual graph G * 2. Identify the edges that lie on the boundary between the two communities by checking for edges in the primal shared by faces corresponding to dual nodes of both communities 3. Remove the boundary edges from the graph thus creating two primal subgraphs G 1 and G 2 Our framework extends the fluctuating sink model proposed by Corson where P i are the outflows at the sinks. Here, we arranged the node order such that the sources have indices 1, . . . , N s and sinks are numbered as N s + 1, . . . , N . To produce Figure The networks shown in Figure The data generated in this study (effective topology of power grid networks and selected leaf venation networks) as well as essential computer code for data processing have been deposited in a Zenodo repository Supplementary Figure d-f, Communities can be identified according to the Fiedler vector. The figure This property is easy to understand for flow networks: Here, the vector v describes a cycle flow which has neither sink or source such that I v = 0. The cycle flows constitute a vector space that coincides with the kernel of the edge incidence matrix I. In plane graphs, the faces provide a distinguished basis of the cycle space. This basis is encoded in the cycle incidence matrix C with entries For convenience, we fix the orientation of each face in the counter-clockwise direction. We now proceed to the definition of the dual graph G * = (V * , E * ). Two common definitions exist, differing in the treatment of the exterior of the graph. 1. The vertex set V * consists of all faces of the primal graph, including the outer face. Then, the dual graph has 2. The vertex set V * consists of all faces of the primal graph, excluding the outer face. Then, the dual graph has |V * | = L -N + 1 vertices. This graph is typically referred to as a weak dual. Two faces (=dual vertices) are adjacent if they share at least one edge. We note that two faces may share more than one edge, which can be included in two different ways. First, we keep every edge separately making the dual graph a multigraph. Alternatively, we can condense the multiedges into ordinary ones, which requires the introduction of edge weights. We will follow the latter definition as our focus is on flow networks which are weighted anyway. We may now define a Laplacian for the dual graph. Starting with the first definition that includes the outer face, we define, in analogy to Eq. ( As for the primal graph, we can decompose the Laplacian in terms of the adjacency and the degree matrix, The dual adjacency matrix A * ∈ R (L-N +2)×(L-N +2) has the entries A * f,g = number of edges shared by faces f and g . and the degree matrix In the second definition, we exclude the exterior face. We may again proceed to define the Graph Laplacian via the cycle incidence matrix and write However, this matrix is not a full Laplacian matrix as its row-sums are not guaranteed to vanish. Instead, L * g is a grounded Laplacian, that is obtained from a full Laplacian matrix by removing one row and the corresponding column The adjacency matrix A * is a (L -N + 1) × (L -N + 1) matrix has the entries A * f,g = number of edges shared by faces f and g . as before and the degree matrix Hence, the row-sums of L * i vanish as required for a Laplacian matrix. We note that the two matrices are related as where the diagonal matrix D • summarizes the connectivity of the interior and exterior D • f,f = number of edges shared between f and the exterior face. Finally, we want to briefly comment on the two alternative definitions of the dual graph and their respective advantages and disadvantages: • The first definition including the exterior face has two closely related advantages making this definition convenient in fundamental analysis: (i) The definitions (3) and ( • However, the first definition is rather inconvenient in the analysis of network structures. The cycle basis is overcomplete. The additional exterior face introduces "artificial" non-local connections in the dual, which are especially unsuitable for the definition and analysis of dual communities. For community detection, we will thus work only with the adjacency matrix • In the analysis of flow networks we can use both definitions alike. In the first case, we have one degree of freedom that remains to be fixed. A common convention is to "ground" the exterior face -then the first definition reduces to the second one. We now consider a weighted plane graph with edge weights denoted as w e ∈ R >0 for all edges e ∈ E. In the analysis of graph duality and flow networks, we can include these weights in two different ways: (i) directly in the incidence matrices and (ii) via separate diagonal weight matrices. We first treat option (i) and focus on the definition of the dual that includes the exterior face. Subsequently, we define the weighted node-edge incidence matrix I ∈ R L×N as with entries To ensure the defining equation for the cycle space, I C = 0, the definition of the cycle edge incidence matrix must be generalized to The dual Laplacian matrix is again given by the equivalent definitions ( and the diagonal degree matrix is given by D * f,f = g A f,g as usual. We stress that the dual weights are inverse to the primal weights as expressed via Eq. ( A second option is to include the weights via an additional diagonal weight matrix while keeping the unweighted incidence matrix Ĩ ∈ R L×N with entries The Laplacian matrix of the primal graph is then defined by the definition which coincides with Eq. (10) as desired. We now proceed to the dual, focusing on the second definition that excludes the exterior face. The cycle edge incidence matrix C ∈ R L×(L-N +1) now remains unweighted with components The dual grounded Laplacian ( Comparing to the definition of the primal Laplacian ( a graph that is disconnected into two parts V 1 and V 2 = V \V 2 . We label the vertices as The adjacency matrix then assumes a block form where In this limit we have λ (0) 2 = 0. Now add some weak connections between the two modules of the graph. Then, the adjacency matrix can be written as We now treat A (1) as a small perturbation and apply Rayleigh-Schrödinger perturbation theory. To zeroth order we have λ (0) 2 = 0 and the corresponding eigenvector v (0) 2 coincides with the trial vector defined by Eq. ( where We can now generalize the above treatment to the dual graph. As discussed above, we base the analysis of communities and connectivity on the dual graph that excludes the exterior face. The Laplacian of the dual graph is defined by In particular, we have where the entries of the adjancency matrix are given by A * f,g = edges e shared by faces f and g and D * f f = g A * f g . As before, we want to define a decomposition of the graph and use the connectivity at the boundary to derive a bound for the algebraic connectivity. However, we now need the weights along the boundary, not across the boundary. To make this precise, we first define a cut-path that we will use instead of a cut-set. Definition 1. Let G = (V, E) be a connected plane graph. The outer boundary B is defined as the cyclic path consisting of the edges adjacent to the exterior face and the connecting vertices. Definition 2. Let G = (V, E) be a connected plane graph. A cut-path is a path that includes no edges from the outer boundary B and that satisfies 1. either the path is cyclic and contains at most one vertex from the boundary B 2. or the path is acyclic and its start and end are on the boundary, v 1 , v n+1 ∈ B. We will now show that such a cut-path p indeed cuts the dual graph into two parts. Then we show that the sum of weights w -1 e along the cut-path provides an upper bound for the algebraic connectivity of Fiedler value of the dual. Lemma 1. Let G = (V, E) be connected plane graph and G * = (V * , E * ) its dual graph. We consider a cut of the dual G * , i.e. a decomposition of the vertex set V * such that Then the following statements are equivalent 1. The two dual vertex sets V * 1 and V * 2 are connected in G * is minimal. 3. The dual of the cut set is the edge set of a cut-path. Proof. The equivalence of ( The equivalence of (1,2) and (3) follows from the geometry of the plane embedding: A vertex v ∈ V corresponds to a point in the plane R 2 , an edge to an arc and a face to a closed polygon. An exact proof for dual graphs that include the exterior face can be found in many text books of graph theory, see e.g. (3) ⇒ (1) Let S be the edge set of a cut-path p. We denote this cut-path as p = (v 1 , e 1 , v 2 , . . . , v n+1 ) and distinguish two cases. (a) If the cut-path p is acyclic, its start v 1 and end v n+1 are distinct and both lie on the boundary B. We can thus write the boundary as and define two cyclic paths p1 = (v 1 , e 1 , . . . , v n+1 = u a , a , u a+1 , . . . u b+1 = v 1 ), p2 = (v 1 , e 1 , . . . , v n+1 = u a , a-1 , u a-1 , . . . , u 1 = v 1 ). In the plane embedding, p1 and p2 correspond to two closed polygon chains enclosing two polygons A 1,2 . As the p1,2 are cyclic paths, the polygons A 1,2 are connected. We can again identify the areas A 1,2 with the dual vertex sets V * 1,2 and conclude the following statements. (i) As p1,2 are cyclic paths, the polygons A 1,2 are simply connected areas. Hence, the dual vertex sets V * 1,2 are connected. (ii) As p1,2 contain the boundary B, we have (iii) As the paths p1,2 do not intersect, the two polygons are disjoint, A 1 ∩ A 2 = ∅, and so are the dual vertex sets, V * 1 ∩ V * 2 = ∅. (b) If the cut-path p is cyclic, its start and end coincide and lie on the boundary In the plane embedding, the cut-path p corresponds to a closed polygon chain enclosing a polygon A 1 . As p is a cyclic path, A 1 is connected. Notably, A 1 touches the boundary in exactly one point corresponding to the node v 1 = v n+1 according to the definition of a cut-path. The area A 2 = A\A 1 must also be connected, otherwise A 1 would touch the boundary in more than one point. We can now identify the areas A 1,2 with the dual vertex sets V * 1,2 and conclude that both V * 1 and V * 2 are connected and satisfy Corollary 1. Let G = (V, E, W ) be a weighted plane graph and be a cut-path. Then the algebraic connectivity of the dual graph G * satisfies where E(p) = {e 1 , . . . , e n } is the set of edges in the cut-path and Proof. In full analogy to the analysis of the primal graph (cf. ( where V * 1 and V * 2 = V * \V * 2 is a decomposition of the vertex set of the dual and N * 1,2 = |V * 1,2 |. The entries of the dual adjacency matrix are given by Eq. ( Defining a vector of flows F = (F 1 , .., F M ) ∈ R M , a vector of potentials θ = (θ 1 , ..., θ N ) ∈ R N and a vector of inflows P = (P 1 , ..., P N ) ∈ R N , we can write these relationships in a more compact form. Kirchhoff's current law In addition to that, we can write the relationship between flows and potentials in vectorized form, Here, W = diag(w 1 , ..., w L ) ∈ R M ×M is a diagonal matrix summarizing the edge weights, cf. Eq. 12. Now we can put together the last two equations to arrive at a discrete Poisson equation for the nodal potentials Here, L = Ĩ W Ĩ is the Laplacian matrix. Quantifying the impact of perturbations -primal graph We now use the notation developed in the last section to study the effect of perturbations, in particular links failures, and derive the expression for the sensitivity factor η i,k, given in the main text. Assume that the inflow at one node i is increased by an amount ∆P and Note that the Laplacian matrix of a connected graph always has one zero eigenvalue Thus, we cannot simply invert this equation to calculate the change in the nodal potentials ∆ θ. This problem is typically solved by making use of the Moore-Penrose pseudoinverse of the Laplacian matrix L † which has properties similar to the matrix inverse Finally, we can read off the change of the flow ∆F on a line . We define an indicator vector l as the th standard unit vector in R M and obtain where we replaced the unweighted incidence matrix Ĩ by the weighted matrix I. Then the sensitivity factor reads Note that the sensitivity factor is purely topological, i.e. it may be calculated only based on the network topology and weights and does not depend on the in-and outflows. If the two nodes i and k are the terminal nodes of an edge p = (i, k), we can identify e ie k = Ĩ l p , and the sensitivity factor reads η p, = w l ĨL † Ĩ l p = w /w p l IL † I l p . The discussion of perturbations in the in-and outflows developed in the last section was recently extended to the dual graph which leaves us with an underdetermined system of equations: We have M unknown flow changes ∆F , but only N -1 equations as one is redundant. The general solution can thus be written as where ∆ F part is one particular solution of the equation and ∆ F hom is an arbitrary solution of the homogeneous equation, i.e. an arbitrary solution of Ĩ ∆ F hom = 0. We can now use graph duality to parametrize the homogeneous solutions and to single out the physically correct solution. The kernel of the node-edge incidence matrix is spanned by the cycle-edge incidence matrix Ĩ C = 0, where we here use the unweighted matrix where f ∈ R M -N +1 is a vector of cycle flows -one for each cycle. The physically correct values of the cycle flows are then determined by Kirchhoff's voltage law (Eq. 30) which may be written compactly as where we used that ∆θ n -∆θ m = ∆F nm /w nm . Inserting equations ( with the dual Laplacian L * g = C W -1 C. We thus found a discrete Poisson equation for the cycle flows f with the grounded dual Laplacian L * g in direct correspondence to its primal counterpart Here, 1 M denotes the identity matrix of dimensions M × M . As a last step, we need to determine a particular solution ∆ F part . This can be accomplished as follows Then a particular solution is given by ∆ F part = T ik ∆P , and we can plug this into the above equation If nodes i and k are the two terminal ends of an edge e = (i, k) = , the path vector may be identified with the edge's indicator vector, T ik = l e . Then we can simplify the above expression for any edge = e to Notably, the first expression in Eq. ( The sensitivity factor η i,k, may also be used to describe the failure of links. Assume that a link e fails, thus loosing its ability to carry flow and setting the weight to zero, w e = 0. Instead of removing the link from the network, we can find an analogous description based on the sensitivity factor Thus, both changes in the inflows and link failures can be captured by the sensitivity factor η. To quantify the effect of (dual) communities on network robustness in linear flow networks we defined the ratio of flow changes in the main text (cf. Ref. Importantly, the ratio can be used to quantify both, the effect of communities on changes in the inflow patterns and on failure spreading. For an inflow and outflow of ∆P at the two terminal ends of the link e, e 1 and e 2 , respectively, the ratio is calculated as Thus, in both cases, the ratio is determined by the sensitivity factor η which is in turn governed by the Pseudo-inverse of the Laplacian matrix L † or the Pseudo-inverse of the dual Laplacian (L * g ) † when formulating the problem in the dual graph. Connectivity structure determines network response to link failures In this section, we will demonstrate why a weak connection between two components of a network limits the flow changes in one component when a link in the other one fails. Our analysis follows the approach towards perturbation spreading used in Manik et al. Consider a connected graph G = (E, V ) with N nodes and M edges consisting of two subgraphs G 1 = (E 1 , V 1 ) and G 2 = (E 2 , V 2 ) with n 1 nodes and n 2 = Nn 1 nodes, respectively, that are mutually weakly connected. Here, a weak connection between the two subgraphs may either be realized through a (relatively) weak number of links in case of an unweighted graph or the overall weight of the connections between the two subgraphs being small We then sort the graph's vertices V in such a way that the first n 1 vertices belong to the first subgraph G 1 and the other n 2 vertices belong to the second one G 2 . We may regard the weak connections between the to subgraphs as a perturbation to the graph in which the two subgraphs are disconnected. In terms of the graph Laplacian L, we thus write Here, L 0 is the graph Laplacian for the graph when disconnecting the two subgraphs, expressed in terms of their Laplacian matrices L 1 ∈ R n 1 ×n 1 and L 2 ∈ R n 2 ×n 2 and L is the perturbation matrix with the diagonal degree matrices D 12 and D 21 denoting the degree for the graph connecting the two subgraphs. A 12 is the adjacency matrix for this graph that is assumed to be relatively sparse, thus indicating the weak inter-subgraph connections. To examine the effect of link failures, we need to study the pseudoinverse of this matrix. Therefore, we denote by X = L † the Moore-Penrose pseudoinverse of the overall graph Laplacian and by X 1 = L † 1 and X 2 = L † 2 the Moore-Penrose pseudoinverses of the subgraphs' Laplacian matrices L 1 and L 2 , respectively. For the inverse X 0 of the unperturbed Laplacian L 0 , we then get In order to calculate the matrix inverse X, we can expand this matrix using the Neumann series (see e.g. Ref. However, these this does not apply here, since we can easily circumvent the formal problems by fixing the phase of an arbitrarily chosen slack node n as θ n ≡ 0 and removing the nth row from the linear set of equations. The resulting set of equations is of full rank and factor as We thus observe that the leading order contribution of the perturbation matrix to the sensitivity factor is L0 if both links are contained in the same module and L1 if they are contained in different modules. Now we compare this to the scaling of Laplacian eigenvalues with the perturbation matrix. The first eigenvector of L 0 is given by the constant shift v 1 = N -1/2 1 N and has eigenalue λ 1 = 0. In the weakly connected limit considering only L 0 , the Fiedler eigenvalue vanishes as well λ ) . Here, we use the superscript (0) to denote the eigenvector and eigenvalue in the unperturbed case. A first order estimate for the Fiedler value may thus be calculated by using Rayleigh Schrödinger perturbation theory as For weakly connected graphs, we thus expect the sensitivity factor η 1 , 2 ,k to scale with the connectivity of the graph in the same way as the Fiedler value of the graph if and k lie in different communities due to the fact that λ 2 ∝ L and expect it to be to leading order independent of the Fiedler value if and k are in the same community. In the main part of the manuscript, we consider the ratio R( , d) between the flow changes ∆F i→j within the other community (i, j) ∈ O and the flow changes in the same community (i, j) ∈ S after a link failure. It is well established that the flow changes typically decay with distance to the failing link in the weakly connected limit assuming without loss of generality that the failing link is located in the first subgraph G 1 , ∈ E(G 1 ). Since we deduced in Eq. ( Note that the derivation works exactly the same way for the dual graph G * and dual such that the sum over the second moment still vanishes Ns i=1 Y i Y j = 0. With these results we can compute the second moments of the inflows P i P j . Given the network topology and the edge weights w , we can further compute the moments of the edge flows F 2 using Kirchhoff's equations. Then one can proceed as in the original model as outlined above. Starting from an initial guess of the edge weights, we iterate the following two steps until convergence: 1. The moments of the flows F 2 are determined from the moments P i P j via Kirchhoff's equations. 2. The weights are updated according to Eq. pronounced and accurate when using the Louvain method, indicating that the description as dual graphs reveals important structural features of the topology of leaf venation networks. : We simply have to replace the sensitivity factor η 1 , 2 ,k by its dual representation.