An unidentified quantum fluid designated the pseudogap (PG) phase is produced by electron-density depletion in the CuO2 antiferromagnetic insulator. Current theories suggest that the PG phase may be a pair density wave (PDW) state characterized by a spatially modulating density of electron pairs. Such a state should exhibit a periodically modulating energy gap Δ ( ) in real-space, and a characteristic quasiparticle scattering interference (QPI) signature Λ ( ) in wavevector space. By studying strongly underdoped Bi2Sr2CaDyCu2O8 at hole-density ~0.08 in the superconductive phase, we detect the 8a0periodic Δ ( ) modulations signifying a PDW coexisting with superconductivity. Then, by visualizing the temperature dependence of this electronic structure from the superconducting into the pseudogap phase, we find evolution of the scattering interference signature Λ( ) that is predicted specifically for the temperature dependence of an 8a0periodic PDW. These observations are consistent with theory for the transition from a PDW state coexisting with d-wave superconductivity to a pure PDW state in the Bi2Sr2CaDyCu2O8 pseudogap phase. Carrier-doped CuO2 sustains both high temperature superconductivity and the pseudogap quantum fluid, often simultaneously. Although the former is reasonably well understood, a decades-long effort by physicists to identify the latter 1,2 has yet to bear fruit. The essential phenomenology of the pseudogap, while complex, is internally consistent. When p holes per unit-cell are introduced to CuO2, the antiferromagnetic insulator (AF) state disappears and the pseudogap (PG) emerges in the region p<p* and T<T*(p) (Fig. A spatially homogeneous d-wave superconductor has an electron-pair potential or order parameter Δ ( ) = Δ with macroscopic quantum phase and critical temperature Tc. By contrast, a PDW state has an order parameter Δ ( ) that modulates spatially at wavevectors with a macroscopic quantum phase . In theory, such a state exhibits a particle-hole symmetric energy gap ∆ ( ) near the BZ edges, with the ∆ ( ) = 0 points connected by extended ( = 0) Fermi arcs • along with a collateral charge density modulation ρ ( ) = ρ • + • with wavevector = 2 (Ref. 39). If the PDW is unidirectional, it necessarily breaks the rotation symmetry of the material at Q=0, and if biaxial it can break time reversal symmetry While charge density modulations ρ ( ) are widely reported in the pseudogap phase For theoretical guidance, we use a quantitative, atomic-scale model for PDW state based upon CuO2 electronic structure and the t-J Hamiltonian, Here, the electron hopping rates between nearest neighbor (NN) and next-nearest neighbor (NNN) Cu orbitals are t and t', respectively, the onsite repulsive energy → ∞, thus the antiferromagnetic exchange interactions J=4t 2 /U, and the operator PG eliminates all doubly-occupied orbitals. A renormalized mean-field theory (RMFT) approximation then replaces PG with site-specific and bond-specific renormalization factors , and , based on the average number of charge and spin configurations permissible Hamiltonian is decoupled into a diagonalizable mean-field approximation using on-site hole density , bond field χ , and electron-pair potential Δ . This mean field t-J Hamiltonian has a uniform d-wave superconducting (DSC) state as its ground state, but PDW and DSC states are extremely close in energy, as has also been shown elsewhere We explore these predictions using strongly underdoped Bi2Sr2CaDyCu2O8 samples with resistive transition temperature = 37 ± 3 K and ≅ 0. imaging of ( , ) is intractable. However, one can suppress these serious systematic "setpoint" errors by using ( , ) = ( , )/ ( , -) or ( , ) = ( , )/ ( , -) so that distances, modulation wavelengths and spatial-phases can be measured accurately. Furthermore, Bogoliubov quasiparticle scattering interference (BQPI) occurs when an impurity atom scatters quasiparticles, which interfere to produce characteristic modulations of ( , ) surrounding each scattering site. The Fourier transform of ( , ), ( , ), then exhibits intensity maxima at a set of wavevectors connecting regions of high joint-density-of-states. Local maxima in ( , ) therefore reveal the sets of energy dispersive wavevectors ( ) generated by the scattering interference . An efficient synopsis of these complex phenomena can then be achieved 10 by using Λ( , Δ) = ∑ ( , ) ≅ , which provides a characteristic "fingerprint" of whatever ordered state, e.g. CDW or PDW, controls the ( ). At T = 4.2 K we first measure ( , ) in a 20 nm-square FOV (see "Methods" section and Supplementary Figure ) in an identical 10 nm-square FOV at = 0.14 = 5 K and = 1.5 = 55 K. Cross correlation analysis of ( , ) at T = 0.14 and of ( , ) at T = 1.5 in this FOV versus bias voltage V, yield a normalized cross correlation coefficients around 0.9 for practically all energies (Supplementary Note 3), thus indicating that virtually no changes have occurred in spatial arrangements of electronic structure upon entering the PG phase. The major exception is in the energy range +100 meV < < +160 meV, wherein the feature denoted coherence peak (arrow Fig. Finally, we consider the widely promulgated hypothesis the mean-field order parameter of a PDW at wavevector is 〈 ↑ ↓ 〉, whereas for a CDW at wavevector it is ∑ 〈 , , 〉 . Second, while a periodically modulating energy gap is a key PDW signature (Fig. ≅ for a = 8 PDW in the CuO2 pseudogap phase, while Fig. To summarize: strongly underdoped Bi2Sr2CaDyCu2O8 at p~0.08 and T = 5 K exhibits the 8a0-periodic Δ ( ) modulations characteristics of a PDW coexisting with superconductivity c. Measured ( , 60 ) at T = 0.14 = 5 K within 9.9 nm × 9.9 nm FOV. The ( , 60 ) manifests unidirectional charge modulations. Predicted QPI signature Λ ( , 20 meV) of 8 PDW state that coexists with DSC state at temperatures T = (g) 0.01t, (h) 0.02t, (i) 0.04t, and (j) 0.05t. Theoretically, it is assumed that the short-range discommensurate nature of the charge order, as seen in the experiments 49 , will lead to reduced intensity of the density wave Bragg peaks compared to the long-range PDW driven charge order obtained in our mean-field analysis. Accordingly, the nondispersing charge order Bragg peaks at wavevectors q = ±nQp, n = 0, 1, 2, ...,7, in PDW+DSC state and q = ±n(2Qp), n = 0, 1, 2, 3, in the pure PDW state are suppressed by a factor of 100 in Λ ( , 20 meV), which helps in highlighting much weaker wavevectors emerging from where, |Ψ > is the unprojected ground state wavefunction. A direct diagonalization of the resulting mean-field Hamiltonian will not yield the lowest energy state, however, as the Gutzwiller factor themselves depend on the local mean-fields. Instead, the ground state energy =< Ψ | |Ψ > has to be minimized with respect to |Ψ > under constraints that the total electron density is fixed and |Ψ > is normalized 1 . This leads to following renormalized mean-field Hamiltonian for paramagnetic states ( = 0). where, = -, ∆ Here, δij,<ij> = 1 for NN sites and 0 otherwise. In this work, we have focused only on paramagnetic states since we are interested in charge ordering without any long-range spin ordering as very few experiments suggested the presence of any long-range magnetic order coexisting with charge order in Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8+δ. In this scenario, the Gutzwiller renormalization factors are simply given by the following expressions 1 Here, we have assumed that the above expressions are valid at all temperatures of interest 2 . In other words, we have approximated ≠ 0 Gutzwiller factors by their values at = 0. Temperature effects enter the calculations via Fermi functions used in the evaluation of the mean-fields [Supplementary Eq. (3-6)]). The renormalized mean-field Hamiltonian in Supplementary Eq. ( The BdG equation has to be solved self-consistently as the matrix elements depend on the mean-fields, which, in turn, depend on the eigenvalues ( , ) and eigenvectors . The paramagnetic ground state of the t-J model treated within aforementioned renormalized mean-field theory (RMFT) is a uniform d-wave superconductor (DSC). However, we are interested in pair density wave (PDW) solutions which have been shown to be very close in energy to the DSC state within RMFT 1-3 as well as in more rigorous numerical schemes like variational Monte-Carlo 4,5 and tensor networks 6 . PDW states can be obtained by initializing BdG equation [Supplementary Eq. ( Here, the modulation wavevector is chosen to be = (±1/8, 0) based on experimental evidences Results presented in the main-text were obtained using the parameter set = 400 meV, = -0.3 , = 0.3 . Further, we chose hole-doping = 0.125, which is larger than the doping = 0.08 at which experiments discussed in the main-text were performed because of the following reasons. First, it has long been known that the t-J model overestimates the doping scale of DSC dome by almost a factor of two. Experiments find the DSC dome to be in hole doping range ~ 0.05-0.3 whereas in the RMFT t-J model (with the aforementioned parameter set) it turns out to be in the range 0.01-0.45 (at = 0) 3 . If we account for this scale difference, then = 0.125 will be closer to the experimental doping of = 0.08. Second, it's hard to get converged PDW solutions at very low dopings as the derivatives of Gutzwiller factors, entering in the on-site potentials [Supplementary Eq. ( For the aforementioned parameter set, a self-consistent pure PDW state is obtained in temperature range 0 < < 0.11 whereas the PDW+DSC state is found as a stable solution for 0 < < 0.085 . Both PDW and PDW+DSC states have almost equal energy per site, which is a few meV larger than the uniform DSC state In the main-text Fig. As evident from Supplementary Figure In order to compute local density of states (LDOS), we first obtain lattice Green's functions ( ) using the eigenvalues and eigenvectors of the BdG matrix [Supplementary Eq. ( Here, 0 is a small artificial broadening set to be 0.01t, and the sum runs over all the eigenvalues. The diagonal lattice Green's function yields total LDOS at a site: where, represents imaginary part and the factor 2 accounts for spin degeneracy. Differential conductance measured in an STM experiment is, however, proportional to the sample's LDOS evaluated at the STM tip position 13 . Thus, we must compute the continuum LDOS few angstroms above the exposed BiO layer in Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8+δ for a meaningful comparison with the experimental data. Accordingly, we obtain continuum Green's function ( , ; ) via a basis transformation 14 from lattice to continuum space where the matrix elements of the transformation are given by the Wannier function ( ) centered at lattice site i. 