Here we present the experimental results of an inverted three-terminal heterojunction bipolar transistor solar cell (HBTSC) made of GaInP/GaAs. The inverted growth and processing enable contacting the intermediate layer (base) from the bottom, which improves the cell performance by reducing shadow factor and series resistance at the same time. With this prototype we show that an inverted processing of a three-terminal solar cell is feasible and pave the way for the application of epitaxial lift-off, substrate reuse and mechanical stacking to the HBTSC which can eventually lead to a low-cost high-efficiency III-V-on-Si HBTSC technology. The HBTSC With an upright cell growth, the base is accessed from the top and its metallic contact must be deposited in a groove parallel to the emitter contact. This increases the shadow factor of both junctions, and a trade-off must be found between shadow factor and series resistance. In the resulting cell, the emitter has been etched away in some regions to access the base, but wet chemical etching of GaInP is difficult to control, not very homogeneous and challenges with severe underetching, which leads to large margins around the contacts, reducing the top cell area and making it impossible to use an interdigitated contact design. In this work, we use an inverted cell growth to mitigate these problems. The base contact is reached from the bottom of the structure and therefore the metallic fingers of the base can be deposited exactly beneath the front metal fingers, further reducing the shadow factor. We also include here another improvement with respect to the upright structures reported in In step b, the contact layer, back surface field (BSF) layer and collector are etched to form a groove for the base contact. To form the base contact, Au/Zn/Pd/Au are evaporated inside this groove. AuGe/Ni/Au are evaporated on the remaining area, which serves as the collector contact and as back reflector for the thin-film structure. This way, the base and collector contacts are interdigitated (the base busbar is actually perpendicular to the base fingers; in the scheme it appears parallel for simplicity). These two contacts are annealed at 420°C for 3 min. Then, in step c, the device is inverted and glued with an epoxy to a semiinsulating silicon substrate and the GaAs substrate is etched, revealing the epitaxial stack from the substrate side. AuGe/Ni/Au are evaporated as front contact and annealed at 180°C for 1 hour to avoid decomposition of the epoxy Fig. With the inversion of the HBTSC, we have achieved a technological breakthrough. This is mainly because in the inverted design, the base contact is achieved by etching through the GaAs collector from the bottom and not through the GaInP from above. This way, the fingers of emitter and base contacts could be stacked one on top of the other. The shadow factors have decreased from (top) and 0.19 (bottom) in the upright structure The performance of this first prototype has room for improvement. The FF, ISC and VOC values are lower than in our previous upright prototypes which achieve 28% AM1.5G efficiency With respect to the high recombination in the bottom junction, it is interesting to note that it is accompanied by a high ideality factor of 3.5. This could again be related to the doping problems of the AlGaInP base layer, in this case most likely to the accumulation of Zn atoms at the base/collector interface that results in a poor-quality junction. Since the introduction of an AlGaInP base seems to have created some problems that were not found in previous HBTSC prototypes with a GaInP base, it seems advisable to use GaInP in the future in spite of it being less optimal from the point of view of the HBTSC theoretical model We have implemented an inverted design for the HBTSC and transferred it onto a Si carrier, paving the way towards substrate reuse and III-V-on-Si mechanical stacking of this technology. With the inverted design, the shadow factor is reduced, making the cell scalable to large-area devices. We present EQE measurements and J-V curves of prototypes, showing that the inverted structure works as a double-junction solar cell. To improve the performance of the device it will be necessary to address the challenge of achieving a high doping in the AlGaInP base layer or substitute it by a GaInP layer.