Interactions between electrons in solids are often behind exciting novel effects such as ferromagnetism, antiferromagnetism and superconductivity. All these phenomena break away from the single-electron picture, instead having to take into account the collective, correlated behaviour of the system as a whole. In this chapter we look at how tunnelling spectroscopy can be used as the experimental tool of choice for probing correlation and interaction effects in one-dimensional (1D) electron systems. We start by introducing the Tomonaga-Luttinger Liquid (TLL) model, showing how it marks a clear departure from Fermi-liquid theory. We then present some early experimental results obtained using tunnelling devices and how they contributed to the decisive observation of both spin-charge separation and power-law behaviour. Other experimental techniques, such as photoemission and transport measurements, are also discussed. In the second half of the chapter we introduce two nonlinear models that are counterparts to the TLL theory, known as the mobile-impurity and the mode-hierarchy pictures, and present some of the most recent experimental evidence in support of both. 1 The failure of Fermi-liquid theory Many-body interactions of electrons in three or two dimensions can, generally speaking, be treated using Fermi-liquid theory, proposed by Lev Landau in 1956 Let us consider a so-called 'normal' Fermi liquid. Here, the system is in a ground state when all interactions are switched off, the states being filled according to Fermi-Dirac statistics. This forms a well-defined Fermi surface at low temperatures. In the non-interacting regime, an excited state can then be represented by a filled Fermi circle or sphere, corresponding to an equilibrium state of zero momentum, together with an additional particle of momentum p. As interactions are switched on, conservation of the total momentum enforces conservation of the momentum p of the same excited state, even as the additional particle moves across the system causing a perturbation. Landau proved that this separate entity-which he called a quasiparticle, composite of contributions from many interacting particles-could move around and only very weakly interact with its surroundings, essentially as if interactions were absent. Non-Fermi liquids mark the departure from this view. For an in-depth review of the field see 1. In higher dimensions, such as two-(2D) or three-dimensional (3D) systems, if the electron liquid is highly correlated, for instance when the energy of the Coulomb interaction greatly exceeds the kinetic energy; 2. In lower dimensions, like one-dimensional (1D) wires, where spatial confinement alone dictates strong correlations regardless of the strength of the interactions in question. In this chapter we focus on the latter and on how tunnelling spectroscopy can be used to experimentally probe such correlations. When confined to a 1D geometry (see Fig. One-dimensional wires mark a drastic departure from their higher-dimensional counterparts as, unlike the latter, there is no longer such a thing as locality of interactions. Instead, the motion of one electron causes a collective response of the whole system. This is why the single-particle properties, on which Fermi-liquid theory rests, break down completely. What emerges instead are the hydrodynamic modes of the Tomonaga-Luttinger liquid (TLL), with bosonic instead of fermionic statistics. We start this chapter by introducing the main ideas behind the TLL model, which replaces Fermi-liquid theory for electron liquids in one dimension, together with its main predictions. a L Figure Many attempts have been made to describe strongly-correlated systems, especially in one and two dimensions. While at first sight, perturbation theory may seem like the obvious approach, it is important to note that any such theory would only work under the condition of weak interactions. Proposed by Tomonaga in 1950 The Tomonaga-Luttinger model is used to describe highly-correlated interacting onedimensional systems. It was initially developed as a simple spinless theory but has since been extended to include spin ( Here, Ĥ0 represents the kinetic energy, while Ĥint refers to the interaction energy of the system. They can be written respectively as where υ F = k F /m is the Fermi velocity, â † k,α and âk,α are the creation and annihilation operators at the right (α = 1) or left (α = -1) branches of the dispersion, and where ρq is the electron density fluctuation operator and υ q is the Fourier transform of the interaction potential. Together, Ĥ accounts for particles moving in either of the right-(R) and left-(L) branches, as well as for inter-and intra-branch interactions By substituting Eq. ( where V 1 (q) = υ q and V 2 (q) = υ q -υ 2kF . Note that the choice of V 1 and V 2 is, in general, completely arbitrary and highly dependent on the interaction process in question. Attempts to verify their form have been made by Dash et al. A full review of the bosonisation method can be found in Apostol Rewriting v = v F /K in eq. 6 allows one to extract the TLL parameter K as Here, K encapsulates both the interaction potentials V 1 (q) and V 2 (q) as well as the Fermi velocity υ F . Note that all of these parameters are independent of temperature. Any model attempting to describe electron behaviour must account for spin. This plays an important role when considering the interaction process given by forward and backward scattering, as was shown by Luther et al. where ρq,α ≡ ρq↑,α + ρq↓,α is the electron density operator and σ =↑, ↓ is the spin index. Note the similarities between the spinless (Eq. 5) and the spinful (Eq. 8) Hamiltonians, the only difference being the potential prefactor of the last term. Therefore, the bosonisation method remains applicable as long as both bosonic operators and the (spin-)density fluctuation operator are also modified to include spin. One of the most striking features of the spinful TLL is what came to be known as spin-charge separation. Once ĤsTLL is rewritten in terms of the spinful bosonic operators, one sees that it decouples into two independent Hamiltonians, which can be associated with charge and spin modes, respectively. This result is analogous to the one discussed in the spinless case. Now, however, one has two independent collective excitations given by the characteristic frequencies ω C q = |q|v C and ω S q = |q|v S , where is the velocity of the charge-density wave (CDW) and is the velocity of the spin-density wave (SDW). These are, generally speaking, different. Similarly to the spinless scenario, one can also define two interaction parameters for the spinful TLL, K ρ,σ given by v ρ ≡ v C = v F /K ρ and v σ ≡ v S = v F /K σ for the charge and spin modes, respectively. A spinful TLL is therefore fully determined by four parameters, υ ρ , υ σ , K ρ and K σ , compared to just two, υ and K, in the spinless scenario. A rigorous way of describing single-particle properties in a many-body system can be given via the spectral function A(k, ω). Formally, it represents the probability density of increasing or decreasing the energy of an N -particle system by adding or removing a single particle from a state characterised by a momentum k and energy ω, see an example in Fig. For comparison, in the absence of interactions, A(k, ω) can be shown x + k 2 y / (2m) for a 2D system. In order to account for broadening arising from disorder, the spectral function can be convolved with a Lorentzian function. Following from the notation used by Kardynal et al. where Γ is the spectral line width associated with the single-particle disorder broadening, μ is the chemical potential, and ξ 1(2) are the energy spectra of the system, given by with E n = (n -1/2) ω 0 being the energy of the nth subband and E 0,1(2) denoting the bottom of the 2D subband in the top and bottom wells, respectively. Experimentally however, most 1D systems are not perfect 1D systems, i.e. infinitely narrow, having instead a finite transverse extension. This can be accounted for by treating the confinement potential as being parabolic, with electron wave functions in the transverse direction given by the eigenstates of the quantum harmonic oscillator, as is the case in semiconducting quantum wires. Consequently, A 1 (k, n; μ) must be modified to account for a harmonic dependence along the y-direction, resulting in energy levels known as 1D subbands and given by where a = m 1D ω/ is the finite width of the wire and H n (x) are the Hermite polynomials. One can also find the momentum distribution function n k of the system in a similar fashion, as it is related to the spectral function via the real-space Green's function, see Fig. Note that, at k = k F , n(k) exhibits power-law behaviour with exponent α = (K + K -1 )/2 -1. There is then a natural connection between the interaction parameter K, derived previously in the context of a spinless TLL, and correlation functions like n(k) The basic principle behind any spectroscopy technique is the measurement of the spectral function A(k, ω) which, for a 1D system, combines all the relevant information about the energy and momentum of the elementary excitations, both in the hole-when a particle is removed-and particle-when it is added-sectors, for arbitrary interaction strengths. From the solutions of the spinful TLL model we know that the spectral function of an interacting 1D electronic system is double-peaked, leading to spin-charge separation, and that the height of those peaks follows a power law in both temperature T and source-drain bias V dc . Early experimental work on verifying the TLL model focused on establishing this power-law nature as well as observing the separation between the spin and charge modes. It can be grouped into three categories following the experimental technique used and includes photoemission spectroscopy, momentum-resolved tunnelling spectroscopy and transport measurements. The range of systems utilised is large and their claims to be a 1D system vary significantly. Nevertheless, important progress has been made using GaAs quantum wires The most direct way of measuring a system's spectral function is by photoemission spectroscopy. This is a difficult experiment to do with high resolution and as such had limited applicability when it came to measuring if 1D systems truly behaved as given by the TLL model. The principle of operation is, however, relatively simple, see Fig. and φ is the work function of the material. This photo-emitted electron leaves the crystal and can be collected by a detector. This gives the emission intensity I(k, ω), which can be related to the spectral function A(k, ω) by Here, M (k) is the photoemission matrix element involving the initial and final states of the emitted photoelectrons. By mapping the system's response of photo-emitted electron energies as a function of analyser angle, information about the band structure can be obtained. For a review of angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) experiments, see Photoemission spectroscopy was first applied by both Kim et al. Another experiment using photoemission spectroscopy was carried out by Gweon et al. Experimental studies on the TLL power-law behaviour were also performed by Bockrath et al. where U is the charging energy of the nanotube and ∆ is the single-particle level spacing. Bockrath et al. showed that, in a 1D system, the conductance along the system is suppressed at zero bias, vanishing as a power-law dependence with temperature T for small biases |eV | k B T , while with source-drain bias as predicted by the TLL model. Here, α depends on the number of 1D channels and on whether the tunnelling is happening into the bulk of the system or whether it is affected by the ends. This can be found from the TLL theory by calculating the momentum distribution function once the spectral function is known. In SWNTs, depending on the contact geometry, the power-law exponent α can then be related to K ρ as either or as different contact geometries slightly change the prominence of the long-range Coulomb interactions. In the experiment, sometimes individual nanotubes were placed on top of two metallic contacts, perturbing the nanotube only weakly and therefore yielding a long 1D system and hence 'bulk' tunnelling. Alternatively, contact metal was deposited on top of the nanotube, yielding a short 1D system in which any tunnelling excitation would propagate to the ends and be affected by the boundary condition there, producing 'end' tunnelling. This is determined by comparing the energy of the tunneling electron to ∆E = 2 v F1D /(K ρ L), which is related to the inverse time scale for the TLL quasi-particles to travel to the end of a wire of length L where Γ(x) is the gamma function, γ takes into account the voltage drops at the two tunnel junctions, and A is an arbitrary constant (see Fig. Following Haldane's suggestion in 1981 and after initial measurements done on the 1D spectral function by Kardynal et al. The idea was to measure the tunnelling conductance between a quantum wire and a parallel two-dimensional electron system (2DES) as a function of both the potential difference between them, V , and an in-plane magnetic field, B, see Fig. The tunnelling probability then depends on the overlap of the wave functions on either side of the barrier, integrated perpendicular to the barrier, at a rate given by Fermi's golden rule By applying a magnetic field B parallel to the layers, a Lorentz force is produced as the electrons tunnel, boosting the momentum by an amount ∆k = eBd/ , where d is the tunnelling distance (the distance between the centres of the wave functions). This allows one to map out the electron dispersion relations on either side of the barrier using the magnetic field B and the voltage V dc applied across the barrier, which provides extra energy eV dc . Putting it all together, we obtain Here, e is the electronic charge, f T (E) is the Fermi-Dirac distribution, d is the separation between the wells, n is a unit normal to the plane, B = -B ŷ is the (in-plane) magnetic-field vector, and A 1 (k, E) and A 2 (k, E) are the corresponding spectral functions of the 1D and 2D systems, together with their Fermi energies, E F1D and E F2D , respectively (see Fig. Both the 1999 proposal of Barnes (Altland et al. The first experimental realisation of tunnelling from a 1D wire that was in the single-subband regime was achieved by Auslaender et al. Figure The interaction parameter K ρ was obtained from the extracted power-law exponents, α T ≈ 0.45 ± 0.04 and α V ≈ 0.52 ± 0.04, depending on whether excitations from electrons tunnelling into or out of the wire generally propagated as far as the ends ('end tunnelling') or not (bulk tunnelling'), see section 2.2. For the latter, the measured exponents gave K ρ ≈ 0.28 and 0.26 respectively, significantly smaller than the value extracted from the holon branch in Fig. , obtained by adding different sources of energy smearing as noise in quadrature. The value of 3k B T was chosen so that the curves in (b) and (c) and all the curves in (d) would superpose. For comparison, using the scaling relation in Eq. ( Overall, the work carried out by Jompol et al. showed clear evidence in support of the TLL model. It was obvious, though, that the 'charge' line observed persisted far beyond the energy range over which the dispersions could be approximated to be linear, making the spin-charge separation a phenomenon that persisted beyond the range of validity of the TLL model. This raised the question, therefore, of what happens to both spin and charge modes in the nonlinear region, that is, far from the Fermi points, where the linear approximation breaks down. The role of interactions in 1D wires at arbitrary energy and momentum has only recently started to be understood. Such 'nonlinear Tomonaga-Luttinger liquids' are the topic of the next section. TLL theory works remarkably well in describing the low-energy behaviour of one-dimensional systems. As we have shown, these exhibit a number of unusual properties, including long-lived plasmonic excitations, the separation of the spin and charge degrees of freedom, and interactiondriven power-law behaviour Excitations away from the Fermi energy are described in a one-dimensional system by nonlinear hydrodynamics, in what came to be known as the mobile-impurity model, see Fig. 12 Figure Nozières and De Dominicis implying that there is now a momentum dependence in the exponent α(k x ) of the interacting 1D spectral function where ). Having now extended the universality of a TLL from the low-to the finite-energy regime, one finds that a momentum-dependent power-law emerges due to the finite curvature of the spectral edge in energy and momentum space. This is a unique feature of nonlinear hydrodynamics in 1D and a hallmark of nonlinear Tomonaga-Luttinger-liquid (NLL) behaviour. Another implication of this theory is the emergence of the 'replicas' of the principal dispersion, i.e. all red lines in Fig. Yet another prediction from the NLL model is the drastic reduction of the plasmon's lifetime. This can be understood by analogy with the linear case. If the spectrum is linear, each electronhole pair can be identifiable by an energy linear to its momentum. If, instead, the spectrum is curved, the possibility exists of having different electron-hole pairs with different energies yet the same momentum. These can morph into a plasmon with wave number q once the interactions are turned on, with a finite spectral width, approximately equal to the spread in energies, δω(q) = ω + (q) -ω -(q), and hence a reduced lifetime τ ∝ 1/δω. The mobile-impurity model, described in the previous section, has released the TLL theory from the restriction of the linear approximation. Nevertheless, it still does not provide a description for arbitrary nonlinear excitations since it is applicable only in the proximity of the spectral threshold. This is because, being constructed by analogy with the edge singularity in the X-Ray scattering problem, the nonlinear hydrodynamics become less well-defined away from the spectral edge separating the forbidden zone from the continuum of many-body excitations in 1D, where such a phenomenological approach becomes inconsistent. A more systematic understanding of the general picture for nonlinear excitations came from a microscopic analysis via the Bethe ansatz. It was found As an example, the hole part of the principal parabola, between the ±k F points, has the largest amplitude but its mirror in the particle sector-a 'replica' in the shape of a dome marked as p0b in Fig. Therefore, for almost all momenta this mode will be unobservable in the thermodynamic limit. The only exceptions are the regions around the ±k F points, where the singularity in the denominator starts to compete with the parametric smallness, resulting in a large amplitude overall. On the other hand, the measurement of the whole mode requires using smaller systems, in which the R 2 /L 2 parameter still leaves the amplitude of the whole mode above the background from the other processes. Close to the spectral threshold the mode-hierarchy reproduces the predictions of the mobileimpurity model. The small parameter R 2 /L 2 provides a path for accounting for the principal amplitudes of the exponential continuum of many-body excitations, which leads to the microscopic calculation of the spectral function. The resulting threshold exponents match those predicted by the phenomenologically introduced nonlinear hydrodynamic model. While the mode-hierarchy emerges away from the Fermi points, close to them (where the spectrum is almost linear) it transitions into the usual linear TLL, see Fig. In 2015, the first observation of structure resembling higher-order excitations, as predicted by the mode-hierarchy model, was reported in Tsyplyatyev et al. As was discussed in the previous section, the Mobile-Impurity model, developed in the context of 1D quantum fluids at arbitrary energy and momentum, makes a remarkable prediction regarding the power-law behaviour of the observed density of states near the spectral edge. Here, due to the finite curvature of the 1D dispersion, the exponent becomes momentum dependent, in clear contrast with the linear model, where no such dependence is expected. For electrons, i.e. spin-1/2 fermions, the observation of a momentum dependence of the threshold exponent away from the Fermi points would constitute a hallmark of 1D nonlinear hydrodynamics. In 2019 Jin et al. The authors observed that an enhancement of the tunnelling conductance below the bottom of the 1D dispersion (see Fig. The extracted Luttinger parameter from the nonlinear regime was K ρ = 0.70±0.03. This is in good agreement with the values obtained from other 1D interaction effects, most notably the ZBA (K ρ = 0.59 ± 0.13 assuming end-tunnelling) and the spin-charge separation (K ρ = 0.76 ± 0.07), both also present in this experiment. Note that throughout this analysis the authors considered K σ = 1, in accordance to renormalisation-group arguments One of the early studies of nonlinear TLL dynamics was done by Barack et al. Recent work by Wang et al. One of the key predictions of the NLL theory is a drastic reduction of the plasmon lifetime. By injecting a plasmon wave into the nanotube, Wang and collaborators were able to observe the interference between the incident and reflected excitations at one end of the nanotube and from there extracted the quality factor and the wavelength of the mode in the system. This allowed them to measure the increase of the quality factor (and consequently, of the plasmon lifetime) as a function of the electron density, see Fig. Their results can be understood from the dynamic structure factor (DSF) of a NLL, see Fig. In contrast, for a nonlinear TLL, like in a semiconducting CNT, the DSF is given by where m is an interaction-dependent effective mass and θ is the Heaviside function. This means that the plasmon mode is no longer an exact eigenstate of the system but instead is broadened, with upper and lower limits given by ω ± = v p q±q 2 / (2m). Consequently, for a given frequency, i.e. energy, there will now be multiple available plasmons with different momenta. A high-energy plasmon can then easily decay into multiple low-energy plasmons. The damping and lifetime associated with this process is determined by the width of the broadening δω(q) = q 2 / m. Free carriers in semiconducting devices screen each other weakly and so the Coulomb interaction between charges is screened over a finite distance, which is however often rather long. This means that when two parallel conducting wires come together, separated only by a thin insulating barrier, a current through one of them can induce a net charge displacement in the other. This is called Coulomb drag. The drag resistivity R D = -V drag /I drive is determined by the drive current in the inducing wire, I drive , and the measured drag voltage in the induced wire, V drag . Initially, it was thought that this phenomenon was due to electrons in the drive wire transferring their momentum to their counterparts in the other wire, via the Coulomb interaction, keeping the original direction of motion unchanged. However, recent work by Laroche et al. Later work by the same group Conductance along a ballistic, one-dimensional, quantum wire is quantised in units of 2e 2 /h, where the factor of 2 arises from the spin degeneracy of the electrons. This is not affected by interactions in a clean system, as it is solely determined by the contact resistance to the Fermi leads. In the presence of disorder, however, it is reduced following a TLL power law. Recent work carried out in the ultra-low-temperature regime (T ∼ 10 mK) in CEO wires revealed promising new evidence for helical nuclear magnetism in the TLL regime. Tracking the conductance of the first mode as a function of temperature, Scheller et al. After ruling out several other potential interpretations, the authors concluded that the most likely explanation is the appearance of a nuclear spin helix-an ordered state of nuclear spins hosted by atoms of the same crystal-thus explaining the drop in conductance by a factor of 2 at lower temperatures, since the wire now only transmits spin-down right-and spin-up left-movers. This is consistent with a recent theory proposed by Braunecker et al. For completeness, we conclude by commenting on a different platform, outside solid state, for studying the physics of strongly correlated many-body systems. In recent years, experiments have emerged reporting the formation of clean, disorder-free 1D chains by trapping ultracold atoms in optical lattices Tunnelling spectroscopy has proven itself over the past years as a powerful technique capable of mapping the dynamics of many-body systems across the whole spectrum of momentum and energy. This has been shown to be extremely important, for not only has it allowed the confirmation of many of the predictions made by the original, linear TLL model, but also, more recently, it has provided much-needed evidence in support of its nonlinear counterparts. Improvements in wafer quality, nanofabrication and tunnelling resolution have also recently allowed for a full mapping to occur at high energies, with early results suggesting signs of physics beyond the Tomonaga-Luttinger paradigm. We anticipate that, provided that two conductors lie close together with a well-controlled tunnel barrier in between, this technique can be applied to study different classes of materials, such as topological insulators, therefore offering itself as a powerful tool for probing exotic single-particle and many-body physics in new systems.