We study voltage controllable superconducting state in multi-terminal bridge composed of the dirty superconductor/pure normal metal (SN) bilayer and pure normal metal. In the proposed system small control current I ctrl flows via normal bridge, creates voltage drop V and modifies distribution function of electrons in connected SN bilayer. In case of long normal bridge the voltage induced nonequilibrium effects could be interpreted in terms of increased local electron temperature. In this limit we experimentally find large sensitivity of critical curent Ic of Cu/MoN/Pt-Cu bridge to I ctrl and relatively large current gain which originate from steep dependence of Ic on temperature and large Ic (comparable with theoretical depairing current of superconducting bridge). In the short normal bridge deviation from equilibrium cannot be described by simple increase of local temperature but we also theoretically find large sensitivity of Ic to control current/voltage. In this limit we predict existence at finite V of so called in-plane Fulde-Ferrell state with spontaneous currents in SN bilayer. We argue that its appearance is connected with voltage induced paramagnetic response in N layer. The idea to control the superconducting properties of superconductors, which are metals, with help of electric field or voltage is based on their large sensitivity to the form of the electron distribution function f (E) and ability to modify f (E) by applied voltage. Origin of the effect could be understood from the equation for the superconducting order parameter ∆ where R 2 (E) = Re(∆/ √ E 2 -∆ 2 ) in the simplest case of spatially homogenous superconductor in absence of superconducting current, λ BSC is a coupling constant in Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer theory, ω D is a Debye frequency and f L (E) is odd in energy part of (1 -2f (E)). With increasing the bath temperature T the equilibrium Fermi-Dirac distribution f (E) = 1/(exp(E/k B T ) + 1) changes and ∆(T ) goes down because more states with E > ∆(T ) are occupied by electrons and f L (E) decreases at low E. At fixed temperature applied voltage V modifies f (E) in a similar way, i.e. f L (E) decreases with increasing V (for example see experimental f (E, V ) in Ref. There are many theoretical and experimental works where voltage controllable superconducting state was studied in metallic superconductors. For example, in Refs. Control of critical current of SNS (or SINIS) Josephson junction by applying of the voltage (or, alternatively, current) to the additional N lead, attached to N part of SNS junction was proposed in Refs. We confirm experimentally these expectations in case of long normal bridge (Cu) and long SN bridge (Cu/MoN/Pt) with lengths L N , L SN ≫ L ee , where L ee is an inelastic electron-electron scattering length, when the deviation from the equilibrium can be described in terms of increased local temperature. For our parameters we find current gain about 6 and we discuss how it could be further improved. We also study theoretically limit of short normal bridge with L N ≪ L ee when nonequilibrium f L (E) has nonthermal form in its central part In this limit we also find large sensitivity of I c to control current/voltage but in addition there is new effect -appearance of in-plane Fulde-Ferrell (FF) state with spontaneous currents flowing along S and N layers in SN bridge. Previously, in-plane Fulde-Ferrell-Larkin-Ovchinnikov (FFLO) state was predicted in similar nonequilibrium SN system in Ref. The structure of the paper is following. In Section II we present our experimental results on current/voltage controllable superconducting state in multi-terminal SN-N bridge with long N bridge. In Section III we theoretically study case of short N bridge and find range of parameters when FF state could be realized in SN bridge and discuss its similarity with FFLO state in equilibrium SFN trilayer. In section IV we conclude our results. At L N ≫ L ee effect of applied voltage on f (E) could be described via introducing the local electron temperature T e in the Fermi-Dirac distribution those spatial distribution along N bridge satisfies the one dimensional (when W N ≪ L N ) heat conductance equation (see for example Eq. ( where α = 3e 2 /(π 2 k 2 B ). Eq. ( As we discuss in Introduction we expect relatively good sensitivity (comparable with that for SNS junction) and large current gain in the studied system. To verify it the multi-terminal bridges were made using Cu(30 nm)/MoN(20nm)/Pt(5 nm) trilayer. The trilayer was grown by magnetron sputtering with a base vacuum level of the order of 1.5 • 10 -7 mbar on standard silicon substrates without removing the oxide layer and at room temperature. At first, Cu is deposed in an argon atmosphere at a pressure of 1 • 10 -3 mbar. Secondly, Mo is deposed in an atmosphere of a gas mixture Ar : N 2 = 10 : 1 at a pressure of 1 • 10 -3 mbar, and finally Pt is deposed in an argon atmosphere at a pressure of 1 • 10 -3 mbar (top Pt layer is used for protection purpose). In the next step the multi-terminal Cu/MoN/Pt bridges was made with help of mask free optical lithography. At the final stage the MoN/Pt layers were removed (by plasma chemical etching) in the part of the system to create normal banks and bridge. Final configuration is present in Fig. Fig. according to The current gain could be increased either by going to lower temperatures or by optimizing parameters of the structure. Indeed, in Ref. In this section we theoretically study the limit of short N bridge with length L N < L ee when voltage controlled distribution function in SN bilayer is not thermal and it is described by Eq. ( In Refs. Existence of odd-frequency superconductivity was also predicted in ferromagnetic part of SF bilayer which has a paramagnetic response In Fig. At temperatures T /T c0 = 0.1, 0.2 and 0.3 the ground state is inhomogenous one (minimum of free energy is at q z = q F F ) but the linear magnetic response is again diamagnetic because ∂ 2 F S /∂q 2 z | qz =qF F > 0 In Ref. In Fig. In contrast to SFN trilayer we cannot use free energy to prove directly that FF state is more preferable than homogenous state. Therefore we lean on the qualitative similarity in shape of J z (q z ) for equilibrium SFN trilayer (see Fig. where we show J z (q z ) and ∆ max (q z ) at large voltages (∆ max is maximal value of ∆(x) in S layer). In FF state superconducting order parameter is larger than in homogenous state -the same effect exists in SFN trilayer. Besides there is an interesting effect -at relatively large V ctrl homogenous superconducting state with q z = 0 does not exist -the same effect was found in Ref. In the FF state in absence of transport current or magnetic field there are spontaneous currents flowing in opposite directions across the thickness of SN bilayer (they also exist in equilibrium SFN trilayer We find that transition to FF state occurs in wide range of parameters similar to one for SFN trilayer In Ref. Spontaneous currents flowing in nonequilibrium SN bilayer being in Fulde-Ferrell state create magnetic field and it could be checked experimentally by using SQUID magnetometer. Moreover one would expect unusual magnetic properties (global paramagnetic response in Meissner state) and unusual ground states in absence of magnetic field (vortex and onion like ones) connected with finite size (length and width) of SN bridge similar to ones predicted for SFN strip, disk and square FF state could be also found from transport measurements. In regime of applied current only states with ∂J z /∂q z < 0 could be realized -these are metastable states (doze with J z ↑↑ q z and having critical current marked as J c1 in Fig. Another way to detect FF state is to measure current dependent kinetic inductance L k (J) of SN bridge. In ordinary superconductor L k (J) = L k (-J) while in FF superconductor L k (J) = L k (-J) due to finite q z = q F F in the ground state. The last property directly follows from the different slopes of J z (q z ) at q z > ∼ q F F and q z < ∼ q F F and relation L -1 k ∼ -∂J z /∂q z . For example L k (J = -J c1 /2)/L k (J = J c1 /2) ≃ 1.4 (for V ctrl = 1.1k B T c0 in Fig. We demonstrate experimentally the possibility to control critical current of dirty superconductor/low resistive normal metal (SN) hybrid bridge by current/voltage applied to the additional/control normal bridge. We argue that the effect is connected with modification of electron distribution function in SN bilayer. In the experiment for our realization of SN-N multi-terminal bridge we find current gain 6. Its relatively large value is connected with i) large contribution of proximity induced superconductivity in N layer to transport properties of SN bilayer and ii) its large sensitivity to the form of electron distribution function. We argue that the gain could be enhanced by optimization of geometrical parameters of SN-N bridge or going to lower temperatures. Besides we theoretically find that proximity induced superconductivity in N part of SN bilayer may have paramagnetic response at relatively large voltage drop and short N bridge and at some parameters it can be larger than diamagnetic response of host superconductor. It leads to appearance of the inplane Fulde-Ferrell state with properties similar to ones for hybrid SF or SFN structures, and, apparently, thin d-wave superconducting films and current driven superconductor with Fermi surface nesting. Authors acknowledge support from Foundation for the Advancement of Theoretical Physics and Mathematics "Basis" (grant 18 where D is a diffusion coefficient (D = D S in superconducting layer and D = D N in the normal layer), q z = ∇φ z + (2π/Φ 0 )A z (φ is a phase of the order parameter, A is a vector potential) takes into account nonzero velocity of superconducting electrons v s ∼ q z in direction parallel to layers (z direction in our case), ∆(x) is a magnitude of superconducting order parameter which has to be found in the superconducting layer via self-consistency equation To calculate the superconducting sheet current density we use the following expression where ρ is normal state resistivity of S and N layers. We consider thin bilayer with thickness of superconducting layer Equations (A1,A2) are solved numerically by using iteration procedure. For initial distribution ∆(x) = const we solve Eq. (A1) in energy interval 0 < E < hω D (we take hω D = 40k B T c0 In numerical procedure we use Newton method combined with tridiagonal matrix algorithm. Found solution Θ(x) is inserted to Eq. (A2) to find ∆(x) and than iterations repeat until the relative change in ∆(x) between two iterations does not exceed 10 -8 . Length is normalized in units of ξ c = hD S /k B T c0 , energy is in units of k B T c0 , current is in units of depairing current of single S layer with the thickness d S . Typical step grid in S and N layers is δx = 0.05ξ c . BSC constant in Eq. (A2) is expressed via hω D and T c0 using following expression which follows from Eq. (A2) when ∆ → 0, R 2 /∆ → 1/E and V ctrl = 0. To decrease the number of free parameters we assume that the density of states in S and N layers is the same and ratio of resistivities is equal to inverse ratio of diffusion constants or mean free paths ρ S /ρ N = D N /D S = l N /l S .