We present a scaling theory of two-dimensional (2D) field effect transistors (FETs). For devices with channel thickness less than 4 nm, the device electrostatics is dominated by the physical gate oxide thickness and not the effective oxide thickness. Specifically, for symmetric double gate (DG) FETs the scale length (Λ) varies linearly with the gate oxide thickness (tox) as Λ ~ 3⁄4tox. The gate oxide dielectric permittivity and the semiconductor channel thickness do not affect the device electrostatics for such device geometries. For an asymmetric device such as single gate (SG) FETs, the fringing fields have a second order effect on the scale length. However, like symmetric DG FETs, the scale length in asymmetric FETs is also ultimately limited by the physical gate oxide thickness. We compare our theoretical predictions for scaled monolayer MoS2 DG FETs. Moore's law In extremely small FETs, the drain contact is physically closer to the source contact and influences the injection of carriers into the channel, which is undesirable. In other words, FETs with short channel length (L) are more difficult to turn off using the gate voltage, and the subthreshold leakage currents are increased. The minimum channel length for a given transistor technology is limited to a multiple of a scale length Λ Extensive research into FET electrostatics has pointed out that Λ depends on the channel thickness (tch), and specifically that a smaller tch yields a shorter Λ. This has driven significant efforts to replace bulk Si, Ge, or III-V FETs with ultrathin semiconductor-on-insulator (SOI) transistors In contrast to bulk semiconductors, the atomic limit of transistor scaling could be enabled by semiconducting two-dimensional (2D) materials and devices In this work, we employ finite element simulations to analyze the device electrostatics for 2D FETs with an extremely thin channel. We show that for symmetric double-gate (DG) FETs with tch < 4 nm, the scale length is mostly independent of tch and gate oxide dielectric constant (εox). In this limit of an extremely thin channel, the dominant determining factor for the scale length is the physical thickness of the gate oxide (tox). This sharply contrasts with previous findings regarding bulk semiconductor FETs (including SOI) that εox and tch are the primary variables for reducing Λ. Instead, we show that the gate oxide dielectric constant plays a secondary and not a dominant role in determining SCE such as DIBL. We also analyze single gate (SG) FETs based on 2D semiconductors and elucidate the effect of drain fringing fields (also known as fringing field induced barrier lowering or FIBL The sample device geometries are shown in Figs. We are primarily interested in device electrostatic simulation in the absence of charge carriers in the channel. This involves solving Poisson's equations inside the device using commercially available tools Figure Scale length in symmetric DG FET. In Fig. Frank et al. We first study the scale length in detail for the symmetric DG FET as shown in Fig. In Fig. For 2D DG FETs, we see that γ ~ 4/3 irrespective of the gate-oxide dielectric constant. For an ideal transistor switch, we expect the gate field to completely control the switching operation. The undesirable short channel effects such as DIBL are a consequence of competition between the drain electric field and the gate electric field to influence the channel barrier. This influence can also be thought of as an effective capacitive coupling from the drain and the gate to the channel barrier. Larger the capacitive coupling, larger is the influence of the drain or the gate. In devices with a thicker channel, the drain field influences the channel barrier through the gate oxide (also known as field induced barrier lowering or FIBL) as well as the semiconducting channel. In the case of thinner channels, the drain field affects the channel barrier predominantly through the gate oxide (FIBL). Therefore, for devices with extremely thin channels such as 2D FETs, the relative capacitive coupling between the drain and the gate to the channel barrier (near the source terminal) does not change with the gate-oxide dielectric constant. The geometry of the gate oxide (i.e. tox, L), and not the dielectric constant, controls short channel effects. To further understand device electrostatics, we show the electrostatic potential in representative structures in Fig. Scale length in asymmetric FETs or SG FETs. We simulate the SG FET as an extreme example of asymmetric FETs. As shown in Fig. The other side of the semiconducting channel can be air (in the case of most experimental backgate FETs) or a dielectric with a dielectric constant of εsd (such as oxide in SOI structures). In the case of an SG FET, the drain field influences the channel potential barrier through the surrounding dielectric in addition to the gate oxide. The scale length in the asymmetric FETs such as SG FET depends on the oxide dielectric constant as well as the surrounding dielectric constant. For symmetric DG FET, the gate coupling strength γ  4/3. In Fig. Discussion on DIBL and relevance of the gate oxide dielectric constant. We showed that Λ does not depend on εox. Though DIBL has an exponential dependence on Λ as ∝ exp(-Λ/L), it does have a negligible dependence on gate oxide dielectric constant. In Fig. We use the experimental data from ref. We further compare the scale length for short and tall contacts in Fig. We can use the theory developed in this paper to design a hypothetical 2D FET with 5 nm channel length and negligible SCE. The best electrostatic for such a transistor can be achieved by constructing a symmetric DG FET (γ = 4/3) which should have a Λ = L/3.5 ~ 1.4 nm or smaller. As per our simulations, this implies that the gate oxide thickness for the 2D FET should be smaller than 1.1 nm. As we wish to scale down the transistor to even smaller channel lengths, we also need to scale the oxide thickness, which will be eventually limited by the gate leakage current. We have established the scale length theory for 2D FETs. We show that for 2D DG FETs, Λ scales linearly with tox or Λ ~ 4/3tox. The oxide dielectric constant does not affect the scaling in DG FETs. Most importantly, the well know scaling length expression Λ  √ε ch t ch t ox /ε ox used to design modern transistors is incorrect for transistors with tch < 4 nm. The oxide dielectric constant and the surrounding dielectric constant still play a minor role in scale lengths for SG FETs. Nonetheless, the scale length in SG FETs will always be larger than symmetric DG FETs for the same gate oxide thickness. We have also uncovered that in addition to an exponential dependence on the scale length, the DIBL for 2D FETs has a sub-linear dependence on the oxide dielectric constant. Eventually, we use the scaling theory to explain a surprisingly high DIBL of 120 mV/V in a 20 nm channel length 2D DG FET. We have also found that the device electrostatic can be affected by the contact geometry. To avoid SCEs, the 2D transistors below 5 nm channel lengths will need a gate oxide thinner than 1.1 nm. The difference between the minimum potential at each channel length with the minimum potential at a channel length of 500 nm (Δψs,min = ψs,min(L = 500 nm) -ψs,min(L)) is shown in the figure using red square symbols. Δψs,min is also known as drain induced barrier lowering or DIBL. The black bold lines show the exponential fit to the symbols. and Yan et al. 