We study the Josephson effect in a clean noncentrosymmetric superconductor/half-metal/noncentrosymmetric superconductor junction, which is grown on the surface of a three-dimensional Topological Insulator (TI) in the ballistic limit. We find the signature of anomalous Andreev Bound States (ABS) and band splitting for a spinactive barrier whose barrier magnetic moment is misaligned with the bulk moment. The chiral Majorana mode and 4π periodic ABS are found to exist on the surface of TI for parallel orientation of the moments in the normal incidence condition. But for anti-parallel misalignment, we observe the 2π periodic ABS. There exist a gap in ABS for oblique incidence. We find the splitting of Andreev levels in the presence of RSOC and also for unequal mixing of singlet-triplet correlations present in NCSC. The Majorana mode, ABS and Josephson supercurrent can be controlled by the ratio of barrier magnetic and non-magnetic moments. The critical current is found to be maximum for singlet or triplet dominated NCSC, while it is minimum in the equal mixing condition. The ABS is found to be barrier thickness dependent and is suppressed for an opaque barrier. We observe a monotonic decay in critical current with a finite length of the junction for all the singlet-triplet mixings and magnetic moments. The current-phase relation is found to be sinusoidal with no phase shift in the half-metallic limit, however, for different orientations of the bulk moment, an anomalous characteristic is also observed. Topological Insulators (TI) are a new class of material that exhibit non-trivial band topology due to a strong spinorbit coupling Many theoretical and experimental efforts are made to demonstrate helical ABS, Current Phase Relation (CPR) and temperature dependence of critical current in various S|TI|S Josephson junctions Josephson junctions with a magnetic material as an intermediate layer can exhibit unconventional spin-triplet proximity effect The paper is organized as follows: In Section II, we present our theoretical model of the proposed system and present an explicit form of the Hamiltonian. We calculate the ABS and supercurrent both analytically and numerically in Section III. In Section IV, we discuss the numerical as well as some approximated analytic results. Finally, we summarize our work with conclusions in Section V. We employ Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) formalism to study the bound states and Josephson supercurrent (JSC) for the proposed setup as shown in Fig. the Hamiltonian for the surface of a 3D TI with induced superconducting and magnetic proximity due to NCSC and HM can be defined as where, Ĥ0 (k) and M are defined as where, v F is the Fermi velocity, μ = μ i [Θ(-x) + Θ(x -L)] are the chemical potentials of the respective layers, m = (m x , m y , m z ) is the magnetization of the bulk HM and σ = (σ x , σ y , σ z ) are Pauli's spin matrices. The last term of Eq. ( where, V 0 gives the intrinsic spin independent barrier potential while V m represent the spin dependent the barrier potential. We define the spin dependent potential as Since both even and odd frequency correlations are present in NCSC at the same time, so the gap matrix ∆αβ appearing in Eq. ( where, ∆ T kσσ ′ and ∆ S kσσ ′ are contributions due to the singlet (S) and triplet (T) components respectively. Here, φ L (φ R ) represents the macroscopic phase of left(right) superconductor. Considering the RSOC vector for CePt 3 Si the gap vectors can be defined as and ∆ S k↑↓ = ∆ k . We define a parameter δ to characterize singlet-triplet mixing as ∆ s = ∆ 0 δ and ∆ t = ∆ 0 (1 -δ). So, in view of Eqs. ( where, Assuming θ as the incident angle of the quasi particle in the left NCSC, the trajectory of the particle can be expressed using the momentum components, k x = |k| cos θ and k y = |k| sin θ. Thus the total wave function of an electron injected in the left NCSC with an angle θ can be written as where, k y is the momentum parallel to the interface and Ψ L NCSC (x), Ψ HM (x), Ψ R NCSC (x) are the quasi particle wave functions in the left NCSC, half metal and right NCSC respectively. The wave functions in different layers are obtained by diagonalizing the Hamiltonian The wave function in the right NCSC region in a similar way can be written as Here we define, η1 = (1, 0, 0, 0) T , η2 = (0, 1, 0, 0) T , η3 = (0, 0, 1, 0) T and η4 = (0, 0, 0, 1) T . Here, a 1 (a 2 ) are the reflection coefficients for up(down) spin electrons, while a 3 (a 4 ) are the reflection coefficients for the up(down) spin holes. c 1 (c 2 ) are the transmission coefficients for up(down) spin electrons, while c 3 (c 4 ) are the transmission coefficients for the up(down)spin holes in right NCSC region. φ L and φ R are the superconducting phase factor for the left and right NCSC respectively. k gives the momenta of the electron (hole) in NCSC with σ = ±1 represent spin up and down particles. The momenta of the electron and the hole are defined as where, μ S is the chemical potential and Z R is strength of RSOC in NCSC region. The factor Ω ± is defined as The quasi particle amplitudes u ± and v ± appearing in Eqs. ( In a similar way the wave function in the half metallic region is where, b 1 , b 2 , b 3 , b 4 are the transmission coefficients for electron and hole in half metallic region. The quasi particle momenta in this region is given by where, M z = h z + V z and μ T I is the chemical potential of TI. In most of the TIs, chemical potential lies closer to the valence band as they are not perfectly insulating. So in experiment where, τ is defined as with tan θ are the parameters characterizing spin independent barrier strength and RSOC. The matrix Λm gives the contribution due to spin active interacting potential and has the following form where, λ 1 = 2ρV 0 cos χ m and λ 2 = 2ρV 0 sin χ m e -iξm . The wave functions must satisfy the boundary conditions defined in Eqs. ( The Andreev Bound States (ABS) can be calculated by the condition det( Â) = 0. The solution for these equations needed several lengthy calculations. However, under some limiting cases they are expressible in analytic form. Considering the limiting cases, like normal interface (θ = 0), transparent barrier (Z 0 = 0), Rashba free case (Z R = 0) and small length scale (L/L 0 << 1), the Andreev levels can be expressed as where, τ = ±1 for left and right moving Cooper pairs respectively, σ is the helicity index and β = Γ 2 1 + Γ 2 2 + Γ 2 3 . The parameters Γ 1 , Γ 2 and Γ 3 are defined as with Using the approximated analytical expression in Eq. ( The angle-averaged Josephson supercurrents of the ABS are evaluated using the standard expression where, J 0 = eN ∆σ . We obtain the numerical plots of Josephson supercurrents by considering T /T c = 0.001 with T c being the critical temperature. We set, v F = 1, h z = 1, h xy = 0 and as ∆ 0 << μ S,T I First, we consider the ABS corresponding to the different angles of incidence of the injected particles. The results are displayed in Fig. In Figs. 4(a)-4(j), we show the dependence of ABS on the ratio of barrier magnetic to non-magnetic moment (ρ) in per-pendicular incidence condition. We study the ABS spectra for different polar angles (χ m ). The plots in the top panel are for azimuthal angle ξ m = 0.5π while the plots in bottom panel are for ξ m = π. We find that the Majorana modes appear at φ = π in parallel configuration for all choices of ρ and ξ m as seen in Figs. We study the effect of barrier transparency on ABS as shown in Figs. 5(a)-5(e) considering a δ-like barrier at x = 0 and x = L. We make this analysis by considering a quasimagnetic barrier with ρ = 0.01 and the barrier moment is misaligned by an angle χ m = ξ m = 0.3π for all plots of Fig. We show ABS spectra for different values of singlet-triplet mixing parameter δ in the bottom panel of Fig. The magnetic tunability of the Andreev energy levels and its effects on the superconducting phase indicates the presence of a non-trivial Josephson current in the proposed setup. Experimentally, Josephson junctions made up of Superconductor-Topological Insulator-Superconductor (S|TI|S) has been realized recently We study the CPR of the total supercurrent for different singlet-triplet correlations in Fig. From Figs. We study the dependence of the critical Josephson current on the length of the Josephson junction in Fig. It is very worthwhile to mention that experimentally transport properties of heterostructures are studied in the diffusive limit. In the diffusive limit, one needs to use quasi-classical Usadel equations to obtain the Andreev levels and supercurrent. However, an analytic equation for ABS energy considering all contributing parameters is too hard to obtain for heterostructure like NCSC|HM|NCSC. So in that case also we need to use a numerical approach. Though we perform all our calculations considering BdG equations in the ballistic limit, our results are quite adequate in diffusive limits also because of two reasons: (1) The anomalous Andreev energy levels and the φ-states are generated due to chiral spin symmetry breaking along with scattering from the spin-active barrier. It is to be noted that these effects pertain uniquely to both ballistic and diffusive limits. ( It is due to the suppression of the higher harmonics. As in diffusive limit, first harmonics give the most important contribution. So our results will be quite adequate in diffusive limits also. There may be some difference in ballistic and diffusive limits qualitatively. But it is expected to have no dramatic alteration of the results in diffusive limit. In summary, we have studied the transport in NCSC|HM|NCSC Josephson junction grown on a 3D TI. Our model predicts the formation of the helical Andreev Bound States, Majorana mode and Josephson supercurrent on the surface of a 3D TI. We employ Bogoliubov de-Gennes equations to obtain ABS and CPR. We investigated the role of the spin-active barrier by considering different alignments of barrier magnetic moment on Andreev levels and supercurrent. It is seen that a 4π-periodic ABS is formed for parallel alignment of barrier and bulk magnetic moments for all incidence angles. However, for anti-parallel alignment, the system resides in 2π in Andreev levels. It is seen that Majorana modes exist at π for parallel alignment in normal incidence, while they disappear in oblique incidence condition. We find that the degenerate Andreev bands split into their corre-sponding branches for misalignments of the barrier and bulk moments. In this condition, a phase shift is observed, which results in φ-junction. It is seen that the Andreev energy levels are suppressed for a strongly magnetic barrier in parallel orientation conditions, while a reverse scenario is observed for anti-parallel orientation. The magnitude of ABS energy decreases with the increase in barrier width. It is found that there exists an anti-crossing at φ = 0 in the ABS spectra for a finite barrier thickness. In the presence of RSOC, the degenerate sub-bands further split into their respective branches. It is seen that with the increasing strength of RSOC, the Andreev levels corresponding to positive spin helicity grow, while the other shrinks. For an NCSC with very strong RSOC, the ABS branches corresponding to negative spin helicity shrinks completely result in no supercurrent for these branches. We find that the band splits for unequal mixing of singlet-triplet parameter even in the absence of RSOC. However, no splitting is observed for equal mixing or singlet/triplet dominated scenarios. We also find that for parallel alignment of the moments, a non-magnetic barrier offers more supercurrent than a magnetic barrier. However, an opposite scenario is observed in anti-parallel orientation. So depending on the orientations, both magnetic and non-magnetic barriers offer critical current in certain orientations. The decay rate of the critical current is found to be dependent on the singlet-triplet mixing parameter. We also find an anomalous characteristic of Josephson supercurrent for random orientation of the bulk magnetic moment, but it is not observed in the half-metallic limit. These results would be a significant guiding background for innovating novel TI based sprintronics appliances.