The Higgs mode associated with amplitude fluctuations of the superconducting gap in uniform superconductors usually is heavy, which makes its excitation and detection difficult. We report on the existence of a gapless Higgs mode in the Fulde-Ferrell-Larkin-Ovchinnikov states. This feature is originated from the Goldstone mode associated with the translation symmetry breaking. The existence of the gapless Higgs mode is demonstrated by using both a phenomenological model and microscopic Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) theory. The gapless Higgs mode can avoid the decay into other low energy excitations, which renders it stable and detectable. Introduction -The idea of spontaneous symmetry breaking, that a state does not need to have the same symmetries as the model Hamiltonian that describes the system under consideration, is one of the cornerstones of modern physics. Perhaps the most important example is the breaking of the gauge symmetry related to the weak and electromagnetic interaction SU(2) × U(1), which creates the Higgs condensate as the origin of particle masses in the Standard Model. The corresponding Higgs boson, which is generated by the quantum excitation of the condensate, was discovered experimentally in 2012 1,2 . The Higgs boson as an elementary particle has a large mass thus requiring a huge particle collider, such as CERN at Europe, to enable its discovery. An elementary excitation, analogous to Higgs boson, can also appear in condensed matter systems In this work, we demonstrate the existence of a gapless Higgs mode in the Fulde-Ferrell-Larkin-Ovchinnikov (FFLO) state of a superconductor. This is based on the observation that the FFLO state breaks spatial translational invariance, thus admitting a gapless "phonon" mode, which is just the Higgs mode. The damping of this low energy Higgs mode is suppressed and the Higgs mode has a long lifetime. The FFLO state was predicted in Pauli limited superconductors due to the imbalanced up and down spin species under a magnetic field Effective low-energy theory -In the FFLO state, the spatial translational symmetry is spontaneously broken, which gives rise to a new type of Goldstone mode. The energy of the system is invariant E(∆(r)) = E(∆(r+δ r )) under a spatial translation δ r , where ∆(r) is a spatial dependent order parameter. The eigenstate of the Goldstone mode is ∂ r ∆. In the FF state, the Goldstone mode is the phase mode, while in the LO state, the Goldstone mode is the amplitude or Higgs mode associated with the amplitude fluctuations. In this paper, we focus on the Higgs mode in the LO state. The relation between the Goldstone mode of the FFLO state and the Higgs mode can be understood using a Ginzburg-Landau action. To the second order in superconducting order parameter Ψ, the low-energy effective Lagrangian can be written as 37 Here we have neglected the coupling of the Cooper pairs to the electromagnetic field for convenience of discussion. To stabilize the FFLO state, we choose γ < 0 and η > 0. In L, both first and second order time derivative terms are allowed by time reversal symmetry and gauge invariant. By performing the particle-hole transformation, Ψ → Ψ * , one can see the K 1 (K 2 ) term breaks (preserves) particle-hole symmetry. It is worth noticing that this particle-hole symmetry is a symmetry of the energy bands in the normal state. The particle-hole symmetry has important consequence on the collective excitation in superconductors In the FFLO state, there are nodal regions with |Ψ(r)| = 0, where the local quasiparticles become gapless. The Higgs mode can decay into these quasiparticles, which renders the lifetime of the Higgs mode being finite. The decay process conserves energy, and as the Higgs mode energy approaches Ω H → 0, the phase space of decay is reduced significantly. It is expected that the Higgs mode becomes long lived in that limit. Field theoretic approach -To gain further insight and to demonstrate explicitly the damping of the Higgs mode, we study the Higgs mode using the microscopic BCS theory. We consider a superconducting film made of an swave superconductor under a parallel magnetic field. In this case, the orbital coupling is absent and the upper critical field is limited by the Pauli pairing breaking ef-fect. The Hamiltonian is given by with μ the chemical potential, E z the Zeeman term and V the pairing interaction strength. We have taken the unit = 1. Using the standard Hubbard-Stratonovich transformation, we obtain the action with superconducting gap function ∆ in the imaginary time domain with the Gorkov Green's function with h = -∇ 2 /2m -μ. We choose a gauge by setting ∆ to be real by noting that the LO is the ground state in the FFLO state. In the weak coupling limit with ∆ ω c E F , where ω c is the cutoff frequency and E F is the Fermi energy, the particle-hole symmetry in the normal state is approximately preserved in the energy window -ω c ≤ E ≤ ω c even in the presence of Zeeman field. The hybridization between the phase mode and Higgs mode is negligible We then consider the amplitude fluctuation around the saddle point solution ∆ 0 , with ∆ = ∆ 0 + s (τ, r) with Σ = sσ x . By expanding the action to the second order of s, we obtain the action for the fluctuation 44 For a uniform BCS state, we can represent s in the frequency-momentum representation, and where ω m = (2m + 1) πT and Ω l = 2lπT are the fermionic and bosonic Matsubara frequency, and L is the linear size of the system. To summarize, we rewrite S 2 as where the coupling matrix M q is given by (9) For the uniform superconducting state, M q can be obtained analytically because G 0 is a two by two matrix. At the resonance condition M q = 0, we obtain the well known dispersion relation for the Higgs mode as The Higgs mode has a gap of 2∆. The phase fluctuations are gapless due to the U(1) symmetry breaking. The phase couples to the external gauge field and becomes a plasma mode with a gap of 2∆ due to the Anderson-Higgs mechanism. The decay of the Higgs mode around energy 2∆ to quasiparticle continuum and plasma mode thus is suppressed. However, the Higgs mode can still decay into other low lying bosonic modes such as the phonon mode, which makes the Higgs mode short lived. Indeed, the lifetime of the Higgs mode is of the order of picosecond in experiments Higgs mode in FFLO state -In the FFLO state, we calculate ∆ 0 (r) numerically by considering a tightbinding Hamiltonian with nearest neighbor hopping on a square lattice 46 We have set the chemical potential to be zero to ensure particle-hole symmetry when E z = 0. Standard Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) method is used to solve this model We then diagonalize the mean-field Hamiltonian by the Bogoliubov transformation, , where γ † n and γ n are the creation and annihilation operators for Bogoliubov quasiparticle at state n and the prime sign means the sum is over all positive quasiparticle state E n > 0. The u and v coefficients are obtained from the BdG equations, The FFLO state is calculated self-consistently by solving the BdG equations iteratively on supercells with the size N x a × a. By considering l x and L z supercells in the two directions, the total size of the thin film is L x a × L z a with L x = N x l x . Therefore, in the folded Brillouin zone, there are l x meshes in the k x axis and L z meshes along the k z axis. By taking N x = 40, l x = 10 and L z = 400, we find the LO state as the energy minimum for the parameters V = 1.6t, E z = 0.15t, k B T = 0.0001. The LO state has the maximum gap |∆ M | ≈ 0.22t at x = 0a, 20a as shown in Fig. We then study the Higgs mode in the FFLO state. In principle, the Higgs mode becomes gapped when ∆ 0 (r) is commensurate with the tight-binding lattice and also in a finite system where Γ (Ω, q) = [s (Ω, q, x 1 ) , • • • , s (Ω, q, x Nx )] † and with f (E) the Fermi-Dirac distribution function and η being a damping parameter which is introduced for convenience of numerical evaluation. Here where n, d are the index of eigen-energy indices. The Green function of the Higgs modes is given by G Ω,q = -M -1 Ω,q and the spectral density is given by A (Ω, q) = -Im (G Ω,q ) /π. Figure At Γ point, except for a peak at Ω = 0, there is another visible peak at Ω ≈ 0.21t, which indicates another amplitude mode. To understand these two modes, we calculate the eigenstates of M Ω,q at q = 0, which are presented in the form of arrows in Fig. The existence of the gapless Higgs mode has consequence on the stability of the FFLO state. In 3D, the FFLO state has a true long range order. However in 2D, the FFLO state becomes quasi-long-range order due to the gapless mode according to the Mermin-Wagner theorem. To induce the FFLO state, the particle-hole symmetry is not exact in the normal state because of the Zeeman field induced spin band splitting. Therefore, there is coupling between the Higgs mode and the phase mode. In charged superconductors, the phase mode becomes plasma mode with the gap proportional to the local superconducting order parameter. The decay of the Higgs mode into the phase mode is thus suppressed. In charge neutral superfluids, the phase mode is gapless. In the uniform state, the gapped Higgs mode decays quickly into the phase mode, and its visibility depends on the dimensionality of the system It is recognized that the FFLO state rather belongs to a broader class of order called pair density wave Conclusion -We have demonstrated the existence of a gapless Higgs mode in the FFLO state of an s-wave superconductor. The gapless Higgs mode originates from the translational symmetry breaking and is also the acoustic "phonon" mode of the FFLO state. This gapless Higgs mode is stable because its decay into other modes is suppressed or forbidden kinematically. The linearly dispersive Higgs mode with zero gap shows up in thermodynamical quantities, i.e. it contributes a T 3 dependence term to the specific heat. The gapless Higgs mode can be probed by Raman spectroscopy and time-resolved terahertz spectroscopy techniques. We consider a two dimensional BCS superconductor under a Zeeman field described by the Hamiltonian where ψ † σ (ψ σ ) is the electron creation (annihilation) operator with the chemical potential μ, spin index σ and pairing interaction strength V . The corresponding action in the imaginary time representation is where β = 1/k B T with T the temperature and r = (z, x). We then perform the Hubbard-Stratonivich transformation to introduce the superconducting energy gap ∆ as By introducing the Nambu spinor operators Ψ † = (ψ † ↑ , ψ ↓ ), the action becomes 42 S = - with and h = -∇ 2 /2m -μ. Integrating out the fermionic degree of freedom, we obtain Now we include the amplitude fluctuation s (τ, r) into the action and obtain with Here s is real and spatial dependent and much smaller than ∆. The action can be expanded to the second order of s as where the terms related to first-order perturbation (second row in Eq. 23) are zero from condition of the saddle point. We specifically take out the second-order perturbation which is the action describing the Higgs modes. In the frequency-momentum representation, we have and with ω m = (2m + 1) πT and Ω l = 2lπT the fermionic and bosonic Matsubara frequency. To summarise, we rewrite S 2 as where the coupling matrix M is given by By considering the uniform superconductivity, in the frequency-momentum representation, we have with where λ k = h 2 k + ∆ 2 , T is the temperature, L is the length of a side of a square sample and f (E) indicates the Fermi-Dirac distribution. We consider zero temperature and the Zeeman field region where |E z | ≤ ∆. This gives the same self-consistent gap equation as the uniform superconductivity without the Zeeman field. Therefore ∆ is independent of E z in this region. We first calculate the trace (31) By using the trace of products of Pauli matrices given by tr (σ i σ we obtain By putting Eq. ( where We also consider the zero temperature and |E z | ≤ ∆, so f (λ k + E z ) = 0 and f (-λ k + E z ) = 1. Eq. ( which is the same as the case E z = 0. Since ∆ is also the same as the case E z = 0, we have M q the same as the case E z = 0 in the region |E z | ≤ ∆. Therefore the Higgs mode dispersion is the same as that at To find the FFLO solution, we switch to a tight binding model which is more convenient for numerical calculations. The tight-binding Hamiltonain with the Zeeman term is given by with r = (z, x). We consider the FFLO solution which breaks (preserves) the translational symmetry in the x (z) direction. Then in the x direction, there are l x supercells each with N x meshes and the total length is L x = l x N x . In the momentum space, the Hamiltonian is given by a. Lx l x and k z = 2π Lz m z . By using the canonical transformation the gap function is given by For proper E z , with self-consistent calculation we can obtain an FFLO state with one period in the supercell. The FFLO state has lower energy than the uniform superconducting and normal state in the intermediate Zeeman field region where and and and We thus further obtain ω m + Ω l , k x + q x , k z + q z , x 2 | G 0 |ω m + Ω l , k x + q x , k z + q z , x 1 ω m + Ω l , k x + q x , k z + q z , x 1 | Σ |ω m , k x , k z , x 1 ) (50) where u n kx,kz (x 1 ) u n * kx,kz (x 2 ) u n kx,kz (x 1 ) v n * -kx,-kz (x 2 ) v n -kx,-kz (x 1 ) u n * kx,kz (x 2 ) v n -kx,-kz (x 1 ) v n * -kx,-kz (x 2 ) , (51) and ω m , k x , k z , x 2 | Σ |ω m + Ω l , k x + q x , k z + q z , x 2 = 0 s (-Ω l , -q x , -q z , x 2 ) s (-Ω l , -q x , -q z , x 2 ) 0 , and ω m + Ω l , k x + q x , k z + q z , x 2 | G 0 |ω m + Ω l , k x + q x , k z + q z , x 1 and ω m + Ω l , k x + q x , k z + q z , x 1 | Σ |ω m , k x , k z , x 1 = 0 s (Ω l , q x , q z , x 1 ) s (Ω l , q x , q z , x 1 ) 0 . By summarizing over ω m , we obtain tr (G 0 ΣG 0 Σ) = T L z l x m,l,kx,ky,qx,qz,x1,x2 n s (-Ω l , -q, x 2 ) iω m -E n kx,kz d s (Ω l , q, x 1 ) s (-Ω l , -q, x 2 ) s (Ω l , q, x 1 ) k,n,d with After performing the Wick rotation iΩ l → Ω + iη with η being an infinitesimal positive number, we write the action for the amplitude fluctuations as S 2 (Ω, q) = Γ † (-Ω, -q) M Ω,q Γ (Ω, q) (57) with Γ (Ω, q) = [s (Ω, q, x 1 ) , s (Ω, q, x 2 ) , • • • , s (Ω, q, x Nx )] † and