Holography is a vital tool used in various applications from microscopy, solar energy, imaging, display to information encryption. Generation of a holographic image and reconstruction of object/hologram information from a holographic image using the current algorithms are timeconsuming processes. Versatile, fast in the meantime accurate methodologies are required to compute holograms performing color imaging at multiple observation planes and reconstruct object/sample information from a holographic image for widely accommodating optical holograms. Here, we focus on design of optical holograms for generation of holographic images at multiple observation planes and colors via a deep learning model the DOENet. The DOENet produces optical holograms which show multitasking performance as multiplexing color holographic image planes by tuning holographic structures. Furthermore, our deep learning model retrieves an object/hologram information from an intensity holographic image without requiring phase and amplitude information from the intensity image. We show that reconstructed objects/holograms show excellent agreement with the ground-truths. The DOENet does not need iteratively reconstruction of object/hologram information while conventional object/hologram recovery methods rely on multiple holographic images at various observation planes along with the iterative algorithms. We believe that the DOENet based object/hologram reconstruction and generation of holographic images may speed up wide-area implementation of optical holography. Optical holography is a superior tool to retrieve phase and amplitude of light from an intensity image, which bears detailed information of the object as size, shape, and refractive index. Reconstructed object/hologram from an intensity image has important roles in high-security encryption For generation of a holographic image fine-tuned phase/amplitude distribution of a hologram is required that increases design duration of a hologram. Considering widearea implementation of optical holography for both retrieving object/hologram information and generation of a holographic image a versatile methodology with a short design/optimization duration is highly demanded. * eyuce@metu.edu.tr For generation of optical holographic images and object/hologram recovery, there are a variety of algorithms frequently used However, for generation of optical holograms which provide holographic images at different observation planes and wavelengths, versatile neural networks are required In this study for the first time to our knowledge a single deep learning architecture is employed to generate (i) a multi-color three images at a single observation plane, (ii) a single color three images at multiple observation planes, (iii) a multi-color three arXiv:2105.13060v1 [physics.optics] 27 May 2021 images at multiple observation planes. In addition to generation of holographic images, the deep learning model provides retrieval of object/hologram information from an intensity image without requiring phase and amplitude information of an intensity holographic image thanks to statistically retrieval behavior of deep learning. Moreover, we obtain holographic images with twinimage free by eliminating phase and amplitude retrieval. Training the deep learning model with a data set which is a one-time process lasting less than an hour speeds up generation of holographic images and object/hologram recovery from an intensity image down to two seconds. A computer-generated hologram (CGH) could be a phase mask or a three-dimensional object where thickness value changes spatially. Thickness distribution of a CGH is interpreted also in a phase distribution with refractive index value of a holographic plate and wavelength of light. With the angular spectrum method (ASM), intensity distribution of a holographic image at each wavelength of a light source is computed by considering thickness distribution of a CGH. Using Eqs. (1-3) standing for Fresnel-Kirchhoff diffraction integral, an electric field of light propagates from a hologram plane to a holographic image plane is calculated. The electric field of light at the hologram plane U Hologram is obtained with an incident amplitude of light A incident , thickness distribution of the hologram t Hologram , refractive index of the hologram material n, and wavelength of light source λ after utilizing Eq. 1. p and q in Eq. 1 are indices of spatially varying amplitude of light at the hologram plane. The light wave from the hologram plane transforms into the image plane with a kernel transformation function G in Eq. 2. The kernel transformation function has light propagation parameters as an observation plane distance from the hologram plane to the image plane d, location of pixels at the hologram plane (x,y), and the image plane (X,Y). a and b are indices at the image plane. Later, we obtain amplitude of light at the image plane U Image with Eq. 3. The intensity of the holographic image I Image is attained with a square of the light amplitude at the image plane U Image . We use correlation coefficient ρ as a metric to evaluate similarity between a ground-truth/ideal holographic image I Ideal and a designed holographic image I Designed with the deep learning model/ASM (see Eq. 4). The same metric evaluates similarity between a ground-truth hologram I Ideal and a reconstructed hologram with the deep learning model I Designed . N in Eq. 4 is number of pixels in the ideal image and the designed image; I Ideal,i and I Designed,i in Eq. 4 are intensity values of ith pixel of the ideal image and the designed image, respectively. The other terms in Eq. 4 are mean of the ideal image μ I Ideal , mean of the designed image μ I Designed , standard deviation of the ideal image σ I Ideal , and standard deviation of the designed image σ I Designed . We compute a correlation coefficient for a groundtruth/ideal holographic image I Ideal and corresponding designed holographic image I Designed at each observation plane distance d and each wavelength of light λ. Using spatially varying 8-level thickness profile of a hologram, we tune phase of a light source to form a holographic image. The holographic image is designed with a linearly polarized continuous light at normal incidence. Resolution of a hologram and a holographic image are 40-by-40. Each pixel of a hologram has a thickness value ranging from 1 μm to 8 μm, which is divided into 8 equal discrete steps. We evaluate performance of a hologram with a correlation coefficient ρ in terms of percent with Eq. 4 during Output: 40x40x8 With MEAN logic operation, the hologram thickness distribution is tuned when average correlation coefficient computed with correlation coefficients at all wavelengths and all observation plane increases. At the end of designing a hologram, we obtained 51200 optical hologram distributions and corresponding holographic images at each light frequency/observation plane. In this manuscript, we employed the deep learning model the DOENet presented in our previous work The selection of design wavelengths is a crucial step to form holographic intensity images at the image plane without a cross-talk between images at different frequencies of light. For this concern, at first, we inspect spectral bandwidth which a holographic image presents when a hologram designed for this image is illuminated by broadband light. We design a CGH that images an intensity distribution of letter A at a wavelength of 700 nm as seen in Fig. In Fig. In Fig. At first, we tuned thickness distribution of a CGH for generation of a holographic color image at a single observation plane. The wavelengths of the color image are 670 nm for alphabet image of A, 700 nm for alphabet image of B, and 730 nm for alphabet image of C. The transmitted images from the hologram plane are projected onto a white screen 350 μm away from surface of the CGH. The thickness optimization of the hologram was performed for four fully scannings of all the hologram pixels which last 3.6 hours with the local search optimization algorithm. The holographic images of letters are presented in Fig. While tuning thickness profile of the hologram for holographic images of letters A, B, and C, we stored intensity images and holograms at each optimization attempt. With the collected data set we tuned weights of the DOENet to reconstruct object information from an intensity color holographic image. The DOENet yields 99.7% accuracies with the training and the validation data sets. We reconstruct a hologram with the DOENet which shows a correlation coefficient of 99.9% with the ground-truth hologram. The reconstructed hologram by the DOENet is high-fidelity object information and obtained within two seconds. When the reconstructed hologram is illuminated with a light source at 670 nm, 700 nm, and 730 nm we see holographic three images as presented in Fig. By using the DOENet, we reconstruct a hologram structure that provides a color image at a single observation plane within two seconds. This holographic structure behaves color filter to simultaneously achieve a full-color holographic image with no cross-talk. Moreover, we see twin imagefree holographic intensity images due to elimination of recovery of phase and amplitude information from the holographic intensity images. Next, we reconstructed a hologram structure that images three different figures forming at different observation planes (Fig. Lastly, the DOENet provides us reconstruction of a hologram that generates a color holographic image at three observation planes (Fig. The deep learning model used in this study decodes three-dimensional information of an object from an intensity-only recording. Our results qualitatively and quantitatively with correlation coefficient demonstrate effectiveness of the DOENet framework for formation of holographic images having different properties as wavelength, figure, and display plane. The DOENet does not expand a possible solution set that is constrained by physics. Instead, the DOENet finds the best solution within the data set considering desired intensity distribution. Compared to exhaustive search algorithms we create holograms by using the DOENet. The developed neural network architecture may boost design duration of a holographic image obtained by a hologram displayed on a spatial light modulator or a digital micromirror device. This work can be further improved to observe holographic images for multiple observers at oblique viewing circumference. Also if phase modulation capability of a hologram is extended with increasing number of thickness values in a hologram, clarity of holographic images improves. We believe the DOENet can be used to retrieve imaginary (phase) and real (intensity) parts of light from an intensity-only holographic image. In this work using a single deep learning architecture the DOENet we demonstrate holographic image formation not only at different frequencies but also different observation planes. The DOENet enables us to obtain phase-only holographic structures to perform generation of holographic intensity images in two seconds. Moreover, thanks to data-driven statistical retrieval behavior of deep learning, we reconstruct hologram/object information from holographic images without requiring phase and amplitude information of recorded holographic intensity images. Compared to the iterative optimization methodologies our neural network produces holograms with several orders of magnitude faster and up to an accuracy of 99.9%. The reconstructed holograms give superior quality reproduced intensity patterns. We believe our work inspires a variety of fields as biomedical sensing, information encryption, and atomic-level imaging that benefit from frequent accommodation of optical holographic images and object/hologram recovery.