We consider a planar SIS-type Josephson junction between diffusive superconductors (S) through an insulating tunnel interface (I). We construct fully self-consistent perturbation theory with respect to the interface conductance. As a result, we find correction to the first Josephson harmonic and calculate the second Josephson harmonic. At arbitrary temperatures, we correct previous results for the nonsinusoidal current-phase relation in Josephson tunnel junctions, which were obtained with the help of conjectured form of solution. Our perturbation theory also describes the difference between the phases of the order parameter and of the anomalous Green functions. I. Introduction 1 II. Formalism 2 A. Basic equations 2 B. Tunneling limit 3 III. Perturbation theory with respect to the interface conductance: Josephson current 4 A. Arbitrary temperatures 4 B. Limiting cases 5 C. Comparison with previous results 6 IV. Perturbation theory for the phases 6 V. Discussion 7 A. Applicability conditions of the perturbation theory 7 B. Role of self-consistency 8 C. Different definitions of the phase jump 8 D. Outlook 8 VI. Conclusions 9 Acknowledgments 9 A. Equations and parametrization 9 B. Order parameter and current 9 1. Arbitrary temperature 9 2. Solvable temperature limits 10 a. T → 0 10 b. T → T c 10 C. Second-order perturbation theory for the phases 11 1. Calculation of χ 2 and φ 2 11 2. Bulk behavior 12 One of the key characteristics of a superconductor is the complex-valued order parameter ∆(r), which is parametrized by its absolute value and phase φ(r) The Josephson effect is a prominent example of the physical role of the superconducting phases At the same time, the SIS junction is the fundamental system for which the Josephson effect was originally predicted Anharmonic (nonsinusoidal) Josephson current is also possible in the case of pair-breaking interfaces In this paper, we consider the SIS Josephson junction between diffusive superconductors at arbitrary temperature T . We consider the tunneling limit but focus on deviations from the sinusoidal current-phase relation due to small but finite conductance of the interface. We develop fully self-consistent perturbation theory taking into account difference between the phases φ(x) and χ(x, ω). We carry out perturbation theory with respect to the ratio of the interface conductance to the conductance of the superconductor on the coherence length, and this parameter is small in the tunneling limit. As a result, we find the second harmonic of the Josephson relation, i.e., contribution to J(δφ) of the form sin 2δφ. The first harmonic sin δφ arises in the first order of the perturbation theory, while the second harmonic sin 2δφ comes from the second order, thus being small in comparison with the first one. In the limit T → T c , we reproduce the results by Kupriyanov We also discuss quantitative difference between the phase of the order parameter and the phases of the anomalous Green functions that follows from our perturbation theory. The paper is organized as follows: In Sec. II, we formulate our model and equations. In Sec. III, we develop our perturbation theory with respect to the interface conductance and calculate the Josephson current. In Sec. IV, we develop our perturbation theory further and discuss difference between the phase of the order parameter and the phases of the anomalous Green functions. In Sec. V, we discuss the applicability conditions of our perturbation theory and the role of self-consistency. In Sec. VI, we present our conclusions. Finally, some details of calculations are presented in the Appendices. Throughout the paper, we employ the units with = k B = 1. FIG. A. Basic equations SIS-type junction is a system of two superconductors separated by a thin insulating layer. In the diffusive, or so-called dirty, limit, when the superconducting coherence length ξ is much larger than the mean free path l, superconductors can be described by the Usadel equations In the planar SIS junction all characteristics depend only on the x coordinate. We can eliminate the vector potential by a gauge transformation, so that all currentcarrying properties of the system are encoded in the phase gradients. In the angular parametrization where ∆(x) = |∆(x)|e iφ(x) is the order parameter, ω = πT (2n + 1) is the Matsubara frequency (at temperature T ), D = v F l/3 is the diffusion constant, and v F is the Fermi velocity. The Usadel equations must be accompanied by the selfconsistency equation where λ is the BCS coupling constant and ω D is the Debye frequency of the superconducting material. We consider the tunneling limit in which the Kupriyanov-Lukichev (KL) boundary conditions apply where σ is the normal-state conductivity of the superconductor material, g N = G N /S is the conductance of the interface per unit area, S is the interface area, and G N is the interface conductance (normal-state conductance of the weak link). In addition to the boundary conditions at x = 0, we have to take into account that far from the interface the superconductors are in the bulk current-carrying state: the density and the velocity of the condensate become constant (do not depend on x), The current J can be found after solving the set of Eqs. (1)-( where e is the charge of electron and ν 0 is the density of states at the Fermi level in the normal state. The self-consistency equation guaranties the current conservation Then, summing Eq. ( At the same time, according to Eq. ( The self-consistent Usadel equations cannot be solved analytically for arbitrary transparencies, but in some limiting cases this can be done approximately. In this paper, we solve the Usadel equations by the perturbation theory with respect to the interface conductance. In a superconductor, the natural energy scale is the bulk temperature-dependent value of the order parameter ∆ 0 (T ). It determines the coherence length, which can be written (in the diffusive limit) as This characteristic length follows from the Usadel equations; however, it turns out to be indeed the relevant spatial scale on which the superconducting properties vary, only at temperatures not too close to the superconducting critical temperature T c . In the vicinity of T c , the full set of the Usadel equations can be reduces to the Ginzburg-Landau (GL) equation written for the order parameter only. In the course of this reduction, the Matsubara summation in the self-consistency equation generates a different coherence length, which can be written as Although this GL coherence length arises when considering the T → T c limit, the resulting expression can be used at any T . From this point of view, we can say that at T not too close to T c , the GL coherence length ( The boundary conditions ( where we have defined the dimensionless conductance parameter This parameter can be rewritten as where the average barrier transparency t is small in the tunneling limit. Due to finite value of α, the proximity effect between the two sides of the Josephson junction leads to suppression of |∆(x)| in the vicinity of the interface (at nonzero phase difference). We standardly define the tunneling limit as the regime in which the proximity effect [i.e., suppression of |∆(x)|] is weak. This condition implies that α must be small. The exact condition for the smallness of α will be discussed below in Sec. V A. One more point regarding various interface parameters should be commented here. The KL boundary conditions (4) and (5) are valid in the limit of small transparencies of interface conducting channels, which may be formulated as t 1. They can be obtained in the first order with respect to t from the more general Nazarov boundary conditions The starting point of our perturbation theory is the solution of the Usadel equations with the KL boundary conditions at α = 0. This trivial solution can be written as We consider the order-parameter phase jump at the interface, as the parameter that defines the current-carrying state of the Josephson junction. This parameter enters the full self-consistent set of equations and determines, in particular, the strength of the proximity effect between the superconducting banks and the current at any point of the junction. Expanding θ, χ, ∆, and φ in powers of α, we get The phases χ(z, ω) and φ(z) in the case of nonzero current J = 0 grow linearly in the bulk of the superconductors. Corrections χ 1(2) and φ 1(2) therefore become large, which may seem to create a problem for our perturbation theory. However, this problem is purely formal because the quantities that actually enter our perturbation theory are not χ and φ themselves but their derivatives dχ/dz and dφ/dz as well as their difference χ -φ; all those quantities are finite in the bulk. Our goal is to find the answer for J up to the α 2 order. The current given by Eq. ( We start with calculating θ 1 and ∆ 1 . In the first order of the perturbation theory, equations for θ 1 and ∆ 1 separate from equations for χ 1 and φ 1 , the pair-breaking term (dχ/dx) 2 in Eq. ( The Usadel equation ( We can solve this linear system with the help of the Fourier transformation (with respect to z). In the Fourier space we find (29) In the first order of the perturbation theory, the real part of the self-consistency equation (3) yields The answer for ∆ 1 can be written in terms of ∆ 0 without any explicit information on ω D and λ. The bulk self-consistency equation can be written as Substituting this expression for λ into Eq. (30), we can rewrite the latter equation in the form The correction to the order parameter is negative and the order parameter is most strongly suppressed in the vicinity of the interface. Plugging expression (29) for θ 1 into this equation, we see that the resulting sum is convergent. We can therefore extend the Matsubara summation to infinite limits (formally putting ω D = ∞). For more details, see Appendix B. We introduce the following notation for a class of sums arising as a result of this procedure: The result for ∆ 1 (k) can then be written in the form Figure The solution of this system is trivial, This formula tells us that in the main order with respect to the interface conductance, the Josephson relation have the standard form J ∝ sin δφ. Moreover, χ 1 (z, ω) = φ 1 (z) are continuous functions at z = 0, unlike χ 0 (z, ω) = φ 0 (z) = (δφ/2) sgn z. Therefore, δχ 1 (ω) = 0. Expanding Eq. ( This boundary condition implies that in order to calculate J (which can be done at z = 0), we do not actually need to calculate χ 2 (z). To find the current up to the α 2 order, we thus only need ∆ 1 and θ 1 . For more details, see Appendix B. The answer for the current has the form where V (T ) is a positive number, which depends on temperature T . While at arbitrary temperature, V (T ) can be found only numerically, we can find explicit results in the limiting cases of T → 0 and T → T c . The answer for the current given by Eq. (40) contains not only the standard part of the Josephson relation J 0 sin δφ but also the second harmonic (sin 2δφ with positive coefficient) and a negative correction to the first harmonic. Below we present results in the limiting cases of T = 0 and T → T c . In the limiting cases, we find Thus the answer for the current at (T c -T ) where G D (T ) = σS/ξ GL (T ) is the diffusive conductance of the superconductor on the length ξ GL (T ). In the T → 0 limit, the characteristic length scale becomes ξ(0). At the same time, since ξ(0) ∼ ξ GL (0), we can write the answer with the help of the same definition for G D (T ) as Equations ( The Josephson relation with the second harmonic in the SIS tunnel junction at arbitrary T was previously derived by Golubov and Kupriyanov The result of Ref. As we have shown in Eq. (38) in the first order of the perturbation theory, the phases χ 1 (z, ω) and φ 1 (z) are the same at all frequencies. In this section, we show that the second-order perturbation theory yields χ 2 (x, ω) = φ 2 (x). We start the second-order perturbation theory by expanding Eqs. ( Due to linearity of the system, we solve it with the help of the Fourier transformation. We must take into account that χ 2 (z, ω) can be discontinuous at z = 0 with a (yet unknown) phase jump δχ 2 (ω). Moreover, in the bulk dχ 2 /dz can be finite, so it is convenient to write equations for new variable which has zero derivative in the bulk, where χ 2 = φ 2 . In the Fourier space, we obtain The system of Eqs. ( 2 (z) are the auxiliary functions that solve the system of Eqs. ( The solution of Eq. (54) gives us δχ 2 (ω) and Φ(k), and with the use of Eqs. ( Even without explicit implementation of this algorithm, we can make sure that χ 2 = φ 2 . Indeed, if we assume that χ 2 = φ 2 , then Eq. ( which cannot be satisfied since both χ (0) 2 (z, ω) and its derivative at z = 0 have nontrivial dependence on ω (as witnessed, for example, by numerical calculations). This proves that χ 2 = φ 2 . Moreover, this result is a consequence of Eq. (47), which contains dθ 1 /dz that plays the role of the nonzero source in this equation. FIG. Equation (54) can be solved numerically, and we present the results of this procedure in the case of T = 0 in Figs. (58) The sum can turn to zero only if δχ 2 (ω) changes its sign. Figure where a is a constant, which can be obtained after solving the integral equation (54) (for more details, see Appendix C). Physically, the overall nonlinear spatial dependence of the phases corresponds to increased velocity of the superconducting condensate in the vicinity of the interface. This compensates for the interface suppression of the order parameter (see Fig. The condition of weak proximity effect, which we assumed when developing our perturbation theory, can be formulated according to Eq. ( In the Fourier representation, the result for ∆ 1 is given by Eq. (34). At T not too close to T c , this yields |∆ 1 (z = 0)| ∼ ∆ 0 , so that the condition becomes α 1. At the same time, at T → T c , Eq. (B17) demonstrates that Summarizing, at all temperatures, the condition of smallness of α can be written as Note that the α parameter itself depends on T in the vicinity of T c as α ∝ (1 -T /T c ) -1/4 . Alternatively, condition (61) can be written as γ(T ) 1, where γ(T ) is defined by Eq. ( While self-consistency for the order parameter is inherent in our calculations, it may be instructive to discuss its role, considering what changes if the self-consistency is neglected and we simply put ∆ = ∆ 0 . Below, we discuss how this would change the results for the Josephson current J. Neglecting self-consistency implies putting ∆ 1 (k) = 0 in Eq. ( Neglecting self-consistency thus leads to dropping out the first term under the integral in Eq. (42). In the limit of low temperatures, T → 0, neglecting self-consistency makes the result for the numerical coefficient V , Eq. ( In the case of approaching the critical temperature, T → T c , self-consistency begins to play a major role. Indeed, in this limit, we have sin θ 0 1, hence the L n sums are of the order of (∆ 0 /T c ) n-1 and vary on the scale of k ∼ T c /∆ 0 1. Substituting this into the integral in Eq. ( We thus conclude that taking into account selfconsistency in our problem is necessary in order to obtain quantitatively and qualitatively correct results. Physically, the current-carrying state of the SIS junction can be defined in several ways. In this paper, we parametrize it by δφ, the order-parameter phase jump at the interface. At the same time, it can be more experimentally relevant where the factor of 2 takes into account that φ(z) is an odd function. Equation (59) provides the connection between δφ and δφ nonlin , While we study J(δφ), the current-phase relation could alternatively be defined as J(δφ nonlin ). Nevertheless, within our accuracy, this difference does not change any of the above results. This is because in the Josephson relation Eq. ( We have shown that the phases φ and χ differ in the second order of the perturbation theory, but this difference does not immediately show up in the answer for the current, Eq. ( At the same time, the Josephson current is an integral quantity (the sum of the spectral components of the current), and one can therefore expect the φ-χ difference to manifest itself more clearly (both from theoretical and experimental point of view) in spectrally-resolved quantities. The most obvious quantity of this sort is the local density of states in the vicinity of the interface, which requires reformulating the theory in the real-energy technique. The behavior of the system in the alternating electric field, so-called Shapiro steps, should also be sensitive to spectrally-resolved characteristics of the system. In addition, an interesting direction is to study systems such as SNS and SFS junctions (where N is a normal metal and F is a ferromagnet). While in the case of tunnel SIS junctions the second Josephson harmonic (which we have calculated) is always small compared to the first one, the SFS case looks especially intriguing since the first harmonic can be suppressed in this case due to specific nature of proximity-induces superconductivity inside the F interlayer We leave the above questions for future studies. We have considered the Josephson effect in a planar diffusive SIS-type junction at arbitrary temperature and constructed fully self-consistent perturbation theory with respect to the dimensionless conductance parameter α 1, which is the ratio of the interface conductance to the conductance of the superconducting material on the coherence length. We have presented analytical analysis of two orders of the perturbation theory. The first order of the perturbation theory provides correction ∆ 1 to the absolute value of the order parameter, see Eq. (34) and Fig. Our perturbation theory also provides solutions for the superconducting phases of the anomalous Green functions and of the order parameter, χ and φ, respectively. In the zeroth order, the phases are equal constants corresponding to the standard main-order solution for the Josephson effect in tunnel junctions. In the first order, the phases are still equal but acquire the linear part, which describes finite velocity of the superconducting condensate at each point of the superconductors. Finally, in the second order, we find that χ = φ. We present the plot of χ 2 (z, ω) at different Matsubara frequencies and of φ 2 (z) at T = 0 in Fig. The overall spatial dependence of the phases is nonlinear, corresponding to increased velocity of the superconducting condensate in the vicinity of the interface. This compensates for the interface suppression of the order parameter and, hence, of the condensate density (due to the proximity effect between the superconducting banks) in order to provide position-independent Josephson current throughout the system, see Fig. (B1) The Fourier transformation of Eq. (B1) leads to Eq. (29). Substituting Eq. (29) into Eq. (32), we obtain Since all the sums in this equation converge, we can extend the limits of summation to infinity, formally putting ω D = ∞. Using the definition of Eq. (33), we can finally rewrite Eq. (B2) in the form of Eq. (34). In order to find the current J, we expand Eq. ( Due to the current conservation, we can calculate the current at any point. Doing this at the interface with the help of the boundary conditions (37) and (39), we obtain Here we use the relations 2e 2 ν 0 D = σ and 2πT ∆ 0 ω>0 The interface value θ 1 (z = 0) is calculated using the inverse Fourier transformation of θ 1 (k) given by Eq. ( Substituting this into Eq. (B4), we can write the result for the current in the form of Eqs. ( In this Appendix, we evaluate the sums defined by Eq. (33) in the two limiting cases, T → 0 and T → T c . Then we discuss the corresponding limiting results for the correction ∆ 1 (k) to the order parameter and for V (T ), which determines the corrections to the Josephson current, see Eqs. (34) and (42). a. T → 0 In the T → 0 limit, the sums of the form Eq. ( To calculate the sums at an arbitrary n, we use the following recurrence identity: The sum L 2 (k, 0) has the form (B10) Then, we obtain Plugging the obtained expressions into Eq. (34), we find ∆ 1 (k). At the same time, the current (40) in determined by V (T ) containing an integral with the L n sums, see Eq. (42). Although we are not able to calculate the integral in Eq. (42) at T = 0 analytically, we can do it numerically obtaining V (0) ≈ 0.272. In this limit, ∆ 0 becomes small and has the form (B14) due to two circumstances. First, current conservation leads to nonzero correction to the velocity of the Cooper pairs in the bulk, i.e., dφ 2 /dz = 0 at z → ∞, which leads to delta-functional singularity in the Fourier transform of χ 2 and φ 2 . Since χ = φ in the bulk, it is possible to solve the system of equations for φ 2 = χ 2 -φ 2 from which the singularity drops out. Second, χ 2 can be discontinuous at z = 0, which leads to a singularity in Eq. (47), The Fourier transformation of Eq. (C5) gives Eq. ( From the self-consistency equation ( Using Eqs. (51), (C3), (C4), and the definition of the phase functional (56), we obtain The next step is to use the boundary condition (53). Substituting there Eq. (C7), we obtain (C8) This can be transformed as (C10) The left-hand side turns to zero after integration of the phase functional, Eq. ( . (C13) In order to calculate V 0 , we consider the Fourier transform of φ 2 (z), and employing Eq. (C6), we get ikφ 2 (k) = ikφ The inverse Fourier transformation gives the derivatives dχ 2 /dz and dφ 2 /dz, from which we can find χ 2 (z, ω) and φ 2 (z), respectively. From Eqs. (C19) and (C20), one can see that in the bulk, the phases χ 2 and φ 2 are equal and vary linearly as The constant a can be found with the use of Eq. (C3), and in terms of the sums defined in Eq. (33), it acquires the form a = 2(1 -cos δφ) sin δφ Both constants a and b do not depend on ω, which shows that χ 2 = φ 2 in the bulk. Unlike the constant b = -V 0 , the constant a at arbitrary temperatures cannot be found without solving the integral equation (54), since it is determined by the phase functional Φ(k). At the same time, in the limit T = 0, its value can be found numerically and equals a ≈ 0.544(1 -cos δφ) sin δφ.