Atomic-level imperfections play an increasingly critical role in nanophotonic device performance. However, it remains challenging to accurately characterize the sidewall roughness with sub-nanometer resolution and directly correlate this roughness with device performance. We have developed a method that allows us to measure the sidewall roughness of waveguides made of any material (including dielectrics) using the high resolution of atomic force microscopy. We illustrate this method by measuring state-of-the-art photonic devices made of silicon nitride. We compare the roughness of devices fabricated using both DUV photolithography and electron-beam lithography for two different etch processes. To correlate roughness with device performance we describe what we call a new Payne-Lacey Bending model, which adds a correction factor to the widely used Payne-Lacey model so that losses in resonators and waveguides with bends can be accurately predicted given the sidewall roughness, waveguide width and bending radii. Having a better way to measure roughness and use it to predict device performance can allow researchers and engineers to optimize fabrication for state-of-the-art photonics using many materials. As nanophotonic devices approach losses less than 1 dB/m Defects on the scale of a single atom can lead to considerable losses, even in waveguides with larger, micron-scale cross-sections. Roughness of waveguide sidewalls limits the optical performance and is typically the largest source of loss. Characterizing the magnitude of this roughness is crucial to understanding how to minimize these imperfections during fabrication. However, sidewall roughness is usually difficult to measure, especially on the sub-nanometer scale required for the state-of-the-art devices at present. It is important not only to be able to correlate the roughness to the losses of straight waveguide devices, but also to predict the losses in any photonic circuit, including those with rings and bends. Having both a direct method to measure sidewall roughness with sub-nm resolution and a model to convert this roughness to device performance permits development and optimization of fabrication processes to achieve low-loss state-of-the-art photonic devices with various materials. Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) is a common method to acquire 2-dimensional (2D) images of a waveguide to infer waveguide sidewall roughness With dielectric samples, the charging effect caused by the lack of surface conductivity and the imaging artifacts caused by focusing and stigmation offsets aggravate this resolution limitation, which make the measurement of sidewall roughness measurements susceptible to error even with sophisticated image analysis methods. Confocal microscopy imaging has also been used to image and extrapolate sidewall roughness Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM) is a direct surface measurement technique that has atomic scale sensitivity with a resolution on the order of 0.1 nm routinely achieved, and is not limited by the material properties of the samples We have developed a method that allows us to directly measure the sidewalls of waveguides made of any material (including dielectrics) using the high resolution of AFM. We illustrate this method by measuring state-of-the-art photonic devices made of silicon nitride (Si3N4). We chose silicon nitride as our example, because it is a superb photonic platform which combines the beneficial properties of a wide transparency range, a high refractive index, and compatibility in large-scale semiconductor manufacturing We fabricate the waveguides from a 730 nm silicon nitride (Si3N4) film deposited by Low Pressure Chemical Vapor Deposition (LPCVD) at 800°C onto double-sided-polished silicon wafers with 3 μm of grown thermal oxide. Lithography is used to define the waveguide device pattern, and then plasma etching is used to transfer the pattern into the film, both steps that introduce sidewall roughness. It is important to elucidate the roughness caused by each of these steps, so as to select the optimal lithography and etching processes to minimize the waveguide sidewall roughness. In this study, we directly compare sidewall roughness of waveguides fabricated using three different combinations of lithography and etching processes: • Process 1: DUV photo-lithography with a standard CHF3/O2 etching recipe • Process 2: DUV photo-lithography with a low-polymer CHF3/O2/N2 etching recipe • Process 3: Electron-beam lithography with a low-polymer CHF3/O2/N2 etching recipe We chose and compared two commonly used patterning methods, namely DUV photolithography and electron-beam (e-beam) lithography. Our DUV photo-lithography mask is written on a Heidelberg DWL2000 Mask Writer using a wavelength of 405 nm and developed in a wet chrome etch using a Hamatech developer tool. The mask pattern is projected onto the Si3N4 wafer using an ASML DUV stepper with 248 nm light, (ASML PAS 5500/300C DUV) where it undergoes a 4X reduction using the optics of the stepper. The waveguide pattern is transferred to the wafer using UVN30 0.5 DUV photoresist (Rohm and Haas Electronics Materials). Meanwhile, electron-beam lithography is done with a JEOL 9500 100 kV using a beam current of 2 nA to direct-write the waveguide features into a MaN-2403 (micro resist technology Gmbh) negative resist. The patterns defined by the above methods are transferred from the resist to the waveguide nitride layer via two different etch processes. We compare a standard nitride CHF3/O2 etch recipe, which is known to leave behind a fluoride polymer residue on the sidewall with an optimized (low-polymer) etch recipe (CHF3/O2/N2). This low-polymer etch recipe uses an increased oxygen concentration to strip the polymer from the waveguide during the etch process. An oxide mask is used to ensure successful pattern transfer and nitrogen is added to the plasma to improve the etch selectivity between the oxide and the nitride Once the waveguides are patterned and etched, we facilitate sidewall measurement by removing the surrounding silicon substrate to create a tall and thin silicon pillar, while keeping the waveguide fully protected. This is easily toppled onto its side and makes the waveguide sidewall readily accessible by a standard AFM. Figure Our sample fabrication method allows us to fully protect the waveguide during all fabrication steps, and can be used to prepare waveguides of any material to be directly measured by AFM, as long as the waveguide is on a substrate that allows a high selectivity deep etch. The measurements of the roughness and the correlation length give a description of both the magnitude of the roughness and the periodicity of its occurrence. These measurements allow us to further predict the performance of the device. Veeco AFM configured in tapping mode. We used commercially available Nanotech ATEC-NC-20 AFM tips which feature a tetrahedral tip that protrudes from the very end of the cantilever as illustrated in Figure While the RMS value gives a measure of the vertical roughness of the sample, the correlation length, (Lc), gives the measure of the lateral distribution of the features. Physically, the correlation length is the horizontal distance one must move along the waveguide to observe self-similar features. To find this we compute the 1D autocorrelation function (ACF) using Equation 1, a plot of which can be seen in Figure In the frequency domain, the PSD is computed by taking the Fourier transform of the autocorrelation function (Equation G x (k) = FT[R x (τ)] = 2σ 2 L c 1 + (L c k) We use the PSD to validate that the scan length and resolution are sufficient to contain the corner frequency, and compute the actual correlation length using the decay of the autocorrelation function for each line cut in the data matrix. We used AFM to directly measure and compare samples fabricated with the three different processes described above. The results of these measurements are shown in Table It is useful to be able to predict the device performance from a measurement of the sidewall roughness of a waveguide. Even sub-nm roughness can significantly influence the optical performance of a waveguide device. The quality factor is a reliable way to estimate optical performance and correlate the roughness measured by AFM with the losses that we measure in the fabricated device. To estimate device performance, we fabricated ring resonators with a fixed radius of 115 μm and varying widths using e-beam lithography together with the lowpolymer CHF3/O2/N2 etching recipe in Si3N4. This fabrication method was chosen because (as described above) it has the lowest sidewall roughness and enables fabrication of the highest quality state-of-the-art photonic devices. We use a laser scanning technique to measure the transmission spectra and the linewidth of the resonator (FWHM) to estimate the Q of a resonator We launch light from a tunable laser source, then transmit it through a fiber polarization controller and couple it into our device via an inverse nanotaper Table The relationship between the quality factor and the sidewall roughness measured by AFM is correlated via the loss calculations. The propagation loss of a ring resonator (α ring ) in terms of quality factor Q can be written as (Equation In this equation, λo is the wavelength of light, FSR is the Free Spectral Range, Qi is the quality factor, ng is the group index and R is the radius of the resonator. The total loss in a ring resonator (α ring ) can be expressed in terms of two loss mechanisms as follows (Equation The α bulk represents the losses from the bulk material which includes not only absorption loss due to specific chemical bonds, but also losses from impurities, internal defects and nanovoids. The α surface_scatter term represents the surface scattering loss which can be related to waveguide geometry and surface roughness parameters by the widely used Payne-Lacey model Where α surface_scatter is the waveguide scattering loss in dB per unit length, σ is the roughness, ko, d, and n1, are the free-space wave vector, the waveguide half width, and the core index, respectively. The function g is determined purely by the waveguide geometry, while f is determined by the correlation length and index step of the waveguide. Details of the expressions g and f can be found in the Payne-Lacey model However, this model was developed to successfully predict loss in straight waveguides, and losses realized in waveguides with bends or resonators are not considered in the standard Payne-Lacey model We modify the Payne-Lacey model by adding a correction factor which allows us to accurately predict the loss of devices with resonators or bent waveguides given a value of sidewall roughness. The loss caused by scattering depends on the magnitude of the overlap between the optical mode and the waveguide sidewall, where the fabrication imperfections are present. In Figure This is an effect which the standard Payne-Lacey model represented by Equation 7 does not incorporate. Mode simulation for waveguide that is 10000 nm wide and 730 nm high using Si3N4 as the core material and SiO2 as the cladding material with and without taking bending into account. (a) TE mode profile of a straight waveguide with no bend. (b) TE mode profile of waveguide with a bending radius of 115 μm. Even though a bending radius of 115 μm is already relatively large for an integrated photonic device, we can see the mode overlap with the sidewalls is dramatically different with and without bend. In order to accurately account for this increased interaction, we add a multiplicative correction factor η to the Payne-Lacey expression. The modified Payne-Lacey Bending (PLB) model is expressed as follows in Equation 8: The correction factor η is the ratio of the mode overlap of the bending mode field over the mode overlap for the straight waveguide geometry, a multiplicative factor which gives the magnitude of the increased interaction. This mode overlap is found by integrating the mode field distribution over the waveguide sidewall surface and it is calculated using a finite element method simulation (performed with COMSOL) for each of the bending radii. For straight waveguides η in the Payne-Lacey Bending model is taken to be 1. Here we calculate correction factor η for the fundamental mode. Higher order modes interact more strongly with the sidewalls and a different η must be calculated for each mode. In order to illustrate the necessity of the correction factor, we plot the Payne-Lacey relationship of sidewall scattering losses both with and without the added correction factor for a ring resonator waveguide with a 10000 nm width and a 115 μm bend radii in Figure for the same resonator with the same measured losses. Meanwhile, the data point on the graph marks the measured roughness and correlation length with error bars obtained from the AFM analysis for the same fabrication process (e-beam lithography with low polymer etching) that we used to fabricate these rings. This data point indicates that, given the measured roughness and correlation length, Payne-Lacey Bending model (with the correction factor) can accurately predict the loss; the traditional model is less accurate and its predicted roughness is much higher than that measured by AFM. The crossing black lines on the graph mark the range of the measured roughness and correlation lengths obtained from the AFM analysis for the same e-beam and low-polymer etching process that we used to fabricate these rings. The magnitude of the correction factor changes as a function of both the bending radii and the waveguide width, which is illustrated in Figure In conclusion, we have developed a method which allows us to directly measure sub-nm sidewall roughness of photonic devices using standard AFM. This is a robust method that can be used to characterize the sidewall roughness of waveguides made of any material with subnm resolution. Using the new method, we report the sidewall roughness measurement of stateof-the-art Si3N4 photonic devices for the first time, and compare the influence of e-beam lithography versus DUV photo-lithography as well as the roughness contributions of two different nitride etching recipes. We have further developed a Payne-Lacey Bending model to predict scattering losses. By measuring the losses of waveguide devices with various widths, we experimentally show that it can successfully predict the sidewall scattering losses for devices with resonators or bent waveguides. The combination of this AFM measurement method with the new Payne-Lacey Bending model is very useful for researchers and engineers from both academia and industry to characterize and optimize fabrication processes. The results of these measurements show there is room for pushing the limits of the new stateof-the-art devices. We have shown that the e-beam lithography provides smoother sidewalls when compared with DUV photo-lithography, with a reduction in the roughness of more than a factor of 2 with all other processes being equal. Currently, our DUV photo-lithography mask is written by a direct laser mask writer. However, in the future, in order to achieve even smoother sidewalls, one could write the DUV photo-lithography mask using e-beam lithography and then project the patterns onto wafer using a DUV or the EUV stepper, where the roughness in the mask pattern will undergo a reduction due to the optics of the stepper. As Equation 7 and 8 show, losses decrease as the square of any reduction in the roughness, σ. Therefore, the propagation loss in state-of-the-art photonic devices could be further reduced and the DUV stepper would also help realize massively parallel fabrication with a lower cost as well. Compared with SEM or confocal microscopy imaging where the sidewall roughness is calculated using images, our method of directly using AFM to measure the sidewall roughness yields a greater amount of information. Not only does it allow us to achieve sub-nm resolution, but it also provides us with surface information on the entire sidewall area instead of just one line cut. For example, from line cuts in Figure Specifically, our measurements of the average vertical (Y-axis) RMS roughness is only 0.31 nm. This analysis allows us to evaluate the individual contributions of each step of the fabrication and to concentrate efforts of sidewall roughness reduction on the steps that have the greatest impact on the roughness values.