We propose a three-terminal structure to probe robust signatures of Majorana zero modes. This structure consists of a quantum dot coupled to the normal metal, s-wave superconducting and Majorana Y-junction leads. The zero-bias differential conductance at zero temperature of the normalmetal lead peaks at 2e 2 /h, which will be deflected after Majorana braiding. This quantized conductance can entirely arise from the Majorana-induced crossed Andreev reflection, protected by the energy gap of the superconducting lead. We find that the effect of thermal broadening is significantly suppressed when the dot is on resonance. In the case that the energy level of the quantum dot is much larger than the superconducting gap, tunneling processes are dominated by Majorana-induced crossed Andreev reflection. Particularly, a novel kind of crossed Andreev reflection equivalent to the splitting of charge quanta 3e occurs after Majorana braiding. Majorana zero modes (MZMs) are zero-energy quasiparticle excitations originating from coherent superpositions of electrons and holes. Following theoretical suggestions, MZMs are supported in 1D systems, such as InAs or InSb wires with strong spin-orbit coupling and proximity-induced superconductivity Due to the property that an MZM can act as both an electron lead and a hole lead in tunneling processes, one of the most exciting theoretical predictions is a quantized zero-bias conductance peak (ZBCP) of 2e 2 h at zero temperature Here we propose a T-shaped hybrid structure to detect MZMs, as illustrated in Fig. At zero temperature, we find that the ZBCP of the normal-metal lead is quantized to 2e 2 /h before braiding, which can be completely induced by the crossed Andreev reflection. This quantized ZBCP is found to be considerably robust against the temperature when the QD is on resonance ( d = 0). We show that the crossed Andreev reflection dominates over the conventional Andreev reflection when d ∆. Importantly, we find that the Majorana braiding shifts the ZBCPs and arouses a novel kind of crossed Andreev reflection equivalent to the splitting of 3e charge quanta, as shown in Fig. It is worth noting that while the Kondo correlations are important in a strong coupling and low-temperature regime, the Kondo resonances are usually either unstable or unquantized This paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II, we introduce the T-shaped hybrid model and explicitly write down their Hamiltonians. In Sec. III, we discuss the electronic transport of the system and provide the corresponding current and conductance formulas, including the analytical expressions for the ZBCPs. In Sec. IV, we present the formula for the shot noise and the Fano factor in terms of appropriate Green's functions. The detailed derivations of the self-energy, the local density of states, and the shot noise are given in Appendix A, Band C, respectively. We introduce the three-terminal setup shown in Fig. The first term in Eq. ( where a † L,kσ (a L,kσ ) are creation (annihilation) operators with wave vector k and spin σ =↑, ↓, and L,kσ is the corresponding electron energy. The second term, the Hamiltonian of the superconducting lead (S) in Fig. (3) The superconducting energy gap ∆ is real here since a unitary transformation has been performed on this Hamiltonian where the QD level d = 0 -eV g /2 is controlled by a gate voltage V g where the Coulomb coupling constants are t 12 = t 13 = t min and t 14 = t max with t min t max where with v L,k and v R,k denoting the complex tunneling amplitudes of the normal-metal and superconducting leads, respectively. The coupling between the QD and the Majorana lead is spin-conserving, i.e., the MZM is always tunnel-coupled to electrons in the QD with the same spin orientation Defining that the spin-↑ direction is along the y-direction, the coupling between the QD and the Majorana lead is given by where λ is the coupling amplitude. For simplicity, we assume λ is real. The ZBCP arising from the crossed Andreev reflection in this T-shaped structure is a remarkable signature of MZMs. In this section, we first calculate the time-average current by using the nonequilibrium Green's function method The time-average current of the normal-metal lead is given by where N L (t) = kσ a † L,kσ (t)a L,kσ (t) is the total number operator of the electrons in the normal-metal lead . The 4 × 4 Green's functions is the corresponding unperturbed Keldysh contour Green's functions of the normal-metal lead. The lesser self-energy is describes the different charge of electrons and holes. The time-average current Eq. ( where the sub-matrices are given by Assuming that the electron energies in Eqs. 2 and 3 are independent of spins with L(R),k↑ = L(R),k↓ = L(R),k , the retarded self-energies from the couplings between the three leads and the QD are given by where is the line-width function with ρ L(R) being the density of normal states. In the wide-band limit, Γ L(R) is a constant independent of the frequency ω. Here The lesser Green's function of the QD can be obtained via the Keldysh equation In the calculation of the time-average current, we can take Σ < Y = 0 (see Appendix A for details). In the case of |eV L | < |∆|, analytical calculations for the time-average current yield I η = e 2h dω(f L -fL )T η (ω), which means that only Andreev reflection processes contribute to the electronic transport of the system. Since the system is in a stationary regime, the total current is conserved, i.e., η I η = 0. The differential conductances of the leads η at zero temperature are obtained by G η = dI η /dV L . Especially, the ZBCPs at zero temperature are When λ = 0, the Majorana Y junction is disconnected with the QD, and the remaining part is reduced to an N-QD-S structure. The maximal ZBCP in Eq. ( The discussion can easily extend to finite temperature regimes. As shown in Fig. In addition to the time-average current, the shot noise can reveal the fluctuation of the current and provide useful information about MZMs Following Ref. The discussion will focus on the case of small transparency ( d ∆) since we find that the Fano factors are quantized in this regime. In Fig. due to the transport of Cooper pairs through conventional Andreev reflection The results denote that the unit of charge transferred between the QD and the normal-metal lead is e as well as the Majorana lead, while the unit of charge transferred between the QD and the superconducting lead is 2e. This is the process of the first kind of crossed Andreev reflection. A hole from the left lead is reflected as an electron into the Majorana lead, while a Cooper pair from the superconducting lead is reflected as a hole into the Majorana lead and an electron into the normal-metal lead Now we braid the MZMs by taking γ 2 → -γ 3 and γ 3 → γ 2 . Since the spin orientations of the MZMs γ 2 and γ 3 belonging to the same complex fermion c 2 are different, observable consequences can be obtained with the connection to the QD. The QD is connected to the Majorana Y junction through γ 3 . Using the Nambu spinors and Eq. ( For the Majorana Y junction sketched in Fig. , λ = 0, When λ = 0, the result is the same as that before braiding; when λ = 0, the occurrence of spin-flip tunneling shifts the ZBCP. We plot the differential conductance of the normal-metal lead after the Majorana braiding in Fig. , the unit of charge transferred between the QD and the superconducting lead is larger than that of a Cooper pair, as shown Fig. Specifically, a Cooper pair transferred between the QD and the superconducting lead is accompanied by an extra electron and a hole, which leads to the 3e charge quanta. One electron of the 3e charge quanta is reflected as an electron into the normal-metal lead, while the other two are reflected as holes into the Majorana lead. Such a process of charge transmission is equivalent to the splitting of the 3e charge quanta. Given that the electrons coupled to the MZM γ 3 are composed of spin-↑ and ↓ electrons with a certain weight depending on the angle θ (see Eq. ( As shown in Fig. ) with increasing λ. As for the Majorana lead, the acceptance of spin-↑ and ↓ electrons with a certain weight is equivalent to the acceptance of an electron with spin polarization angle θ in each current pulse, which gives rise to The units of the charge transferred between the normal-metal lead and the QD for both kinds of crossed Andreev reflection are identical, so the Fano factor of the normal-metal lead stays at | F L ( d ∆)| = 1, the same as that before braiding. We have studied the ZBCPs and the Fano factors of the T-shaped structure. We have shown that the ZBCP of the normal-metal lead is always quantized to 2e 2 /h at zero temperature before braiding, which is quite robust at finite temperature when the QD is on-resonance. This quantized conductance can entirely arise from the Majorana-induced crossed Andreev reflection, which is protected by the energy gap of the superconducting lead. After Majorana braiding, the quantized ZBCP shifts and becomes dependent on the line widths Γ L , Γ R and the QD level d . This variation is owing to the introduction of spin-flip tunneling between the Majorana lead and the QD after braiding. By analyzing the quantized Fano factors, we have found that the crossed Andreev reflection dominates over the conventional Andreev reflection when d ∆. We have also found a novel kind of crossed Andreev reflection equivalent to the splitting of the 3e charge quanta. The quantized ZBCPs and Fano factors induced by the nonlocal crossed Andreev reflection provide strong fingerprint for MZMs. In this section, we present the details of the analytical calculation of the terms containing Σ < Y in Eq. 9 . The lesser self-energy from the Majorana lead is given by where with ω + = ω + i0 + , as we mentioned in the main text (κ here is same to that appeared in Eq. ( Using the formula we can obtain Using the relationship with φ(x j ) = 0, the imaginary part of κ 1 and κ 2 reduce to where i.e., G R QD (0) is a purely imaginary function. Note that the imaginary part of G R QD (0) is tiny, we can obtain G R QD (0) ≈ 0. For example, the terms containing Σ < Y in Eq. ( (A14) Hence we can take Σ < Y = 0 in the calculation of the timeaverage current and the shot noise. For convenience, the whole system is divided into two subsystems, one is "quantum dot + Majorana Y-junction+Normal-metal lead", the other is the superconducting lead. The Hamiltonian of the superconducting lead is given by Eq. ( In the Nambu space (a † R,k↑ , a R,-k↓ , a † R,-k↓ , a R,k↑ ), the unperturbed Green's function of the BCS superconductor evaluated at the origin (r = 0) is represented as where ρ R is the density of states and ω + = ω + iη with η = 0 + . We reduce the expression above by taking When |∆| > |ω|, the pole (imaginary part >0) is ξ k =i √ ∆ 2 -ω 2 ; when |∆| < |ω|, the pole (imag part >0) is Using the theorem of residues, we obtain the unperturbed Green's function of the BCS superconductor as The spectral function of the superconducting lead is given by . The self-energy at the origin (r = 0) can be calculated as where we have used Fourier transform |ν R,r The density of states ρ R around the Fermi-surface is approximately regarded as a constant. The effective Green's function of the QD in the subsystem "quantum dot + Majorana Y-junction+Normal-metal lead" is given by . Hence the LDOS of the superconducting lead is In this section,we review the formalism for the shot noise which will be used in the main text where H η = kσ η,kσ a † η,kσ a η,kσ and The tunneling Hamiltonian is given by where t kσ is the tunneling amplitude between the leads η and the QD. The definition of the shot noise is given by Using the notation for four-type of the two-particle Green's functions the shot noise can be expressed as kk ,σσ where G (2)> i (t, t ) can be obtained from G i (τ, τ ) via analtyical continuation. The expression of G i (τ, τ ) can be reduced by using the S-matrix expansion and Wick's theorem, and more details can be found in Ref. where ) . The two-particle Green's functions above can be decomposed into the connected and disconnected terms, i.e., G i,conn (τ, τ ). The disconnected terms are given by The analytic continuation rules give where G QD is the 4×4 matrix form of the elements G QD,σ σ and Σ η is the 4×4 matrix form of the elements Σ η,σσ = k |t kσ | 2 G η,kσσ . The matrix σ z = diag(1, -1, 1, -1) describes the different charge of electrons and holes. Finally, we apply the convolution property of Fourier transform ∞ -∞ d(t-t )e iω (t-t ) x(t-t )y(t -t) = 1 2π ∞ -∞ dωF [x](ω)F [y](ω+ ω ) to the above shot noise and obtain (2)> 1,disc (t, t ) -t kσ t * k σ G (2)> 2,disc (t, t ) -t * kσ t k σ G (2)> 3,disc (t, t ) + t * kσ t * k σ G (2)> 4,disc (t, t ) + H.C. kσ | 2 |t k σ | 2 F η,kσ (t, t) + F * η,kσ (t, t) F η ,k σ (t , t ) + F * η ,k σ (t , t ) . kσ dt 1 G R QD,σσ (t, t 1 )Σ < η,kσσ + G < QD,σσ (t, t 1 )Σ A η,kσσ + H.C., |t |t > -G > -G > + dt 1 G