The high-T c superconducting (HTS) dynamo exploits the nonlinear resistivity of an HTS tape to generate a DC voltage when subjected to a varying magnetic field. This leads to the so-called flux pumping phenomenon and enables the injection of DC current into a superconducting coil connected to the dynamo without current leads. In this work, the process of charging a coil by an HTS dynamo is examined in detail using two numerical models: the Minimum Electromagnetic Entropy Production and the segregated H-formulation finite element model. The numerical results are compared with an analytical method for various airgaps and frequencies. Firstly, the I-V curves of the modeled HTS dynamo are calculated to obtain the open-circuit voltage, shortcircuit current and internal resistance. Afterward, the process of charging a coil by the dynamo including the charging current curve and its dynamic behavior are investigated. The results obtained by the two models show excellent quantitative and qualitative agreement with each other and with the analytical method. Although the general charging process of the coil can be obtained from the I-V curve of the flux pump, the current ripples within a cycle of dynamo rotation, which can cause ripple AC loss in the HTS dynamo, can only be captured via the presented models. High-T c superconducting (HTS) flux pumps employ a source of varying magnetic field relative to an HTS tape to generate a DC voltage (with a large ripple) and inject DC current into a superconducting coil connected to it. In HTS dynamo-type flux pump, this source of varying magnetic field is a permanent magnet(s) that rotates around an axis and transits past a stationary superconducting tape(s). The working mechanism of an HTS dynamo is similar to traditional dynamos, but without the need for commutator and brushes. Indeed, in the HTS dynamo, the nonlinear resistivity of superconductor serves as a natural rectifier to generate a DC voltage within each cycle. The HTS dynamo has drawn much attention in the last decade, since it was proposed and designed by Hoffman et al. in 2011 Many articles have reported experimental investigations into the process of charging a superconducting coil using an HTS dynamo, starting with Although several experimental studies have been carried out to explore the impact of various design parameters of an HTS dynamo on the charging process of an HTS coil, there is still a need for efficient models to fully examine the details and optimize this process. In recent years, several numerical models have been developed, which can be categorized into two groups. The first group models the open-circuit mode, where the output current is zero Proper modeling of the dynamic behavior is important because the ripples within each cycle can potentially cause AC loss in the coil. In addition, some applications such as motors and generators can be sensitive to ripple currents and their ripple magnetic fields. In this work, we model the charging process of a coil by an HTS dynamo-type flux pump. We perform these calculations using both the minimum electromagnetic entropy production (MEMEP) method and the segregated H-formulation finite element method, benchmarking the two techniques. The numerical results are also compared to analytical results. The models allows us to study the current ripples and their resultant AC loss in an HTS dynamo during the charging process. Fig. In our study, a constant J c equal to J c0 = I c0 /(b • a) has been assumed for simplicity. Although this will reduce the charging efficiency of the flux pump as discussed in We assume an isotropic E-J power law to define the non-linear characteristic of the HTS tape: where E c = 10 -4 V/m is the critical electric field, J c is the critical current density and n is the n-value, which defines the steepness of the transition between the superconducting state and the normal state. In this article, we assume that both tape and magnet are infinitely long along the z axis in a Cartesian 2D coordinate system. Therefore, the current density J, vector potential A, and electric field E, satisfy J(r 2 ) = J(x, y) e z , A(r 2 ) = A(x, y) e z and E(r 2 ) = E(x, y) e z , where r 2 is the 2D position vector in the cross-section and e z is the unit vector along the z axis, corresponding to the assumed infinitely long direction of the tape. The relation between the current density and the vector and scalar potentials is: and the current conservation equation: where ∂A/∂t is the change of vector potential with respect to time and φ is the scalar potential. For Coulomb's gauge (∇ • A = 0), the vector potential A in Equation ( The cross-sectional average of the electric field E(J) is: where S s is the cross-section of superconducting tape, d 2 r 2 is the surface differential in the cross-section and ρ is the nonlinear resistivity of the HTS tape, which can be obtained from Equation where φ is the electrostatic potential, E av is obtained by Equation ( The cumulative total output voltage, V cumul (t), is: The DC output voltage of the dynamo, V DC , is: as the time average value of the induced voltage over one period of rotation, T , in the steady-state. The MEMEP 2D method is a variational method, which the solution minimizes the entropy production made by electromagnetic fields As detailed in where Ω is the superconducting or normal conducting region in the 3D space, ∆J, ∆A J , ∆A M are the change of the variable between two consecutive time steps, ∆t is the time difference between two time steps, and J 0 is the current density at the previous time step. In addition, U in this functional is the dissipation factor, defined as This dissipation factor can include any E-J relation for superconductors or normal conductors. When the superconducting tape of the dynamo is connected in series with a coil, we can still use the functional of Equation where F S , F L , F R are the terms (of a single functional) for the superconducting tape, coil, and resistance, respectively. The expression of these is the same as in Equation ( With the assumptions of section 3.1, J(r 2 ) = J(x, y) e z , A(r 2 ) = A(x, y) e z and E(r 2 ) = E(x, y) e z , where r 2 is the 2D position vector in the cross-section, r 2 = xe x +ye y . In addition, ∇φ(r) is uniform with value ∇φ(r) = -(V /l)e z , where e z is the unit vector along the z axis and l is the tape effective length. The voltage V is conventionally defined as in a passive circuit element V = φ(z = -l/2) -φ(z = +l/2). With these assumptions, we simplify the superconducting tape functional into where S S is the cross-section of the superconducting tape and I is the net current in the tape. The non-uniform applied magnetic field B M caused by the rotating magnet appears in the functional in the form of A M . As well, in the infinitely long geometry, the A J contribution of the vector potential in Coulomb's gauge is Although we may consider a superconducting coil with local non-linear resistivity, here we assume for simplicity an ideal inductor of inductance L. Thus, we neglect (nonlinear) eddy currents in the conductor and any linear or non-linear resistive effect. As a result, J is uniform in the conductor cross-section and U(J) = 0. Taking also into account that the coil is not submitted to external magnetic fields, the coil functional from the Equation ( where the voltage of the inductance V L , is conventionally defined as the difference in electrostatic potential between the entry and exit of current I at the coil terminal. In a similar way, we assume that there are no eddy currents in the resistance (representing joints), the resistivity there is linear, and that they are not submitted to external applied magnetic fields. Following the reasoning of for any 3D shape of the resistive joint, where R is the resistance and the voltage V R is, again the drop in the electrostatic potential as defined in a passive circuit element. Since all elements are connected in series, the sum of the voltage terms of all three functionals is I(V S + V L + V R ). Since the sum of the voltage drops are in a closed circuit, they follow V S + V L + V R = 0; being Kirchhoff's second law. Thus, the whole system minimizes the following functional Here, we have used the same voltage definition for all elements, as a passive circuit element, for consistency. However, if we consider the HTS dynamo as a voltage source, the voltage is defined with opposite sign. The latter definition is used in the analysis of section 4. The segregated H-formulation (SEG-H) finite-element model, implemented in COMSOL Multiphysics, consists of a magnetostatic permanent magnet model and a timedependent H-formulation HTS wire model. The former is coupled unidirectionally to the latter using electromagnetic boundary conditions and a rotation operator to mimic the movement of the magnet The HTS wire model implements the 2D H-formulation The contribution, A J , the vector potential due to the superconducting current, is calculated using COMSOL's Poission's Equation interface (one of the 'Classical PDEs' available in the Mathematics module), where and an appropriate Dirichlet boundary condition is set, on the outer boundaries of the HTS wire model, such that Equation ( The total output voltage derived from the HTS wire model, including the contributions from E av , ∂ t A J,av and ∂ t A M,av , as defined by Equation ( For many configurations The current in the electrical circuit of Fig. where I sat = V oc /(R c + R eff ) is the saturation current, which is the maximum value of current that the flux pump can deliver and τ = L/(R c + R eff ) is the time constant of the circuit, determining the charging rate of the flux pump. The flux pump reaches 99.3 % saturation of the final value, I sat , after 5τ . The results of calculations using the MEMEP and SEG-H methods along with analytical results are presented and discussed in this section. For both methods, we have used 60 mesh elements across the width and one mesh element along the thickness of the tape. We have limited the number of mesh elements as much as possible up to a point that does not affect the accuracy of the results. The reason was to reduce the calculation time in order to be able to calculate up to millions of time steps in a reasonable time. To obtain the I-V curve of the HTS dynamo, we impose different transport DC currents in the dynamo and calculate the corresponding DC voltage values. Using the I-V curve, the HTS flux pump can be described as a current-controlled voltage source, as shown in Fig. In this section, we estimate and discuss the instantaneous output voltage components, the dynamic charging current curve of the coil and the resultant ripple AC loss. 4.2.2. Instantaneous current Fig. The ripples of the charging curve shown in Fig. Fig. Different number of cycles were required for each frequency to reach the saturation current I sat , which is a function of the time constant τ . For this reason, we used 2125, 5000 and 7000 calculated cycles for the frequencies of 4.25 Hz, 25 Hz and 50 Hz, respectively, which correspond to durations of 500 s, 200 s and 140 s. For the analytical calculations of the charging current, as given by the Equation For a given airgap, the coil current saturates faster with a higher value of I sat as the frequency increases. R eff increases linearly with frequency, thus the time constant τ decreases with increasing R eff . We also observe that I sat increases with increasing frequency, which suggests that V oc increases faster than R eff as the frequency increases. By considering the last calculated data point of each current curve in Fig. While the voltage signals in Fig. One may question why such complications are needed to analyze the charging process of an HTS dynamo, when it can be modeled simply by the analytical considerations presented in Section 3.4. For this purpose, only the I-V curve of the flux pump (including the effective resistance of the flux pump, which is still obtained from numerical models) and the characteristics of the coil would be needed. However, the analytical model cannot capture the dynamic behavior of the flux pump and the output voltage. This can be important and is only possible when the HTS dynamo is coupled with the coil circuit, as it has been performed in these models. In addition, our models have the potential to be coupled with other multiphysics analyses, as well as with a MEMEP or finite-element model of the superconducting coil in more detail. Furthermore, the models allow investigations on HTS dynamos with nonlinear I-V characteristics and their influence on the dynamics of the charging process Crucially, the current ripple shape in each cycle reflects the dynamic operation of the HTS dynamo while the magnet transits past the tape, resulting in the two peaks of the current. Since these ripples can potentially cause AC loss and subsequent thermal loss in the coil, accurate calculations of these ripples are important. In this work, two novel numerical methods for simulating the charging process of a coil by an HTS dynamo were presented: The Minimum Electromagnetic Entropy Production (MEMEP) and the segregated H-formulation (SEG-H). They were compared together and with an analytical method through nine different cases including three airgaps of 1, 2 and 3.7 mm and three frequencies of 4.25, 25 and 50 Hz. Firstly, the I-V curves of the modeled HTS dynamo and thus the effective resistances were calculated and compared together. The maximum percentage difference between the effective resistances of the two models was less than 2 %, which occurred at the highest frequency and the smallest airgap. Then, the instantaneous voltage components and the dynamic charging current curve of the coil for the two models were calculated and compared together, which showed excellent quantitative and qualitative agreement. It was found that the current charging curve contains ripples within each cycle, which cannot be captured via the analytical method. Such ripples cause ripple AC loss in the HTS dynamo, which was shown to be almost constant during the whole charging process. Afterwards, the charging process of a coil by the dynamo was investigated and there was again excellent quantitative and qualitative agreement between the two models and the analytical method. In all, the two presented numerical methods showed promising performance to describe the charging process of an HTS dynamo over thousands of cycles, as well as capturing the current ripple within a cycle. In addition, the flexibility of the numerical modeling frameworks presented here have the potential to be coupled with other multiphysics analyses, as well as with a MEMEP or finite-element model of an HTS coil. Besides, the models are capable of studying HTS dynamos with nonlinear I-V characteristics and their influence on dynamics of the charging process. conductors. COMPEL-The international journal for computation and mathematics in electrical and electronic engineering, 2011. [46] M D Ainslie, T J Flack, and A M Campbell. Calculating transport AC losses in stacks of high temperature superconductor coated conductors with magnetic substrates using FEM. Physica C: Superconductivity, 472(1):50-56, 2012.