The recently discovered layered kagome metals AV3Sb5 (A = K, Rb, and Cs) with vanadium kagome networks provide a novel platform to explore correlated quantum states intertwined with topological band structures. Here we report the prominent effect of hole doping on both superconductivity and charge density wave (CDW) order, achieved by selective oxidation of exfoliated thin flakes. A superconducting dome is revealed as a function of the effective doping content. The superconducting transition temperature (Tc) and upper critical field in thin flakes are significantly enhanced compared with the bulk, which are accompanied by the suppression of CDW. Our detailed analyses establish the pivotal role of van Hove singularities (VHSs) in promoting correlated quantum orders in these kagome metals. Our experiment not only demonstrates the intriguing nature of superconducting and CDW orders, but also provides a novel route to tune the carrier concentration through both selective oxidation and electric gating. This establishes AV3Sb5 as a tunable 2D platform for the further exploration of topology and correlation among 3d electrons in kagome lattices. The kagome lattice, with an in-plane network of corner-sharing triangles, represents an ideal playground to realize various intriguing correlated phenomena From the perspective of electronic structure, the Fermi level of AV 3 Sb 5 lies in the vicinity of multiple van Hove singularities (VHSs) In this Letter, we study the CDW and superconductivty in thin flakes of CsV 3 Sb 5 and propose a novel doping method by selective oxidation, taking advantage of the semi-metallic nature of Sb. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and gate-tuning experiments substantiate that hole doping in the topological kagome metals AV 3 Sb 5 is realized for the first time. The T c increases to 4.8 K with much enhanced and highly anisotropic upper critical fields, while the CDW is suppressed. A characteristic superconducting dome is revealed when considering the nonlinear relationship between the flake thickness and the effective doping. The T c evolution follows the density of states at E F , with a maximum when the higher-order VHS coincides with E F , as modelled by our density functional theory (DFT) calculations. Our research provides a novel route to tune the correlated quantum states in layered kagome materials. The crystal structure of CsV 3 Sb 5 shows P 6/mmm symmetry with alternating stacking of kagome layers (V 3 Sb 5 ) and charge reservoir layers (Cs), as displayed in Fig. To verify the possibility of hole doping, we compare the XPS of the bulk sample and the exfoliated thin flakes (Fig. The achieved hole doping in the thin flakes allows us to investigate its influence on superconductivity and CDW orders. Fig. We further investigate the thickness-dependent superconductivity and CDW transition temperatures, T c and . The T CDW is determined by standard dρ/dT procedure as shown in Fig. By using the enhanced T c as an indicator, it is possible to further provide a complementary evidence of the hole doping by conventional gate-tuning experiment. We expect that introducing electron doping in pre-oxidized samples can drive the T c towards the bulk value, i.e., lower T c . As shown in Fig After retracting the gate voltage, the T c quickly recovered to 4.8 K, indicating a pure gating effect (cyan line shown in Fig. To theoretically simulate it, we performed calculations with Cs vacancies using virtual crystal approximation. The band structures for the pristine and structures with 3%, 5% Cs vacancies are displayed in Fig. Upon hole doping, the higher-order VHS1 point moves towards the Fermi level, resulting in an increase in DOS at E F , as shown in Fig. Based on above analysis, the phase diagram can be drawn in terms of temperature versus effective hole doping, as shown in Fig. There are three VHSs close to the Fermi level in AV 3 Sb 5 , two of which have sublattice-pure and one sublattice-mixed features In conclusion, we realized the hole doping of the newly discovered topological kagome metals through a synergetic effect of thickness controlling and selective oxidation. Compared with bulk CsV 3 Sb 5 , the hole-doped thin flake shows a much higher T c of about 4.8 K and a greatly enhanced H c2 . The competing nature between superconductivity and CDW order is established and a comprehensive phase diagram is revealed, analogous to cuprates and iron-based superconductors. Band structure analysis demonstrates the crucial role of VHSs in the T c enhancement with hole doping. The results presented here provide new insight for the interpreation of superconductivity and CDW order in kagome systems. The proposed method may open the door to explore the kagome materials in the 2D limit, and the successful realization of gating effect can be applied to further reveal exotic correlation phenomena in these rich physical systems. N ote. We recently became aware of two independent works on thin flakes exfoliation for KV 3 Sb 5 