Phase-change memory devices have found applications in in-memory computing where the physical attributes of these devices are exploited to compute in place without the need to shuttle data between memory and processing units. However, non-idealities such as temporal variations in the electrical resistance have a detrimental impact on the achievable computational precision. To address this, a promising approach is projecting the phase configuration of phase change material onto some stable element within the device. Here we investigate the projection mechanism in a prominent phase-change memory device architecture, namely mushroom-type phase-change memory. Using nanoscale projected Ge 2 Sb 2 Te 5 devices we study the key attributes of state-dependent resistance, drift coefficients, and phase configurations, and using them reveal how these devices fundamentally work. Phase change memory (PCM) devices can not only store data in their adjustable physical state but also use that data to perform computations by modifying an externally applied signal. This attribute has enabled their use in the emerging computational scheme of in-memory computing The understanding of 'projection' has, however, remained limited to lateral-type architectures, which are not yet established for scaling-up. Of interest, therefore, are vertical devices with established materials and processing methods, that can be densely integrated and provide an optimized balance of key device properties, such as the mushroom-type PCM devices Figure R Liner (u a , T,t) = ρ Liner,o 2π × t PCM × (ln(u a )ln(r BE )) × exp where, ρ Amor,o , ρ Crys,o , ρ Liner,o , and ρ Leak,o are the electrical resistivities of the sub-scripted components; they are temperature independent Arrhenius prefactors at time instance t 0 . t PCM and t Liner are the thickness of the phase-change material, and the liner respectively, and other symbols have their previously defined meanings. Note that these equations are only valid for the regime where u a ≥ r BE . t Liner in our investigation are sub-10 nm, and for such a film thinness, we invoke directional anisotropy , where n is a positive rational number. The shunt resistance R Leak takes into account any electrical conducting pathways that may exist in the amorphous phase-change material dome and is a proxy for the shunt (parasitic) resistor used commonly to account for conductive defects in the modeling of solar cells The thermally activated charge transport (T dependence) and resistance drift (t dependence) are accounted in the above equations by expressions after the square brackets, respectively. E Amor , E Crys , E Liner , and E Leak are the activation energies and ν Leak , ν Crys , ν Crys and ν Leak are the drift coefficients of the sub-scripted components. t is the time elapsed after t 0 , k b and T are the Boltzmann constant (in eV) and ambient temperature (in K), respectively. Using these lumped resistors we frame an equivalent electrical circuit of a mushroom-type device, with and without a liner. This is sketched in Figure R Liner⊥ in eqn.7 can be also considered as a component that is in series with both R Amor Leak and R Crys (see section S1). The essential benefit of a PMPCM device is that the liner decouples information storage from the information read-out. This occurs due to the parallel circuit configuration, since the majority of current flows 'preferentially' through R Liner , instead of traversing through R Amor . To gain an initial overview of the key differences in the device metrics with and without the liner, we plug the required material and device parameters into our circuit model. We plot the resistance and drift coefficient as a function u a and T , as illustrated in Figure A key parameter needed to verify the circuit model is the charge-transport activation energies (E) of the different device components making a PMPCM device. To obtain these we measure unprojected and PMPCM devices. Figure Another important metric that requires verification is the geometry of the amorphous volume in PMPCM devices. In the circuit model we approximated this to be hemisphere. To study this, we simulated the steady-state behavior of mushroom devices using a custom electro-thermal finite-element method (FEM) model (see Methods). Figure The amorphous dome sizes (u a ) corresponding to the various programmable resistance states must also be obtained experimentally, in order to make fair comparisons. To extract u a , we make use of the standard field-voltage relation u a = V th F th . Here, F th is the threshold-switching field unique to d-GST and V th is the threshold-voltage at which the snap-back in the current-voltage measurement occurs. An example measurement is shown in Figure Having thus obtained the various important device metrics, we now investigate how the drift coefficients (ν) in the unprojected and PMPCM devices scale as a function of u a . Figure We fit the circuit model to this data, and in the spirit of capturing an accurate physical picture, we fit most parameters. The model can adequately trace the data (red trace in Figure We now discuss the mechanisms that lead to the ν(u a ) dependency in PMPCM devices by sketching the different operational regimes (see Figure Ambient temperature is yet another important state-variable that can impact device behavior. We now discuss the temperature dependence of the drift coefficients in unprojected and PMPCM devices. We perform these measurements by creating a RESET state and performing multiple resistance vs time measurements on it at different ambient temperatures (achieved through a heated sample stage). Figure The mechanisms that lead to the ν(T ) dependency in the PMPCM devices are discussed in Figure In this paper, we discussed the important material and electrical attributes of projected mushroom-type phase-change memories. Using a combined experimental and theoretical framework, we described how a conductive thin film (liner) when added to a mushroom device modifies the data read-out characteristics. In spite of similar programming and phase configurations to unprojected devices, we found the state-dependent resistance drift and temperature sensitivity to evolve differently in the projected devices. We observed the projection efficacy to be decisively determined by the liner's physical thickness, and the mismatch of electrical resistivity and the electronic activation energy between the phase-change material and the liner. Our findings provide the first insights into how vertically configured projected memristive devices may fundamentally operate. The results lay a directed framework for building higher performing projected memory for computational-memory applications. We fabricated Projected PCM devices based on a typical mushroom-type geometry by placing a projection liner between the heater and phase-change material. The devices comprise an 80 nm thick film of a doped-Ge 2 Sb 2 Te 5 (d-GST) phase-change material, a sub-10 nm thick film of metal-nitride (M x N y ) liner, bottom and top M x N y electrodes, where the bottom electrode radius is 19 nm. The device is 540 nm wide, and equally broad. All material depositions were carried out using sputter depositions. The devices were made on an 8-inch wafer, and we observed spatial nonuniformity's in the thicknesses of the different films. This was noted using ellipsometry measurements, and we took these variations into account in our analysis. We characterized the retention, threshold voltage, SET speed and resistance drift properties of the projected and unprojected devices. The results are discussed in the supporting information. We calibrated the FEM model using the activation energy measurements on unprojected devices. For simulations, the current flow in the device is modeled by enforcing the continuity equation at each mesh point, using the expression ∇.J = 0 and J = -σ ∇V , where J is current density, σ is electrical conductivity, and V is the voltage. The crystalline phase-change material conductivity follows a Poole-Frenkel-type activated-transport model. To capture the self-heating that governs the operation of these devices, the continuity equation is solved simultaneously with the energy conservation equation -∇.(k∇T ) = J.(σ -1 J), where k is the thermal conductivity of the material and T is the local temperature in the device. The thermal properties of the materials here are assumed to follow both the Weidemann-Franz electronic relationship. All parameters including electrical and thermal interface (boundary) resistances are taken from measurements and tabulated in section S4. In our analytical modelling a device without the liner comprises only R Amor , R Crys and R Leak . When u a = r BE in both device types, the BE can be referred to as fully covered or blocked, in which case a fraction of current traversing from BE to TE must always flow through the resistive amorphous volume. In this case, the resistances of the BE and TE to current are insignificant and can be ignored. In our fitting to the temperature dependent drift coefficient, similar to resistivity anisotropy, we also considered anisotropy in E Liner . From fitting we observed E Liner⊥ < 0.5E Liner , regardless data could also be fitted without anisotropy. Device measurements: The electrical measurements were performed in a custom-built probe station. The temperature of the chuck was measured using a Lake Shore Si DT-670B-CU-HT diode. Devices were electrically contacted with high-frequency Cascade Microtech Dual-Z GSSG probes. DC measurements of the device state were performed with a Keithley 2600 System SourceMeter. AC signals were applied to the device with an Agilent 81150 A pulse function arbitrary generator. A Tektronix oscilloscope (DPO5104) recorded the voltage pulses applied to and transmitted by the device. Switching between the circuit for DC and AC measurements was achieved with mechanical relays. Note that in our measurements all READ operations were performed at 0.2 V. We extract E Amor , E Crys and E Liner by fitting the resistance vs temperature data to the Arrhenius equation of where, R T is resistance at temperature T , R ∞ is the device resistance at ∞ K and other symbols have their usual meanings. We obtain the state-dependent u a by using the field equation. As a starting point, from a known V th and u a , we extract F th . For this we measure the current-voltage trace of a RESET state and fit the trace to the modified Poole-Frenkel transport model a where, I is the current (in A), V is the voltage (in V), q is the electrical charge, A is the contact area (in m 2 ), N tot is the trap density (in m -3 ), τ 0 is attempt-to-escape from a trap (in s), ∆z is the inter-trap distance, E C -E F is equivalent to E Amor , and other symbols have their usual meanings. For plot shown in Figure By fitting resistance vs time data for each state with the resistance drift equation ν = ) , we extracted the drift coefficients. Here, R 0 is the device resistance at time t 0 , and t is the time elapsed after t 0 . Table 