We present single-mode nanowire (NW) lasers with ultralow threshold in the near-infrared spectral range. To ensure the single-mode operation, the NW diameter and length are reduced specifically to minimize the longitudinal and transverse modes of the NW cavity. Increased optical losses and reduced gain volume by the dimension reduction are compensated by excellent NW morphology and InGaAs/GaAs multi-quantum disks. At 5 K, a threshold low as 1.6 μJ/cm 2 per pulse is achieved with a resulting quality factor exceeding 6400. By further passivating the NW with an AlGaAs shell to suppress surface non-radiative recombination, single-mode lasing operation is obtained with a threshold of only 48 μJ/cm 2 per pulse at room temperature with a high characteristic temperature of 223 K and power output of ~ 0.9 μW. These single-mode, ultralow threshold, high power output NW lasers are promising for the development of near-infrared nanoscale coherent light sources for integrated photonic circuits, sensing, and spectroscopy. Keywords:nanowire laser, single-mode, quantum disks, low threshold, near-infrared Nanowire (NW) lasers with their ultracompact footprint, ease of integration, and low energy consumption are of great interests for future integrated photonic devices in optical interconnects and super-resolution imaging. In this work, we report single-mode NW lasers with ultralow threshold at the wavelengths around 950 nm. Through computational methods, the NW length and diameter are optimized to ~ 2.2 μm and ~ 200 nm, respectively, to support single-mode lasing. This is the smallest dimension reported to date for NW lasers. To overcome the large optical loss and small gain volume, multiple GaAs/InGaAs quantum disks (QDs) are grown in the central region of the GaAs NW to provide sufficient optical gains. At 5 K, the lasing threshold is low as 1.6 μJ/cm 2 per pulse with a Q-factor exceeding 6400. By further passivating the NW with an AlGaAs shell uniformly to suppress surface nonradiative recombination, room temperature single-mode lasing operation is obtained with a low threshold of 48 μJ/cm 2 per pulse and a power output ~ 0.9 μW. The merits of single-mode, ultralow threshold, and room temperature operation make near-infrared NW laser a promising nanoscale coherent light source for integrated photonic circuits, sensing and spectroscopy. The inserted GaAs/InGaAs QDs in the GaAs NW have a spontaneous emission around 1 μm in wavelength with a linewidth of 50 nm (see Figure in which λ is center wavelength (1000 nm), L is the length of NW and neff is the effective refractive index of guided mode. According to the definition of group index ng, the mode spacing could also be expressed as follows: By simulation in Lumerical MODE analysis, the group index of HE11a and HE11b are calculated to be 5.60 and 5.99, respectively. Figure When the length of NW equals to 3.3 μm, the mode spacings of HE11a and HE11b are approximate 30 and 25 nm. Moreover, the mode spacings increase as the length of NW decreases. For a gain curve with a spectral width of ~ 50 nm (in the case of our InGaAs/GaAs QDs), then there only one mode within this bandwidth when the length is less than 3.3 μm (see the inset of Figure These features are important to maintain a stable guided mode along the NW to obtain a high Q factor in the optical cavity. The top view shown in Figure High-angle annular dark field scanning transmission electron microscopy (HAADF-STEM) analyses show that multi-QD region (brighter regions correspond to InGaAs QDs), is located about 1.2 μm above the bottom of the NW. The magnified view of the QDs region in the inset of Figure In this work, we demonstrate single-mode lasing from unpassivated GaAs/InGaAs multi-QDs NWs up to 180 K. By designing the cavity size of the NW, the lasing mode can be selected and controlled. The high optical gain provided by the QDs can compensate for the optical loss caused by the reduced cavity length. Furthermore, the excellent NW morphology also results a low cavity loss. Single-mode lasing at room temperature is obtained by passivating the NW surface an AlGaAs/GaAs shell to further reduce non-radiative losses from the surface. Our QDs NW lasers exhibit single-mode output with a very low threshold fluence ~ 48 μJ/cm 2 per pulse at room temperature with a high characteristic temperature ∼223 K and power output ∼ 0.9 μW. This realization of excellent single-mode, ultralow threshold NW lasers are promising for the development of high-powered nano-scale laser for future applications. Growth method: GaAs/InGaAs QD NWs were grown on GaAs (111)B substrates via SA-MOVPE in an AIXTRON 200/4 reactor. Before growth, ~30 nm of SiO2 was first deposited on the GaAs (111)B substrates at 300 °C by plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition. Then hexagonal arrays of holes were patterned by electron beam lithography, followed by reactive ion etching. After trim etching with sulfuric acid and hydrochloric acid, the substrate was loaded into the growth chamber. Trimethylgallium, trimethylindium and arsine were used as precursors for the Ga, In and As, respectively. The details of the growth conditions can be found in the supporting information. A confocal photoluminescence microscopy system (shown in Figure The Supporting Information is available free of charge on the ACS Publications website. Mode hopping analysis:The mode spacing between the new and the previous peak is about 25 nm, which is different from the HE11a/HE11b Fabry-Pérot mode spacing for this NW, calculated to be 40 nm. Considering the passivation cap/shell resulting in an increase of overall NW diameter to ~300 nm, TE01 mode transverse mode is also supported in the NW. So, the mode might hop between TE01 and HE11a/HE11b, with increasing temperature. By solving the equation 2Lneff=Nλ for TE01 and HE11a/HE11b, a mode spacing of 25.5 nm between TE01 at and HE11a is obtained, which matches well with the experimental mode spacing. The detailed simulation is discussed as follows: The lasing mode and wavelength are determined by: simulation, the lasing peak and the solutions do not match well under the broad range of temperatures investigated. Optical excitation can also heat up the NW, so actual temperature of NW should be higher than operating temperature, which can also contribute to the slight mismatch between solutions and lasing peak at room temperature. Notes: To get straight and regular shape of the GaAs/InGaAs QD nanowires, highquality mask without any unexpected pinholes is the precondition and a cleaning process is necessary to ensure that the substrate and mask are free of residual organic matter and oxides. Secondly, a higher growth temperature is beneficial for achieving the taper-free morphology and avoiding the accompanying island-like particle growth on the substrate.