Trapped ions are excellent candidates for quantum computing and quantum networks because of their long coherence times, ability to generate entangled photons as well as high fidelity singleand two-qubit gates. To scale up trapped ion quantum computing, we need a Bell-state analyzer on a reconfigurable platform that can herald high fidelity entanglement between ions. In this work, we design a photonic Bell-state analyzer on a reconfigurable thin film lithium niobate platform for polarization-encoded qubits. We optimize the device to achieve high fidelity entanglement between two trapped ions and find >99% fidelity. The proposed device can scale up trapped ion quantum computing as well as other optically active spin qubits, such as color centers in diamond, quantum dots, and rare-earth ions. Trapped ions are one of the most advanced platforms for quantum computing and quantum networks. They exhibit long coherence times Thin film lithium niobate is a promising material platform to implement photonic Bell analyzers on a compact chip. Lithium niobate has a broad transparency window over the visible spectrum In this work, we propose and analyze a design for a photonic Bell-state analyzer for polarization-encoded qubits in thin-film lithium niobate. To overcome the polarization anisotropy, we optimize the dimensions of the device to achieve the desired unitary operation of the transverse electric (TE) and transverse magnetic (TM) polarization components simultaneously. We design the Bell-state analyzer to operate at the main transition wavelength (493.55 nm) of trapped barium ions ( 133 Ba + and 138 Ba + ), which are a leading candidate for optically active qubits for trapped ion quantum computing Although conceptually simple, chip-integration of this device is challenging due to the requirement that the beam splitter must be non-polarizing. To satisfy this requirement, we consider the directional coupler structure shown in Fig. The goal is to design a beam splitter that exhibits 50/50 power splitting ratios for both TE and TM modes. To gain a better understanding of how to achieve this condition, we apply coupled mode theory to analyze the coupling region of the device , where λ 0 is the operating wavelength. Due to the large anisotropy in the shape of the waveguides, the TE and TM modes will in general have different Δn, which will lead to different power splitting ratios for the two polarizations. To achieve a Bell-state analyzer, we need to first minimize this disparity. We denote Δn 12 and Δn 13 as the coupling strength for the TE and TM modes, respectively. We define the ratio ξ = )* "# )* "$ as the figure of merit for our device, with the optimal device achieving ξ = 1. We perform all simulations using a three-dimensional eigenmode expansion solver (Lumerical Mode solutions). In all calculations, we set the refractive indexes of lithium niobate and SiO2 to be 2.34 To achieve ξ = 1, we vary the width and etch depth of the Bell-state analyzer with a gap distance of g = 65 nm (Fig. In order to design the full device, we must also consider the S bend regions (Fig. Using the previously optimized width (w), etch depth (he), gap (g), and bending length (Ls), we then simulate the complete device with the S-bends. To analyze the polarization-insensitive operation of the device, we investigate how the normalized power values at ports 3 and 4 change with the coupling length (Lc) for the TE and TM modes (Fig. To achieve polarization insensitivity for the full device including the S-bends, we vary the gap, which significantly controls the power splitting ratio of the Bell-state analyzer, while keeping the other parameters fixed at their previously optimized values (w = 475 nm, he = 110 nm, Ls = 30 μm). We define a polarization-dependence parameter, ζ , which is the difference in the normalized powers of the TE and TM modes of port 3. To achieve any arbitrary polarization insensitive power splitting ratio, we calculate the root mean square value of ζ for coupling lengths of 1 to 25 μm, which contain all the possible power splitting ratios, and define the parameter as δ. We then minimize δ by varying the gap, which occurs at g = 40 nm (Fig. The fidelity of detecting the entangled ion state Then, we define the entanglement error as Fig. TM polarization ratio occurs, as shown in Fig. Although we design this polarization-insensitive photonic Bell-state analyzer for remote ion entanglement, coupling light into the chip independent of polarization is crucial to maintain high fidelity entanglement between ions. If the TE and modes couple with different efficiencies, that will destroy the polarization insensitivity of the device and reduce the fidelity of entanglement. Therefore, we analyze and optimize the coupling efficiencies for the TE and TM modes. To couple light into the chip, we consider a specific coupling scheme based on a lensed fiber. This approach can maintain the polarization insensitivity and yield high coupling efficiencies 