The origin of the pseudogap behavior, found in many high-T c superconductors, remains one of the greatest puzzles in condensed matter physics. One possible mechanism is fermionic incoherence, which near a quantum critical point allows pair formation but suppresses superconductivity. Employing quantum Monte Carlo simulations of a model of itinerant fermions coupled to ferromagnetic spin fluctuations, represented by a quantum rotor, we report numerical evidence of pseudogap behavior, emerging from pairing fluctuations in a quantum-critical non-Fermi liquid. Specifically, we observe enhanced pairing fluctuations and a partial gap opening in the fermionic spectrum. However, the system remains non-superconducting until reaching a much lower temperature. In the pseudogap regime the system displays a "gap-filling" rather than "gap-closing" behavior, similar to the one observed in cuprate superconductors. Our results present direct evidence of the pseudogap state, driven by superconducting fluctuations. Even though unconventional and high-T c superconductivity arises in a diverse set of materials, many of them share similar features in their phase diagram. One prominent feature is a superconducting (SC) dome, which emerges near the termination point of a non-SC phase with either spin or charge order. The second feature is anomalous transport and non Fermi-liquid (nFL) behavior around the putative quantum critical points (QCP). These features have led to the proposal that soft quantum-critical fluctuations of the order parameter serve as the source for the universal behavior and mediate singular interaction that gives rise to superconductivity with nontrivial pairing symmetry, strange metal behavior, and intertwined orders. In many unconventional superconductors, most notably the cuprates, there is a third feature: the "pseudogap(PG)", a gap-like feature in the fermionic spectrum above the SC phase. Despite decades of investigation, the origin (or origins) of the PG remain intensely debated. One class of proposals names exotic, possibly topological order in the particle-hole channel as the origin The understanding of the coupling between fermionic excitations near the Fermi surface (FS) and bosonic quantum critical fluctuations i ĉk ). Blue arrows and grid in the middle layers denote bosonic parts with an unit vector representing θ ∈ [0, 2π) of the rotor on each site. The interaction between two rotors on nearest sites (e.g. θm and θn) is tb. The on-site coupling K between fermions and bosons is shown by the vertical dashed lines. The system size is L × L. b U -T phase diagram of the model obtained from QMC simulation. The inset zooms in to the vicinity of the pseudogap (PG, yellow), ferromagnetic (FM, blue) and superconducting (SC, orange) regions. The blue points on the FM phase boundary are determined by finite size scaling with fixed T or U . Notably, for U = 5.9, as temperature gets lower, the system first enters into the FM phase at T ≈ 0.13, then exits it at T ≈ 0.08. The yellow points of the PG boundary are determined from the onset of a PG in the single-particle spectrum, as shown in Fig. are free of the sign-problem plaguing most fermionic QMC, allowing for a realistic test of theory. In this work, we investigate the PG physics via such a sign-free QMC simulation of fermions near a ferromagnetic QCP. We find robust signatures of a PG above the SC state and are able to study its spectral properties and its interplay with the dynamics of the ferromagnetic degrees of freedom. We also compare the numerical results with several theoretical predictions, and reconcile many key aspects of the two. Overview. Before going into the details of our work, we present an overview of the essential features of our model and a summary of the main results. The model we choose to implement is a variant of a quantum critical model, in which the bosons represent critical ferromagnetic(FM) spin fluctuations (a "spinfermion" model). When looking for a spectral property of the superconductivity, such as a PG, such a model has an advantage over analogous ones, e.g. antiferromagnetic or nematic models (see e.g. In the normal state, at low enough temperatures we find in the bosonic sector near the QCP an overdamped dynamics with linear frequency response (z = 2 scaling). This is different from the z = 3 behavior, found in Ising systems, and is a result of a non-conservation of the order parameter in our model. In the temperature range, where the bosonic susceptibility is linear in frequency, we observe several remarkable features. The uniform susceptibility deviates from Curie-Weiss behavior and actually becomes weaker at smaller T . In the fermionic sector, we find a gap-like feature in the density of states (DOS). Unlike in a BCS superconductor, the size of the gap remains roughly independent on temperature, while the DOS becomes progressively depleted (filled) upon lowering (raising) temperature. Importantly, the scaling behavior of the pairing susceptibility clearly shows that the system is not in a SC state. We thus identify the spectral gap in such a state as a PG. We note that the "gap-filling" behavior observed in our numerical results has also been observed in tunneling and photoemission experiments on the cuprates The quantum-critical spin dynamics and normal state fermionic properties that we find are consistent with recent theoretical predictions for nFLs at finite temperature , obtained within the modified Eliashberg theory The onset temperature for PG behavior, T PG , and SC T c , extracted from QMC, are consistent with theoretical predictions (see Ref. Crucially, we view our finding of a PG as the evidence of a universal mechanism for the formation of a PG from SC fluctuations near a QCP, not limited to the specific model of FM spin fluctuations that we used. We do not claim that we present a model for PG formation in a specific material, but in view of our findings we do expect SC fluctuations to be a contributing factor to PG formation in any system close enough to a QCP, independently of the specific origin of the pairing boson. The PG, obtained in our work, comes from pairing fluctuations in a situation when the pairing is in turn mediated by a propagator of a FM order parameter. While our model does not directly describe experimental situation in the cuprates, where antiferromagnetic fluctuations are often considered to be a pairing glue, we argue that the mechanism for the PG formation, studied in our work, is a universal phenomenon of the pairing near a quantum-critical point Model. We consider a model of itinerant fermions coupled to SO(2) quantum rotors, as shown in Fig. where The first term Ĥqr describes a quantum rotor model on a square lattice. Here Li is the angular momentum of 2D rotor θi at site i. The second term Ĥf describes two identical copies of spin-1/2 fermions on a square lattice, with layer index λ = 1 and 2 representing the top and the bottom layers. Fermions in each layer can hop between nearest-neighbor (next-nearest-neighbor) sites with hopping amplitudes t 1 (t 2 ), and the chemical potential μ controls the fermion density. The last term Ĥqr-f couples quantum rotors and fermions via an onsite FM interaction that tends to align XY component of a fermion spin with the direction of a rotor on each site. In the absence of fermion-rotor coupling, rotors develop quasi-long-range FM order via a Kosterlitz-Thouless(KT) transition We express all quantities in units of t b . In the simulations we set K = 4, t 1 = 1, t 2 = 0.2 and μ = 0. We varied U and the temperature T and constructed the phase diagram of the model, Fig. Pseudogap and superconductivity properties. We observe a SC dome around the QCP. Above the dome, we find evidence of PG behavior in the range of T , whose width is comparable to T c . First, by measuring correlation functions of Cooper pairs in various pairing channels, we found that the dominant pairing channel is spin-triplet and odd under the interchange between the top and the bottom layers (layer-singlet), i.e., ∆(r) = 1 √ 2 (ĉ r1↑ ĉr2↓ -ĉr2↑ ĉr1↓ ) = 1 √ 2 (ĉ r1↑ ĉr2↓ + ĉr1↓ ĉr2↑ ), where 1 and 2 label layers. In the classification of 2D irreducible representations, this is an s-wave gap, as ∆(0) is fi- nite. We verified (see Supplementary Figure Third, to determine the actual SC transition temperature, T c , we performed scaling analysis of the pairing susceptibility using KT scaling for the pairing susceptibility We analyzed the QMC data within the quantum critical theory of itinerant ferromagnets ture for the pairing within the Eliashberg theory for quantum-critical pairing We note that previous QMC work (see e.g. Magnetic dynamics and re-entrance effect. The pairing behavior also has an impact on the magnetic phase transition and the quantum dynamics of the rotors. As shown in Fig. We note, that in the absence of an SC dome, previous works (see e.g. In addition, we measured the inverse dynamical bosonic susceptibility of the rotors across different regions of the phase diagram. Our results are summarized in Fig. First, at higher frequencies we find a linear frequency dependence (z = 2), which does not saturate to a finite value. This is surprising at first glance, since Landau damping for a ferromagnet has an ω/q form (z = 3) rather than linear ω. We note that, in purely electronic models χ -1 (q, ω) is required to be non-analytic at any coupling strength due to spin conservation, and non-analytic behavior was seen previously in simulations of Ising-ferromagnets. However, in our simulations of the XY model, the order parameter is not conserved, leading to linear frequency dependence, in direct contrast to Ising model studied in Refs. Second, at lower Matsubara frequencies accessible at lower temperatures, the ω 2 behavior is again restored even in the quantum-critical region. As discussed above, this is again a direct result of the formation of a gap -this time the pseudogap, which depletes the low-energy fermion density of states and reduces the fermionic feedback on the bosons. From the analysis above, we see that the spin dynamics is consistent with the quantum-critical behavior and PG physics. In this work, we performed a large-scale quantum Monte Carlo simulation of a FM spin-fermion model. We reported direct spectral and thermodynamic evidence of the formation of a PG prior to the SC transition. Within such a PG phase, the temperature evolution of the fermion spectral gap exhibits a gap-filling behavior, in sharp contrast with that of a conventional superconductor. Moreover, we found that the dynamics of the spin fluctuations display a different behavior than the well-known Landau damping behavior with z = 3. Remarkably, we were able to reconcile all these features with theoretical predictions of Eliashberg theory and its generalization to the γ-model. Experimentally, PG phases have been observed in various unconventional superconductors QMC simulations and data analysis. We employ the determinant quantum Monte Carlo (DQMC) method In order to obtain real-frequency spectral functions, the SAC scheme is employed to obtain the spectral function N (ω) from the imaginary-time correlation function G(τ ), It is known that the problem of inverting the Laplace transform is equivalent to find the most probable spectra N (ω) out of its exponentially many suggestions to match the QMC correlation function G(τ ) with respect to its stochastic errors, and such transformation has been converted to a Monte Carlo sampling process Theoretical analysis. We analyzed the QMC data for fermionic and bosonic response using the modified Eliashberg theory, which is a low energy effective dynamical theory for itinerant fermions near a QCP at finite temperatures. The theory accepts as parameters the static properties of a coupled fermion-boson system near a QCP, e.q. fermion bandstructure, bosonic susceptibility, etc., and computes the dynamical response of the system in terms of the fermionic self energy Σ(k, ω n ) and bosonic self energy (polarization) Π(q, Ω n ), taking into account the low energy excitations near the FS. It accounts for deviations from the canonical T → 0 quantum critical behavior, e.g. deviations from the Σ ∼ ω 2/3 n nFL self energy, and from the Landau damping Π ∼ Ω n /(v F |q|) as discussed in the main text. For details on the method see Refs. We applied the theory to our QMC data, both to verify our assumptions on the normal state of the system and to extract the effective fermion-boson coupling. In the bare theory, the coupling ḡ ∼ K 2 , but it is renormalized by fermions with energies of order of the bandwidth, so it should be extracted by fitting from the QMC data. We present results for U = 6 which is almost above the QCP in Supplementary Figure Finally, we used the obtained ḡ to predict T PG within Eliashberg theory (the γ-model). Our model corresponds to γ = 1/3. The analytical prediction for T PG can be found in Ref. the numerical data analysis. AK, YW, KS and AVC performed the theory analysis. All authors wrote the manuscript together. A. Quantum Rotor Model. The Monte Carlo simulation on the quantum rotor model (QRM) starts from employing a proper basis for the Hamiltonian. As shown in Eq. 2 in main text, the boson part has global U(1) symmetry under θ representation. We adopt the representation of the angle variable θ for each site, ranging between [0, 2π), which are the eigenstates of the potential part. Using the canonical commutation relation [ θi , nj ] = iδ i,j , the QRM Hamiltonian can be expressed as, and the partition function obeys, Using Trotter decomposition, we can divided β into M slices with step ∆τ = β/M , and insert the complete sets of the {θ i } at each time slice. We have, The states follow the periodic boundary condition {θ(M )} = {θ(0)}. For the potential part, θ i (l)-s are the eigenstates of V and can be directly calculated. For the kinetic part, if one inserts a complete basis of J i (l) as the integer-valued angular momentum at site i and time slice l, one finds that The term θ i (l)|J i (l) has a complex value e iJi(l)θi(l) . Next, we transfer the square term of J i (l) into linear term with the help of the Poisson summation formula, Then, we modify this by a Villain approximation to where the kinetic part of QRM can be regarded as the effective interaction along imaginary time axis. We finally map the QRM to 3D anisotropic XY model The determinantal quantum Monte Carlo (DQMC) is designed to deal with the interacting fermion lattice model with quartic interactions In DQMC, one transfers the non-eigenstates to a series of classical configurations, such as the space-time rotor configurations in previous section, and then samples in the resulting configuration space. To start with, one writes down the path integral of partition function, Here, M = β/dτ , denoting the number of the imaginary time slices. Ĥ is the total Hamiltonian and contains both bosonic and fermionic parts, and their interaction. The trace operation can be divided into trace for fermions Tr F and bosons dθ i , where we express the bosonic degrees of freedom as θ for each site. Next, we insert a series of unit operators with periodic boundary conditions {θ(M )} = {θ(0)} and make ∆τ → 0, = Tr F Dθ M -1 l=0 {θ(l + 1)}|e -∆τ Ĥqr e -∆τ ĤF e -∆τ Ĥqr-f |{θ(l)} Next, utilizing the Supplementary Equation (10), we write the partition function as e ∆τ t b i,j cos(θi(l)-θj (l)) Tr F M -1 l=0 e -∆τ ĤF e -∆τ Ĥqr-f (14) The bosonic part can be taken out of the fermion trace. Furthermore, the kinetic part of free fermion is independent of configuration and can be calculated at the beginning of the simulation, while the interaction part of boson and fermion depends on the configurations of θ. The calculation process on Tr F is always displayed as the determinant. Finally, the total weight of configuration is, where W b ({θ}) is the weight of bosonic part, and H F , H qr-f is the matrix in fermionic layer, spin, coordinate representation. So far, we have mapped the model to a series of classical configurations and obtained its weight. Using Markov chain, we sample the configuration of {θ} and implement both local update schemes and global updates -a Wolff update scheme -to avoid critical slowing down, see algorithm analysis and details of QRM in C. QMC sign problem. We find an antiunitray transformation K = iσ y K under which the model is invariant, where σ y is a Pauli matrix in the layer basis, and K is the complex conjugation operator. Thus the model is free of the sign problem, and B is 2N × 2N dimension matrix for single layer fermions, where N = L × L is the number of sites. Since the model is symmetric for two layers, the Green's function is the same for both layers with same site and spin index, i.e. G σσ 11 = G σσ 22 , where G σσ λλ = T ĉiσλ ĉ † jσλ . The simulation of DQMC is restricted to finite system sizes, and its computational complexity scales as O(βN 3 ) For the next-nearest-neighbor hopping, , hopping(boundary crossing) where B = Φ0 L 2 is the unit magnetic flux, and i x , i y are the indices of site range between 1 and L in the x and y lattice directions. Various arrows represent the direction of hopping terms from site i to j. Note that when L → ∞, the magnetic field approaches 0, and the Hamiltonian goes back to the original one. The method of adding z-flux significantly reduces finite size effects. However, the magnetic field breaks the translation symmetry, i.e., the momentum k is not valid for fermion. In the DQMC simulation, we add the z-flux when measuring bosonic observables, e.g., bosonic susceptibility. While for fermionic observables e.g. spectral functions, superfluid density, we drop it. On-site, s-wave, Intra-layer, spin-singlet On-site, s-wave, layer-triplet, spin-singlet On-site, s-wave, layer-singlet, spin-triplet(S = 0) On-site, s-wave, layer-singlet, spin-triplet(S = 1) Nearest-neighbor, s-wave, Intra-layer, spin-singlet Nearest-neighbor, s-wave, layer-triplet, spin-singlet Supplementary Note 2: Physical observables. In order to obtain the phase diagram of our model in the main text, we measure different physical observables in DQMC simulations, and analyze their behavior. Besides the main results presented in the main text, here we give a detailed description of the rest of them. Superconductivity is expected to be enhanced near the QCP As for the pairing, considering that the interaction is on-site and layer and spin symmetric, we compute a number of different on-site channels and find the strongest one occurs in the s-wave channel with orbital-singlet and spin-triplet C os,st0 , with the order parameter where 1,2 are layer indices. The detailed definition of the various pairing channels is listed in Supplementary Table P s captures the dynamic pair-pair correlation, which increases as temperature goes down. We show the results for all pairing channels and find no response therein in Supplementary Figure where k x is the kinetic energy density. Λ xx (q, ω) is the current-current correlation function, which is associated with the paramagnetic current density j σ x (r i , τ ), where j σ x (r i , τ ) is defined as, The criteria of superconductivity comes from the Meissner effect that if the current density response of a superconductor in a static, ω = 0, long wavelength q y = 0, the London equation is given by, where, ρ s is the superfluid density to be calculated. The response is always transverse such that one can take the different order of the long wavelength transverse and longitudinal limit and obtain, which means ρ s can be calculated from the currentcurrent correlation function. In the thermodynamic limit, one expects that ρ s has a universal jump at the transition point, which according to the renormalization theory of the BKT phase transition In the DQMC, we compute the dynamic bosonic susceptibility For the bare rotor model, the behavior of dynamic susceptibility has the standard form, where ξ c is the correlation length of bosonic field, which diverges at the critical point (in the lattice simulation such divergence is parameterized by the inverse distance towards the QCP in terms of the control parameter of the transition such as U -U c ). When taking q = 0, ω n = 0, the dynamic susceptibility goes back to the uniform static susceptibility χ, which only depends on temperature and tuning parameter U . Our results of the uniform static susceptibility of the coupled system can not be captured by generic the Curie-Weiss form in Supplementary Equation Supplementary Note 3: Pseudogap, superconductivity and the representative scans in the phase diagram. A. Scan at the maximum T c . We start with the scan at U = 6 as a function of reducing temperature. In Fig. These two temperature/energy scales of the pseudogap region, are consistent with that in other physical observables. Supplementary Figure Considering finite size effect, the nonmonotonous behavior of χ(T ) depicts a crossover of two phase, whose transition temperature is approxiametly at T = 0.09. range order of the s-wave pairing state. This can be seen in Fig. the fermionic SC properties. In addition, at U = 6, the momentum dependence χ(|q|, ω = 0), falls nicely with the power-law of |q| -2 , as shown in Supplementary Figure B. Scans at the re-entry regime. In this section, we focus at U = 5.9, where the re-entry phenomenon is detected from the boundary of KT phase transition. We analyze the data in the Fig. KT phase at smaller U versus T near the QCP. We first use the scaling of the uniform bosonic susceptibility to determine the U KT as ) at fixed T with η = 1/4. It is expected that if one scales χL -7/4 , the curves of different system sizes will cross at the U KT and this is indeed what we saw in Supplementary Figure Furthermore, the uniform susceptibility also manifests the bending behavior along the temperature axis at β = 12 shown in Supplementary Figure C. Scans at ferromagnetic phase. When U is decreased from the QCP to smaller values, the ferromagnetic properties of the bosonic part gradually increase. The pseudogap phase is strongly suppressed, and the crossover temperature drops to the temperature lower than we could explore. Similar to previous method, this can be seen from the bosonic static susceptibility. Supplementary Figure that at U = 5.5, the crossover temperature is lower than T = 0.05. Thus we think the pseudogap phase disappears quickly at small U in the ferromagnetic regime, as shown in the phase diagram in the main text. D. Scans in the disordered phase. The pseudogap phase found in the vicinity of QCP extends to the disordered phase at larger U . Here we present a temperature scan at U = 8 with N (ω) at different temperatures. The behavior in Supplementary Figure Many experiments have observed the strong diamagnetic susceptibilities accompanying with pseudogap region. In the lattice model, the diamagnetic fluctuations corresponding to the Meissner effect are identified by measuring the superfluid density ρ s Supplementary Note 4: Theoretical analysis. A. Modified Eliashberg theory. We analyzed the QMC data for fermionic and bosonic response using the modified Eliashberg theory (mET), which is a low energy effective dynamical theory for itinerant fermions near a QCP at finite temperatures. Within this theory, one obtains and solves the set of self-consistent equations for fermionic self-energy Σ(k, ω n ) ≈ Σ(ω m ) and bosonic propagator Π(q, Ω n ), related to fermionic Green's function G(k, ω n ) and bosonic susceptibility χ(q, Ω n ) as The input parameters for mET are These are, respectively, the fermionic Fermi vector, Fermi velocity, bosonic velocity, static bosonic susceptibility, and the effective static boson-fermion vertex. At a QCP, r(T ) → 0. At the bare level, ḡ = K 2 χ 0 , see Eq. ( The thermal contribution is a solution of a selfconsistent equation, . The quantum contribution is where B mn = (ḡkFvF|ωn-ωm|/π) The expressions are cumbersome, but allows one to straightforwardly compute Σ T and Σ Q numerically. The outcome of the computations is the following. At T → 0, Σ T vanishes and m , leading to the well-known nFL fermionic behavior and z = 3 dynamical scaling. At a finite T , there exists a wide range of temperatures, where the variations of Σ T and Σ Q with ω n nearly compensate one another, leading to a fairly flat total self energy Σ(ω m ). Roughly, this happens because Σ T (Σ Q ) are decreasing (increasing) functions of ω n . The bosonic self-energy has the form, For v F q ω n , Σ, and at low T , Π ∝ Ω n /(v F q) has the form of a canonical Landau damping of the bosons. This gives rise to z = 3 scaling. However, at q = 0 and at a small but finite Ω n , and the scaling changes to z = 2. Supplementary Equation ( Since MET is valid in the vicinity of a QCP, we picked data for U = 6 to perform the analysis. This is because it is near the critical U = 5.9, but the reentrance effect, shown in Fig. where Σ(ω n ) appears in Supplementary Equation In terms of the inputs to our theory, Supplementary Equation ( ∆ FM is on order of an inverse lattice vector π/L, L = 12, consistent with the splitting seen in e.g. Fig. 