I. Introduction II. Zero-index metacavities A. Realization ways 1. Two-dimensional photonic crystal zero-index media 2. Metal/dielectric multilayer zero-index media 3. Circuit-based zero-index media B. Physical properties 1. Geometry-invariant cavity 2. Homogeneous field 3. Inhomogeneous field C. Effective zero-index (EZI) cavities 1. EZI cavity realized by two types of single-negative media 2. Enhanced magneto-optic effect and nonlinear effect 3. EZI cavity with topological characteristics D. Applications 1. Switching 2. Nonreciprocal transmission 3. Collective coupling III. Hyperbolic metacavities A. Realization ways 1. Metal/dielectric multilayer hyperbolic media 2. Metal nanowire hyperbolic media 3. Circuit-based hyperbolic media B. Physical properties 1. Anomalous scaling law 2. Size independent cavity mode 3. Continuum of high-order modes C. Applications 1. Subwavelength lasers 2. All-angle filters 3. Wide-angle biosensors IV. Conclusion and Optical devices fundamentally count on the interactions between light and the matter Recent developments in the photonics and metamaterials are opening alternative avenues for ORCs design. Metamaterials are artificial materials with ingeniously constructed, and their properties come from their structure and carefully designed meta-atoms rather than from the properties of their constitutive materials For traditional FP and PC cavities, destructive and constructive interferences appear in different regions due to the determined optical path difference of EM waves, namely local interference. As mentioned above, due to the limitation of interference mechanism, it is difficult to achieve strong coupling between quantum dots and a traditional ORC. However, the EM field in ZIM is uniform, which can be used to achieve the global coherent effect, that is, nonlocal interference phenomenon. Therefore, ZIMs provide a good platform to study the CQED without precise positioning On the other hand, because of the limitations of the standing-wave formation conditions for FP-type resonance, the miniaturization of ORCs formed using traditional materials is difficult. However, due to the special dispersion curve of HMM, it can also be used to observe the anomalous scaling law and realize size-independent ORCs. Therefore, HMMs provide a good solution for the technologies that require the miniaturization of subwavelength ORCs without reducing the value of Q Zero-index and hyperbolic metacavities greatly deepen our understanding of ORCs, reveal many physical phenomena rarely observed in nature, and offer applications for controlling light, including switching, unidirectional transmission, lasers, sensors, filters, and so on. As mentioned in the introductory part, ε and/or μ are near zero in ZIMs, which can realize various EM responses and provide new situations to revisit some fundamental phenomena in wave propagations It is well known that semiconductor doping can greatly improve the electrical properties of semiconductor devices. Inspired by this idea, doping ZIM can significantly improve its ability of EM manipulation So far, most of the researches are focused on isotropic ZIMs. But another kind of special ZIM, anisotropic zero-index metamateiral (AZIM), has attracted more and more attention because of its special EM properties. In AZIM, because only one tensor element in the ε or μ tensor is near zero. In this case, the IFC of AZIM will have many forms, which can be either flat elliptic or hyperbolic The simplest way to achieve ZIMs is to use the natural dispersion characteristics of materials. For metal materials, the permittivity can be described by a simple Drude model which has also been successfully constructed in experiment Within an EMT under the condition of long-wave approximation, the periodic arrangement of artificial structures with subwavelength unit-cells can be regarded as an effective homogeneous medium, characterized by macroscopic EM parameters  and  . By designing suitable artificial structures, such as the the AMNZ media can be conveniently engineered based on the split-ring resonaotrs (SRRs) in microwave regime // (1 ) , ( where the subscripts ⊥ and // indicate that the components are perpendicular and parallel to the 0, 0  ⊥  correspond to two types of AENZ media with the flat IFCs along ⊥ and // directions, respectively. In order to overcome the narrow band characteristic of AENZ media constructed by metal/dielectric multilayers, an optimized stepped structure is proposed to design broadband AENZ media By using transmission lines (TLs), the circuit-based system can be used to construct abundant metamaterials with flexible EM parameters , where 0 Z and eff  denote the characteristic impedance and effective wave impedance, respectively. For the general 2D TL model with lumped capacitors and resistors in Fig. where 0  and 0  are the vacuum permittivity and permeability, respectively. The effective permittivity and permeability of the circuit system can be tuned using the lumped elements in the circuit. The above inset of Fig. In this circuit model, the admittance is where 0 C and 0 L denote the capacitance and inductance per unit length, respectively. d denotes the size of unit cell. Therefore, the effective electromagnetic parameters of the system are According to Eq. ( For the conventional cavities, the resonant frequency strongly depends on the shape and size of the cavity. Generally, with the increase of the cavity size, the equivalent wavelength of the corresponding resonant mode increases, which leads to the decrease of the frequency. However, because ZIM has a very small refractive index, the wavelength of EM waves in ZIM tends to infinity. A natural question is whether ZIM can be used to design geometry-invariant resonant cavities? In 2016, where S Z denotes the surface impedance of the particle embedded in ENZ media. From Eq. ( Strong fields are helpful for enhancing the interaction between light and the matter. , respectively. However, the field profile is always inhomogeneous, which is mainly determined by the characteristics of standing wave field, as shown in Fig. Especially, when the transverse-electric (TE) polarized waves impacting to the MNZ media ), the electric field is homogeneous ( 0  → E ) to guaranting the magnetic field is a finite value: Similarly, the magnetic field is homogeneous for the ENZ media under transverse-magnetic (TM) polarized waves. This poses a question: can ZIM be used as special cavity to achieve uniform field enhancement? In 2011, The corresponding electric field distribution of the ZIM cavity mode is shown in Fig. Compared with Figs. For TM (TE) polarized waves, the electric (magnetic) field in the MNZ (ENZ) meida is a constant. Figure The schematic of a 2D MNZ shell cavity surrounded by air is shown in Fig. Moreover, different from the isotropic radiation in Fig. In Maxwell's theory, the EM parameters of materials are characterized by permittivity ε and permeability μ. The appearance of metamaterials enriches the EM response of materials. People can design artificial materials with arbitrary combination of permittivity and permeability. In addition to left-handed media with ε < 0 and μ < 0, there are also single-negative (SNG) media with negative ε or μ alone. Especially, ε < 0, μ > 0 and ε > 0, μ < 0 correspond to ENG media and MNG media, respectively. ENG and MNG meida are painted respectively pink and blue for see in Fig. where ZENG (kENG) and ZMNG (kMNG) are wave impedances (wave vectors) of ENG and MNG media, respectively. di (i = 1, 2) denote the thickness of the ENG or MNG layer. Considering Under EMT, this heterostructure can be equivalent to a matched EMNZ media with The simplest structure is to insert a pair of ENG/MNG heterostructures directly into 1D PC [179], as shown in Fig. ) ( ) It can be clearly seen that there is a band gap exist in the individual left PC: (CD)m and right PC: (C'D')n in Fig. In general, the large magneto-optical (MO) activity and opotical nonlinearity of materials are highly desirable in many applications, such as the isolators, optical switches, etc. In this section, we review that the EZI cavity can be used to significant enhance the MO effect and nonlinear effect. Compared with the single-layer MO medium, the optical isolator realized by MO PC has the advantages of high transmission, strong Faraday rotation effect and small volume. Transparent yttrium iron garnet (YIG) is one of the most studied MO media. Although the MO activity of MO metal is much larger than that of YIG, the MO metal is opaque, thus the MO activity of MO metal is nearly inaccessible. Similarly, the the third-order nonlinear susceptibility of noble metals is large, but it is difficult to be used. Interestingly, the opaque metal with MO activity or opotical nonlinearity can become transparent when the heterostructurte (i.e., EZI cavity) is formed by matching suitable materials. In addition, the tunneling mode in EZI cavity can realize the strong localization of the field, thus enhancing the interaction between light and matter.Considering a heterostructure consisting of an all-dielectric PC: (AB)6 and a MO metal layer (M), the EZI cavity with tunneling mode is constructed . B is the SiO2 layer with 2.1 = . P is the protection film SiO2. A and M are the MO media, which correspond respectively to Bi : YIG and Co6Ag94 media. Under an applied magnetic field is in the z direction, the permittivity tensor of layer A and M is: where  is the off-diagonal element responsible for the strength of MO activity of the medium. The transmission (solid line) and reflection (dashed line) spectrum of the heterostructure (AB)6MP is shown in Fig. There is a dip of zero reflection at =  631 nm, that is the the tunnelling mode satisfied the matched consitions As mentioned above, the impedance matching and phase matching conditions are equivalent to the zero average conditions. Therefore, the heterostructure composed of PC and metal layer also belongs to the EZI cavity. Especially, the corresponiding spectrum of the Faraday rotation angles where  is the linaer permittivity and but for the 1D metallo-dielectric PC. The working frequency of (h) corresponds 525 THz, which is marked by the black arrow in (g). Reproduced with permission from Copyright 2009, OSA Publishing. Recently, the topological photonics has attracted people's great attention due to their great advantages in fundamental topological research and practical applications where are the effective mass and effective potenstial, respectively. The topological properties of bands or the band gaps can be directly distinguished by the effective EM parameters thickness of the unit cell. The band structure of the 1D PC can be obtained by: where q represents the Bloch wavevector. Based on the above parameters, the corresponding band Recently, the short-wavelength optical science is undergoing great development. In fact, the refractive indices of all materials are close to 1 in X-ray band, so a single layer cannot be used as a photonic insulator. The X-ray insulator is realized by using the band-gap of multilayer structures. However, in which the size of unit cell is close to the atomic scale. So the structural fluctuations are unavoidable. A question naturally arises: can the topological properties be applied in the X-ray band to enable new devices? Recently, the topological edge state based on the 1D PCs have also been extened to the the X-ray band Copyright 2019 Wiley-VCH. The transmission electron microscope (TEM) image of the fabricated PC1-PC2 sample is shown in Fig. where 1 () mx and 2 () mx are the effective masses of the unit cell of PC1 and PC2, respectively. Length 1 L and 2 L denote the total thicknesses of PC1 and PC2, respectively. The interface position of the two PCs is defined as 0. By adding certain kinds of disorders into PC2, the robustness of X-ray edge state in the hetero-structure is demonstrated in Figs. 12(c)-12(f). It can be seen that when the topological protection condition is still satisfied, the edge state is almost the same as that without disorder. On the contrary, if this condition is not satisfied, the edge state will be greatly affected. Therefore, based on two kinds of 1D PCs with different topological properties, the topological edge state in the X-ray band is demonstrated. Imporantly, this edge state is demonstrated to be robust against thickness disorders as long as the zero-average-effective-mass condition is satisfied. The related results extend the concept of topology to the X-ray band and may provide insightful guidance to the design of novel X-ray devices with topological protections Active control of EM wave transmission and radiation greatly enriches the flexibility of light control. In 2018, According to the EMT, the effective anisotropic ENZ layer is realized by using gold nanowire array where Si  are the permittivity of Si and Au, respectively. The concentration of gold nanowire is defined by the interdistance p and nanorod diameter 2a as Especially when the cavity mode frequency is tuned to that of the effective ENZ media, the high and low transmission of the structure is obviously affected by the ENZ condition However, for the low-transmission state deviation from ENZ condition, the mode is mainly reflected. In addition, as mentioned in the Sec. C, the nonlinear response of the materials can be improved significantly by ZIMs. Therefore, the optical modulator based ons the zero-index cavity provides a double advantage of high mode transmission and strong nonlinearity enhancement in the fewnanorod-based design. In the infrared regime, the permittivity of Au can be written as Importantly, the all-optical modulation overcomes the barrier that the modulation speed of tranditional modulator is slow, thus enables integrated nanoscale switches and modulators in Si waveguides In addition, zero-index cavity with PEC boundary has been used to realize the geometryinvariant resonant cavities in Fig. When the QE is placed in the center 0 = x , the cavity mode corresponds to the non radiative mode, that is, the field will be confined in the cavity, as shown in Fig. However, when the position of the QE in the left bubble is separated from such symmetrical positions 1 = xm  , two QEs will be coupled resonantly. Therefore, this study reveals that switching between radiating mode and nonradiating mode is possible. This provides a new way to control the emission characteristics of QEs, such as enhancing/suppressing the spontaneous emission of QEs In Sec. C.2, the enhanced MO effect have been presented in the 1D heterostructure, which is associated with the tunneling mode of EZI cavity. Recently, the nonreciprocal properties of MO ZIMs have attracted people's great attention The interaction between the cavity field and atoms plays an important role in the CQED. Generally, in order to ensure the strong coupling between the quantum emitter and photons, it is necessary to place the QE at the maximum of the cavity field, which is very challenging in the manufacturing process. Therefore, due to the limited choice of quantum dots and the position uncertainty caused by the inhomogeneity of cavity field, it is difficult to improve the coupling strength between quantum dots and cavity field. In 2012, Jiang et. al., proposed theoretically and verified experimentally that the zero-index cavity with uniformed fields can be used to overcome this limitation magnetic control [216] and optical pumping [217], greatly enrich the design flexibility of zero-index cavities. In addition, the low-loss ZIMs based on bound states in the continuum (BIC) have been proposed splitter The interaction between light and matter depends on media dispersion in momentum space, which can be characterized using IFCs ) can be written as where x k , y k , and z k denote the x , y , and z components of the wavevector, 0 k is the wave-vector in free space. According to Eq. ( Figure HMMs Wire metamaterials represent a large class of artificial EM structure, which corresponds the lattices of aligned metal rods embedded in the dielectric host (1 ) where the filling ratio of the metal wires is equal to the radio of cross-sectional areas of the metal wires and the host dielectric m  denote the permittivity of the metal and dielectric, respectively. Especially, the electric HMMs can be realized for // 0  ⊥  . Figure In the 2D TL system, circuit-based metamaterials can realize various electromagnetic parameters under Because of the special HMM dispersion, the propagation direction of a wave in a HMM is different from that in a normal anisotropic material with a closed IFC. For the traditional optical cavity made of dielectric, whose IFC is a closed circle and the supported wavevector is limited. In addition, the isotropic property of dielectric making the tranditional optical cavity is directional independent, as shown in Figs. The abnormal wavevector properties of the HMM is marked '-' in Fig. For tranditional optical cavities composed of dielectric, the frequency increases with the increase of mode order due to the standing wave condition. However, this scaling law of the cavity mode will be modified in the HMMs. Especially, the anisotropic scaling law have been demonstrated in the hyperbolic cavity based on metal/dielectric multilayers Copyright 2012 Springer Nature. The anomalous scaling law of hyperbolic cavity also have been clearly demonstrated based on the circuit-based hyperbolic cavity in the microwave regime Hyperbolic cavity exhibits the abnormal scale property along the direction that perpendicular to the optial axis of the HMM. As introduced in Fig. For conventional cavity mode, any mode order appears at one single frequency. It is because that when the incident angle of the light is fixed, the wavevector in the propagating direction is given. However, once the special wavevector in the propagating direction corresponds to more than one frequency, the mode continuum allowing multiple manifestations of the same order can be realized Interestingly, k is nonmonotonic with angular frequency  at a fixed  in the HMM. As a result, the mode continuum can be realized in the hyperbolic cavity. Reproduced with permission from One the most important applications of the optical cavity is the lasers. However, it is difficult to miniaturize the conventional cavity, mainly because the FP resonance condition determines that the size of the cavity is comparable to the wavelength. Although the localized surface plasmon resonance of metal can be used for the small volume localization, the intrinsic loss of metal has a great influence on the Q value of the cavity. The high-k modes of HMM provide a new way to surpass these limitations and realize the subwavelength optical cavity with low-loss, which make the HMM cavities attractive candidates for ultra-small low-threshold lasers In addition to the gain efficiency, the radiation feedback is also an important factor in the design Reproduced with permission from The exceptional dependence of propagating wavevector on polarization, frequency as well as on the angle of incident light in hypercrystals have been systemically introduced [285-291]. Especially, the dispersionless bandgap of 1D hypercrystal has been proposed based on the condition of phase variation compensation The edge states in the 1D heterstructure composed of the metal layer and PCs have the properties of localization and polarization-dependence, which can be used to design ultrasensitive optical sensors based on the singularity of the ellipsometric phase (i.e., reflection phase difference between two orthogonal polarizations  = -TM TE  ) The optical cavity with metamaterial (i.e. metacavity) is of great significance in fundamental and applied physics. On the one hand, the optical cavity can confine the EM wave in a small scale, which can effectively improve the photon DOS thus enhancing the interaction between light and the matter. On the other hand, metamaterials can control the transmission, radiation and coupling of EM wave arbitrarily, so it can realize many novel physical phenomena which are difficult to realize in traditional optical cavities, and can be used to construct more functional optical devices. In this review, two kinds of special metacavities, zero-index metacavity and hyperbolic metacavity, are systematically introduced. ( Moreover, the applications of zero-index metacavity in switching, nonreciprocal transmission and collective coupling are introduced in detail. ( that it has anisotropic resonance characteristics, and can observe the anomalous scaling law, scale independent cavity modes and continuous cavity modes. In particular, the special dispersion of hyperbolic metacavity can be used to realize miniaturization of low-loss laser. And the special mode distribution of hyperbolic cavity mode can be used to enhance the radiation feedback and reduce the lasing threshold. In addition, for the hypercrystal constructed by HMMs, by adjusting the structure parameters, the dispersionless cavity mode can be realized and used for all-angle filters. Similarly, based on the dispersion control, hypercrystal can also be used to design highly sensitive biosensors. In general, the zero-index and hyperbolic metacavities provide new and efficient means for EM wave control, and provide new ways for the design of novel optical devices, which are expected to be applied in the future of photonic integration. So far, ZIMs and HMMs have been widely used to study the novel transmission properties of EM waves splitting As a special kind of anisotropic material, it has the characteristics of both ZIM and HMM. Therefore, the performance of this new metamaterial for optical cavity design needs to be explored in the future. In addition, biaxial metacavity is also a very interesting research topic interlayer rotation of 2D materials/metasurfaces provides a new way to study the topological phase transition of IFC 