In Ta/CoFeB/HfO2 stacks a gate voltage drives, in a nonvolatile way, the system from an underoxidized state exhibiting in-plane anisotropy (IPA) to an optimum oxidation level resulting in perpendicular anisotropy (PMA) and further into an overoxidized state with IPA. The IPA → PMA regime is found to be significantly faster than the PMA → IPA regime, while only the latter shows full reversibility under the same gate voltages. The effective damping parameter also shows a marked dependence with gate voltage in the IPA → PMA regime, going from 0.029 to 0.012, and only a modest increase to 0.014 in the PMA → IPA regime. The existence of two magneto-ionic regimes has been linked to a difference in the chemical environment of the anchoring points of oxygen species added to underoxidized or overoxidized layers. Our results show that multiple magneto-ionic regimes can exist in a single device and that their characterization is of great importance for the design of high performance spintronics devices. Controlling magnetic properties with electric (E) fields is of great importance for spintronics applications due to its potential for lowering power consumption in novel memory prototypes. It has been shown that E-field induced charge accumulation can lead to important changes in magnetic anisotropy FIG. Fig. Regime I is therefore showing a relatively faster dynamics than in regime II under G V =-2 V and a highly suppressed reversibility at G V =+4 V, while in regime II, a slower dynamics and full reversibility are observed. This may be linked to a high degree of stability of the final position of the ions within regime I, which would create a high energy barrier for the inverse process, suppressing reversibility under a gate voltage of +4 V. In regime II, although the energy barrier remains asymmetric between the PMA → IPA and PMA←IPA transitions, a gate voltage of +4 V is sufficient to revert the effects of a gate voltage of -2 V. This could be linked to a weaker anchoring of the mobile oxygen species in regime II. In this section, we will discuss the impact of magnetoionics on the effective damping parameter α eff . A series of samples, exposed to gate voltages -2 V and -1.5 V, has been investigated by Brillouin light scattering (BLS) in the Damon-Eshbach geometry after removal of the IL gate. The in-plane magnetic field dependence of the average frequency of the Stokes and anti-Stokes spin-wave frequencies was measured at a wavenumber k =8.08 μm -1 . Fig. dence, where a monotonic decrease is seen in regime I, in contrast with the much less pronounced increase seen for regime II in a similar μ 0 M eff range. It is important to mention that the values of α eff obtained from the slopes of the data points in Fig. The proposed magneto-ionic mechanisms involved in regimes I and II are depicted in Fig. In conclusion, we have shown the existence of two distinct nonvolatile magneto-ionic regimes in Ta/CoFeB/HfO 2 stacks where oxygen species migrate under negative/positive gate voltages toward/away from the CoFeB layer. This voltage driven ionic motion induces first an IPA → PMA transition in regime I, corresponding to a transition from an underoxidized to an optimally oxidized state. In regime II, a PMA → IPA transition occurs and it is correlated to a transition from an optimally oxidized to an overoxidized state. Regime I shows a much faster dynamics and highly suppressed reversibility for positive gate voltages with respect to regime II. In addition, it also shows a marked decrease of the effective damping parameter from 0.029 to 0.012 compared to the relatively small increase to 0.014 observed in regime II. The existence of regimes I and II is proposed to be the result of a difference in the binding strength of the migrated oxygen species, that can be correlated with different binding sites on the surface and inside the CoFeB layer, respectively. The results presented here reveal the complexity of magneto-ionics and the importance of a deep understanding of the ionic mechanisms involved in order to design robust and reliable devices for spintronics applications. This system could be easily transferred to a solid state device where the two regimes could be probed at higher gate voltages in order to re-evaluate reversibility and explore fast operation times. This will allow to choose an IPA to PMA transition, either in regime I or II, that best fits the requirements for practical applications and to design strategies to favour operation in one of the two magneto-ionic regimes.