We combine electron beam lithography and masked anodization of epitaxial aluminium to define tunnel junctions via selective oxidation, alleviating the need for wet-etch processing or direct deposition of dielectric materials. Applying this technique to define Josephson junctions in proximityinduced superconducting Al-InAs heterostructures, we observe multiple Andreev reflections in transport experiments, indicative of a high quality junction. We further compare the mobility and density of Hall-bars defined via wet etching and anodization. These results may find utility in uncovering new fabrication approaches to junction-based qubit platforms. Zero energy modes in a 1-dimensional (1D) topological superconductor are candidate building blocks for highfidelity quantum computation Josephson junctions or tunnel barriers separating topological segments from normal regions are particularly sensitive to disorder. Typically, crystaline superconductors, grown using molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) are etched away using invasive wet chemical processing or damaging dry etchant techniques Here, we report the use of anodization to define a Josephson junction via the selective oxidation of epitaxial aluminium on an InAs heterostructure. In addition to being largely non-invasive, the technique offers a means of defining structures with a resolution limited, in-principle, only by the nanometer precision of the electron beam lithography. In a straight up comparison we also show that Hall bars defined via anodization have a moderately higher mobility than devices that are shaped by wet-etch processing. Anodization is a standard industrial method used extensively to protect or modify the properties of surfaces The anodization circuit is realized such that the target metal constitutes the anode. By driving a current through the target metal submerged in a suitable electrolyte, an oxydo-reduction reaction can be induced. In the case of Al, alumina (Al 2 O 3 ) is formed: This process allows for the controlled oxidation of Al to proceed to a specific depth beyond the 3 nm native oxide Turning to quantum devices, we make use of this reaction to define tunnel barriers in materials comprising superconducting heterostructures. Unlike conventional fabrication approaches that remove the Al superconductor and back-fill with dielectric, here we rather use a second lift-off patterned layer of evaporated Al (Al-mask) on top of the epi-Al and employ the anodization process. In this way, we are able to retain the high-resolution pattern of the evaporated Al-mask, and, also the high-quality interface between the heterostructure and the newly formed dielectric near the shallow quantum well. Starting from an InAlAs/InAs/InGaAs heterostructure (quantum well 10 nm below the surface and 7 nm of in situ grown epi-Al), The anodization is stopped at a known voltage, V anod , which corresponds to the thickness of the Al-mask. In this way, the Al-mask has effectively been anodized instead of the epi-Al in the specifically patterned regions. The regions that were not covered by the Al-mask are now fully insulating, while the parts of the epi-Al which where covered with the Al-mask are now covered with a layer of alumina. An anodization rate of 100 mV/s for both the Al-mask and epi-Al has been measured. It is worth emphasizing that for this method to work the rates for both must be equal. This ensures that the Al-mask and the uncovered epi-Al layer will be fully anodized at the same point in time. Following the anodization, a mesa structure is etched in order to avoid top-gate leakage. The alumina around the mesa is removed using a developing solution, AZ726, followed by a dilute phosphoric acid etch. Finally, a 5 nm thick alumina layer is grown by ALD and the Ti/Au top-gates are deposited, as shown in Fig. The anodization ratio of oxide thickness, d, to measured voltage, V anod , was determined by performing ellipsometry on test samples anodized to different depths. A ratio of 1.37 nm.V -1 was found, which is consistent with values in the literature Next, we compare the mobility and electron density of Hall bars defined using standard wet etching to those defined by anodization, as shown in Fig. For comparison, a sample from the same wafer was patterned into a Hall bar using an optimised standard Transene type-D etch Finally, to demonstrate the utility of this technique for nanoscale device fabrication, a Josephson junction with a barrier region of length ∼ 150 nm was fabricated using anodization, as shown in Fig. The current-voltage characteristics of the device as a function of applied top-gate voltage can be seen in Fig. With increasing negative applied top-gate voltage, the 2DEG is depleted and the critical current decreases, as shown in the lower panel of Fig. Finally, we apply a perpendicular magnetic field and investigate the differential resistance of the junction, as shown in Fig. 