Quantum confinement in atomically-thin TMDCs enables the realization of deterministic single-photon emitters. The position and polarization control of single photons have been achieved via local strain engineering using nanostructures. However, most existing TMDC-based emitters are operated by optical pumping, while the emission sites in electrically pumped emitters are uncontrolled. Here, we demonstrate electrically driven single-photon emitters located at the positions where strains are induced by atomic-force-microscope indentation on a van der Waals heterostructure consisting of graphene, hexagonal-boron nitride, and tungsten diselenide. The optical, electrical, and mechanical properties induced by the local strain gradient were systematically analyzed. In particular, single-photon emission was observed at the indentation sites at 4 K. The emission exhibits photon antibunching behavior with a g (2) (0) value of ~0.3, intensity saturation and a linearly crosspolarized doublet. This robust spatial control of electrically driven single-photon emitters will pave the way for the practical implementation of integrated quantum light sources. Quantum emitters created by natural or artificial defects in two-dimensional (2D) transition dichalcogenides (TMDCs) have been widely studied because of their unique 2D nature The physical properties of TMDC-based emitters can be readily and reliably manipulated by electrical control In this work, we demonstrate an electrically driven single-photon emitter array with deterministically controlled emission sites. A tunneling device based on a graphene/h-BN/WSe2 heterostructure was placed on a deformable substrate, and a local tensile strain was applied on the 2D heterostructure by indentation using an atomic-force-microscope (AFM) tip Design and fabrication of electrically driven single-photon emitters. Figure The van der Waals heterostructure is rationally designed based on the following specifications. First, the bottom graphene is separated from the WSe2 monolayer by the h-BN insulating layer; thus, the current can be injected uniformly into the entire area of the WSe2 by tunneling. This current injection scheme is distinct from that in lateral split-gate p-n junction devices The operating mechanism of the proposed device is schematically illustrated in Figure At zero bias between the bottom and top graphene layers, no charge flows through the vertical layers owing to the constant Fermi energy (EF) across the heterojunction. When a bias voltage is applied, the EF increases above the conduction band edge of the monolayer WSe2 and electron tunneling occurs through the h-BN barrier. This initiates the radiative recombination of electronhole pairs residing in the optically active WSe2 region. In particular, because the band gap is engineered by the induced strain, the electron-hole pairs funnel into the localized exciton trap and EL emission occurs at the indentation site. Van der Waals heterostructures with indentation sites were fabricated via the following procedures (Fig. Mechanical properties of the indented heterostructure. The close-up AFM topography images of the indentation sites show the height profiles across the horizontal and vertical cross-sections. The heterostructure was permanently deformed with a depth of ~25 nm, which is the average value of the seven indentation sites fabricated by the AFM tip at the applied load of 6.33 μN (Fig. The maximum standard deviation of the depth was 6.9 nm, which was attributed to the heterogeneities in the WSe2/h-BN/graphene/PMMA interfaces. The relatively large stiffness of the heterostructure, compared with that of the monolayer TMDC, led to the asymmetric shape of the indentation site: the tip could slide slightly along the surface instead of remaining at the same location during the indentation process. Nonetheless, this fabrication method effectively reduced the occurrence of uncontrolled wrinkles and random strain gradients, which were frequently observed in 2D layers transferred onto nanopatterned substrates, because only a small area of the AFM tip was in contact with the heterostructure To further understand the indentation process, we performed a finite-element method (FEM) simulation to calculate the morphology of the indent on the heterostructure when it was pressed by an incompressible conical tip with a radius of curvature rt (see Methods). The van der Waals heterostructure was modeled as a single linear elastic material with effective mechanical parameters To investigate the emission properties of the fabricated heterostructure with indentation sites, a high-resolution confocal raster scan was performed at 4 K using two scanning galvo mirrors, while a bias voltage was applied to the heterostructure. The EL emission was collected by a 100× objective lens with the numerical aperture of 0.85 and sent to avalanche photodiodes (APD) via optical fibers (see Methods). Figure We also measured the EL spectra at the indentation sites (Fig. To investigate the single-photon nature of the localized emissions from the indentation sites, we performed photon-correlation measurements using a Hanbury Brown and Twiss interferometer (see Methods). A narrow spectral window with the width of 10 nm was opened to select the desired peak in the EL spectra (black arrows in Fig. We note that the measured g Voltage-dependent EL measurements. We next measured the EL spectrum at an indentation site (point 1 in Fig. In addition, we plotted the measured peak intensity and linewidth from the indentation site 1 as a function of the bias voltage (Figs. V as the bias voltage increased (Fig. Taken together, these measurement results indicate the single-photon nature of the electrically driven emission from the indentation sites. Fine-structure of single-photon emission. A higher-resolution EL spectrum was next measured over the wavelength range of 738-742 nm to further investigate the optical properties of the dominant sharp emission peak (Fig. In summary, we demonstrated electrically driven deterministic single-photon emitters in a vertical heterojunction with an active WSe2 monolayer indented by an AFM tip. The employment of nanoscale elastic strain engineering to achieve exciton localization in the electronic structure enabled the efficient generation of robust single photons in our design. The fabrication process of the indentations was elucidated by numerical simulations. The turn-on voltage of the light-emitting heterostructure was manipulated through the band-structure engineering by local strain gradients. Indeed, we observed localized bright spots at the indentation sites, which exhibited narrow EL emission peaks with photon anti-bunching and intensity saturation behaviors at applied voltages of >1.5 V. We note that linear cross-polarized doublet in the localized emission can provide a valley degree of freedom as an information carrier. Our fabrication procedure is scalable and applicable for integration with other photonic platforms such as high-quality optical cavities and/or low-loss optical waveguides. For example, the performance of single-photon emission can be further improved through Purcell enhancement by placing a nanoscale cavity on the indentation site. We believe that this work demonstrates an efficient approach for electrically driven single-photon sources in van der Waals heterostructure, outperforming the present emitters with random occurrence, and suggests next-generation singlephoton devices for quantum information and quantum communication. Device fabrication. Graphene/WSe2/h-BN/graphene stacks on a polymer substrate were fabricated using typical mechanical exfoliation and transfer methods. Graphene monolayers grown on a copper film (2D Semiconductors) were first patterned using photolithography and oxygen plasma on a SiO2/Si substrate. Mechanically exfoliated monolayer WSe2 (HQ graphene) and fewlayer h-BN were assembled on the other SiO2/Si substrate, and monolayer graphene was placed on top via a dry transfer method. The stacked graphene/WSe2/h-BN heterostructure was then placed on the other patterned graphene monolayer (fig. Numerical simulation. Mechanical contact simulations were performed using FEM (COMSOL Multiphysics, structural mechanics module) to calculate the deformation and strain field of the indented heterostructure on the elastic polymer substrate. The material properties of the polymer substrate were described by the Neo-Hookean hyperelastic material model: the density was 1,185 kg/m 3 and the Lamé parameter was 0.383 GPa. The indentation force was applied to the heterostructure using a contacted incompressible AFM tip with a radius of rt. Based on the threelayer composite model in beam vibration theory, the TMDC heterostructure was assumed to be a single linear elastic material with the following effective mechanical parameters: the density was 2,950 kg/m 3 , the Young's modulus was 884 GPa, and the Poisson's ratio was 0.2. The deformation of the indented heterostructure was then calculated as the force applied by the tip varied from 100 to 7,000 nN. The forces were determined based on the actual values used in the experiment. Furthermore, we obtained the displacement along the z-axis and calculated the absolute value of the diagonal strain tensor |εzz|. Optical measurements. Optical measurements were performed on the samples using a home-built confocal microscope in a He-flow cryostat (Montana Instruments s50) at 4 K. For the highresolution raster scans, two scanning galvo mirrors were used with a 4-f confocal alignment system. A bias voltage was applied to the samples using a source measurement unit (Keithley 2450). The EL emission was collected by a 100× objective lens with the numerical aperture of 0.85, and sent to either a monochromator/CCD (Princeton Instruments PIXIS 400 BRX) or avalanche photodiodes (Excelitas SPCM AQRH 13). Photon statistics measurement was performed using the HBT setup. The photons were spectrally filtered by band-pass filters, coupled to an optical fiber, split into two paths using a non-polarizing 50:50 fiber beam splitter, and finally detected by two identical avalanche photodiodes and time-tagging electronics (PicoQuant Picoharp 300). To perform polarization-resolved measurements, a linear polarizer was placed in front of the fiber coupler. Measured second-order correlation function g 