Metamaterials are artificially created media, which allow introducing additional degrees of freedom into electromagnetic design by controlling constitutive material parameters. Reconfigurable time-dependent metamaterials can further enlarge those capabilities by introducing a temporal variable as an additional controllable parameter. Here we demonstrate a first-of-its-kind reconfigurable volumetric metamaterial-based scatterer, wherein the electromagnetic properties are controlled dynamically with light. In particular, hybridized resonances in arrays of split ring resonators give rise to a collective mode that presents properties of artificial high-frequency magnetism for centimeter waves. Resonant behavior of each individual ring is controlled with a photocurrent, which allows the fast tuning of macroscopic effective permeability. Thus, the artificial gigahertz magnon resonant excitation within a subwavelength spherical scatterer is governed by light intensity. Four-dimensional control over electromagnetic scattering in both space and time opens new venues for modern applications, including wireless communications and automotive radars to name just a few. Metamaterials are artificially created media in which the electromagnetic properties can be controlled by subwavelength structuring of their unit cells. Control over effective material properties can be achieved in many ways, including, for example, mechanical deformation and electronic control that are among the preferable and already proven strategies. Here we propose a paradigm solution to this dynamic reconfigurability problem and demonstrate a first-of-its-kind tunable volumetric metamaterial. In particular, our architecture is based on arrays of split ring resonators (SRRs), serving as microscopic magnetic dipoles. Each SRR is loaded with a varactor, which in turn is driven by a photodiode. The tandem is activated with light and does not have any physical connection (wires) to an adjutant unit cell. The light is guided into the volume of the structure by optical fiber bundles that do not scatter centimeter waves significantly (see the inset in Figure Under uniform illumination, the collective resonance of the structure can be reconfigured with light. In particular, we show that artificial magnon resonance of a metamaterial-based sphere can be controlled with light, and the resulting scattering cross-sections can be tuned dynamically. Metamaterial architecture is based on ordered arrays of SRRs, chemically etched on printed circuit boards (PCB). To extract the effective parameters of our structure, the numerical retrieval in a waveguide geometry was done with the help of CST Microwave Studio, based on the Nicolson-Ross-Weir method. The resulting effective permittivity and permeability, as a function of frequency, were extracted numerically and are shown in Figure Artificial magnon resonance resembles a celebrated phenomenon of localized plasmon resonances, taking place in noble metal nanoparticles. Duality of Maxwell's equations allows drawing analogies between electric and magnetic phenomena, while the field of metamaterials enables replicating material properties. The polarizability of a small magnetic sphere is given by where μ r is the relative permeability of the material, while r is the radius of the sphere. The modified expression, which includes retardation effects and radiation reaction is given by where k is the free space wavenumber of the incident radiation. Eq. 1 shows that the resonance is obtained when Re(μ r ) = -2 and the quality factor of the peak is governed by the radiation losses (Eq. 2). More detailed this phenomenon is described in work. Tunability properties of the structure will be assessed next. For this purpose, several capacitance nominals of the varactor diodes were chosen to demonstrate the tunability characteristics. Decrease in capacitance (demonstrated in the following experiment with light) shifts the resonance of the structure to higher frequencies, which is quite expected from the lumped circuit theory (Figure Tolerance in lumped element nominals can be quite important if many of them are used in a structure with a strong resonant response. Furthermore, as it will be shown in the experimental part, the capacitance tuning will be performed with light. It means that non-uniform illumination of photodiodes and different efficiencies of the later elements will result in a pseudo-random spread of capacitances within a unit cell. To estimate the impact of these factors on performance degradation, a statistical model was developed. The parametric retrieval was performed on six unit cells, placed inside the waveguide with dimensions 20 × 20 × 60 mm. Capacitance nominals within each unit cells were taken to be equal since the same photodiode drives the voltage drop on the elements. However, nominals in the different unit cells were taken according to the following statistical model: where C 0 = 9.2 pF and ΔC is varied from zero (all the elements are the same without a spread) to 1.2 pF (corresponding to the maximum ΔC var for the Skyworks SMV 1413 varactors, driven by one PIN photodiode BWP34) and rand([0, 1]) is a random variable with a uniform distribution between 0 and 1. This particular form was chosen to resemble the experimental scenario, where C var = C 0 is the capacitance in the "dark" mode, and its value can only be reduced with the introduction of a photocurrent. For each specific value of ΔC var n = 5 realizations have been considered. Permeability dispersion was extracted for each particular case and then averaged over the number of realizations. the relative permeability averages to unity. This effect will be important for analyzing the experimental data, reported in the next section. Electromagnetic scattering performance of 3D metamaterial-based sphere is assessed in this section. Numerical analysis was conducted with the help of frequency domain solver, implemented within the CST Microwave Studio software. The final design of the scatterer consisted of 11 PCB layers with printed unit cells, which were assembled to form an approximately spherical shape with a radius of 60 mm. The distance between the layers was h The backward scattering cross section was calculated for the following values of the varactor diodes:C var = 9.2 pF, corresponding to the "dark" regime; C var = 8 pF, corresponding to the uniform "bright" regime; and ΔC var = 1.2 pF, corresponding to the inhomogeneous illumination case. In the ideal case, the observed resonance shift was around 10% with respect to the carrier frequency (Figure Since the structure is strongly anisotropic, it is worth investigating its scattering capabilities in the case of inclined incidence. The key parameter in this case is the projection of magnetic field polarization on the major axis of the structure. To check the experimantal feasibility of light-induced tuning capabilities, a single unit cell was constructed first and its resonant properties were investigated. The unit cell was fabricated on FR-4 PCB (dielectric constant of 4.43, a thickness of 1.5 mm) by chemical etching. Lumped elements (Multilayer Ceramic Capacitors 500R07S0R5AV4T and Skyworks SMV 1413 varactors) were soldered to the SRRs' gaps. The capacitance of each varactor diode was controlled by soldering the BWP34 photodiode on the PCB. Complex reflection coefficient (S11) of the structure was acquired with the help of a small magnetic probe antenna connected to the transmitting port of a Vector Network Analyzer (VNA E8362B). The probe was placed 5 mm above the unit cell and two regimes of illumination were tested: "dark" with no light source and "bright" with the light source turned on. In the "bright" regime, the photodiode was illuminated with 100 mW red laser pointer (λ = 655 nm). Experimenal results of a single unit cell tuning are shown in Figure One of the main challenges in constructing volumetric tunable metamaterial is to provide a drive to each individual cell. Electrical wiring of a circuit board significantly affects antenna performance by introducing additional coupling channels. Furthermore, the introduction of bunched metal strips influences the scattering characteristics; and, in fact, can even govern the interactions with incident radiation. This problem can be partially solved in reflect arrays configuration, where the wires are hidden behind the ground plane that isolates them from antenna elements. It is important to note, however, that those architectures are planar and cannot be extended to the third dimensionthis is the key difference between 2 and 3D. Here we introduce a new concept of electro-optical drive, distributed over an optical network, and implement it experimentally. The experimental sample was fabricated following the effective medium design, maintaining the same geometric parameters as in the numerical modeling. Overall, the structure has 1080 lumped elements. To provide an efficient scattering cross-section modulation with light, the capacitance of each varactor diode was controlled by the BWP34 photodiodes, exactly as in the case of unit cell discussed earlier. The light was guided to the diodes with the help of wide fiberglass fibers, which were roughened on purpose to out scatter a sufficient optical intensity. Those fibers (a total of 22) can be clearly seen on the photograph in Figure Volumetric reconfigurable metamaterial was designed and experimentally demonstrated. The concept of tunable RF magnon resonance, controllable with light, have been developed. The architecture is based on arrays of SRRs that serve as microscopic magnetic dipoles, which hybridize to a collective magnetic mode. Each SRR was loaded with a tandem of a varactor and a driving photodiode, which allowed replacing branched conducting wire network with optical fibers that are transparent to RF waves. It was shown that artificial magnon resonance within the metamaterial-based sphere can be controlled by light and scattering cross-sections are affected by it in real time. This demonstration can link to new solutions in the field of wireless communications and RFID technologies, where real-time control over scattering cross-sections is highly demanded. Furthermore, recent advances in additive manufacturing can allow exploring all three geometric degrees of freedom more efficiently and enhance the capabilities with additional temporal control. 