Material susceptibilities govern interactions between electromagnetic waves and matter. They are of a crucial importance for basic understanding of natural phenomena and for tailoring practical applications. Here we present a new calibration-free method for relative complex permittivity retrieval, which allows use of inexpensive and accessible equipment, and simplifies the measurement process. This method combines the advantages of resonant and non-resonant techniques, which allow the extraction of material parameters of liquids and solids in a broad frequency range, where material's loss tangent is less than 0.5. The essence of the method is based on excitation of magnetic dipole resonance in a spherical sample with variable dimensions. The size-dependent resonant frequencies and the quality factors of magnetic dipolar modes are mapped on real and imaginary parts of permittivity by employing Mie theory. Samples are comprised of liquid solutions, enclosed in stretchable covers, which allows changing the dimensions continuously. This approach enables the tuning of the magnetic dipolar resonance over a wide frequency range, effectively making resonance retrieval method broadband. The technique can be extended to powders and solid materials, depending on their physical parameters, such as granularity and processability. The retrieval of material parameters is of a crucial importance for a broad range of applications, based on propagation of electromagnetic waves and their interactions with matter 1 . Material`s susceptibilities govern constitutive relations, substituting Maxwell's equations and enabling to find their unique solutions. While a general concept of the parametric retrieval is quite universe and is always based on probing a structure's response to an applied electromagnetic field, practical constrains set numerous technical limitations and give rise to development of many complementary experimental techniques. The set of experimental methods for parametric retrieval is rather large, but the vast majority can be divided into two main groups: resonant An open-ended coaxial probe technique Another widely used method for parametric retrieval utilizes a waveguide configuration. Here a sample is inserted into a two-port waveguide section connected to a VNA. The retrieval is based on relating S-parameters to the impedance of an unknown material Another widely used approach utilizes transmission line geometry. A dielectric sample is placed on top of a microstrip line, connected to VNA ports. S-parameters are then converted to complex permittivity of the sample Cavity configuration is one of the most commonly used resonant methods. It allows the extraction of permittivity values from resonant responses, measured with and without a sample, incorporated inside the cavity The beforehand presented survey demonstrates strengths and limitations of several existent methods. We propose an experimental technique, which combines the advantages of both resonant and nonresonant methods. Our approach is based on Mie theory which describes electromagnetic scattering from the sphere where similar approximation were used in, e.g. Based on the formulation of Eqs. 1 and 2, we propose a new technique for parametric retrieval. Our method is calibration-free and does not require expensive additional equipment (apart from a scalar network analyzer, phase information is not mandatory). Furthermore, the data post-processing is transparent and straightforward, which makes the method to be cheap and easy to handle. In order to retrieve permittivity within a desired frequency range, the diameter of the sphere D should be varied continuously. This was implemented by using a stretchable latex balloon, which contained a liquid solution. The volume of the incompressible liquid was controlled with a calibrated injecting syringe, connected to the latex enclosure via a capillary. Schematic representation of the setup is depicted on Fig. The resonance measurement was made by approaching the structure with a magnetic loop antenna (Fig. and magnetic (red) vector fields, corresponding to the magnetic dipole resonance. The sphere's dimensions can be dynamically tuned, shifting the corresponding magnetic dipole resonance in frequency. A nonresonant probe (loop antenna) is connected to a vector network analyser (VNA) and placed above the sphere. Permittivity is retrieved by monitoring spectral dips in the reflection coefficient from the probe (S11-parameter) -S11 spectrum is schematically depicted in the right inset. Resonant frequency fr, corresponding to the dipole magnetic resonance, along with the resonance quality factor, allow retrieval of complex permittivity in a broad spectral range, defined by the set of available sphere's radii. First, numerical simulation was performed to estimate the accuracy of the proposed method. A spherical thin shell filled with distilled water, was analyzed numerically with Frequency Domain method, implemented in CST Microwave Studio. Permittivity obtained with commercial dielectric assessment kit (DAK) The proposed method can also be applied to solid materials. However, a set of samples with different dimensions should be prepared with available fabrication techniques (e.g. machine milling). Another possible and even more valuable application of the resonance method could be as a quality check of materials, where responses of new fabricated samples are compared with a reference sample. Here we demonstrate this capability by investigating six identical high-quality ceramic spheres of 15 mm diameter (Fig. The calculated values of the real and imaginary parts of the spheres' permittivity are presented in the Table It is important to consider the limitations of the proposed method, namely, material losses which make the resonant response less pronounced. We therefore performed a set of numerical simulations, where the real part of the permittivity was kept constant (80) and the loss tangent was varied from 10 -4 to ~1. The frequency range was taken to be between 0.5 and 3.5 GHz and the radius of the sphere was 10mm Fig. the range of applicability (0.5 is set as the higher bound for acceptable losses). Real part of the permittivity is 80, radius of the sphere 10mm. We have demonstrated a new calibration-free method for extracting complex material permittivities of liquid solutions. Our methodology combines the advantages of both the accurate resonant and broadband non-resonant approaches. Our design is based on a stretchable enclosure, which allows continuous tuning of sample's (resonant cavity) dimensions. Note, that the essence of the method is the resonant approach, while the broadband operation is achieved via continuous tuning of the resonant condition. The key for the extraction procedure is Mie theory which links resonant conditions, dimensions, and material parameters. The proposed methodology was compared to calibrated commercially available tools and showed a good agreement within 5% accuracy over a broad frequency range (0.5-3.5GHz). The main fundamental limitation of the method is related to loss tangent, which cannot access the value of 0.5. Practical difficulties of the implementation are related to mechanical stabilization of samples and accurate maintenance of their spherical shape. Thermal control was found to be also an important factor. The temperature and chemical resistance of the enclosing spherical shell can be increased, if PVC vinyl, neoprene or nitrile are used instead of latex. In this case, thicker enclosures might be employed. As the result, a core-shell geometry (shellthe enclosure; corea liquid under investigation) will be involved. Coreshell geometries can be also analyzed with Mie solutions 