Automated technologies for quality inspection of fruits have attracted great interest in the food industry. The development of nondestructive mechanisms to assess the quality of individual fruit prior to sale may lead to an increase in overall product quality, value, and consequently, producer competitiveness. However, the existing methods have limitations. Herein, a texture sensor based on highly sensitive hair-like cilia receptors, to allow a quick quality evaluation of fruit is proposed. The texture sensor consists of up to 100 magnetized nanocomposite cilia attached to a chip with magnetoresistive sensors in a full Wheatstone bridge architecture. In this paper we demonstrate the use of ciliary sensors in scanning fruits (blueberries and strawberries) in different maturation stages. The contact of the cilia with the fruit skin provided qualitative information about its texture in terms of ripeness stage. Less mature fruits exhibited, on average, a highest peak voltage of 0.14 mV for blueberries and 0.12 mV for strawberries, while overripe fruits exhibited 0.58 mV and 0.56 mV, respectively. The results were confirmed by sensorial assessment of the fruit freshness, and therefore attesting the application potential of the sensing technology for fruit quality control. There is a growing concern about diet and its influence on health. Fruits are among the most healthy and nutritive foods, namely in terms of vitamins and minerals, which are known to help in the prevention of various diseases Several nondestructive techniques have been reported for measuring quality attributes of fruit Humans tend to rely on their sense of touch to grade fruits according to their ripeness stage, as soft and wrinkled skin fruits are ripe while rigid and smother skin fruits are less mature The operating principle of the device is based on GMR sensor technologies to detect the change of the cilia's magnetic stray field upon deflection. While passing the sensing system over the fruit skin the cilia bend according to its texture, thus modifying the stray field emanating from it and consequently changing the resistance of the underlying sensor. The sensor array is made of four GMR sensing elements in a full Wheatstone bridge configuration, forming an active area of 9 mm 2 , of which 3 mm 2 are the sensitive area. GMR sensors were preferred to other magnetic sensor technologies because combine higher sensitivity than AMR and lower noise than TMR technologies The sensor consists of four GMR elements operating simultaneously, each composed of a series of 35 x 12 spin-valves (420 total). Each spin-valve is 40 μm long and 3 μm wide with the sensitivity along the width direction. Bonded over the sensor is the 100 cilia array, each with 150 μm in diameter and 150 μm long, spaced from each other by 100 μm. The GMR sensing element consists of a toppinned spin-valve sensor The artificial cilia array fabrication process, figure Four GMR sensor arrays were individualized and assembled into a full Wheatstone bridge on a chip carrier, two of the elements had dR/dH > 0 and the two remaining ones dR/dH < 0, i.e. with antiparallel reference layers. This architecture was chosen rather than individual spin-valve sensors to mitigate temperature drifts (not affected by fruits at different temperatures, from cold storage rooms to ambient warehouse), reduce the noise and originate a bipolar output ideally centered on zero, simplifying its future integration with other electronic components To characterize both spin-valve array and Wheatstone bridge, a Helmholtz coil was used to apply a homogeneous magnetic field along the sensor's sensitive direction while measuring the resistance with a source meter (Keithley 2400), with a DC current bias of 1 mA. The resistance of each spin-valve was 273 Ω and of the 420 spin-valves array was 798 Ω. The spin-valve sensor array showed a linear response to an applied magnetic field between -2 and 2 mT with a sensitivity of 0.07%/mT in the sensitive direction. The Full Wheatstone Bridge response to a varying magnetic field was measured (Fig. The results (Fig. This proof-of-concept study demonstrates that direct sensor readout could provide a fast assessment, with applications in fast quality control screening of fruits, carried out by nonspecialized personnel. Spin-valve sensor arrays arranged in a Wheatstone bridge architecture detect changes of the stray field created by the permanent magnetic cilia when deflected according to the fruit skin texture. The sensor detected the skin texture of blueberries and strawberries in different ripeness stages, showing the lowest voltage for green fruits (0.14 mV for blueberries and 0.12 mV for strawberries) and the highest voltage for wrinkled skin, overripe, fruits (0.58 mV for blueberries and 0.56 mV for strawberries). Thus, it is possible to correlate fruit ripeness stage with voltage: as fruits mature, their skin becomes more wrinkled, which when rubbing it over the sensor causes a more accentuated cilia deflection, resulting in a higher voltage. An advantage of the cilia is their permanent magnetic behavior which facilitates future sensor integration since it does not require an external magnetic field bias. Future work includes improving the sensor architecture, by increasing cilia array and sensing area dimensions, and sensitivity to be more tailored to fruit quality assessment. Also, fixing the fruit in a moving stage to remove the operator interference and reduce output signal noise. The developed sensor may, in the future, be integrated into a robot's fingertips for it to evaluate the skin texture of fruits and grade them according to the ripeness stage. This way, fruits in a more advanced maturation stage will not be packed together with less ripe fruits, which will decrease their premature ripening and consequently improve product durability, quality, and value.