The two-dimensional electron gas at the interface between LaAlO3 and SrTiO3 (LAO/STO) exhibits gate tunable superconductivity with a characteristic dome-like shape of the critical temperature (Tc) in the phase diagram. As shown recently [Phys. Rev. B 102, 085420 (2020)], such an effect can be explained as a consequence of the extended s-wave symmetry of the gap within an intersite real space pairing scenario, leading to a good agreement between the experiment and theory. In this work, we turn to a detailed analysis of the influence of spin-orbit coupling on the LAO/STO phase diagram by considering the atomic and the Rashba components. In particular, we analyze the optimal carrier concentration for which the maximal Tc is reached relative to the Lifshitz transition point. We find that the a misalignment between the two can be significantly enhanced by the spin-orbit splitting of the bands, combined with the fact that superconductivity sets in when the Fermi level passes the anticrossing induced by the spin-orbital hybridization. In the presence of the external in-plane magnetic field, our calculations show four-fold anisotropy with the paramagnetic limit largely exceeded for B || directed along the high symmetry points [01] and [01]. The obtained electron concentration dependence of B c|| reproduces the characteristic dome-like shape reported in experiments and the estimated value of B c|| corresponds to that measured experimentally. In recent years, the two-dimensional electron gas (2DEG) at the interface between LaAlO 3 (LAO) and SrTiO 3 (STO) has attracted growing interest as a natural platform for studying the interplay between superconductivity Although superconductivity at the LAO/STO interface has been discovered already some time ago Up to date, a few theoretical proposals have been made to explain the characteristic shape of T c . Scenarios that are being considered emphasise the role of electron-electron correlations Here we further explore our hypothesis based on the extended s-wave symmetry of the gap in the LAO/STO interface. In particular, we analyze the influence of SOC on arXiv:2106.12317v1 [cond-mat.mes-hall] 23 Jun 2021 the phase diagram in the context of the LT and n opt relative position. Moreover, the interplay between superconductivity and SOC is investigated here, in the presence of the external magnetic field. The latter becomes important in relation to the recent experimental reports First, we show, that due to the appearance of the SOC the system encounters two Lifshitz transitions, as the carrier concentration is increased. The superconducting phase is created in close proximity to the first one, while the T c maximum appears slightly above the second. We discuss this result in view of the available experimental data. Next, we turn to the analysis of the critical in-plane magnetic field where we find a four-fold anisotropy of B c|| with respect to the magnetic field orientation. Interestingly, for a high symmetry crystallographic directions, the estimated value of B c|| corresponds to the one measured in the experiment The paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II a theoretical model is provided and the spin-orbit components at the LAO/STO interface are introduced. The influence of SOC on the phase diagram and superconducting state is discussed in sec. III A. In Sec. III B we analyze the anisotropy of the critical magnetic field resulting from the presence of SOC. Sec. IV contains the summary. The effective band structure of the (001)-oriented LAO/STO interface is formed by the Ti t 2g orbitals confined in a narrow quantum well, which is created near the interface as a result of the polarization discontinuity with the single particle part, ĤT BA , which takes the form where ĉ † klσ (ĉ klσ ) creates (annihilates) electrons with spin σ, momentum k, and the band index l = xy, xz, yz. The latter corresponds to the three orbitals d xy , d xz , d yz of the Ti atoms placed on the square lattice. Ĥ0 term describes the three bands of the system with the dispersion relations and the hybridization term The tight-binding parameters are reported in Ref. 2 and take the values: t l = 875 meV, t h = 40 meV, t d = 40 meV, ∆ E = 47 meV. The remaining components of Eq. ( where ∆ SO determines the atomic-like spin-orbit energy and σ = (σ x , σ y , σ z ) are the Pauli matrices. The Rashba spin-orbit term ĤRSO results from the intrinsic electric field at the interface which breaks the inversion symmetry and takes the form with ∆ RSO controlling the strength of the interaction. In Eq. ( The Coulomb repulsion term ĤU has the following form where U and V are the intra-and inter-orbital Coulomb repulsion integrals while the primmed summation is restricted to l = l . For simplicity, we take U = V ≡ 2 eV, which corresponds to the value calculated in Ref. 32. Finally, in our model, the superconducting state is enabled by a real-space intersite intraorbital pairing between the nearest neighboring sites as well as the interorbital pair hopping term where the summations run over the nearest-neighbors only, σ is the spin opposite to σ, and the pairing strength is determined by the parameters J and J , respectively. In the calculations, we assume that the interorbital pair hopping energy, J , is one order of magnitude smaller than the intraorbital coupling constant, J. Within the standard mean field approach, Hamiltonian (1) can be transformed to where N is the number of atomic sites in our system, n l = nil↑ + nil↓ , while the vector fk is the twelvecomponent composite operator The full matrix form of Ĥk is given by where the prime of H 0 in Eq. (13) indicates that in the diagonal elements l k , Eqs. (4), we include the chemical potential term as well as the effective shift of the atomic energy, which originates from the Hartree-Fock approximation of the Coulomb interaction terms. Namely, in H 0 the diagonal elements of Eq. ( The part of Ĥk which is responsible for superconductivity takes the form where and The summation above runs over the four nearest-neighboring atomic sites surrounding the ith atomic site. Value of Γ σσ l does not depend on the position of i-th atomic site since we are considering a spatially homogeneous system (Γ σσ il ≡ Γ σσ l ). The explicit definition of the pairing amplitudes ∆ σσ ijl is given by Even though, in the absence of the external magnetic field, the extended s-wave pairing amplitude appears as stable where the real-space symmetry factors are with δ v being the appropriate Kronecker delta, giving δ v = 1 only when v = (0, 0) and x(ŷ) is the unit vector along x(y) axis. It should be noted, that the spin-singlet pairing (∆ ↑↓ = -∆ ↓↑ ) is compatible with the s-and d-wave gap symmetries, while the spin-triplet pairing (∆ ↑↓ = ∆ ↓↑ ) is allowed for the p-wave gap symmetry. In general, in the considered model, a multicomponent gap structure can be realized with a mixture of s, p, and d symmetries as well as both singlet and triplet contributions. The pairing energies Γ σσ l are determined by solving the set of self-consistent equations ( The superconducting state is thermodynamically stable when its free energy is lower than the energy of a normal state. Here we discuss the impact of the atomic and Rashba SOC on the superconducting properties of 2DEG at the LAO/STO interface. Then, we analyze an anisotropy of the critical magnetic field induced by the spin-orbital interaction. Although in experiments SOC can change with the gate potential First, we focus on the sole effect of the atomic SOC by assuming ∆ RSO = 0. We set the superconducting coupling constant J = 0.165 eV (J = 0.0165 eV) so that the model with ∆ SO = 0 reproduces the maximal critical temperature T c ≈ 0.35 K measured in the experiment As shown in Fig. In Fig. After the analysis of the influence of the two SOC components on the superconducting state, we now discuss the temperature-dependent phase diagrams calculated for realistic values of both SOC parameters ∆ SO = 30 meV and ∆ RSO = 30 meV The appearance of dome-like shape behavior of T c in the system without SOC was explained in detail in our recent paper In panel (a) of Fig. As shown in our recent paper We now analyze the effect of SOC on the in-plane critical magnetic field of the superconducting 2DEG at the LAO/STO interface. For a parallel magnetic field, due to the strong confinement of electrons in a few nanometer quantum well close to the interface, the orbital motion and vortices can be neglected, making the coupling of the magnetic field to the spin and the orbital magnetic momentum [cf. ĤB in Sec.II] the dominant pair-breaking effect. In contrast to the case with B = 0, now the bands xz and yz are no longer equivalent. Instead, their response to the external magnetic field depends on the B || orientation. Due to the C 4 symmetry, the pairing amplitudes for the band yz and the magnetic field directed along [10] are equivalent to the amplitudes for the band xz and the magnetic field along [01]. Therefore, for the sake of clarity, in this subsection we mainly concentrate on the band yz and the lower lying band xy. For the magnetic field oriented in the [10] direction, the non-monotonic (dome shape) dependence of the critical field at T = 0, is shown in Fig. perconducting gap in the bands xz/yz [Fig. Even though, for different bands the superconducting amplitudes at B || = 0 have different magnitudes, they are all characterized by a single critical field as the pairings in all bands are linked by the Cooper pair-hopping term. The calculated value of B c|| , which is slightly above 4 T at the maximum, quantitatively agrees with the one measured in the (111) LAO/STO interface 12 that is characterized by the highest SOC strength, close to that assumed in our calculations. Although the critical field for other crystallographic orientations is reported to be slightly smaller In 2D superconductors, the orbital effects of the inplane magnetic field are strongly suppressed due to the confinement in the transverse direction. The parallel upper critical field (B c|| ) is determined solely by the Zeeman effect and is given by the Chandrasekhar-Clogston formula In Fig. The superconducting tail and the corresponding critical field both depend on the magnetic field orientation and are different for [01] ( [10]) and [11] directions as presented in panel (b). Interestingly, the tail does not occur when the magnetic field is directed along [11] for which the superconductor-to-normal state transition is of the first order. This behavior can be explained if we analyze changes of the Fermi surface induced by the magnetic field -see Fig. Finally, one should also note that the Fermi surface in LAO/STO is characterized by the C 4 symmetry at B = 0. This, in turn, results in the four-fold anisotropy of the critical field, demonstrated in Fig. For the sake of completeness, we also calculate the temperature dependence of the paring amplitudes at n tot corresponding to the T c maxima (Fig. Assuming the real space nearest neighbour pairing, we have studied the impact of the SOC on the phase diagram of the LAO/STO interface within the mean field Hartree-Fock approximation. The atomic and Rashba SOC have been considered separately and, as shown, both are detrimental to the superconducting state. According to our analysis, due to SOC the system undergoes two Lifshitz transitions within the lowcarrier concentration regime. Superconductivity is created slightly above the first one when the Fermi energy passes the anticrossing between the bands xy and yz. Then, a rapid enhancement of superconductivity occurs at the second Lifshitz transition, with the maximal T c being reached slightly above it. Therefore, the distance between the lower critical concentrations for the appearance of the superconducting state and the optimal concentration, for which the maximal T c appears, is largely influenced by the atomic SOC energy. The Rashba in-teraction, on the other hand, only weakly suppresses the superconductivity and for its large value, can lead to the characteristic narrow peak in the superconducting amplitudes resulting from the van Hove singularity. It would be interesting to determine which of the two Lifshitz transitions are seen in experiment. Possibly different positions of LT reported experimentally 1,3 may actually correspond to LT1 and LT2 which appear in our analysis. In the presence of the magnetic field B c,|| exhibits the characteristic dome with its critical values close to the ones measured experimentally Finally, we should note that when the in-plane magnetic field is applied, the center of the band (Fermi surface) is shifted away from the Γ point [7]. In this case, it could be energetically favorable to create the nonzero total momentum of Cooper pairs with a pairing between electrons in the states |k ↑ and | -k + q ↓ . This would lead to a superconducting condensate with a spatial e 2iq•r modulation of the gap, similarly as in the Fulde-Ferrell-Larkin-Ovchnnikov state As a final remark, we should mention that the extended s-wave symmetry is in all considered cases the dominant component of the gap at LAO/STO interface. It reproduces the experimental phase diagram with a good accuracy. Nevertheless, for the case with both SOC coupling and the magnetic field present, a small p x /p y -wave pairing appears. Although the physical mechanism behind the superconductivity in LAO/STO is still under debate, recently two theoretical proposals have been reported, which are consistent with our hypothesis on the extended s-wave symmetry of the gap. According to the first scenario The work was supported by National Science Centre (NCN) according to the decision number 2017/26/D/ST3/00109 and in part by PL-Grid Infrastructure.