Quantum materials with non-trivial band topology and bulk superconductivity are considered superior materials to realize topological superconductivity. In this regard, we report detailed Density Functional Theory (DFT) calculations and Z2 invaraints for the NbC superconductor, exhibiting its band structure to be topologically non-trivial. Bulk superconductivity at 8.9K is confirmed through DC magnetization measurements under Field Cooled (FC) and Zero Field Cooled (ZFC) protocols. This superconductivity is found to be of type-II nature as revealed by isothermal M-H measurements and thus calculated the Ginzberg-Landau parameter. A large intermediate state is evident from the phase diagram, showing NbC to be a strong type-II superconductor. Comparing with earlier reports on superconducting NbC, a non-monotonic relationship of critical temperature with lattice parameters is seen. In conclusion, NbC is a type-II around 10K superconductor with topological non-trivial surface states. Condensed matter scientists are always keen to discover new materials and explore their novel physical properties Topological Superconductivity in bulk material can be induced either by doping suitable elements in topological material Other TMCs, such as VC In this work, we synthesize a polycrystalline sample of NbC in a single step at a relatively higher temperature (1350 0 C) from our previous report on NbC Band structure calculations are also performed by using DFT at the same path as suggested in ref. A polycrystalline sample of NbC is prepared in a single step by following the solid-state reaction route as suggested in ref. The PXRD pattern of synthesized polycrystalline NbC crystal was recorded using Rigaku mini flex-II tabletop X-ray diffractometer equipped with CuK α radiation of 1.5418Å wavelength. Rietveld refinement of the PXRD pattern was performed using Full Proof software, and the Unit cell of NbC was drawn using VESTA software. Band structure calculations were performed under DFT protocols using Quantum Espresso (QE) software in QUANTUM VITAS Fig. Synthesized NbC sample has a cubic structure with F m -3 m space group symmetry. Rietveld refined PXRD pattern shows that all observed peaks are well fitted under F m -3 m space group symmetry. The goodness of fit  2 is found to be 2.85, which is in an acceptable range. The constituent elements; Nb and C occupy (0, 0, 0) and (0, 0, 0.5) atomic positions in the lattice. Lattice parameters obtained from Rietveld refinement are a=b=c= 4.4739 The obtained lattice parameters are slightly higher than as reported in our previous report 28. The variation in Lattice parameters in NbC results is due to the change in the stoichiometry of Carbon Fig. Lower critical field H c1 is the field at which the M-H plot deviates from linearity, or this is the field at which the first magnetic line of force penetrates the superconducting sample. Fig. To get an estimate of H c1 , a straight line is marked, which is showing the deviation from linearity. However, from this, the accurate value of H c1 cannot be determined. A separate exercise described in ref. For this, first, the low magnetic field M-H data is linearly fitted. The slope of this linear fit is used to determine M 0 , and then this M 0 is subtracted from each isotherm. This difference (M-M 0 ) is represented as M, and this change is plotted against the applied field. A baseline is drawn for M=0, and H c1 is the point at which M deviates from this zero baseline. This exercise is shown in the inset of Fig. This particular K-path is considered from ref. The first principle calculation of band structure shows that the NbC system respects the Time-Reversal Symmetry (TRS) since each band splits into two when SOC is included, as shown in fig. Summarily, we have synthesized a polycrystalline sample of NbC in a single step at a higher temperature than previously reported. A non-monotonic relationship is observed in T c with lattice parameters and synthesis temperature. FC and ZFC plots confirm bulk superconductivity at 8.9K. Nature of Superconductivity is found to be strong type-II through M-H plots and phase diagrams. Simultaneously, the DFT calculations show that bands at high symmetry points do split when SOC is included which is also confirmed by calculating Z2 invariant for the same. It suggests that NbC has a topologically non-trivial band structure. This result, along with observed superconductivity at around 8.9K, suggests that NbC is a potential candidate to explore topological superconductivity. 