The present contribution proposes a thermodynamically consistent model for the simulation of the ductile damage. The model couples the phase field method of fracture to the Armstrong-Frederick plasticity model with kinematic hardening. The latter is particularly suitable for simulating the material behavior under a cyclic load. The model relies on the minimum principle of the dissipation potential. However, the application of this approach is challenging since potentials of coupled methods are defined in different spaces: The dissipation potential of the phase field model is expressed in terms of rates of internal variables, whereas the Armstrong-Frederick model proposes a formulation depending on thermodynamic forces. For this reason, a unique formulation requires the Legendre transformation of one of the potentials. The present work performs the transformation of the Armstrong-Frederick potential, such that final formulation is only expressed in the space of rates of internal variables. With the assumption for the free energy and the joint dissipation potential at hand, the derivation of evolution equations is straightforward. The application of the model is illustrated by selected numerical examples studying the material response for different load constellations and sample geometries. The paper provides a comparison with the experimental results as well. Fatigue failure significantly influences the safety measures during the service life of engineering structures. It particularly holds for structures subjected to alternate loading with high amplitudes, which is an often situation when speaking of transportation vehicles. Dependent on the number of cycles and load amplitude, the interplay of the brittle and ductile failure takes place. However, the present contribution focuses on the low cycle fatigue where the role of plasticity is essential. The high complexity of the ductile damage under the cyclic load strongly motivates the virtual testing of materials on the basis of the computer simulations. The present work envisages a coupling of the phase field method of fracture to the Armstrong-Frederick model of plasticity with the kinematic hardening to this end. The base for the phase field model of fracture has been set in the work by Some of previous works have also considered coupling of plasticity to the phase field method The Armstrong-Frederick model coupled to the phase field method is a promising approach inheriting the advantages of both incorporated techniques. However, the numerical implementation of this coupled approach brings with it several challenges such as the definition of a unique framework for both setups, the derivation of coupled evolution equations, the distinction between the tension and compression mode and certainly the development of the computationally efficient algorithm. Some of these issues are discussed in the present contribution which is structured as follows. An overview on the phase field method of fracture is presented in Sect. 2, whereas Sect. 3 introduces the Armstrong-Frederick model of plasticity. Furthermore, the Armstrong-Frederick evolution equations are derived by using two versions of the minimum principle of dissipation potential (Sects. 4 and 5). The concept for the coupling of two methods is presented in Sect. 6 and complemented by explaining the scheme for the calculation of the plasticity multiplier on the basis of the consistency condition (Sect. 7). Details on the numerical implementation including the global part and the material point part are presented in Sect. 8. Eventually, the paper also includes numerical examples simulating the tests with the uniformly increasing and the cyclic load. The contribution finishes with conclusions and an outlook. The derivation of the coupled method requires a short recapitulation of separate approaches, which is done in two subsequent sections. Sect. 2 provides an overview of the phase field method, whereas Sect. 3 focuses on the Armstrong-Frederick model. The present work uses the phase field framework proposed by Miehe and coworkers which is furthermore used to define the total crack surface A for the entire body B An assumption that the crack propagation is a fully dissipative process yields to the conclusion that the constitutive dissipation potential has to be proportional to the rate of crack surface density where parameter g c is related to the critical Griffith-type fracture energy and can be seen as a constitutive threshold value. However, this potential still does not guarantee that the damage is an increasing function. For this reason, the potential is extended by introducing the penalty term Here, the negative Macaulay brackets assure that the penalty term only activates for a negative damage evolution and the constant k p has to be chosen as high as possible in order to stipulate the condition ḋ ≥ 0. Along with the penalty term (4), the damage potential turns into In a further step, the model focuses on the definition of the free energy and its reduction on the basis of function ω Here, the positive constant k d prevents the energy to become identical to zero at a fully broken state. Moreover, the reduction function only affects the tension part of the energy which corresponds to the concept of the anisotropic degradation of energy The additive split of the energy into a tension part Ψ + ( ) and a compression part Ψ -( ), is of the special interest for simulating the cyclic behavior where the crack closure in the compression mode has to be considered. The definitions of the positive and negative energy parts of the free energy are based on the spectral decomposition of the strain tensor where i are the principal strains, n i are the principal strain directions and i is the summation index. Equation ( , whereas the negative ones have already been used in Eq. ( such that it holds σ ± = ∂Ψ± ∂ . For a case of an isotropic material characterized by Lamé constants λ and μ, the energy spit turns into with the corresponding equilibrium equation and stresses Since the free energy and the dissipation potential are known, the minimum principle of dissipation potential is used to derive the evolution equation for the internal parameter, namely The equilibrium equation ( 3 The Armstrong-Frederick kinematic hardening model The Armstrong-Frederick kinematic hardening model In rheological models, it is simulated as a damping element connected in series to an elastic spring. These are additionally coupled to a friction element in parallel Here, C is the fourth order elasticity tensor and c represents the kinematic hardening modulus. The Helmholtz free energy serves furthermore as a basis for the formulation of dissipation which, in the case of an isothermal process, only depends on the elastic power (σ : ̇ ) and free energy rate ( ΨAF ) In the concrete case of the Armstrong-Frederick model, the dissipation turns into: which yields two groups of consequences. The first consequence is the constitutive law σ = ∂Ψ AF ∂ , whereas the second consequence defines the driving forces of internal variables: The later definition corresponds to the back stress and gives insight into the physical meaning of material parameter c. It is a proportionality constant relating the back stress χ to the strain-like quantity ξ. In analogy to the constitutive law of elastic materials, c represents the kinematic hardening modulus. A shorter notation for internal variables ν = { p , ξ} and for corresponding driving forces q = {σ, χ}, together with the constitutive law for stresses, yields the result for the so-called reduced dissipation The Armstrong-Frederick model is eventually completed by introducing the yield locus formula where symbol || • ||= √ • : • denotes the Frobenius norm, σ and χ are deviatoric parts of stresses σ and back stresses χ and σ Y is the yield limit. Condition (19) defines the admissible set of driving forces yielding inelastic deformations. 4 Derivation of the evolution equations based on the minimum principle for the dissipation potential in terms of driving forces The completion of the Armstrong-Frederick model previously described also requires the derivation of evolution equations which can be accomplished by using different concepts. One possibility is to follow the minimum principle of dissipation potential (MDP) as proposed in works by The dissipation potential ( The Lagrangian corresponding to the minimization problem ( which yields the following stationary conditions The first equation in ( The second equation in ( Here, the same argumentation as in Eq. ( Equations ( The MDP-approach differs from the common approach treating the yield locus equation Ω as a subsidiary condition within the Lagrange formalism of the constrained optimization. The main difference manifests itself in the evolution equations taking the form ν = λ ∂Ω ∂q with λ as the Lagrange multiplier. An important advantage of the MDP-approach compared to the constrained optimization method is that it allows a standardized variable transformation, which is often a useful tool in coupling strategies. Both models summarized in Sects. 2 and 4 apply the minimum principle of dissipation potential. However, the phase field model uses a formulation in terms of the rate of internal variables, whereas the Armstrong-Frederick model minimizes the dissipation potential in terms of driving forces. Naturally, the coupling procedure requires a unique formulation in a single space. The present contribution deals with the approach in terms of velocities, such that the transformation of the potential Φ AF * (ν, q) into the space of rates is necessary. This type of exchange is conducted on the basis of Legendre transformation (LT) defining the new potential as follows The maximization procedure relies on two stationary conditions, the first of which gives a relationship for rates of plastic deformations Bearing in mind that the multiplier λ is a scalar, Eq. ( On the other hand, the second stationary condition together with (30)b leads to the final expression for deviatoric stresses Driving forces (31)b and ( More details on derivation are presented in Appendix A. Result (33) now enables the formulation of the new minimization problem (34) Bearing in mind the deviatoric character of quantities ̇ and ξ, the problem can also be written as: (35) Equation ( A transformation of the system ( Note that the insertion of ( which is only valid for || ̇ p || = 0. By taking the norm of (39)b, it follows that ||σ -χ|| = σY . This consequence indicates that dissipation potential (33) intrinsically includes the yield locus condition. Accordingly, it can be summed up that the dissipation potential (33) describes the same problem as the dissipation potential ( The previous system includes the equilibrium equation, the constitutive law, two evolution equations and the Karush-Kuhn-Tucker conditions defining the plastic domain. Equation ( 6 Coupling of the Armstrong-Frederick model to the phase-field approach The coupling of the two methods starts by writing the Armstrong-Frederick energy in a form splitting the tension and compression part of elastic energy in order to introduce the damage influence as was done in Sect. 2 However, damage also influences the hardening energy in the case where the tension mode is active. For this reason, the present model introduces a function distinguishing the pure compression mode from the pure tension and from the mixed modes By using this new notation, the coupled free energy is written as and corresponding constitutive laws take the form where the spectral decomposition of elastic strains has the standard form Bearing in mind stress definition (49), the equilibrium equation turns into The damage influence on the dissipation functional related to the plastic deformations follows the same argumentation as in the case of the hardening energy, such that the coupled dissipation potential Φ c consists of two terms where the second term is weighted by the function ω With the definitions ( yields the following system of equations which, together with equilibrium equation ( Here, a shorter notation N = σ-χ ||σ-χ|| is introduced to denote the so-called direction tensor. Details on the derivation of evolution equations and of the yield criterion are provided in Appendix B. Evolution equation ( Since difference (σχ) is deviatoric, the condition above also can be written as follows: In a further step, the stress rate along with Eqs. ( (66) However, the split of the elastic strain rate into a positive and a negative part cannot be performed as a superposition of positive/negative parts of the total and plastic strains. For this reason, the previous equation can only be solved numerically by using an iterative procedure. For this purpose, the initial guess λ 0 is obtained by neglecting the terms including the stress rates Thereafter, all subsequent steps follow the iteration rule for the calculation of the updated value λ i The iterative process stops if the prescribed accuracy is achieved. 8 Numerical implementation The minimum principle of dissipation potential along with the time-incremental variational principles represents an important tool for the numerical solution of boundary value problems. Within this concept, the Lagrange function L MDP corresponding to the body Ω is integrated over a single time increment [t n , t n+1 ]. In its original form, this integral depends on external variables (u), internal variables (ν) and on the rates of internal variables, so-called velocities ( ν). However, the velocities can be replaced by the Euler-forward approximation ν = (ν n+1 -ν n )/∆t, where ∆t = t n+1 -t n is the time increment. As a consequence, the result only depends on discrete values of external and internal variables such that the time integration is performed as follows (69) Here, displacement u is the only external variable since an isothermal process is considered. In a further step, the minimization with respect to the displacements and internal variables in the current time step n + 1 yields the sought solution. Within this procedure, term Ψ( e n , ν n ) can be neglected since it only depends on values in the previous time step n. By adding the potential of external forces l(t n+1 , u n+1 ) in (69), the new, combined Lagrangian is constructed (70) Within the present work, the minimization of ( The definition of the global solution part (gl) starts with the reduced formulation of the Lagrangian by only including the reduced elastic energy and damage potential (71) By using the expression for the crack surface density (1) and definition (5) the increment ∆Φ d can be reconstructed as shown in The FE-implementation now requires the derivatives of the Lagrangian L. The first derivatives are required in order to form the residual whereas the second derivatives are needed for the definition of the stiffness matrix These relationships use the following indicator functions The remaining part of the numerical procedure at this level encompasses the standard steps typical of an FE-model. To this end, the bilinear shape functions corresponding to a quadrilateral element and staggered solution scheme are applied in the present work. This approach staggers between the displacement and the phase-field and is advantageous compared to the monolithic solution type due to its higher robustness. However, both approaches are well established nowadays as shown in works applying monolithic schemes The material point solution part evaluates internal variables p and ξ by using a predictor-corrector scheme if damage and deformations (d, u) as well as rate ω = ω (d-dn) ∆t are known from the global level solution. The predictor step calculates the trial stress by assuming that plastic deformations do not change in comparison with the previous time step n The trial stress is furthermore introduced in the yield locus function to check whether the prediction is true If the control value Φ c,tr is negative, the prediction ( whereas the later iterations follow the rule The previous expressions use the approximation ̇ = ( -n ) ∆t and notation N tr = (σ trχn ) ||σ tr -χn || . Note that index i is related to the iterative solution for λ i , whereas index n denotes the time step. Quantities without any index are related to the step n + 1 or are constant. Finally, the solution of the iterative procedure (83)-( (88) The model developed inherits the advantages of both methods that it incorporates. That makes its application field large, as demonstrated in the subsequent sections studying the behavior of the cold-formed carbon steel (CS) and of the cold-formed stainless steel (SS). Among others, selected numerical examples deal with the purely elasto-plastic material behavior (Sect. 9.1), with the simulation of crack propagation on a notched sample (Sect. 9.2) and with the study of the life time in the LCF-mode (Sect.9.3). The first group of examples illustrating the application of the model studies a purely elasto-plastic material behavior under a cyclic load by neglecting the damage effects. To this end, simulations at a single material point are performed for parameter sets shown in Tab. 1. The prescribed strains gradually change from zero to 1 % and thereafter decrease to -1 %. The cycle again closes at zero load level. Two cycles with identical load paths are carried out. Each cycle takes 2 s to complete, whereas a single time step is ∆t = 0.01 s. Simulations are carried out for two kinds of steel, namely for the cold-formed carbon steel (CS) and the cold-formed stainless steel (SS). The results are furthermore compared to the experimental findings by The geometry of the sample for the second group of simulations is shown in Fig. and propagation can be simulated within a fairly small number of time steps in order to reduce the computational effort and to provide a qualitative analysis of relevant phenomena according to the results from The behavior of the notched sample (Fig. In the first case, the prescribed displacement linearly increases up to the maximum value of ūx = 0.005 mm. The constant time increment is ∆t = 0.005 s and the total loading time amounts to 1 s. The results at a quadrature point of an element directly located at the end of the initial crack are monitored for the illustration in Fig. Amongst others, the model proposed enables the estimation of the life time in the LCF-mode. To this end, the number of cycles up to the total failure is evaluated dependent on the amplitude of the cyclic load applied. The latter is kept constant during the test. The material failure is caused by the material defects such as production process induced pores at a small length scale. In most cases, surface porosity is the critical factor for the fatigue phenomenon. However, the present paper assumes that different methods of the surface treatment can resolve this type of imperfection and that a defect in the bulk of material causes the crack initiation. This part of the analysis assumes the sample geometry (Fig. The very first step of the analysis applies a strain of 3 %. The assumed time increment is ∆t = 4.28 × 10 -4 s and 2000 time steps simulate a single cycle. As expected, a vertical crack propagates through the middle of the sample, which is shown in Fig. The results of simulations together with the experimental results by The observations mentioned previously have also been approved by repeating the same kind of tests for the stainless steel as shown in Fig. The present work couples the phase field method of fracture to the Armstrong-Frederick model of plasticity with the kinematic hardening. The chosen concept inherits the advantages of both techniques and is aimed at the study of LCF effects in ductile materials. However, the numerical implementation of this promising approach faces several challenges, such as the definition of a unique framework for both setups, the derivation of coupled evolution equations, the distinction between tension and compression mode and the development of a computationally efficient algorithm. The basis for the phase field fracture model are the Griffith's theory and the dissipation potential relying on the assumption of a crack surface function. The derivation of evolution equations uses the minimum principle of the dissipation potential, which requires to express the dissipation potential of the classical Armstrong-Frederick model in terms of the internal variable rates by using the Legendre transformation. The model developed also takes into account that the unloading and the compression mode have no effect on the damage evolution. The approach is eventually implemented in the FE-program FEAP where the displacements and damage are calculated at the global level by using a staggered scheme, whereas inelastic internal variables are updated locally, at each Gauss point. The application of the model is illustrated by three groups of examples related to the cold-formed carbon steel and the cold-formed stainless steel. The first group of tests investigates the purely elasto-plastic material behavior without the influence of damage and focuses on the numerical reconstruction of the stressstrain hysteresis due to a cyclic load. The second group of tests simulates the crack propagation on a notched sample and particularly analyses the influence of plastic parameters on the damage evolution. The simulations show that the rapidly hardening materials are prone to a faster damage evolution. The ability of the model to constrain the damage evolution in the unloading and compression stages of a loading cycle is demonstrated as well. The last group of tests studies the life time of the carbon steel in the LCF-mode and compares the numerical results to the experimental findings by The model proposed is a promising tool with regard to the simulation of fatigue effects, giving rise to many new issues. Among others, it can be extended to capture "hidden" aspects of the fatigue process such as the microcrack initiation based on the theory of persistent slip bands and the microcrack propagation along the crystallographic planes. Moreover, the additional effects typical of high and very high cycle fatigue, as well as the threshold for the damage initiation have to be incorporated. A comprehensive validation of the model with respect to the experimental results as well as its application and calibration for further materials are also envisaged. The formulation of the MDP in terms of rates of internal variables is based on Legendre transformation: Φ AF (ν, ν) = max q {L LT = q : ν -Φ AF * (ν, q)}, (89) The corresponding stationary conditions have already been derived in Sect. The last term is a constant and thus can be neglected, since the evolution equations are obtained by its minimization of the potential. Accordingly, the sought potential turns into The potential of the coupled problem has the form where Ψc is defined in Eq. ( such that a transformation of the system (95) and ( whereas the insertion of ( (98) Finally, constitutive law (51) is used to derive the evolution equation for the back stress: χ = -ωcξωc ξ = -ωcξ + cω ̇ p -1 bω χ . (99)