A new fatigue life prediction method using the energy-based approach under uniaxial and multiaxial random loadings is proposed in this paper. One unique characteristic of the proposed method is that it uses time-derivative damage accumulation model compared to the classical cyclebased damage accumulation model. Thus, damage under arbitrary random loading can be directly obtained using time-domain integration without cycle counting (e.g., rain-flow cycle counting method in classical fatigue analysis). First, a brief review of existing models is given focusing on their applicability to uniaxial/multiaxial, constant/random, and high cycle fatigue/low cycle fatigue loading regimes. It is observed that most existing models are only applicable to certain loading conditions and many of them are not applicable/validated under random loadings. Next, a timederivative damage accumulation model under uniaxial random loading is proposed. The proposed damage function is inspired by a time-domain fatigue crack growth model. The fatigue life is obtained by integrating the damage function following random energy loading histories. Following this, an equivalent energy concept for general multiaxial loading conditions is used to convert the random multiaxial loading to an equivalent random uniaxial loading, where the time-derivative damage model can be used. Finally, the proposed model is validated with extensive experimental data from open literature and in-house testing data under various constant and random spectrum loadings. Conclusions and future work are suggested based on the findings from this study. Fatigue is a critical issue that has been researched for many years. An accurate prediction of fatigue life is very important to ensure the integrity of structural component used in the real world. Theoretically speaking, all structural components are under general multiaxial random loadings, although simplifications have been made to approximate the problem as uniaxial and/or constant amplitude loadings. Existing fatigue models for general multiaxial fatigue loadings can be classified as stress-based The stress-based approach is a widely used method used to predict the fatigue life, especially in high cycle fatigue (HCF) regime. For example, the stress-based model, proposed by Liu and Mahadevan The strain-based approach was proposed by several authors based on different concepts. For example, a strain-based model The energy-based approach has been proposed Beyond the three classifications above, there are a few different approaches to predict the fatigue life. The fracture mechanics-based approach based on the fatigue crack growth analysis and the equivalent initial flaw size (EIFS) concept has been proposed for fatigue life prediction The fatigue model with the EIFS concept is suitable for both uniaxial and multiaxial constant loading cases Multiaxial constant loading cases have been predicted very well by several other models Again, the demonstration and validation of these models for random loadings is lacking. The random fatigue loading spectrum includes various peaks/valleys and sometimes are not even cyclic (e.g., Christmas tree-type spectrums). In practice, cycle counting algorithms (e.g., rainflow-counting algorithm) and a damage accumulation rule (e.g., Miner's rule) are combined with the multiaxial fatigue model for fatigue life prediction under random loading spectrums. A review that summarizes several criterions for solving random loading cases can be found in A detailed comparison for different models reviewed here is shown in Table Loading spectrum Loading path Loading regime that all these reviewed methods are cycle-based. The cycle-based method relies on the cyclecounting algorithm and cycle-based damage accumulation rule, which is very difficult for general multiaxial random loadings. For example, critical plane-type approach needs to know the critical plane orientation, which is not known as a priori for random loadings. Some averaged calculation is needed. In addition, cycle counting results based on different load channels (e.g., tensile or tortional loading) might be totally different if the loading frequency differs. Finally, cycle-counting method ignores the sequence effect in the true time-history. Thus, it is intrinsically difficult if nonlinear damage accumulation occurs. In view of this, the proposed study proposes to use an alternative approach for fatigue analysis which is based on the time-derivative definition of damage. Time-based damage concept can track every damage increment under every time step. The damage accumulation can be in analogy to a time-domain integration and avoids the ambiguity of cyclecounting and cycle definition. The remaining of this paper is organized as follows. The time-derivative model under uniaxial loading will be introduced first. A new damage accumulation function in analogy to fatigue crack propagation will be discussed in detail. Next, the time-based concept is integrated with an equivalent energy concept to extend the model to general multiaxial random loadings. Following this, the validation of the model using several databases from open literature and in-house testing will be presented. Finally, a conclusion and discussion of the results will be presented. The future work is also suggested in the end. The time-derivative concept is illustrated in Fig. The time-derivative damage model will specify the instantaneous damage accumulation rate at every time point (i.e., load point). Therefore, the fatigue life can be directly predicted by integrating the damage with respect to time (alternatively with respect to load history). function, proposed in The details are not discussed here, and readers can refer to the cited articles using in situ experimental imaging analysis where ∆aa is the incremental crack length in the current cycle. AA , BB and dd are fitting parameters. KK mmddmm is the maximum stress intensity factor from the previous loading cycle. δδ is the CTOD. A schematic plot of this function is shown in Fig. Fig. where ∆DD is incremental damage in the current cycle, and the other parameters are the same as those in Eq. ( The proposed model is energy-based and the stress is replaced by energy. For ideal elastic response, we have where E is the Young's modulus, UU is the strain energy, and σσ is the stress. Substituting Eq. ( Eq. ( The same modification can be applied to CTOD δδ as well. Taking the differential form for both sides of Eq. ( where dddd dddd is the time-derivative damage growth rate. It should be noted that KK′ mmddmm refers to the largest value from the previous loading history and is considered to be a constant in the current loading cycle. Thus, only δδ′ is considered for the derivative operation. Eq. ( Eq. ( where ∆DD is the incremental damage. Energy-derivative formulation can be rewritten as Substituting Eq. ( where dddd dddd is damage increment per cycle. ∫ UU dd-1 dd mmmmmm dd mmmmmm ddUU refers to the accumulated energy in the current completed cycle. UU mmddmm hmmii is a memory energy value and depends on the loading history. For constant loading, the value is the same as the maximum energy UU mmddmm in the equation. For random loading, UU mmddmm hmmii may come from an earlier cycle due to the memory effect. In the current study, a memory window is selected and the maximum value from this memory window is used for damage calculation. Various memory window size can be selected, and the current study uses the value of one hundred complete load reversals before the current calculation. The experimental validation later in this paper shows great accuracy for this memory window size. As can be seen in Eq. ( Next question is the fatigue failure criteria and we followed the same concept as the fatigue damage accumulation: the material will fail when the value of accumulated damage exceeds 1. Eq. ( where dd is expressed as Eq. ( Now, the equation is related to maximum energy and minimum energy if the loading is a complete cycle. Eq. ( Fig. where DD ff is the total damage at the failure, DD dd-1 is the cumulative damage in the previous time, and ddDD is the incremental damage in the current time point. Eqs. extensive database from open literatures. This also eases the future application of the proposed methodology as the time-derivative formulation is relatively new in the fatigue community. Detailed calibration procedure is shown below. This section tries to calibrate the proposed model parameters using widely available constant amplitude S-N curve data. Analytical solution is obtained for easy implementation in the future. The proposed study used the energy instead of stress/strain in the classical S-N curves. The energy-curve under uniaxial constant amplitude loading is assumed to follow the classical Basquin equation (i.e., power function) as where UU is the energy range. From classical FCG analysis where DD 0 is the initial damage in the material. In the current study, initial damage is assumed a very small value and can be approximated as zero. By comparing Eq. ( where R is the stress ratio from the constant amplitude fatigue testing. For R<0, a modification factor is added as β is calibrated with a negative stress ratio fatigue crack growth testing. Details about β can be found in It is seen that the proposed method has three parameters that need to be calibrated: A, B, and dd. Fatigue S-N curve has two independent fitting coefficients: pp and qq. No unique solution for A, B, and dd can be obtained. In the proposed study, we fixed the value of dd = 0.01 to get feasible parameter calibration for fatigue life prediction. The authors tried different dd values and experimental validation shows that dd = 0.01 works well for the investigated loading and materials. The above discussion is for uniaxial random loadings. The section focuses on the extension to general multiaxial random loadings. An equivalent energy concept for multiaxial constant amplitude loading was proposed by Wei and Liu where UU ddttddddtt is the total energy, UU ddmmtt is the dilatational energy, and UU ddmmii is the distortional energy. The dilatational and distortional energy can be expressed using three other energy terms: tensile energy, torsional energy, and hydrostatic energy. The final equation can be expressed as UU ddttmm ttqq = UU ddttmm + ssUU ddtttt + kkUU HH The proposed model is validated with experimental data from several open literatures Table 1. The theoretical derivation and experimental validation demonstrate the feasibility using a timederivative formulation for arbitrary loading spectrum life prediction without the need for cycle counting. √ √ √ √ ProposedIn Table1, most of methods do not cover all loading conditions. This is especially true for random loading spectrums. In view of this, the motivation of this study is to develop a model which can handle all these different loading conditions, especially for random loadings. It is also noticed