Understanding the atomic structure and structural instability of organic-inorganic hybrid perovskites is the key to appreciate their remarkable photoelectric properties and failure mechanism. Here, using low-dose imaging technique by direct-detection electron-counting camera in transmission electron microscope, we investigate the atomic structure and decomposition pathway of CH3NH3PbI3 (MAPbI3) at the atomic scale. We successfully image the atomic structure of perovskite in real space under ultra-low electron dose condition, and observe a two-step decomposition process, i.e. initial loss of MA followed by the collapse of perovskite structure into 6H-PbI2 with their critical threshold dose also determined. Interestingly, an intermediate phase (MA0.5PbI3) with locally ordered vacancies can robustly exist before perovskite collapses, enlightening strategies for prevention and recovery of perovskite structure during degradation. Associated with structure evolution, the bandgap gradually increases from ~1.6 eV to ~2.1 eV, and it is found that both C-N and N-H bonds can be destroyed under irradiation, releasing NH3 and leaving hydrocarbons. These findings enhance our understanding of the photoelectric properties and failure mechanism of MAPbI3, providing potential strategy into material optimization. Organic-inorganic hybrid perovskites (OIHPs) have attracted great research interests as promising materials for the next generation photovoltaic energy harvesting The lack of detailed understanding on atomic structure of OIHPs is largely due to the incapability to image OIHPs at the atomic scale It is well known that STEM imaging introduces comparably larger dose and damage than low-dose HRTEM, while the contrast of HRTEM is sensitive to imaging condition, making it difficult to identify the specific atomic columns of MAPbI3 28 . To overcome these difficulties, we adopted DDEC camera combined with imaging technique using a negative value of the spherical-aberration coefficient MAPbI3 nanocrystals with 10-20 nm size and good crystalline (Supplementary Fig. We then investigate the atomic-scale structure via imaging technique using a negative value of the spherical-aberration coefficient (Cs), which has enabled the successful observation of both light and heavy element in oxide perovskite The effect of ordered VMA on its electronic structure is further investigated. Fig. In addition to electronic structure evolutions, it is worth investigating how the chemical bonding within organic components evolves (Fig. Based on above study, we further investigate the atomic-scale decomposition pathway of MAPbI3. Fig. With increased doses, it is observed that the intensities of these three atomic columns gradually change (Fig. The extreme beam sensitivity of OIHPs hinders atomic-resolution imaging and thus the detailed investigations on their structure-property relationships. By DDEC camera, we have determined that the threshold doses for superstructure formation is about 2.7 e Å -2 , and perovskite collapses into PbI2 within 272.0 e Å -2 , both of which are smaller than those measured by electron diffraction (ED) Atomic-scale imaging of MAPbI3 and its degradation pathway allows us to better understand properties of OIHPs. For example, the observed off-center displacements (up to ~ 30 pm) between different atom columns likely indicate the polar nature of this material What happens to organic compositions during the degradation is still under debate. Some suggest that N-H bond is broken under illumination Ion migration in OIHP-based electronic device is regarded as one of the most important processes, which contributes to the phase segregation, hysteresis in J-V curves and device degradation In summary, we have acquired the atomic structure of MAPbI3, determined the threshold doses during TEM characterizations, and clarified the atomic-scale ion migration during its degradation into PbI2. The degradation pathway is proposed to be a two-step, initialed by loss of MA and followed by diffusion of Pb and I to form PbI2, during which both C-N and N-H bonds can be destroyed under irradiation, releasing NH3 and leaving hydrocarbons. Such degradation process leads to the gradual increase of bandgap. These findings can be used to guide the future TEM characterizations, enrich the understandings of the degradation mechanism and optimization strategies, and provide atomic-scale insights into understanding its fundamental properties. MAPbI3 Synthesis. MAPbI3 nano-crystals were bought from Xiamen Luman Technology Co., Ltd. Micro MAPbI3 was synthesized as previously reported 