The magnetic damping constant is a critical parameter for magnetization dynamics and the efficiency of memory devices and magnon transport. Therefore, its manipulation by electric fields is crucial in spintronics. Here, we theoretically demonstrate the voltage-control of magnetic damping in ferro-and ferrimagnetic-insulator (FI)/topological-insulator (TI) bilayers. Assuming a capacitor-like setup, we formulate an effective dissipation torque induced by spin-charge pumping at the FI/TI interface as a function of an applied voltage. By using realistic material parameters, we find that the effective damping for a FI with 10 nm thickness can be tuned by one order of magnitude under the voltage with 0.25 V. Also, we provide perspectives on the voltage-induced modulation of the magnon spin transport on proximitycoupled FIs. Voltage or electric-field control of magnetic properties is fundamentally and technologically crucial for energetically efficient spintronic technologies, 1,2 such as magnetic random-access memories (MRAMs), In this work, we theoretically demonstrate the voltagecontrol of magnetic damping in FI/TI bilayers. We formulate an effective dissipation torque induced by spin-charge pumping at the FI/TI interface as a function of a gate voltage V G . Our main result is that the voltage changes the effective damping by one order of magnitude for a FI with a perpendicular magnetization configuration and 10 nm thickness. Also, we provide perspectives on the modification of magnon scattring time in a FI-based magnonic device. To study the effective damping torque, we consider 2D massless Dirac electrons on the TI surface with the magnetic proximity effect, where is the reduced Planck constant, v F is the Fermi velocity of the Dirac electrons at zero applied voltage, p = -i ∇ is the momentum operator, {x, ŷ, ẑ} are the unit vectors along the respective Cartesian axes, σ = (σ x , σ y , σ z ) is the vector of Pauli matrices for the spin, and ∆ is the exchange interaction constant. For simplicity, we ignore here the particle-hole asymmetry and the hexagonal warping effect in the surface bands. Also, ∆ and v F are assumed to be temperature indepen- dent. where σ L and σ AH are longitudinal and transverse (anomalous-Hall) conductivities, respectively, and depend on the z-component of the magnetization (m z ) This nonequilibrium spin polarization μ P exerts a dissipation torque on the magnetization, T SP = -γ∆/(M s d)μ P × m, namely with where γ is the gyromagnetic ratio and d is the thickness of the FI layer. Equation ( with the voltage-dependent Fermi energy, where ǫ is the permittivity of a FI and F is the intrinsic carrier density, i.e., at V G = 0. Note that we can define a voltage-dependent surface electron density n V (V G ) ≡ n int + ǫV G / (ed) that shows the underlying mechanism behind the voltage-control of interfacial phenomena in insulating bilayers with surface carriers, which goes beyond topological materials. Namely, a voltage increases or decreases the effective electron density and therefore enhances or weakens all effects that depend on this density, including isotropic where the energy E k is the eigenvalue of Eq. ( where a = nV 2 0 / 4 3 v 2 F (in units of eV -1 s -1 ) parameterize contribution of the impurity scattering, Figures The electric manipulation of magnon spin transport is a relevant topic in spintronics. For example, in YIG with an injector and a detector Pt contact, changes of the magnon spin conductivity can be obtained by using a third electrode that changes the magnon density, So far, the magnon spin transport in the FI/TI bilayer lacks microscopic theory with few exceptions. where V max (≈ -68 mV for Fig. even for a FI with 2 nm thickness (see the supplementary material), so that we disregard the influence of the magnon gap in the following calculation. Figure From -130 mV to -250 mV, the thermal excitation is suppressed, so that α L monotonically decreases with |V G | due to the reduction of the Fermi surface. Hence, in this regime, one can effectively modulate the magnon spin transport by the voltage. In summary, we have theoretically demonstrated the voltage-control of magnetic damping in ferro-ferrimagnetic insulator (FI)/topological insulator (TI) bilayers. Assuming a capacitor-like setup, we formulate an effective damping torque induced by spin-charge pumping at the FI/TI interface as a gate voltage function. The presence of a perpendicular electric field results in a shift of the Fermi level or, equivalently, a modified interfacial electron density, increasing or decreasing the efficiency of the pumping process. We studied the consequences of this damping enhancement using realistic material parameters for FI and TI. We found that the effective damping with the out-of-plane magnetization configuration can be modulated by one order of magnitude under the voltage with 0.25 V. The present results motivate an application: the magnon scattering time can be tuned by a gate voltage, potentially allowing for a magnon transistor type of application. A complete quantitative description of the latter requires a microscopic theory of magnon spin transport in FI/TI bilayers, which might remain an unexplored issue. The voltage-control of magnetic damping paves the way for low-power spintronic and magnonic technologies beyond the current-based control. See the supplementary material for the calculation of the spin-charge pumping in FI/TI bilayers, the characterization of the FMR under several values of the applied voltage, the influence of V G -dependence of the anisotropy in the magnon dispersion. a Reference 25, b Reference 33, c Reference 49.