The recently discovered layered kagome metals AV3Sb5 (A=K, Rb, Cs) exhibit diverse correlated phenomena, which are intertwined with a topological electronic structure with multiple van Hove singularities (VHSs) in the vicinity of the Fermi level. As the VHSs with their large density of states enhance correlation effects, it is of crucial importance to determine their nature and properties. Here, we combine polarization-dependent angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy with density functional theory to directly reveal the sublattice properties of 3d-orbital VHSs in CsV3Sb5. Four VHSs are identified around the M point and three of them are close to the Fermi level, with two having sublattice-pure and one sublattice-mixed nature. Remarkably, the VHS just below the Fermi level displays an extremely flat dispersion along MK, establishing the experimental discovery of higher-order VHS. The characteristic intensity modulation of Dirac cones around K further demonstrates the sublattice interference embedded in the electronic structure. The crucial insights into the electronic structure, revealed by our work, provide a solid starting point for the understanding of the intriguing correlation phenomena in the kagome metals AV3Sb5. Transition-metal based kagome materials, hosting corner-sharing triangles, offer an exciting platform to explore intriguing correlated The characteristics of VHS bands are crucial in determining the Fermi surface instabilities In this work, we perform a comprehensive study on the electronic structure of CsV3Sb5 by combining polarization-dependent angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) measurements with Density Functional theory (DFT). The diverse nature of the four VHSs in the vicinity of the Fermi level (EF) is directly revealed. We observe three VHSs around the M point below the EF, formed by Vanadium 3d orbitals. Two of them are of conventional p-type, while the other one is of higher-order p-type. In addition, we find a conventional m-type VHS slightly above EF from our theoretical calculations. Furthermore, we show that the sublattice features are also embedded in the Dirac cone around the K point, exhibiting characteristic intensity modulations under various polarization conditions. Our study provides crucial insights into the electronic structure, thereby laying down the basis for a solid understanding of the correlation phenomena in the kagome metals AV3Sb5. CsV3Sb5 crystalizes in a layered hexagonal lattice consisting of alternately stacked V-Sb sheets and Cs layers. Each V-Sb sheet contains a 2D vanadium kagome net interweaved by a hexagonal lattice of Sb atoms (Fig. The overall band dispersion and constant energy contours of CsV3Sb5 obtained via ARPES experiment are summarized in Fig. Particularly, VHS1 and VHS2 are just slightly below EF with strong intensity. Remarkably, VHS1 exhibits a pronounced flat dispersion that extends over more than half of the`M -`K path. Indeed, by fitting the experimental spectra we find that the quadratic term is substantially smaller than the quartic one, revealing the higher-order nature of VHS1 (see Supplementary Fig. After directly identifying the VHSs in CsV3Sb5 from the band dispersion, we now turn to determining the sublattice nature of VHSs from the orbital symmetries by employing polarization-dependent ARPES measurements (see Supplementary Materials for experimental details). According to the selection rules in photoemission, bands can be selectively detected depending on their symmetry with respect to given mirror planes of the geometry Likewise, when the slit is along the`G -`K direction, the orbitals can be selected accordingly (see supplementary Table With the experimental determination of the orbital character around the`M point, we plot the theoretical orbital-resolved band dispersion in Fig. The band top of dxz band at`M is above EF and beyond experimental observation (Figs. We further discuss the sublattice features of the Dirac cone bands around the`K point. The polarization dependent intensity patterns of the Dirac cones can convey the phase information of electronic wave functions, providing a way to determine the chirality of the Dirac cone Our ARPES measurements, combined with DFT calculations, reveal the different natures of the four 3d-orbital VHSs near EF and the chiralities of the kagome-derived Dirac cones in CsV3Sb5. These are general features in the family of kagome metals AV3Sb5 and have important physical implications. For example, the nontrivial sublattice texture of the p-type VHSs leads, via sublattice interference, to a suppression of local Hubbard interactions and promotes the relevance of non-local Coulomb terms 