The reconfigurable intelligent surface is a promising technology for the manipulation and control of wireless electromagnetic signals. In particular, it has the potential to provide significant performance improvements for wireless networks. However, to do so, a proper reconfiguration of the reflection coefficients of unit cells is required, which often leads to complex and expensive devices. To amortize the cost, one may share the system resources among multiple transmitters and receivers. In this paper, we propose an efficient reconfiguration technique providing control over multiple beams independently. Compared to time-consuming optimization techniques, the proposed strategy utilizes an analytical method to configure the surface for multibeam radiation. This method is easy to implement, effective and efficient since it only requires phase reconfiguration. We analyze the performance for indoor and outdoor scenarios, given the broadcast mode of operation. The aforesaid scenarios encompass some of the most challenging scenarios that wireless networks encounter. We show that our proposed technique provisions sufficient improvements in the observed channel capacity when the receivers are close to the surface in the indoor office environment scenario. Further, we report a considerable increase in the system throughput given the outdoor environment. W IRELESS data rates have been increasing exponen- tially and continue to double every 18 months Thus, in order to achieve intelligent, sustainable, and virtual LoS communication links, wireless networks have been gradually shifting towards the software-defined paradigm in which all the elements of the network can be controlled via programming. The wireless channel, however, has traditionally remained a non-maneuverable quantity. With the advent of the Reconfigurable Intelligent Surface (RIS) One possible way to realize the RIS paradigm is grounded on the powerful EM control delivered by the Metasurface (MS) concept. MSs are thin layer structures composed of a matrix of sub-wavelength resonators known as unit cells. These building blocks allow to manipulate the effective permittivity and permeability μ of the medium Recent works have proven that the behavior of MSs can be tuned during and after deployment. This is achieved by introducing tunable or switchable electronic components The overall functionality is derived from the aggregated response of all unit cells, which are tuned individually. Concretely, to realize a particular function (e.g., beam steering), very specific amplitude and phase profiles need to be applied to the impinging wave • Integrate tuning and control elements on a per-cell basis Such complexity can often lead to uneconomical designs and fabrication processes, which is an obstacle towards commercializing the applications within 5G networks, such as for Vehicle-to-everything communications In a multi-receiver communication scenario, the broadcast station should adequately radiate EM waves toward the location of the receivers. A wide beam radiation pattern can provide such a requirement. However, a wide beam is detrimental as it radiates energy over a huge space. This strategy is not feasible for mmWave spectrum due to the high propagation losses and blocking effects. The proper solution is to engineer the radiation pattern with respect to the location of the receivers. Hence, independent control on the multiple beams is required. Figure One way to engineer a multi-beam radiation pattern is to control both amplitude and phase (amp/phs) reflection of the unit cells We build this paper based on previous works The organization of the paper is as follows: In Section II, we review the latest works in multi-user communications. Section III describes proposed technique to reconfigure the MS for multi-beam radiation pattern. Section IV describes the indoor, outdoor, and broadcast scenarios on which we evaluate our system. In Section IV-D the system model is introduced. Section V presents the performance evaluation and Section VI concludes the paper. TDM allocates the communication link to multiple receivers in separate time slots where SL is the length of the subframe, U GD is the user group delay, N is the number of users and R is the reconfiguration speed. As an example, consider that the maximum length of a single subframe for the 5G New Radio (NR) is 1 ms Further, let us assume that we have N = 10 groups of users, wherein each group, a user is served in a given subframe. Hence, it is essential that the MS reconfiguration is completed in a time that is on the scale of a few microseconds, which is a real challenge. This seems unrealistic for beyond 5G or 6G networks KPIs. A simple strategy to meet the 5G criteria is to communicate with all the receivers concurrently. So, instead of multiplexing in the time domain, we can partition the area of the MS and assign per user segments. This segmentation process is equivalent to dividing the original MS into tiles each may serve a single reflection Independent amp/phs control of the unit cells has been proposed for multi-beam steering Even though the original profiles only have phases and the amplitude of these terms are unity, the out come of their summation has a matrix of amplitudes (A). In general, a summation form of arbitrary multi-beamforming results in where Φ mn (θ rk , φ rk ) is the phase gradient of mn unit cell for the kth-beam aiming (θ rk , φ rk ). The result of this summation is a term with both phase profile Ψ mn and amplitude profile Γ mn . This means we can engineer a multi-beam radiation pattern by controlling the simultaneous amp/phs response of the unit cells. While optimization methods can help us determine the best configuration for certain radiation patterns, they require extensive computing power and time. Since the number of possibilities of MS configuration is huge, finding the optimized reconfiguration is not trivial. To exemplify the numbers, consider a grid of 10 × 10 unit cells. Next, as suggested in In this section, we review the basics for single beam steering then we modify it for multi-beamforming. For anomalous reflection, MS manipulates the reflected toward arbitrary direction. To this end, the reflection phase of each unit cell has to be controlled. Consider an impenetrable boundary interface under illumination of an incident plane wave. The incident wave vector k i with elevation angle θ i and azimuth angle φ i can be written as where k ix , k iy , k iz are the wave vector coordinates The same formulae can be derived for the reflected wave vector k r with the elevation angle θ r and azimuth angle φ r . k 0 and n 0 are the wavenumber and refractive index of free space. In general, the direction of the reflected beam can be engineered by an appropriate linear phase profile Assuming that the MS imposes the phase profile Φ(x, y), we assign the virtual wave vector k Φ = ∇Φ = ∂ x Φ x + ∂ y Φ ŷ (∂ x and ∂ y denote partial derivatives). Applying the boundary conditions of the tangential components of the electromagnetic fields, the momentum conservation law for wave vectors can be expressed as from Equation where ∂ x Φ and ∂ y Φ describe the imposed phase profiles in the x and y directions, respectively, and the subscripts i and r denote incident and reflected waves, respectively. Reflection position in the far-field is implied with pairs of angle variable θ r and φ r in a spherical coordinate system. Thus, the required phase profile for mn-th unit cell reads Using phase gradient described in Equation ( Assuming small unit cell size (D u < λ/2), surface current distribution on each unit cell is approximately uniform. Based on Huygens principle, we can assume each unit cell is a point source. The total scattering field can be regarded as the superposition of the scattering wave from each unit cell cosθe jk0ζmn e jΨmn Here, we propose a solution to discard the need for amplitude configuration. By considering the energy conservation law, in a closed system, the total energy from the impinging waves should be equal to the energy carried by the scattered beams. So, in the limit of lossless and fully reflective unit cell design only the phase of the reflected wave is shifted. Then, there must be an optimal reconfiguration profile with phase-only control by which we can engineer the desired multi-beamforming. Mathematically, by applying the right coefficients to the individual phase profile responsible for the singular beamforming, Equation (2) become 1e Ψ(θr,φr) = a 1 e Φ1(θr1,φr1) + a 2 e Φ2(θr2,φr2) a mnk e jΦmn(θ rk ,φ rk ) = 1e jΨmn This equation does not have a unique answer. Depending on the prioritization of the beams one can think of different configurations. Nevertheless, the simplest solution to satisfy Equation ( from Equation ((13)) and ((3)), Equation ((10)) reads e jΦmn(θ rk ,φ rk ) (15) Now by using Equation ((9)) and (( To illustrate the efficacy of our MS coding, we analyze its performance in the standard indoor and outdoor environments, as defined by 3rd Generation Partnership Project (3GPP) The scenario corresponding to indoor office environments is presented in Fig. Hence, in Fig. The Urban Micro (UMi) environment, as shown in Fig. Consequently, while the SCBS will be blocked by the myriad obstacles present in a dense urban environment, such as that shown in Fig. As part of the analysis, in this work, for both the indoor and UMi scenarios, the broadcast mode of communications is evaluated. The broadcast (as well as multicast) mode enables the network to communicate the same information to multiple users at the same time. An important example of such an application is the video streaming service. Given the scenarios, we now discuss the system model for our evaluation. Firstly, we state that for both the indoor office environment and UMi scenarios, the BS and SCBS, respectively, communicate with the user through a LoS path facilitated by the MS. Hence, the channel model for the aforesaid data path is represented as: where y sc and x sc are the received and transmitted signals, respectively, and η sc denotes the additive white Gaussian noise with zero mean and variance (average noise power) σ 2 sc . Furthermore, h BM and g MU are the SCBS-to-MS and MSto-UE channel coefficient vectors, respectively. Additionally, Θ is the phase shift matrix that is formed by diagonalization of the vector of phase shifts applied at each element of the MS on the received signal from the BS Next, the channel model for the MCBS to UE path in the UMi scenario (see Section IV-B) is defined as: where y mc and x mc are the received signal at UE from MCBS and transmitted signal from MCBS to UE, respectively. The channel coefficients for the MCBS to UE channel is represented by h mc , with the additive white Gaussian noise represented as η mc which has zero mean and variance (average noise power) σ 2 mc . Further, G mc is the MCBS transmit gain. From Eqs. ( whereas the received SNR at the UE for the UMi scenario is expressed as: Next, the maximum achievable throughput for the users in both the indoor and UMi scenarios can be defined by the Shannon-Hartley theorem as follows: where, R is the maximum achievable throughput for a user, B is the allocated bandwidth by a base station (BS/SCBS/MCBS), and SN R is the Signal-to-noise ratio at the receiver from a given base station. Hence, from Eqs. ( where B inh is the bandwidth allocated to the user by the BS. On the other hand, the maximum achievable throughput for the UMi scenario, as shown in Fig. where, R U M i is the achievable throughput, and B sc and B mc are the allotted bandwidths to the user from the SCBS and MCBS, respectively. However, to compute the received signal powers, i.e., ||y sc || 2 and ||y mc || 2 in Eqs. ( where P r is the received power, P t is the transmitted power, G r is the gain at the receiver antenna, G t is the gain at the transmit antenna (G BM , G M U and G mc ), P L is the scenario dependent path loss and L o are the other losses incurred at the transmitter and receiver feed, and other mismatches, etc. Note that, in this work we ignore the other losses L o for the sake of simplicity. In addition, we define the pathloss models 2 , based on the CI and 3GPP models P L inh-LOS = 32.4 + 20 log 10 (f ) + 17.3 log 10 (d 3D ) (25) 2 In this work, we assume that there is no shadow fading. Hence, in eqs. ( P L inh-N LoS = 38.3 log 10 (d 3D ) + 17.30 + 24.9 log 10 (f ) (27) where, P L U M i , P L inh-LoS , P L inh-N LoS , and P L inh-N LoS are the pathloss for the UMi scenario (for both LoS and NLoS setups), indoor office LoS scenario and the NLoS scenarios, respectively. In addition, c is the speed of light, f is the central frequency of operation and d 3D is the 3D distance between the transmitter and receiver. Next, for the received signal power computation in Equation (( Lastly, we introduce Table We evaluate the performance of our MS driven network in both indoor offices (Fig. Before delving deeper into the channel capacity analysis, it is imperative to understand the behavior of the MSs in the wireless environment. By behavior, we mean that the SNR profile of the wireless channel corresponding to the reflected path from the MS. This is an essential step, as it highlights the channel properties of the reflected path from the MS. Thus, through Fig. The SCBS uses an antenna with 30 dBi directivity that operates at 28 GHz is located at (x, y) = (0, 0) with 10 meters height. The RIS is at (x, y) = (10, 100) with 5 meters height and UEs are respectively Due to the propagation loss, throughput degrades when the UEs are further away from the RIS. As the number of UEs increases, the throughput grows but if we divide it between the UEs, in fact throughput for each user drops down. For instance, this system provides 2 Gbps throughput for 6 UEs thus each user has 0.33 Gbps throughput. The proposed phase only configuration provides more throughput compare to amp/phs configuration. The difference increases by the number of UEs such that for 8 UEs the throughput increases by around 0.8 Gbps. We now present the channel capacity analysis for the UMi environment given the broadcast MCBS uses an antenna with 17 dBi directivity that operates at 3.55 GHz is at the center of the coordinate system (x, y) = (0, 0). The altitude of the antenna is 25 meters. The SCBS is located at (x, y) = Figure The proposed method avails optimum theory for spacemultiplexing to reconfigure the MS. Concretely, this proposal provisions independent control over the radiation pattern lobes by which multi-user communication links can be established. Subsequently, the analysis shows that the MS based system provides the best performance when the MS is located close to the users. Further, we observed promising performance for indoor office and UMi environments given the broadcast mode of operation. Specifically, in the indoor office scenario, we observe that if the users are within 1-2m of the MS, then at least 0.5 Gbps of data rate can be experienced by the users (with a peak data rate of ∼ 2.2 Gbps). Next, for the UMi scenario, we observed that the MS based system provisions more than one order of magnitude more channel capacity in the presence of 7 users compared to MCBS communication. Hence, through this work, we have shown the efficacy and effectiveness of the designed MS for 5G and beyond scenarios with multi-user applications. In this paper, we primarily focus on the beamforming/beam-steering application towards multi-user environment, which is of significant importance for beyond 5G networks