Pristine graphene interacts relatively weakly with Al, which is a specie of importance for novel generations of metal-ion batteries. We employ DFT calculations to explore the possibility of enhancing Al interaction with graphene. We investigate non-doped and Ndoped graphene nanoribbons, address the impact of the edge sites, which are always present to some extent in real samples, and N-containing defects on the material's reactivity towards Al. The results are compared to that of pristine graphene. We show that introduction of edges does not affect the energetics of Al adsorption significantly by itself. On the other hand, Ndoping of graphene nanoribbons is found to affect the adsorption energy of Al to the extent that strongly depends on the type of N-containing defect. While graphitic and pyrrolic N induce minimal changes, the introduction of edge NO group and doping with in-plane pyridinic N result in Al adsorption nearly twice as strong as on pristine graphene. The obtained results could guide the further design of advanced materials for Al-ion rechargeable batteries. Graphene, a 2D honeycomb structure of sp 2 hybridized C atoms, is assumed to be a promising material for various applications due to low mass, two-dimensionality, excellent electrical conductivity and other fascinating properties The world is energy-addicted, and the energy needs are ever rising. Among the novel energy conversion and storage systems, Al-ion batteries stand out due to their low cost and low flammability. Small mass and radius, and high abundance of Al in Earth's crust, together with three-electron redox properties, lead to a high capacity of Al-ion batteries Besides 2D graphene, other prospective carbon allotropes are considered for various applications: one-dimensional nanotubes, quasi-one-dimensional nanoribbons, and zerodimensional fullerenes. The performance of these nanomaterials depends on their structure, physical and chemical properties. For example, while pristine graphene is a zero-gap semimetal, the resistivity of a graphene nanoribbon increases as its width decreases In order to investigate aluminium interaction with several graphene-based surfaces, we performed Density Functional Theory (DFT) calculations with the idea of their possible use as electrode material in aluminium-ion batteries. We study the adsorption of aluminium on pristine graphene and graphene nanoribbons saturated with hydrogen atoms on the edges (GNRH) and GNRH with various nitrogen defects. We analyse changes in the electronic structure of these systems and try to link them to their chemical properties. The DFT calculations were performed using the Quantum ESPRESSO package Atomic positions were fully relaxed until the residual forces acting on atoms were below 0.001 eV Å -1 . We use pristine graphene (p-graphene) as the benchmark and the simplest model in our periodic calculations. We use a hexagonal graphene supercell consisting of 54 carbon atoms (C54), corresponding to the (3√3×3√3)R30° structure. The two-dimensionality of the system is achieved by the sufficiently large height of the supercell (24 Å), so that the adjacent layers of graphene (along the z-axis) do not interact. The first irreducible Brillouin zone was sampled using Γ-centred 4×4×1 set of k-points generated using the general Monkhorst-Pack scheme The models of (nitrogen-doped) graphene nanoribbons used in this contribution have been reported in our previous work, ref. During the interaction of many elements of the periodic table with graphene dispersion interactions significantly contribute to the overall interaction where Esub+Al, Esub, and EAl stand for ground-state total energies of the substrate with Al adsorbed, the total energy of a bare substrate, and the total energy of an isolated Al atom, respectively. As defined, negative Eads indicates that an exothermic process has taken place. For charge analysis, we used Bader's algorithm where ρAl@subs stands for the ground-state charge density of the substrate with Al adsorbed in the optimal position (as given in Fig. There are three high-symmetry sites available for any adsorbate on pristine graphene: (i) above one C atom (top site), (ii) above the centre of a C-C bond (bridge site), and (iii) above the centre of the C6 hexagon (hollow site). With the presence of defects in graphene's structure, the number of inequivalent adsorption sites increases. We find that the preferential site for Al adsorption on p-graphene is the hollow site (Fig. except for the case of the non-local vdW-DF2 functional (Table The significantly stronger Al binding reported in ref. Considering everything stated above, we consider our choice of computational method (section 2) well thought out. Looking at DOS plots of Al@C54 (Fig. The adsorption of Al is investigated on different non-equivalent sites of GNRH with and without N-containing defects. Generally, it could be expected that Al adsorption would be weakened by N doping of GNRH because N introduces an additional electron to the system, hindering charge transfer from Al to the substrate. But, of course, this strongly depends on the type of N defect, as will be discussed below. In the case of Al adsorbed on C54H12, we find a situation similar to Al on p-graphene. The preferential adsorption site for Al@C54H12 is the modified edge hollow site (Fig. In the case of the nanoribbon containing pyridinic N at the edge (C53NH11), the strongest Al adsorption is observed when Al interacts directly with N (Fig. The case of Al adsorption on GNRH doped with pyrrolic N at the edge (C52NH11 model) is somewhat similar to the case of graphitic N -the adsorption energy is 0.05 eV more negative than on C53NH12, and 0.08 e more is transferred from Al to the substrate (Table However, the preferred adsorption site, in this case, is the edge hollow site which is the furthest from pyrrolic N (Fig. When GNRH is doped with NO (C53H11NO model), Al prefers direct interaction with O atom (Fig. Functionalization of GNRH with the amino group (C54H11NH2 model) results in preferential Al adsorption on the modified edge hollow/bridge site containing the carbon atom which is bound to NH2 (Fig. In light of the ongoing search for novel metal-ion batteries, we discuss the studied substrates as potential candidates for an electrode material in an Al-ion battery. As the simplest criterion for the possibility of reversible adsorption/desorption of Al during battery operation, we compare the reported values of Eads(Al) to Al's cohesive energy (Ecoh(Al) = 3.39 eV per atom Since our results imply that the presence of O-containing moieties could benefit the nanoribbon's reactivity towards Al, it is worth mentioning that we have also investigated the possibility of Al adsorption on p-graphene functionalized with one O or OH group per C54 ((3√3×3√3)R30°) supercell, which resulted in AlO or AlOH phase separation, i.e. the O/OH groups detachment from the graphene surface (Supplementary Information, Fig. We performed DFT calculations to investigate the possibility of enhancing the adsorption of aluminium onto graphene. We have found that the simple introduction of edges, i.e. switching from ideal graphene to graphene nanoribbons, does not affect the energetics of Al adsorption significantly. Moreover, the influence of the adsorption site distance from the edge of the non-doped GNRH on Al's adsorption energy is negligible. N-doping of graphene nanoribbons affects the nanoribbon's reactivity towards Al, but the outcome strongly depends on the type of N-containing defect. While graphitic N induces minimal changes in this regard, we find that the introduction of the NO group at the edge results in Al adsorption nearly twice as strong as on pristine graphene and doping with pyridinic N in even stronger binding by about 0.3 eV. In all the investigated cases, there is a significant charge transfer from Al to the substrate. That way, the substrates, which were semiconductors with a small band-gap in the bare state, receive enough charge to become conductive, with in-plane pyridinic N doped ribbon as the only exception. In addition, the functionalization of semiconducting graphene nanoribbons with Al can be considered as a way for improving the material's conductivity. The charge transferred from Al to the N-doped GNRH is not located only at the site where the interaction occurs (usually the N site), but it is also partially stored in the graphene plane around the dopant site. Overall, selective doping and functionalization of graphene nanoribbons with N-containing moieties positively affect Al storage and could lead to the development of advanced materials for the next generation of multivalent ion rechargeable batteries. a 