Parameter estimation procedures provide valuable guidance in the understanding and improvement of organic solar cells and other devices. They often rely on one-dimensional models, but in the case of bulk-heterojunction (BHJ) designs, it is not straightforward that these models' parameters have a consistent physical interpretation. Indeed, contrarily to two-or three-dimensional models, the BHJ morphology is not explicitly described in one-dimensional models and must be implicitly expressed through effective parameters. In order to inform experimental decisions, a helpful parameter estimation method must establish that one can correctly interpret the provided parameters. However, only a few works have been undertaken to reach that objective in the context of BHJ organic solar cells. In this work, a realistic two-dimensional model of BHJ solar cells is used to investigate the behavior of state-of-the-art parameter estimation procedures in situations that emulate experimental conditions. We demonstrate that fitting solely current-voltage characteristics by an effective medium one-dimensional model can yield nonsensical results, which may lead to counter-productive decisions about future design choices. In agreement with previously published literature, we explicitly demonstrate that fitting several characterization results together can drastically improve the robustness of the parameter estimation. Based on a detailed analysis of parameter estimation results, a set of recommendations is formulated to avoid the most problematic pitfalls and increase awareness about the limitations that cannot be circumvented. The world's renewable energy consumption is projected to keep on rising during the upcoming decades. length-scale ( 10 nm) is seldom available. As a result, it is often argued that the active layer can be modeled as a one-dimensional (1D) effective medium with uniform physical properties, which result from a combination of the characteristics of the two considered materials and the BHJ morphology itself. As of today, the most realistic models such as master equation, With this kind of model, existing fitting approaches provide reasonable parameter values when applied to experimental measurements. However, the values are not guaranteed to be relevant if they describe a 1D effective medium model, Proving that a fitting procedure is trust-worthy is difficult, because an independent validation of the parameters obtained is typically lacking. However, it is easy to confirm that this procedure performs adequately in a simulated context where the ground-truth (GT) is known. In this work, the robustness of several parameter estimation procedures is evaluated according to a protocol depicted in Fig. In least-square fitting procedures, the root mean square error (RMSE) quantifies the disagreement between a reference dataset Y ref and the prediction Y (θ) of a fitting model M i . It is to be minimized with respect to the model's parameters θ, and is defined as where where p(Y where σ j quantifies the measurement uncertainty. From Eqs. ( where the RMSE weights are chosen as w j = 1/σ In addition, the probabilistic Bayesian picture stresses the relevance of computing a credible region in which the true θ lies with a high probability, rather than a single best value. On the practical side this shifts the focus away from local minimization to global sampling, which can be achieved by state-of-the-art Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) algorithms. In order to demonstrate that the results discussed are independent of the GT choice, the analysis is repeated 13, for which one of the evaluated procedures P was initially presented. That procedure is therefore expected to perform well when applied to the corresponding reference dataset. Geometric parameters are chosen to emulate the so-called checkerboard geometry, featuring straight conduction pathways with no tortuosity. The parameter values used for this GT can be found in Tables Tabulated GT values for G eff are the spatial average of the free carriers generation rate in 2D simulations. The uncertainty factors σ j for each datapoint j are an important set of hyper-parameters. They represent how accurately the model is expected to reproduce the measurement. A natural lower bound for σ j is σ ref,j , the uncertainty directly imputable to the measuring apparatus: any attempt to reproduce the measurement beyond that accuracy limit implies fitting the noise of the instrument. Additional disagreement between the reference and the prediction comes from the choice of an approximate 1D model, which cannot reproduce the finest details of the synthetic measurements. Failure to acknowledge this model error also leads to overfitting, and slows down MCMC convergence considerably. In our experience, using σ j = σ ref,j yields artificially small error bars on I-V curves and impedance measurements, and in practice it is not possible to fit the prediction to the data with that level of accuracy, suggesting that the discrepancy is dominated by model error. Moreover, the noise level from the Keithley 2420 SMU is so much smaller than that of the Agilent 4294A analyzer that the dark C-V measurement would be effectively ignored by the procedure. For each apparatus, we therefore apply a weighting factor δ a to σ ref,j . Empirically, we found that all measurements contribute comparable terms to the RMSE by setting δ a = 40 for the SMU; δ a = 4 for the impedance analyzer; and δ a = 1 for the oscilloscope. The whole reference datasets 1 and 2, associated with θ ref,1 and θ ref,2 , are shown as black symbols in Figs. Considering solely the light I-V measurement taken from the reference dataset 1, the MCMC procedure is used to search for the values of the following parameters: the carrier mobilities (μ n , μ p ), the effective freecarrier generation rate G eff , the bimolecular recombination rate k rec , the built-in voltage V bi , the extraction barriers (φ cat , φ an ), and the parallel resistance R p . The device thickness L, active area S, series resistance R S , and relative permittivity ε r are assumed to be known accurately and kept equal to their GT value during the extraction. The starting points of the procedure are randomly drawn within a broad region of realistic values centered around θ ref,1 . The parameters μ n , μ p , R p , and k rec are mapped to a logarithmic scale (log-scale) to accelerate MCMC convergence. Three local minimum of I-V curve's RMSE (i.e. modes) are detected after 1000 iterations. Sampling such a multimodal distribution can be slow using emcee. Therefore, credible intervals were obtained by sampling each mode separately for an additional 1000 iterations. The results are summarized in Table To discriminate the modes, the parameters can be validated against other characterizations of the reference. The final walkers positions are taken as input parameters to generate responses for each control measurement listed in Table A natural remedy to the concerns raised in Sec. III A would be to work with 2D or 3D models for inference tasks to benefit from an explicit morphology description. Although this solution has been employed successfully in the past, the increase in computation times is so large that it is too time-consuming in many practical cases. In this section, the robustness of this procedure is evaluated. In addition, we discuss important settings that are Characterization data Extracted parameters all of the above μn, μp, φcat, V bi , φan, γ 1. Ground-truth 1 a. Step A The plateau current value I ∞ of the dark-CELIV measurement (Fig. where A is the slope of the CELIV voltage ramp. A slope A = -100 V/ms was applied during 30 μs. The current is averaged over the 20 to 30 μs interval, where it has reached saturation. At a sampling rate of 100 points/μs, this provides enough statistics to cancel the noise from the apparatus. We obtain C geom = 2.656 ± 0.002 nF from the data, and if L and S are known perfectly, this gives directly ε r = 3.000 ± 0.002 which matches the GT. Otherwise, the uncertainties from L and S must be propagated to the error bar of ε r . Because a 1D model is used here, one should keep in mind that the value of ε r extracted is only an effective value, averaged over the entire junction. With C geom known, the capacitance of the device in the high-frequency region (Fig. where the cutoff frequency ω c depends on R S according to the expression Here, a series resistance of R S = 20.1 Ω is found, in good agreement with the GT value R S = 20 Ω. b. Step B The Ohmic regime of the dark I-V curve (Fig. c. Step C The effective free-carrier generation rate G eff is adjusted to reproduce the short-circuit current J SC at one sun (Fig. Step D The electron and hole mobilities are extracted from the normalized TPC measurements (Fig. Fig. Normalizing TPC implies that the dependence of J SC on carriers mobility will not affect the fitting agreement. In principle, this allows step D to focus on the timedependence of the current rise and decay. However it may yield surprising results when using a local minimization procedure such as Levenberg-Marquardt. Although the RMSE has a clear attraction sink for all three modes if the transient currents are normalized, the current density of the TPC plateau is underestimated by the two spurious modes by more than a factor of two, as shown on Fig. e. Step E For this step, the built-in voltage V bi , along with extraction barriers φ cat and φ an , is extracted from I-V and C-V characteristics. In their article, During this step, only the V OC and the C-V peak position (V peak ) are adjusted. We noticed that they both vary linearly with the sum V gap ≡ V bi + φ cat + φ an in the range of parameter values visited by MCMC. Therefore, the procedure uses the additional degrees of freedom (two out of three) to attempt to recover fine details of the I-V and C-V curve's injection regimes, which are subject to a strong model error. As a result, the barrier values obtained at this stage appear to be arbitrary, and it is more meaningful to extract the value of V gap . We obtain V gap = 1.4934 ± 0.0001 V, a +7 % deviation from the GT. The error bar is two orders of magnitude smaller than k B T /q 26 mV, the smallest voltage appearing in the model. This reveals how sensitive the RMSE is to V gap , a consequence of the magnitude of the SMU uncertainty around V OC (∼ 0.1 μA). f. Step F For this step, the recombination prefactor γ is varied in order to match the photo-CELIV measurements (Fig. g. Step G For this step, a global fitting procedure is run using MCMC sampling. As shown by the blue bundle of curves in Fig. Despite the uneven agreement, one can notice from Table h. Cross-validation In Ref. 13, the inferred parameters are cross-validated by showing that the model's predictions are in excellent agreement with TPV measurements, although not exploited for fitting. However, we find that a good agreement on TPV is reached already at step D, well before the procedure's end, while the parameters are still evolving significantly. This suggests that the TPV response is much easier to reproduce than other measurements, such as C-V or CELIV. In our experience, a set of parameters providing a satisfactory agreement at step G will always have a RMSE close to 1 on TPV, whereas the opposite is clearly not true. Therefore, the success of this cross-validation step should not significantly improve the credibility of the inferred parameters. It will now be shown that our main conclusions are not tied to a specific choice of GT, as they remain valid for θ ref,2 and the reference dataset 2. a. Steps A to C Up to step C, no additional observation is to be made. The results from these steps are summarized in Table VI and confirm the precision and accuracy of the estimations obtained with the reference dataset 1. Step D As can be noted from Table Step E This step confirms that the RMSE is solely controlled by V gap . The Markov chains yield the value V gap = 1.68417 ± 0.00006 V, which is again excessively precise, while it overestimates the GT by ca. 7 %. The positions of V OC and V peak are correctly reproduced, but φ cat and φ an are estimated with only one significant figure since this stage fails to constrain the barriers. Step F Again, step F is performed using a brute force search, in which γ varies logarithmically from 10 -2 to 10 +2 , minimizing the RMSE at γ = 0.215. e. Step G Fig. Impedance measurements (see Figs. The full list of extracted parameters can be found in Table Based on the observations made so far, we now suggest changes to Neukom et al.'s procedure. Step-by-step description of the procedure a. Steps A to C As steps A, B and C are already providing adequate results, they were left unchanged, resulting in the same fitting quality on ε r , R S and R p . However, keeping G eff fixed afterwards is somewhat arbitrary since J SC is dependent on the mobilities and the recombination rate, which are only extracted at a later stage. Hence, G eff is adjusted in subsequent steps. An alternative could be to extract G eff from the saturation current at high reverse bias, which is less sensitive to mobilities and recombination rate than J SC . b. Step D The main effect of G eff is to linearly rescale the entire TPC response, but it has a little-tono influence on the rise and decay times. Releasing this additional parameter should thus be sufficient to reproduce the plateau current at steady-state. Therefore, the TPC is no longer normalized at this stage. Combined, we expect that these two alterations are effective at removing the spurious modes of Fig. c. Steps E and F We found that extraction barriers estimated from step E are not reliable, and since V gap is easy to recover during the global fit because it correlates linearly with V OC , we suggest skipping this stage. One could expect step F to accelerate the convergence of the global fit as the estimation of γ is stable when moving from steps F to G. In practice, we found that this convergence boost was not significant, and we propose to ignore this step also. d. Step G By monitoring the RMSE of each measurement from steps C to G, we noticed that some characterizations have a RMSE negligible compared to the total before they even participate in the fit. It suggests that they only contain information that is already captured by other measurements. For instance, the dark-CELIV is dominated by RC effects, also probed by the photo-CELIV. It makes dark-CELIV information redundant in an extraction stage where the photo-CELIV is already in use. Likewise, the dark I-V curve repeats information contained in the light I-V curve, except for the estimation of R p at step B. Impedance measurements were not found to be redundant with any other technique, but in our experience, it is challenging to obtain a low RMSE Table Restraining the number of fitting measurements in this way has three main advantages: 1) it reduces the fitting time by reducing the number of simulations run at each iteration; 2) convergence is expected to be reached in fewer iterations because contradictory requirements between transient and impedance responses are lifted; 3) the discarded measurements can either be spared (reducing the number of experiments required) or used to expand the cross-validation dataset. Indeed, we argue that we achieve strong crossvalidation of the inferred parameters by using θ est to predict the dark I-V, dark-CELIV, C-freq, dark C-V, and TPV curves. Among these five measurements, the C-freq and dark C-V curves are the most informative because they are not redundant with any other characterization. A small RMSE for these measurements is therefore indicative of a good fit, but it may not always be possible to achieve with a 1D model. At least, V peak should be predicted as accurately as V OC . In contrast, the dark I-V, dark-CELIV, and TPV curves are easier to reproduce. A large RMSE for these measurements would therefore suggest overfitting, but a small RMSE would be inconclusive. During our reduced step G', the TPC characteristic is left without normalization, and G eff is still released as a fitting parameter. Parameters μ n , μ p , and γ are again varied logarithmically because this reduces the number of iterations required for convergence. The proposed procedure is applied to the reference dataset 1. As stated above, and shown in Table After convergence has been reached for step D, the mobilities are underestimated by about 20 %, with balanced electron/hole transport. While G eff increases by less than 1 % compared to step C, the two spurious modes which failed to describe the TPC plateau have disappeared. The predictions Y (θ) obtained at the last MCMC iteration for step G' are displayed with red bundles of curves in Fig. Among the common dataset used by both procedures, it can be noted that the peak of the photo-CELIV is reproduced more accurately using our approach (Fig. Even though they were not part of the fitting dataset, the dark I-V (Fig. G eff slightly improves during step G', with respect to step D. The average mobility was underestimated by about 10 %, closer to the GT than the method from Ref. 13 (30 %), whilst slightly unbalanced (μ p /μ n 1.32). As can be noted from Table Here, μ n and μ p are correlated with G eff , even if the latter only varies within a ±3 % range. In that context, it is not appropriate to define consistent credible regions for G eff , μ n , and μ p by the direct read of the percentile intervals. It is important to realize that due to correlations, independent values of G eff , μ n and μ p cannot be extracted. At this stage (step D), this is not an issue because the final MCMC walkers' positions can be used as the starting positions of the next stage. Indeed, contrarily to a local minimization procedure, MCMC approaches are able to represent the parameter joint distributions in their complexity. The parameter correlation will be easier to reduce at step G', when a larger set of measurements is considered. Nevertheless, it may be valuable to get an approximate sense of the location and spread of each parameter distribution. Therefore, we first consider a credible re-gion C for G eff (16th-84th percentile interval), and then characterize the distributions of μ n and μ p , conditional on G eff ∈ C by fitting them to normal distributions. Using this scheme, we obtain values for G eff , μ n and μ p in close agreement with the GT, as reported in Table During step G', the mobility estimations lose some of their accuracy and the mobility ratio increases to 4. Because this ratio is large enough for the two mobility modes to be clearly separated, no special treatment is needed to analyze step G'. Therefore, all the procedures presented in this paper exaggerate mobility imbalance. The improved procedure does not solve this issue, but it reduces its magnitude by a decade compared to Sec. III B. The accuracy on the estimation of V gap is equivalent to Neukom et al.'s procedure (+4 %). The full list of extracted parameters can be found in Table Previous sections have shown that considering distinct characterizations for fitting allows reaching a good agreement for most measurements. Nevertheless, it is apparent from Tables V and VI that the values of the groundtruth θ ref are generally not contained within MCMC error bars of the infered parameters θ est . This demonstrates that the extracted parameters are only effective, and should be interpreted as such. In particular, the effective generation rate G eff is well reproduced by all procedures considered in this work, suggesting it can straightforwardly be interpreted as a volume averaged generation rate. In contrast, the Langevin recombination rate prefactor γ is consistently observed to be lower than 1. As already pointed out by previous theoretical work, charge carriers are protected from recombination in the 2D model, because donor and acceptor domains are segregated whereas in the 1D effective medium model, bimolecular recombination occurs in the bulk of the active layer. Likewise, it has been proposed 5,37 that transit times of free cariers are affected by the details of the BHJ geometry. Apparent carrier mobilities are expected to be decreasing functions of the tortuosity. This could explain why the apparent mobilities obtained by fitting the TPC responses are 20 % below the GT in the tortuous case (θ ref,1 ), but closer to the GT in the nontortuous case (θ ref,2 ), as shown respectively in Tables V and VI. A clear rationale to predict the effective mobilities from the geometry is missing and would require further research. While the effective parameters yielded by our procedure are not closer to the GT than Ref. 13, the global fitting step G' predicts the characterization datasets with higher accuracy. Values of V gap reported in Tables V and VI reveal that V gap is overestimated by the procedures, even though V OC and V peak are well reproduced and the error bar on V gap is smaller than the precision needed. This suggests that V gap should also be considered as effective, which is consistent with the fact that the V OC of BHJ devices is dependent on the morphology. In this work, we have tested the robustness of three different fitting strategies for OPV characterization data. By generating synthetic but realistic device responses, we can express clear conclusions about each method's accuracy in a context that closely matches experimental conditions. As fitting procedures are ultimately about extracting parameters, this level of validation could not have been achieved using experimental measurements, for which ground-truth parameters are unknown. We reiterate the literature's consensus that I-V data alone is insufficient to draw meaningful inferences about physical parameters, as defined in standard driftdiffusion models. In fact, following that approach is prone to misleading conclusions, wasting time and resources, as clearly demonstrated in Sec. III A. Moreover, after having carefully evaluated the procedure proposed in Ref. 13 (see Sec. III B), we validated a modified procedure that leverages substantial improvements (see Sec. III C) to achieve a better accuracy with fewer measurements. In addition, using a global MCMC fitting procedure provides a better appreciation of the validity of the results, in the form of error bars, and the ability to detect several RMSE modes when they exist. While a MCMC fit typically requires more model evaluations than Levenberg-Marquardt, it can be run in parallel, on up to 32 processors in our case, and does not require evaluating the model's Jacobian. That makes our procedure suitable for high fidelity parameter extraction at the expense of higher computational cost. In this regard, replacing the MCMC sampling with a less model-intensive Bayesian sampler may enable lower computation times in the future without changing the overall structure of the procedure. Regarding the extracted parameters obtained by the above-mentioned procedures, they are all associated to a 1D effective medium model as it needs less computational ressources. While the obtained values did not match the ground-truth, these 1D effective parameters can adequately represent a broad set of device measure-ments, especially in the non-tortuous case. Nonetheless, their values must be carefully interpreted as aggregated information from BHJ morphology and other physical properties. Because a 1D model has fewer degrees of freedom than a 2D or 3D model, one can not hope to fully disentangle the exact physical parameters and the BHJ morphology from each other. The missing link, i.e., a detailed knowledge of the relationship between the morphology and the effective parameters, would be a significant step towards the understanding of structure-to-performance relationships in OPV cells. m} is the corresponding prediction of M i , and w = {w j , j ∈ 1, . . . , m} are weighting factors. a Modes 1 and 2 are symmetric: mode 2 is deduced from mode 1 by exchanging donor and acceptor roles.