New developments in scanning tunneling spectroscopy now allow for the spatially resolved measurement of the Josephson critical current Ic between a tip and a superconducting sample, a nearly direct measurement of the true superconducting order parameter. However, it is unclear how these Ic measurements are correlated with previous estimates of the spectral gap taken from differential conductance measurements. In particular, recent such experiments on an iron-based superconductor found almost no correlation between Ic and the spectral gap obtained from differential conductance g = dI/dV spectra, reporting instead a more significant correlation between Ic and the the coherence-peak height. Here we point out that the correlation-or the lack thereof-between these various quantities can be naturally explained by the effect of disorder on unconventional superconductivity. Using large scale numerical simulations of a BCS d-wave pair Hamiltonian with manyimpurity potentials, we observe that "substitutional" disorder models with weak pointlike impurities lead to a situation in which the true superconducting order parameter and Ic are both uncorrelated with the spectral gap from dI/dV measurements and highly correlated with the coherence-peak heights. The underlying mechanism appears to be the disorder-induced transfer of spectral weight away from the coherence peaks. On the other hand, smooth impurity potentials with a length scale larger than the lattice constant lead to a large positive correlation between the true superconducting order parameter and the spectral gap, in addition to a large correlation between the order parameter and the coherence-peak height. We discuss the applicability of our results to recent Josephson scanning tunneling spectroscopy experiments on iron-based and cuprate high-temperature superconductors. A good deal of what we presently know about cuprate and other unconventional superconductors is due to scanning tunneling spectroscopy (STS), which over the past several decades has uncovered a panoply of exotic phenomena in these materials. Recent technical advances have resulted in a variant of the experimental technique called Josephson scanning tunneling spectroscopy (JSTS), which makes use of quantum-mechanical tunneling of Cooper pairs between a superconducting tip and the sample to map the spatial variations of the critical current. JSTS is similar to STS, but with superconducting tips instead of metallic ones so that the tunneling process can be understood as that of a very small superconductorinsulator-superconductor junction. The critical current is observable at very small bias voltages, reflecting Cooperpair tunneling between the tip and the sample. A second indication that the correlation between the local critical current and the spectral gap was weak was discovered in the aforementioned JSTS measurement on FeTeSe, which showed that the spectral gap was almost completely uncorrelated with the quantity I 2 c R 2 N , which should be proportional to the square of the superconducting order parameter (R N is the normal-state junction resistance). In this paper we set out to explain this conundrum by revisiting a very well-trodden path: disorder in d-wave superconductors. We also find a strong correlation between the order parameter and the coherence-peak height. We illustrate this mechanism for isolated impurities, and we find that even when disorder takes on a more complex form, this correlation between the order parameter and the coherence-peak height persists. We find that this mechanism describes these particular correlations in FeTeSe well, but we find that for BSCCO this picture needs to be bolstered by strong-coupling effects to account fully for the material's STS phenomenology, in particular the necessity of a spatially dependent scattering rate (pre-sumably due to interaction effects) that is neglected in our disorder-only model. In this section, we will discuss the model and methods used in the study of the correlations between the superconducting order parameter and various spectroscopic quantities that can be extracted from STS experiments. Our starting point is a square-lattice tightbinding model with attractive nearest-neighbor interactions. The Hamiltonian is (1) ij in the second term of Eq. 1 signifies that the sum over i and j is restricted to nearest-neighbor pairs of sites. Treating interactions within mean-field theory, we define ∆(i, j) = V 0 c i↑ c j↓ , where i and j are nearest-neighbor sites; this leads us to the following mean-field Hamiltonian describing a d-wave superconductor: The hopping matrix elements are where V imp (i) is the impurity potential on site i, t = 1 and t = -0.3 are the nearest-neighbor (n.n.) and nextnearest-neighbor (n.n.n.) hopping matrix elements, respectively. Throughout this work, we choose the chemical potential so that the hole doping of the clean system is 10%, relative to half-filling. Because the chemical potential, rather than the electron density, is fixed, the impurity potential will dope the system; however, in all cases we choose V imp (i) such that the doping is small. To obtain the LDOS and the superconducting order parameter efficiently for large system sizes, we use a Green's function formalism. The Green's function G(i, j, ω) is defined as where [] -1 is a matrix inverse in Nambu space, and η is a small broadening parameter that we take to be a constant. G and H are both 2N x N y × 2N x N y matrices, with N x and N y the dimensions of the system in the x-and y-directions, respectively. By imposing periodic boundary conditions along the y-direction and open boundary conditions along the x-direction, one can rewrite H to be block diagonal. This implies that the diagonal subblocks of G, and hence the LDOS, can be obtained very efficiently using a recursive algorithm described in detail elsewhere in the literature. where is the pairing interaction, and n f (ω, T ) is the Fermi function. Eq. 5 appears to require the evaluation of the offdiagonal (in real space) blocks of G. However, since we are interested only in nearest-neighbor d-wave pairing, we merely need to obtain the elements of G corresponding to nearest-neighbor pairs, which requires the evaluation of only the lower and upper diagonal subblocks of G, and hence the amount of computational time does not scale up dramatically; these subblocks can be obtained by recursion from the diagonal subblocks which are the first set of outputs of the algorithm. The main obstacle turns out to be the frequency integral, which requires a wide range of energies over which G is calculated; however, the calculational effort scales only linearly in the number of frequencies used and is therefore manageable under most circumstances. All our calculations are performed in the limit T → 0; we focus on this limit because the experimental JSTS studies on unconventional superconductors published thus far have been performed at very low temperatures deep within the superconducting state. where δ = (δ x , δ y ) connects i to its four nearest neighbors. For the calculation of I c , we follow Graham and Morr, To simplify matters, we have taken the tip to be a sitecentered "filter" with five atoms in the shape of a cross (this is the smallest tip one can make which measures dwave correlations in an x-y-symmetric fashion). We further assume this tip to be made of the same d-wave superconductor, but without disorder, as was done in Ref. 31. For each position i, we obtain the spectral gap and coherence peak height from LDOS at i. This is illustrated in Fig. where P and Q are the spatial averages of P i and Q i and the sums run over spatial sites. This is the same definition used by Cho et al. in their analysis of JSTS data. In this section, we explore the correlations between the four quantities of interest-the order parameter, the Josephson current I c , the spectral gap, and the coherence peak height-that are induced by a concentration p of pointlike impurities. The impurity potential takes the form where {i} imp is the set of lattice sites that host an impurity. Two limits, the low and high impurity concen-tration limits, can be understood qualitatively, and these are discussed in turn below. This form of disorder is very well-studied and can be understood analytically in the weak-impurity Born limit and the unitary limit of the disorder-averaged theory, In contrast, both the spectral gap (Fig. The coherence-peak height (Fig. Next, we consider an ensemble of weak pointlike impurities that are randomly distributed throughout the sample, such that each lattice site has a probability p of hosting an impurity with on-site potential strength V = 0.25. Since we are at fixed chemical potential, the impurities change the electron density. At the largest impurity concentration considered in this section, p = 20%, we estimate that this dopes the system by ∼ 0.01 electrons per unit cell, which is negligible. Figure At low impurity concentrations, the similarities with the single-impurity case are reflected in the correlations between the different quantities of interest (Fig. Two of the correlation functions (SG-CPH and OP-CPH) are nearly independent of impurity concentration, while the third (OP-SG) depends significantly on p, changing from negative to positive and then decreasing towards zero as p increases. The small value of the OP-SG correlation coefficient at high impurity concentrations can be explained by the differing length scales over which the order parameter and spectral gap respond to the impurities: at a position i, the order parameter depends on the distribution of impurities within a coherence length of i, while the spectral gap responds locally to individual impurities. The two quantities are thus uncorrelated when the number of impurities in a correlation volume is large (note that in our simulations, the average BCS coherence length of the clean system is about ξ 0 3 lattice constants). In contrast, correlations between the coherence peak height and the order parameter (OP-CPH) or spectral gap (SG-CPH) are both large and nearly independent of doping. It appears that the intuitive correlations one can obtain from Fig. We next consider a binary-alloy model, in which each lattice site has an equal probability of hosting one of two ions, with ionic potentials ±V b . Such a model might be appropriate for the iron-based superconductor FeTeSe, in which the Te and Se ions form a solid solution, and which is a highly inhomogeneous superconductor with no easily identified correlations between topographic and electronic maps. While we keep the relative proportions of each ionic component fixed, we tune V b from 0.0625 to 0.5, which covers the evolution of disorder from the weak Born limit to the strongly disordered limit where superconductivity is strongly suppressed. We use the same tight-binding parameters here as in the previous simulations and keep the background chemical potential fixed. While our model consists of a single band with d-wave pairing, we believe that the qualitative aspects should carry over to systems with a general sign-changing gap order parameter, like s ± in Fe-based, multiband superconductors such as FeSeTe. In Fig. In summary, we find that even for a highly inhomogeneous superconductor, with impurities spread densely throughout the sample, a strong correlation can be seen between the order parameter (or, equivalently, I c ) and the coherence-peak height, but not the spectral gap. This is in fact what is reported in the iron-based superconductor FeTeSe 26 : a large correlation (r ≈ 0.6) was measured between the coherence-peak height and the quantity I 2 c R 2 N , which in our analysis is essentially equivalent to a strong correlation between the CPH and OP. On the other hand, there was no observed correlation between the spectral gap and I 2 c R 2 N in experiment. These results find a natural explanation here from the response of the superconducting condensate to disorder. Lastly, we consider smooth disorder-i.e., disorder with a length scale larger than the lattice constant. This form of disorder has been hypothesized to be central to cuprates such as BSCCO that host dopants located in the insulating layers away from the copper-oxide planes, Smooth disorder can be understood simply as impurities that generate mostly forward scattering. Despite the seeming intractability of this disorder model, disorderaveraged treatments of weak purely forward scatterers in d-wave superconductors exist, which allow straightforward conclusions to be drawn as to the strength of pair-breaking and the effects on T c due to these impurities. It was found that in the weak purely forward-scattering limit, no pair-breaking occurs due to these impurities, similar to Anderson's theorem for s-wave superconductors with nonmagnetic scatterers. where r ij = |i -j| 2 + z 2 0 is the distance between lattice site j and an impurity situated a distance z 0 above site i. Here, L is the screening length, and V s governs the strength of the single-impurity potential. The factor α i takes the values ±1 with equal probability, and is introduced to reduce the amount of electron-doping induced by disorder. We present simulations assuming that the dopants are located a distance z 0 = 2 lattice constants away from the CuO 2 plane. The parameter L governs the range of the potential, with small L corresponding to pointlike impurities. We wish to highlight the influence of the finite range of impurities to compare to the other cases considered here, but a direct comparison allowing isolation of this effect is not straightforward. We illustrate one possible comparison in Fig. In the case of sufficiently smooth disorder, L ξ, we expect superconductivity to be essentially uniform in the presence of a local chemical potential set by disorder. In this extreme case, we expect the order parameter and the spectral gap to be well correlated with each other. The approach to this limit can already be seen to some extent in Figure We show the two-dimensional histograms between the order parameter and both the spectral gap and the coherence-peak height for increasing screening lengths L in Fig. Interestingly, r between the order parameter and the coherence-peak height is almost a constant function of L for 0.25 ≤ L ≤ 4, with its value around r ≈ 0.6. This r is also markedly higher than the corresponding correlation coefficients we have found for weak binary-alloy disorder. In contrast to pointlike disorder, we find an overall positive correlation between the spectral gap and the coherence-peak height for most of the range of L, which varies from around 0.2 when L = 0.25 to 0.5 when L = 4. When L = 0.125, however, the SG-CPH correlation becomes negative, similar to the pointlike disorder cases studied earlier. In this paper, we have examined the correlations between various experimentally measurable quantities, and we find that the observed lack of correlation between the true order parameter (as measured from I c maps) and the spectral gap (as obtained from dI/dV measurements) can be explained simply as the effect of disorder. When one has signficant levels of pointlike disorder, consistent, e.g., with disorder in overdoped cuprates, the correlation is weak for a wide range of disorder strengths. In contrast, the correlation is found to be strong when disorder is smooth in the sense that the impurity range or disorder correlation length is comparable to or larger than the coherence length ξ 0 . We also find a fairly prominent correlation between the order parameter and the coherencepeak height, which can be attributed to spectral-weight transfer due to the presence of weak impurities. We do not intend to claim that disorder alone is responsible for these effects-clearly the phenomenology of BSCCO demands that interaction effects that act inhomogeneously throughout the system (e.g., a spatially varying scattering rate) be present; these are not taken into consideration in our models. Our main point is that disorder could account for a good part of the mystery of why the order parameter and the spectral gap are not necessarily correlated with each other. This explanation is founded on the observation that I c maps are a near-perfect proxy observable for the superconducting order parameter-not the superfluid density-and once this is taken into consideration, the discrepancy between the two sets of quantities arises as a simple consequence of the reorganization of spectral weight in the presence of disorder. In fact, for FeTeSe, where interaction effects may not be as important as in the cuprates, the phenomenology contained in binary alloy models provides a surprisingly comprehensive explanation for all of the correlations (or the lack thereof) seen between various pairs of experimental measurables. For the cuprates, on the other hand, the situation is murkier. There is as yet no published systematic analysis establishing definitively the sort of correlation that exists between I c and the spectral gap in the cuprates. However, our results can shed light on possible explanations should a strong correlation (or the absence thereof) be found between these two quantities in experiment. If the I c maps and the dI/dV spectral-gap maps are highly correlated (i.e., r > 0.5) with each other, then the smoothdisorder model discussed previously provides a minimal explanation that accounts for this agreement. The observed distribution of spectral gap values in STM studies on BSCCO precludes an explanation in terms of smooth disorder in the extreme limit L ξ, however If on the other hand there is a lack of correlation of the order parameter and the spectral gap, any one of the pointlike models considered in this paper is a likely candidate to explain this effect. The absence of a strong correlation would suggest too that if the disorder in the cuprates were due to off-plane dopants, then these are in the well-screened limit such that they may be treated as pointlike scatterers. It is known however that STS experiments on BSCCO find a strong anticorrelation between the spectral gap and the coherence-peak height. However, the suppression of the coherence-peaks within regions with large spectral gaps is an effect that appears to be beyond the minimal disorder-based models we have considered, since what is seen in experiment is not merely the suppression of the coherence peak within large-spectral gap regions, but a concurrent broadening of the spectra. It is likely that this broadening is due to inelastic scattering, which ensures that large-spectral gap regions are broadened much more than small-spectral gap regions, driven by "local doping" wherein large-spectral gap and small-spectral gap regions behave similarly to underdoped and overdoped cuprates on average, respectively. This strong-coupling explanation is supported by STS studies which find that a large scattering rate is necessary to account for the suppression of the coherencepeak height these large-spectral gap regions. A. R. Schmidt, K. Fujita, E.-A. Kim, M. J. Lawler,