We employ analytical and numerical approaches to show that unpaired Majorana zero modes can occur in cores of Abrikosov vortices at the interface between a three-dimensional topological insulator, such as Bi2Se3, and a twisted bilayer of high-Tc cuprate superconductor, such as Bi2Sr2CaCu2O 8+δ . When the twist angle is close to 45 o the latter has been predicted to form a fully gapped topological superconductor up to temperatures approaching its native Tc 90K. Majorana zero modes in these structures will persist up to unprecedented high temperatures and, depending on the quality of the interface, may be protected by gaps with larger magnitudes than other candidate systems. Introduction -Unpaired Majorana zero modes (MZMs) continue to capture the imagination of researchers due to their promise in new technologies but also as an outstanding intellectual challenge in the physics of quantum matter. An important component in the ongoing worldwide effort is design and fabrication of new platforms where MZMs occur robustly under a wide range of conditions and at accessible temperatures An appealing route towards realizing MZMs at higher temperatures is to employ high-T c cuprate superconductors. However, the SC order parameter in all cuprates is known to have a d x 2 -y 2 symmetry Our idea, illustrated in Fig. Compared to the STI proximitized using a conventional s-wave SC our proposed setup features several key advantages including potentially larger excitation gaps and higher critical temperatures. In addition, due to its extremely short coherence length ξ, the cuprate bilayer will exhibit very few Caroli-de Gennes-Matricon states The model -The low-energy theory of the STI surface proximitized with SC order is given by the Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) Hamiltonian Here h k = v(σ y k xσ x k y ) describes the single massless Dirac fermion on the STI surface and is, in this representation, proportional to the unit matrix in spin space. ∆ and ∆ denote the d x 2 -y 2 and d xy components, respectively. The energy eigenvalues can be written as It is important to note that in view of Eq. ( where p = -i∇ is the momentum operator and we performed a uniform π/2 rotation around σ z for future convenience. In order to enable analytical progress we focus here on the pure chiral limit ∆ = ∆ which, for a single vortex placed at the origin, yields a system with full rotation symmetry. The gap operator can be constructed as described in Ref. Here a 0 is the lattice constant of the underlying lattice model, p ± = p x ± ip y , {a, b} = 1 2 (ab + ba) and θ(r) denotes the phase of the space dependent gap function ∆(r). The double symmetrization is required to ensure that the resulting operator is hermitian and the last term is needed to maintain gauge invariance Vortex core zero mode solution -The order parameter in the presence of a single vortex is given by where (r, φ) represent the polar coordinates of vector r and integer n encodes vorticity. For the sake of simplicity we assume ∆ 0 (r) to be constant for all r, although in reality the amplitude is required to vanish at the origin. To find the zero-energy eigenstate Ψ 0 (r) bound to the vortex we follow the strategy outlined in Ref. If we denote Ψ 0 = (u, v) T with u, v two-component spinors in spin space, it is easy to see that the zero-mode condition ΞΨ 0 = Ψ 0 implies that v = iσ y u * . Thus, Ψ 0 is fully determined in terms of only two independent complex components u = (u ↑ , u ↓ ) T which obey the following equation We solve this equation by passing to polar coordinates and adopting the ansatz where ∆l,l = e -ilφ ∆e -il φ . Because ∆ ∼ e i(n+2)φ the requirement that ∆l,l+1 and ∆l+1,l are φ-independent implies 2l + 1 = n + 2. It follows that a non-degenerate zero-energy solution can exist only when l = (n + 1)/2, that is, l = 1 for a vortex and l = 0 for an antivortex. Working out the required ∆l,l operators and passing to a dimensionless coordinate ρ = rk F with k F = μ/v Eqs. (9) become, for the n = 1 vortex, with δ = ∆ 0 μa 2 0 /v 2 the dimensionless gap amplitude. It is straightforward to obtain exact numerical solutions of Eqs. solves Eqs. Lattice model results -To confirm the existence of the zero mode in a broader context we performed numerical simulations within a minimal lattice model. These do not depend on the assumption of pure chiral limit and in addition provide useful information on the entire vortex spectrum, not just the zero mode. Although strictly speaking the STI surface cannot be described by a T -invariant 2D lattice model where To implement the Abrikosov vortex we express H latt k in the real-space representation. We consider a square sample containing L × L lattice sites with open boundary conditions and the vortex placed at the center. In this representation the BdG Hamiltonian becomes a hermitian matrix of size 4L 2 which we diagonalize numerically for system sizes up to L = 59. More details on the model and its real-space implementation in the presence of vortices can be found in Ref. where the sum is over positive energy eigenvalues n of H latt and Ψ n (r) = (u n (r), v n (r)) T are the corresponding eigenstates. When evaluated at the vortex center ρ(ω, r) shows a pronounced peak near zero energy, Fig. Outlook -Our results establish the existence of unpaired MZMs in cores of Abrikosov vortices at the STI surface with an induced order parameter of d x 2 -y 2 + id xy symmetry. The latter may occur in twisted bilayers of high-T c cuprate superconductors such as Bi2212 While the mechanism leading to the zero mode is ultimately similar to the classic Fu-Kane construction Because Bi2212 is known to superconduct up to 90K in its monolayer form our proposed construction could open new directions in the pursuit of Majorana fermions at high temperatures. An important measure of the potential usefulness in applications is the size of the minigap ∆ min protecting the Majorana zero mode from thermal excitations. In our proposed setup the minigap is given by the level spacing δE between the Caroli-de Gennes-Matricon vortex core states. In SM we estimate δE 1/ρ(μ)πR 2 v where ρ(ω) = ω/2π 2 v 2 is the TI surface density of states and R v denotes the vortex core radius, related to the coherence length ξ. We show that owing to the small DOS in the TI surface and the short cuprate coherence length ξ the minigap can be large such that only a handfull of bound states appear inside the vortex core. Obtaining a reliable estimate for the minigap size, however, is challenging because it depends sensitively on the quality of the TI/SC interface as well as the minimum SC gap in the twisted bilayer. The latter in turn depends on details of the interlayer coupling at nonzero twist as discussed in recent works Early work on interfacing topological insulators with (untwisted) Bi2212 already produced encouraging results. Mechanically bonded tunnel junctions By appealing to the Bessel function identities (∂ x ± m/x)J m (x) = ±J m∓1 (x) it is easy to see that the solution to Eqs. For x 1 the Bessel functions behave as which indicates that χ 0 (ρ) is not normalizable, just as one would expect of a scattering state in the absence of a gap. Now consider the effect of turning on small nonzero δ. We seek the solution in the form f (ρ)χ 0 (ρ) where f is a slowly-varying envelope function. In the long-distance limit ρ 1 the dominant contribution to the pairing operator in Eqs. The solution is an exponentially decaying oscillatory function χ ∞ (ρ) given in Eq. ( For an antivortex we consider Eq. ( The full solution, once again, must be obtained by numerical integration; an example is shown in Fig. As for the vortex we find that when the dimensionless gap δ is small this asymptotic solution turns out to approximate the exact numerical solution very well at all distances (see Fig. It is interesting to note that the asymptotic solution χ ∞ (ρ) in Eq. (S5) has the same form as the exact zeromode solution for a vortex in the Fu-Kane model at a non-zero chemical potential According to the classic work of Caroli, de Gennes and Matricon As noted in Ref. This result agrees with the detailed calculation of Ref. [23] if one takes c = π/ √ 2 2.22. In conventional superconductors E F typically exceeds ∆ by two or three orders of magnitude making δE too small for individual CdGM states to be experimentally resolved. In NbSe 2 , for example, ∆ 1.1 meV while E F 350 meV. This makes the expected level spacing δE 0.003 meV, too small to be resolved by scanning tunneling spectroscopy (or any other probe). We may similarly estimate the core level spacing in the proximitized TI surface. The key difference here is the linear Dirac dispersion k = v|k| which yields the normal-state density of states ρ(ω) = ω/2π 2 v 2 . Assuming the chemical potential of the surface electrons μ ∆ TI , where ∆ TI is the proximity-induced gap, we may estimate the number of the core states N CdGM ρ(μ)∆ TI πR 2 v . From this, the level spacing can be de-duced as where we have taken c = π/ √ 2 as before. We note that the proximity-induced gap ∆ TI has canceled out in this expression, the energy spacing being determined by the density of states ρ(μ) and the coherence length ξ. Because the SC order in the TI is induced by the proximity effect we expect that the vortex core size will be controlled by the coherence length ξ of the superconductor. In a pure d-wave SC the coherence length is momentumdependent, reflecting the momentum-dependent structure of the d-wave gap function. In the d + id phase that we assume occurs in the twisted cuprate bilayer the core size will be controled by the twist-induced minimum gap that we denote ∆ topo (the notation here reflects the fact that ∆ topo protects the topological edge modes). We thus take ξ = v F /π∆ topo as reflected in the last expression of Eq. (S7). For sufficiently small surface chemical potential μ (but still large compared to ∆ TI ) Eq. (S7) indicates that minigap δE can be large. As a concrete example we consider μ = 100meV, ∆ topo = 10meV and v/v F = 1, which yields δE ∼ 4meV. While there is a large uncertainty associated with this estimate it nevertheless suggests that a situation with very few CdGM states inside the induced gap ∆ TI can be readily achieved, in contrast to the conventional SC case discussed above. (Note that ∆ TI is some fraction of ∆ topo , depending on the nature of the TI/SC interface.) The above conclusion is in line with the results of our lattice simulation shown in Fig. 