Atmospheric turbulence can generate scintillation or beam wandering phenomena that impairs free space optical (FSO) communication. In this paper, we propose and demonstrate a proof-of-concept FSO communication receiver based on a spatial demultiplexer and a photonic integrated circuit coherent combiner. The receiver collects the light from several Hermite Gauss spatial modes and coherently combine on chip the energy from the different modes into a single output. The FSO receiver is characterized with a wavefront emulator bench that generates arbitrary phase and intensity patterns. The multimode receiver presents a strong resilience to wavefront distortions, compared to a monomode FSO receiver. The system is then used to detect an analog modulation of an optical beam through a random wavefront profile to mimic the transmission of a signal on a degraded optical link. Optical feeder links are currently considered as a promising technology to cope with the continuous growth in high data rate communication demand To preserve a good coupling efficiency in a SMF FSO receiver, the aperture size of the collection lens is limited by the correlation length of the atmospheric turbulence to tens of centimeters Recently, binary tree architectures (BTA) have been proposed to combine the light from an array of optical input beams to one output beam Therein, photonic integrated circuits (PIC) exhibit attractive features for achieving the coherent combination of the multiple outputs of the receiver. PICs provide both optical and electronic functions with ultimate small footprint, and a remarkable thermal and mechanical stability In this paper, we propose and demonstrate for the first time of our knowledge a complete FSO receiver for optical communications associating a spatial demultiplexer and a BTA on a PIC. This architecture thus combines the advantages of a BTA supporting multimode collection area and the high integration capability and robustness of PICs. In the first section, we describe the wavefront emulator that we developed in order to mimic phase and amplitude distortion and evaluate the receiver performances. The emulator is calibrated to selectively excite the demultiplexer eigenmodes in order to generate arbitrary phase and amplitude spatial beam profiles as a combination of the demultiplexer mode basis. In a second section we describe and characterize the combining PIC. In the last section the performances of the complete FSO receiver are evaluated. The proposed receiver and wavefront emulator test bed are presented in Figure with A 0 the amplitude of the input wavefront on the SLM1. So, by changing the phase patterns written onto SLM1 and SLM2, we manipulate the amplitude and phase of the wavefront independently at the same time. Figure We designed a photonic integrated BTA to combine the energy from the 15 output fibers of the MPLC. It has been fabricated within IMEC's (Belgium) Silicon On Insulator (SOI) photonics foundry through multiprojects wafers shuttle and packaged by PHIX (Netherlands). The operating principle of the BTA is described in Figure The optical coupling loss from fiber to waveguide is estimated to ~ 4dB / interface using shunt waveguides in the PIC (not represented). We measured a total insertion loss of 7dB at 1535 nm from any of the 15 fiber inputs to the on-chip direct or (I/Q) coherent detection. The 7dB breaks out in 4dB coupling loss plus 5 × 0.6dB for each of the 5 cascaded Mach-Zehnder interferometers in the total optical path of the PIC (see Fig. To characterize the efficiency of the complete FSO emulator and receiver (MPLC and BTA on the PIC), we generate arbitrary wavefronts as combination of HG modes with the setup of Fig. For the monomode receiver, the coupling efficiency η mono corresponds to the ratio of the coupled power in the output single mode fiber P out to the free space input power P in (cf. Fig 6 Finally, to detect radiofrequency modulations applied to the electric field with the full setup (wavefront emulator and multimode receiver), we used the on-chip coherent receiver. The coherent receiver is composed of a 2x4 multimode interference (MMI) 90° hybrid coupler and two pairs of balanced photodiodes (cf. Fig. As a preliminary evaluation of the on-chip I/Q receiver, we used an acousto-optic frequency shifter placed upstream of the wavefront emulator input to generate an analog frequency modulation of the optical link at 80 MHz. To mimic a degraded microwave photonic link, a random HG modes combination extracted from Fig. We have proposed and demonstrated a proof-of-concept FSO receiver based on a spatial demultiplexer and a PIC coherent combiner. We have developed a wavefront emulator to test the receiver with arbitrary amplitude and phase patterns. The FSO receiver has proven the efficient coherent combination of 6 fibers for different random inputs. Compared to a conventional SMF FSO receiver, we have showed that our system is much less sensitive to phase and amplitude perturbations. In a final experiment, we validate the FSO receiver for the on-chip detection of a modulated input wavefront. This first characterization of the setup shows the great potential of this complete architecture, from the emulator bench to the BTA on the PIC. This setup will be further improved with a fine tuning of the delays between the different channels (with tunable optical delay line) to use the FSO receiver with modulated signals with an higher modulation bandwidth and more complex frequency modulation scheme (OOK, QPSK, DQPSK, ...). The implementation of realistic atmospheric perturbation scenario (with the projection of simulated distorted wavefront on the HG basis) is also currently considered. As a conclusion, the implementation of FSO receivers based on a spatial demultiplexer with coherent combination presents several advantages compared to standard SMF FSO receiver: The architecture shows a strong resilience to random phase and intensity perturbation, as the coupling efficiency does not depend on the energy distributions among the spatial modes. As a consequence, this systems ought to be less sensitive to atmospheric turbulence. Then, the system is largely scalable, as MPLCs can project and convert wavefronts into a large number of spatial modes, and integrated photonic platforms allow to encompass a large number of photonic devices on the same chip. Moreover, since insertion loss in the PIC are mostly dominated by coupling loss, increasing the channel count will have a limited impact on the total insertion loss. For instance, since we estimated in section 3 the loss of one combining cell to ~0.6dB, then doubling the number of input channels would only add 0.6dB to the total insertion loss. The scalability of the architecture to a large number of modes can provide significant benefit for FSO communication receivers: as the spatial demultiplexer collects a large number of spatial modes and have a high numerical aperture, the collection area is larger than standard SMF FSO receiver. The aperture diameter of the collection lens with this system could therefore become higher than the atmospheric turbulence correlation length and so increase the received signal power. The present approach also opens up prospects for upcoming hybrid PIC platforms combining SOI, SIN and InP, offering ultra-low loss waveguides, high bandwidth phase shifters and high performance photodiodes, which would benefit the number of recombined channels. out /P x,y