Semiconducting transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) are promising for flexible highspecific-power photovoltaics due to their ultrahigh optical absorption coefficients, desirable band gaps and self-passivated surfaces. However, challenges such as Fermi-level pinning at the metal contact-TMD interface and the inapplicability of traditional doping schemes have prevented most TMD solar cells from exceeding 2% power conversion efficiency (PCE). In addition, fabrication on flexible substrates tends to contaminate or damage TMD interfaces, further reducing performance. Here, we address these fundamental issues by employing: 1) transparent graphene contacts to mitigate Fermi-level pinning, 2) MoOx capping for doping, passivation and anti-reflection, and 3) a clean, non-damaging direct transfer method to realize devices on lightweight flexible polyimide substrates. These lead to record PCE of 5.1% and record specific power of 4.4 W g -1 for flexible TMD (WSe2) solar cells, the latter on par with prevailing thin-film solar technologies cadmium telluride, copper indium gallium selenide, amorphous silicon and III-Vs. We further project that TMD solar cells could achieve specific power up to 46 W g -1 , creating unprecedented opportunities in a broad range of industries from aerospace to wearable and implantable electronics. Conventional silicon (Si) solar cells dominate the photovoltaics market with a market share of about 95% due to their low-cost manufacturing and reasonable power conversion efficiency (PCE). 1 However, the low optical absorption coefficient and brittle nature of Si lead to degraded performance in ultrathin, flexible Si solar cells and therefore prevent their broader usage in applications demanding high power per weight (i.e. MoOx also serves as an effective anti-reflection coating for WSe2, leading to an additional increase in JSC. Given the approximate location of Gr, WSe2 and Au Fermi levels, the depletion regions of Gr-WSe2 and Au-WSe2 Schottky junctions are estimated to be in the order of 1 μm and therefore expand throughout the entire depth of the ~200-nm-thick WSe2 layer, leading to fully depleted devices. specific power, PS) and flexibility, for example in aerospace, transportation, architecture and self-powered wearable and implantable electronics. . Figure ) Au CIGS, a-Si and III-Vs. However, due to the higher work function of WS2 compared to WSe2 and therefore the lower built-in potential in Gr-WS2 Schottky junctions, WS2 solar cells exhibit lower VOC, JSC, FF and hence PCE (see Supplementary Fig. Next, we measure the current density vs. voltage (J-V) characteristics of flexible WSe2 solar cells in the dark and for AM 1.5G illumination at various incident power intensities (Fig. By fitting a power law equation on the measured current density and incident power data (Fig. To accurately define the active area of the device, the photocurrent profile across the width of the device (x-axis in Fig. Most devices, such as the one shown in Fig. We measure the absorption spectrum of WSe2 solar cells at different stages of fabrication, i.e. after polyimide release (Au-WSe2), after Gr transfer (Au-WSe2-Gr) and finally after MoOx deposition (Au-WSe2-Gr-MoOx), as shown in Fig. After transferring Gr on top of WSe2, the overall absorption of the stack is slightly reduced. Optical simulations using the transfer matrix method produce a similar result (Supplementary Fig. Depositing 10 nm of MoOx on top of Gr increases the overall absorption of the stack. This can be either due to parasitic absorption within MoOx or its anti-reflection coating effect improving the absorption within the WSe2 absorber layer. To answer this question, we simulate absorption using the transfer matrix method. Nearly all absorption occurs within the 209-nm-thick WSe2 absorber layer. Note the discontinuous vertical axis, used to magnify the smaller contributions. According to Fig. The WSe2 solar cells show an average optical absorption of about 55% over the 450-850 nm wavelength spectrum. Using the simulated WSe2 absorption spectrum and assuming unity internal quantum efficiency (IQE), we calculate a maximum JSC of 20.0 mA cm -2 , slightly underestimated because absorption at wavelengths below 400 nm and above 1000 nm are excluded due to lack of available material data (see Supplementary Fig. According to realistic detailed balance models developed for TMD photovoltaic cells, single-junction multilayer TMDs can in principle achieve ~27% PCE with an optimized optical and electronic design. Research efforts to scale up TMD growth to large areas would soon enable scalable and low-cost production of TMD photovoltaic cells, ) TMDs to achieve high power conversion efficiency and specific power at a low cost as well as their stability and environmentally-friendliness (in contrast to perovskites) makes them a serious candidate for nextgeneration photovoltaics, especially in high-specific-power applications. In summary, we demonstrated flexible WSe2 solar cells with record-breaking power conversion efficiency PCE of 5.1% and power per weight PS of 4.4 W g -1 . We performed detailed optical and electrical characterizations on these solar cells to explain their superior performance and identify areas of improvement, providing practical guidelines on the optical and electronic design to enhance PCE and PS. We also tested the flexible solar cells under bending and showed similar performance in flat and bent states. Future large-area TMD cells will require more bending studies to verify effects of light-coupling at different angles on the solar cell performance. Lastly, we benchmarked the flexible WSe2 solar cells against other thin-film photovoltaic technologies and showed their potential to achieve ultrahigh PS, creating unprecedented opportunities in a broad range of industries from aerospace to wearable electronics. Device fabrication: The details on device fabrication are provided in Supplementary Section S1. In short, WSe2 flakes were mechanically exfoliated onto Si/SiO2 substrates. Next, 135 nm of Au serving as solar cell bottom contacts was electron-beam evaporated and structured by optical photolithography and lift-off. Then the flexible PI substrate was spin-coated on top, cured and all structures were released together in DI water. After flipping the substrate, graphene was wet-transferred as transparent top contact and structured by optical photolithography and dry etching. Finally, MoOx was deposited by electron-beam evaporation and structured by optical photolithography and lift-off, followed by annealing in ambient air for the purpose of doping, passivation and anti-reflection coating. The process flow is schematically shown in Supplementary The photocurrent from the device was measured on a custom-built optoelectronic setup. A supercontinuum laser source (Fianium) and an acousto-optic tunable filter (Fianium) were used to provide monochromatic illumination across a broad spectral range. To achieve high signal-to-noise ratio, the laser light was modulated by a chopper wheel (400 Hz) synchronized with two lock-in amplifiers. The laser light was focused onto the sample using a 50X long working distance objective (Mitutoyo M Plan APO NIR). To image the sample, two beam splitters were placed in the illumination path for a halogen lamp and a charge-coupled device (CCD) imaging camera, respectively. Using a glass slide, a small fraction of the reflected light was directed into a large-area Si photodiode (New Focus, model 2031) connected to a lock-in amplifier (Stanford Research SR810 DSP) to measure reflection from the sample. The sample was placed on a chip carrier and then mounted on a three-axis piezo stage to accurately control its spatial position. Electrical connections were made by soldering wires (34-gauge enameled wires) using thermally stable solder paste Sn42/Bi57.6/Ag0.4 T4 (Chip Quik) onto the Au metal pads. To measure the photocurrent, the mounted sample was connected in series with a source meter (Keithley 2612), a tunable current-to-voltage amplifier and a second lock-in amplifier (Stanford Research SR810 DSP). The absorption measurements were performed using a Nikon C2 confocal microscope coupled to a CCD camera (Acton Pixis 1024, Princeton Instrument) and a spectrometer (Acton SP2300i, Princeton Instrument). Unpolarized light from a halogen lamp was used to illuminate the sample through a 20X objective (Nikon CFI Achromat LWD, NA = 0.4). The reflection spectra (R(λ)) were normalized to the calibrated reflection spectrum of a protected silver mirror (Thorlabs, PF10-03-P01). Since all devices were fabricated on top of thick Au contact, the absorption spectra were calculated by absorption(λ) = 1 -reflection(λ). The Raman measurements were performed on a HORIBA Scientific LabRAM HR Evolution spectrometer using an excitation wavelength of 532 nm. For Raman measurements an acquisition time, accumulations, laser power and optical grating of 20 s, 2, 2.8 mW, 1800 gr mm -1 were used, and the spot size is less than 1 μm. Optical Simulation: Optical simulations were performed using the transfer matrix method. A normally incident plane wave was assumed in all simulations. The thickness of each layer used in simulations is shown in Fig 1b . The bottom Au contact was modeled as a semi-infinite substrate due to its small penetration depth. Optical constants for WSe2, Gr and Au were taken from the literature. We follow a recently developed fabrication and transfer approach, Next, we spin-coated a lift-off layer LOL 2000 (3000 rpm, 60 s) on our substrates and baked it on a hot plate at 200 °C for 5 minutes. This was followed by spin-coating of Shipley 3612 photoresist (5500 rpm, 30 s) and baking on a hot plate at 90 °C for 1 minute. The lift-off layer/photoresist stack was then patterned by photolithography on a direct write lithography tool (Heidelberg MLA 150, dose: 90 mJ cm -2 , defocus: -2) and developed (MF-26A, 32 s). 135 nm of Au was deposited on top using electronbeam evaporation (AJA International). After a lift-off process similar as in Ref. 39, patterned Au bottom contacts and metal pads were left behind on top of the flakes and the substrate. The use of Au without any additional sticking layer enables us to later pick up the metal structures and TMD because no covalent bonds with the silicon dioxide substrate are formed (more details in Ref. 39). The PI (PI-2610, HD MicroSystems) was spin-coated on top of the electrodes and TMD conformally covering all structures, baked at 90 °C and 150 °C for each 90 s, and finally cured at 250 °C in nitrogen ambient for 30 minutes. After that, all structures embedded into PI can be easily released from the silicon substrate by agitation and gentle mechanical force with a tweezer in deionized (DI) water without any discernable damage (more details in Ref. 39). After flipping the substrate, we temporarily attach it again to a silicon carrier with poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) to perform the graphene transfer. Graphene is grown via chemical vapor deposition at 1060 °C in an AIXTRON Black Magic furnace on commercial Cu foils with large preferentially 100 oriented grains (JX Mining, 99.9% purity HA-V2 treated rolled copper foil), which are surface cleaned in glacial acetic acid and commercial thin film nickel etchant (Transene, Nickel Etchant TFB) solution prior to growth. We then etched graphene to remove it in undesired areas by reactive ion etching with the same parameters as mentioned above. For the purpose of doping, passivation and anti-reflection coating, 10 nm of patterned MoOx was deposited on top by e-beam evaporation (Kurt J. Lesker) from a MoO3 pellet (Advanced Chemicals, 99.95% purity) at a rate of 0.3 Å s -1 , using the same photolithography and lift-off processes as described for the graphene etch and Au contact definition, respectively. Afterwards, we annealed the samples on a hot plate at 200 °C in ambient air for 10 minutes in order to further oxidize MoOx and therefore increase its work function, resulting in improved surface charge-transfer doping. 79 Ti and Al, despite their lower work functions compared to Au, lead to worse performance, most probably due to their reactive nature and therefore forming poor interfaces with WSe2. Ti and Al are known to be highly reactive/oxidizing, especially when in contact with TMDs, leading to the formation of AlOx at the Al-WSe2 interface and TiOx + TixSey at the Ti-WSe2 interface. where JSC, VOC, FF and PCE are the short-circuit current density, open-circuit voltage, fill factor and power conversion efficiency, respectively. Then, we sum up the areal mass densities of all materials in the solar cell stack including the substrate by using the volumetric mass density multiplied by the respective material thickness. ) by dividing Pmax by the total area mass density from Table Table with their power conversion efficiencies (PCE).