Bulk superconductivity in a topological semimetal is a first step towards realizing topological superconductors, which can host Majorana fermions allowing us to achieve quantum computing. Here, we report superconductivity and compensation of electrons and holes in single crystals of the nodal-line semimetal CaSb2. We characterize the superconducting state and find that Cooper pairs have moderate-weak coupling, and the superconducting transition in specific heat down to 0.22 K deviates from that of a BCS superconductor. The non-saturating magnetoresistance and electron-hole compensation at low temperature are consistent with density functional theory (DFT) calculations showing nodal-line features. Furthermore, we observe de Haas-van Alphen (dHvA) oscillations consistent with a small Fermi surface in the semimetallic state of CaSb2. Our DFT calculations show that the two electron bands crossing the Fermi level are associated with Sb1 zigzag chains, while the hole band is associated with Sb2 zig-zag chains. The Sb1 zig-zag chains form a distorted square net, which may relate the M Sb2 family to the well known M SbTe square net semimetals. Realization of superconductivity and a compensated semimetal state in single crystals of CaSb2 establishes the diantimonide family as a candidate class of materials for achieving topological superconductivity. A central theme in the field of topological materials has been the search for topological superconductors, which are expected to host Majorana fermions and have potential applications in achieving fault-tolerant quantum computing In topological semimetals on the other hand, superconductivity may be realized without doping due to the finite density of states at the Fermi level E F . In addition, bulk bands form nodal points or nodal lines near E F in momentum space (k space) A number of materials with a square net of atoms in their crystal structure and non-symmorphic symmetry have been identified as topological semimetals in recent years, including SrMnSb 2 In this paper, we confirm the existence of bulk superconductivity in high quality single crystals of CaSb 2 and take several steps in identifying the nature of this superconducting state. Measurements of the phase diagram in magnetic field give us the fundamental superconducting length scales in the material: the London penetration depth and the superconducting coherence length. Low temperature specific heat measurements suggest unconventional aspects of the superconducting pairing state. Furthermore, we present band structure calculations demonstrating that states associated with the distorted Sb square-net are dominant near the Fermi level and thus play a central role in the superconducting state and electrical properties. We observe de Haas-van Alphen (dHvA) oscillations consistent with our calculated Fermi surfaces. In electrical resistivity measurements under magnetic fields, we observe a rise in resistivity at low temperature, consistent with previous reports. The magnetoresistance at low temperature reaches high values without saturation and the concentration of hole and electron carriers is almost equivalent below 50 K. All of these results show that superconductivity in CaSb 2 occurs in the context of a well compensated semimetal. Single crystals of CaSb 2 were grown from Sb self flux. Pieces of Ca (Alfa Aesar, 99.98 %) and Sb (Chempur, 99.999 %) with a molar ratio of 1:3.75 were loaded into an Al 2 O 3 crucible and sealed in a quartz tube with a pressure of 0.3 atm argon. The mixture was slowly heated to 700 • C and held at this temperature for 12 h. Subsequently, the mixture was cooled to 670 • C at a rate of 10 K/h, followed by slow cooling to 592 • C with 1 K/h. At this temperature, the crystals were separated from the flux by centrifuging at 2000-3000 rpm for about 15 s. Shiny, plate-like crystals with dimensions up to 3 x 3 x 0.5 mm 3 were obtained by this method. Crystals are stable in air for several weeks. Phase purity and orientation of the crystals were checked by X-ray diffraction (XRD) using a Bruker D8 with Cu Kα 1 radiation (1.54056 Å). The composition and homogeneity were confirmed by means of energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) using a Philips XL30 scanning electron microscope equipped with a Bruker Quantax 200 energydispersion X-ray microanalysis system and an XFlash 6010 SDD detector. Electrical resistivity measurements were performed with conventional four-and five-probe geometries using a Quantum Design Physical Property Measurement System (PPMS) equipped with a 3 He/ 4 He dilution refrigerator insert. For these measurements Pt wires (25 μm) were attached to the sample with silver epoxy. Measurements of the magnetic susceptibility were done using a Magnetic Property Measurements System 3 (MPMS3) also from Quantum Design, equipped with a 3 He insert. Specific heat measurements were performed using a PPMS (Quantum Design). Electronic structure calculations were performed within the framework of density functional theory (DFT) as implemented in the package Wien2k The CaSb 2 single crystals used in this study were characterized using X-ray diffraction (XRD) and energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) to confirm the quality of the samples. The powder XRD pattern measured on our sample, shown in Fig. We characterize the superconducting state of CaSb 2 and show bulk superconductivity with sharp superconducting transitions, using magnetic susceptibility, specific heat, and resistivity measurements. The magnetic susceptibility at low temperature is shown in Fig. In order to map out the field-temperature phase diagram, we track the shift in T c for different applied magnetic fields in DC magnetization and specific heat measurements in Figs. To estimate μ 0 H c2 (0), we use the Werthamer-Helfand-Hohenberg (WHH) equation where Φ 0 is the quantum flux h/2e. We get ξ GL of 116 nm. To measure μ 0 H c1 (0) we measured the field-dependent magnetization (M ) at different temperatures below the critical temperature, as shown in Fig. where μ 0 H * c1 (0) is the lower critical field at 0 K and T c is the superconducting critical temperature. μ 0 H * c1 (0) FIG. We estimate the penetration depth λ using ξ GL = 116.1 nm and μ 0 H c1 (0) = 4.9 mT with the equation we get λ = 89.5 nm for CaSb 2 . We calculate the Ginzburg-Landau constant κ GL = λ/ξ GL = 0.771±0.038. Based on our calculated values, we classify CaSb 2 as a type-II superconductor since κ GL > 1 √ 2 . However, it is just barely type-II, so this property will be sensitive to defects and carrier density in this semi-metallic material. In Fig. The result of this fit is γ n = 1.778 mJ mol -1 K -2 and β = 0.471 mJ mol -1 K -4 . The phonon contribution represented by the cubic term βT 3 was subtracted from the total C P to evaluate the electronic part of the specific heat C el . The electronic contribution to specific heat C el divided by temperature is plotted as a function of temperature in Fig. The Debye model is used to calculate the Deybe temperature Θ D where n = 3 and R is the gas constant 8.314 J mol -1 K -1 . The Debye temperature was calculated to be Θ equation where μ * = 0.10 and T c = 1.60 K. We find λ ep = 0.458 for CaSb 2 , suggesting it is a weak-moderate coupling superconductor. Using λ ep , γ, and the Boltzmann constant k B , we calculate the electronic density of states at the Fermi energy N (E F ) with the equation N (E F ) was estimated to be 0.52 states eV -1 per formula unit (fu) of CaSb 2 . We calculate the mean free path (l) using the following equation where N (E F ) = 0.52, the molar volume V M = 52.0 cm 3 /mol, ρ = 1 μΩcm (Fig. The magnitude of the specific heat jump ∆C/C en ∼ 0.95, C en being the electronic specific heat in the normal state, is about 34% smaller than the value of 1.43 expected for a BCS model in the weak-coupling limit. In Fig. We consider a model at the extreme end of possible gap anisotropy, one that includes line nodes in the superconducting gap CaSb 2 seems to fall at the border of type-I and type-II superconductivity. YbSb 2 , which crystalizes in a higher symmetry crystal structure (Cmcm, S.G.:63), has been reported to be a type-I superconductor The resistivity measurements reveal metallic behavior with a longitudinal resistivity ρ xx of ca. 1 μΩ•cm at 2 K (Fig. and based on the carrier densities n e,h and mobilities μ e,h for electrons and holes. By simultaneously fitting ρ xx and ρ xy to the two-band model (see Sup. We confirmed our experimental findings by band structure calculations based on density functional theory (DFT). The resulting band structure of CaSb 2 is shown in Fig. To complement our findings about the Fermi surface based on electrical transport experiments, we have studied the magnetization in the normal state at low temperatures. At 1.8 K, we observe de Haas-van Alphen (dHvA) oscillations in fields larger than 2.5 T for B c. In Fig. The three fundamental frequencies are 71.5(1) T, 77.5(1) T, and 115.8(1) T. Using the Onsager relation A F = 2πe F Next, we compare the extremal orbits from dHvA oscillations with those predicted by DFT calculations. We do not find a quantitative match between theory and experiment. The mismatch can be caused by two possibly concomitant reasons: (i) the as-grown single crystals are self-doped, resulting in an experimental Fermi energy different from the theoretical one or (ii) the functional used Interestingly, CaSb 2 is one of only a handful of materials that displays at ambient pressure both a large MR (i.e. semimetallic character) and superconductivity, see Tab. III. These materials include MoTe 2 In this Article, which is the first report on single crystals of CaSb 2 , we report evidence for bulk superconduc-tivity in CaSb 2 with an onset of about 1.6 K. The C P jump at T c is inconsistent with that expected in a BCS superconductor, and the decay in the C el at low temperature hints at anisotropy of the superconducting gap function. Our transport measurements support a wellcompensated semimetal picture for CaSb 2 , where electrons and holes are almost perfectly compensated below 20 K. The high quality of the single crystals allows us to measure de Haas-van Alphen (dHvA) oscillations and we identify three frequencies associated with a small Fermi surface. Measuring the intrinsic superconducting and compensated semimetal properties of CaSb 2 was only possible due to availability of single crystals. Our calculations reveal that bands at the Fermi level are dominated by contributions from the distorted Sb square-net. The exact nature of the topologically non-trivial band crossing can be elucidated in future experiments, including ARPES. The family of square-net materials and diantimonides with distorted square-nets host a rich variety of properties, and the present work will serve as an important step towards connecting these two sub-fields. Our results promote CaSb 2 , and the family of M Sb 2 , for further investigation of topological properties and superconductivity. Note added. After submitting this manuscript, we noticed a report on the properties of polycrystalline CaSb 2 showing a peak in T c under pressure, and suggesting an unconventional nature of the superconductivity 