It is well known that performance of a thermophotovoltaic (TPV) device can be enhanced if the vacuum gap between the thermal emitter and the TPV cell becomes nanoscale due to the photon tunneling of evanescent waves. Having multiple bandgaps, multi-junction TPV cells have received attention as an alternative way to improve its performance by selectively absorbing the spectral radiation in each subcell. In this work, we comprehensively analyze the optimized nearfield tandem TPV system consisting of the thin-ITO-covered tungsten emitter (at 1500 K) and GaInAsSb/InAs monolithic interconnected tandem TPV cell (at 300 K). We develop a simulation model by coupling the near-field radiation solved by fluctuational electrodynamics and the diffusion-recombination-based charge transport equations. The optimal configuration of the near-field tandem TPV system obtained by the genetic algorithm achieves the electrical power output of 8.41 W/cm 2 and the conversion efficiency of 35.6% at the vacuum gap of 100 nm. We show that two resonance modes (i.e., surface plasmon polaritons supported by the ITOvacuum interface and the confined waveguide mode in the tandem TPV cell) greatly contribute to the enhanced performance of the optimized system. We also show that the near-field tandem TPV system is superior to the single-cell-based near-field TPV system in both power output and conversion efficiency through loss analysis. Interestingly, the optimization performed with the objective function of the conversion efficiency leads to the current matching condition for the tandem TPV system regardless of the vacuum gap distances. A thermophotovoltaic (TPV) system consists of a high-temperature emitter and a TPV cell, and directly converts the radiative energy into the electrical energy through a photovoltaic effect It is well known that the performance of a TPV system can be enhanced when a gap between the emitter and the TPV cell is smaller than a thermal characteristic wavelength determined by Wien's displacement law Comprehensive analysis of optimized near-field tandem thermophotovoltaic system It was also reported that magnetic polariton (MP) excited by the grating emitter can also tailor the emission spectrum of the NFTPV system Alternatively, one can change the configuration of the TPV cell to further improve its performance Because a multi-junction cell can surpass the SQ limit of a single-junction cell, multi-junction cells have been intensively investigated in various photovoltaic fields from theoretical design to real fabrication In this work, we throughly analyze the performance of the near-field tandem TPV system consisting of a monolithic interconnected InAs and GaInAsSb subcells and a thin-ITO-covered emitter. A simulation model coupling the nearfield thermal radiation based on fluctuating electrodynamics and the charge transport equations is developed. Then, we optimize the configuration of the proposed NFTPV system using a genetic algorithm to maximize the conversion efficiency at a given vacuum gap distance. The performance of the single-cell-based and the tandem-cell-based NFTPV systems will be comprehensively compared through the loss analysis. In addition, by optimizing the system structure at different vacuum gap distances using the same design variables, we confirm whether the proposed NFTPV system could find a high-performance configuration that satisfies the current matching condition regardless of the vacuum gap distance. Figure ITO has been widely adapted to NFTPV works because its plasma frequency can be tuned by regulating the oxygen concentration during the fabrication process The tandem cell consists of two -on-TPV subcells: an InAs bottom cell and a GaInAsSb top cell. Because an InAs cell has a narrow bandgap and can operate at room temperatures Dielectric function ( , , ) of semiconductors including quaternary compound Ga In 1-As Sb 1-above its bandgap is obtained from the semi-empirical model proposed by The dielectric function of tungsten is obtained from the tabular data in the wavelength range of < 10 m When the photon whose energy is greater than the bandgap of the tandem cell is absorbed, an electron-hole pair is generated. If we find the spatial distribution of the steady-state minority carrier concentration in the direction of perpendicular to the TPV cell surface under the illumination condition (i.e., -direction), the photocurrents generated in each subcell can be calculated. In this study, the one-dimensional steady-state continuity equation considering the diffusion and recombination of the minority carrier is considered where ( , ) is the frequency-dependent local carrier concentration, 0 is the equilibrium carrier concentration, and is the photogeneration rate. The subscript of and h represents the electron and hole, respectively. In order to calculate the photogeneration rate, one needs to know the spectral near-field radiation absorbed in each subcell at location . When calculating the near-field radiation, each subcell is treated as a homogeneous isotropic medium regardless of the doping type. The net radiative heat flux from the emitter to each tandem TPV cell layer can thus be expressed by where is the parallel component of wavevector, and the subscript of indicates the tandem TPV cell layers from the bottom to the top (e.g., = 1 is the Au reflector, = 2 is the InAs bottom cell, and = 5 is the GaInAsSb top cell). To calculate , , ( , ), we use the standard formalism of fluctuational electrodynamics where Θ( , ) = ħ exp{ħ ∕ }-1 is the mean energy of the Planck oscillator with ħ beting the Planck constant divided by 2 , and is the Boltzmann constant. In Eq. ( where , , ( , ) and , , ( , ) are the contribution of radiative heat flux by waves in -direction and --direction, respectively (see Fig. In this section, we will concentrate on how to obtain the photocurrent generated in the InAs bottom cell and thus omit the subscript of for simplicity. We define = ,bottom , = ,bottom + dp,bottom , and = ,bottom + dp,bottom + ,bottom , where ,bottom , dp,bottom , and ,bottom are the width of -region, depletion region, and -region. The width of the depletion region can be calculated by dp = √ (2 ∕ )( ∕ )ln( ∕ 2 )(1∕ + 1∕ ), where is the static relative permittivity, is the electron charge, is the -region doping concentration, is the -region doping concentration, and is the intrinsic concentration. The spectral radiation absorbed at location of the InAs bottom cell can be expressed by Then, the photogeneration rate can be calculated by where indicates the angular frequency corresponding to the bandgap energy of the InAs bottom cell. Using Eq. ( In the above equation, ,h and ,h can be obtained from the following boundary conditions: (i) at the edge of the -doped region, the electron is recombined with the surface recombination velocity i.e., { ( , { (0, ) -0 } ; (ii) the electron and hole concentrations are in equilibrium at the edge of the depletion region (i.e., = 0 at = and h = 0 h at = ); and (iii) at the edge of the -doped region, the hole is recombined with the surface recombination velocity h i.e., h Referring to recently reported value The drift photocurrent density originating from the swept minority carriers by the built-in electric field is generated in the depletion region. We assume that the drift photocurrent is produced without recombination loss. Thus, it can be written by Finally, the total spectral photocurrent density generation is obtained by summing the diffusion and drift photocurrents as: The calculation process described in Eqs. ( where ph, = ∫ ∞ , ph, ( ) is a total photocurrent density with = 1 (or 2) indicating the bottom cell and top cell, respectively. The dark saturation current density ( 0, ) represents the current flowing by diffusion of the carriers at the dark condition and can be obtained by Eq. ( ) -1} at = and h -0 h = 0 h {exp( ∕ ) -1} at = . Unlike the photocurrent, the dark current is frequency independent and can be written by where ,h = √ ,h ,h is the diffusion length of the electron and hole. The maximum electrical power output of the tandem TPV system, is defined by the maximum product of current density and voltage, i.e., = max{ × ( )} for 0 < < As shown in Fig. Comprehensive analysis of optimized near-field tandem thermophotovoltaic system The optimal configuration of the proposed near-field tandem TPV system is listed in Table To elucidate how the optimal configuration achieves the maximum performance, the absorbed spectral heat flux, the spectral photocurrent, and -characteristics are analyzed and compared with a bare case. As shown in Fig. The integrated spectral photocurrent appears as a short-circuit current in the -characteristics of the TPV cell. In Fig. Detailed physical mechanisms for the performance enhancement of the proposed near-field tandem TPV system can be explored by the contour plot of , , as shown in Fig. A large amount of radiative heat is transferred between the vacuum light line and the light line of the top cell, suggesting that near-field radiation through the frustrated mode largely contributes to the absorption in the top cell. As represented in Figs. where ∞ = 4 and the damping frequency of ITO, Γ = 0.1 eV To improve the conversion efficiency of the near-field tandem TPV system, the absorption of two subcells must be increased together to satisfy the current matching condition. In the proposed system, we exploit two different resonance modes. In the top cell, the surface mode supported by the SPP resonance in the ITO-vacuum single interface is the main physical mechanism of the absorption enhancement. Owing to the trapped waveguide mode formed in the thin TPV cell, the large photocurrent can be generated in the bottom cell. Individual effects of the thin-ITO film and the Au reflector on the radiative heat flux are provided in Section 4 of the Supplementary Material. To clearly demonstrate advantages of the tandem-cell-based NFTPV system compared to conventional single-cell system, two single-cells systems made of GaInAsSb or InAs cell {refer to Fig. where is the bandgap energy of the semiconductor. The first term of the right-hand side of Eq. ( implying that the difference between the photon energy and the bandgap energy causes the thermalization loss. The electrical and above-bandgap losses for the optimum single cases also can be estimated from Eqs. ( Firstly, the result of the loss analysis of the optimum tandem is compared with that of the optimum single GaInAsSb. Because the dark current of the InAs cell in the tandem TPV system is large, the electrical loss of the optimum tandem case is larger even though the open-circuit voltage of the tandem cell is enhanced satisfying the current matching condition. In addition, while the quasi-monochromatic radiation is absorbed in the top cell of the tandem TPV or single GaInAsSb cell, the bottom cell has multiple spectral peaks due to the trapped waveguide modes, which rather increases the above bandgap loss. However, the slightly higher conversion efficiency is achieved for the optimum case due to the significant advantage in the parasitic absorption loss, particularly in the sub-bandgap absorption. Moreover, the maximum electrical power output generated in the optimum tandem case is 1.4 times larger than the optimum single GaInAsSb case. Therefore, the overall performance of the NFTPV system with the optimum tandem cell is better than that of the optimum single GaInAsSb cell is used. The major difference in the loss analysis between the optimum tandem case and the optimum single InAs case is the above-bandgap loss. The optimum single InAs case shows the largest above-bandgap loss even though is tuned such that spp is located near the bandgap frequency of the InAs. Because the total thickness of a single InAs cell is the same as that of a tandem cell, thickness-dependent waveguide modes are excited in a way to improve the above-bandgap absorption of the InAs cell, similarly to the case of tandem cell. In fact, Fig. Contours of , absorbed in the top and bottom cells are plotted in Fig. We have analyzed a tandem-TPV-cell-based NFTPV system consisting of a thin-ITO-covered tungsten emitter and a GaInAsSb/InAs monolithic interconnected tandem TPV cell. To develop the simulation model of the proposed NFTPV system, firstly, the spatial distribution of absorbed near-field radiative heat flux was attained by separating the forward and backward waves in each subcell. We then calculated the spectral and spatial photocurrent generated in each subcell using a semi-analytically solved minority carrier's concentration distribution. With the genetic algorithm, the conversion efficiency of 35.6% and the electrical power output of 8.41 W/cm 2 were achieved at = 100 nm when the emitter and TPV cell are at 1500 K and 300 K, respectively. The optimal configuration of the NFTPV system satisfied the current matching of subcells, which is an essential design feature of achieving the high-performance multi-junction cells. We elucidated that the physical mechanism of the performance enhancement originates from two resonance modes, i.e., SPP resonance supported by the ITO-vacuum interface and waveguide mode excited in the thin tandem cell. Based on the loss analysis, it was found that the overall performance, including the conversion efficiency and the electrical power output of the tandem-cell-based NFTPV system, is superior compared to the single-cell-based NFTPV system. In addition, at far-to-near field vacuum gap distances, the proper utilization of two resonance modes can yield high-performance near-field tandem TPV systems, achieving current matching conditions. Since the simulation model developed in this study can be applied to emitters using multilayers or HMMs other than thin films, this work will facilitate the development of the further enhanced NFTPV system in the future. To validate the spectral radiative heat flux calculated by the energy flow split and the spectral photocurrent density simulated by the semi-analytic method, a near-field TPV system consisting of a GaSb/InAs tandem TPV cell and the tungsten emitter is introduced (see Fig. In this work, Temperature is T = 300K, Doping concentrations are N A,D = 10 18 cm -3 for two subcells and In order to obtain carrier lifetime τ <e,h> , effect of radiative recombination, Shockley-Read-Hall(SRH) trapassisted recombination , Intrinsic carrier concentration n i,Q is calculated from third row of Eq. ( Lorentz-Drude Oscillator model ( ∞ , ω LO , ω TO , γ, Γ = e meμe , and ω p = ( NAe 2 0 ∞me ) 1/2 needs to be obtained for quaternary compound using Vegard's law. m e and μ e are electron effective mass and mobility obtained from above and 0 is permittivity of the vacuum. ∞,Q , ω LO,Q , ω TO,Q and γ Q are driven from binary compound properties using Eq. ( The spectral radiative heat flux described in Fig. The surface plasmon polariton (SPP) resonance due to the ITO-vacuum interface and the waveguide mode due to the Au reflector separately contribute to the main increment of the absorption in the top cell and bottom cell, respectively. In the manuscript, we deal with the optimum case with thin-ITO covered emitter and Au backside reflector, and the bare case without ITO film and Au reflector (see Figs. configuration of single-cell-based near-field thermophotovoltaic systems. Comprehensive analysis of optimized near-field tandem thermophotovoltaic system