When modeling superconducting devices based on REBCO tapes and working near or above the critical current value (i.e. I > I c ), the power-law model is not always accurate. In our previous works, we proposed the overcritical current model, based on a combination of fast pulsed current measurements and finite element analysis. The overcritical current model was provided in the form of look-up tables and was validated experimentally. We showed that the overcritical current model could better reproduce experimental measurements than the power-law model, and that the power-law model predicts a faster quench than the overcritical current model. In this contribution, we propose the eta-beta model, a mathematical expression to model analytically the overcritical current model, based on measurements performed between 77 K and 90 K in self-field conditions. The proposed model is verified by comparing DC fault measurements with the results of numerical simulations using the eta-beta model to represent the electrical resistivity of the superconducting layer of REBCO tapes. High-temperature superconductor (HTS) materials in the form of Rare Earth Barium Copper Oxide (REBCO) commercial tapes hold immense potential for future applications such as hadron therapy One of the significant drawbacks of the power-law model is that it poorly describes the overcritical current regime (I > I c ) of the superconducting material, and other models remain empirical In our previous works, we developed the overcritical current model ρ OC (I, T ), based on fast pulsed current measurements and finite element analysis The model proposed in this work, named eta-beta model, uses a mathematical relationship that overcomes this problem. The mathematical expression of the overcritical current model is based on measurements performed between 77 K and 90 K, in self-field conditions. The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we outline the experimental methods and the characterization of the samples. In Section 3, we present the mathematical expression of the overcritical current model, we report the experimental data in the overcritical current regime and compare them with the power-law model. Section 4 provides a discussion on the fitting parameters for the overcritical current model and their typical values. In Section 5, the overcritical current model is validated by comparing DC fault measurements performed on silver-stabilized samples with the results of a 2-D electro-thermal model implemented in COMSOL Multiphysics. The experimental data in the overcritical current regime were obtained by combining ultra-fast pulsed current measurements and finite element analysis techniques developed in Current pulses up to I = 4 I c and as short as 20 μs were applied without destroying the samples. The detailed characteristics of the samples are given in Table To reproduce the dissipative behavior in the overcritical current regime, we propose a mathematical fitting model. We obtained the model proposed in this work (eta-beta model) by using the Uniform Current (UC) model on pulsed current measurements, presented in figure where ρ min = 10 -17 Ω • m (added to avoid numerical problems when the current is ∼ 0 A), ρ c = 10 -15 Ω • m, I c (T ) is the temperature-dependent critical current, and η(T ) and β(T ) the temperature-dependent fitting parameters. Equation ( , where ρ SC ηβ (I, T ) and ρ UC (I, T ) are the eta-beta model and the experimental data calculated at (I, T ), respectively, N meas is the number of data, and ρ UC,max (T ) and ρ UC,min (T ) are the maximum/minimum values of resistivity obtained from the UC model for the selected temperature T . The values of NRMSD ηβ (T) range between 1 and 12% for temperatures between 77 K to 90 K. For purpose of comparison, we also use the power-law model with a temperature-dependent critical current I c (T ). The power-law relationship is written as follows: where Ω is the cross section of the REBCO layer, E c = 1 μV • cm -1 is the electric field criterion and n is the constant power-law exponent. The critical current value I c (T ) in both models decreases linearly with the temperature with a relationship of the form: where I c,77 K is the critical current at 77 K in self-field conditions, and T c is the critical temperature Finally, for both the eta-beta and the power-law models, the normal state resistivity of REBCO ρ NS (T ) is added in parallel to that of the superconductor where k indicates the two models, namely the power-law model (ρ PWL ) and the overcritical current model (ρ ηβ ). The temperature dependence of the normal-state resistivity of REBCO is modeled with a simple linear relationship, i.e.: where ρ Tc ranges from 30 μΩ • cm to 100 μΩ • cm and α = 0.47 μΩ • cm • K -1 according to the literature In figure Such results corroborate the work done by Falorio et al. This section presents a detailed discussion about the fitting parameters η(T ) and β(T ) used in the ρ ηβ (I, T ) model. In figure We can fit a piecewise polynomial function of 2 nd and 1 st -degree on η(T ) and β(T ), respectively. For η(T ) the relationship can be written as follows: where T is the temperature of the REBCO material, T 1 and T 2 are the threshold temperatures below and above which η remains constant, and a i (with i = 0, 1, 2) are the polynomial coefficients. The parameter η max is determined by imposing a continuity condition such that η(T 2 ) = η max . The piecewise polynomial relationship for β(T ) is the following: where T is the temperature of the REBCO material, T 2 a threshold temperature above which β remains constant, and b i (with i = 0, 1) are the polynomial coefficients. The parameter β max is determined by imposing a continuity condition such that Table During the experiments, the sample and sample holder were immersed together in a liquid nitrogen bath (77 K). Prior to each limitation test, the current source circuit was used to measure the critical current of the sample, using 10-ms-long square current pulses. The total voltage drop between pin 1 and 38 was measured. A National Instruments card (NI-8255) was used for the data acquisition. For each pulse, the current amplitude was increased until the critical electric field criterion was reached (1 μV • cm -1 ). The measured critical current for sample SP02b, cut from the same spool as SP02, is I c = 109 A and the n-value is n = 24. After the critical current measurement, the sample was disconnected from the current source and connected to the voltage source to perform a DC limitation test. The voltage V s of the supercapacitor and the length of the pulse were set to the desired values. Differential measurements of the voltage drop between two adjacents voltage taps and the voltage drop between the two extreme taps were monitored during each measurement. Then, after the limitation test, the sample was disconnected again from the voltage source and reconnected to the current source in order to re-measure the I c and verify if the sample suffered degradation or not during the limitation test. In this work, we developed a 2-D longitudinal cross-section electro-thermal model in COMSOL Multiphysics where V (t) is the electric scalar potential, and σ(I, T ) = 1/ρ(I, T ) is the temperature-dependent electrical conductivity. We used the measured voltage V HTS (t) as a voltage excitation applied on the left boundary of the tape (dashed red line), while on the right boundary of the tape (dashed purple line) we imposed a ground (V = 0). Finally, on the remaining boundaries of the conductor, we have: The heat equation is solved on the 2-D domain represented in figure where on the left-hand side of the equation, we have the mass density ρ mass (T ), the specific heat capacity C p (T ) and the thermal conductivity k(T ). On the right-hand side of the equation, there is the heat source term and a cooling term. The term σ(I, T )(-∇ 2 V ) represents the heat source Joule losses, where the voltage gradient ∇V is calculated from equation For the REBCO layer, we considered both the overcritical current model ρ ηβ (I, T ) and the power-law model. For sample SP02 we implemented the overcritical current model ρ ηβ (I, T ) according to the parameters η(T ) and β(T ) in Table Note that if Φ(x) = 1 the tape is perfectly homogeneous; if Φ(x) = 0 the tape has no superconducting properties. In our model, Φ(x) is a piecewise function composed of N constant intervals and representing the N intervals along the tape: The parameters Φ i (with i = 1, 2, ..., N ) are the coefficients that specify the local deviation of the local critical current I c (T, i) from the nominal value of I c,nom (T ). For example, specifying Φ i = 1.1 and Φ j = 1.2 means that the i-th and j-th regions are such that I c (T, i) = 1.1 I c,nom (T ) and I c (T, j) = 1.2 I c,nom (T ), respectively. The parameters Φ i are normally distributed (Gaussian distribution) around a mean Φ av and with a standard deviation σ Φ,% The average I c,av (T ) of the critical current distribution I c (T, x) instead, depends on the degree of inhomogeneity. For instance, if I c,nom = 109 A, an inhomogeneity degree of 20 % implies I c,av (T ) = I c,nom /(1 -0.2) 136 A. By referring to the normally distributed parameters Φ i in equation 1. This means that the average of the critical current distribution I c,av (T ) is: and the minimum of the critical current distribution corresponds to the measured critical current I c,nom (T ): Finally, we selected N = 30 sections, which means around 3 mm per section for our setup measurements. In reality, the variation of I c occurs at a much smaller scale. We choose of using N = 30 sections as a compromise, in order to obtain some insights of the influence of I c non-uniformity while keeping the computation time reasonable. In Figure A possible explanation since the current regime explored in these measurements is near the critical current of the tape (109 A) and the critical current distribution is not uniform, the tape does not quench uniformly and different regions quench at different time. To verify this hypothesis, we implemented an inhomogeneous critical current distribution, as described in the previous section. For our simulations, we selected an inhomogeneity degree of 3 %, which means I c,nom = 109 A, I c,av (T ) = I c,nom /(1 -0.03) 112 A, Φ av,3 % 1.03 and σ Φ,3 % = 0.01. For both DC limitation tests, an inhomogeneous critical current distribution improves the matching between the simulated and experimental current profile. These results confirm our previous hypothesis about the impact of the inhomogeneity on the simulated current; an inhomogenoeus critical current distribution improves the matching between simulations and experiments at 2 ms. Specifically, since different regions quench at different time, the overall resistance of the tape is lower and the current is higher, which explains the smoother profile of the simulated current. Further remarks on the simulation results are necessary. Firstly, there are still some discrepancies around 2 ms, which are probably due to the difficulty of knowing the exact degree of inhomogeneity and the exact position of the defects in the tape. A precise knowledge of the critical current distribution may further improve the matching between experiments and simulations. However, we verified that simply changing the degree of non-uniformity of I c (up to 20 %) does not improve the agreement with experimental results. Secondly, the current rise at the beginning of the simulated current pulse is too sharp with respect to the measured current. This difference may be due to an incorrect compensation of the voltage induced in the voltage tap during the measurements. The simulation results, however, confirm that the eta-beta model reproduces better the temporal profile of the measured current accurately for the two electric fields level considered, especially the current peak around 1 ms. In this paper we introduced the eta-beta ρ ηβ (I, T ) model as an alternative to the power-law model. The advantage of the ρ ηβ (I, T ) model is its extended range of validity in the overcritical current regime. Through numerical simulations, we validated the ρ ηβ (I, T ) model with DC fault current measurements. In Note that if σ Φ,% goes to 0, the critical current distribution approaches perfect homogeneity. According to the statistic of the normal distribution, the values less than three standard deviation (±3 σ Φ,% ) away from the average (I c,av (T )) account for 99.73 % of the set