Thin transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) sustain superconductivity at large in-plane magnetic fields due to Ising spin-orbit protection which locks their spins in an out-of-plane orientation. Here we use thin NbSe2 as superconducting electrodes laterally coupled to graphene -making a planar, all van der Waals (vdW) two-dimensional Josephson junction (2DJJ). We map out the behavior of these novel devices with respect to temperature, gate voltage, and both out-of-plane and in-plane magnetic fields. Notably, the 2DJJs sustain supercurrent up to parallel fields as high as 8.5 T, where the Zeeman energy EZ rivals the Thouless energy E T h , a regime hitherto inaccessible in graphene. As the parallel magnetic field H increases, the 2DJJ's critical current is suppressed, and in a few cases undergoes a suppression and recovery. We explore the behavior in H by considering theoretically two effects: A 0-π transition induced by tuning of the Zeeman energy, and the unique effect of ripples in an atomically thin layer which create a small spatially varying perpendicular component of the field. 2DJJs have potential utility as flexible probes for two-dimensional superconductivity in a variety of materials, and introduce high H as a newly accessible experimental knob. By coupling graphene to exfoliated superconductors such as NbSe 2 [1-3] it is possible to realize Josephson junctions where both the normal and superconductor materials are two-dimensional (2D). Such junctions should sustain high in-plane magnetic fields. Thin NbSe 2 retains superconductivity at very high in-plane fields due to a combination of suppressed orbital depairing and Ising protection against pair-breaking [4, 5], and can sustain magnetic fields above 8 T without any measureable effect on the gap size 2D Josephson devices are a useful platform for the study of finite momentum superconducting states: Cooper pairs may survive in the spin-polarized Fermi surface created at high magnetic fields by attaining a finite center-of-mass momentum Finite Cooper-pair momentum q = 2E Z /hv F is dictated by the Zeeman energy E Z = 0.5gμ B H, where g is the Landé factor, v F is the Fermi velocity, and μ B is the Bohr magneton. The resulting oscillation of the order parameter within the junction can create π-phase junctions, where the transition to the π-phase is found in junction lengths L determined by the multiples of π/q. Weak links characterized by large g-factors have shown signatures of finite momentum Cooper pairing We study planar NbSe 2 -Graphene-NbSe 2 junctions, fabricated by transferring cracked NbSe 2 on exfoliated graphene (see Figure In a this device we find that the supercurrent exhibits a pronounced suppression-recovery pattern, a feature which may be associated either with a 0-π transition, or with with the effect of graphene ripples. We begin by characterizing the transport of a 2DJJ. Figure The Thouless energy, E T h , defined as the inverse of the traversal time of the junction, is an energy scale characteristic of normal transport, which also governs the superconducting properties of Josephson c. Temperature dependence of the critical current of Junction A (blue dots) and a fit to Eq. 1 (orange line), taken with gate voltage of -20 V. d.,e.,f. Differential resistance of Junction A as a function of bias current and external perpendicular magnetic field, taken with gate voltages of 12 V, -4 V (Dirac point), and -20 V, respectively. All the panels show data at H = 0 T and T = 30 mK. junctions It is predicted that in infinitely long metallic diffusive SNS junctions, with perfect contacts, at zero temperature eI C R N = αE T h (R N is the junction normal resistance In the long junction limit at low temperatures theory predicts where α 1 = α 2 = 10.82 and b = 1.3. Previous attempts to fit the temperature dependence in SGS junctions led to findings of α 1,2 = 1.1 -2.9 in Using the above, we find the period to be ≈ 0.7 mT -larger than the observed period, likely due to flux focusing Since the junction is sensitive to out-of-plane fields H ⊥ on the scale of a few hundreds of μT, extreme care is needed when aligning H ⊥ and H in our vector magnet to the sample geometric tilt. We do this by measuring the out-of-plane interference pattern, at any given H . At low fields, of up to 1.5 T in Junction A, the interference pattern shows a clearly distinguishable central lobe (Fig. We now turn our attention to Fig. The salient features of the data are therefore (a) exponential decay of the critical current at low field In what follows, we discuss the physics in our 2DJJ by considering both the parallel field-tunable Zeeman splitting of the graphene band structure, and the orbital effect of out-of-plane ripples in the graphene Lacking an intrinsic spin-orbit coupling, graphene dispersion is affected by magnetic field only through Zeeman splitting, where the Zeeman energy is analogous to the exchange interaction in SFS JJs In the latter, the superconducting order parameter in the ferromagnetic layer varies as the product of an an exponential decay and an oscillatory term: where ψ(x) is the order parameter at the position x along the junction, ψ i is the order parameter at the superconducting lead, and k 1 , k 2 are the inverse characteristic length scales associated with the decay and oscillation. In the diffusive limit, they are both given by 1 where D is the diffusion coefficient. The order parameter thus experiences a decay accompanied by oscillation, with zeros occurring periodically when Lk 2 = π/2 + nπ, or E Z = (π/2 + nπ) 2 E T h . This behavior of the order parameter leads to an oscillatory decay of the critical current of the junction. Following this intuition, critical current of an SGS junction in a parallel magnetic field is thus expected to undergo an exponential suppression at low fields -in agreement with our observations. The oscillatory component of the wave function leads to a 0-π transition: a change of the equilibrium phase difference between the two superconducting leads, accompanied by a reversal of the supercurrent. Using the analytical solution of the Usadel equations in an SGS junction From the experimentally observed transition field of 2.8 T, assuming g = 2 we find E T h = 64μeV . This falls between the order of magnitude expected for E T h of hundreds of μeV which we extract from f.-h. I C vs. H ⊥ for H = 0, 4.1 and 6.2 T, line cuts from the simulation in (c) normal regime transport properties, and E * T h of tens of μeV extracted from I C R N . Recalling that a lower effective E T h has been attributed to Andreev reflection across an imperfect S-N interface, we point out that there is to the best of our knowledge no theory addressing how this would effect the Zeeman physics in the junction. In the data in Fig. We now turn to the orbital effects associated with the locally varying perpendicular components of H . These variations may be caused either by graphene height variations, or by disruptions to the parallel field due to the Meissner effect, which diverts flux lines around the superconducting electrodes (flux-focusing). Because both ripples and flux-focusing give rise to a spatially varying perpendicular field component, their effect on the electric current is similar. For concreteness we give an in-depth discussion of the ripple scenario, but note that underlying mechanism could in principle also be flux-focusing. Using the same model discussed previously, we distinguish between the effects of short and long wavelength ripples where η is the average ripple amplitude within the junction, and λ is the wavelength (or the limiting junction dimension if the ripple extends beyond the junction). For the typical short wavelength ripple seen in graphene on SiO 2 , parallel fields of order 50 T are required to obtain an entire flux quantum within a ripple. However the cumulative effect of many such ripples causes a faster decay of the critical current which can create exponential-like behavior, similar to the Zeeman effect 2DJJs in a parallel field are highly sensitive to long-wavelength height variations As a long wavelength feature accumulates much more flux, it is possible to reach a flux quantum given a few T parallel field and a small height variation of η ≈ 0.1 nm within the junction. We note that based on AFM and STM studies, it is difficult to tell whether such sub nm height variations are present over micron length scales. Such geometry is physically conceivable due to strain or curvature of the substrate, and cannot be ruled out. We show the simulated supercurrent in a sample ripple configuration containing ripples in Fig. These in general cause a sharper decay of critical current with parallel field Since we expect Zeeman and ripple effects to coexist, we present a compound simulation which considers them both (Fig. The lobe structure at H = 0, 4. ), exhibits the experimentally observed transition between Fraunhofer-like and SQUID-like profiles. Finally, we observe how the application of H affects the gate dependence of the critical current (Fig. The observed gate dependence of the interference pattern shows that at H around the suppressionrecovery field of 2.8T, the junction enters a new regime where the critical current survives in patches at fluctuating gate values. Similar phenomenology has been observed in ballistic graphene JJs at high perpendicular field, and attributed to chaotic billiards due to cyclotron orbits reflecting from the graphene edge Within the Zeeman effect interpretation, it could be due to local gate driven fluctuations around the 0-π transition as in We conclude that the 2DJJ architecture allows the study of graphene Josephson junctions at high parallel magnetic fields, where supercurrent is sensitive to both the Zeeman effect and sub-nm graphene height variations. Junction currents evolve from a Fraunhofer-like to a SQUID-like interference pattern. We observe a supercurrent suppression and recovery feature which may be associated with a Zeeman driven 0 -π transition, or with the accumulation of a single flux quantum within a μm-wavelength ripple. While in the present measurements it is difficult to distinguish between the two effects, future experiments, with graphene placed on hBN, are expected to suppress the ripple contribution. In the future it will be interesting to consider devices of the 2DJJ architecture utilizing different 2D materials as contacts and weak links. For example, devices where graphene inherits a spin-orbit term from a TMD substrate. The combination of significant spin-orbit and high parallel magnetic fields in the context of a Josephson junction, could give rise to topological effects The authors wish to thank M. Aprili, Y. 1 Supplementary Section: Measurement and field alignment procedure The system studied here, an SNS junction using graphene as the weak link between NbSe 2 SC leads, is very sensitive to the presence of perpendicular fields on the scale of hundreds of μT. When applying parallel magnetic field, perpendicular field can also be present, either from a small misalignment of the sample within the magnet, or from the presence of vortices and trapped magnetic flux in the leads, in the junction or in the magnet itself. At low parallel magnetic fields, the interference pattern of the supercurrent with the application of perpendicular field shows a clear maximum at zero applied field. Thus, it is possible to track the shift of this maximum with applied parallel field and find the sample misalignment. In the measurements reported in this work we have done so, and found the required amount of perpendicular field to compensate for this effect. The interference patterns reported here are always with respect to the corrected zero perpendicular field. At higher magnetic fields, this correction is not enough, as remnant field, coming from vortices in the leads and trapped flux in the magnet affects the sample. To correct for that, we assume that a small change in the parallel field should not create a large change in the interference pattern of the junction. Based on this assumption, when analyzing the data, we use the following alignment procedure: We shift the interference pattern measured at a given parallel field by a some amount of perpendicular field. We calculate the sum of the squared differences between an this pattern and the pattern measured in the previous parallel field. We repeat this for a series of shifts and find for which shift this difference is minimal. We choose this shift as the correct alignment for the pattern, and repeat with the pattern taken at the next step of the parallel field. The above procedure was utilized for junction A. For other junctions, we could not determine the orientation of H ⊥ =0T at high values of H due to jumps in the interference pattern. Therefore we used the maximal critical current I max C as an indicator of the junction critical current. 2 Supplementary Section: Simulation of ripples in graphene We assume the presence of height variations in graphene, and in the absence of the Zeeman effect (taking , theoretically calculate the critical current expected for Junction A, shown in main text Fig. The specific result we chose to present in the main text was generated from the following ripple profile: η(x, y) = 1.25 sin 64.6y + 1.7164 sin 3.5x -0.7+0.45 sin 37.3y + 2.136 sin 2x+1.3 sin 2y + 0.3224 sin 0.1x + 0.03 Ripple amplitude is given in nm, while the coordinates x,y are normalized and range between -0.5,0.5. The profiles were chosen with wavelengths much larger than 50 nm, in order to accommodate the use of the wide-junction approximation We present critical current measurements from devices B,C,D, showing I C vs H ⊥ (Junction B has a weak link of bilayer graphene, the rest are monolayer). This exhibits a Fraunhofer-like interference at To fabricate a graphene -NbSe 2 Josephson junction (JJ), we first exfoliate graphene on markered SiO 2 and locate suitable flakes. Next, NbSe 2 is exfoliated on PDMS gel and examined to find flakes which are a few layers thick and have an observable crack, less than 500 nm wide. Chosen NbSe 2 flakes are transferred onto graphene using the viscoelastic dry-transfer method data in 3 panels (a)-(d) comes from a different measurement than panel (f), taken on the same device, and show a slightly different lobe structure