Temperature and pressure are essential parameters in the synthesis, evaluation, and application of functional materials. This study proposes the addition of a heating function to a high-pressure diamond anvil cell (DAC) with in-situ measurement probes. The proposed DAC allows for simultaneous control of temperature and pressure within the sample space and can be used to synthesize functional materials under extreme conditions. The various components, namely the heater, thermometer, and measurement probes, were fabricated with a boron-doped diamond epitaxial film and could be used repeatedly. The developed DAC was used to successfully conduct the high-pressure annealing of La(O,F)BiS2 single crystal and the high-pressure synthesis of EuFBiS2 superconductors. The proposed technique shows promise for further exploration of superconductors to broaden the research field. Superconductors are promising materials for various applications such as energy-saving products, super-fast trains, and high-resolution magnetic sensors. However, superconductivity can only be achieved within limited conditions under a critical temperature (Tc) of less than 20 K for NbTi-and Nb3Sn-based materials Thus, the development of high-Tc superconductors at lower pressure is important for practical application. The synthesis of superconducting hydrides is affected by several issues. First, electrical measurement probes are required to observe the superconductivity of the sample under extreme conditions. Specialized DACs with boron-doped diamond (BDD) probes have been developed to function stably under high pressure due to their superior chemical and mechanical hardness These BDD probes can be used for repeated resistivity measurements until the diamond anvil itself is broken. An observation of the superconducting phase with Tc of 25 K on sulfur hydrides at a high pressure above 120 GPa has been successfully demonstrated using the DAC with BDD probes The second issue is the need for a high-temperature generation method to react the hydrogen and host metal under high pressure. Laser heating is generally used to synthesize superconducting hydrides and achieve high temperatures beyond 5000°C This study proposes a high-temperature and high-pressure sample synthesis platform with an in-situ electrical transport measurement function. As shown in the schematic image of Fig. The measurement probes, resistive heater, and resistive thermometer are fabricated from a BDD film homoepitaxially grown from the diamond anvil surface and could all be used repeatedly. A typical circuit schematic of the proposed DAC with BDD probes, heater, and the thermometer is presented in Fig. The resistances of the sample and thermometer are measured using a standard four-probe method, and the generated temperature is determined based on thermometer resistance using a calibration table. The fabrication of the BDD components was conducted via a combination of electron beam lithography and microwave plasma-assisted chemical vapor deposition (Fig. The fabricated anvil was subjected to a heating test at ambient pressure. The calibration table to determine the temperature based on thermometer resistance was established by measuring the resistance-temperature (R-T) relationship in a tube furnace under N2 gas flow to avoid oxidation of the diamond. The temperature was measured using a thermocouple placed near the diamond anvil. The thermometer exhibited metallic behavior until ~800 K, as shown in the temperature dependence of resistance in Fig. Single crystals of La(O,F)BiS2 were grown using an alkali metal flux according to a method similar to previous studies The metallization during high-pressure annealing is considered a key factor in understanding the unique feature on La(O,F)BiS2. The high-pressure synthesis experiment was conducted for a layered superconductor EuFBiS2. According to the previous study Starting materials of EuS, Bi2S3, and BiF3 were mixed in a nominal composition. The mixture was placed onto the diamond anvil, and the DAC was prepared using ZrO2 as the backup plate material. The temperature was plotted against the resistance of the starting material mixture under 3.1 GPa, as shown in Fig. A magnified view of the R-T curve of the sample under a magnetic field after the heating revealed that the sample resistance started to decrease from 8.6 K (Fig. of the observed superconductivity. The measured Bc2 is drastically higher than that reported in previous results without heating Further, the reusability of the BDD components was demonstrated after heating tests under pressure. The developed DAC was successfully used to conduct the high-pressure annealing of a La(O,F)BiS2 single crystal and the high-pressure synthesis of EuFBiS2. Higher temperature and pressure generation are expected as the DAC is developed further, promising to synthesize high-Tc superconductors. 