We report a correlative microscopy study of a sample containing three stacks of InGaN/GaN quantum dots (QDs) grown at different substrate temperature, each stack consisting of 3 layers of QDs. Decreasing the substrate temperature along the growth axis leads to the proliferation of structural defects. However, the luminescence intensity increases towards the surface, in spite of the higher density of threading dislocations, revealing that the QD layers closer to the substrate behave as traps for non-radiative point defects. During atom probe tomography experiments combined with in-situ microphotoluminescence, it was possible to isolate the optical emission of a single QD located in the topmost QD stack, closer to the sample surface. The single QD emission line displayed a spectral shift during the experiment confirming the relaxation of elastic strain due to material evaporation during atom probe tomography. III-Nitride LEDs have reached their maturity and are now a standard commercial product that finds wide application, for example in lighting and signaling. However, some unsolved problems remain. The efficiency droop that appears associated with Auger phenomena sets a performance limit In this work, we analyze the optical performance of 3 stacks of InGaN/GaN QDs grown at different substrate temperature, each stack consisting of 3 layers of InGaN QDs. Lowering the substrate temperature leads to an increased density of structural defects The test structure was synthesized by plasma-assisted molecular beam epitaxy (PAMBE), and the growth process was monitored by reflection high-energy electron diffraction (RHEED). In order to explore the role of the growth temperature and material quality on the optical properties of InGaN QDs, we designed sample containing 3 stacks of 3 layers of self-assembled InxGa1-xN/GaN (2 nm/12 nm) QDs, separated by 70 nm of GaN [see schematic description in Fig. After deposition of the QD material, the growth was interrupted for 15 s, resulting in a rough surface morphology observed by RHEED. Then, the GaN barriers were deposited with a Ga flux slightly higher than the stoichiometric value. Before the growth of the following QD layer, the Ga excess accumulated at the GaN growth was consumed with active nitrogen during 20 s. STEM studies were performed in an aberration-corrected FEI Titan 80-300 microscope operated at 200 kV, using high-angle annular dark field (HAADF) and bright field (BF) detectors. CL mapping was carried out in an Attolight CL microscope. The acceleration voltage was 10 kV and the beam current was  5 nA. The luminescence was collected through an integrated microscope objective (NA:0.7). By scanning the sample, the optical spectra of each pixel are recorded on a CCD camera through a dispersive spectrometer with 400 mm focal length (grating for spectral measurements: 150 grooves/mm blazed at 500 nm with 2 binning; grating for CL mapping: 600 grooves/mm blazed at 300 nm with 8 binning). Secondary ion mass spectrometry (SIMS) investigations were performed in a SIMS magnetic selector instrument from CAMECA Needle-shaped tips required for APT and lamella specimens for TEM were prepared by scanning electron microscope/focused ion beam (SEM/FIB) using a Zeiss Nvision40 and a Zeiss Crossbeam550, respectively. To extract the region of interest, the as-grown sample was previously coated with a 500-nm-thick Pt layer using a GATAN PECS system. Lift-out procedures were carried out with Ga + ions accelerated 30 kV. Annular milling and lamella thinning procedures were performed with an acceleration voltage of 30 kV in a first stage, and then 2 kV for the final milling and cleaning stages, to minimize the thickness of the amorphized region The samples were analyzed in a homemade laser-assisted tomographic atom probe system coupled with a micro-photoluminescence (μPL) bench, also referred to as a photonic atom probe (PAP) To confirm the presence of In in the ultrathin InGaN QD layers, and assess the defectpromoted diffusion of In along the growth axis, we have used secondary ion mass spectroscopy (SIMS). Results are reported in Fig. In order to analyze the indium distribution in the InGaN/GaN QDs and the luminescence at the scale of a single emitter, field-emission tip specimens were fabricated and characterized by La-APT. FIB prepared tips were first observed in TEM, as illustrated in Fig. . During these preliminary measurements, we used a repetition rate of 3.8 MHz, adjusting the laser power in the range of 25 to 600 μW. In these spectra, it is possible to identify the emission of GaN at 356 nm and a narrow line around 390 nm, which is assigned to InGaN QDs. As previously observed During the APT measurements coupled with μPL, the laser frequency was reduced to 340 kHz for the reasons that are well explained in ref. The evolution of the peak wavelength and FWHM of the QD line during the evaporation of the tip is described in the Fig. Figure The distribution of electric field in the tip can cause artifacts in the measurement of alloy composition Plane-views of the indium composition of the second topmost (outlined with a blue rectangle in Fig. Coming back to the structural properties of the sample, there is an important degradation of the structural quality along the growth axis due to the progressive reduction of substrate temperature during the growth. These results, illustrated in Fig. To summarize, we have performed a correlative microscopy study of 3 stacks of 3 layers of self-assembled InxGa1-xN/GaN (2 nm/12 nm) QDs, separated by 70 nm of GaN, and each of the three stacks grown at different substrate temperature. Although lowering the substrate temperature leads to an increased density of structural defects, we observed higher emission intensity in the topmost layers, grown at lower temperature. This result highlights the relevance of inserting InGaN underlayers to bury non-radiative point defects. During atom probe tomography measurement of the topmost QD layers, it was possible to resolve one single QD emission line. The single QD line displayed a spectral shift during the experiment confirming the relaxation of elastic strain due to material evaporation. 