Coupled-resonator microstrip filters are among the most versatile filter topologies. A known design approach uses full-wave electromagnetic simulations to determine the coupling coefficient between resonators as a function of their relative position. This could be done using time-domain simulations using a fast Fourier transform (FFT) to extract the couplings from the S parameters obtained from timedomain signals. However, this approach has a poor performance in terms of resolution and specially for weak couplings, leading to unreasonably long simulation times. To overcome this, we introduce a technique to obtain the couplings directly from time signals, without moving to the frequency domain. This procedure works for strong and weak couplings, with much shorter simulation times and a reduced simulation domain over the FFT approach. This technique is used to design coupled resonator filter efficiently from time domain simulations. We implement this procedure using the finite-difference timedomain framework using an open source solver and discuss our implementation. We show that its results are very similar to previously published ones obtained from frequency domain simulations, even in the case of very weak couplings. Finally, we design and measure a filter to show the good performance of the proposed approach. Coupled resonator filters This work was partially supported by the Grant PICT 2016-1925 and the International Cooperation Project CNRS-CONICET MOSIME. of research for the last decades. A usual synthesis approach is to start with the desired filter response and obtain the required coupling coefficients that yield this response. These include the inner coupling coefficients In Fig. It is important to mention that, as the coupling decreases, the frequencies f -and f + become closer to each other. This means that the frequency resolution required to extract these couplings becomes increasingly large as the couplings decrease. Another important observation is that (1) is very sensitive to small variations in f + and f -, meaning that a small error in estimating them, will produce a large variation of the coupling coefficient K. The procedure described in the previous paragraph can be used to experimentally measure the coupling coefficient of microstrip resonators. It can also be used to extract the coupling coefficient in frequency domain simulators. Depending on the simulator used, the downside of a frequency domain approach is that it requires the simulation of a large number of discrete frequencies near the resonance frequency or relying on an effective interpolation of the spectrum. Implementing this procedure from time domain simulations, however, will introduce several complications. A straightforward approach would be to obtain an estimate of the S 2,1 parameter using the Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) of the input and output signals. However, it is well known that the frequency resolution attainable when using periodogram-type estimators depends on the total number of samples available. In fact, the theoretical frequency resolution of the periodogram is 1/N , where N is the number of samples of the time signal. This resolution is poor compared to other approaches which achieve a much better resolution with a substantially smaller number of samples. Furthermore, it provides biased and inconsistent frequency estimations Finally, to estimate the transfer function we must perform the quotient of two inconsistent estimators, which further increases the final estimator variance In this paper we propose a technique to extract the coupling coefficient between microstrip resonators using time-domain simulations, which overcomes many of the difficulties mentioned in the previous paragraph. This technique will work for both strong couplings and weak couplings, where using the FFT is impractical. In addition, in the strong coupling regime, where using the FFT approach is possible, the proposed technique will require much shorter simulation times and a reduced simulation domain. In principle it is possible to apply this technique to many resonator topologies, specially those which are built from half-wavelength resonators, such as, hairpin resonators, square and rectangular open-loop resonators, among others (see In the proposed technique, one of the resonators is excited directly by injecting a current pulse at one of its edges. Then, the voltage time signal on the other resonator is measured by integrating the electric field between the ground plane and the resonator. After processing the measured voltage, the resonant frequencies are extracted from the signal by applying a super-resolution technique In the past, there have been works which use super-resolution techniques for the extraction of frequency domain information from time-domain simulations, but to the best of our knowledge they have not been applied to the analysis of resonant microstrip circuits or microstrip filter design. For example, in the authors use super-resolution techniques on FDTD signals to extract frequency-dependent equivalent-circuit parameters of microstrip multiconductor transmission lines. Other approaches to extract frequency domain information from FDTD signals are for example The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section II we discuss the proposed approach to extract the couplings. We also review the procedure to extract the external quality factor, which is also required to design filters. In Section III we compare the proposed approach to previously published results by others authors and to measurements. Finally, in Section IV we present some closing remarks. In this section we describe the procedure to extract the coupling coefficient between two identical microstrip resonators which have a resonance frequency f 0 . The coupling strength is controlled by how the resonators are laid out relative to each other. To elicit a resonant response, one of the resonators is excited injecting a current pulse between the ground plane and the microstrip resonator. This is done via a planar current source on one of the edges of the resonator. By directly injecting the excitation in the resonator, the feed lines are avoided, reducing the simulation domain size and avoiding the perturbation of the feed lines. In Fig. where f p is a parameter which controls the time duration/bandwidth of the pulse. It is required that required to obtain the coupling coefficient can be extracted. To do this, the voltage is measured at the center of the other resonator by numerical integration of the vertical field between the ground plane and the microstrip. Since the excitation pulse will have an approximately flat frequency content in the range of interest, the resonant peaks in |S 2,1 | will be present in the raw voltage signal measured at the output resonator. Hence, it is not necessary to compute any S parameters, we can extract the frequencies directly from the voltage signal measured at the output resonator. In Fig. Using the voltage signal, the spectral peaks are extracted. In short, the time signal is downsampled : : : Output pulse The resonance extraction procedure, which we now describe, is summarized in Fig. Thus, the amplitude of the input pulse normalized by its zero frequency value is: From ( where f 0 is the resonance frequency of the resonators and f is a parameter which controls the bandwidth of the filter. The requirement for f is that it provide sufficient attenuation of the remains of the resonant peaks that are present near 2f 0 . In our examples we parameterize f in terms of the bandwidth of the filter to be designed B as: where 2 ≤ α ≤ 5 are reasonable values. This is because the coupling values required are related to the bandwidth of the filter. For stronger couplings, the frequencies f + and f -which appear around f 0 will be separated from f 0 . This means that the double frequency resonances which appear around 2f 0 will be closer to f 0 and will have a large chance of interfering with the estimation. For this reason, smaller values of α are more convenient for stronger couplings. On the contrary, for weak couplings, the peaks will be very close to f 0 and a larger value of α will be better to make sure that the bandpass filter does not suppress one of the peaks, if there is a small error in the estimation of the resonance frequency f 0 . Finally, once the signal is properly filtered, the frequencies of the two resonant peaks are found by using a super-resolution algorithm. To estimate the frequency peaks we use ESPRIT based on the correlation matrix implementation using the forward-backward approach To extract the external quality factor it is more efficient to use the scattering parameters obtained from the FFT of the transient time signals. For completeness, we briefly review the procedure here and discuss our implementation in gprMax. To extract the external coupling coefficient a single resonator is excited using the chosen feed method for the filter topology. Then, the S 1,1 parameter of this circuit is obtained and, from there, the external quality factor is obtained using the group delay as where ω 0 is the resonance angular frequency of the resonator. Now, to extract the S 1,1 parameter we proceed in two stages. In the first stage, we extract an incident voltage V inc by using the setup in Fig. In this setup, a short microstrip segment is excited in the middle using the feed model in Fig. parameter is obtained from the FFT of the voltage waves as where F is the Fourier Transform of the time signals. In this section we study the performance the proposed approach using time domain simulations. In Section III-B we compare our results for high and low couplings to simulations presented in other papers. Then in Section III-C we design and build a filter to validate the procedure using real measurements. All the examples are presented for hairpin filters which are one of the most representative examples, but other resonators could also be considered with similar results. For both sections we parameterize the shape of the hairpin resonators according to Fig. As mentioned before, all our FDTD simulations were carried out in gprMax x/y plane. The simulation domain is always terminated in a PML with a thickness of 10 cells using the standard PML formulation of gprMax For the extraction of the external quality factor, the procedure outlined in Section II-B is used (see Fig. All the simulations were done using the dielectric smoothing option enabled, which is fundamental for accurate results. All microstrips are modeled as zero-thickness perfect electric conductor (PEC) strips except for the measured filter, where copper is used. We now apply the proposed procedure to extract the four different types of couplings of hairpin resonators which can be seen in Fig. The largest difference appears in the case of type 2 mixed couplings, where the worst difference is around 0.25mm for a coupling of K ≈ 0.014. In this section we build a filter using the proposed approach and we compare the simulation of the built filter with the measurements. We chose a 5th order Butterworth filter of center frequency f c = 3.75GHz, a bandwidth B = 350MHz, and with 50Ω tapped-line feed These values are converted to the required couplings via the following equations This leads to the following required coupling coefficients: The width of the resonator is chosen to be w = 1.5mm (characteristic impedance around 75Ω) and g = 2w. The resonator length L was chosen to be L = 9.9mm. For all the simulations the cell size are To extract the external quality factor, we simulated the feed line and the first resonator from Fig. Using Figs. 11 and 12 the hairpin separation and tapping points were selected. In order to simulate the terization can be seen in Fig. filters, we needed to set the loss model for the substrate. Since we cannot choose a constant loss tangent model for gprMax, we used a second order Debye model which we tuned so that the dielectric constant and loss tangent were close to the values of the substrate in the prescribed frequency range. The model for the permittivity used is therefore: where τ 1 = 9.8 × 10 -11 s, τ 2 = 1.56 × 10 -11 s, ∆ 1 = ∆ 2 = 0.0164, inf = 3.5. Using this loss model, the value of L was adjusted by numerical simulations to optimize the response of the filter, starting from the initial value L = L. The feed model used for the filter was the same as for the extraction of the external quality factor. The feed line length and horizontal clearance around the filter was 100 cells (including the PML) and the position of the current source and voltage sensor was the same as for the external quality factor. The initial and final values after this optimization can be seen in Table In this journal we have presented a procedure to extract the coupling coefficient between microstrip resonators for the design of filters by using time domain simulations and super-resolution techniques.