We numerically implement the concept of thermal radiation pumps in realistic photonic circuits and demonstrate their efficiency to control the radiation current, emitted between two reservoirs with equal temperature. The proposed pumping scheme involves a cyclic adiabatic modulation of two parameters that control the spectral characteristics of the photonic circuit. We show that the resulting pumping cycle exhibits maximum radiation current when a cyclic modulation of the system is properly engineered to be in the proximity of a resonance degeneracy in the parameter space of the photonic circuit. A developed Floquet scattering framework, which in the adiabatic limit boils down to the analysis of an instantaneous scattering matrix, is offering an engineering tool for designing and predicting the performance of such thermal pumps. Our predictions are confirmed by time-domain simulations invoking an adiabatically driven photonic cavity. The subfield of thermal photonics is attracting a lot of attention due to the rapid technological progress in nanophotonics, and the promise that these developments can be utilized for thermal radiation management. Along these lines, an important milestone for thermal radiation management is the implementation of photonic protocols that allow for a non-reciprocal heat transfer. The majority of these studies rely on magneto-optical effects The structure of the paper is as follows. In the next section we present the Floquet scattering formalism and analyze in detail the specific case of adiabatic pumping. Furthermore, utilizing an ISM approximation, we identify conditions which will lead to the design of efficient pumping circles. Based on the insights gained from the ISM Floquet formalism, in section , we design an adiabatic thermal radiation pump using a photonic circuit consisting of a periodically modulated microcavity. The direct time-domain calculations of the radiated thermal current confirm nicely the expectations, thus establishing the ISM Floquet formalism as a useful tool for the design of efficient pumping cycles. Our conclusions are presented at the last section of the paper. FIG. We consider two thermal reservoirs α = 1, 2 at temperature T α that exchange thermal energy via a periodically modulated photonic circuit. The reservoirs emit radiation with amplitudes θ + α (ω) that satisfy the condition where • indicates a thermal ensemble average, and |θ + α (ω)]| 2 describes the mean number of ω-photons injected from the α -th thermal reservoir to the circuit. The mean photon number is Θα and Φ α (ω) is a spectral filter function. The later can be used to control the spectral emissivity of the thermal reservoirs and can be achieved via the deposition of photonic crystals that support bandgaps, or their coupling to the photonic circuit via a waveguide or a cavity with cut-off frequencies, etc. We further assume that the circuit is periodically driven with a set of time-varying parameters x(t T which modulate, for instance, the refractive index of its constituent materials. When radiation at frequency ω enters into the driven circuit, it can be scattered to other sidebands with frequencies ω m = ω + mΩ, m ∈ Z. The incoming/outgoing radiations with amplitudes θ ± α (ω) from/towards the reservoir α are related via the Floquet scattering matrix S F as follows where the matrix element S F α,β (ω m , ω m ) describes the transmission/reflection amplitude of the electromagnetic field entering the reservoir α with frequency ω m provided that it was emitted from reservoir β with frequency ω m . We furthermore assume that the number of photons is conserved during the Floquet scattering process, We are now ready to evaluate the average photon current toward the reservoir α. The latter takes the form ĪPh. where e -iωt dω is the complex field amplitude. Specifically, using Eqs. ( where N α (ω) is the photon current density entering reservoir α. Similarly, we can evaluate the corresponding thermal radiation energy. The associated average energy current Īα toward the thermal reservoir α reads: where for the second equality we have employed the unitarity of the Floquet scattering matrix S F . Equations ( We can do a further analytical progress with Eq. ( 2π Ω 0 dtS t (ω)e imΩt (see Supporting Information). Substitution of this expression in Eq. ( The first contribution Īα,b is due to the temperature gradient between the reservoirs and does not depend on the modulation frequency Ω Here, T = Ω 2π dt|S t 2,1 (ω)| 2 is the average transmittance of the frozen system over one modulation cycle. Notice that it is the same for left and right emitted radiation since the reciprocity of the frozen (undriven) system enforces the relation The second contribution Īα,p is the thermal radiative pumped energy flux, which originates from the modulation of the scatterer and is given as where Θ0 (ω) = Θα (ω) Tα=T0 is associated to a mean temperature T 0 = (T 1 +T 2 )/2, and P α (ω) = i dt dS t dt (S t ) † α,α . In the classical limit Θ0 (ω) ≈ k B T 0 /( ω), the integration of the first term of Eq. ( where x = Ωt. In contrast to the pumped current, Īα,d is proportional to O(Ω 2 ) and its direction does not depend on the orientation of the modulation loop, i.e., the substituting of Ω → -Ω does not reverse the direction of this current contribution. Moreover, in the adiabatic limit, the dissipative current is negligible as compared to the pumped current which scales as O(Ω). Obviously, the smaller the value of Īα,d the better is the performance of an adiabatic thermal pump. Of particular interest is the analysis of the adiabatic energy flux between two reservoirs at the same temperature. In such scenario, known as adiabatic thermal radiation pumping where Q α (ω) represents the radiative energy density per pumping area and we have also assumed that the modulation cycle encloses a small area in the parameter space i.e., A = Π N ν=1 dX ν → 0. In the derivation of Eq. It is interesting to note that P α (and thus Q α ) can be given conveniently in terms of the instantaneous scattering matrix S t . To better understand this, we parametrize S t as where φ t is the transmission phase, R t is the reflectance, and α t is the phase of the reflection coefficient. With this parametrization, we can show that which highlights the geometric character of the pumping operation. On the other hand, the radiative (time-averaged) pumped thermal energy flux Īα during one pumping cycle can be evaluated directly from direct time domain experiments using the following expression where I x0 is the normalized time-dependent directional net energy current evaluated at some observation position x 0 between the system and the reservoir. Comparison between Eqs. Clearly, the evaluation of the pumping current via Eq. ( A careful analysis of the integrand in Eq. ( Another observation is associated with the dependence of P (ω) from the scattering parameters, see Eq. ( We are now ready to evaluate the thermal energy flux for a realistic photonic adiabatic pump consisting of a square optical microcavity, see Fig. We adiabatically drive the cavity by modulating the permittivities ε 1(2) (t) within two embedded circular spots while the permeability μ 0 remains constant, see Fig. Before analyzing the pumped energy current, we will first describe the spectral properties of the microcavity and the parametric change of the eigenmodes with respect to the permittivity variations ε(x, y) = ε[1 + ∆ε(x, y)]. To this end, we first consider the uniform square cavity of size a by setting ∆ε(x, y) = 0. Due to its geometric symmetry, the microcavity presents spectral degeneracies which we will be using for the design of optimal pumping circles. The spectrum can be evaluated explicitly by solving directly the frequency-domain Maxwell's equations We assume transverse electric (TE) modes of the form E = E t (x, y), H = H t (x, y) + H z (x, y)ẑ, where the vectors E t (x, y) and H t (x, y) with the subscript t stands for transverse field components in the x-y plane. From Eq. ( which when supplemented with the PEC boundary condition, i.e. ∂Hz ∂n = 0 yields where k x = mπ/a, k y = nπ/a with n, m = 0, 1, 2, • • • . The corresponding frequency spectrum is where ε = ε 0 ε r is the permitivity, and a is the linear size of the square cavity. We focus on the two degenerate TE modes with the lowest frequencies ω d /(2π) = ω 10 /(2π) = ω 01 /(2π) = (2a √ εμ 0 ) -1 ≈ 0.8802 THz, and the corresponding electric field profiles The modification of the permittivities ε 1(2) lifts the degeneracy. Accordingly, the mode profiles will be modified and their electric fields will satisfy the following relation We approximate the solution near ω d via the linear combination E ≈ φ 1 E 01 +φ 2 E 10 , and obtain the following relation using Eq. ( which, after taking the dot product with the vectors E 01 * and E 10 * and the subsequent integral over space, yields where ∆εdxdy, and The existence of the nonzero solution of Eq. ( where ∆ω = ω -ω d . It is important to notice that E 01 is perpendicular to E 10 which results in N 10 = (N 01 ) * = 0. Consequently, the splitting of the eigenfrequencies ∆ω would vanish when N 0 = N 1 , producing a degenerate line in the parameter space. The condition N 0 = N 1 for degeneracy is not related to the symmetry of the system. For example, consider the case of a material perturbation on two separate domains with ∆ε(x, y) = ∆ε 1 (x, y) + ∆ε 2 (x, y). In this case, we have Therefore, for a given ∆ε 1 (x, y), we can easily find a ∆ε 2 (x, y) such that N 0 -N 1 = 0. In such case the degeneracy will survive even in the presence of these specific permittivity perturbations which evidently destroy the geometric symmetry of the cavity. Of course, the above claim is correct up to first order perturbation. It is therefore imperative to analyze numerically their existence and even question it in the case that the cavity is coupled to the reservoirs. This latter situation needs additional care since the coupling to the reservoirs introduces an additional perturbation which might destroy the degeneracy of the associated resonant modes. To confirm the conclusions of the perturbation argument, we analyze in detail the transmission spectrum of the cavity in a frequency range containing the two lowest resonances, see Fig. We assume that the two thermal reservoirs that are attached to the microcavity are at fixed temperature T = 300 K. We model these two reservoirs as two identical lumped ports with characteristic impedance Z 0 = 50 Ohms and length 1 20 a (for the specific arrangement see Fig. In order to isolate the frequency domain where the resonance degeneracy ω d /(2π) ≈ 0.95T Hz occurs, we have filtered the emission of the baths using a spectral filtering function Φ(ω) = θ H (ω -ω min ) -θ H (ω -ω max ), where θ H (ω) is the Heaviside step function, ω min /(2π) = 0.88T Hz, and ω max /(2π) ≤ 1.06T Hz was chosen in a way that maximizes the radiative current. Next, we calculate the radiative energy density Q(ω) versus frequency. Although the evaluation of Q(ω) is a demanding computational task in case of a direct implementation of Eq. ( frequencies (indicated with solid and dashed black lines in Fig. The integration of Q(ω) with the weight function ωΘ α (ω) (we assume Φ(ω) = 1) leads to a slightly enhanced contribution of the smaller frequencies in the radiative pumped current Īα , Eq. We have developed a Floquet scattering formalism that allows us to design periodic, time-modulation schemes for thermal radiation management. In the adiabatic limit, we arrived to analytical expressions where the net average radiative energy current can be separated into three contributions identified as bias current, pumped energy current, and dissipation due to the driving. All these components have been conveniently expressed in terms of the instantaneous scattering matrix. The resulting expressions allow for an better insight to the problem of radiation management. As an example we have used them to enhance the radiation current in case of an adiabatic thermal pump corresponding to the scenario of thermal reservoirs with equal temperature. We validate the analytical results by performing realistic time domain simulations in a photonic microcavity setup. We show that when a pumping cyclic is designed to operate in the proximity of a spectral degeneracy, the pumped energy flux is dramatically enhanced. Furthermore the direction of the radiative current can be reconfigured by displaying the position of the center of the pumping cycle with respect to the degeneracy point in the parameter space. Our results can be used for the study of efficient thermal radiative machines and they offer a new computational tool that allow us to design efficient driving protocols for radiation management. Relation between Floquet and instantaneous Scattering matrices; Detailed calculations of the thermal radiative current and its adiabatic limit; Energy balance in periodically modulated setups; Scattering analysis of the microcavity setup. Includes Refs. This is an useful equation since it allow us to express the Floquet scattering matrix in terms of the instantaneous scattering matrix, in the adiabatic limit Ω → 0. We highlight that Eq. ( The net average photonic current directed toward the reservoir α, ĪPh. α , is the difference between the average current entering the reservoir α from the system, ĪPh.α , and the average current of photons emitted by the reservoir α and directed toward the system, ĪPh.+ α , ĪPh. By using the Fourier transform, which translates the problem to the calculation of the correlation of the field amplitudes. In the case of ĪPh. Now, for the case of ĪPh.α , the associated correlation results where we have used Eqs. ( ĪPh. - Here, the delta function enforces ω m -ω n = 0, which implies that the difference between the central frequencies is a multiple of the modulation frequency, i.e. ω -ω = (n -m)Ω. In turn, this imposes an additional relation between the integers n, m, because Of course, the relation n = m implies that ω = ω , and as a result ĪPh. - This equation admits to be interpreted in a Landauer like formalism: the average number of photons current directed toward reservoir α from the system consists of all those photons emitted at a reservoir β with frequency ω m that after an inelastic scattering process with the time-modulated system end up entering reservoir α with frequency ω. Finally, collecting the results of Eqs. (S8) and (S12), we have that the net average photon current entering reservoir α is ĪPh. This equation allow us to introduce the net number of photons density, which is the net average number of photons per unit frequency entering reservoir α. Then, the net energy carried by ω-photons is simply ωN α (ω), and thus represents the associated thermal radiation energy current entering reservoir α. In this section we present a detailed derivation of Eqs. (5-9) of the main text. In particular, we show how, resorting to the adiabatic limit and for small temperature gradients, we obtain analytical equations for the bias current, the pumped current, and dissipation associated to the driving. We highlight that all these equations are conveniently expressed in terms of the instantaneous scattering matrix. We start by considering the thermal radiative energy current given by Eqs. (S14) and (S15), where we used Eq. (S28) in the second line and in the third one, we changed variables ω → ω -m and m → -m. The last line of Eq. (S16) corresponds to Eq. ( In the adiabatic regime, the small modulation frequency allow us to use a series expansion of the reservoir's spectral emission function centered in a frequency ω, Θα (ω m ) ≈ Θα (ω) + ∂ Θα(ω) ∂ω 2 (mΩ) 2 . Notice that in our case of resonant scattering, the frequency window of major contribution for the pumping process occurs for frequencies around some resonant frequency, i.e. ω ∼ ω 0 > 0, which then admits the expansion when the modulation frequency is small. Using this approximation in Eq. (S16), we obtain where Notice that each term depends in a different manner with Ω, specifically, J 1 = O(Ω 0 ), while J 2(3) = O(Ω 1 ) and In what follows, we discuss each one of the J n terms and their associated adiabatic limit for the case of systems with two reservoirs. Under such conditions, we connect the Floquet scattering matrix to the instantaneous scattering matrix via the set of Eqs. (S29), thus providing simple expressions for the terms in the thermal radiation current. We start by considering the term J 1 , which is proportional to the unbalance between the spectral emission functions of the reservoirs, e.g. due to a temperature gradient (or bias). This term corresponds to the average bias thermal radiative current discussed in Eq where Tα,β (ω For the second line we considered case of a system connected to two reservoirs, α = α , and we denote T (ω) = Tα,α (ω). We now consider the second and third terms, J 2 and J 3 . Using Eq. (S29) in the adiabatic limit, they read , where we considered two reservoirs, α = α . To arrive to the last line, we used integration by parts and dropped the contour terms because S t (ω)| ω=0 ≈ S t (ω)| ω→∞ ≈ 0. We take the derivative in ω in J 3 , and, for simplicity, we define Both J 2 and J 3 are terms of first order in Ω so we consider their sum J 2 + J 3 . Thus, Next, we consider the pumping scenario, where there is no temperature gradient between the reservoirs, Θα(ω)+ Θα (ω) 2 = Θ0 (ω), and Θα(ω)-Θα (ω) 2 = 0. In such a situation, J 2 + J 3 represents the thermal radiative pumped energy current. Therefore Īα,p ≡ J Of course, our analysis can be extended to situations where the temperature gradient is small, where Θ0 (ω) is associated to a mean temperature T 0 = (T α + T α )/2. Notice that Eq. ( where we made explicit the dependence of the instantaneous scattering matrix on the dimensionless parameter x = Ωt to emphasize the Ω 2 dependence. For this reason, the sum of these two terms, Īα,d ≡ J 4 + J 5 , represents a dissipation current whose direction does not change by reversing the direction of the modulation cycle, i.e. Ω → -Ω. Instead, it is always directed from the scatterer to the reservoir (if Īα,d > 0) and it is associated to a power exchange between the radiation and the modulation mechanism. In a pumping scenario, where the modulation is slow, this term is much smaller than the pumping currents and can be neglected. Notice that Īα,d ≡ J 4 + J 5 constitutes Eq. ( , where x ∈ [0, 2π). Energy balance. Here, we discuss about the energy balance of the time-modulated setup in the framework of the Floquet scattering. In addition, in the adiabatic regime, we provide an expression for the power performed on the system by the modulation mechanism. We consider, for simplicity, the case of a system connected to two reservoirs. In the case where the parameters of the system are not modulated in time, the sum of the thermal radiative energy currents entering the reservoirs is zero, due to energy conservation. However, this is in contrast to what happens in the time modulated scenario. In such a situation, the sum of the thermal radiative energy currents entering the reservoirs (averaged over one modulation cycle) can be different than zero since the modulation mechanism may exchange energy with the radiation inside the structure. Thus, where W is the average energy exchanged between the modulation mechanism and radiation per modulation cycle. In order to find an expression for W based on the radiative energy currents entering the reservoirs, we introduce Eq. (S16) into Eq. (S24), First, we discuss a few properties of the Floquet scattering matrix that we use to derive our main results. As we have discussed in the main text, the element of the Floquet scattering matrix S F α,β (ω, ω ) describes the amplitude of the electromagnetic field entering the reservoir α with frequency ω given that it was emitted from reservoir β at a frequency ω . Here, the system is periodically modulated with frequency Ω and thus inelastically scatters the field such that ω = ω + mΩ = ω m , m ∈ Z. We assume that the the Floquet scattering matrix is unitary, (S F ) † S F = S F (S F ) † = I, and thus Additionally, there is translational symmetry in the Floquet space, S F α,β (ω, ω m ) = S F α,β (ω -m , ω). Next, we provide a list of useful expressions that connect, in the adiabatic limit, the Floquet scattering matrix with the instantaneous scattering matrix. We use the following equations to derive the Eqs. (S19), (S22), and (S23): . Here, we used the definition of the delta function, m e imΩ(t-t ) = 2π Ω δ(t -t ).