We compute the heat generated by (non-interacting) nanomagnets subjected to an alternating magnetic field (AMF) and study its transfer to the hosting medium and environment. For the first task, we compute the heat generated by the nanomagnets (or the specific absorption rate S) using the ac susceptibility in the linear regime. For the second task, the loss of heat to the environment is modeled with the help of a balance (macroscopic) equation based on Newton's law of cooling. This equation is solved both numerically and analytically for a generic ferrofluid and the analytical solution renders a very good approximation to the general balance equation. Then, we investigate the effects of AMF frequency and amplitude on the temperature elevation during its temporal evolution. Finally, using the available experimental data for maghemite and magnetite ferrofluids, we discuss the behavior of Newton's heat transfer coefficient in terms of the AMF amplitude and frequency. These results could trigger experimental investigations of this coefficient which characterizes the rate of heating in a ferrofluid, with the aim to build more refined models for the mechanisms of heat generation and its diffusion in ferrofluids used in magnetic hyperthermia. The process of magnetic hyperthermia (MH) occurring in assemblies of magnetic nanoparticles, or nanomagnets (NM), offers a significant advantage over the traditional methods for cancer treatment In MH, the NM are heated with the help of an external AC magnetic field, that is a time-dependent (alternating) magnetic field (AMF), and the optimization of the whole process depends on several factors, such as the magnetic field itself (amplitude and frequency), NM size and concentration, and solution viscosity Another observable that is being actively used and * Electronic address: hamid.kachkachi@univ-perp.fr which is quite relevant for characterizing MH and assessing its efficiency is the temperature rise after the start of heating, upon varying the AMF characteristics and the sample's properties In the present work, we study the balance between the heat generated by the NM subjected to the AMF and the heat lost to the sample's immediate environment, a balance that turns out to determine the temperature time profile observed in ferrofluids. For this purpose, we present a phenomenological study of the heat exchange of a (non-interacting) polydisperse assembly of NM, subjected to an external AMF, with its environment. More precisely, we compute the heat Q generated by the nanomagnets (or the SAR S) through the dynamic response given by the out-of-phase component of the AC susceptibility (χ ′′ ) of the system. Next, we describe the loss of this heat to the environment with the help of a balance equation including a term that describes a kind of Newton's law of cooling. The latter involves a phenomenological coefficient L n , the heat transfer coefficient, which we estimate for two NM species, the maghemite and magnetite, using the experimental data available for these materials and variable AMF characteristics (amplitude and frequency) We would like to add a final word regarding the comparison of our model with experiments. First of all, we emphasize that our objective here is not to build a model that would quantitatively fit the curves measured for polydisperse assemblies of nanomagnets. This would not be possible, anyway, given the various simplifications, exemplified by the absence of inter-particle interactions. Instead, the main idea to compare with experiments our results for the time profile of the temperature elevation is twofold: 1. Show that, at the time scales investigated in experiments, the observed temperature profile is mostly determined by the balance equation that accounts for i) the conversion into heat of the electromagnetic energy brought in by the AMF and ii) its loss into the environment. 2. Estimate the order of magnitude of the Newton coefficient and investigate its dependence on the AMF characteristics that are accessible to today's measurements. Figure We start by defining the model system which we use for studying the diffusion mechanisms of the heat generated by the nanomagnets (NM) into their hosting medium and then to the environment. Our model system is sketched in Fig. In the general scheme for SAR measurement, the sample is initially set to the same temperature as its environment, T 0 . Then, the AMF is switched on at t = 0. The latter excites the NM which then release heat within the sample, i.e. they heat up the fluid. The heat thus generated then diffuses across the sample and the heat flux reaches the sample's limits, or its interface with the environment, to which the heat is transferred by conduction, convection or radiation. If we assume that the NM are homogeneously distributed through the sample, the heat power by unit volume is S/V ff , where V ff is the volume of the whole sample (NM + base fluid), i.e. the ferrofluid. The time evolution of the temperature within the sample, measured at position r, is governed by the heatdiffusion equation with sources, namely where ρ kg/m 3 , c v (J/K/kg), and κ (W/K/m) are respectively the density, the specific heat and the thermal conductivity of the sample, all assumed to be uniform. P (W) is the heat power and V s the sample volume. In this case, Eq. ( Here C ff = i c i m i is the heat capacity (in J/K) of the sample. We have introduced the coefficient L ff (W/K) as the analog of the heat transfer coefficient between the sample and its environment. This equation implies that the temperature rise in the ferrofluid is the result of a balance between the heat power generated by the NM (within the ferrofluid) and the heat power lost to the environment. The last process is described here by the so-called Newton's law of cooling [see the textbook In Ref. where ∆T max = P/L ff and ς = C ff /L ff . Thus, in the steady state (t → ∞), the heat generated and that lost become equal and the sample temperature remains constant at T max = T 0 + ∆T max . Next, we discuss the calculation of the SAR. This may be inferred either from the area of the dynamic hysteresis loop or from the dynamic response of the system represented by the AC susceptibility. A detailed discussion can be found in Refs. The SAR S of a nanomagnet, of volume V and magnetic moment m = M s V , subjected to an AC magnetic field H (t) = h cos (ωt) is given by where the out-of-phase component of the AC susceptibility χ = χ ′iχ ′′ reads (in the Debye approximation) with the equilibrium susceptibility η is the reduced relaxation time, i.e., η ≡ ωτ eff , where τ eff is the effective relaxation time given by with τ N being the Néel relaxation time related with the motion of the net magnetic moment in the energy potential of the NM and τ B , the Brown relaxation time related with the physical motion of the NM within the fluid. More precisely, in zero DC magnetic field and using the usual notation, we have according to the Arrhenius law and where ξ is the viscosity of the medium (fluid); for maghemite, ξ = 0.00235 kg/m/s (or 0.00235 Pa.s). V H is the hydrodynamic volume that is larger than the magnetic volume V = 4πR 3 /3 of a NM of radius R. In general, V H is much larger than V In order to give estimates of the various physical parameters, we have to give each term appearing in Eq. ( Note that the specific heat c ff may also be rewritten as where ρ bf is the density of the base fluid and ρ Fe the concentration of the magnetic substance in the fluid. Now, comes the discussion of the coefficient l ff , which is measured in W/K/g. This should be interpreted as the analog of Newton's coefficient of heat transfer between the whole ferrofluid and its environment which may be the container or air. This is an unknown parameter that depends on the sample (its shape, size, etc), and for which it is rather difficult to come up with a simple and precise expression. So, in the present context, it is regarded as a free parameter that could be estimated from experiment. Let us, however, attempt to estimate its value and limits. At initial time, t = 0, or say at short times, the heat just generated by the nanomagnets diffuses through the ferrofluid, without yet reaching out to the environment. At this stage, we may set l ff = 0 and obtain the equation This is the equation used in experiments However, it is more convenient to work with a dimensionless equation. For this purpose, we introduce the time scaling factor (similar to a "relaxation time"), ς = c ff /l ff and thereby the dimensionless time τ ≡ t/ς. Next, we define the relative temperature rise θ (t) ≡ (T -T 0 ) /T 0 and the dimensionless SAR Ξ ≡ S/ (T 0 l ff ) so that Eq. ( Note that for the numerical solution of this equation, the variable T in the expression of SAR given in Eq. ( In our discussion above regarding the solution of Eq. (2), or with Ξ (T 0 , h, ω) being simply the dimensionless SAR evaluated at T 0 and where and η 0 ≡ η (T 0 ), see Eq. ( In Fig. We may conclude then that the analytical profile in Eq. ( Incidentally, we already see that the increase of the AMF amplitude has a stronger effect than that of increasing its frequency [see further discussion in the next Section]. We have (numerically) solved the differential equation ( with the mean volume V m and standard deviation δ. Then, the SAR of the assembly is given by the volume average (W is already normalized) In the following sections, we will discuss our results and compare them with experiments performed on two prototypical NM assemblies most often used in MH applications, namely assemblies of maghemite and magnetite NM studied in Refs. For magnetite, we will mainly refer to and compare with the data provided by Shah et al. Let us now discuss the specific heat and "relaxation time" defined respectively in Eqs. For maghemite, we use the data for the samples studied by Murase et al. In Fig. These temperature profiles agree very well with those observed in experiments (see below for a quantitative comparison). We have seen that, for both maghemite and magnetite, the asymptotic values of the temperature elevation ∆T are higher for the assembly of nanoparticles than for a single particle (not shown here), but this obviously depends on D m and δ. For the two substances, we see that the initial slope of the temperature rise, i.e. ∆T /∆t| t=0 , increases with the AMF frequency as was observed in experiments Now, we discuss the coefficient of heat transfer l ff . In the general Newton's law of cooling at a solid-fluid interface In analogy with Newton's law of cooling, we have introduced the heat-transfer coefficient l ff in the balance equation ( Accordingly, in Figs 4 and 5 we plot (in full curves) the time profiles of the temperature rise obtained from Eq. ( A more stringent goodness-of-fit test could be performed if more experimental data were available for the AMF amplitude and frequency and the model extended to interacting assemblies. Nevertheless, the adjustment we perform here allows us to obtain an estimate of the coefficient l ff for magnetite and maghemite ferrofluids and for different values of AMF amplitude and frequency. In a more elaborate theory of heat transfer in ferrofluids and their interface with the external environment, the Newton heat-transfer coefficient should depend on the features of the system (NM+bf) as well as the external stimulus. However, in the present phenomenological approach, the collection of data extracted from a comparison to experiments, is not sufficient for assessing the global behavior of l ff . Nevertheless, this indicates the range of l ff values for such system configurations and gives a first hint as how it could behave as a function of the AMF characteristics. Indeed, we mentioned earlier that l ff may be inferred from experiments using the saturated temperature elevation (∆T max ) and the corresponding SAR S (T max ). This implies that in this longtime regime, l ff should follow the behavior of the SAR, in terms of its dependence on h, ω and the NM volume distribution (D m , δ). In the intermediate times, usually explored in experiments and reported in Figs. to be a monotonously increasing function of the AMF frequency while it exhibits a non regular variation with respect to the amplitude. All in all, here we provide a first attempt to characterize this coefficient but further experimental and theoretical investigations are required in order to build a function for l ff in terms of the characteristics of both the AMF and the NM assembly. We have built a simple formalism for studying the heat generated by magnetic nanoparticles subjected to an alternating magnetic field and its transfer to the sample's environment, with the assumption that temperature equilibration within the ferrofluid is much faster than the heat exchange between the ferrofluid and its external environment. This formalism is based on i) the linear dynamic response of the (non-interacting) assembly of nanomagnets given by the ac susceptibility which renders the specific absorption rate of the system, and ii) a balance (phenomenological) equation that describes the heat transfer at the interface between the ferrofluid and its environment with the help of Newton's law of cooling. The latter involves a heat transfer coefficient that helps characterize the heat flow and the rate of temperature elevation within the ferrofluid. The balance equation has been numerically solved and a good approximate analytical solution has been provided. Using our formalism, we studied the temporal profile of the temperature rise as a function of the magnetic field frequency and amplitude and have favorably compared it to the available experiments on magnetite and maghemite ferrofluids. We have thus confirmed that an increase of these parameters enhances the specific absorp-tion rate and thereby the temperature elevation in the prototypical ferrofluids studied in experiments, namely maghemite and magnetite in water. We have also discussed the behavior of the Newton heat-transfer coefficient for these samples using the available data for various amplitudes and frequencies of the magnetic field. The data collected by fitting our theoretical results to the experimental curves provide a few hints regarding the behavior of this coefficient but are not sufficient to draw a general or universal tendency. For the latter, one should also take into account the mechanisms of heat diffusion within the nanofluid. We suggest that this Newton's coefficient, introduced here to quantify the heat transfer from the ferrofluid to its environment, could be used as a new handle for optimizing the temperature rise in ferrofluids. Its experimental studies should provide us with valuable hints for building more refined models to better describe the mechanisms of heat generation and its diffusion in ferrofluids used in applications such as magnetic hyperthermia. In particular, its dependence on the volume fraction of nanomagnets and their mutual interactions in the ferrofluid is crucial for such applications. The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.