Based on our revised perturbational-band theory, we study possible pairing states driven by interaction in the electron-doped quasicrystal 30 • -twisted bilayer graphene. Our mean-field study on the related t-J model predicts that, the beneath-van-Hove and beyond-van-Hove low doping regimes are covered by the chiral d + id and g + ig topological superconductivities (TSCs) respectively. The g +ig-TSC possesses a pairing angular momentum 4, and hence following each effective C12-rotation by ∆φ = nπ/6, the pairing phase changes 4∆φ. This intriguing TSC is novel, as it belongs to a special 2D E4-irreducible representation of the effective D12 point group unique to this quasicystal and absent on periodic lattices. The Ginzburg-Landau theory suggested that the g + ig-TSC originates from the Josephson coupling between the d + id pairings on the two mono-layers. The twisted multi-layer graphene family since synthesis have driven the revelation of such intriguing quantum phases It has been long to search SC in the graphene family. Particularly, various groups have proposed On the other front, the SC on QCs has recently been a hot topic In this paper, we study the pairing states in the doped QC-TBG, adopting the t-J model on this QC. We revise the perturbational band theory to suit it to the study on the finite lattice involving e-e interaction. The meanfield (MF) pairing phase diagram in the low electrondoped regime shows that the beneath-VH and beyond-VH doping regimes are covered by the d + id and g + ig TSCs, respectively. The g + ig TSC belongs to the 2D E 4 -IRRP of the effective D 12 point group unique to this QC, which possesses a high L = 4 and its gap phase changes 2π/3 for each 30 • -rotation. Such an intriguing TSC originates from the Josephson coupling between the d+id pairings on the two monolayers, as suggested by the Ginzburg-Landau theory. Our results not only open the door to study e-e correlation driven phases on extrinsic QCs, but also reveal a novel TSC rare on periodic lattices. We start from the following arXiv:2106.08542v3 [cond-mat.str-el] 12 Jul 2021 tight-binding (TB) model for the QC-TBG with t ij provided in the SM[80] adopted from Ref. Eq. (S1) can be decomposed into the zeroth-order intralayer hopping term H 0 and the perturbational inter-layer tunneling term H as Here k/q, μ(= t(top), b(bottom)), α/β and σ label the momentum, layer, band and spin respectively, ε μα k is the monolayer dispersion and T αβ kq is given by (3) In thermal dynamic limit, the nonzero T αβ kq requires k + G (t) = q + G (b) Note that on our finite lattice with discrete momentum points, for each typical k on the top layer, no q on the bottom layer can make k + G (t) = q + G (b) exactly satisfied. Therefore for each top-layer state |kα (t) , we abandon this relation and directly use Eq. ( Along the lines connecting the high-symmetry points in the Brillouin zone marked in Fig. The main effect of the inter-layer coupling on the electron-doped side lies in that the top-layer band branches and the bottom-layer ones cross and split at the X points, and simultaneously their layer components are exchanged (see the inset of Fig. The density of state (DOS) obtained by our approach is well consistent with that obtained by directly diagonalizing the real-space Hamiltonian, particularly in the electron-doped side, as shown in Fig. with J ij = 4t 2 ij /U and U = 10 eV. Here the sum (i,j) goes through the (i, j) pairs on the bilayer. The total Hamiltonian is then given by the following t-J model, Eq. ( Here ξi,kμα / √ N denotes the wave function of | kα (μ) , v νβ F (q) is the Fermi velocity and q denotes the component along the tangent of the FS. The pairing symmetry is determined by the gap form factor ∆ μα (k) corresponding to the largest pairing eigenvalue λ solved for Eq. Phase diagram and Ginzburg-Landau theory: The pairing symmetries can be classified according to the IRRPs of the point group D 6d , or effectively D 12 if we redefine the C π 6 as the combination of it and the succeeding layer exchange. The D 12 possesses six singlet IRRPs and three triplet ones, see the SM Figure Suppose the normalized gap form factors (either in the real or k space) on the t/b layers are Here Pφ denotes the rotation by φ. Setting the global "complex amplitudes" of the pairing gap functions on the t/b layers as ψ t/b Here the F 0 -and the A-terms denote the contributions from each monolayer and their Josephson coupling respectively. The A > 0 and θ ∈ (-π, π] are real numbers. Now let's rotate the system by ∆φ = π 6 , followed by a succeeding layer exchange, under which Eq. Under A > 0, as the two layers are identical, F should be minimized at ψ b = e iθ ψ t . The solution θ = π/3 or -2π/3 makes ( ψt , ψb ) = e -i π 3 (ψ t , ψ b ) or e i 2π 3 (ψ t , ψ b ), corresponding to L = π 3 /∆φ = 2 or -2π 3 /∆φ = -4, respectively. Both solutions are supported by our microscopic calculations in different doping regimes. More heuristically, our results can also be understood directly by the definition L = ∆φ SC /∆φ. As there is a 2nπ uncertainty in ∆φ SC , we should investigate the rotation by the minimum angle ∆φ m . For each monolayer with D 6 symmetry, ∆φ m = π/3. If we rotate the QC-TBG by π/3, then the d + id pairing with L = 2 within each mono-layer causes ∆φ SC = 2π/3 in that layer, as well as in the coupled system. This ∆φ SC can also be indistinguishably viewed as -4π/3. However, the emergent D 12 symmetry in the QC-TBG allows for the rotation by ∆φ m = π/6, under which we have either ∆φ SC = π/3 causing L = 2, or ∆φ SC = -2π/3 causing L = -4, which are distinguishable now. Our microscopic calculation results allow for both phases in different doping regimes. Novel TSC: The distributions of the gap amplitudes of the obtained d + id-and g + ig-SCs on the FSs are fully gapped The g + ig-TSC obtained here is novel, as it belongs to the 2D E 4 -IRRP absent for the typical D 2n point group on periodic lattices. Generally, the 2D IRRPs of D 2n include the E L with L ≤ n -1[80]. For periodic lattices, we have n ≤ 3 and hence L ≤ 2, corresponding to the p + ip and d + id. Here in the QC-TBG, we have n = 6 and hence L ≤ 5, including the g +ig. Although on periodic lattices with, say D 6 symmetry, the g + ig can also emerge as a higher-harmonics basis function of the E 2 -IRRP, it's generally mixed with the d + id as both belong to the E 2 . Occasionally, the mixing weight of the d + id-component vanishes and one gets the g + ig The difference between the properties of the TSCs on extrinsic and intrinsic QCs is clarified here. It's illustrated in Ref. In conclusion, we have revised the perturbational band theory to suit it for the study of e-e interaction driven SCs on extrinsic QCs. This k-space approach is more convenient than the real-space ones This approach also applies to other extrinsic QCs. One example is the 45 • -twisted bilayer cuprate film. While Ref. This section provides some details of the perturbational-band-theory approach adopted in our study for the freeelectron part of the quasi-crystal twisted bilayer graphene (QC-TBG). We will provide here detailed information of the band structure, the Fermi surface (FS) and density of state (DOS) thus obtained for the system. We start from the following tight-binding (TB) model of the QC-TBG, where σ labels spin and the hopping integral t ij between site i and site j is given as with Here, R ij is the length of the vector R ij , pointing from site i to site j, and e z is the unit vector perpendicular to the graphene layer. The lattice constant and interlayer spacing are given by a ≈ 0.246 nm and d ≈ 0.335 nm, respectively. The parameters t π ≈ -2.7 eV, t σ ≈ 0.48 eV and r 0 ≈ 0.0453 nm are taken according to Ref. The Hamiltonian (S1) could be decomposed into the zeroth-order intralayer hopping term H 0 and perturbational inter-layer tunneling term H , namely, where μ [= t (top), b (bottom)] and α (= 1, 2) are the layer and band indices, respectively, k and q label the momentum, and ε μα k is the dispersion of single-layer graphene. The eigenstate of H 0 is denoted as |kα (μ) (here we omit the spin index for simplicity, since the following treatment has nothing to do with the spin degree of freedom), representing a monolayer state on the layer μ. The interlayer tunneling matrix element T αβ kq reads where ξ/ √ N (N is the number of unit cells on each monolayer, i.e. 1 4 of the total site number) represents the real-space wave function for the monolayer state |kα (μ) . Our perturbational-band theory is a numerical version of the usual analytical second-order perturbational theory. Given a zeroth-order state |kα (μ) with the zeroth-order energy ε μα k , we provide in the following our procedure to obtain its perturbation-corrected state | kα (μ) , and the perturbation-corrected energy εμα k . For a state |kα (t) in the top layer, one can find some states |qβ (b) in the bottom layer which couple with it through Eq. (S4). In thermal dynamic limit, the nonzero coupling matrix element where G (t/b) represent the reciprocal lattice vectors of the top/bottom layers. However, on our finite lattice with discrete momentum points, for each typical k on the top layer, no q on the bottom layer can make the relation (S5) exactly satisfied unless k = q = G (t) = G (b) = 0, as the two sets of relatively states, we find again all the |k j α (t) j states on the top layer which obviously couple with them. Gathering all these states related to |kα (t) as bases to form a close sub-space, we can write down and diagonalize the Hamiltonian matrix in this sub-space to obtain all the eigen states. Among these states, the one having the largest overlap with |kα (t) is marked as its perturbation-corrected state | kα (t) , whose energy is marked as εtα k . The procedure to get | qβ (b) and εbβ q is similar. Along the lines connecting the high-symmetry points in the Brillouin zone marked in Fig. Near the Γ point, the band structure on each layer comprises two bands: one band labeled as "+" originates from the bonding between the A and B sublattices, while the other labeled as "-" originates from the anti-bonding between the two sublattices. The formula of the four zeroth-order states near the Γ point for the two layers are as following, On each layer, the energy of the state labeled by "+" is lower than that of the state labeled by "-". Therefore, the former occupies the band bottom regime and the latter occupies the band top regime. Then we consider the interlayer couplings between each two zeroth-order states from different layers. Before that, we first evaluate the coupling between the states |kX (t) and |qY (b) where τ is the sublattice position. Since t(k + G (t) ) decays exponentially for large k + G (t) , we only consider G (t) = 0. Further more, the nonzero value of the δ k+G (t) ,q+G (b) function requires G (b) = 0 for k/q ≈ 0 near the Γ point. Then, equation (S7) can be written as From Eq. (S6) and Eq. (S9), one gets Therefore, one can see that the strong interlayer coupling only takes place in the band bottom regime of the band structure. This explains the p-h asymmetry character of the band structure. Below, we shall focus on the electrondoped side as the weaker interlayer coupling there validates our perturbational approach. The main effect of the interlayer coupling on the electron-doped side lies in that the top-layer band branches and the bottom-layer ones cross and split at the X-point, after which they exchange their layer components, as shown in the inset of Fig. The perturbational coupling between the two degenerate states |kα (t) and |kα (b) leads to their hybridization into bonding and anti-bonding states with an energy split between each other, causing the band splitting. Consequently, the FSs contributed from the two layers also cross and split upon crossing that line, after which they exchange their layer components, as shown in the insets of Fig. shown in the inset of Fig. This section provides some details of the mean-field calculations for the t-J model in the QC-TBG. As a start point, the superexchange interaction part of the Hamiltonian can be separated into the spin singlet-and triplet-pairing channels, i.e., where J ij = 4t 2 ij /U and U = 10 eV. The singlet-pairing channel ∆ ij(0,0) reads as and the three degenerate components of the triplet pairing are as following, Due to J ij > 0, the triplet-pairing channels are always suppressed and thus only the singlet-pairing channel is considered, that is, (i,j) (i,j) This interaction Hamiltonian can be transformed to the eigen basis expanded by the perturbation-corrected eigenstates | kα (μ) . Our numerical results verify that each two states within this set are almost orthogonal to each other, which justifies this set as a good basis for the following study involving interaction. Writing the creation (annihilation) operator of the eigenstate | kα (μ) for the spin σ as c † kμασ (c kμασ ), we have where ξi,kμα / √ N represents the real-space wave function for the perturbation-corrected eigenstate | kα (μ) . Substituting Eq. (S15) back to Eq. (S14), we get the following BCS Hamiltonian, with the pairing potential V μν αβ (k, q) defined as Here Re(z) indicates the real part of z. Note that we only consider the intra-band pairing with opposite momenta and spin here, i.e. the pairing between the time-reversal pair | kα (μ) ↑ and | -kα (μ) ↓ . The Hamiltonian in Eq. (S16) can be mean-field decoupled in the BCS channel to get the following mean-field Hamiltonian, where μ c is the chemical potential. The superconductor pairing gap ∆ μα (k) reads Here, f [x] is the Fermi distribution function. Since ∆ μα (k) → 0 when T → T c , Eq. (S19) leads to After some further derivations where v νβ F (q) is the Fermi velocity and q denotes the component along the tangent of the FS. The pairing symmetry is determined by the gap form factor ∆ μα (k) corresponding to the largest pairing eigenvalue λ solved for this equation. The superconducting critical temperature T c is related to λ via the relation T c ∼ e -1/λ . Note that on the above mean-field treatment, we have not considered the no-double-occupance constraint. This constraint can be treated by the Gutzwiller approximation, under which the free-electron part of the Hamiltonian will be renormalized by the Gutzwiller factor δ. Under such treatment, the only revision of the above Eq. (S21) lies in that the Fermi velocity v νβ F (q) should be renormalized by the factor δ. Under such revision of Eq. (S21), the pairing symmetry would not be changed. Therefore, the no-double-occupance constraint would not change the pairing symmetry obtained by our mean-field calculations. The influence of this constraint on the superconducting T c is as follow. Firstly, as v νβ F (q) → δv νβ F (q), we have λ → λ/δ. Secondly, under the no-double-occupance constraint, the T c obtained via the relation T c ∼ e -1/λ only represents the temperature for the pseudo gap. As the Gutzwiller approximation renormalizes the pairing order parameter by the factor δ, the real T c should also be renormalized by this factor. As a result, we have T c ∼ δe -δ/λ . For δ → 0, as λ ∝ ρ E F ∝ δ, we have T c ∝ δ. Here ρ E F represents for the DOS on the FS. Near the VH doping, the T c estimated under our choice of interaction parameters, i.e. U = 10 eV, is slightly lower than that obtained by the mean-field calculation. Overall, the T c ∼ δ curve after the Gutzwiller projection is qualitatively similar with that of the mean-field result. Note that as the accurate interaction strength of the real material cannot be exactly known, the strength of the superexchange coefficients J ij can vary by several times from the adopted values in our study, which will considerably influence the obtained T c . Physically, the superconducting T c of the QC-TBG should be near that of the monolayer graphene studied previously, as the pairing eigenvalue λ obtained here is close to the value obtained for the case with the interlayer coupling turned off, as suggested by our numerical results. In the linearized gap equation (S21), as the pairing potential V μν αβ (k, q) is invariant under the point-group symmetry of the system, all the obtained normalized gap function {∆ μα (k)} corresponding to the same eigenvalue λ form an irreducible representation (IRRP) of the point group. Therefore, the pairing symmetries of the QC-TBG can be classified according to the IRRPs of the D 6d point group. Redefining the 30 • -rotation about the centric axis (normal Table Pairing symmetries Ground-state gap functions 1D to the QC-TBG plane) as the combination of it and a succeeding layer exchange, the D 6d point group can be redefined as the D 12 point group, whose IRRPs are shown in Table In Table In the last column of Table The main features exhibited in Table Figure This section provides more informations about the four leading gap functions obtained from solving the linearized gap equation (S21). Here we will show the gap functions of the s-, the i x 6 -y 6 +15(x 2 y 4 -x 4 y 2 ) -, the (d x 2 -y 2 , d xy ), and the (g x 4 +y 4 -6x 2 y 2 , g x 3 y-xy 3 ) wave pairings for two typical doping levels, i.e. δ = 0.20 below the VH doping and δ = 0.32 above the VH doping. The other two pairing symmetries, i.e. the i 3(x 5 y+xy 5 )+10x 3 y 3 and i * i are not shown as their pairing eigenvalues are lower than the four shown symmetries. For the degenerate (d x 2 -y 2 , d xy )-and degenerate (g x 4 +y 4 -6x 2 y 2 , g x 3 y-xy 3 )-wave pairings, we shall determine how the two basis functions are mixed to minimize the ground-state energy by numerical calculations. Figure Figure Since the two d-and g-wave pairing gap functions each are doubly degenerate, we shall mix the two basis functions for each case to minimize the ground-state energy. The start point is the Hamiltonian of the system, We introduce the following pairing gap function, where ψ 1 and ψ 2 are two complex numbers. The ∆ μα (k) and ∆ (2) μα (k) represent the two degenerate normalized basis functions of the d-wave or g-wave pairing symmetries obtained from solving the linearized gap equation (S21). Using Eq. (S23), we obtain the following mean-field Hamiltonian, This Hamiltonian can be diagonalized to obtain the mean-field BCS ground state. Then ψ 1 and ψ 2 are determined by minimizing the ground-state energy, i.e. the expectation value E of the Hamiltonian Eq. (S22) in the mean-field BCS ground state, Note that the chemical potential μ c is determined by fixing the total electron number when varying ψ 1 and ψ 2 . Our numerical results for the energy minimization are as follow. Setting ψ 1 : ψ 2 = 1 : αe iθ , our results suggest α = 1 and E as functions of θ, i.e. E(θ) are shown in Fig. with η > 0. Consequently, the minimized energy is realized at θ = π/2 or 3π/2, leading to ψ 1 : ψ 2 = 1 : ±i. Therefore, the ground-state pairing gap functions of the two pairing symmetries take the form of d x 2 -y 2 ± id xy -and g x 4 +y 4 -6x 2 y 2 ± ig x 3 y-xy 3 , abbreviated as d + id and g + ig. For this result, we will provide an understanding based on the Ginzburg-Landau theory in the next section. In this section, we provide two Ginzburg-Landau (G-L) theory based analysises toward the above numerical results obtained by our MF calculations. In the first G-L theory, we provide an understanding for why the two basis functions of the obtained degenerate (d x 2 -y 2 , id xy )-or (g x 4 +y 4 -6x 2 y 2 , ig x 3 y-xy 3 )-wave pairings in the QC-TBG should be mixed as 1 : ±i. In the second one, we provide an understanding for why the coupling between the d + id pairing order parameters in the two mono-layers can lead to either d + id or g + ig TSCs in the QC-TBG. The first Ginzburg-Landau theory based analysis is as follow. We rewrite the Eq. (S23) into the following form as with Ψ ≡ (ψ 1 , ψ 2 ) T . The free energy function F can be expanded up to O(|ψ| 4 ) as follow, with In obtaining this formula, we have used the U(1)-gauge and the time-reversal symmetries of the free energy which requires invariance of F under the transformation Ψ → e iθ Ψ and and the one Ψ → Ψ * . Applying an arbitrary operator P within the point group D 12 to the pairing gap function, we get with Ψ ≡ P T Ψ, where P is the matrix representation of P . For the pure rotation part of D 12 with angle θ, we have P T (θ) = cos θ+iσ y sin θ. Since the symmetry operator P does not change the free energy function, i.e., F (Ψ) = F ( Ψ), one can immediately obtain C 2 = C 3 = C 5 = C 6 = C 7 = C 9 = 0 because σ x and σ z in these terms do not commute with σ y . As a result, the free energy function can be simplified as, Notice that this formula is consistent with that obtained in Ref . This is why our calculation results can well be fitted with the cosine function, as shown in Fig. The second G-L theory based analysis is as follow. In the QC-TBG, there are two graphene mono-layers which are weakly coupled. It's known that the electron-electron interaction within each mono-layer can induce degenerate (d xy , d x 2 -y 2 )-wave pairing. Therefore, if we turn off the inter-layer coupling, we would obtain four degenerate dwave pairings, i.e. (d x 2 -y 2 ). As the intra-layer hopping and interaction strengths are much stronger than the inter-layer ones, one can reasonably first let each two degenerate d-wave pairings on one mono-layer mix as d ± id, and then consider their inter-layer Josephson coupling. Further more, we only consider the cases wherein the pairings from the two mono-layers are both d + id or d -id, because otherwise the system cannot gain energy from the inter-layer Josephson coupling. The argument for this point is as follow. Physically, the coupling between the d ± id pairing order parameters from the two layers mainly originates from the inter-layer Josephson coupling. Formally, this coupling can be understood as the consequence of the secondorder perturbational process, if one takes the inter-layer tunneling term H in Eq. (S3) as the perturbation. The contribution of this second-order perturbation to the energy or the free energy can be roughly taken as where ∆ denotes the averaged pairing-gap amplitude and t ij is symmetric under the 6-folded rotation. From Eq. (S32), we have Eq. (S44) is used in the main text to obtain θ = π 3 or -2π 3 , under which this equation is satisfied. The latter generator dictates The symmetry under this specular reflection operation requires Clearly, the free energy formula (S37) and (S38) satisfy Eq. (S46). From the above analysis, we know that the free energy function provided by Eq. (S37) and Eq. (S38) satisfies all the symmetries of the system. Through minimization of the free energy function, we can obtain the d ± id or g ± ig pairing symmetries of the QC-TBG, as has already been provided in the main text. This section provides detailed informations about the topological properties of the obtained d + id and g + ig TSCs, including their winding numbers, Chern numbers, the spontaneous super current and the Majorana edge states. The distributions of the gap amplitudes of the obtained d + id-and g + ig-wave pairing gap functions for the typical doping level δ = 0.32 are shown on the two Fermi pockets separately in Fig. The topological properties of the obtained TSCs are robust against slight deviation of the twist angle from 30 • to, say 29.9 • . Under such deviation, the point group decays to D 6 , and our solution of Eq. (S21) at, say the doping level δ = 0.32, yields a leading pairing symmetry belonging to the 2D IRRP of D 6 with L = 2. The 1 : ±i mixing of the two obtained degenerate basis functions leads to a distribution of the gap phase angles on the FS very similar as that of the g + ig-wave pairing shown in Fig. The details for calculating the Majorana edge states are as follow. We transform Eq. (S18) into the real space and get the BdG Hamiltonian, In the following, we provide the details for the calculation of the spontaneous super current. The α-component (α = x, y) of the vectorial current operator at site i is defined as where A is the vector potential with component A iα . It appears in ĤMF [A] through a modification of ĤTB into For the study of the spontaneous super current, the field A goes to 0. In such a case, one gets where R ij,α is the α-component of R ij . After some derivations, one can get We prove below that the expectation values of the super currents on each site are always zero under the periodic boundary condition for each layer, that is with Note that the intra-band pairing has been taken in the above derivation, which is usually physical. Therefore, the spontaneous super current cannot emerge under the periodic boundary condition for each layer, if only the intra-band pairing is considered. However, under the open boundary condition, the spontaneous super current can emerge at the edge. Our numerical results reveal the existence of the Majorana edge states and spontaneous edge currents in the d + id and g + ig TSC states, with the latter case shown in the main text. These properties further justify the topological properties of the obtained TSCs. kq with |kα j t ij R ij,α kαμ Re ξ * ij t ij R ij,α kαμ Re ξ * i,kμα + ξj,kμα v 2 kμα = 0,