The increased capabilities of coupling more and more materials through functional interfaces are paving the way to a series of exciting experiments and extremely advanced devices. Here we focus on the capability of magnetically inhomogeneous superconductor/ferromagnet (S/F) interfaces to generate spin-polarized triplet pairs. We build on previous achievements on spin-filter ferromagnetic Josephson junctions (JJs) and find unique correspondence between neat experimental benchmarks in the temperature behavior of the critical current and theoretical modelling based on microscopic calculations, which allow to determine a posteriori spin-singlet and triplet correlation functions. This kind of combined analysis provides an accurate proof of the coexistence and tunability of singlet and triplet transport. This turns to be an opportunity to model disorder and spinmixing effects in a JJ to enlarge the space of parameters, which regulate the phenomenology of the Josephson effect and could be applied to a variety of hybrid JJs. The growing complexity of the Josephson junctions (JJs) in terms of layout and materials has significantly increased the "parameters space" for a full understanding and control of their properties It is well established that spin-polarized triplet pairs are generated via spin-mixing and spin-rotation processes at magnetically inhomogeneous S/F interfaces The strong evidence for the presence of spin-triplet supercurrents in a JJ is the slower decay of the characteristic voltage of the junction with increasing F layer thickness In parallel with the work on diffusive ferromagnets, superconducting tunnel junctions with ferromagnetic insulator (FI) barriers (SFIS), namely spin-filter NbN/GdN/NbN JJs, have revealed unique transport properties, such as spin-polarization phenomena Here we build on a previous study of the critical current I c as a function of the temperature T in NbN-GdN-NbN JJs The large variety of materials and configurations employed in diffusive SFS JJs in literature allows to access a wide range of behaviors for the thermal dependence of the I c An external magnetic field perpendicular to the Josephson transport direction gradually modifies the experimental I c (T ) curves, i.e. a plateau extended over a wide range of temperatures evolves into a non-monotonic behavior by increasing the magnetic field. To the best of our knowledge, this represents the experimental evidence of an "in situ" tuning of the relative weight between spin-singlet and spin-triplet supercurrents in single-layered SFIS JJs, which is explained in terms of a reduced disorder parameter in presence of magnetic field for a multi-domain ferromagnet. The ability to describe the combined effect of magnetic inhomogeneities and disorder in complex barriers, with clear benchmarks on the phenomenology of the junctions, can be of reference for a variety of structures. The junctions under study are NbN/GdN/NbN JJs We model the S/FI/S junctions using a tight-binding BdG Hamiltonian on a two-dimensional (2D) lattice The Hamiltonian of the junction in the Nambu⊗spin space is given by with Here, ψ † μ (r) and ψ μ (r) are the field operators creating/destructing an electron with spin μ at the lattice point r = jx + my, with j = 0, 1, . . . , L, L + 1 and m = 1, . . . ,W . Here and in the followings, the symbols . and . describe the 2 × 2 and 4 × 4 matrices, in spin and Nambu⊗spin spaces, respectively. In Equation In the S-leads, ĤS is described by the parameters t S and μ S , representing the hopping integral among nearest-neighbor lattice sites and the chemical potential, respectively. Relevant parameters of the Hamiltonian ĤFI , instead, are the hopping integral t, the Fermi energy μ FI and the amplitude of the spin-orbit interaction α, used to introduce a spin-symmetry breaking The Josephson current J at finite temperature T is derived from the Matsubara Green's function (GF) of the FI barrier, calculated with the recursive Green's function (RGF) technique and solves the following Gor'kov equation Here ω n = (2n + 1)πT is the fermionic Matsubara frequency, T is the temperature and τ0 and τν (ν = 1, 2, 3) are the analogous of the identity and Pauli matrices in the Nambu space, respectively. The Josephson current originates from the GFs connecting two adjacent sites along the x-direction (namely Ǧω n (r, r + x) and Ǧω n (r + x, r)), and reads Here, Tr stands for the trace over the Nambu⊗spin space and Ť± matrices describe the hopping and the SOC along the propagation direction (their explicit form is reported in Supplementary Note 1) The off-diagonal terms of the matrix in the right-hand side of Equation 2 are the so-called anomalous Green's functions Fω n . From these latter, taking the elements with r = r = jx + my, we can derive the four pairing components with s-wave symmetry at each position in the barrier ( j = 1, . . . , L) along the x-direction 45 : where f 0 is the spin-singlet component, and f ν , with ν = 1, 2, 3 are the spin-triplet components. In particular, f 3 is the oppositespin triplet component and the equal-spin triplet components f ↑ ( f ↓ ) are defined as f ↑ (↓) = i f 2 ∓ f 1 (see Supplementary Note 1 for details). Here, similarly to Equation( Analogous considerations can be applied to the GFs connecting the sites at the position r with their neighbors in rx and r + x, from which we can calculate the odd-parity p-wave pairing functions. Thus, the p-wave correlations, at the position j along x inside the barrier (r = jx + my), can be expressed as: In Figure Details on Hamiltonian parameters used in the simulations can be found in Supplementary Note 2. However, we here briefly discuss the spirit of our lattice modelling. All the energy parameters are expressed in dimensionless units where the energy scale is the hopping t in the FI. The strenght of the SOC, α, is scaled by ta (with a lattice constant), while the Josephson current is calculated in units of J 0 = e∆. In our simulations, we fix t = 1, μ FI = 0, μ s = 3, ∆ = 0.005, h = 0.25. Further, we note that NbN (S leads) and GdN (FI barrier) are characterized by almost equal hopping parameters When modelling the experiments, we use α as a measure of the spin-mixing and it is chosen to be α = 0.04, unless otherwise indicated. Although we choose a small spin-orbit field so that α h, it breaks the spin symmetry at interfaces and is sufficient to cause the generation of long-range equal triplet-correlation pairs with total spin projection S z = ±1. The numerical simulations in Figure2 are performed on lattices characterized by: (a) L = 8, W = 24, (b) L = 8, W = 28, (c) L = 8,W = 32, expressed in units of lattice sites. Tunnel junctions experience an exponential suppression of the critical current when increasing the barrier thickness We notice that the Hamiltonian parameters, as well as the lattice size, have no microscopic (atomistic) origin and are chosen to describe the main mechanisms that are expected to occur in the experimental devices. Even though the lattice size is scaled down compared to the experimental system, we think that our theoretical model gives qualitatively an accordance with the experimental results as long as the model parameters are adjusted accordingly. We can relate the plateau in the I c (T ) curve to an overall broadening of a 0 -π transition in temperature. The calculated CPRs in Figures In Figure The 3.0 nm-thick barrier junction exhibits s-wave triplet correlations functions larger than the singlet one, with a major contribution provided by the equal-spin triplet component with S z = +1, f ↑ (Figure In order to investigate the peculiar transport properties arising in these systems, we have probed the I c (T ) response to an external magnetic field applied in the plane of the JJs. In Figure The results are reported in Figure Such a progressive variation of the I c (T ) curves in presence of an external magnetic field is not observed in junctions with thinner GdN barriers, as shown in the Supplementary Figure This picture is supported by numerical simulations obtained when changing the strength of the impurity potential in the 2D-lattice model while keeping fixed all the other parameters. As a matter of fact, in order to have a good agreement with experimental data, we model the GdN as a ferromagnetic half metal In Figure The theoretical results in Figures In Figure At the same time, by keeping the spin-orbit field weak and by increasing V imp (dark blue-scale), the minimum of the 0 -π transition occurs at higher critical current values and it is broadened in temperature, but always showing a non-monotonic trend for the I c (T ). The characteristic plateau structure is observed only when considering a combined effect of SOC and impurities, once fixed the dimensions of the system. As it is shown for the SFIS JJ with d F = 3.0 nm in Figure A transition between the peculiar plateau-shape of the I c (T ) curve towards an incipient 0 -π curve is experimentally observed increasing the strength of an external weak magnetic field (Figure In conclusion, in this work we have investigated on the occurence of the unconventional I c (T ) behaviors observed in SFIS JJs. The presence of a plateau extended over a wide range of temperatures and the peculiar non-monotonic behavior in the I c (T ) when increasing the thickness of the barrier can be explained in terms of the coexistence of spin-singlet and triplet superconductivity, whose correlation functions have been calculated by using a tight-binding BdG descripion of the system The I c (T ) measurements at zero-field have been performed by using an evaporation cryostat from 0.3 K up to the critical temperature of the devices T c ∼ 12 K The I c (T ) curves at finite external magnetic field have been measured by using the evaporation cryostat, which is equipped with a NbTi coil able to generate a magnetic field perpendicular to the transport direction At each temperature, we have measured the amplitude of the first lobe of the Fraunhofer pattern H 0 . The error on H 0 is 3%. Then, we have estimated the critical current I c at different percentage of H 0 , from 0%H 0 to 85%H 0 for the JJ with d F = 3.0 nm. The I c for the JJ with d F = 3.5 nm at high temperatures is less than some nanoamperes Given the small range of the field explored, the shift of the maximum in the Fraunhofer pattern due to the hysteretic magnetization of the barrier was of the order of ∼ 0.1 mT Table (A) s-wave (B) p-wave 