We develop a theory for the dynamics of an Andreev bound state (ABS) hosted by a weak link of finite length for which charging effects are important. We derive the linear response of both the current through the link and charge accumulated in it with respect to the phase and gate voltage biases. The resulting matrix encapsulates the spectroscopic properties of a weak link embedded in a microwave resonator. In the low-frequency limit, we obtain the response functions analytically using an effective low-energy Hamiltonian, which we derive. This Hamiltonian minimally accounts for Coulomb interaction and is suitable for a phenomenological description of a weak link having a finite length. Andreev bound states (ABSs) constitute key elements of the microscopic picture of the Josephson effect The advent of circuit quantum electrodynamics (cQED) brought new experimental capabilities for investigating ABS physics. By coupling the weak link to a microwave resonator, experiments finely resolved separate ABSs and probed their spectrum in various limits The manipulation and readout of Andreev qubits rely on interaction with microwave-frequency modes and radiation. A simplest model that describes the microwave properties of an ABS is that of a short, highly transparent junction with a single transport channel All of the above simplifications of the short junction model come from neglecting the dwell time of a quasiparticle in the junction region. Usually, the finite dwell time is accounted for by considering microscopic models in which the length of the weak link is comparable to the superconducting coherence length. While such models add an additional realistic aspect for describing the microwave properties of the weak link Here we answer this question affirmatively and calculate the microwave response of a finite-length weak link in a simple phenomenological model that accounts for the dwell time and Coulomb interaction. To build up the model, we assume that the level spacing in an isolated weak link region is large compared to the superconducting order parameter in the leads, δε ∆. In that case, there is only a single ABS in the system. The finite dwell time, t dw , introduces the energy scale Γ ≡ /t dw which can be interpreted as a normal-state linewidth of levels in the weak link. We consider the case in which this scale may be comparable to ∆. The electrodynamics of the ABS in this regime can be captured by representing the weak link as a single-level quantum dot coupled to two superconducting leads by tunnel junctions poisoning Below we summarize our main results. After writing down the fundamental aspects of our model [Sec. II], in Sec. III we find the ABS energy spectrum as a function of its occupancy with quasiparticles and applied phase and gate voltage biases. The main parameters that control these dependencies are the rates of tunneling between the dot and the leads Γ L , Γ R (expressed in energy units), the superconducting order parameter ∆, and the on-site Coulomb repulsion U . Our results for the energies are valid at arbitrary ratio Γ/∆ (where Γ = Γ L +Γ R ) provided that Coulomb interaction is weak, U ∆ + Γ, so that the Kondo effect does not develop In an experimentally relevant limit Γ ∼ ∆ In the even fermion parity sector the ABS forms an Andreev pair qubit The response functions of the ABS are sensitive to the presence of Coulomb interaction. The strength of the interaction U can be deduced from the response functions measured in states with different occupation of the ABS. In Sec. VI we identify a particularly convenient quantity which gives a direct access to the magnitude of interaction, χ asym = χ[0]+χ [2] 2 χ The response functions can be measured experimentally in a circuit quantum electrodynamics (cQED) architecture by coupling the weak link to a microwave resonator and measuring the dispersive shift of the latter. We demonstrate how specific components of the matrix response function χ may be singled out by tailoring the geometry of the resonator [see Sec. VII]. Our theory thus provides a guide for analyzing measurements of the microwave response of finite-length nanowire weak links. We consider a weak-link between two superconducting leads with a solitary ABS. We assume that the linewidth for a quasiparticle in the weak link, Γ ≡ /t dw , might be comparable to ∆ while the level spacing of the link δε ∆. It is possible to model such a weak link as a quantum dot tunnel-coupled to two superconducting leads (see Fig. The Hamiltonian of the lead i (i = L/R denotes the left/right lead, respectively) is: (2) Here ψ σ,i (r) and ψ † σ,i (r) are the annihilation and creation operators of an electron with spin σ = ↑ or ↓ in the lead i, ξ is the operator of kinetic energy with the respect to the Fermi level, and ∆ is the s-wave superconducting gap, identical in the two leads. We work in a gauge in which the superconducting phases of the leads are attached to the tunneling amplitudes, cf. Eq. ( The "quantum dot" is described by where g (t) is determined by the applied gate voltage, g (t) = -eV g (t) (e > 0). The latter can have both a static and a dynamic part, V g (t) = V g + δV g (t), where V g controls the energy of the fermionic level at the dot and δV g (t) describes the external driving. U > 0 is the energy of Coulomb interaction at the level. Throughout the manuscript we assume that the Coulomb interaction is weak, U ∆ + Γ. The reference point for the gate voltage is chosen such that g = 0 is the charge neutrality point. The remaining term in Eq. ( where t i is the tunneling amplitude. The superconducting phase φ i (t) has static and dynamic parts, φ i (t) = φ i + δφ i (t). The dynamic component of each phase is related to the dynamic part of the voltage applied to the respective lead, δV i (t), via the Josephson relation , where φ 0 = /2e is the reduced flux quantum. It is convenient to characterize the tunneling between the dot and the leads by the corresponding tunneling rates Γ i = πνt 2 i , where ν is the normal-state density of states at the Fermi level in the leads (per spin species). We also introduce the total tunneling rate Γ and the difference of tunneling rates δΓ: Throughout our work we assume for simplicity that the rates Γ L and Γ R do not depend on the applied gate voltage. In our model, we assume that the capacitance between the dot and the gate is much larger than the capacitances between the dot and the superconducting leads. This assumption is justified if the gate is located sufficiently close to the weak link. We also neglect the capacitance between the dot and the ground. In this case, voltage V g (t) applied to the gate is equivalent to voltage -V g (t) with respect to the ground applied simultaneously to both leads, as these two situations differ by an overall shift of energy. Using this freedom we choose φ L (t) = -φ R (t) = φ(t)/2. We discuss how our theory is modified at an arbitrary ratio between the capacitances to the gate and to the leads in Appendix E. Finally, we introduce the operators of the charge at the dot, Q = -e σ d † σ d σ , and of the current flowing through the weak link, Î = -e 2 d dt (N R -N L ), where N i is operator of the number of electrons in lead i. We note that d dt Q = e d dt (N L + N R ) due to charge conservation. We initially assume that the phase bias φ and gate voltage V g are static and study the many-body energy spectrum of model defined by Eqs. ( We start with a detailed description of the many-body spectrum in the absence of Coulomb interaction. We then take U = 0 into account perturbatively. At U = 0 the energies of the discrete levels can be expressed as (see where the subscript 0 indicates that U = 0. Here, E cont is the energy associated with the continuum states (see later discussion). E A,0 > 0 is the energy of the ABS which can be found by solving characteristic equation det G -1 dd (ε) = 0 In this expression, τ x,y,z are Pauli matrices in the Nambu space, and The energy of the ABS, E A,0 , can be written analytically when the parameters of the system are tuned such that E A,0 ∆. The latter condition is satisfied, at any phase bias, if the level at the dot is located close to the Fermi energy and is weakly coupled to the leads, Γ, | g | ∆. It is also satisfied when the coupling to the leads is strong, Γ > ∼ ∆, provided |δΓ|, | g | Γ and |φ -π| 1. In either case we obtain an approximate solution The prefactor ∆/(∆ + Γ) characterizes the extent to which the wave-function of the ABS is localized at the quantum dot. If the tunneling between the leads and the dot is weak, Γ ∆, the wave-function is predominantly localized at the dot and ∆/(∆ + Γ) ≈ 1. In this regime, Eq. ( Note that, regardless of the ratio between Γ and ∆, the approximate functional form of the dependence of E A,0 on φ in Eq. ( There is, however, an important difference: in our model the level is generally detached from the superconducting gap at all phase biases, δ < ∆, whereas for the short junction δ = ∆ and E A,0 therefore reaches ∆ at φ = 0. In Eq. ( where . This energy depends on the gate voltage and phase due to the coupling between the leads and the dot, E cont ≡ E cont ( g , φ). The integral in Eq. ( By extrapolating Eq. ( To conclude the discussion of the non-interacting case, we note that at U = 0 the ground state of the system always has even fermion number parity as follows directly from Eq. Next, we apply the first order perturbation theory in U to approximately find the energies of the discrete states in the presence of Coulomb interaction. We start with the states in the even fermion parity sector, |0 and |2 . At U = 0 it is convenient to parametrize their energies as To determine E A and E even , we project the interaction Hamiltonian, , onto the subspace formed by the unperturbed states |0 0 and |2 0 , thus constructing a characteristic equation. The projection is carried out conveniently is the basis of particle and hole states that can be obtained from |0 0 and |2 0 by a proper rotation. We find the following equation for E A (see Appendix B for details of the derivation): where H is related to the non-interacting Green's function, H = E A,0 -Z(E A,0 )G -1 dd (E A,0 ) [see Eqs. (8), with γ ≡ γ[φ] = Γ cos(φ/2) + iδΓ sin(φ/2). Functions are defined as where i, j = p/h are the Nambu indices that correspond to particles and holes, respectively. The parameter α ≡ α[ g , φ] in Eq. ( It can be explicitly expressed through the bound state energy E A,0 : At arbitrary Γ, g , φ equations ( where Here, functions f ≡ f (Γ/∆) and g ≡ g(Γ/∆) depend only on the total tunneling rate Γ and contain no dependence on φ and g with the considered precision. These functions describe the renormalization of g and γ[φ] in the expression for E A by the Coulomb interaction [cf. Eqs. ( We proceed by calculating energy E even in Eq. ( At arbitrary Γ, g , and φ, the energy E even can be computed numerically using Eqs. ( In this case, we may approximate and neglect |A ph | A pp , A hh . When the tunneling between the dot and the leads is strong, Γ/∆ 1, the ABS spreads from the dot into the leads, and α 1. This dilutes the effects of interaction. Indeed, using Eq. ( U . In the opposite limit, Γ ∆, the ABS is localized at the dot: α ≈ 1 and E even -E 0 [1] = U/4. We note that in the leading approximation in E A,0 /∆ parameters α and A ij are independent of φ and g [see Eq. ( Finally, we calculate the energy of the odd states, E does not depend on σ). By computing the matrix element (see Appendix B) we obtain An example of phase and gate-voltage dependence of energies E[n] obtained numerically with Eqs. ( A notable feature demonstrated by Fig. To characterize this asymmetry we introduce the difference In the absence of Coulomb interaction E asym = 0, as follows directly from Eq. ( and thus E asym = U/2. In the presence of tunneling, we use Eqs. ( with α given by Eq. of states with n quasiparticles at the Andreev bound state as functions of φ [panel (a)] and g = -eVg [panel (b)]; the energies are calculated with respect to E[0] evaluated at φ = 0 and g = 0. The plots are produced using Eqs. ( The gate voltage dependence in panel (b) is plotted for φ = π; note that g is computed with respect to the charge-degeneracy point g = 0. Dashed line shows the half-sum between energies E[0] and E )/2 (dashed gray curve). The mismatch between the two curves is determined by E asym , see Eq. ( Notably, E asym > 0 (since U > 0). This means that Coulomb interaction pushes the energy of the odd state down with respect to the energies of states in the even sector. This tendency leads to the switch of the ground state parity from even to odd for sufficiently strong Coulomb repulsion Γ+∆ and E A ∆ we reproduce the known result for the boundary between the phases with even and odd ground states Finally, we note that the asymmetry between the levelspacings can be probed in the tunneling spectroscopy of the junction If the ABS is located well below the gap, E A ∆, the dynamical properties of the junction at small frequencies, ω ∆, can be described with a help of a low-energy theory. Here we present such a theory. The requirement The fermion number parity is conserved within our model. Thus, the dynamics of the system can be studied separately for states with odd and even fermion parity. In the odd parity sector, states |1 ↑ and |1 ↓ are not coupled by the applied phase or gate voltage drives due to spin conservation. Thus, in the odd states the system adiabatically follows the change in g and φ induced by the drives as long as the drive frequency is small, ω ∆. The dynamics is more intricate in the even parity sector. If the frequency of the drives is comparable to E[2] -E[0] = 2E A , the transitions between states |0 and |2 have to be accounted for. This dynamics can be captured by a low-energy Hamiltonian. The latter can be obtained from the full Hamiltonian by applying a twolevel adiabatic approximation. In the particle-hole basis, the low-energy Hamiltonian is given by (see Appendix C for the detailed derivation) where are defined in Eq. ( Hamiltonian , where |p and |h are the particle and hole states respectively (see Appendix C for details). It is convenient to perform a time-dependent gauge transformation that removes V (t) from the diagonal components of Eq. ( even with where One can check that in this gauge the low-energy charge and current operators can be obtained as the derivatives of the low-energy Hamiltonian: even , respectively. This property is useful for studying the electromagnetic response of the system and therefore we always work with the gauge-transformed version of the low-energy Hamiltonian. Thus in what follows we omit the prime in H (le) even . We note that the limit Γ ∆ reduces the Hamiltonian Finally, we remind that Hamiltonian (28) was derived under the assumption that capacitance between the dot and the gate is much larger than the capacitance between the dot and the leads. If the capacitances to the leads and to the gate are comparable, g (t) [and thus ̃ g (t)] in Eq. ( In this section, we study the linear electromagnetic response of the ABS to weak externally applied drives δV g (t) and δφ(t) = φ 0 δφ(t) [note that we use the flux variable φ to characterize the differential phase drive; φ 0 = /2e is the reduced flux quantum]. As follows from linearizing Hamiltonian (1), time-dependent perturbations describing these drives are given by δH Q (t) = QδV g (t) and δH I (t) = Îδφ(t), respectively. The linear response function χ[ω, n] ≡ χ[ω, g , φ, n] depends on the state in which the system resides before the application of the perturbations. n = 0 and n = 2 correspond to states |0 and |2 , respectively. n = 1 corresponds to either |1 ↑ or |1 ↓ (the response function in our model does not depend on spin and we do not specify it in the definition of χ). We define the response function as a matrix Here, δQ and δI are the deviations of the average charge and current from their stationary values. As usual, the Hermitian (anti-Hermitian) part of χ describes the non-dissipative (dissipative) response of the system. The response function matrix satisfies a general relation that guarantees that physical quantities are real, Prior to computing χ, we discuss symmetry properties of this matrix. From time-reversal and particle-hole symmetries we obtain respectively (for brevity we omitted the state argument n). Here matrix M = diag{1, -1}. From inversion symmetry we get [43] In this expression we introduced Γ L and Γ R as arguments. Note that in the right side of Eq. (34) these arguments are exchanged. The symmetry relations have a set of important consequences for the off-diagonal component of the response function χ IQ (similar conclusions are true for χ QI ). From Eq. Finally, from Eqs. ( Here, indices A and B stand for Q or I while a and b are the respective drive variables, V g or φ. The second term in Eq. ( and the quantum capacitance, where Q describes the average charge at the dot. The offdiagonal component, The second term in Eq. ( where Here the average is computed over the unperturbed stationary state of the system which we assume to be either |0 , |1 ↑ , |1 ↓ , or |2 . The subtraction of the zero-frequency contribution is required to ensure that δχ AB [0, n] = 0 and that the overall response function χ AB is related to derivatives of energy at zero frequency (see Appendix D 1 for detailed discussion). As follows directly from the Kubo formula, δχ AB can be expressed as a sum over many-body states of the system, (37) Here, k labels the many-body states, prime designates that k = n, and A nk and B kn are the matrix elements of operators Â and B. Notice that the sum in Eq. (37) runs over the states that belong to both discrete and continuous parts of the many-body spectrum. If the system is initially in an even state, |0 or |2 , the sum involves one discrete state (|2 or |0 , respectively) in addition to the states of continuum. If the system is in an odd state, |1 ↑ or |1 ↓ , the sum includes only the states of the continuum; there are no matrix elements between |1 ↑ and |1 ↓ due to spin conservation. We now describe how the response function can be computed in the limit of weak Coulomb interaction, U ∆ + Γ, and small frequencies, ω ∆ Notice that the response function has a resonant behavior at the transition frequency, ω = 2E A . Such a resonance corresponds to a process in which a drive photon is absorbed to change the occupation of the Andreev bound state. Away from the resonance, the low-frequency response is purely non-dissipative. The dynamic component of the response function in state |2 is approximately related to that in state |0 via as follows directly from Eq. (37) when neglecting terms with k in the many-body continuum. Next, recall that according to Eq. ( Note that for ω E A , the response function scales as δχ QQ [ω, 0] ∝ ω 2 . Similarly to δχ QQ , the components δχ QI , δχ IQ , and δχ II can be found with the help of the low-energy Hamiltonian Notice that there exists a well-defined limit δχ IQ [ω, n]/(-iω)| ω→0 = C p which describes the capacitive response of the polarization charge between the leads to the applied gate voltage. The capacitance C p vanishes for symmetric contacts, δΓ = 0. This is because in that case the system is symmetric under a combination of a time-reversal and inversion symmetries (see Eq. Capacitance δχ II [ω, n]/(-iω) 2 | ω→0 describes the response of the polarization charge to the voltage bias between the leads. For Γ ∆, |δΓ|, | g |, U equation ( (43) This limit corresponds to the case of a short single-channel junction with high transparency. Accordingly, Eq. (43) reproduces the known result for the response function of the short junction near φ = π We demonstrate the behavior of the low-frequency response functions χ QQ [ω, n] and χ II [ω, n] for a particular choice of model parameters in Fig. since ω is small compared to ∆. For weak Coulomb interaction, they are primarily determined by E cont , i.e., the contribution of the occupied continuum states [see Eqs. ( Results of Sections III-V indicate that the response functions are sensitive to the on-site Coulomb repulsion. Therefore, the measurement of these functions might be used to estimate the strength of the Coulomb interaction. A particularly convenient combination of the response functions that explicitly characterizes the magnitude of parameter U is which we call the response asymmetry. This quantity is illustrative because it is non-zero only in the presence of Coulomb interaction. The latter property can be easily seen in the limit ω → 0. Indeed, χ asym AB [ω → 0] = ∂ a ∂ b E asym and E asym = 0 for U = 0 as was shown in Section III. We demonstrate in Appendix D 4 that the response asymmetry also vanishes at ω = 0 when U = 0. We calculate χ asym AB in the regime of perturbatively weak Coulomb repulsion and low frequency, ω ∆. There, the asymmetry reduces to that of the adiabatic components of the response functions. Indeed, in this limit the dynamic components of the response functions cancel in the combination χ AB [ω, 0]+χ AB [ω, 2], as can be seen from Eq. where α is given by Eq. For stronger coupling, Γ < ∼ ∆, we demonstrate the asymmetry of inductive response functions χ II [ω, n] in Fig. Above we demonstrated that the microwave response of a finite-length weak link is characterized by four response functions, χ QQ , χ QI , χ IQ , and χ II . Experimentally, these response functions can be studied using the toolbox of circuit quantum electrodynamics (cQED). In cQED, the weak link coupled to a microwave resonator shifts the frequency of the latter. The magnitude of this dispersive shift may be related to a certain combination of the response functions, specific for a particular resonator design. In this section, we elucidate this relation and demonstrate how different response functions can be measured by appropriately tailoring the geometry of the resonator. We assume that the weak link hosting ABS is attached to a microwave resonator at two sites, L and R [see Fig. We assume that the resonator is grounded (see Fig. Here Y ij [ω] is the admittance of the resonant Andreev level. The admittance matrix is related to the response functions computed in Section V [see Eq. ( (we suppressed the frequency arguments for brevity). We assume that the presence of the weak link does not affect the structure of the modes of the resonator. This assumption is justified if the admittance of the load is small enough. In that case, Eq. ( and (Y res ij ) [ω res ] = dY res ij /dω| ω=ωres . Equation ( Finally, we mention that Eq. ( Our work elucidates the problem of computing the microwave response of a finite-length weak link hosting a single ABS. Within a minimal Hamiltonian model, we calculated the corresponding linear response functions and found their evolution with the number of quasiparticles occupying ABS. The resulting linear response functions can be used to analyze the state-dependent dispersive shifts in cQED experiments with the weak link coupled to a microwave resonator. Our minimal model captures the essential features differentiating a finite-length weak link from a point contact: (i) for the former both the ABS and the delocalized states contribute to the inductive response, and (ii) a finite-length link may accommodate electric charge making Coulomb interaction important. Our theory combined with the recent experimental results Low-energy Hamiltonian. The energy of an ABS formed in a finite-length weak link lies within the superconducting gap and does not reach ∆ at any phase bias. To describe the ABS energy spectrum and dynamics, we derived a 2 × 2 low-energy Hamiltonian which takes into account weak charging effects and delocalization of the quasiparticle into the leads [see Eq. ( ∆, and provides a reasonable extrapolation between the solvable limits at E A (φ) ∼ ∆. The low-energy Hamiltonian describes the dynamics of the ABS in the even fermion parity sector. It provides a lumped element model of the weak link that can be used to analyze a variety of microwave experiments. Here, we applied the Hamiltonian to calculate the linear response functions of the weak link. The low-energy Hamiltonian may also be used in more complicated situations where the quantum fluctuations of phase across the weak link are appreciable Inductance of the continuum part of the weaklink spectrum. As well-known in theory Electrodynamic response functions. A finitelength weak link may accommodate charge. Both this charge and the current through the weak link respond to gate voltage and phase bias. Thus, the microwave response of an ABS has a multi-terminal character; the linear response functions form a 2 × 2 matrix, χ. At small frequencies the response functions are adiabatic, i.e., they can be found as the derivatives of the energies of the many-body states with respect to appropriate parameters [see Eq. ( Coulomb interaction. Accumulation of charge in a finite-length weak link makes the effects of Coulomb interaction important for the ABS physics. Surprisingly, most of the microwave experiments with nanowire weak links completely ignore the role of interaction in interpreting the data. Our recent experimental results Our quantum-dot inspired description of a finite-length weak link can be extended in multiple ways. In particular, it is possible to include the Zeeman effect, account for more levels in the weak link, and for spin-orbit interaction. Looking forward, it would be interesting to compute and analyze, in the same framework, the microwave response of a finite-length weak link connecting topological superconductors Here, we work in the "semiconductor" picture of superconductivity, in which there are states with both positive and negative energies. The first term corresponds to the states of the continuum. The second and the third terms describe the ABS; E A,0 is the ABS energy which may be found as a solution of det G -1 dd (ε) = 0 in the interval ε ∈ [0, ∆). The ground state of Hamiltonian (A8) corresponds to all single-particle states with negative energy being occupied, where |Ω is the vacuum state. Other discrete many-body states are The number n in the label of the state |n 0 characterizes the number of single-particle excitations above the ground state. We can find energies of the discrete states with the help of Eqs. (A8), (A9), and (A10), Here E cont = <-∆ corresponds to the total energy of the filled states of the continuum. This continuum contribution can be conveniently represented in terms of the Green's functions G R/A of the system, As can be shown, i,0 are the Green's functions of the lead i in the absence of tunneling to the dot [it is given by g While the first term is thermodynamically large, it is also independent of the phase and gate-voltage biases φ, g . Therefore, it has no effect on the dynamics of the ABS. By omitting the irrelevant first term and performing integration by parts on the second term, we obtain Eq. where fermionic operators γ p/h are defined as and α is a normalization factor that ensures {γ p/h , γ † p/h } = 1 [this factor is similar for γ p and γ h due to particle-hole symmetry]. The particle and hole operators γ p/h are more convenient than operators γ ±EA,0 since the interaction Hamiltonian has a more concise form in terms of the former; this simplifies the calculation of the matrix elements of H int . We note that the normalization factor α can be expressed with the help of particle-hole symmetry as Thus, physically it describes the probability of finding a quasiparticle in the ABS at the dot rather than in the leads. We proceed by finding the correction to the energies of the odd states due to the presence of interaction. First, we note that the matrix element of H int between different odd states vanishes since the Coulomb interaction conserves spin. The matrix elements between the odd and even states are zero as well, due to the conservation of fermion number parity. Therefore, to find the desired corrections to the odd states energies, it is enough to compute the expectation value of the interaction Hamiltonian in either of the odd states [the result is the same for the two odd states due to spin-rotation symmetry]. To evaluate this expectation value, it is convenient to express the odd states in terms of the particle and hole operators γ p/h , Substituting the decomposition of operators (B3) into Eq. (B1) and using Eq. (B6) we find for the projection of H int on either of the odd states: Here, we used a set of relations that follow from particle-hole symmetry: and the completeness relation for the single-particle wave-functions: The sums over energies in Eq. (B7) can be expressed in terms of the integrals of the Green's function of the dot. Direct comparison shows that Using these relations in Eq. (B7) we obtain Eq. ( Note that α = 1 -trA follows from Eqs. (B9) and (B10). The trace can be easily computed in terms of E A,0 by bending the integration contour in complex plane. This results in Eq. ( The matrix elements of the interaction Hamiltonian in the even fermion parity sector are computed most easily in the basis of particle and hole states. These states are defined as [see Eq. (A9) for the definition of |O ]. The states |p/h are directly related to the even states |0 0 /2 0 . Using Eq. (B4) we obtain The computation of the matrix elements of H int between particle and hole states can be carried out similarly to how it was done for the odd states. This results in Eqs. ( 1. Low-energy expression for EA In this subsection, we use Eqs. ( Here, in the second term under the sign of det, E A,0 can be neglected in comparison to ∆ in the square root factors. With a similar precision, α can be exchanged for its low-energy value, ∆/(∆ + Γ). Finally, the elements of the matrix A may be approximated by Substituting Eqs. (B14) and (B15) with φ L = -φ R = φ/2 in Eq. (B13) and solving the resulting simplified equation we obtain Eqs. ( and Eeven for weak coupling between the dot and the leads Here, we explicitly calculate energies E where we retained only the leading terms that determine the g -and φ-dependence of E[1] -E 0 With a similar precision we find In the main text, we focus on a particular gauge in which φ L (t) = -φ R (t) = φ(t)/2. In this gauge, we find by combining Eqs. (C16) and (C17): where δΓ = Γ L -Γ R and Finally, we note that in the considered gauge the Berry connection term in Eq. (C18) is small: at most, it produces relative corrections ∼ E A /∆ to the transition matrix elements. The renormalization of the Berry connection due to U ∆ + Γ thus has a very weak influence on the dynamics of the ABS (which is controlled by a small parameter ∼ E A U/∆ 2 1). Neglecting the renormalization, we arrive to Eq. ( Appendix D: Linear response functions 1. General expression for the linear response functions In this section, we derive Eq. ( that includes the diamagnetic term ∂ b Â and the Kubo term χ K AB By definition, the dynamic part of the response function δχ K AB [ω, n] vanishes at zero frequency. The remaining part, in turn describes the zero-frequency response. We may simplify the latter part using the fact that at ω = 0 the system follows the applied drives adiabatically. The adiabaticity implies where we used Â = ∂ a H = ∂ a E[n]. Thus we identify which leads to Eq. ( In this Appendix, we present the plots of phase-and gate voltage-dependence of χ IQ [n, ω] for the parameters Γ L , Γ R , U and ω similar to those used in Fig. Here, we present expressions for the dynamic parts of the response functions without neglecting the small phase factor in Eq. ( Equation where Response function δχ QI can be obtained from Eq. (D6) by conjugating the expression in the square brackets. In this Appendix, we provide the exact expressions for linear response functions in the discrete states |0 0 , |1 0,σ , and |2 0 in the absence of Coulomb interaction. We also clarify why in the non-interacting case the linear response functions satisfy the occupation rule (χ[ω, 0] + χ[ω, 2])/2 = χ[ω, 1]. Again, we use units with = 1. We start with a general expression for the linear response functions. As was shown in Appendix D 1, Here, A and B stand for either current or charge, a and b are the corresponding drive variables (V g corresponds to Q and φ corresponds to I), and the average in χ K AB is taken over the discrete state |n 0 (with n = 0, 1 or 2). The adiabatic part of the response function, ∂ a ∂ b E 0 [n], can be calculated using the exact expression for the energies of the discrete states, cf. Eq. ( and are given explicitly by We will now use the Wick's theorem to express the average [ Â(t), B(0)] in terms of the single-particle Green's functions and matrix elements of the operators I and Q [see Eq. (D10)]. To do that, we first introduce the relevant Green's functions: where μ, ν are the indexes in the Nambu space. In terms of these Green's functions the response functions can be expressed as where A and B are the single-particle versions of the operators Â and B, respectively, and the trace is taken over the matrix indices both in the dot/lead subspace and in the Nambu subspace. Note that the information about the state of the system -|0 0 , |1 0,σ , or |2 0 -is encoded in G +-and G -+ . Next, it is convenient to relate G +-and G -+ to the retarded, advanced, and Keldysh Green's functions, The relations may be summarized as (D14) Representation of Eq. (D14) is convenient, because the retarded and advanced Green's functions are agnostic to the state of the system. The information about the latter is solely contained in the Keldysh Green's function. Substituting Eq. (D14) into Eq. (D12) we obtain As the next step, we transfer the latter equation to the energy domain and use Kramers-Kronig relations as well as In the Eq. (D17) n(ε) is the distribution function. For the considered discrete states n(ε > ∆) = 0 and n(ε < -∆) = 1. State |0 0 is determined by n(-E A,0 ) = 1 and n(E A,0 ) = 0; states |1 σ,0 have n(E A,0 ) = n(-E A,0 ) = (1 + σ)/2, where σ = 1 and σ = -1 correspond to spin up and down, respectively; finally, in the state |2 0 we have n(-E A,0 ) = 0 and n(E A,0 ) = 1. Ultimately, we obtain Notice that the trace in Eq. (D18) does not depend on the distribution function n(ε) since it contains only the retarded and advanced Green's functions. The components of these Green's functions were computed in Appendix A 1. We identify where G R/A dd is determined by Eq. ( di , and G R/A ij are given in Eqs. (A6) and (A7). Note that the advanced Green's function can be obtained from the retarded Green's function via G A (ε) = (G R (ε)) † . Matrix V can be decomposed into a continuum contribution (that is non-zero for |ε| > ∆ only) and the contributions corresponding to the ABS (which are non-zero only at ε = ±E A,0 ), In this expression, where The second line contains processes that involve both the ABS and the quasiparticle continuum. Finally, the first term in the third line corresponds to transition processes that involve only the ABS. The contributions to χ K AB [ω, n] stemming from the first two lines are small at small frequencies due to the large energy denominators. They can be neglected for ω ∆ -E A,0 in comparison with either the first term in the third line of (D24), or with the adiabatic contribution to the response function. In the main text we assumed E A,0 < ∼ ∆ and thus it was enough to require ω ∆ to neglect the first two lines of Eq. (D24). Equation (D24) can be used to obtain an especially simple expression for the diagonal components of the dynamic part of the response function, δχ AA . We find Notice that the diagonal parts of the response function scale as ∝ ω 2 at small frequencies. In the absence of interaction the response functions satisfy the occupation rule, This can be easily checked using Eq. (D24) for the finite-frequency response function χ AB [ω, n]. To do that, first note that n(-E A,0 )n(E A,0 ) = 1 in the state |0 0 and n(-E A,0 )n(E A,0 ) = -1 in the state |2 0 . Therefore, the average of n(-E A,0 )n(E A,0 ) between the even states is zero. At the same time, n(-E A,0 )n(E A,0 ) = 0 in the odd states. Thus Eq. (D26) holds. We believe that the validity of the occupation rule Eq. (D26) in the absence of Coulomb interaction is not restricted to a particular model considered here. First of all, Eq. (D26) is agnostic to the presence of other ABS within the gap, as long as they have a consistent occupation. Equation (D26) should also hold at U = 0 in the presence of magnetic field and spin-orbit coupling (though in the absence of spin-degeneracy the right hand side of Eq. (D26) should be replaced with a half-sum of the odd sates in the considered spin-split doublet). Finally, the occupation rule also survives the presence of above-the-gap quasiparticles provided that the occupation of the ABS is certain. the gate voltage is static. Then we find Matrix Y ij [ω] can be used to determine the frequency shift of the microwave resonator coupled to the weak link, see Eq. ( 