We report the results of our in-depth analysis of spectroscopic and thermodynamic properties of a multi-orbital metal, like FeSe, which first develops a nematic order and then undergoes a transition into a superconducting state, which co-exists with nematicity. We analyze the angular dependence of the gap function and specific heat CV (T ) of such nematic superconductor. We specifically address three issues: (i) angular dependence of the gap in light of the competition between nematicityinduced s-d mixture and orbital transmutation of low-energy excitations in the nematic state, (ii) the effect of nematicity on the magnitude of the jump of the specific heat CV (T ) at Tc and the temperature dependence of CV (T ) below Tc, and (iii) a potential transition at Tc1 < Tc from an s + d state to an s + e iη d state that breaks time-reversal symmetry. We consider two scenarios for a nematic order: scenario A, in which this order develops between dxz and dyz orbitals on hole and electron pockets and scenario B, in which there is an additional component of the nematic order for dxy fermions on the two electron pockets. INTRODUCTION. Iron-based unconventional superconductors demonstrate remarkable properties, which include multi-orbital low-energy electronic states and ubiquity of the nematic phase. A particularly interesting situation occurs when superconductivity is preceded by the development of a nematic order that breaks C 4 lattice rotational symmetry down to C 2 . The most prominent example of this so-called nematic superconductor is FeSe, in which a nematic order develops at T n ∼ 90K at ambient pressure, while superconductivity develops at a much lower T c ∼ 9K, out of a nematic state The electronic structure of FeSe in the tetragonal phase consists of two hole pockets, centered around the Γ point (the inner one and the outer one), and electron pockets, centered around the X and the Y points of the Brillouine Zone, respectively (Fig. nematic order, when the corresponding band sinks below the Fermi level We consider two scenarios for the nematic order, Φ. In the first (scenario A) we assume that Φ splits the occu-pations of d xz and d yz orbitals: Furthermore, we follow earlier theoretical and experimental studies Scenario B was recently advanced in Ref. A similar behavior has been obtained in monoclinic systems by allowing a non-zero interorbital d xz -d xy and d yz -d xy nematicity In this work we analyze the effect of nematicity on the superconducting state within both scenarios. We discuss the angular dependence of the superconducting gap, most notably on the hole pockets, and the behavior on the specific heat C(T ) at and below T c . Multi-orbital superconductivity in Fe-based materials in the absence of a nematic order has been extensively studied by many groups The pairing interaction in the s-wave and the d-wave channels is expressed in terms of dressed interactions between hole and electron pockets: intra-orbital densitydensity interaction U he , and inter-orbital pair-hopping interactions J he and J ee (see Sec III below). The terms U he and J he are enhanced by magnetic fluctuations with momenta near (0, π) and (π, 0) (the distances between the centers of the Γ and the X and the Y pockets, respectively), and J ee is enhanced by magnetic fluctuations with momentum (π, π) (the distance between the X and the Y pockets). We follow earlier works Our goal is to understand what happens at intermediate values of Φ, relevant to FeSe, in particular, whether there exists the range of Φ h and Φ h /Φ e , where ∆ h has nodes. We show that this range exists, but is confined to near-equal interactions in s-wave and d-wave channels. Nevertheless, even if the gap does not have nodes, its angular variation follows the orbital content of the hole pocket and undergoes a strong evolution once the orbital content changes. For completeness, we also consider the case when the d-wave interaction is stronger than the one in the s +-channel. In this case, the gap has 4 nodes at small Φ h,e and no nodes at large Φ h,e , due to orbital transmutation. We show that the transformation of the nodal structure at intermediate Φ h,e is rather involved, and for some Φ e /Φ h there exists an intermediate gap configuration with 8 nodes. We next consider the behavior of the specific heat C v (T ) at and below T c . We analyze how the jump of C v (T ) varies with the type of nematic order and whether the jump primarily comes from fermions from d xz and d yz orbitals, or there is a sizable contribution from the d xy orbital. A similar issue has been recently studied Finally, we address the issue of potential second transition to the new phase within the superconducting state. The argument here is that in a situation, when the attraction in the d x 2 -y 2 channel is comparable to that in the s +-channel, a bi-quadratic coupling between s-and d-order parameters may turn the s + d pairing state into an s + ie iη d state (the analog of a mixed s + id state in the absence of nematicity). Such a state breaks Z 2 time-reversal symmetry, as the relative factor can be either i or -i. Recent specific heat measurements, C v (T ), of FeSe The structure of the paper is the following. In the next Section we briefly discuss the electronic structure of FeSe. In Sec. III A we obtain the pairing interaction within scenario A, convert it into the band basis, and solve for the pairing gaps on hole and electron pockets. In Sec. III B we analyze the angular dependence of the gap on the hole pocket at various Φ h and Φ h /Φ e . In Sec. III C we study temperature dependence of the gap below T c . In Sec. IV we compute the jump of the specific heat at T c within both scenarios and compare them to the available experimental data. We decompose the jump into contributions from different orbitals and study their relative strength. We also compute specific heat at T < T c . In Sec. V we consider a putative transition into s + e iη d state. Finally, We present our conclusions in Sec. VI. As mentioned in the Introduction, we consider a twodimensional 3 band/3 pocket model Hamiltonian with a hole pocket, centered at the Γ point of the BZ and two electron pockets, centered at X = (0, π) and Y = (π, 0) points of the Brillouin zone, respectively. For simplicity, we neglect the effect of spin-orbit coupling on the band dispersion. where each term is bilinear in spinors. For scenario A we introduce the nematic order Φ as the difference in the occupation of d xz and d yz orbitals, see Eq. (1). We define Φ on the hole pocket as Φ h and on the electron pocket as Φ e . The latter is the difference in the occupation of d xz orbital on the Y pocket and d yz orbital on the X pocket. For scenario B we additionally introduce a second component of a nematic order as the difference between occupations of d xy orbitals on Y and X pockets, see Eq. (2). The band Hamiltonian for the hole pocket H Γ is where θ h is the polar angle for momentum k, measured from the k x -direction in the anti-clockwise direction. We set c = -b 2 , which yields circular hole pockets in the tetragonal phase. The parameters of Eq. ( The larger hole Fermi surface pocket survives at a finite Φ h and becomes elliptical. The dispersion of the corresponding band is see Fig. where the momentum label (k) is implicit and At direction jumps discontinuously from +1 to -1 (yellow and green curves in Fig. The electron pockets are described by the band Hamiltonian H X/Y The diagonal elements are Here, k is measured from X = (π, 0) for the X pocket, and from Y = (0, π) for the Y pocket and the upper (lower) sign corresponds to the X(Y)-pocket. θ X (θ Y ) is the polar angle, measured with respect to k x(y) -direction for the X(Y ) electron pocket in the anti-clockwise direction. Φ e is the electron nematic order defined as, The band parameters of Eq. ( and the band operators e X and e Y , in terms of which where The pairing interaction for the model with local fermion-fermion interaction in the band basis has been discussed previously We consider only the pairing interaction involving d xz and d yz fermions, i.e., assume that μ, ν ∈ {xz, yz}, and Q xz = (0, π), Q yz = (π, 0). The restriction to d xz and d yz orbitals is justified as d xy -fermions have a larger mass Substituting these into Eq. ( where, are s-and dwave components of the pairing interaction between the hole and the electron pockets. We use α = U d Us to measure relative strength of this part of the interaction in the swave and the d-wave channels. We introduce the gap functions ∆ h on the hole pocket and ∆ X and ∆ Y on the electron pockets. The equations for ∆ h , ∆ X , and ∆ Y are obtained by solving 3 × 3 matrix equation. We present the BCS gap equations in Appendix (B), Eqs. (B1-B3). The solution of these gap equations is At T ≈ T c , ∆ i (i = 1, • • • 4) are the solutions of the matrix equation: Here λ is the eigenvalue of the gap matrix defined as A defines the angular average of A over the corresponding Fermi surface pocket, and N X , N Y and N h are the densities of states for the X, Y , and the Γ pocket, respectively. In Fig. We numerically solve Eq. ( where λ 0 = Ne cos 4 φ X . For J ee = 0, the gap function is either s-wave, for α < √ 2, or d-wave, for α > √ 2. For J ee = 0, superconductivity is s-wave when The phase diagram for Eq. 27 is shown in Fig. To simplify the presentation, we neglect J ee . Without nematicity, superconducting order is s-wave for α < √ 2 and ∆ h = ∆ 1 . At small Φ (i.e., small Φ h and Φ e ), φ h ≈ θ h and ∆ 2 ∝ Φ. This gives rise to Φ cos 2θ h angular variation of ∆ h . If this was the only effect of nematicity, the angle variation would grow with Φ, and ∆ h would necessary develop a deep minima and then gap nodes. However, as Φ increases, φ h deviates from θ h due to orbital transmutation, and at large Φ becomes π/2 almost everywhere on the hole pocket. Then ∆ 2 cos 2φ h term becomes angle-independent, and the gap function on the hole pocket recovers a pure s-wave form. Besides, due to the same orbital transmutation, the magnitude ∆ 2 becomes a non-linear function of Φ and not necessary exceeds ∆ 1 even at large Φ. A similar situation holds if α > √ 2, when the superconducting order without nematicity is d-wave, ∆ h = ∆ 2 cos 2θ h . At a small Φ, the key effect of nematicity is an admixture of ∆ 1 . At large Φ, θ h → φ h ≈ π/2, and the nodes disappear. The questions, which we address below are (i) whether for α < √ 2 the nodes in ∆ h develop at intermediate Φ h and (ii) how the nodes in ∆ h disappear for α > √ 2 as Φ h increases. To address these issues we solve the gap equations for different α at various Φ h and Φ h /Φ e . We show the results in Figs. 7-11. Before we discuss these results, several general observations are in order. According to Eq. ( The ratio ∆ 2 /∆ 1 depends on Φ h , Φ e , and on α. Obviously, the nodes are possible only if |∆ 2 /∆ 1 | > 1. Shrinking the angular variation of cos 2φ h at Φ h > Φ cr puts additional restriction on ∆ 2 /∆ 1 for the nodes to appear. Further, the number of possible nodes changes between Φ h < Φ cr and Φ h > Φ cr . In the first case, the gap functions at θ = 0 and π 2 are ∆ 1 + ∆ 2 and ∆ 1 -∆ 2 , respectively. When |∆ 2 /∆ 1 | > 1, the two have opposite signs, hence there have to be an odd number of nodes between 0 and π 2 ; the total number of nodes is then 4, 12, 20, . . . . For Φ h > Φ cr , ∆ h (θ) at θ = 0 and π/2 become the same ∆ 1 -∆ 2 due to orbital transmutation. Then, there have to be an even number of nodes between 0 and π/2, hence the total number of nodes is 0, 8, 16, . . . . In our case, we find (see Appendix for details) where and The function g(Φ e ) measures the asymmetry between X and Y pockets at a non-zero Φ e . We find that it increases roughly linearly with |Φ e |. We now discuss the results. In Fig. Next, we see from Fig. In Fig. 1. In Fig. 2. In Fig. 3. In Fig. For α > √ 2, superconducting order in the tetragonal phase is d-wave with 4 nodes on the hole pocket. With increasing nematic order the nodes disappear due to orbital transmutation either because ∆ 1 becomes larger than ∆ 2 or ∆ 2 remains larger than ∆ 1 , but φ h clusters around π/2. In Fig. Note that the results for a non-zero J ee are quite similar, only the value of α near which the system develops nodes coming out of an s-wave superconductor at Φ = 0 shifts from α = √ 2. In this section we obtain the temperature dependence of ∆ i (T ) near the superconducting transition. We will use the result for ∆ i (T ) in the next section, where we compute the jump of the specific heat at T c . We assume that the ratios ∆ i /∆ j do not change substantially with temperature and parametrize four gap functions as where ∆ = (∆ 1 , ∆ 2 , ∆ 3 , ∆ 4 ) are the same (up to an overall factor) as we obtained in Sec. III B by solving the linearized gap equations where ∆ 2 0 (T ). Multiplying Eq. ( where K = 7ζ (3) 8π 2 , we obtain Multiplying the Eq. (B4) by ∆ 1 + ∆ 2 cos 2φ h , averaging over the hole Fermi surface pocket, and using Eqs.(B5)-(B6), we obtain the relation Approximating log Λ T ≈ log Λ Tc + Tc-T Tc and using Eq. ( We recall that ∆ 3 and ∆ 4 are functions of Φ h , Φ e and α. For J ee = 0, the same procedure yields where λ is the largest eigenvalue of Eq. ( In this section we examine the specific heat jump at T c and its band-resolved composition, as a function of nematicity for scenarios A and B. In the mean-field approximation the specific heat is the sum of contributions from Γ, X and Y pockets: The first term in the r.h.s of Eq. ( The second term in the r.h.s of Eq. ( Substituting the results for the gap functions, we find that Setting J ee = 0 and using Eq. ( Using Eqs. where 1.43 is the BCS result for a single band superconductor, and N = N h + N X + N Y . Without a nematic order, the ratio would be The effect of nematicity on the specific heat jump is involved because N i , c i , and the coherence factors cos φ i , all vary with it. In Fig. For α ≈ √ 2, the behavior of ∆C v /C v vs Φ h is intermediate between the ones at α = 0.5 and α = 2.5. We also plot in Fig. Below we present the results for the specific heat jump and its decomposition into contributions from different bands for the scenario B, when there is additional contribution Φ xy , Eq. ( In Fig. A more substantial difference is actually for the specific heat in the normal state. In scenario A d xy fermions from both X and Y pocket contribute to C v (T ) above T c . In scenario B, d xy fermions from Y are gapped, and only d xy fermions from X contribute. As a result, the normal state C v (T ) is reduced in scenario B compared to A, while ∆C v at T c remains the same as only d xz and d yz fermions contribute to the jump. As the consequence, ∆C v /C v is larger in scenario B than in scenario A. We show this explicitly where we plot ∆C v /C v as a function of Φ xy that drives the system between scenario A and scenario B. We see that ∆C v /C v is roughly a constant at small Φ xy , when scenario A is valid. It then rapidly increases and saturates at a larger value at large Φ xy , when scenario B is valid. Specific heat measurements in FeSe In this section we consider a possibility of a second superconducting transition in FeSe, caused by a transformation of the s + d state into the s + e iη d state. Such an instability may arise near the point where the pairing interaction is attractive in both s-wave and d-wave channels, with comparable magnitudes. The parameter range of s + e iη d has previously analyzed in Ref. s-to d-wave symmetry at α ≈ √ 2. In panel (b) we set J ee = J eh , in this case the transition from s-to d-wave is at negative α ∼ -0.7. The black curves in the Fig. Specific heat measurements on FeSe in Ref. We also note in passing that in panel (b) of Fig. In this paper we presented in-depth analysis of superconducting gap function and specific heat of a multiorbital metal, like FeSe, which first develops a nematic order and then undergoes a transition into a superconducting state, which co-exists with nematicity. We considered two scenarios: scenario A, in which nematic order develops between d xz and d yz orbitals on hole and electron pockets (Φ h and Φ e ) and scenario B, in which there is an additional component of the nematic order for d xy fermions on the two electron pockets (Φ xy ). We specifically addressed three questions. The first one is the angular dependence of the gap. Here we analyzed the competition the two effects. One is nematicity-induced s d mixture, which necessary induces angular variation of the gap function even if the superconducting state is an s-wave without nematicity. Another one is orbital transmutation of low-energy excitations in the nematic state. This effect tends to make Fermi surface pockets mono-orbital and thus favors an angle-independent gap function. We analyzed the crossover from initial s -d mixing to eventual angleindependent gap and argued that the most likely scenario for stronger s-wave attraction in the tetragonal phase is a gap function with no nodes, while for stronger dwave attraction the 4 nodes from d-wave order disappear once nematic order exceeds a certain threshold. However, in a parameter range where s-wave and d-wave interactions have comparable strength, we find more involved crossovers in which, e.g., the number of nodal points goes from zero to a finite number and then back to zero, or when the number of nodal points goes from 4 to 8 and then to zero. The second question that we addressed is the behavior of a specific heat in a nematic superconductor. For this, we solved the non-linear gap equation, obtained the forms of the gaps below T c , and used them to compute the specific heat C v (T ). We analyzed the evolution of C v (T ) with the nematic order in both the scenario A and the scenario B. Here our key result is the specific heat jump at T c : ∆C v /C v . We found that ∆C v /C v is around one in the tetragonal phase, for parameters appropriate for FeSe. The magnitude of ∆C v /C v increases with the nematic order and saturates at ∆C v /C v ∼ 1.5 -1.6. This is quite consistent with the experimental result for FeSe ∆C v /C v ∼ 1.65 (Refs. The third question that we addressed is a potential transition at T c1 < T c from an s + d state to an s + e iη d state that breaks time-reversal symmetry. Such a transition was suggested Averaging cos 2φ h and cos 2 2φ h over the angle θ, we get, cos 2φ h = t cos(2θ) -2t sin(θ) At θ = 0, π, bx f (0, δ) has a |δ| type non-analyticity as we find from Eq. (A12) bx f (0, δ) = Φ cr + t|δ| 1 + t sgn(δ) (A14) and plot in Fig. We claim that the second blue under-braced term in Eq. (A16) contains the non-analytic behavior of of cos 2φ h , because, as δ → 0, the denominator diverges at θ = 0 and π, see Fig. To calculate the second term, we rewrite the denominator to separate the singular from the regular part, bx f (θ, δ) -Φ cr = bx f (θ, δ) -bx f (0, δ) + bx f (0, δ) -Φ cr = t|δ| 1 + t sgn(δ) + (bx f (θ, δ) -bx f (0, δ)) . (A17) We again approximate that (bx f (θ, δ) -bx f (0, δ)) does not change much with δ. So we write it as, bx f (θ, δ) -bx f (0, δ) ≈ bx f (θ, 0) -bx f (0, 0) = φ cr f (θ). (A18) Then, the non-analytic contribution of cos 2φ h is, where, x = δ Φcr , and We peform the integration over θ in Eq. A19, and obtain As δ → 0, the first term of Eq. (A21) inside the parenthesis approaches a finite value(-arccos(t)), while the second term blows up because of the tanh -1 function(see Fig. Even though nematic order couples s-and d-wave symmetry and brings angular dependence to the superconducting gap function in the primary s-wave state, one finds that ∆2 ∆1 = 0 when the numerator of Eq. (C6) vanishes, For this case, the gap function on the hole pocket becomes purely s-wave, despite the presence of nematic order. μ h (2m h ) -1 b 13.6 f (θ, δ) -Φ cr 2 = t 2 (bx f (θ, δ) cos(2θ) -Φ cr ) 2 (bx f (θ, δ) -Φ cr ) 2 + δ 2 1 (bx f (θ, δ) -Φ cr ) 2 -2δ (bx f (θ, δ) cos(2θ) -Φ cr ) (bx f (θ, δ) -Φ cr ) 2 (A23) of Amalia I. Coldea and Matthew D. Watson, "The key ingredients of the electronic structure of fese," Annual Review of Condensed Matter Physics 9, 125-146 (2018).