We propose and explore a physical mechanism for the stabilization of the complex spatiotemporal dynamics in arrays (bars) of broad area laser diodes taking advantage of the symmetry breaking in non-Hermitian potentials. We show that such stabilization can be achieved by specific pump and index profiles leading to a PT-symmetric coupling between nearest neighboring lasers within the semiconductor bar. A numerical analysis is performed using a complete (2+1)-dimensional space-temporal model, including transverse and longitudinal spatial degrees of freedom and temporal evolution of the electric field and carriers. We show regimes of temporal stabilization and light emission spatial redistribution and enhancement. We also consider a simplified (1+1)-dimensional model for an array of lasers holding the proposed non-Hermitian coupling with a global axisymmetric geometry. We numerically demonstrate a two-fold benefit: the control over the temporal dynamics over the EELs bar and the field concentration on the central lasers leading to a brighter output beam, facilitating a direct coupling to an optical fiber. Diode lasers systems, either in the form of a single Edge-Emitting Laser (EEL), in the form of arrays of lasers (lasers bars), or as stacks of EEL bars, are replacing other lasers sources due to their compactness, affordable prices and high performance. However, they present a major drawback, the laser spatiotemporal instability and divergence which, particularly, prevents them to efficiently couple to optical fibers. Spatiotemporal complex dynamics is commonly observed in spatially extended, dissipative systems which are driven by an external pump. Board area diode lasers are no exception and are plagued by self-focusing filamentation instabilities and complex dynamical behaviors Recently, the interplay between gain and index modulation has emerged as a fruitful new research area in photonics. Initially introduced as a curiosity in quantum mechanics Our proposal is intended to obtain a stable emission from an array of EELs and the improvement of its beam quality and energy distribution within the laser array. Altogether allows the direct coupling to fiber or optical guide without any optical component that should strongly enhance the coupling efficiency. The light generated in every single semiconductor laser is expected to be spatially redistributed and temporally stabilized via non-Hermitian coupling between neighboring lasers induced by a particular gain (pump) and index modulation (stripes) of the structure. The system is described by a complete (2+1)dimensional space-temporal model, including transverse and longitudinal spatial directions and temporal evolution of the electric field and carriers. We first identify the onset of spatiotemporal instabilities for a single laser source, the regime of temporally stable and monomode emission severely restricts the power of the laser source. However, splitting a broad EEL source in an array of stable, thinner lasers with stable emission parameters, is not a solution, since new temporal and synchronization instabilities arise from the coupling between neighboring lasers leading again to irregular spatiotemporal behaviors. Thus, we propose a non-Hermitian asymmetric coupling between EELs within the array for stabilization and redistribution of the light emission. This emission improvement is first demonstrated for the simple two coupled laser system. We determine the stabilization performance as a function of the shift between the pumped region and laser stripes and the distance between the two lasers. Next, we analyze a system formed by three lasers holding a global mirror symmetry to induce an inward coupling in the laser array. In the following, a simplified (1+1)-dimensional model is used to extend the study to a full EEL bar formed by an array of many lasers. The simulations show both temporal stabilization and simultaneous spatial redistribution, i.e. localization, of the generated light. In order to model the spatial redistribution and temporal stabilization of coupled EEL sources, we use a well-established model including the spatiotemporal evolution of the electromagnetic field and carrier density inside the cavity ( ) where k 0 is the wavevector, n is the effective refractive index, σ is a parameter inversely proportional to the light matter interaction length, h is the Henry factor or linewidth enhancement factor of the semiconductor, α corresponds to losses, p 0 is the pump, D is the carrier diffusion coefficient and γ is the inverse of carriers' relaxation time, τ nr . In our calculations the transverse and longitudinal spatial coordinates are in units of the wavelength, time is normalized to the roundtrip time; N is normalized to N 0 (the carrier's density to achieve transparency) and the electric field envelope is normalized to τ ω  nr a being a the gain parameter, ω the angular frequency of light. Polarization of the material is eliminated in eq. (1) as the semiconductor laser is considered a class B laser and the fine longitudinal interference between the forward and backward fields, considered to be blurred by the carrier diffusion, is disregarded. Finally, the transverse modulations of the refractive index Δn(x) account for the individual laser stripes; and the pump, Δp(x-s), where s is a spatial shift the spatial profile of the electrodes. Both modulations, Δn(x) and Δp(x-s), induce the real and imaginary parts of the non-Hermitian potential, which, properly designed, may lead to an asymmetric field coupling. See Fig. In the proposed scheme, the two profiles, Δn(x) and Δp(x), can be slightly spatially shifted a distance s, one with respect to another, and it is precisely this interplay between index and gain profiles that is expected to induce a non-Hermitian potential and asymmetric coupling between neighboring lasers. The boundary conditions are straightforwardly determined by the Fabry-Perot cavity mirrors located at z = 0 and z = L are 0 ( 0) ( 0) A z r A z , where L is the length of the laser and r 0/L are the corresponding reflection of the edge mirrors at z = 0/L, respectively. First, we numerically study the spatiotemporal behavior of a single EEL source through the system model in eq. ( Once the main dynamics and parameters of a single laser are determined we proceed to analyze the effect of the coupling between lasers on the dynamics. Such coupling depends on the distance between neighboring lasers and can be further engineered by introducing a displacement between the laser profile and the pump, as schematically shown in Fig. The performance of the proposed asymmetric coupling is assessed by the asymmetric energy enhancement and temporal stability of the attained regimes. We calculate the enhancement as the relative intensity of the laser to which the energy is accumulated, i.e. as the ratio of the temporally averaged intensity of the enhanced laser, for s ≠ 0, versus the unshifted case, s = 0. We explore the parameter space of the distance between lasers, d, and asymmetry shift parameter, s (spatial shift between the pump and the refractive index profiles) for a fixed value of the pump. The results are summarized in Figs. 2. (e). While a larger enhancement could be expected by increasing the shift parameter s. However, we observe that the emission decreases for a maximum around a given shift value, namely s ≈ 0.25 μm. This decrease may be attributed to the asymmetric configuration of both lasers which also induces an asymmetric leaking of energy opposite to the direction of the other laser. Such leaked energy is therefore lost, and the net gain for the whole system is reduced; being the largest relative intensity of the enhanced factor around about 2. Moreover, such enhancement increases for a smaller distance, d. In addition, the temporal stability of the emission may be evaluated by mapping the amplitude of the temporal oscillations of the enhanced laser also in the distance-shift, (d,s), parameter space. Temporal instabilities arise for small d and s values, i.e. when the distance between lasers or coupling asymmetry decrease. For center-to-center distances close to the laser width the emission is found to be unstable for all values of s. On the contrary, stability is found either increasing the coupling asymmetry for a given laser distance, as also, trivially, at larger distances between lasers. Interestingly, inspecting Figs. 2. (e) and (f), we observe that there is a range of parameters around the maximum relative intensity region which coincides with a temporally stable behavior. where, / are complex numbers standing for the coupling parameter from the lasers at positions j+1 and j-1, respectively, and the spatial and temporal coordinates and all parameters are normalized as in eq. ( , where d is the distance between lasers and and the amplitudes of the real and imaginary part of the non-Hermitian potential. Therefore, from eq. ( being m m the coupling strength. In this model we can define different types of coupling between lasers depending on the values of m r , m i and the phase, Φ. For Φ = ± π/2, the coupling is perfectly symmetric while for Φ = 0, the coupling becomes PT-symmetric. In turn, and for simplicity we assume m r = m i = 1, the PTsymmetry breaking point, which entails no restriction but assuming the maximally asymmetric situation. Despite the relationship between parameters of spatial modulation in both models is nontrivial, we can infer a logarithmic relationship between m m and the laser distance d as far as the coupling strength should decrease exponentially with the laser separation given by (d-w). This relationship is verified by direct comparison of the temporal instability in both models shown in Fig. The system of eq. ( In summary, we propose a physical mechanism for the temporal stabilization and localization of the emission of a coupled array of EELs or an EEL bar. The scheme is based on a non-Hermitian coupling between neighboring lasers with a global mirror-symmetric geometry. While the monomode emission of a single laser is assured by reducing its width, spatiotemporal instabilities may still arise from the coupling between lasers in an array. Such temporal instabilities are molded by a non-Hermitian coupling that may be simply introduced by a lateral shift between the pump and index profile, technically by a spatial shift between the individual laser stripe and corresponding electrode. Such asymmetric coupling, while temporally stabilizing the emission also redistributes and localizes energy close to the central symmetry axis. The proposed stabilization scheme is analyzed by a complete spatiotemporal model, including transverse and longitudinal spatial degrees of freedom and the temporal evolution of the electric fields and carriers. We perform a comprehensive numerical analysis in terms of the design parameters, namely the distance between lasers and non-Hermitian shift observing regimes of simultaneous temporal stabilizations and light localization. In turn, the validity of the proposal is also demonstrated for an array with a large number of lasers using a simplified model where the transverse space is accounted by the coupling between neighboring laser cavities. The proposed non-Hermitian architecture for stable EEL bars is demonstrated leading to a brighter output beam, yet the field concentration is expected to facilitate a direct coupling of these semiconductor lasers arrays to an optical fiber.