A programmable quantum current generator based on the application of Ohm's law to quantum voltage and resistance standards has demonstrated a realization of the ampere from the elementary charge with a 10 -8 relative uncertainty Since 20 May 2019, the ampere definition has been related to the quantum description of the electrical transport and not to a mechanical force anymore. As the numerical value of the elementary charge e has been fixed, a current of one ampere is the flow of 1/1.602176634 × 10 -19 elementary charges per second For small currents, below 1 nA, single electron current sources offer another way for the quantum realization of the definition of the ampere by controlling the flow of electrons one by one at a clock frequency (for recent reviews For currents above 1 nA, more recently different groups also proposed developments based on Ohm's law involving quantum electrical standards, either to improve current measurement uncertainty in the μA range below 10 -7 by current-to-voltage conversion with a quantum Hall resistance array The first demonstration of the PQCG showed very promising results, however, making it a primary current standard needs to ensure a very reliable operation. The reduction of noise and instability are essential for that purpose. At first, the paper details the noise characterizations and the modifications implemented to improve the set-up. It then reports on ammeter calibrations carried out following well established quantization criteria, that notably demonstrate an improvement of the measurement uncertainties in the mA range. Finally, a first direct comparison of the ampere realizations performed with measurement uncertainties of a few parts in 10 7 at 50 μA is presented. The principle of the programmable quantum current generator is presented in figure The reference current It can also be written as I PQCS = n J ef J (1-α), which emphasizes the relation to the elementary charge. This current is divided into two separate branches in the double connection to the QHRS. In order to detect and amplify the sum of these currents, we use a CCC, which insures the ampere-turns balance of several superconducting windings by means of the SQUID-based feedback loop. Thanks to the introduction of two CCC windings of identical number of turns, N JK , into the double connection between the PJVS and the QHRS, the balance between the primary and secondary circuit, N is exact within one part in 10 9 for all windings and within few parts in 10 10 for the windings used in the present study The PJVS used in this work is the PJVS A from reference In our previous work 2.2.1. Analysis of the noise of the system. The SQUID is an ultra sensitive magnetic flux-to-voltage converter, and hence interferring electromagnetic signals are critical: both, low-level high-frequency noise and sharp transients, can be detrimental to the operation of the system. In the PQCG, the noise to which the SQUID is exposed can have different origins: i) direct flux noise picked up by the SQUID, ii) flux noise coming from the currents that circulate in the CCC windings due to Johnson-Nyquist noise emitted by the resistive elements connected to them, and iii) external electromagnetic noise picked-up in the circuit through capacitive or inductive couplings. Moreover, the CCC is a complex system of 15 magnetically coupled superconducting windings with distributed capacitances and with inductances L i ∼ i 2 L CCC , where L CCC is the inductance of the toroidal shield and i the number of turns. For example, for the windings of 2065 turns, L 2065 = 85 mH and the equivalent parallel capacitance is 1 nF. The total flux noise S tot φ (f ) = S SQUID (f ) + S CCC (f ) can be deduced from the power spectral density S tot φ (f ), where S SQUID (f ) and S CCC (f ) are the respective contributions from the noise of the SQUID (intrinsic or captured), and from the noise of the CCC and the circuit connected to it. The latter is the most difficult to analyse. Thus, to have a better understanding, a model of the circuit is useful. Here we have used a simplified model of two magnetically coupled series-RLC circuits as a generic model to account for the main features of the spectra (see section 8.2) in different situations. Because it includes the magnetic coupling between the windings, this model goes beyond our previous simulations Figure Given the coupling of external noise to the PQCS, it was therefore crucial to damp the high frequency resonances Once the winding has been chosen, N D is fixed and hence L D is fixed. The choice of the capacitance C D is made such that the broad peak is well below 10 kHz so that the damping is efficient at 12 kHz. The last parameter, R D , fixes the amplitude of the broad resonance and the quality factor Q ∼ Finally, we have chosen R D = 1 kΩ and Q ∼ 1 as a good compromise because it suppresses the high quality factor resonance at 12.6 kHz, such that the main goal has been reached, and it limits the amplitude of noise towards the low frequency part. However, the amplitude of the broad peak is about 1 mφ 0 / √ Hz. Two possible improvements can be considered, increasing of the resistance by a factor of 2 to reach the critical value Q = 1/2 and/or placing the resistance at 4.2 K. The latter point will be detailed in the present paper. Note that the resonance at 35 kHz did not disappear, it has been broadened and slightly shifted to 36 kHz; for the moment, this is not clearly understood, and the model cannot account for it because only two windings are simulated. Its possible detrimental effect on the stability may be limited anyhow by the damping, which attenuates part of the high-frequency components of the signal during the fast reversals that are likely to excite this resonance. More unexpectedly, figure This hypothesis has been confirmed recently, as the noise level at low frequency retrieves the expected one, as soon as the peak in the intermediate bandwidth is reduced by a factor of 8.5 by placing the resistance R D = 1 kΩ at 4.2 K, as shown in figure In external feedback mode, a CCC winding is used as the feedback path instead of the dedicated modulation coil of the SQUID (internal feedback mode). It has a big impact on the dynamic of the system and the problems of stability are even more severe. Compared to the internal feedback, the stability of the FLL is ensured by choosing an operation mode (5S) with a reduced bandwidth of 500 Hz as suggested in the documentation of the SQUID This instability has been overcome by modifying the closed-loop feedback gain. Let us detail the original external feedback circuit as illustrated in figure To reduce the common mode noise on the PQCS circuit, a common mode torus has been placed on the output of the PJVS, on the current leads that supply the QHRS, as depicted in figure Finally, after all these modifications, the system has gained stability in internal feedback mode. As shown in figure Compared to reference Here we present the calibrations of two precision digital ammeters (DA), an HP3458A (DA 1) and a Fluke 8508A (DA 2), in the mA ranges. During the calibrations, the ammeter replaces R Load in figure Before each calibration, we systematically verify the quantization of the PJVS by checking the current amplitudes of the quantized voltage steps, U J = 0, ±n J f J K -1 J , of each segments at the operating frequency and at the optimum microwave power. The relative correction α = 1.6 × 10 -7 ± 2.5 × 10 -9 for N JK =160 is calculated by taking into account the resistances of the double connection. Each calibration point takes less than 10 minutes. An on-off-on cycle is used to subtract the offsets, the measured value is calculated from eleven cycles as shown in the figure Figure During a calibration campaign, the quantization criteria demonstrated in reference Figure Figure These calibration examples show that the PQCG is a precious tool which allows characterizing thoroughly precision DAs with relative uncertainties close to 10 -7 while reducing the traceability chain. By doing regular calibrations with the PQCG, a better knowledge of the short and long term stabilities of such precision DAs can be gained. Hence, if regularly calibrated by the PQCG, they could be used as secondary standards with uncertainties better than the manufacturer specifications with the goal of improving the calibration and measurement capabilities (CMCs). In this last section, we present the results of the direct comparison of the current measurements performed using the Ultrastable Low-Noise Current Amplifier and the PQCG. The ULCA can be used for two purposes: current measurement or current generation, i.e., for current-to-voltage or voltage-to-current conversion. It is based on a two-stage design: a first stage provides a current gain G I of 1000 and a second stage provides a current-to-voltage conversion with a transresistance R IV (typically, 1 MΩ for the 'standard' ULCA). Thanks to this design, the device can be operated either in normal or extended mode Thanks to its small size and compact design, the ULCA is perfectly suited as a travelling standard The current measured by the ULCA is given by I ULCA = U R IV /R IV . It is determined from the value of the transresitance R IV estimated at the time of the comparison from the calibration history determined at PTB (see section 8.4 in the annex to this paper) and from the voltage drop U R IV across R IV measured on the 10 V range of a digitizing voltmeter (DVM). The latter is routinely calibrated against a 10-V conventional Josephson voltage standard at LNE. In that way, we compare on one side the current measured by the combination of the ULCA and the DVM -both traceable to PTB's quantum Hall resistor and LNE's Josephson voltage standard, respectively -and the current generated on the other side by the PQCG -involving LNE's PJVS and QHRS -and estimated from the expression Considering the degrees of equivalence of PTB and LNE in the international comparison BIPM.EM-K10.b We have performed eighteen measurements within two days. We have applied exactly the same measurement sequence as for DA 1. Figure The Type A relative uncertainty of each measurement point is < 2 × 10 -8 . This low Type A uncertainty allowed us to resolve a drift of 2.5×10 -7 over the first 24 h followed by a period of stabilization to within 2.5×10 -8 , corresponding to the last 9 points in figure The DVM gain error has been estimated from a two-weeks calibration campaign before the comparison. Unfortunately, we observed a deviation from the known linear drift when recalibrating the instrument one month after the comparison, which might have been due to a temperature regulation problem in the laboratory during this period. Therefore the relative Type B uncertainty contribution due to this correction has been increased to cover this problem and amounts to 2.3×10 -7 . The typical uncertainty of the calibrations of R IV at PTB is 6×10 -9 . During the comparison the internal temperature of the ULCA was recorded and was about 21 difference was accounted for by a correction calculated from the -1.4 × 10 -7 / • C temperature coefficient determined at PTB. The corresponding relative uncertainty contribution is 0.2×10 -7 . An additional uncertainty component has been added in the uncertainty budget, it accounts for the long term stability and the stability against transportation of R IV . It has been estimated to 2×10 -7 (see section 8.4). Table For the final result of the comparison, we have used 9 data points obtained for ± 21.875 μA and ± 43.750 μA. The experimental standard deviation of the mean of the 9 points is 7 × 10 -9 . The final result of the comparison is expressed as the mean value of the 9 points within the total relative combined uncertainty (represented by the red dashed dotted lines in figure In this comparison, the realizations of the ampere from both laboratories agree to -3.7 parts in 10 7 with a combined standard uncertainty of 3.1 parts in 10 7 (k c = 1). This result is reported in Figure To conclude, we have identified and estimated the noise sources of the PQCG with the support of an electrical model based on magnetically coupled RLC circuits. It turns out that the primary quantum circuit of the PQCG, which is formed by the PJVS, the QHRS and the CCC in series, is strongly coupled to noise via the connection to ground. This leads to an instability of the SQUID for windings of large number of turns, which is resolved by implementing a cryogenic damping circuit, an optimized SQUID feedback circuit and an adapted grounding scheme. These improvements allowed us performing calibrations of commercial precision ammeters with a relative measurement uncertainty of a few parts in 10 7 , only limited by their stability. These devices, which also demonstrated linearity within a few parts in 10 7 , could be used as secondary current standards if they are periodically calibrated against the PQCG. Furthermore, the improved PQCG was used to feed an Ultrastable Low-Noise Current Amplifier (ULCA) with currents in the 50 μA range. The agreement we found, at a level of a few parts in 10 7 , demonstrates the equivalence of the ampere realizations at LNE and PTB. Our results represent the state-of-the-art of currents in the range ± 50 μA. However, there is room for improvements for future comparisons with the goal to reach 1 part in 10 7 or less. Improvements should include: (i) the use of transportable thermostat (thus avoiding thermal shocks during transport potentially responsible for discontinuity in the calibration value of the ULCA), (ii) timely calibration of the DVM before and after the series of measurements (or even during this series). Even better performance could be achieved by using a null detection scheme with a second PJVS The Josephson array is subdivided into 14 smaller array segments, and follows the sequence 256/512/3072/2048/1024/128/1/1/2/4/8/16/32/64. The quantum Hall resistance standard, based on an eight-terminal Hall bar made of a GaAs/AlGaAs semiconductor heterostructure (LEP514), was produced at the Laboratoire Electronique de Philips For the model of the noise coming from the CCC at high frequency, we consider two series-RLC circuits where κ is the coupling factor. The parameters are given in the figure The noise voltage density ẽ1 and ẽ2 of the voltage noise sources, e 1 and e 2 , due to the Johnson-Nyquist noise of the resistances R 1 and R 2 are expressed in V/ √ Hz and are given by : ẽ1 = √ 4kT R 1 and ẽ2 = √ 4kT R 2 respectively and are written as a vector : Model of two coupled series-RLC circuits The currents are deduced from the following system of linear equations : and The screening current δI on the toroidal superconducting shield due to the noise currents is deduced from the relation: δI 22 . The noise sources e 1 and e 2 being uncorrelated, the current noise amplitude is given by : The Allan deviation allows the analysis of the noise by differentiating noise types according to the exponent of its power dependence with time. White noise manifests itself by a τ -1/2 dependence. In the white noise regime, the Allan deviation σ w is related to the flux power spectral density S φ by : where τ is the sampling time. We want to relate the flux power spectral density measured for the PQCG to the relative Allan deviation σ I /I (= σ φ /φ) expected for a series of current measurements obtained from on-off-on cycles that allows us to subtract the offsets. For that, we calculate the standard deviation of an on-off-on cycle by adapting a calculation done for polarity reversals by Drung et al. The value of the current calibration point, corresponding to one on-off-on cycle, is calculated from the average of the 'on' values for which we subtract the average of the 'off' values. We suppose that the standard deviations, σ on and σ of f , for the 'on' and 'off' polarities, can be calculated from the white noise standard deviations (see equation 2) corresponding to the duration, τ on and τ of f = 2τ on , of the 'on' and 'off' polarities, respectively. The white noise uncertainty for the on-off-on cycle, σ cycle , is then given by : with σ 2 of f = σ 2 on /2. In figure We introduce the factor A defined as A = 2S φ /(1 -ρ), such that : Finally, the Allan deviation for a sequence of n s cycles is : All the parameters used for the calibration measurements and for the Allan deviation are given in table 8.3. We tried to realize as much as possible similar acquisition times for the two DAs despite the different parameter settings and the different dead times. As can be seen from table 8.3, the DA 1 has been used in the mode AUTOZERO ON (internal offset errors due to bias currents of the amplifiers and thermal emfs are subtracted), which is the most accurate mode. However compared to the other DA, which does not have this function, the measuring time has been doubled for DA 1, in order to have the same effective measuring time in a given polarity. This explains the difference of the timing parameters for the two DAs. To calculate the relative Allan deviation expected for the PQCG at I PQCG = 0.918 mA, we have to divide A by the flux seen by the SQUID due to I PQCS , i.e. A rel . The flux is 460 φ 0 (calculated with the parameters N JK = 160, N = 4, I PQCS = 23 μA and the flux sensitivity 8 μA•turns/φ 0 ). We calculate A rel based on a large range of estimates for S φ at 20 mHz, which spans from 8 to 50 μφ 0 / √ Hz taking into account the all cases from white noise to 1/f noise. we cannot clearly assign the discontinuity to the transport to or from LNE. This impacts the estimation of the transresistance, and hence the value of I ULCA , at the time of the comparison. Here, to make the less assumptions possible, we have considered a linear interpolation at the date of the comparison, between the value of the last calibration before transportation and the first after return to PTB. The estimated uncertainty is calculated from a rectangular probability distribution of total width equal to the difference between these two values (7×10 -7 ). The relative uncertainty on the estimation of R IV is therefore 2 × 10 -7 . From the measurements done at LNE, the transresistance R IV can be estimated from ∆I/I = (R IV -100kΩ)/100kΩ. This value can be compared to the value obtained at PTB. It has been added in figure 