Particle agglutination assays are widely adapted immunological tests that are based on antigen-antibody interactions. Antibody-coated microscopic particles are mixed with a test sample that potentially contains the target antigen, as a result of which the particles form clusters, with a size that is a function of the antigen concentration and the reaction time. Here, we present a quantitative particle agglutination assay that combines mobile lens-free microscopy and deep learning for rapidly measuring the concentration of a target analyte; as its proof-of-concept, we demonstrate high-sensitivity C-reactive protein (hs-CRP) testing using human serum samples. A dual-channel capillary lateral flow device is designed to host the agglutination reaction using 4 μL of serum sample with a material cost of 1.79 cents per test. A mobile lens-free microscope records time-lapsed inline holograms of the lateral flow device, monitoring the agglutination process over 3 min. These captured holograms are processed, and at each frame the number and area of the particle clusters are automatically extracted and fed into shallow neural networks to predict the CRP concentration. 189 measurements using 88 unique patient serum samples were utilized to train, validate and blindly test our platform, which matched the corresponding ground truth concentrations in the hs-CRP range (0-10μg/mL) with an R 2 value of 0.912. This computational sensing platform was also able to successfully differentiate very high CRP concentrations (e.g., >10-500 μg/mL) from the hs-CRP range. This mobile, cost-effective and quantitative particle agglutination assay can be useful for various point-of-care sensing needs and global health related applications. Particle agglutination assays are widely used immunological tests based on antigen-antibody interactions In this paper, we demonstrate a rapid and cost-effective quantitative particle agglutination assay using deep learning-based analysis (Fig The dual-channel capillary lateral flow device is composed of different types of sheet materials (Supplementary Fig. Both the control and test particle solutions are prepared using the CRP Latex Reagent component of the CRP Latex Test Kit (310-100, Cortezdiagnostics Inc, USA), which has an average particle diameter of 0.81 μm. To prepare the test particles, 100μL of Latex Reagent is centrifuged at 3000 rpm for 10 min. After removal of the resulting supernatant, the beads are re-suspended in an equal volume of glycine buffer. The CRP saturated control particles are prepared by saturating antibody binding sites on the test particles; for this, the particles are diluted three times by PBS buffer and CRP antigen (30-AC10, Fitzgerald) is added to the solution to reach a final CRP concentration of 0.5mg/mL. Following a 2-hour incubation with an orbital shaker and the addition of 1% BSA, the prepared particles are stored at 4 °C. To perform the assay, we add 5 μL of the activation buffer (0.5% tween 20 in DI water) into both test and control channel inlets. We then dry off the channels and place the sensor onto the CMOS image sensor with a custom-designed holder. Next we mix 2 μL of the serum sample with 4.2μL of test and control particle solutions individually, and load them into the corresponding inlets. Following this, the measurements start, recording the in-line holograms of the channels for 3 min. The use of human serum samples was approved by UCLA IRB (#19-000172) for CRP testing. The CRP levels of these patient samples were measured by CardioPhase hsCRP Flex® reagent cartridge (Cat. No. K7046, Siemens) and Dimension Vista System (Siemens) at UCLA Health System, which constituted our ground truth measurements. A mobile lens-free microscope was developed for monitoring of the particle agglutination assay reactions inside the capillary device. A fibercoupled light emitting diode (LED, peak wavelength: 850 nm) is used to illuminate the capillary device to form inline-holograms The captured time-lapsed holograms are automatically processed using MATLAB. The test and control channels are first identified and cropped out. The background of each channel, which contains randomly located dust particles that are attached to the bottom of the microfluidic chip, is estimated using the first five frames of the image sequence. The axial distance (z 2 ) between the microfluidic chip and the CMOS sensor is approximated by auto-focusing on these immobile particles Two shallow neural networks (see Supplementary Fig. where y i is a binary indicator (the ground truth label), representing if the measured CRP concentration is above 10 μg/mL or not, for each measurement i, in a training batch of N different measurements. p i indicates the probability whether the CRP concentration is higher than 10μg/mL or not for a given measurement i. It is calculated using the output values of the network O = [O 1 , O 2 ] as p = exp(O 1 ) exp(O 1 ) + exp(O 2 ) (2) The quantification network (Supplementary Fig. In Eq. ( The hyper-parameters of both neural networks (e.g., the number of neurons and sliding window sizes for A t (t), A c (t), n t (t) and n c (t)) are optimized through a greedy search. For each parameter search, the corresponding neural network was trained for 5 times with 500 epochs in each training. The validation loss was then averaged to find the best candidates. After optimizing all the hyper-parameters, both networks were trained using the Adam optimizer for 1,000 epochs. At the beginning, the learning rate was set to 10 -4 . The validation loss was calculated after every epoch of training and a learning rate scheduler was adopted to monitor the validation loss so that the learning rate was reduced by a factor of two if there was no improvement in 100 consecutive epochs of training. The networks were composed using Pytorch and trained on a desktop computer (Origin PC Corp., FL, US) using a CPU only. The typical training time for classification and quantification networks is ~30 sec and ~60 sec, respectively. For blind inference, the classification and quantification neural networks on average took less than 0.1ms per test using a desktop computer with 64 GB memory and i9-7900X CPU (Intel corp., CA, US). A lateral flow particle agglutination assay was developed to quantitatively measure the CRP concentration of serum samples by monitoring the particle agglutination reaction between CRP and antibody coated latex particles. The assay was composed of a custom-designed, lowcost dual-channel capillary lateral flow device to host the antigen-antibody interactions (Figs. A sheet-tape-sheet sandwich structure was manually assembled to form the test and control channels. An absorption membrane was inserted at the outlet of each channel. Water evaporation on the membrane provides the driving force for continuous flow. The diffusion of both CRP and latex particles in the laminar flow enabled the antigen-antibody reaction in the test channel, resulting in agglutinated particle clusters with their size varying as a function of the test time and the CRP concentration in serum (Fig During the total assay time (3 min), time-lapsed inline holograms were acquired using a mobile lens-free microscope at 1 frame/sec. The captured holograms (Fig 88 human serum samples were collected from different patients with various CRP concentrations. 144 different measurements were conducted on these clinical samples (duplicate measurements were conducted on 56 samples). Given that only three out of 88 serum samples had CRP concentrations higher than 10μg/mL, additional acute inflammation samples were created by spiking CRP into clinical samples to achieve a concentration of >10μg/mL. For this purpose, three clinical samples with original CRP concentrations lower than 0.2μg/mL were spiked to achieve five different CRP concentrations (20, 50, 100, 200 and 500μg/mL), forming 15 additional samples to represent a concentration range of >10μg/mL. A total of 45 measurements were performed on these CRP-spiked, additional samples (triplicate measurements on each sample). Therefore, the total number of CRP measurements that we have made with our sensor platform is 144 + 45 = 189. Conventional particle agglutination assays suffer from false-negative diagnosis of high concentration cases due to the saturation of antibody's binding sites by excessive antigens, also as known as the hook effect The decision-making performance of this two-network based computational sensing system is depicted in Fig. To further highlight the capabilities of this neural network-based inference of the target analyte concentration, in Fig. In this work, the antibody-antigen interaction is assisted by the laminar flow inside the dual-channel capillary lateral flow device. The flow rate is a key parameter to guarantee the stable reactivity of the assay. The size of the absorption membrane and the external humidity are critical factors in determining the flow rate inside the capillary channel. The membrane size we used in this work was optimized by evaluating the assay's reactivity under different flow rates and different humidity conditions (see Supplementary Fig. Several studies were reported in the literature to overcome the hook effect in sensor response by using advanced assay designs In terms of digital processing of these spatio-temporal changes within the test channel, the particle localization algorithm that we employed significantly simplified the neural network structure. Although the raw acquired holograms were noisy, after the particles were localized using the multi-height back-propagation of each hologram, a shallow neural network architecture with a small number of neurons and trainable parameters was sufficient to quantify and classify the CRP concentration of serum samples over a large dynamic range. This shallow network architecture also shortened the inference time through each one of the networks: on average it took less than 0.1 ms per CRP test to have an output from the classification and quantification neural networks. With batch processing of multiple tests in parallel, this inference time can be further reduced. We demonstrated a rapid, simple, and cost-effective particle agglutination assay for point-of-care testing by using a custom-designed capillary lateral flow device and a mobile lens-free microscope. The agglutination of particles was captured, as a function of time, by a mobile lens-free microscope and digitally processed by two different neural networks for classification and quantification of the CRP concentration of the serum sample under test. This deep learning-assisted sensor has a low material cost (1.79 cents/test) and requires a small sample volume (4μL of serum per test), presenting a promising platform for various point-of-care sensing applications.