Nanowire (NW)-based opto-electronic devices require certain engineering in the NW geometry to realize polarized-dependent light sources and photodetectors. We present a growth procedure to produce InAs/InP quantum dot-nanowires (QD-NWs) with an elongated top-view crosssection relying on the vapor-liquid-solid method using molecular beam epitaxy. By interrupting the rotation of the sample during the radial growth sequence of the InP shell, hexagonal asymmetric (HA) NWs with long/short cross-section axes were obtained instead of the usual symmetrical shape. Polarization-resolved photoluminescence measurements have revealed a significant influence of the asymmetric shaped NWs on the InAs QD emission polarization with the photons being mainly polarized parallel to the NW long cross-section axis. A degree of linear polarization (DLP) up to 91% is obtained, being at the state of the art for the reported DLP values from QD-NWs. More importantly, the growth protocol herein is fully compatible with the current applications of HA NWs covering a wide range of devices such as polarized light emitting diodes and photodetectors. Integrating III-V semiconductor nanowires (NWs) on silicon substrates has been widely studied to achieve telecom band NW lasers In the field of linearly polarized light sources with quantum dot-nanowires (QD-NWs), two methods of fabrication are reported in literature: The first one is the top-down fabrication of elliptic NWs using etching. In this work, we experimentally demonstrate a growth method to realize HA InAs/InP QD-NWs grown on Si(111) substrates using the vapor-liquid-solid (VLS) method by solid-source molecular beam epitaxy (ss-MBE). By using two growth steps consisting of rotating the sample during the axial growth of the InAs/InP QD-NWs while rotation interruption is implemented during the radial growth of the InP shell, we enable the transformation of the hexagonalsymmetric (HS) NWs into HA NWs. Polarization resolved photoluminescence (PL) together with Finite Difference Time Domain (FDTD) simulations fully confirm the predicted performances with the QD emission being polarized parallel to the long NW cross-section axis and a degree of linear polarization (DLP) value as high as 91%. In a standard symmetric QD-NW, the NW diameter (DNW) has to be tuned to efficiently couple the QD emission to the fundamental HE11 NW guided mode. In high refractive index NWs such as GaAs and InP NWs the optimized diameter is in the order of 0.25×λ, where λ is the QD emission wavelength. Moreover, the H/D ≈ 0.1 ratio guaranties a strong heavy-hole ground state in the valence band. The top-view SEM images in Figure In Figure where the θ is analyzer angle, θ0 provides the orientation angle for the maximum PL intensity and ( ) is the minimum (maximum) value of the PL intensity. We also define the degree of linear polarization As far as the symmetric NW sample is concerned a weak DLP of 4% is extracted. This confirms a negligible heavy-hole light-hole mixing for these QDs and that the PL emission from the QDs is similarly coupled to the two degenerate fundamental optical modes. This result agrees with the small height/diameter ratio of the QDs which favours a hole state with a strong heavy-hole character and with the bottom-up growth which guarantees the QD alignment with the NW central axis. This result is also in agreement with the work of van Weert et al. The DLP values for the InAs QDs in HA InP NWs (A, B and C samples) are 33%, 71 % and 85%, respectively. This increase of the optical anisotropy with the increase of the long/short axis ratio and the alignment of the PL polarization with the NW long axis are signatures of the impact of the anisotropic NWs on the QD emission. The DLP value as a function of the emission energy is reported in Figure in the telecom band presents the interest to relax the constraint on the control of the QD emission wavelength. This result agrees with previous works on symmetric and asymmetric photonic wires emitting around 950 nm where large funneling efficiencies were also reported over broad spectral ranges. A blue-shift of the maximal value of DLP is also observed in Figure measurements are carried out on NW ensembles and a size distribution of the short and long axis are expected or by the small difference between the ZB and WZ refractive indices of InP. In this paper, we have succeeded in controlling the polarization state of the emitted photons from InAs QDs embedded in InP NWs by changing the NW morphology from symmetric to asymmetric cross-section with long and short axes. To realize such a structure, a specific growth procedure was used during the radial growth of the InP shell, which was performed without rotating the sample while the NW [11-20] direction was aligned with the In cell flux. Our method has confirmed the impact of the HA NWs on the DLP value of the light emitted by the InAs QDs: a high DLP ≈ 91 % was reached from HA InAs/InP QD-NWs, with the QD emission being mainly polarized parallel to the NW long cross-section axis. This work stands out as a pioneering approach compared to the reported studies in literature through the growth method of HA InP-NWs with controlled InAs QD dimensions, an emission in the telecom band and monolithic growth on a Si substrate, thus opening a very promising route for polarized single photon sources. Moreover, it can be expanded for a wide range of applications such as polarized light-emitting diodes or polarized sensitive photodetectors. In the general picture, our growth protocol offers a simple and cost-effective approach covering various applications of the asymmetric NWs. FDTD Simulations: FDTD simulations were performed (with the use of Rsoft FullWAVE software) assuming a semi-infinite NW to remove any back reflection of the guided mode as a consequence of the bottom NW/substrate interface. The calculations were performed for the A, B and C samples. The InP NWs (InP refractive index n=3.2) are designed with an asymmetric hexagonal shape with numerical values taken from table 1. The dipole is located along the NW center axis, 0.3 μm below the flat top facet in agreement with the growth procedure. QD dipoles emitting at 1.35 μm, 1.25 μm and 1.4 μm are used for A, B and C samples, respectively. The far field emission profile is calculated as a function of the QD dipole orientation: parallel or perpendicular to the NW long axis. The numerical aperture of the experimental setup is considered to extract a theoretical DLP from the far-field intensity patterns. The QD-NWs were excited from the top using a CW 532 nm laser source with a power, P = 42 mW. The laser light was focused on the sample using a focusing lens so that the laser spot dimension on the sample is around 200 μm. The light emitted from the QDs was collected from the upper part of the sample using a Cassegrain reflective microscope objective which collects light from a 0.15 numerical aperture (NA) to a 0.4 NA. A 830 nm long-pass filter was used to cut the light emitted by the laser. Another focusing lens was added after the filter to focus the light emitted by the InAs QDs on the optical fiber coupled to a monochromator equipped with a liquid nitrogen cooled InGaAs camera. An analyzer is added in the optical path to obtain a resolved spectrum in linear polarization. The 0° angle of the analyzer corresponds to the perpendicular orientation of the analyzer with respect to the NW long cross-section axis. The emission from the InAs QDs was recorded at different polarization angles with a step of 15° in order to study the influence of the NW long/short axis dimensions on the optical polarization of the QDs. The response function of the experimental setup was registered using an unpolarized light source as a function of the analyzer angle after the sample measurements to remove any polarization dependence of the experimental setup from the experimental data.