Upon insertion and extraction of lithium, materials important for electrochemical energy storage can undergo changes in thermal conductivity (Λ) and elastic modulus (M). These changes are attributed to evolution of the intrinsic thermal carrier lifetime and interatomic bonding strength associated with structural transitions of electrode materials with varying degrees of reversibility. Using in situ time-domain thermoreflectance (TDTR) and picosecond acoustics, we systemically study Λ and M of conversion, intercalation and alloying electrode materials during cycling. The intercalation V2O5 and TiO2 exhibit non-monotonic reversible Λ and M switching up to a factor of 1.8 (Λ) and 1.5 (M) as a function of lithium content. The conversion Fe2O3 and NiO undergo irreversible decays in Λ and M upon the first lithiation. The alloying Sb shows the largest and partially reversible order of the magnitude switching in Λ between the delithiated (18 W m -1 K -1 ) and lithiated states (<1 W m -1 K -1 ). The irreversible Λ is attributed to structural degradation and pulverization resulting from substantial volume changes during cycling. These findings provide new understandings of the thermal and mechanical property evolution of electrode materials during cycling of importance for battery design, and also point to pathways for forming materials with thermally switchable properties. Understanding the thermal conductivity (Λ) of lithium-ion (Li-ion) battery electrode materials is important because of the critical role temperature and temperature gradients play in the performance, cycle life and safety of Li-ion batteries The majority of Li-ion battery research has treated temperature as a macroscopic indicator, focusing on the balance between heat generation within the cell and dissipation out of the cell Li-ion battery electrodes exhibit materials specific reversible and irreversible electrochemical reactions with lithium-ions, some of which result in significant changes in thermal conductivity. While Cu or Al current collectors common to most Li-ion batteries have highthermal-conductivities, in all except a few designs, the majority of the heat is dissipated normal to the current collectors, and thus must flow through the anode and cathode active material, as well as the electrolyte and separator to exit the cell Electrochemical reactions of electrode materials can be generally classified into three reaction categories: intercalation, conversion, and alloying. Intercalation systems are the most mature, have been shown to exhibit reversible lithium storage for thousands of cycles, and are the basis of most current Li-ion batteries. Conversion and alloying reactions offer potentially higher energy densities than intercalation systems, however, so far at the cost of cycle life Accurate analysis of thermal transport in a nanoscale thin-films requires a precise design and control of thermal penetration depth to confines thermal waves in a limited region. We apply in situ TDTR to measure Λ of electrode materials in a sub-micron thin-film geometry (See methods and Supporting Figure As intercalation and conversion electrodes exhibit small or moderate volume changes (≤ 100%) during cycling, they can be electrochemically cycled in a liquid cell without delaminating. The alloying electrode (Sb on Au/Al/SiO2/sapphire) undergoes immediate delamination in a liquid cell during the first cycle because of a large volume change > 100% during lithiation. To prevent delamination, we employ an all-solid-state cell and apply ~30 MPa of pressure. Details for the design and assembly of liquid and solid-state cells are described in Supporting Figure Intercalation materials exhibit fast and reversible lithium insertion/desertion kinetics. Previous reports have shown reversible Λ switching of intercalation electrode materials during lithiation/delithiation. LixCoO2, LixMoS2 and LixP are found to exhibit Λ switching contrasts (Λhigh/Λlow) of 1.5 -2.0 TiO2 and V2O5 exhibit theoretical volume expansions of less than 6% upon lithium intercalation For TiO2, intercalated lithium-ions within the 1-D vacancy channels form LiO6 octahedra with oxygen atoms of the TiO6 chains. As a result, the O-Ti-O bond angle octahedra changes with the inserted lithium-ions, resulting in reversible phase transition between tetragonal α-TiO2 (x < 0.1) and orthorhombic β-LixTiO2 (0.1 < x < 0.6) phases We stop at x ≈ 2 since further insertion of lithium-ions can trigger a transition to ω-phase (2 < x < 3), which appears to be irreversible We measured Λ and M of LixTiO2 and LixV2O5 as a function of the lithiation state, x, using in situ TDTR and picosecond acoustics. Prior to TDTR measurement, we confirm the metal/oxygen stoichiometries of TiO2 and V2O5 using Rutherford backscattering spectrometry (RBS, Supporting Figure Figure Figure Λ of TiO2 does not measurably change in this region. As lithium insertion progresses, TiO2 becomes biphasic with coexisting Li-rich (β-TiO2) and Li-poor (α-TiO2) phases V vs Li/Li + . Λ of TiO2 decreases within this region as the Li-rich phase and biphasic boundaries grow as the concentration of lithium increases. For intercalation electrode materials such as MoS2, Λ decreases could be attributed to phonon scattering with inserted lithium V vs Li/Li + to the cut-off voltage. We note, we do not observe a second discharge potential plateau corresponding to the β to γ phase transition because of the thickness of the TiO2 film. Sizedependent lithium-insertion experiments show that lithiation of anatase above x > 0.6 (γ-TiO2) is kinetically limited to a few tens of nanometers within a practical cycling rate at room temperature (γ-TiO2 is a poor lithium-ion conductor due to fully occupied vacancy channels) With each cycle, we observe horizontal shifts in potential curves due to the irreversible electrochemical capacity loss at each cycle. Λ of LixTiO2 shows a decreasing trend with an increasing number of cycles, probably due to accumulation of defects within the material. However, the Λ contrast between the lithiated and delithiated states remains nearly constant at a 1.6 (7.7 vs. 4.7 W m -1 K -1 during the 1 st cycle, 6.3 vs. 4.0 W m -1 K -1 during the 5 th cycle). Figure phases. Due to the presence of 2-D diffusion pathways, V2O5 exhibits higher lithium-ion diffusion coefficients (DLi ~10 -112 cm 2 s -1 ) GPa during lithiation to x = 2. Contrary to the monotonic increase in M with lithiation, we observe a non-linear Λ response of LixV2O5, including a Λ decrease from 7.2 W m -1 K -1 (x = 0) to 4.7 W m -1 K -1 (x = 0.5) followed by an increase to 5.4 W m -1 K -1 (x = 1). During further lithiation (x = 2), Λ gradually decreases to 4.8 W m -1 K -1 . Figure During the subsequent delithiation process (charge), three potential plateaus regions are reduced as some lithium-ions are trapped. The Λ valley is also shifted with respect to the potential plateau shift. Specifically, the Λ (open circles) of V2O5 slightly increases within the third charge potential plateau region (γ to δ). Then, Λ starts to decrease at the beginning of the second charge potential plateau (δ to ε), reaches a local minimum at the end of the second charge potential plateau (ε) and increases again with the first potential plateau (ε to α). Λ during the rest of delithiation processes are shown in Supporting information Figure During the subsequent lithiation/delithiation cycle (2 nd ), we limit the lithiation state up to x = 1 (Figure Λ and elastic modulus of LixTiO2 and LixV2O5 show opposite trends with respect to x. This behavior is similar to computational results for Li-intercalated graphite and LixMoS2 where, at low lithium content, randomly intercalated lithium ions scatter phonons but at higher lithium contents eventually increases Λ due to acoustic phonon stiffening Since the discovery of conversion reactions of metal-oxides with lithium We choose Fe2O3 and NiO as model conversion systems. Due to slow diffusion kinetics for alloying electrode materials, diffusion coefficients of lithium in Fe2O3 (DLi ~ 10 -141 cm 2 s -1 ) [48] and NiO (DLi ~ 10 -131 cm 2 s -1 ) One mole of Fe2O3 and NiO can take up to six and two moles of Li-ions, respectively. The degree of lithiation x is defined as the maximum molar lithium capacity per one mole of Fe2O3 and NiO. RBS data suggest that Fe2O3 and NiO films contain inhomogeneous metal-rich phases (Fe3O4 and Ni) (Supporting Figure Figure Figure Figure Figure The difference between the discharge curves of Fe2O3 and NiO suggests that the first and the rest of the electrochemical cycles take different lithiation/delithiation pathways. The first lithiation involves irreversible processes. During the first lithiation microcracks, voids, defects and vacancies can be formed along with formation of SEI, breaking of M-O bonds, rearrangement of atoms and even pulverization of the electrode materials From the second cycle, microcracks and voids act as facile lithium-ion diffusion pathways. Defects and vacancies provide energetically favorable sites for lithium-ions As thermal transport is mediated by phonons, Λ of Fe2O3 and NiO decreases with the growth of the amorphous phase. Λ of amorphous materials can be estimated using the atomic density and speed of sounds where the minimum mean-free-path of vibrational modes is reduced to the interatomic distance. With this approach, we have successfully predicted asymptotic Λ of disordered materials including dielectrics and polymers While Λ of NiO remains above Λmin, Λ of Fe2O3 drops below Λmin during lithiation x > 0.8. We note that Fe2O3 exhibits a volume expansion 40% larger than theory while NiO shows a volume expansion similar to that theoretically expected. The excess volume expansion could explain why Λ of Fe2O3 drops below Λmin. We speculate that this additional reduction in Λ is extrinsic to the material property and due to the formation of voids, microcracks and low thermal conductivity SEI within the electrode materials. The electrochemical charge/discharge capacities and coulombic efficiencies of Fe2O3 and NiO during in situ TDTR experiments are presented in Supporting Figure Alloying electrodes, e.g., Si, Sn and Sb, form binary alloys with up to 4.4 Li-atoms per host atom. Li-sulfur and Li-air electrode materials also fall into this class. As a result, alloying electrode materials exhibit high theoretical capacities, ranging from 660 mA h g -1 to 4200 mA h g -1 , however, at a cost of up to a 300% volume expansion during lithiation The corresponding phase transition between Sb and Li3Sb was confirmed using XRD (Supporting Figure Figure The lithiation state x is defined by the theoretical capacity (x = 3, Q = 660 mA h g -1 ), the density and the thickness of the Sb film. First, we measure Λ = 18 W m -1 K -1 for pristine Sb using frontside and backside TDTR. Sb is a semimetal with overlapping valence and conduction bands at EF. We estimate the electronic thermal conductivity Λe = 12 W m -1 K -1 using the Wiedemann Franz law and the electrical conductivity measured by four-point probe. The lattice thermal conductivity ΛL is estimated by subtracting Λ with Λe. The estimated value of ΛL = 6 W m -1 K -1 agrees with the first principle calculation for crystalline Sb During the first lithiation process, we observe a dramatic Λ decrease from 18 W m -1 K -1 (x = 0) to 0.6 m -1 K -1 (x = 2.9). This markedly large Λ change can be primarily attributed to the elimination of the electronic contribution to Λ during the semimetal to semiconductor (Li3Sb) transition. A similar degree of Λ reduction is predicted for Zn3Sb, GaSb and CdSbAg during semiconductor-to-metal transitions at the melting point Along with the electronic transition, ΛL plays an important role in decreasing Λ at the lithiated state. Sb alloys show significantly low ΛL compared with Sb. For example, amorphous Sb2Te3 shows Λ = 0.23 W m -1 K -1 This structural degradation can contribute to capacity fading, electric contact loss and large irreversible capacity of alloying electrode materials. Since a majority of phonons carrying heat in Sb and Li3Sb have a mean free path between 10 nm to 100 nm These changes are detrimental to Λ of electrode materials because they add boundary and defect scattering, and introduce low-thermal-conductivity phases including SEI and voids. In this regard, we hypothesize that the degree of lithiation (or volume expansion) is directly related to irreversible Λ. To test our hypothesis, we limit lithium intake of Sb to Q = 250 mA h g -1 (equivalent to x = 1.14) per each lithiation process. After lithiation, we freely delithiated Sb up to 1.5 V vs Li/Li + . Figure Both full and limited Sb show a similar trend in Λ decrease up to x ~ 1, which is about the irreversible capacity of the fully activated Sb at the first cycle. However, further cycling results in a noticeable difference in Λ retention and hysteresis. As limiting the discharge avoids formation of Li3Sb, we do not observe noticeable Λ hysteresis during lithiation and delithiation. Sb cycled over a limited range shows much higher Λ at the delithiated state (10.4 -4.9 W m -1 K -1 ) and lithiated state (8.2 -3.1 W m -1 K -1 ), and shows Λ switching ratios Λhigh/Λlow > 1.5 from 2 nd to 5 th cycle, similar to intercalation electrode materials. From the lithium-ion electrode materials was investigated, several trends emerge. Figure We plot Λ of each electrode at the initial state (Λ0, high thermal conductivity state) and Λ contrast, using the lowest Λ state (Λlow) at each cycle in Figure showing reversible thermal conductivity switching Intercalation and alloying LixP are plotted separately. Intercalation electrodes, including V2O5 and TiO2, show reversible Λ and elastic modulus switching, ascribed to their reversible crystalline phase transitions during lithiation/delithiation. In all these systems, Λlow > 1 W m -1 K -1 . On the contrary, conversion electrodes undergo irreversible Λ decrease of a factor of two to five during the first lithiation process and no further change in Λ during subsequent cycling. Therefore, they show low Λlow and small Λlow/Λ0. Conversion Sb shows the largest changes in thermal conductivity between Λ0 = 18 W m -1 K -1 and Λlow = 0.6 -8.2 W m -1 K -1 , depending on the cycle number and the degree to which it is lithiated. M of electrode materials strongly depends on SOC and electrochemical reaction mechanism. We observe reversible lattice stiffening of intercalation materials (M increases with x) while conversion and alloying materials show lattice softening (M decreases with x) with varying reversibility. The irreversible Λ loss of conversion and alloying electrode materials are closely related to the degree of lithiation (degree of volume expansion required to accommodate lithium). During cycling, conversion and alloying electrode materials can undergo structural degradation and pulverization, creating defects, voids, cracks and SEI within the electrode materials. As these factors are extrinsic to the properties of the electrode material, the observed decrease in Λ of the electrode material during cycling is best considered to be a convolution of the material properties and large scale defects which further inhibit the flow of heat We report clear trends in thermal conductivity and elastic modulus of three important classes of electrode materials and provide a comprehensive comparison as a function of their state-of-charge, number of cycles and electrochemical lithium storage mechanism. Thermal conductivity changes range from 1.5 times to a factor of ten during cycling, and we draw the lowest bound of thermal conductivity of electrode materials achieved during cycling. While many of the advances in Liion battery technology have been based on new high-power and energy density electrode materials, prior to this report there was little information on the reversible and irreversible thermal conductivity changes during cycling. This study emphasizes the state-of-charge dependent thermal properties of Li-ion batteries and the nature of volatile thermal conductivity of certain classes of electrode materials. The thermal conductivity of electrode materials is important for engineering design, and the experimental method studied here can be used to characterize changes in the physical properties of electrode materials during cycling. Understanding how the thermal conductivity of electrode materials change during cycling could be used to enhance the window of operation of Li-ion batteries and provide insights into the thermal evolution of Li-ion battery electrode materials. The thermal conductivity contrast of alloying electrode (Sb) is the largest among the reported materials, providing insights into materials with thermally switchable properties. Sample preparation: Substrates were prepared by plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition (PECVD) of α-SiO2 film (~200 nm) on a sapphire substrate (0001). An Al thin-film (~60 nm) was subsequently deposited on the SiO2/sapphire by magnetron sputtering. Then, Fe2O3, NiO, V2O5, and TiO2 films were deposited on the Al/SiO2/sapphire substrate using electron beam evaporation (Rocky Mountain Vacuum Tech, Englewood, CO). The base pressure, e-beam voltage and current were set to 10 -6 Torr, 3.4 kV and 20 mA, respectively. The SiO2 on sapphire substrate is optically transparent, and provides a low thermal conductivity barrier to drive most heat flow through the electrode material. The Al film simultaneously acts as the current collector and the optical transducer for TDTR measurement Electrochemical Measurements: Fe2O3, NiO, V2O5, and TiO2 electrodes were assembled with a liquid cell consisting of 1.0 M LiClO4 in EC (ethylene carbonate)/DMC (dimethyl carbonate) electrolyte (1:1 by vol) and a lithium metal foil (Alfa Aesar, 99.9%) as a counter electrode. The solid-state cell was employed to perform the electrochemical test of Sb with Li2S-P2S5 solid electrolyte (Sigma Aldrich, 77.5 to 22.5 molar ratio) and an In-Li counter electrode. The solidstate cell was pressed with a vise clamp during measurement. A complete description regarding the design and assembly of the liquid and solid cells can be found in Supporting Figure Electrochemical cycling of electrode materials was performed using a portable potentiostat (Bio-Logic SP-200) at room temperature. the material of interest from the time-resolved thermoreflectance signal at the modulation frequency f. We performed TDTR We measured the temperature excursion of the transducer film as intensity changes of the probe beam with a RF lock-in amplifier (SRS SR844) synchronized to the function generator at f. In situ TDTR measurements were performed during galvanostatic cycling of electrode materials. We solved the analytical heat transport model for layered structures with Λ of the electrode material as a free parameter. In this model, heat capacity and thickness of each electrode material were interpolated between the lithiated and delithiated states (Supporting Figure W m -1 K -1 . Λ of Sb at the initial state is independently confirmed by front-side TDTR measurement. During lithiation, most materials expand and their Λ decreases, so during cycling we do not move into a regime where the thermal penetration depth exceeds the material thickness. Therefore, the liquid and solid electrolyte do not affect TDTR signal during cycling. Unlike intercalation electrode materials with changes in C and d less than 10% during cycling, conversion and alloying electrodes show non-negligible changes in C and d during cycling. These changes must be considered in the modeling, as they impose an obvious shift in SΛ with respect to x. All C values at the lithiated and delithiated electrodes were measured by front-side TDTR with varying f except Sb. Due to the irregular surface thickness, we were not able to confirm C at the lithiated state of Sb. Instead, we used a calculated heat capacity of Li3Sb C = 2.36 J cm -3 K -1 where both Sb and Li match well with the classical heat capacity (Note, the Debye temperature of Li3Sb is = 171 K). Figure Note that Λ of lithiated Sb could be underestimated as Sb shows the largest heat capacity transition ΔC = 70% during cycling. Defect, void and inhomogeneous phase transition could result in a discrepancy between actual C and the interpolated C(x), which will underestimate Λ to the same extent (SΛ ~ SC, Figure In this range, Au and Pt transducers are partially transparent and their thermoreflectance (dR/dT) values are about an order of magnitude smaller than Al at λ = 785 nm. [3] Therefore, Au and Pt are subject to a significant optical artifact (~ 20% of the total TDTR signal) based on the fraction of the beam reflected from the electrolyte with a high dn/dT > 10 -4 K -1 . Therefore, we chose Al as a transducer film and a current collector for working electrode materials for the backside TDTR measurement. To estimate the optical artifact induced by the SiO2 film on the substrate we performed an optical transfer-matrix calculation with Al/SiO2/sapphire to calculate the effect of thermo-optic constant of the substrate. Given the thermo-optic constant of SiO2 (dn/dT = 8.6 × 10 -6 K -1 at 785 nm), [4] the total thermoreflectance was shifted by up to 0.7 % compared with the ideal substrate (dn/dT = 0) considering the transient temperature rise during the measurement. From the sensitivity analysis, we estimate the effect of optical artifacts on Λ uncertainty would not exceed 2 %. Electrochemical stability of substrate: As Al forms a binary alloy with Li by an electrochemical reaction below 0.5 V vs Li/Li + , we chose electrode materials whose working potential window is higher than 0.5 vs Li/Li + . [5] This potential range works with all cathode materials and a limited number of anode materials for lithium-ion (Li-ion) batteries. Among anode materials, 3-d metal oxides, Sn and Sb-based anode materials are stable in this range, but carbon and silicon-based anode materials exhibiting discharge potential plateaus below 0.5 V vs Li/Li + are incompatible with Al film. Here, we tested the voltage window of the Al/SiO2/sapphire substrate shows cyclic voltammetry (CV) curves with varying cut-off voltages from 0.5 to 0 V vs Li/Li + . Figure survived at an elevated temperature up to 500 °C for 1 h. Figure We measured that the optical reflectivity of as-prepared and heat-treated V2O5/Al/SiO2/sapphire substrate remained unchanged but the thermal conductivity of V2O5 increased from 0.9 W m -1 K -1 to 8.4 W m -1 K -1 due to the improved crystallinity and the reduction of defects. [6] Similarly, Λ of Fe2O3 increased from 1.7 W m -1 K -1 to 3.9 W m -1 K -1 (400 o C) and 7.6 W m -1 K -1 (500 o C). Λ of NiO increased from 2.1 W m -1 K -1 to 5.2 W m -1 K -1 (300 o C). Steady-state temperature rise: We used Al/SiO2/sapphire substrates for backside TDTR measurements of electrode materials. The thin SiO2 film (200 -300 nm) was set to thicker than the heat penetration depth, thereby increasing SΛ of the electrode materials. [2, 7] The thickness of the SiO2 layer plays a dominant role in the steady-state temperature rise ΔTss due to the accumulation of heating pulses. In this paper, we used 5× and 10× objective lenses to focus the pump and probe beam onto the Al film with 1/e 2 intensity radii of 10 and 5 μm, respectively. The intensities of the pump and probe beam were set to 5-10 mW and 3-5 mW, respectively. The corresponding temperature rise by a single pump pulse ΔTpp and ΔTss are calculated as ~ 1.5 K and ~ 8 K, respectively. Sapphire was used as a high-thermal-conductivity heat sink. We calculate that the contribution of steady-state temperature rise added by the SiO2 layer is 50 % by comparing ΔTss with and without the sandwiched SiO2 layer. Replacing thin SiO2 with a thick SiO2 layer would result in a dramatic increase in ΔTss > 30 K, which is not appropriate for the accurate Λ analysis. Liquid cell: Liquid cells were prepared by a 25-mL round bottom flask modified with a 1-cm diameter opening with an O-ring joint on the side (Figure We prepared the solid-state cell consisting of polyaryletheretherketone (PEEK) cell die with two machined Ti rods that serve as current collectors for both working and counter electrodes (Figure A complete procedure of the solid-state cell assembly is as follows. In the Ar-filled glove box, Sb/Au/Al/SiO2/sapphire substrate (5 mm diameter) was inserted into the stepped hole in the modified Ti rod. Then, we uniformly spread 100-mg 77.5Li2S-22.5P2S5 solid electrolytes on the Ti rod mounted with the PEEK cell die. Then, we pressed the electrolyte (30 MPa) to form a 13 mm diameter pellet. Finally, the indium-lithium (In-Li) counter electrode was attached to the other side of the solid electrolyte pellet and pressed at 30 MPa with the other Ti rod. The solid-state cell was sealed with a 3M tape before taken out of the glove box. During the TDTR measurement, a steel vise was used to keep the pressure of the solid-state cell (Figure Volume expansion: We measured volume changes of the five electrode materials between the lithiated and delithiated states using cross-sectional scanning electron microscopy (SEM). Figure showed a negligible volume expansion of < 1 % during charge/discharge cycles. In comparison, conversion Fe2O3 showed a volume expansion of 140%. The irreversible volume expansion ratio was measured as 16%. NiO showed a slightly lower volume expansion of 100% with a slightly higher irreversible volume expansion of 22%. The alloying Sb showed the most dramatic volume expansion accompanied by severe structural degradation, which leads to high uncertainty in the volume expansion estimation. Note that cycling in a liquid electrolyte cell resulted in immediate delamination of Sb film due to the dramatic volume expansion of the film. Even with the solidstate cell, Sb film was highly deformed after cycling (after 10 cycles, Figure For intercalation electrode materials, we observe lattice stiffening where the echo shifts to shorter delay time with increasing x. For conversion and alloying electrode materials, we observe an irreversible lattice softening where the echo shifts to longer delay time with increasing x. For alloying material, Sb shows the most dramatic shift in echoes after the lithiation. During delithation, we observe that the echo returned to the initial position due to the reversible phase transition between Sb and Li3Sb after delithiation (Figure However, the remaining capacity (~180 mA h g -1 ) remained nearly unchanged for the following cycles with coulombic efficiency higher than Fe2O3 (> 95% from 2 nd to 5 th cycle). Alloying electrode: During the first cycle, Sb exhibits a discharge capacity Q = 636 mA h g -1 , close to the theoretical capacity of Qtheory = 660 mA h g -1 (x = 3). However, this value gradually decreased to 450 mA h g -1 during the second cycles. Sb exhibits a large irreversible capacity and poor coulombic efficiency. By limiting discharge, electrochemical capacity retention and coulombic efficiency are improved (from 3 rd cycle). 