We study a model of N fermions in a quantum dot, coupled to M bosons by a disorder-induced complex Yukawa coupling (Yukawa-SYK model), in order to explore the interplay between non-Fermi liquid and superconductivity in a strongly coupled, (quantum-)critical environment. We analyze the phase diagram of the model for an arbitrary complex interaction and arbitrary ratio of N/M , with special focus on the two regimes of non-Fermi-liquid behavior: an SYK-like behavior with a power-law frequency dependence of the fermionic self-energy and an impurity-like behavior with frequency independent self-energy. We show that the crossover between the two. can be reached by varying either the strength of the fermion-boson coupling or the ratio M/N . We next argue that in both regimes the system is unstable to superconductivity if the strength of time-reversal-symmetrybreaking disorder is below a certain threshold. We show how the corresponding onset temperatures vary between the two regimes. We argue that the superconducting state is highly unconventional with an infinite set of minima of the condensation energy at T = 0, corresponding to topologically different gap functions. We discuss in detail similarities and differences between this model and the model of dispersion-full fermions tuned to a metallic quantum-critical point, with an effective singular dynamical interaction V (Ω) ∝ 1/|Ω| γ (the γ-model). The coupling of order-parameter fluctuations and electronic degrees of freedom in the vicinity of a quantum critical point (QCP) yields a variety of fascinating phenomena, which, as many believe, are responsible for the complex phase diagram of several strongly correlated electron systems The competition between NFL and pairing has been addressed within several models of fermions interacting with their collective spin and charge excitations , or generalized gapless bosonic modes , for electron-phonon interaction in the limit of vanishing dressed Debye frequency In this communication, we analyze this competition within a generalization of the Sachdev-Ye-Kitaev (SYK) model The outcome of the competition between NFL behavior and pairing in YSYK models depends on the ratio of the number of fermions and bosons, N/M , and the strength and symmetry of the Yukawa coupling. In particular, by choosing real or complex Yukawa coupling, one can model disorder that either preserves or breaks time-reversal symmetry (TRS) In this article, we extend previous works and consider a generic complex interaction and arbitrary N/M . We analyze in detail the emerging NFL behavior and pairing instability, and reveal special features of the pairing mediated by dispersionless critical fluctuations. We report three sets of results, which are based on our analy-sis of coupled equations for the fermionic self-energy, the bosonic polarization, and the pairing vertex. First, we obtain the normal state phase diagram as a function of temperature and fermion-boson coupling g 0 for various N/M . Refs. 105 and 106 have found that for N = M there are two types of NFL behavior -an SYK-like one at smaller temperatures or smaller g 0 , with characteristic power-law fermionic and bosonic self-energies, and an impurity-like one at higher temperatures and larger g 0 , with a frequency-independent fermionic self-energy. We show that these two regimes exist for all values of N/M . We also argue that there is a range of T where fermions and bosons behave as almost free quasiparticles, and that at small N/M there are additional intermediate regimes. Second, we obtain the onset temperature for the pairing, T (0) c , as a function of three parameters: the coupling g 0 , the ratio N/M , and the degree of TRS-breaking disorder specified by a parameter α. We argue that the behavior of T (0) c depends on out of which regime the pairing develops. At small to intermediate N/M and g 0 , the pairing emerges at the boundary between the SYK regime and the regime of free fermions (Fig. for topologically different pairing states with n zeros in the gap function ∆ n (ω m ) along the Matsubara axis. The condensation energy at T = 0 then has an infinite set of discrete minima. The deepest one is for the topologically trivial case n = 0, however the presence of the other solutions enhances fluctuation effects at a finite T . We argue that all T (n) c emerge simultaneously at α = α c . We also present a detailed comparison between the pairing of dispersion-less fermions in the YSYK model and of dispersion-full fermions at a QCP with an effective, frequency-dependent interaction V (Ω) ∝ 1/|Ω| γ , where the value of the exponent γ is specific to the type of a QCP (the γ model) The structure of the paper is the following. In the next section, we introduce the model and obtain the equations for fermionic and bosonic self-energies and the pairing vertex. In Sec. III, we present the results for the normal state assuming a non-superconducting ground state. We consider T = 0 in Sec. III A and a finite T in Sec. III B. For the latter we analyze separately the SYK regime in Sec. III B 1 and the impurity regime in Sec. III B 2, and obtain the phase diagram for a generic M/N and T in Sec. III B 4. In Sec. IV, we analyze the pairing instability. We first analyze in Sec. IV A the pairing out of the regime of almost free fermions. Then, in Sec. IV B, we obtain the condition for the pairing at T = 0 and prove that the ground state is a superconductor if TRSbreaking disorder is below a critical value. In Sec. IV C we argue that there exists an infinite number of solutions for the pairing gap, which differ in how many times the gap function changes sign along the Matsubara axis. In Sec. IV D, we consider finite T . We obtain the critical temperatures and analyze its behavior as function of M/N , the coupling g 0 , and the TRS-breaking disorder α. In Sec. V we present an in-depth comparison between the YSYK model and the γ-model. We present our conclusions in Sec. VI. Some technical aspects are discussed in the appendices. We follow earlier works ( †) iσ are fermionic operators, and φ k describe bosons with canonical momentum π k and mass ω 0 . Electrons and bosons are both dynamical degrees of freedom with no spatial dependence. One can view Eq. 1 as a toy model for strongly interacting fermions with negligible bandwidth. The couplings g ijk = g ijk + ig ijk are generally complex and Gaussian-distributed with zero mean value and the second moment given by The dimensionless parameter α determines the strength of TRS-breaking disorder and acts as pair breaking for superconductivity. One can also consider a non-random version of Eq. ( We use the replica trick to perform the disorder average and derive the set of coupled equations for fermionic selfenergy Σ(ω m ), bosonic polarization Π(ω m ), and the pairing vertex Φ(ω m ), as functions of Matsubara frequency (see, e.g., the Appendix in Ref. The functions G(ω m ) and F (ω m ) on the right hand side of these equations are the dressed normal and anomalous electron propagators The equations for Σ(ω m ) and Φ(ω m ) have the same functional form as the Eliashberg equations for an electronphonon interaction, and to shorten notations we will be calling Eqs. (3) Eliashberg equations. In the following we will be interested in the limit Φ(ω m ) → 0, valid when the system is at the verge of developing a pairing instability. To leading order in Φ(ω m ), we obtain At T = 0, the frequency sum is replaced by the integral T ωm = dω/(2π), and the equations become The equation for the pairing function Φ(ω m ) can be reexpressed as an equation for the gap function ∆ In the rest of the paper, we analyze the solutions of the Eliashberg equations at T = 0 and finite T for various ratios of fermion and boson numbers N/M and different ḡ. For the latter, it is convenient to introduce a dimensionless coupling constant A. T = 0: SYK quantum criticality We first analyze the solutions of the Eliashberg equations for Σ(ω) and Φ(ω) at T = 0. Earlier works with Substituting Σ(ω) and Π(ω) into Eq. ( This equation determines η as a universal function of N/M . We plot η vs N/M in Fig. The prefactor ωη in Eqs. ( where In fact, this last expression is only approximately correct because the corresponding integral in Eq. ( For intermediate values of η, a η and b η are numbers of order one and ωη ∼ ω 0 g 2 0 . B. Finite temperature At finite temperature, additional thermal effects appear. It was shown in Ref. 105 that for N = M , the SYK solution, appropriately extended to include a temperature-dependent mass in the boson propagator, holds up to a certain temperature, determined by the interaction. At larger T , the system crosses over to the regime of almost free fermions at g 0 < 1 and to another universal regime at g 0 > 1. In this last regime, dubbed impurity-like NFL, Σ(ω) is still larger than ω, however, the self-energy is frequency-independent. Here, we generalize the analysis of both SYK and impurity regimes to arbitrary N/M . We show that the boson mass and thermal self-energy depend on N/M and thus on η. As a result, characteristic scales also vary with N/M , and the phase diagram depends not only on the coupling, but also on N/M . In particular, we demonstrate that for small N/M , there is no direct cross-over from the SYK to the impurity regime. Instead, intermediate regimes appear. In the opposite limit of large N/M , the self-energies in the SYK and in the impurity regimes have almost identical forms, and the system's behavior in the two regimes becomes indistinguishable. We define the SYK regime at a finite T as the one where the self-energy still has a power-law form, Eq. ( Using this self-energy, we obtain the polarization operator in the form: Π(ω n , T ) = Π(0, T ) + δΠ(ω n , T = 0) + δΠ(ω n , T ), where δΠ(ω n , T = 0) is given by Eq. ( and δΠ(ω n , T ) = ω 2 0 (T /g 2 0 ω 0 ) η p η (ω n /T ) (see App. B 1 for details and the expression for p η (x)). Finally, Π(0, T ) = -ω 2 0 + m 2 (T ) with the temperature-dependent mass where and ζ(z) denotes the zeta function. The limits are c η → η for η → 0 and c η → ln 2 for η → 1. To analyze how thermal effects influence the SYK solution for various η, we rewrite Σ(ω n ) by pulling out the thermal contribution (the one with m = n in Eq. ( where p(x) = b η x η + a 2 η p(x) /c η . For small or intermediate η, the mass term remains finite and b η /c η ∼ a 2 η /c η ∼ 1, so that for relevant ω/T = O(1) the thermal piece is of the same order as the terms in the sum over m = n. The thermal piece then can be neglected in an order-of-magnitude calculation. The rest gives the SYK form of the self-energy, Eq. ( For a generic η, the system also crosses-over to the impurity regime, but this happens at large enough g 0 . The argument is that in Eq. The route to the impurity regime by increasing the coupling has been discussed in Ref. We now search for the self-consistent solution of the Eliashberg equations at a finite T , assuming that the thermal piece dominates. We label the corresponding variables with subindex i. We express all quantities in terms of M/N instead of η, because the exponent η is a characteristic of the power-law behavior of the selfenergy, which, as we will see, no longer holds in the im-purity regime. We still assume that Σ(ω m ) ω m . Keeping only the thermal contribution in the Eliashberg equation for the self-energy (the m = n term in the sum in Eq. ( The boson mass m 2 i = D -1 (0) is determined selfconsistently from Π(0, T ) = -ω 2 0 + m 2 i . Evaluating Π(0, T ) with the self-energy from Substituting Eq. ( Using this Σ i , we find that the full boson polarization is given by Π where Self-consistency in the impurity regime requires that m 2 (T ) is smaller than δΠ i (ω m )+ω 2 m for relevant ω m ∼ T . For N M this holds for any g 0 . In the opposite limit N M , this holds for large enough g 2 0 > (M/N ) 2 (ω 0 /T ). Because the limits N M and N M correspond to η ≈ 1 and η 1, these results are consistent with the ones in Sec. III B 1. We address the crossover between the SYK and the impurity regimes in Sec. III B 4 below, when we discuss the phase diagram. A finite T also opens up a window in the parameter range, where both fermionic and bosonic self-energies Σ and Π are small compared to the bare ω n and the bare ω 2 0 + ω 2 m in the inverse fermion and boson propagator, respectively. Thus, fermions remain weakly interacting quasiparticles, and bosons retain an excitation gap close to the bare ω 0 . The appearance of a regime of free fermions can be understood by comparing the SYK expressions for the self-energy, Eq. ( T/ω 0 g 0 1 We now discuss the phase diagram for a generic M/N and T ∼ ω. It is instructive to separately consider the cases N ≈ M , N M and N M . We sketch the corresponding phase diagrams in Fig. The phase diagram for N ≈ M has been obtained in Ref. For N M (η ≈ 1), we found in Secs. III B 1, III B 2 that the impurity regime emerges already at small T and g 0 . At the same time, we note that the forms of Σ i and m i in Eqs. ( In the opposite limit N M (η 1), the forms of the self-energy in the SYK and the impurity regimes differ substantially. We argue that in this case the system cannot cross-over directly from one regime to the other. This can be seen by comparing the electronic selfenergies Σ i and Σ(T ) at the lower boundary of the impurity regime at T /ω 0 ∼ (M/N ) 2 /g 2 0 , where m 2 i ∼ T 2 . For a direct cross-over, the two self-energies must be of the same order. However, Σ i ∼ ω 0 (N/M )g 2 0 , while Because Σ i and Σ(T ) are so different, an intermediate regime develops between the SYK and the impurity regime (region III in Fig. . Similarly, there is no direct crossover between the impurity regime and free-fermion regime. Indeed, at the other boundary of the impurity region, at T /ω 0 ∼ (N/M ) 2 g 2 0 > 1, where m 2 i becomes of order ω 2 0 , Σ i still exceeds the bare ω n ∼ T . This opens up intermediate region I in Fig. NFL behavior in the normal state is one effect of the system's self-tuning to criticality. Another one is the appearance of a singular pairing interaction mediated by a gapless boson. In our YSYK model, this interaction scales as (1 -α) and is attractive for α < 1, see Eq. ( We begin by analyzing superconductivity in the range of parameters where in the normal state the self-energy for fermions and the polarization operator for bosons are small compared with bare inverse fermionic and bosonic propagators, i.e., both fermions and bosons can be approximated as free particles. This regime emerges most naturally at finite temperature in the limit N M (η 1) and g 0 < 1. We assume and then verify that in this regime a superconducting instability occurs at T c ∼ g 2 0 ω 0 , and relevant internal ω m and external ω n in Eq. ( Note that the Matsubara sum converges because the pairing kernel contains the square of the fermionic G(ω m ). The convergence justifies our assumption that typical ω m ∼ T c . Then, relevant ω n are also of order T c . We see from Eq. ( At T = 0, the ground state without superconductivity is the SYK-like NFL with scaling forms of fermionic and bosonic propagators. We recall that Σ(ω) ∼ ω (1-η)/2 ω(1+η)/2 η . Consider first the linearized equation for the pairing vertex Φ(ω) at ω ωη , where Σ(ω) ω. We will see below that relevant internal ω in Eq. ( The kernel of Eq. ( and the beta function B(x, y) = Γ(x)Γ(y)/Γ(x + y). A solution of Eq. ( We plot α c as a function of η in Fig. In the opposite limit η → 1, the critical α c tends to zero We can see this analytically by expanding Eq. ( where H x is the harmonic number. This reproduces Eq. ( in good agreement with the numerical solution in Fig. For α > α c , the normalized power-law solution of the linearized gap equation corresponds to β = η/2 -|κ|, and this solution can be obtained perturbatively, starting from an infinitesimally small frequency-independent Φ 0 (see Ref. At α = α c , the two exponents β 1,2 = η/2 coincide. A more careful analysis shows that at this α, where c is arbitrary. For α < α c , β 1,2 = η/2 ± iκ are complex, and Φ(ω) oscillates as a function of frequency These oscillations cannot be obtained perturbatively starting from Φ 0 because the kernel in ( To show that this is indeed the case, i.e., that α c is a critical strength of TRS-breaking disorder which separates superconducting and NFL ground states, we need to show that at α = α c , the linear equation for Φ(ω) has a non-trivial solution for all ω, not only for ω < ωη , which we considered so far. Such a solution, if it exists, should match Eq. ( For convenience, we restricted the integral to positive frequencies. At large ω ωη , Φ(ω) must decay as 1/|ω| η , as one can verify by direct substitution of this form into Eq. To proceed further, we convert Eq. ( ing this in Eq. ( Eq. ( The constant is cancelled out by choosing a particular ratio of c 2 /c 1 . With this choice, we recover the required high-frequency behavior Φ(ω) ∝ 1/|ω| η . In the lowfrequency limit, we recover Eq. ( We now consider the case α ≤ α c when we expect the ground state to be a superconductor in more detail. A naive expectation would be that for these α, the so- lution of the linearized gap equation disappears, and a finite Φ nl (ω) emerges as the solution of the non-linear gap equation. In our case, this is partly true. Namely, a finite Φ nl (ω) does appear, however the solution of the linearized gap equation does not disappear. To see this, we keep η 1 and analyze the linearized gap equation (39) for α < α c . Applying the same reasoning as before, we again find the normalized Φ(ω) as the sum of the two hypergeometric functions, Φ(ω) = c 1 Φ 1 (ω) + c 2 Φ 2 (ω). The boundary condition at high frequencies, Φ(ω) ∝ 1/|ω| η , is satisfied if we choose a particular c 1 /c 2 (which depends on α) to cancel out a parasitic constant. At small ω, Φ(ω) oscillates in the same way as we found in the previous section where φ is expressed via c 2 /c 1 We now argue that the solution of the linearized gap equation is the end point of an infinite set of solutions of the non-linear gap equation. For this, we recall the reasoning in the previous section that one can construct an approximate solution of the non-linear gap equation by setting Φ nl (ω) to be some constant Φ nl (0) up to a boundary frequency ω ∼ Φ nl (0), taking Φ nl (ω) to be proportional to Φ(ω) at higher frequencies. The constant Φ nl (0) has to be chosen such that Φ nl (ω) is smooth at the boundary. In our case, a natural candidate for the boundary frequency is the position of an extrema in Φ(ω). However, because of the oscillatory behavior of Φ(ω), there is a set of extrema at ω * n ∝ exp(-πn/κ). Following this logic, we obtain not one but an infinite set of candidate solutions of the non-linear gap equation with gap amplitudes Φ nl (ω) changes sign one time, and so on. In this nomenclature, the solution of the linearized equation Φ(ω) = Φ Matsubara axis is a center of a vortex in the complex frequency plane ]. Thus, in the limit η → 0, Φ N L (0) remains finite, consistent with Eq. ( As a next step, we verify our reasoning for multiple solutions by extending the analysis of the gap equation to finite T . If the candidate Φ to vanish. It is not reached completely due to numerical restrictions. Inset shows the same data on a logarithmic scale. We show the corresponding gap functions for α = 0 in Fig. give rise to a set of critical temperatures T 0), which all must emerge simultaneously once α becomes smaller than α c . We illustrate this in Fig. ≈ 0.994 × 10 -3 g 2 0 ω0 and T (2) c ≈ 1.79 × 10 -5 g 2 0 ω0). It is obtained at discrete Matsubara frequencies, lines are guides to the eye. The number of zeros increases for the different gap functions from zero to three. We start with the analysis of the gap equation with α in the YSYK model at α = 0 can be considered a NFL counterpart of the suppression of T c by pair-breaking magnetic impurities in Abrikosov-Gor'kov theory of pairing in a dirty Fermi liquid Further, it follows from Eq. ( where f n (η) does not depend on the coupling. The corrections to Eq. ( We also see from Fig. with n ≥ 1 at η = 0 implies the necessity of a dynamical pairing interaction in order to get an infinite set of pairing solutions. Next, we analyze the gap equation using as input the expressions for the self-energy and the bosonic polarization in the impurity regime, Eqs. ( We first recall that we found in Sec. III B 2 that at large N/M , the critical behavior in the impurity regime is almost indistinguishable from that in the SYK regime. Hence, T c , obtained using Eqs. ( (1) c obtained from Eqs. ( For α = 0, Eq. ( independent of the coupling constant g 0 , i.e. T c is solely determined by the ratio of electron and boson flavors. In the limit N/M 1, this result can be equivalently expressed as T c ∼ ω 0 √ 1 -η. Our numerical calculations using the full gap equation confirm these findings. Fig. For α = 0, T c extracted from Expanding in α, we find that α reintroduces the dependence on the coupling and suppresses the critical temperature by For g 0 = O(1), the corrections due to α are amplified by large (N/M ) 3/2 . We compare T c for α = 0 and a representative α = 0 in Fig. We note that for α = 0, the gap equation ( Combining the results of the previous sections, we obtain how the onset temperature of pairing evolves as function of temperature and coupling for different N/M . We focus on the largest T (0) c = T c and consider the evolution of T c in the three exemplary cases N M , N ≈ M and N M . We show the results in Fig. Let us first discuss the common features for very small or very large g 0 . Generally, for small g 0 and α = 0, we have found that T c increases as ω 0 g 2 0 . At α = 0, the initial slope is reduced by 1 -α. This is true when superconductivity develops out of the free-fermion or out of the SYK regime. The combination of our analytical and numerical results shows that for N M , T c is inside the free-fermion regime, for N ≈ M , T c is parameter-wise at the boundary between the free-fermion and the SYK regimes, but numerically well inside the SYK regime, and for N M , T c is deep inside the SYK∼impurity regime. For very large g 0 , pairing always develops out of the impurity regime. In this case, the onset temperature T c ∼ ω 0 M/N saturates at a coupling-independent value if α = 0. The ratio T c /ω 0 is parametrically large for N M and small for N M . If α = 0, T c is reduced by a correction that scales as αg 2 0 . The behavior at intermediate couplings changes qualitatively depending on N/M . For N ≈ M , the change from small-to large-coupling behavior occurs around g 0 ≈ 1, when the SYK regime crosses over to the impurity regime. For N M , where SYK and impurity regimes are indistinguishable, it occurs around smaller g 0 ≈ (M/N ) 1/4 when δΠ(Ω) ∼ Ω 2 . For N M , the evolution of T c depends on α. For α = 0, T c passes through the intermediate range I, where it increases from T c ∼ ω 0 at g 0 = O(1) to T c ∼ M/N ω 0 ω 0 at the boundary of the impurity regime at g 0 ∼ (M/N ) 3/4 . The form of T c in regime I roughly follows T c ∼ ω 0 g 2/5 0 . For α = 0, pair-breaking effects reduce T c for g 0 > 1 to T c ∼ ω 0 / √ αf (αg 4/5 0 ), where f (x 1) ∼ √ x and f (x 1) is finite. In this case, T c passes through regime II before entering the impurity regime. Finally, let us note that, even if the largest onset temperature T c = T as function of the coupling strength g0 for η = 0.8 (N/M ≈ 2). The data is obtained using the SYK expressions as input in the gap equation. However, the expressions of the impurity regime are comparable for this η (see Fig. within the SYK regime. When α approaches α c , all T (n) c emerge out of the SYK regime. It is instructive to compare the results that we obtained for the YSYK model with the ones for a set of models of dispersion-full fermions with a large bandwidth brought to a QCP by some external parameter (see e.g., the list of literature in Ref. For a subset of such models, it is further assumed that bosons are slow modes compared to fermions, for one reason or the other. In this situation, one can neglect vertex corrections and obtain the set of closed equations for the fermionic self-energy, the pairing vertex, and the bosonic polarization operator, similar to Eqs. (3), but with additional integrals over momentum: In these expressions k is a fermionic dispersion and k 0 is the momentum with which density or spin order develops. For a metallic QCP, lowenergy physics comes from fermions near the Fermi surface, for which k = v F (k -k F ), and the dominant contribution to Π(ω m , k) comes from Landau damping of a boson into a particle-hole pair. There is no self-consistent tuning to a QCP, i.e., the dressed mass vanishes only for a certain bare ω 0 . The condition that bosons are slow compared to fermions further allows one to compute Π(ω m , k), substitute it into the two other equations, select the pairing channel, and integrate over momentum components by factorizing this integration into integration over the component transverse to the Fermi surface (i.e., over k ) in the fermionic propagator and over the component along the Fermi surface in the bosonic propagator, whose momentum is confined to be between points on the Fermi surface. This gives rise to a set of two coupled equations for the "local" fermionic self-energy Σ(ω) and the "local" pairing vertex Φ(ω). The resulting local theory is not exact as in several cases momentum dependence can be integrated out only if one neglects logarithmic corrections The equations for Σ(ω) and Φ(ω) have the same form for different metallic models and differ only in the form of an effective dynamical interaction between fermions V (Ω n ). At a QCP, V (Ω n ) is singular at T = 0 and scales as 1/|Ω n | γ , where the value of γ is model-specific, e,g., γ = 1/2 for an antiferromagnetic QCP, γ = 2/3 at a QCP towards Ising-nematic order, and so on (see Ref. In the normal state, the equation for the self-energy in the γ-model takes the form where m γ (0) = 0 and g is the effective fermion-boson coupling (g γ ∝ ḡ2 ). It is similar to the corresponding Eq. ( Our goal in this section is to compare the onset of pairing in the two models. For this purpose, it is instructive to compare the YSYK model with the extended γ-model, in which the interaction in the particle-particle channel has an extra factor 1/N compared to that in the particle-hole channel. [122] The linearized gap equation in the extended γ-model takes the form or, equivalently, We first discuss the T = 0 case, where the equation on where ω 0γ = g/(1 -γ) 1/γ . At small frequencies ω ω 0γ , this equation has the same form as Eq. (30). In the limit η → 1 when 1/(πb η ) → (1 -η), we can even exactly identify η with γ and (1 -α) with 1/N . The general solution of Eq. ( Furthermore, at small γ, one can reduce the integral equation ( At finite T , the linearized gap equation for the γ-model has a solution at a discrete set of T (n) c , very similar to what we found for the YSYK model The relation between N and α is a bit more tricky at T = 0 than at T = 0 and depends on how the extension to N = 1 is made. On a surface, 1/N still plays the same role as 1 -α, i.e., the thermal m = n contribution to the gap equation Finally, we note that for α = 0, the gap equation in the YSYK model in the impurity regime Eq. ( In this communication we have addressed the interplay between fermionic incoherence and pairing in the YSYK model consisting of N fermions in a quantum dot, randomly coupled to M bosons via a disorder-induced complex interaction. Such a system can be viewed as a toy model to study quantum-critical phenomena in fermionic systems with a bandwidth that is smaller than the strength of the interaction. In the YSYK model, the same coupling is responsible for NFL behavior and an attractive pairing interaction, similar to what happens in a conventional metal with finite bandwidth brought to a QCP. In contrast to conventional scenarios, no finetuning is required to induce quantum-critical behavior. Instead, the YSYK model can reach a quantum-critical ground state and develop superconductivity for any values of bare parameters. We have shown that the interplay between NFL behavior and superconductivity sensitively depends on the ratio of fermion and boson flavors N/M , the (dimensionless) fermion-boson coupling g 0 and the strength of TRS-breaking disorder α. The starting point of our analysis is a set of coupled equations for the electron and boson self-energy, and the pairing vertex (Eliashberg equations). These equations are obtained through disorder averaging, assuming replica-diagonal solutions, and become exact in the limit N, M → ∞. We found and analyzed the solutions of these equations for arbitrary N/M , extending earlier results for N = M , and uncovered a rich normal-state phase diagram with several stronglycorrelated regimes, some of which are not present at N = M . At small temperatures and couplings, the self-consistent solution displays characteristic powerlaw frequency dependence in fermion and boson selfenergies, |Σ| = a η g 1+η 0 ω (1+η)/2 0 |ω| (1-η)/2 and δΠ = (b η /a 2 η )g -2η 0 ω 2-η 0 |ω| η , similar to the behavior in the original SYK model with random four-fermion interaction. The exponent η is uniquely determined by the ratio N/M with η → 0 for N/M → 0 and η → 1 for N/M → ∞. At larger temperatures and/or couplings, thermal contributions induce another self-consistent, impurity-like solution with frequency-independent fermionic self-energy |Σ i | ∼ ω 0 g 2 0 N/M , which in turn gives rise to a term linear in frequency in the bosonic propagator δΠ i ∼ M/(g 2 0 N )ω 0 |Ω|. The SYK and the impurity regimes have been detected in the earlier study of the case N = M in Ref. 105. We found new physics for N = M , which becomes most revealing when either N M or M N . For N M , we found that SYK and impurity phases become almost identical (i.e., the fermionic self-energy has almost identical form in the two regimes). For M N , we found additional intermediate regimes between the SYK, the impurity, and the free-fermion regime (in which fermionic and bosonic propagators are close to their bare values). As a next step, we obtained the onset temperature for superconductivity, T c , that develops out of the SYK or the impurity regime and investigated the impact of TRS-breaking disorder on T c . At smaller values of the coupling, superconductivity sets in at the boundary between the SYK and the free-fermion regime, while for larger g 0 , it develops out of the impurity regime. In the first case, the onset temperature increases quadratically as function of g 0 , and the prefactor depends on η (and thus N/M ) and on the strength of TRS-breaking disorder α. The η-dependence is such that onset temperature remains finite at η → 0 (N M ) and vanishes at η → 1 (N M ). TRS-breaking disorder suppresses the onset temperature, and it vanishes at a critical α c . We have shown that α c monotonically decreases with increasing η (increasing N/M ). This means that the superconducting state becomes fragile for large N/M . When superconductivity develops out of the impurity regime, T c is independent of the coupling for TRS-preserving disorder (α = 0) and scales with M/N . A finite α again suppresses T c and reintroduces the dependence on g 0 so that T c decreases for larger couplings. Generally, the superconducting state seems to be more robust (larger T c and larger α c ) when it develops out of the SYK rather than the impurity regime. We also found that the superconducting state is highly unconventional in that there is an infinite, discrete set of topologically different gap functions with n sign changes on the Matsubara axis. They give rise to a set of onset temperatures T (n) c , which all emerge at the same critical α c in an infinite-order BKT-transition. The different gap functions exist as long as the pairing interaction is dynamical. Finally, we presented a detailed comparison of the YSYK model and the γ-model of dynamically interacting dispersion-full fermions near a conventional QCP. We focused on the pairing behavior and argued that it is very similar in the two models. In particular, the infinite set of topologically different pairing solutions arises in both models. Subtle distinctions appear outside of the lowenergy regime due to a different role of bandwidth and of pair breaking. Overall, this comparison reveals that the deep relation between the YSYK model and quantum critical behavior of interacting fermionic systems extends beyond the NFL behavior in the normal state and involves superconducting properties. with the hypergeometric function 2 F 1 and we defined a = η(η -4(1 -α)/(πb η )) and b = (1 + η) 2 -16η(1 -α)/(πb η ). Note that b → -b in the expression Φ(z) is also a solution (but not linearly independent). If z a η z or ω a 2/1(+η) η ω, we recover the power law that we found in our analysis of the gap equation for small frequencies in the the main text (A13) For large frequencies, we see that the gap equations yields Φ(ω) ∝ ω -η . The leading term of the solution obtained from the differential equation for z a η z is a constant and we request it to vanish, which leads to a condition for + C 2 (a η z) In Eqs. (B2) and (B3), it is obvious that Π T (ω n , T ) is a function of ω n /T multiplied by ω 2 0 (T /g 2 0 ω 0 ) η , as we stated in the main text. We also separate the frequency-independent part Π T (ω n , T ) = Π T (0, T ) + δ Π(ω n , T ), so that we can write with For η → 0 and finite T , the corrections vanish d η = O(η). With the help of Eq. (B3), we can even show that Π T (ω n , T ) = m 2 (T ) exactly for η = 0 without expanding in ω n /T . However, for η → 1, m 2 → 0 and corrections are of order one. In summary, for small to moderate η, we can approximate the boson propagator in the SYK regime including leading thermal corrections as This expression is exact for η → 0. Let us also note that it was shown in Ref. 105 that the T = 0 SYK-like expressions plus the thermal mass m 2 (T ) fit well to the numerical solution at finite, small temperatures for M = N (η ≈ 0.68). In addition, the Monte-Carlo computations in Ref. As described in the main text, we have determined the critical temperature for superconductivity based on the linearized gap equation Eq. 