We demonstrate experimental results based on time-resolved photoluminescence spectroscopy to determine the oscillator strength (OS) and the internal quantum efficiency (IQE) of InGaAs quantum dots (QDs). Using a strain-reducing layer (SRL) these QDs can be employed for the manufacturing of single-photon sources (SPS) emitting in the telecom O-Band. The OS and IQE are evaluated by determining the radiative and non-radiative decay rate under variation of the optical density of states at the position of the QD as proposed and applied in J. Johansen et al. Phys. Rev. B 77, 073303 (2008) for InGaAs QDs emitting at wavelengths below 1 μm. For this purpose, we perform measurements on a QD sample for different thicknesses of the capping layer realized by a controlled wet-chemical etching process. From numeric modelling the radiative and nonradiative decay rates dependence on the capping layer thickness, we determine an OS of 24.6 ± 3.2 and a high IQE of about (85 ± 10) % for the long-wavelength InGaAs QDs. Semiconductor quantum dots (QDs) are well-established solid-state nanocrystalline structures that can be used as close-to-ideal two-level quantum emitters applicable for instance in quantum communication An important intrinsic property of any QD emitter is the internal quantum efficiency (IQE) which describes the ratio of quantum conversion from exciton formation into single-photon emission. The IQE plays a major role in the total quantum efficiency of a fully-processed device and directly impacts the photon extraction efficiency being a key parameter of quantum light sources. Thus, knowing and increasing the IQE is crucial for device optimization. Another important QD parameter is the oscillator strength (OS) of the optical transition. The OS is directly related to the radiative decay time of the emitter and determines the light-matter coupling strength of QD devices using effects of cavity quantum electrodynamics In order to determine the IQE and OS of telecom wavelength InGaAs QDs their total decay rate Γ(ω, z) at a frequency ω and at z position below the sample surface is determined experimentally. The associated decay rate is given by the following relation: where and the OS can easily be derived from where the electron mass m e , the vacuum permittivity ε 0 , the vacuum speed of light c 0 , the elementary charge q and the refractive index n of the surrounding GaAs is given The purpose of this work is to obtain a quantitative understanding of 1.3 μm InGaAs QDs, which were optimized for the development of quantum light sources emitting in the telecom Oband, in terms of their IQE and the OS. Using metal-organic chemical vapor deposition (MOCVD) the corresponding sample was prepared in the following way. First, a 300 nm GaAs buffer is grown on n-doped GaAs (100) substrate and followed by 1 μm thick Al0.90Ga0.10As layer. Then a 2 μm thick GaAs layer and another 100 nm thick Al0.90Ga0.10As layer is deposited. These three layers are originally designed as sacrificial layers to be removed during a post-growth flip-chip processing, as described in more detailed way in Refs. The QD layer with a density of 5x10 9 cm -2 is located 637 nm above the second etch stop layer and is formed by 1.5 monolayers of In0.7Ga0.3As followed by GaAs flush corresponding to a nominal thickness of half a monolayer. The subsequent 5.5 nm thick InGaAs SRL has a gradual decrease of the In-content from 30% to 10% over the first 3.5 nm. This layer is followed by a GaAs capping layer with a thickness of 236 nm. An overview of the whole sample structure is given in Fig. In order to vary the thickness of the caping layer as required for extracting the radiative and non-radiative emission rate of the QDs the grown sample was prepared as described in the following. First, the surface of the sample was cleaned thoroughly and the photo resist AZ 701 MIR was applied using spin coating. UV lithography was used to pattern the surface with several slim rectangular structures to form a height reference to determine the capping layer thickness after the upcoming etching process. The sample was cut into 25 pieces to undergo wet-chemical etching after thorough cleaning with isopropanol. The etching solution and water (H2O) in a volumetric ratio of 2:1:60. The solution was continuously agitated with a magnetic stirrer and left to rest for 600 seconds after adding the H2O2. The etching rate had been previously determined to be 0. For the subsequent time-resolved measurements the monochromator was set to a wavelength of 1260 nm at the center of the QD ensemble emission. This allows for measurements with suitable high signal-to-noise ratio which we will consider representative for the O-band range, even though it is located at the short-wavelength edge of this band. This section describes the extraction of the IQE and the OS based on the experimental results obtained by TRPL measurements for different top layer thicknesses. The corresponding data is depicted in Fig. The upper limit of the OS for a strongly confined exciton in QDs which are smaller in size than the exciton Bohr radius is f osc max = E p ħω Interestingly, the high OS makes the long-wavelength QD interesting candidates for the study of cQED effects. We performed an experimental evaluation of the OS and IQE of InGaAs QDs capped with an SRL that can be used to manufacture high quality telecom wavelength SPSs. For this purpose, the exitonic decay rates at the center of the QD ensemble emission band with a wavelength of 1260 nm were measured via TRμPL for different thicknesses from 242 to 37 nm of the GaAs top layer remaining after etching. By fitting the experimental results with the radiative decay rates and simulated LDOS data we found a radiative decay rate Γ rad hom of (1.15 ± 0.15) ns -1 , a non-radiative decay Γ nrad of (0.2 ± 0.14) ns -1 . From this we calculated an IQE of (85 ± 10)% and an OS of 24.6 ± 3.2 , which confirms that the realized InGaAs QDs provide strong carrier confinement and keep their attractive properties for advanced quantum technologies when capped with an SRL. Continuing the research should lead to further increase of the emission wavelength range. As our QDs feature emission range from 1200 to 1350 nm, a further investigation of the influence of QD size would be of strong interest. Also, measuring the temperature dependence of the OS up to 40 K would be insightful for practical applications such as stand-alone SPS cooled by Stirling cryocooler with based temperatures in the range of 35 -40 K.