While various nanophotonic structures applicable to relatively thin crystalline silicon-based solar cells were proposed to ensure effective light in-coupling and light trapping in the absorber, it is of great importance to evaluate their performance on the 1 Reducing optical losses is of paramount importance for further developing photovoltaic (PV) devices. This holds especially true for the market-dominating single-junction c-Si solar cells, for which optical losses constitute one of the main limitations to reach their efficiency limit. In response to that need, various nanophotonic concepts Nevertheless, while a plethora of nanophotonic structures was proposed and investigated in recent years, it is of paramount importance to analyze their performance in a full solar module architecture under realistic irradiation conditions. For example, such analysis was performed for different solar module architectures where sufficient optical properties were achieved using strategies involving textured interfaces and/or flat ARCs. Here, we study the energy yield of relatively thin wafer-based c-Si solar modules, for which the solar cell stack is coated with double-sided nanostructure gratings. Suitably designed square arrays of dielectric high-index TiO 2 nanodisks are used as AR and LT photonic nanostructures. Their geometrical parameters are subject to optimization. Results are compared to modules containing more traditional planar thin-film anti-reflective layers. We consider mono-and bifacial modules and introduce the nanodisk array on the front surface of the c-Sibased heterojunction (HJT) solar cell for the former module configuration and both the front and rear side for the latter. The nanodisk arrays are initially optimized at normal incident light by full-wave optical simulations concerning the short-circuit current associated with the reflected portion of the light (details in Sec. Calculation of reflectance, transmittance, and absorptance ). The optimal design of these nanodisk arrays depends on whether they are employed on the front side, where they serve the purpose of suppressing reflectance, or on the rear side, where they facilitate the light trapping. Therefore, when optimizing the nanodisk arrays, different designs are found depending on the mechanisms through which they contribute to enhancing the absorptance in the c-Si wafer. To estimate the annual energy yield (EY) of the solar module architectures with nanodisk arrays, the optical response from the optimized nanodisk arrays when placed on the front and rear solar cell contact layers is simulated using full-wave optical tools depending on the angle of incidence. This is the primary information fueled afterward into the EY modeling framework. The annual EY is assessed for monofacial and bifacial module architectures with and without TiO 2 nanodisk arrays at locations with different climate conditions. The influence of albedo radiation is also considered, which is especially relevant to consider in bifacial module configuration. The four different architectures studied in this contribution are schematically depicted in In the case of flat reference c-Si HJT solar cell stacks, the front hydrogenated amorphous silicon (a-Si:H) (passivation intrinsic and n + doped, the thickness can be found in The configurations containing optimized AR nanodisk array had a reduced front ITO thickness of 10 nm with TiO 2 nanodisks arranged in a square lattice of 320 nm pitch, with individual nanodisk having a radius of 125 nm and a height of 90 nm. The bifacial module configuration with added optimized LT TiO 2 nanodisk square array (individual nanodisk with a radius of 215 nm and height of 395 nm, 565 nm pitch) had the same rear ITO thickness as the reference architectures. These values for the geometrical parameters are the results of an optimization of the AR and LT nanodisk arrays discussed in Sec. Calculation of reflectance, transmittance, and absorptance . In the case of the monofacial modules, HJT c-Si solar cell had 300 nm thick silver back contact while the front side contacting metallic grid and its effect on the optical performance of the module is neglected. The window module layers comprise encapsulating EVA (400 μm) and glass (4 mm) with thin-film anti-reflective MgF 2 coating (130 nm). In the case of the bifacial architecture, the rear side of the solar cell typically has the same contacting scheme as the front side (no conformal metallic layer). The modules in the bifacial configuration were considered to have the same window layers as the ones introduced on the front side. In such a configuration, the module can absorb the light that is incident on its front and from its rear side. Additionally, one can harvest albedo radiation since the transmitted portion of the light is reflected from the ground, and thus, can be reabsorbed in the silicon, significantly boosting the annual EY. When a bifacial solar module is tilted, albedo radiation can also impact the annual EY due to the light reflected from the ground and incident of the front of the module. We note that when a monofacial solar module is tilted, albedo radiation that is incident on the front of the module can also be considered. Refractive indices of c-Si, TiO 2 , ITO, and Ag used in the calculations were taken from literature. The numerical simulations of the EVA-cell interface for both AR and LT TiO 2 nanodisk arrays were performed using the finite element method (FEM) with commercial software JCMsuite. The electrical parameters corresponding to a typical c-Si HJT solar cell used in the annual EY calculation are summarized in Table A device characterized by these properties would have a J SC around 38.3 mA/cm 2 . This yields V OC = 0.734 V at temperature T = 25 • C from the following equation: where the thermal voltage V th = kT /q = 0.0257 V, and the values of ideality factor and reverse-blocking current can be found in Table At the EVA-cell interfaces with introduced AR and LT nanodisk arrays, reflectance and transmittance into all scattering directions at each wavelength and incidence polar and azimuth angles is calculated as the ratio of the scattered reflected or transmitted power to the power of the incident field. At the considered interfaces, both c-Si and EVA are assumed to be semi-infinite. For a given azimuth angle φ in , reflectance and transimittance values form matrices of the size (N θ in , N θr,t , N λ ), where the entries correspond to all polar angles of incidence, scattering angles, and wavelengths, respectively. The polar angle θ in is varied from 0°to 89°with 5°step, and the results are then interpolated at intervals of 1°. In case of azimuth angle φ in , the symmetry of the nanodisk coating is exploited, and only calculations for angles between 0°and 45°with 15°step are performed. The calculated matrices for different φ in values are subsequently averaged. Total reflectance and transmittance for a certain wavelength and incident polar and azimuth angles are calculated according to: where k r,t are the wave vectors of reflected and transmitted fields, θ r,t = (±k z /k r,t ) are the scattering angles, E 0 is the amplitude of an incident plane wave with a mixed TE-TM The optical performance of the nanodisk arrays was optimized with respect to the shortcircuit current associated with reflectance at a normal light incidence, which is calculated using the following equation: where e is the electron charge, E ph = hc/λ is the energy of a photon, and SI AM1.5 (λ) is the spectral irradiance. For this calculation, air mass 1.5 global (AM1.5G) tilted irradiance raw data was taken from, Within the EY modeling framework, where the optical response of the entire architecture is computed, the light propagation in multi-layer thin-film stacks is treated coherently, for which the transfer matrix method is employed. When AR and LT nanodisk arrays are considered instead of those thin-film layers, the corresponding output matrices for reflectance, transmittance, and absorptance are integrated into the modeling framework. For thicker layers, such as the c-Si substrate of the cell and window layers of the module, the assumption of coherence breaks down. The Beer-Lambert law can describe the absorption of the light in those layers: where I 0 is the initial intensity, α is the absorption coefficient of the considered medium, and z is the distance traveled in it. We analyzed the annual EY of the four solar module architectures introduced in Fig. By covering different climate zones, we aimed to highlight the robustness of the nanodisk arrays performance and their ability to improve the annual EY for all types of irradiation conditions, albeit with small differences that most likely originate from the spectral features of the nanodisk arrays. The solar modules were considered to face south, and the tilt angles θ m were optimized for each location. This resulted in θ m values to be 38°for Anchorage, 30°f or Kansas City, and 17°for Honolulu, respectively. As expected, for the monofacial case, the module with an AR nanodisk array (Fig. outperforms the standard flat architecture with an optimized ITO coating (Fig. To better understand the mechanism behind the annual EY improvement when the nanodisk arrays are introduced on top of the front and back contacts of a solar cell, one can look at the optical properties of the cell interfaces with the optimized nanodisk arrays. Figure The graphs (c) and (d) in Fig. Another critical aspect of the solar module's optical performance is parasitic absorption. Here, all discussed results are for a selected median c-Si absorber thickness of 40 μm and at normal light incidence. Figures However, when the AR nanodisk array is introduced (Fig. In the case of the bifacial standard reference module and forward illumination direction (Fig. However, due to the strong scattering enabled by LT nanodisks, parasitic absorption is also increased for longer wavelengths. When the light is impinging on the rear side of the bifacial solar module (Fig. We have numerically studied the annual energy yield (EY) under realistic irradiation conditions for monofacial and bifacial crystalline silicon (c-Si) heterojunction (HJT) solar module architectures with AR and light trapping (LT) titanium dioxide (TiO 2 ) nanodisk square arrays introduced on top of the front and rear ITO layers and compared their power outputs with the ones of the corresponding standard reference flat solar modules. We have shown that while reducing the silicon absorber thickness, the relative increase of the annual EY is reaching up to 11.0 % rel and 43.0 % rel for monofacial and bifacial modules with nanodisk coatings, respectively. This improvement is comparable for the locations with different climate conditions. Moreover, in the case of bifacial module architecture, taking into account the albedo radiation produces an additional boost of the module performance. The designed dielectric nanodisk arrays for the front and rear contacts of c-Si HJT solar cell have both a significant impact on the light absorption in the c-Si wafer. At the same time, their AR and LT properties are decoupled. The front AR nanodisk array has a relatively small individual disk size and lattice constant, and its broadband backscattering suppression is related to the helicity preservation condition. In contrast, the rear LT nanodisk array has larger features and array pitch and allows for efficient scattering into multiple scattering directions. Furthermore, these AR and LT nanodisk square array designs are not restricted to a specific material or a particular photovoltaic solar cell stack and, thus, can be investigated for different solar module configurations.