The nonsymmorphic Zr2Ir alloy is a possible topological semimetal candidate material and as such may be part of an exotic class of superconductors. Zr2Ir is a superconductor with a transition temperature of 7.4 K with critical fields of 19.6(3) mT and 3.79(3) T, as determined by heat capacity and magnetisation. Zero field muon spin relaxation measurements show that time-reversal symmetry is preserved in these materials. The specific heat and transverse field muon spin rotation measurements rule out any possibility to have a nodal or anisotropic superconducting gap, revealing a conventional s-wave nature in the superconducting ground state. Therefore, this system is found to be conventional nonsymmorphic superconductor, with time-reversal symmetry being preserved and an isotropic superconducting gap. Topological superconductors (TSCs) have emerged as an exciting exotic class of unconventional superconductors. These materials have a nontrivial topology with a superconducting gap in the bulk but with topologically protected states at the surfaces Recently, experimental studies performed on theoretically predicted topological binary and ternary superconducting compounds, such as: NbC, TaC In this paper, a detailed study of the superconducting properties of the nonsymmorphic alloy (space group I4/mcm, No. 140) Zr 2 Ir using magnetic susceptibility, electrical resistivity, heat capacity and muon-spin rotation/relaxation (μSR) techniques. Recent work has revealed that the nonsymmorphic symmetry can host novel topological phases A polycrystalline sample of Zr 2 Ir was made using a stoichiometric mixture of Zr (99.99 %) and Ir (99.97 %) by standard arc melting method under a high purity argon gas atmosphere. The sample was flipped and remelted several times to improve the chemical homogeneity. The resulting 'button' had negligible mass loss during this process, and was annealed at 750 • C for three days in vacuum-sealed quartz tube. Room temperature powder X-ray powder diffraction (XRD) data was collected using a PANalytical X , pert Pro diffractometer using Cu K α radiation (λ = 1.54056 Å). The DC susceptibility measurements were performed using a MPMS3 (Quantum Design). Resistivity and specific heat measurements were performed in the Physical Property Measurement System (PPMS, Quantum Design). The μSR measurements were carried out at the ISIS pulsed neutron and muon source at the STFC Rutherford Appleton Laboratory, United Kingdom using the MuSR spectrometer. Zero-field muon spin relaxation (ZF-μSR) measurements were performed in the temperature range 0.3 -10 K. The transverse-field muon spin rotation (TF-μSR) measurements were performed at 60 mT, well above the lower critical field H C1 (0). We have analyzed the μSR data [30] using the Mantid software. Rietveld refinement of the room temperature XRD pattern was performed using the FullProf software package The magnetization was measured in both zero-field cooled (ZFC) and field cooled (FC) mode with an applied field, H = 1 mT. These measurement confirms bulk superconductivity at T C = 7.4(1) K (Fig. The temperature dependence of the resistivity were measured in a range of different applied fields, from zero to 6 T, and is shown in Fig. where ρ sat is the high-temperature saturation resistivity, and ρ 1 (T) is the ideal temperature-dependent resistivity given by the following expression where the second term is due to inelastic electronphonon scattering. θ D is the Debye temperature, r is a pre-factor and depends on the electronic structure of metal through the Fermi velocity and density of state, and ρ(0) is the residual resistivity. The best fit yields a residual resistivity ρ(0) = 98(1) μΩ cm, a Debye temperature θ D = 148(3) K, and a high temperature saturation resistivity ρ sat = 557(5) μΩ cm. The value of θ D is close to that obtained from the specific heat data (described later). To find the lower critical field, H C1 (0), the low field magnetization were collected at different temperatures, as shown in Fig. and estimated H C1 (0) as The magnetization was also measured with different magnetic fields over a temperature range of 1.8 K ≤ T ≤ 10 K, in order to determine the upper critical field, H C2 (0). Values for H C2 (T) were determined by taking the onset temperature as the criteria for T C . Fig. where t = T/T C and gives H mag C2 (0) = 3.79(3) T. We have also calculated H C2 (T) by using the same relation (??) from the specific heat and resistivity data collected at different fields, which gives slightly higher H C2 (0) value Fig. We have calculated the coherence length, ξ GL (0) as 93.2(1) Å using the relation H mag C2 (0) = 3.79 T, where Φ 0 (= 2.07 ×10 -15 T m 2 ) is the magnetic flux quantum The GL-parameter, k GL = λ GL (0) ξ GL (0) = 18.2(2) and shows the alloy is a type-II superconductor. To find the electron-phonon co-relation and the nature of superconductivity in Zr 2 Ir, the specific heat was measured in zero field and in different applied magnetic fields. A sharp jump at T = 7.26(1) K verifies bulk superconductivity. Fig. T The Debye temperature θ D was calculated using the where N (= 3) is the number of atoms per formula unit, R is the molar gas constant (= 8.314 J mol -1 K -1 ) and was found to be 209(2) K. The density of states at the Fermi level D C (E F ) is 8.0(1) states eV f.u and was determined from the relation where k B is Boltzman constant. The strength of the attractive interaction between the electrons and phonons (λ e-ph ) was calculated using the McMillan equation To further explore the superconducting gap structure, transverse field muon spin rotation (TF-μSR) spectroscopy measurements were taken at different temperatures with an applied field of 60 mT. The applied field ensures a well-ordered flux line lattice at temperatures below T C as the applied field is greater than H C (0). Fig. The decaying Gaussian oscillatory function (G T F (t)) best fit the TF-spectra, which consists of two decay components where φ is the offset of the muon spin polarization with respect to positron detector and γ μ /2π = 135.5 MHz/T is muon gyromagnetic ratio. The temperature dependence of effective depolarization rate σ is related to the first and second moments by the relations ( Fig. In a type-II isotropic superconductor with a hexagonal Abrikosov vortex lattice having κ > 5 and H/H C2 ≤ 0.25 with penetration depth λ to be calculated to a high degree of accuracy by the relation ) where h = H/H C2 (T ) is the reduced field. λ GL (0) was found to be 1169(10) Å using H C2 (0) = 3.79 T. To investigate the presence of a spontaneous magnetic field in the sample, we have collected ZF-μSR spectra at temperatures above and below the superconducting transition temperature. The asymmetry spectra were best fitted by static Kubo-Toyabe function multiplied by an exponential decay component with where A 1 is the initial sample asymmetry, σ ZF and Λ are the Gaussian and an additional relaxation rate, respectively. A BG is background contribution associated with muon stopping in the silver sample holder. Fig. We report superconductivity in possible topological semimetal Zr 2 Ir having nonsymmorphic crystal structure. It shows the bulk type-II superconductivity with transition temperature T C = 7.4(1) K with the lower and upper critical field as 19.6(3) mT and 3.79(3) T, respectively. Specific heat measurements exhibit that superconducting energy gap, ∆0 k B T C is 1.99 