Understanding the competition between superconductivity and other ordered states (such as antiferromagnetic or charge-density-wave (CDW) state) is a central issue in condensed matter physics. The recently discovered layered kagome metal AV 3 Sb 5 (A = K, Rb, and Cs) provides us a new playground to study the interplay of superconductivity and CDW state by involving nontrivial topology of band structures. Here, we conduct high-pressure electrical transport and magnetic susceptibility measurements to study CsV 3 Sb 5 with the highest T c of 2.7 K in AV3Sb5 family. While the CDW transition is monotonically suppressed by pressure, superconductivity is enhanced with increasing pressure up to P1 ≈0.7 GPa, then an unexpected suppression on superconductivity happens until pressure around 1.1 GPa, after that, Tc is enhanced with increasing pressure again. The CDW is completely suppressed at a critical pressure P2≈2 GPa together with a maximum Tc of about 8 K. In contrast to a common dome-like behavior, the pressure-dependent T c shows an unexpected double-peak behavior. The unusual suppression of Tc at P1 is concomitant with the rapidly damping of quantum oscillations, sudden enhancement of the residual resistivity and rapid decrease of magnetoresistance. Our discoveries indicate an unusual competition between superconductivity and CDW state in pressurized kagome lattice. Superconductivity and the charge density wave (CDW) state are two different cooperative electronic states, and both of them are originated from electron-phonon coupling and Fermi surface instabilities. Superconductivity is often observed in CDW materials, however, the interplay between CDW order and superconductivity is still not well elucidated The materials with kagome lattice provide a fertile ground to study the frustrated, novel correlated and topological electronic states owing to unusual lattice geometry High pressure is a clean method to tune the electronic properties without introducing any impurities, and pressure is often used as a control parameter to tune superconductivity and CDW state. Here, we performed high-pressure electrical transport measurements on CsV3Sb5 single crystals with the highest Tc of 2.7 K in AV3Sb5 family. Maximum Tc of 8 K is observed at P2 ≈ 2 GPa when CDW is completely suppressed. Strikingly, an unusual suppression on superconductivity is observed between P1 ≈ 0.7 GPa and P2 ≈ 2 GPa. These results indicate an unexpected, exotic competition between CDW and superconductivity in this region, which makes CsV3Sb5 a rare platform to investigate the interplay of multiple electronic orders. High pressure resistivity and magnetic susceptibility measurements. We performed resistivity and magnetic susceptibility measurements on CsV3Sb5 under pressure to track the evolution of the CDW state and superconductivity in the compressed material. Temperature dependence of resistivity for CsV 3 Sb 5 under various pressures is shown in Fig. ) as a function of temperature under various pressures as shown in Fig. shows strong pressure dependence. Hc2 dramatically increases with increasing the pressure, and reaches a local maximum value around P1. With further increasing the pressure, the H c2 can be rapidly suppressed as shown in Fig. Combing the high-pressure electrical and magnetic susceptibility measurements on sample 1 and 3 with PCC and sample 2 with DAC, we can map out the phase diagram of CsV3Sb5 with pressure as shown in Fig. The pressure dependence of T clearly shows that two peaks are located at P1 and P2, and the superconducting transition width ΔT c shows sudden enhancement with pressure between P1 and P2, as shown in Fig. Although superconductivity was reported in some kagome lattice materials Material syntheses. Single crystals of CsV 3 Sb 5 were synthesized via a self-flux growth method similar to the previous reports High-pressure measurements. Piston cylinder cell (PCC) was used to generate hydrostatic pressure up to 2.4 GPa for high-pressure electrical transport measurements. Daphne 7373 was used as the pressure transmitting medium in PCC. The pressure values in PCC were determined from the superconducting transition of Sn Note added: During the preparation of this manuscript, we noticed a similar high-pressure work 