The Casimir Force, a quantum mechanical effect, has been observed in several microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) platforms. Due to its extreme sensitivity to the separation of two objects, the Casimir Force has been proposed as an excellent avenue for quantum metrology. Practical application, however, is challenging due to attractive forces leading to stiction and failure of the device, called Casimir pull-in. In this work, we design and simulate a Casimir-driven metrology platform, where a time-delay based parametric amplification technique is developed to achieve a steady state and avoid pull-in. We apply the design to the detection of weak, low frequency, gradient magnetic fields, similar to those emanating from ionic currents in the heart and brain. Simulation parameters are selected from recent experimental platforms developed for Casimir metrology and magnetic gradiometry, both on MEMS platforms. While MEMS offer many advantages to such an application, the detected signal must typically be at the resonant frequency of the device, with diminished sensitivity in the low frequency regime of biomagnetic fields. Using a Casimirdrive parametric amplifier, we report a 10,000 fold improvement in the best-case resolution of MEMS single-point gradiometers, with a maximum sensitivity of 6 Hz/(pT/cm) at 1 Hz. The development of the proposed design has the potential to revolutionize metrology, and specifically may enable unshielded monitoring of biomagnetic fields in ambient conditions. Quantum fluctuations in the electromagnetic field give rise to forces between conductors at the same potential, when their separation is near 100 nm. Known as the Casimir force, this phenomenon was first predicted by H. B. G. Casimir Quantum metrology has long-standing application to the measurement of very weak magnetic fields. The superconducting quantum interference device (SQUID) measures changes in magnetic field associated with a flux quantum Existing gradiometer technology is reviewed in Fig. The sensitivity of resonant MEMS devices can be tuned by many techniques, such as parametric amplification In this work, we propose the coupling between two resonators by the quantum-derived Casimir Force. Fundamentally, we combine two metrology platforms, a MEMS Casimir platform, and a MEMS singlepoint gradiometer platform. The Casimir platform 5 comprises a MEMS accelerometer functionalized by a gold sphere, where the voltage potential can be controlled. A Casimir Force measurement is achieved when a gold plate is brought within 100 nm of the sphere. The MEMS gradiometer platform The design in this work is a nontrivial combination of an experimental MEMS gradiometer platform The proposed sensing platform is illustrated in Fig. negate the effect of an anticipated electrostatic coupling between the plate and sphere, as has been shown previously The functional diagram of this design, shown in Fig. x SM (t) = s 0 + x S (t) -x M (t) Here, Eq 1 relates to the sphere, Eq 2 to the magnet, and Eq 3 to their separation. In Eq 1, xS is the displacement of the sphere, mS is the mass, ω0S is the natural frequency, QS the quality factor, and k0S the unperturbed spring constant. The sphere is driven electrostatically by FDr-S and experiences an attractive coupling force, FCas, when the separation is small (order 100 nm). Similarly, in Eq 2, xM is the displacement of the magnet, mM is the mass, ω0M is the natural frequency, QM the quality factor, and k0M the spring constant. The magnet is also driven electrostatically by a force, FDr-M, and experiences an equal and opposite coupling force to the sphere, FCas, at small separations. In addition, a slow, time-varying gradient magnetic field would impose a force, FM. in Eq 3, xSM is the real-time separation distance between the sphere and magnet, and s0 is the separation in the absence of the Casimir coupling force. The forcing terms are expanded in Eqs 4-7 below. F Cas = -π When the two resonators are coupled as described in Eqs 1-3, there is a spring softening effect analogous to the electrostatic spring softening observed in capacitive systems k p (s 0 ) = π The system described is a complex combination of several physical phenomena, leading to a highly nonlinear system and a large parameter space. Therefore, simulations using MATLAB's Simulink and Simscape are chosen to characterize the system. A simplified block diagram is illustrated (Fig. At the start of the simulation (t=0), we assume that the sphere is resonating at the unloaded resonance frequency, ω0S, and the magnet is resonating at 2ω0S. The objects are proposed to incrementally approach each other from a large separation distance (> 1 μm, where the Casimir force is minimal) to reach the prescribed separation. This approach is based on the experimental observation 5 of the Casimir Force, using a similar platform. As the Casimir coupling begins to interact, our feedback system will adjust the actuation of the sphere (Fig. A gradient magnetic field is introduced to the system in Fig. The parametric pumping is expected to enhance the coupling of the Casimir Force. Analytically, the sphere-plate Casimir coupling was shown The system is characterized by simulation (Fig. The high quality factor of the system facilitates frequency shift detection. Recall that the uncoupled case is when the separation between the sphere and magnet is larger than 1 μm. At such separations, the sphere responds to a harmonic drive with symmetric oscillations shepherded by the spring's linear restoring force. The coupled case is when the separation between the magnet and sphere is in the range of 100 nm. In this regime, the spring's restoring force deviates from parabolic, becoming asymmetric (Fig. In the coupled configuration, the parameters are tuned to characterize the system and investigate useful areas of design space. The first parameter of interest is the time delay of the magnet's oscillation, τ2f. In Fig. The time response of the controlled system (τ2f=750 μs) is dynamically characterized over an elapsed time of 2 s for zero gradient magnetic field input (Fig. The sensitivity, Sfreq, is tunable with respect to separation (Fig. The best-case resolution of the system is discussed for frequency shift detection of the high quality peak. For laboratory based frequency detection systems, such as Agilent's 53132A frequency counter, a resolution of 10 parts-per-million using a 1 s gate time would be relatively standard. A maximum sensitivity, Sfreq, of 6 Hz/(pT/cm) is observed (Fig. improved resolution (10,000 fold) for the best-case scenario of the presently designed MEMS single-point gradiometer While this work focuses on employing a Casimir-driven parametric amplifier to MEMS sensing, there are other configurations which may be useful to consider. The electrostatic force acts at larger separations (> 100 nm), which may be more resilient to pull-in. Electrostatic forces may also be parametrically amplified Resonant MEMS devices such as this design are often limited by several types of noise. The characteristic 1/f noise from mechanical and electrical sources will largely not affect the resonator coupling near 1kHz, but the low frequency changes in separation which are sought to be measured here will likely be affected. We suggest that techniques such as chopper stabilization and lock-in amplification be employed to reduce this effect. Low frequency magnetic noise, such as from power lines in an urban area or the Earth's magnetic field will interfere with sensitive magnetic measurements. As was experimentally analyzed previously Our design is intended for an ambient temperature and pressure environment, and so we anticipate thermomechanical noise to be a dominant influence on our measurements. Thermal damping on each of the resonators is mitigated in part by the sine-wave feedback pumping. Our simulations did not investigate noise directly, but the design and experimental implementation may be directly compared to previous work 5 μm, such as those designed in this work. Although we intend for this design to be used in ambient environments, vacuum packaging or cryogenic environments would further reduce the effects of damping. Finally, it was theoretically shown 37 that another source of damping for a dynamic Casimir oscillator may arise from the nonuniform relative acceleration of the sphere and plate, which enclose the nonlinear properties of vacuum. It may be interesting to combine our sensitive platform design with cryogenic and magnetically shielding environment to investigate this effect experimentally. We are confident that the design strategies presented in this work, in addition to those that reduce the effects of noise will profoundly enhance the performance of single-point MEMS gradiometers. We have investigated a quantum-derived coupling of two resonant microstructures to achieve extremely high sensitivity to changes in a gradient magnetic field. The resonators are coupled by the nonlinear Casimir Force, which arises from the electromagnetic interaction between closely spaced dielectrics (near 100nm) in a sphere-plate geometry. A customized parametric amplification technique is developed, where one resonator is synchronized at double the frequency of the other, and the time delay is tuned to find a steady state solution. The frequency shift of the high quality, coupled resonance peak is detected to infer a measured gradient magnetic field. A slowly varying field at 1 Hz is imposed, where a best-case resolution is calculated to be 1.6 aT/cm at a sensitivity of 6 Hz/pT/cm. This is a 10,000 fold improvement on the bestcase resolution of the previously designed MEMS single-point gradiometer. Many applications, especially the measurement of biomagnetic fields, already rely on complex quantum metrology. The MEMS quantumenhanced gradiometer presented in this work paves a path toward unshielded, ambient temperature measurements of extremely weak gradient magnetic fields.