Superconductivity in low carrier density metals challenges the conventional electron-phonon theory due to the absence of retardation required to overcome Coulomb repulsion. In quantum critical polar metals, the Coulomb repulsion is heavily screened, while the critical transverse optic phonons decouple from the electron charge. In the resulting vacuum, the residual interactions between quasiparticles are carried by energy fluctuations of the polar medium, resembling the gravitational interactions of a dark matter universe. Here we demonstrate that pairing inevitably emerges from "gravitational" interactions with the energy fluctuations, leading to a dome-like dependence of the superconducting Tc on carrier density. Our estimates show that this mechanism may explain the critical temperatures observed in doped SrTiO3. We provide predictions for the enhancement of superconductivity near polar quantum criticality in two and three dimensional materials that can be used to test our theory. Superconductivity exemplifies the dramatic effects of interactions in many-body quantum systems Several theories have been advanced to explain superconductivity in polar metals using conventional electronphonon interaction These considerations motivate us to reconsider superconductivity in quantum critical polar metals, guided by two key observations: first, the strong ionic screening associated with the enhanced dielectric constant severely weakens the electronic Coulomb interaction (Fig 1 (a)); second, since the critical transverse optic phonon modes decouple from the electron charge, the resulting quan- tum fluid can be likened to dark matter, for like baryons in the cosmos, electron charge does not directly interact with the the intense background of zero-point fluctuations. Moreover, like dark matter, the quantum critical TO modes are only revealed to the electrons via their "gravitational interaction", mediated by the stressenergy tensor. The resulting interaction becomes increasingly intense at a quantum critical point; we model it by the Hamiltonian where ρ e (x) = ψ † (x)ψ(x) is the electron density, ( P (x)) 2 is proportional to the energy density of the local polarization P and g is a coupling constant with the dimensions of volume. This coupling locally suppresses the zero-point fluctuations of the polarization in the vicinity of electrons, that in turn lowers the chemical potential of electrons passing in the region (Fig. Here we study the consequences of the coupling to energy fluctuations of the order parameter (1) in quantum critical polar metals. We find that quantum criticality causes the zero-point fluctuations to intensify, increasing the attractive interaction between electrons. Moreover, while the Fermi liquid behavior is robust against these couplings, the attractive interactions mediated by the energy fluctuations overcome the Coulomb repulsion in the low density regime. Using model parameters for SrTiO 3 we find agreement with experiments both in the magnitude of T c and in its doping dependence; finally we predict the fingerprints of this novel mechanism to be more pronounced in two-dimensional quantum critical polar systems. Our theory is built on an isotropic model for the polar metal, with an action S = S e + S C + S En , where S En = dτ H En is the energy fluctuation term is the electronic action, in terms of the Fourier transformed electron field ψ k , where k ≡ (iω n , k) is a four-vector containing the Matsubara frequency and wavevector k and (2) is the Coulomb interaction between the total charge densities eρ e -∇ • P , where q ≡ (iν n , q). ε 1 is the bare dielectric constant, Ω 0 is the ionic plasma frequency and ω T ( q) is the energy dispersion of the transverse optical mode. At low momenta ω 2 T ( q) ≈ ω 2 T + c 2 s q 2 , where c s is the speed of the transverse optic mode and ω 2 T vanishes at the QCP. The Gaussian coefficients of the polarization, δ 2 S C /δP a (-q)δP b (q) = D -1 ab (q) in (2), separate into transverse and longitudinal components where D -1 L,T (q) = (ν 2 n +ω 2 T,L ( q))/ε 0 Ω 2 0 are the inverse longitudinal and transverse phonon propagators. The longitudinal optic mode frequency We first consider the case where g = 0. Integrating over the longitudinal modes, the Coulomb interaction becomes Here, for is the renormalized dielectric constant, P T a (q) = (δ abqa qb )P b (q) are the transverse components of the polarization. Most importantly, in action (4) the quantum critical transverse polar modes are entirely decoupled from the electronic degrees of freedom, exemplifying the dark matter analogy. Normally, low carrier density metals are considered strongly interacting, for the ratio of Coulomb to kinetic energy, determined by m * e 2 the Bohr radius, is very large at low densities. However, in a quantum critical polar metal, the large upward renormalization of the dielectric constant, Eq. ( 1 at the polar QCP, leading to r s 1. Furthermore, the electronic corrections to the dielectric constant, given in RPA by δ RP A = e 2 q 2 ε0 Π e (q, ν n ), where Π e (q) is the dynamical susceptibility (Lindhardt function) of the electron gas, can be neglected. Indeed, The regime considered here is in stark contrast to the conventional case of the relevant frequency being of the order of ω L E F . There, the strong frequencydependence of leads to a Bardeen-Pines attraction near the Fermi surface. Additionally, at low momentum transfers v F q ω, a new scale appears in the problem -the electronic plasma frequency; its contribution to pairing is however suppressed by the factor ε -1 We next consider the effect of turning on the coupling to energy fluctuations in which naturally explains the suppression of the polar state by charge doping, universally observed in polar metals The coupling of the energy fluctuations to the electron density fluctuations δρ e (x) = ρ e (x) -n e , cannot be integrated out exactly. Interactions with critical fluctuations near QCPs can be relevant perturbations in scaling sense where is recognized to be an attractive density-density interaction resulting from two-phonon exchange, Fig. leading to a long-range interaction of the form where λ = 2π 2 cs . Away from criticality, ( where ω q = ω 2 + c 2 s q 2 . The characteristic electronic momentum and energy transfer scales are q ∼ k F ∼ n 1/3 and ω ∼ E F ∼ n 2/3 , respectively, resulting in |q| -1 ∼ n -1/3 , c s /|ω n | ∼ n -2/3 . Furthermore, following (6), a finite electron density leads to a finite correlation length of the order ξ ∼ n -1/2 . Consequently, the interaction character changes with density, and can be described by an effective interaction V P air En ( x, τ ) obtained by inverse Fourier transforming the final result of Eq. ( Log 2. Density dependence of the effective energy-fluctuation mediated electron-electron attraction V P air En ( x, τ ) (see text): colored lines show the relevant energy scales for the interaction; in each region (gray dashed lines) the dominant scale determines the effective form of the interaction. At low densities the interaction can be approximated with a local one. On increasing the density, the momentum dependence of the interaction first becomes prominent, while at the highest densities, strong retardation shows on the scales of order /EF . A more detailed calculation of the interaction potential yields where Ω T = max q ω T ( q). Here it is important to note, that since the integral is logarithmically divergent, large momenta of the order of the Brillouin zone size contribute significantly. At such momenta, the dispersion is expected to deviate from the simple quadratic one. Thus in practical calculations, we need an average value of c s which we approximate in the spirit of Debye approximation by c s = Ω T /((6π 2 ) 1/3 /a 0 ). We remark that the contribution of the longitudinal modes to the induced interaction can be shown to be negligible in the critical regime Ω T ω T , c s k F and assuming Additionally, in deriving the above we assumed that the momentum and energy cutoff scales are sufficiently large such that the corrections to the phonon propagator Eq. ( Superconductivity at low densities: We now show that the attractive interaction mediated by the energy fluctuations always leads to superconductivity at low densities close to the polar QCP. More specifically, averaging the repulsive Coulomb ((4), ( where is the density of states. In deriving this we used that ω T ∼ (gn) 1/2 , E F ∼ n 2/3 c s k F ∼ n 1/3 . Most importantly, we find that at low enough dopings the two-phonon attraction inevitably overcomes the Coulomb repulsion due to the logarithmic enhancement of the former. In particular, the total interaction is still attractive for densities below where for g ∼ a 3 0 . For strongly polar materials, Ω 0 Ω T and hence α 1, so this restriction is unimportant. Moreover, from As the phonon dispersion flattens near the Brillouin zone edges, the average c s < c s so that n max 1 corresponds to a dilute charge concentration well below half filling. Finally, away from the QCP (i.e. ω T (n e = 0) = 0), the Coulomb screening is reduced, resulting in an additional repulsive term ∼ 2πe 2 ω 2 T /(Ω 2 0 k 2 F ) (c.f. ( Let us now discuss the critical temperatures of the resulting superconductor. At low densities, the interaction is essentially instantaneous (see Fig. T /(c s k F ) 2 . 2D polar metals: Similar calculations can be performed in two dimensions. While at tree level, Eq. ( -a stronger singularity than in 3D. In the limit c s k F ω T the terms due to LO phonon energy fluctuation also have to be included, being of the same order, but this does not change the qualitative form of the interaction[28]. Finally, the bare Coulomb repulsion in 2D is given by 2πe 2 q . Screening with the polar mode and conduction electrons, however, reduces it to where l 0 is the 2D layer thickness. Superconductivity in SrT iO 3 : We now apply these results to doped SrT iO 3 . Fig. As discussed above, proximity to the QCP should enhance T c , particularly at low densities. Such a correlation has been observed for the cases of oxygen isotope substitution Thin films of SrTiO 3 will provide a platform to explore the predictions of the energy fluctuation theory. Fig. 