A change of orbital state alters the coupling between ions and their surroundings drastically. Orbital excitations are hence key to understand and control interaction of ions. Rare-earth (RE) elements with strong magneto-crystalline anisotropy (MCA) are important ingredients for magnetic devices. Thus, control of their localized 4f magnetic moments and anisotropy is one major challenge in ultrafast spin physics. With time-resolved X-ray absorption and resonant inelastic scattering experiments, we show for Tb metal that 4f-electronic excitations out of the ground state multiplet occur after optical pumping. These excitations are driven by inelastic 5d-4f-electron scattering, alter the 4f-orbital state and consequently the MCA with important implications for magnetization dynamics in 4f-metals, and more general for the excitation of localized electronic states in correlated materials. In ultrafast spin dynamics in metals, optically induced transitions in valence electronic states are the first excitation step. Recent experiments and theory identified direct consequences of these initial excitations for the spin dynamics: optical inter-site spin transfer (OISTR) between different atomic sites of transition metal (TM) compounds leads to enhanced speed and efficiency of demagnetization The spin-polarized itinerant 5d electrons mediate the indirect exchange coupling between the 4f states of neighboring atoms (Ruderman-Kittel-Kasuya-Yosida (RKKY) interaction) and thus enable in equilibrium long-range order of the strongly localized 4f magnetic moments With new pulsed X-ray sources and instrumentation at the European X-ray Free Electron Laser (EuXFEL) and the Free Electron Laser in Hamburg (FLASH), experimental approaches have recently become feasible that merge high energy and time resolution with core-state selective probing. For detecting the 4f electronic dynamics we combined two complementary methods: X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS) and resonant inelastic X-ray scattering (RIXS), as schematically illustrated in Fig. As depicted by the experimental scheme in Fig. In the RIXS setup shown in Fig. In order to identify the particular excitations in the 4f multiplet we describe the 4f ground and excited state XAS and RIXS spectra with atomic multiplet calculations We start with analyzing the RIXS spectra presented in Figs. 2B. The main pump-induced change is a shift of the two ground-state RIXS features at around 2.64 eV and 3.4 eV by about 0.26 eV to lower energies (black horizontal arrows in Fig. The RIXS cross-section for specific 4f multiplets across the Tb N4,5 resonance strongly depends on the incoming photon energy; their spectral weight is therefore not a good measure of the admixture of excited states in the probed volume. We better quantify the overall contribution of 7 F5 excitations from the XAS spectra measured at 150 fs pump-probe delay (Fig. How is this excitation possible? As argued above, 4f-4f transitions directly induced by the pump pulse are negligible. For optical d-f excitations from the itinerant 5d valence states into the localized 4f states or vice versa our pump-laser-photon energies are too low: Such excitations require energies of 2.8 and 2.3 eV, respectively (29), while we pump with 1.55 eV photons for XAS and 1.2 eV photons for RIXS (two-photon absorption processes are negligible under our experimental conditions; see SM). The pump-laser excitation hence cannot alter the 4f state directly, but it heats the valence electrons of mixed 5d and 6s character, which then can transfer the excitation to the 4f system. That such a 5d6s-4f energy transfer is the relevant process here, is revealed by the temporal evolution of XAS and RIXS spectral changes. In Fig. In Fig. How about the excitations of energetically higher lying multiplets 7 FJ with J = 4,3,2,1,0? Such transitions require an angular momentum transfer ΔJ < -1. Either multiple 5d-4f electronic scattering events each involving ΔS = 1 or a transfer of angular momentum from the reservoir of quenched 5d orbital momenta might permit higher ΔJ changes. Indeed, by including the contribution of higher 4f 8 multiplets to the 'pumped' XAS spectrum (assuming a thermal occupation, weighted with a Boltzmann factor and degeneracy 2J + 1; see SM for details) improves the fit to the differential XAS (dashed purple line in Fig. We notice that the shape of the pumped XAS spectrum is not constant but changes with pump-probe delay. Figure The pump-excitation energy in our experiment is not sufficient to directly excite states with varied 4f electron number: The transitions to a 4f 9 ( 6 H15/2) or 4f 7 ( 8 S7/2) multiplet requires 2.8 eV and 2.3 eV, respectively In fact, by including 4f 9 and 4f 7 multiplets in our XAS simulation we can achieve a quantitative description of the reported spectral changes at 150 fs delay in Fig. There are issues with the 5d-4f electron transfer interpretation, that we discuss in the following: First, only about 0.1% of the 5d electrons/holes at 4000 K (peak temperature from the 2TM calculations) will exhibit energies compatible with respective tunnelling processes. To cause the observed effects, this channel must be very efficient. This at least is possible as the coupling between 5d and 4f states is rather strong For Gd, which we used for a reference XAS measurement (see SM, Fig. While open questions remain for the excitations of higher 4f 8 multiplets and the 5d-4f electron transfer, the XAS and RIXS data show the 4f 8 7 F6 → 7 F5 multiplet excitation without any doubt as the dominant effect. This helps understanding angular momentum transfer in nonequilibrium magnetization dynamics of Tb and other RE ions. 4f-state excitations need to be included in a full description of non-equilibrium processes, particularly because they could affect the coupling between the 4f system and the lattice, an important channel in magnetic dynamics of RE metals The effect of 4f orbital excitation goes beyond a mere rescaling of the 4f-phonon coupling. We validate this effect, by investigating the influence of the 4f 8 7 F5 excited states on the MCA. At room temperature in the paramagnetic phase of Tb all mJ levels (J = -6 ... + 6) of the 7 F6 multiplet are occupied While we could prove the 7 F6 → 7 F5 transition, the data indicate additional 4f excitations with minor weight and a time-dependent contribution of different excited states. In addition to the changes of the MCA, also contributions to ultrafast demagnetization could matter, e.g., by thermal occupation of the 4f states or via electron-transfer transitions. The latter could principally quench the MCA by orders of magnitude by creating Gd-like configurations Our work stands apart from studies on 4f orthoferrites, where the rare-earth ions (R) are placed in non-centrosymmetric positions of the RFeO3 crystal lattice In the Tb XAS experiment we altered the 4f state of about 20 % of all atoms (compare best fit, blue solid lines in Fig. Our findings are particularly relevant in view of recent reports on all-optical switching (AOS) in Tb-based compounds Our findings identify a fundamental excitation mechanism, based on 5d-4f inelastic electronic scattering. This so far disregarded process is highly relevant for optically induced magnetization dynamics in 4f metals and their compounds, as it provides basic insights to atomic spin and orbital dynamics, as well as to non-equilibrium 5d-4f coupling mechanisms. The presented electronic scattering channel might be exploited to optically control material parameters in magnetically ordered metals and further correlated materials. The ultrafast handle to transiently manipulate MCA may be functionalized for, e.g., writing bits in high density magnetic storage devices. We performed the X-ray absorption experiment at the EuXFEL SCS Instrument Resonant inelastic X-ray scattering at the PG1 beamline of FLASH I We conducted the RIXS experiments at the PG1 -TRIXS permanent end station (44) (RIXS spectrometer for Time-resolved Resonant X-Ray Scattering) located at FLASH. The PG1 beamline can reach energies from 36 to 250 eV with high intensity and an energy resolution of about 0.07%, ideal for investigating RIXS at the N4,5 resonance of Tb around 147 eV. The experiment was performed at a grazing incident angle of about 25° and photons were collected under 105° with respect to the sample surface. The outgoing photons are dispersed according to their energy by a grating spectrometer and recorded on an X-ray CCD camera. In focus the RIXS grating spectrometer provides a resolution of about 100 meV/px at 147 eV, corresponding to about 140 meV total resolution in the spectrum. Off-focus the resolving power decreases according to the dispersion and due to the refocusing off-axial parabolic mirror. This results in a variation of the energy-resolution across the probed energy-loss region. For the RIXS data shown in Figs. 2B & 2F the spectrometer focus was optimized at 2.5 eV energy loss. For pumping we used near-infrared-laser pulses of 1030 nm wavelength (hν = 1.2 eV) and achieved a time resolution of 300 fs For the XAS and RIXS signals from the pumped and unpumped sample, we take the standard error for absorption and scattered signal respectively. For the differential change of the signals (Figs. In the XAS experiment we studied polycrystalline Tb and Gd transmission samples of 10 nm thickness. To prevent oxidation, the RE metal was sandwiched between yttrium layers. The samples were grown on an aluminum heat sink on a silicon nitride membrane, resulting in the following structure Y(2)/RE(10)/Y(25)/Al(300)/SiN(100), where RE = Tb and Gd. Numbers in brackets give the layer thickness in nanometers. The Tb and Gd samples were measured at room temperature in the paramagnetic phase. For the RIXS study we grew a thicker Tb film (40 nm) to maximize the number of absorbed photons and therewith the count rate in the RIXS signal. The film was grown by molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) on a W(110) single crystal, prepared and characterized by X-ray magnetic circular dichroism at the PM3 beamline of BESSY II (Helmholtz-Zentrum Berlin) Atomic multiplet calculations of M4,5 edge XAS and N4,5 edge RIXS Because of the localized character of the 4f states, the shape of the absorption multiplets can be simulated even for laser-excited samples We performed DFT calculations, using the full-potential linear augmented plane wave (FP-LAPW) method in the local spin-density approximation (LSDA), as implemented in the programs ELK Map of differential X-ray absorption over photon energy (Tb M5-edge) and pump-probe delay. We integrated the data in the time intervals I and II (black vertical lines, color-coded in Fig. When a metallic thin film is subjected to a near-infrared-laser pulse, electrons are excited by the photon electric field. Initially, the absorbed energy is barely transferred to the lattice and consequently the electronic system heats up. The electron and phonon temperatures, Tel and Tph, are decoupled for up to several picoseconds until the electron-phonon interaction equilibrates the two heat baths. This is phenomenology well captured by the so-called twotemperature model (2TM), (1) CC el The parameters entering Eqs. ( Where TE is the so-called Einstein temperature. The Einstein model is sufficiently accurate for temperatures higher than the Debye temperature, TD. Both, Einstein and Debye models provide very similar values for TE = 0.75 TD, where TD =174 K and Cph ꝏ = 2.2 ꞏ10 6 J/(m3K) The optical pump-and X-ray probe beams were nearly coaxial and normally incident on the sample. From measured beam power and spot size and the 10 kHz repetition rate we estimate an incident pump fluence of (10 ± 2) mJ/cm 2 . The optical constants for crystalline Y (n = 2.13, k = 2.67) and Tb (n = 2.47, k = 3.27) are taken from Ref. To correctly estimate the absorbed power, effects like reflection between the layers need to be taken into account as well. For an idealized sample Y(2)/ Tb(10)/ Y(20)/Al(300)/SiN(100) (numbers in brackets is thickness in nm) a total absorption of A = 0.332 and a total reflection of R = 0.66 can be simulated, using the program IMD by David Windt An experimental measurement of the sample reflectivity for 800 nm light showed only (49.8 ± 0.8) % reflection under normal incidence. Such a lower reflectivity corresponds to a higher absorption. Hence, the absorbed power in the Tb layer is corrected to (23.5 ± 0.4) %. This accounts to an absorbed energy of (2.4 ± 1.3) kJ/cm3. In Eq. ( The 2TM does not include electron thermalization. Therefore, the laser duration was set to τ = 85 fs to describe the internal thermalization of the electron gas via electron-electron scattering (~200 fs FWHM). In Eq. ( (5) PP 0 = PP laser (tt = 0, zz = 0) = AAAA 0 The total absorbed energy density can be calculated by integrating Plaser (t, z) over time. For example, at the surface Eabs = ∫ Plaser (t, z) dt = AF0/d . To fit the transient XAS data (Fig. For the case considered here Tel,peak ~ 5200 K. In the presence of electron-phonon coupling and thermal transport, the peak temperature reduces to Tel,peak ~ 4300 K, for the parameters considered here. The total absorbed energy per unit area reduces to the integration over the sample, from z = 0 to z = d and over time. In Fig. where f (E, Tel) the Fermi distribution. Hence, ( where ΔE/kB = 3133 K. We find g(Tel) = DΔE/(exp(ΔE/(kBTel)) -1). Since the scaling factor between the differential X-ray absorption signal P(t) and g(T) is unknown we normalized g(Tel) such that Δgmax = Pmax. In particular, we obtain P = 1 -0.03 g(T) / Δgmax(T). The solid black line in Fig. The Schrödinger equation of a free atom contains the kinetic energy of the electrons (p 2 /2m), the electrostatic interaction of the electrons with the nucleus (Ze 2 /r), the electronelectron repulsion (e 2 /r) and the spin-orbit coupling of each electron (l.s) (67): The kinetic energy and the electrostatic interaction of the electrons with the nucleus are the same for all electrons in a given atomic configuration. They define the average energy of the configuration (Hav). The electron-electron repulsion and the spin-orbit coupling define the relative energy of the different terms within a configuration, for example leading to the Hund's rule assignment of the electronic ground state configuration. The electron-electron repulsion is very large, but the spherical average of the electron-electron interaction can be separated from the non-spherical part. The spherical average can then be added to Hav. Overall this Hav is neglected in the atomic multiplet simulations of X-ray absorption: the difference between Hav in the initial and final state of the X-ray absorption process defines the energy shift needed in the calculation to fit to the experimental absorption spectrum. The modified electron-electron Hamiltonian plus the spin-orbit coupling part determine the energies of the different terms within the atomic configuration in both the initial and final state of the X-ray absorption process. The terms of a configuration are indicated by their total orbital moment L, spin moment S and total moment J in a 2S+1 LJ format. The general formulation of the matrix elements of two-electron wave functions can be written as: fi) and G i (gi) are the Slater-Condon parameters for, respectively, the radial (angular) part of the direct Coulomb repulsion and the Coulomb exchange interaction. The fi and gi are non-zero only for certain integer values of k (running from 0 or 1 to i), depending on the configuration. The direct Coulomb repulsion f0 is always present and the maximum value i equals two times the lowest value of l. The exchange interaction Slater-Condon parameter gi is present only for electrons in different shells. In our case, the M4,5/N4,5 edge will be the 3d/4d and 4f states. For gk, k is even if l1 + l2 is even and k is odd if l1 + l2 is odd (l1 = 2, l2 = 3 for 3d 9 4f n+1 ). The maximum value i equals l1 + l2. A 4f n configuration contains f0, f2, f4 and f6 Slater-Condon parameters, because l = 3 for a 4f electron, thus the maximum value is 6. The final state in X-ray absorption with the 3d 9 4f n+1 configuration contains f0, f2, f4, f6 (for direct 4f-4f interaction) and f2, f4 (for 3d-4f/4d-4f interaction) and g1, g3 and g5 Slater-Condon parameters. The value for f0 for the 4f n initial state was based on the reduced f2, f4 and f6 parameters: The values for f0 for the 3d 9 4f n /4d 9 4f n X-ray absorption final state (considering the interactions of 4f-4f electrons and 3d-4f/4d-4f electrons) were based on the reduced f2, f4 and f6 and g1, g3 and g5 parameters: The Slater-Condon parameters used in this work were taken from Theo Thole's multiplet extension The Hartree-Fock approximation only provides a very rough estimation of electronelectron interaction. It is usually overestimating the expectation energies. Therefore, we need to apply a Slater reduction factor to correct interaction strength. The reduction factor is not only depending on the probing edges but also influenced by the target sample. Thus, we set Gdf = 0.70, Fdf = 0.80 and Fff = 0.61 for the X-ray absorption calculations at the M5 edge and Fff 2 = 0.80, Fff 4 = 0.91 and Fff 6 = 0.91, Gdf = 0.60 and Fdf = 0.60 for the N5-edge calculations. The g1(df), g3(df) and g5(df) are multiplied by Gdf, f2(df), f4(df) are multiplied by Fdf and the f2(ff), f4(ff) and f6(ff) for both the initial 4f n configurations and 3d 9 4f n+1 configurations are multiplied by Fff (i) . Both the X-ray absorption and resonant inelastic X-ray scattering calculations were conducted by Quanty routine (47-49). Calculations were done with the so-called lua-input-files and an example of such an input-file is shown in Table The two spectra at the top of Fig. The Tb N4,5 edge RIXS spectra were calculated using the Kramers-Heisenberg formula. The scattering geometry was set to 105° emission and 25° incident angles. Instead of the 3d core shell, the Tb N4,5 edge couple with the 4d states. The ground state configuration is identical to the M edge as indicated above since the core shell is filled. But the excitation energies are slightly altered since somewhat different Slater reduction factors were applied. The energies required to excite the multiplets by 4f inner-shell transitions are listed in Table In the X-ray absorption experiment we measured the intensity of the incoming X-rays I0 and of the signal IT transmitted through the sample. As X-ray absorption we evaluate the extinction XAS = -log(IT/I0). For simulation of the pump-induced effect on the Tb M5 absorption spectrum, as a first step the XAS signal in equilibrium for the unpumped sample is described by atomic calculations (see Section 4 and 5). The calculations deliver the imaginary part of the scattering amplitude f, which corresponds to the transition probability from the 3d5/2 ground state to the unoccupied 4f state with different 4f electronic configuration and on an arbitrarily shifted energy scale e. In the case of the unpumped signal we fit the Im[f(e)] for the 4f 8 7 F6 ground state (GS) multiplet to the XAS spectrum. This aligns the calculated and experimental energy scales, described by an energy shift a. EE(aa) = ee + aa. with a Gaussian function we account for the energy resolution in the experiment and the core-hole lifetime broadening, which yields the absorption coefficient The XAS signal is where d denotes the sample thickness and C an offset. The edge jump is approximated as with H(EB) being a Heaviside-function at the binding energy EB, scaled by Iej and corehole life time broadened by convolution with a Gaussian function. Simulation of the X-ray absorption spectrum for the Tb 4f 8 ground state For the fit parameters a, ΔE, d, C, Iej, EB, Elifetime shown in Table For the simulation of the pump-induced spectral changes, the spectrum for the pumped sample is described by the GS spectrum with admixtures of different excited electronic configurations. Therefore, we write the absorption coefficient for the pumped spectrum as where i indicates the excited 4f state, μi the respective absorption coefficient and ci the relative contribution to the total absorption coefficient. The XAS signal from the pumped sample is with the fit parameters in Table For the simulation P is fitted with ci as fit parameters. In the case of 4f 8 excited states contributing to the signal, we assumed a constant parameter a (see Table Beginning with the simulation of the differential absorption for the dataset recorded at 150 fs pump-probe delay, as a first attempt we considered contributions, only from the lowest excited state 4f 8 7 F5. We find reasonable agreement for (16 ±1) % admixture of the 7 F5 multiplet to the GS, however do not achieve a quantitative description of the experimental data (Fig. Within these settings we find (72 ± 2) % of the 7 F6 GS, (20 ±1) % of the 7 F5, (4.5 ± 0.7) % 6 H15/2 for 4f 9 and (3.3 ± 0.2) % 8 S7/2 for 4f 7 , contributing to the pumped absorption spectra at 150 fs pump-probe delay. For the simulation of the pump effect obtained from cuts through the energy-delay map in Fig. After binning the RIXS data over delay, the averaged spectra for each delay-bin were background-subtracted by the pump-pulse background recorded for each run and the background of diffuse scattered light. Secondly the data were normalized to the probe-pulse intensity and to the integrated intensity of each spectrum in the range of + 2 eV to -10 eV. This normalizes to the overall emitted light, making the spectra at different delays comparable. The duration of the optical laser pulse was 30 fs and of the FEL pulse 25 fs. The measured arrival time jitter for small time spans of 10 min was on the order of 50 fs. Combining these numbers gives a temporal resolution of about 65 fs. This is the time resolution of the measurements presented in Fig. For the XAS experiment we studied polycrystalline transmission samples of 10 nm thickness sandwiched between Y-layers. Samples were grown by molecular beam epitaxy in the combined MBE/SD (sputter deposition) chamber of the PM3 beamline at BESSY II. The base pressure in the chambers is 1 x 10 -10 and 1 x 10 -9 mbar for MBE and SD, respectively. As substrate we used an Al heat sink on a silicon nitride membrane. The pressure during evaporation was 7 x 10 -9 mbar at maximum. The stack was Y(2)/RE(10)/Y(25)/Al(300)/SiN(100), where the number indicates the nominal layer thickness in nanometer and RE = Gd or Tb, respectively. Due to different positions of the evaporators with respect to the quartz microbalance, we estimate thickness variations on the order of 30 %. The Tb sample used for the RIXS experiment was epitaxially grown in the MBE/SD preparation chamber, as well. Here we grew 40 nm Tb on a W(110) single crystal via MBE. For oxidation protection we capped the sample with 4 nm Ta using SD. The pressure during Tb growth was 2.7 x 10 -9 mbar and Ta was sputtered at an Ar pressure of 2 x 10 -3 mbar. Both, MBE growth of RE metal on W and Y, are established methods. As for the different film thicknesses, it has been shown that Tb films grow in bulk like structure after a few deposited layers As for the XAS experiment we assume that maximal 20 % of all Tb atoms are in the first excited multiplet state, we calculate for a density of 3.12 x 10 22 atoms/cm 3 a stored energy of 0.27 x 10 3 J/cm 3 (as used for the simulation of the XAS data with the 2TM-model) which corresponds to about 10 % of the maximum absorbed energy density. Two-photon absorption can contribute to excitation of multiplets with excitation energy below 2ħωω ~ 3.1 eV, but only while the pump-pulse excites the sample, i.e., around zero delay. Independent of the initial distribution, electrons will still thermalize to a hot Fermi distribution within 200 fs. The temperature of this distribution decays as described in Fig. Calculation of the Tb 4f 8 7 F6 RIXS map at the N4,5 resonance (top) and horizontal cuts through this map (RIXS spectra, bottom) for the 7 F6 (thick solid lines) and 7 F5 (thin solid lines) multiplets. Simulation of the unpumped Tb M5 XAS spectrum with the parameters shown in Table Tb M5 resonance at 150 fs pump-probe delay for pumped (orange dots) and unpumped sample (blue dots), as well as the differential X-ray absorption plotted to the right abscissa (black dots). The error bars are deduced from the error propagated standard deviation of the measured transmission IT and I0. The lines show the simulation of the data, based on a fit of the difference signal, assuming admixtures of the lowest 7 F5 multiplet to the 7 F6 ground state. We find best agreement for (16 ± 1) % 7 F5 and (84 ± 1) % 7 F6 contribution. Tb M5 resonance at 150 fs pump-probe delay, as well as the differential X-ray absorption (dots). The lines show the simulation of the data, based on a fit of the difference signal, assuming a 4f 8 multiplet occupation following a Boltzmann distribution. We find best agreement for a temperature of (1930 ± 80) K. Tb M5 resonance at 150 fs pump-probe delay, as well as the differential X-ray absorption (dots). The lines show the simulation of the data, based on a fit of the difference signal, assuming admixtures of 4f 8 excited multiplets to the 7 F6 groundstate scaled to the weight of 5d electrons in the Fermi distribution that allow for specific 4f 8 excitations. We find best agreement for a (1110 ± 30) K Fermi profile. Hartree-Fock Slater-Condon valus for direct 3d-4f (fi (df)) interactions (all values in eV). 