The ability to accurately extract low-amplitude voltage signals is crucial in several fields, ranging from single-use diagnostics and medical technology to robotics and the Internet of Things. The organic electrochemical transistor, which features large transconductance values at low operation voltages, is ideal for monitoring small signals. Its large transconductance translates small gate voltage variations into significant changes in the drain current. However, a current-to-voltage conversion is further needed to allow proper data acquisition and signal processing. Low power consumption, high amplification, and manufacturability on flexible and low-cost carriers are also crucial and highly anticipated for targeted applications. Here, we report low-power and high-gain flexible circuits based on printed complementary organic electrochemical transistors (OECTs). We leverage the low threshold voltage of both p-type and n-type enhancement-mode OECTs to develop complementary voltage amplifiers that can sense voltages as low as 100 μV, with gains of 30.4 dB and at a power consumption < 2.7 μW (single-stage amplifier). At the optimal operating conditions, the voltage gain normalized to power consumption reaches 169 dB/μW, which is >50 times larger than state-of-the-art OECT-based amplifiers. In a two-stage configuration, the complementary voltage amplifiers reach a DC voltage gain of 193 V/V, which is the highest among emerging CMOS-like technologies operating at supply voltages below 1 volt. Our findings demonstrate that flexible complementary circuits based on printed OECTs define a power-efficient platform for sensing and amplifying low-amplitude voltage signals in several emerging beyond-silicon applications. Complementary metal-oxide-semiconductor (CMOS) field-effect transistors, made from silicon (Si), have been the workhorse of the integrated circuit (IC) industry since the 1980s, in part due to their low power consumption. Dennard scaling 1 , the CMOS scaling law, states that the supply voltage for each new CMOS generation is reduced by 30%, and the power consumption subsequentially reduces by 50%. After decades of development, the latest 7-nm-node CMOS process reaches a supply voltage of 0.75 V 2 . Today, the Si-CMOS technology is heavily explored in Internet of Things (IoT) applications, serving as low-power outposts that record physical sensor parameters (e.g., motion, light, temperature), communicate over long distances, and harvest and store energy for its operation Unlike field-effect transistors, organic electrochemical transistors (OECTs) typically operate at less than 1 V and consist of a conducting polymer channel and a gate connected by a common electrolyte While the large OECT transconductance can translate a small voltage into a sizable current, postsignal processing often necessitates further current-to-voltage conversion. To address this need, a handful of high-gain OECT-based voltage amplifiers have been developed In this work, we report a different approach to reduce power consumption, which takes advantage of CMOS technology. Si-based electronics have already shown significant improvements in power efficiency afforded by CMOS circuits compared to unipolar technologies, wherein only one type of transistor is used Here, we report a printed, flexible single-stage voltage amplifier based on a pair of complementary OECTs, which operates at low voltages (0.3-0.7 V) with less than 2.7 μW power consumption. Both ptype and n-type OECTs operate in the accumulation mode, with maximum transconductance of ~0.20 mS and threshold voltages of less than |0.25| V, enabling low voltage operation. Electrochemical bulk doping of the channel materials is confirmed by in-situ spectroelectrochemistry measurements. The driving strength and the operating voltage of both p-type and n-type OECTs are well balanced and enable the development of single-stage complementary inverters having voltage gains of up to 26 V/V, static power consumption as low as 12 nW, and excellent noise margin (89%). With a DC offset at the input, the inverter operates as a pull-push amplifier which is able to sense AC voltage signals as low as 100 μV with a gain of 30.4 dB. This ability to detect small voltage signals with very low power consumption yields a power-normalized gain of up to 169 dB/μW, which is over 50 times greater than state-of-the-art amplifiers based on OECT technologies. The DC voltage gain can be further increased by cascading double inverters into a two-stage amplifier that reaches 193 V/V, which is the highest gain among emerging CMOS-like thin-films technologies operated at low voltages (sub-1-volt) to date. Our voltage amplifier based on printed complementary OECTs offers a power-efficient solution for autonomous, conformable, wearable, and portable sensors. In addition, the low operation voltage (0.3 V) offers the possibility of being (self-)powered by light, heat, wireless power, triboelectricity, and other power sources that can only provide low voltage and/or limited power supply, thus opening the way to battery-free wearable electronics. Complementary electronic circuitries require the development of both p-type and n-type enhancementmode OECTs. Here, we use polythiophene functionalized with tetraethylene glycol side chains (P(g42T-T)) and poly(benzimidazobenzophenanthroline) (BBL) as the p-type and n-type semiconducting polymers, respectively (Fig. For each OECT, the channel length/width (L/W) is 200 μm/2 mm, and the Ag/AgCl gate region is 2×2 mm 2 . When implemented as OECT channels, both P(g42T-T) and BBL show relatively low threshold voltages In a three-terminal (drain, source, and gate) OECT device (Fig. (linear region) (1) where μ is the charge carrier mobility, CV is the volumetric capacitance, W, L, and d are the channel width, length, and thickness, respectively, and VT is the threshold voltage. Unlike conventional fieldeffect transistors, the channel thickness d contributes to the conductivity as the accumulation of charges occurs throughout the entire bulk of the semiconductor layer. For printed P(g42T-T) OECTs, the application of a negative VGS oxidizes the semiconductor channel and enables the accumulation and transport of holes in the channel under a negative VDS. Figs 2a-b show the typical output (IDS-VDS) and transfer (IDS-VGS) characteristics of P(g42T-T)-based OECTs reaching an ON/OFF ratio of ~10 3 at VGS < 1 V. In addition, no hysteresis in IDS is observed over the entire VGS range, which is beneficial for the stable operation of analog circuits (e.g., amplifiers). The transconductance g * = ∂I !" /∂V '" , a key figure of merit used to evaluate OECTs, is also shown in Fig. we can then extract the product of mobility and volumetric capacitance μCV = 22.9 F cm -1 V -1 s -1 in the saturation region (for VDS between -0.4 and -0. It should be noted that the transconductance reaches its maximum at VGS between 0.4 and 0.5 V, rather than at the highest applied VGS = 0.7 V. This suggests that the printed BBL OECTs are optimally operated at VGS between 0.4 and 0.5 V for applications where high transconductance is desirable (e. g., amplifiers). The threshold voltage of the printed BBL-based OECTs is 0.16 V (Supplementary Figure To understand the operation of P(g42T-T) and BBL OECTs, we measured absorption spectra of the polymer films on FTO inside a three-electrode electrochemical cell. We used 0.1 M NaCl as the electrolyte and an Ag/AgCl reference electrode to match the OECT characterization. The absorption spectra of the pristine polymers in air are presented in Supplementary Figure Having validated a pair of well-balanced p-type and n-type OECTs working in enhancement-mode, we demonstrate a printed complementary inverter that yields large gains (~26 V/V) at a low supply voltage (< 0.7 V). The schematic of an OECT-based complementary inverter is shown in Fig. The switching threshold of an inverter (VM), defined as when Vin equals Vout, is an indication of the balanced driving strengths of p-type and n-type transistors, and ideally, the threshold is equal to VDD/2. The switching threshold is shown in Fig. Another benefit of balanced p-type and n-type OECTs is to obtain large high and low noise margins (NMH and NML), defined as follows: where VIH and VIL are the input voltages HIGH and LOW at the operation points of = -1 at the voltage transfer characteristics (VTC) of the inverter (Fig. The voltage gain Av in units of V/V and decibels (dB) is defined as: As shown in Fig. Low power consumption is another major advantage of CMOS-like technologies since one of the two transistors is always in the non-conducting OFF-state in static conditions. The current at VDD = 0.7 V is below 17 nA, yielding a static power consumption of only 12 nW, which is far lower than that of state-of-the-art unipolar OECT-based inverters (1.18 mW) In order to thoroughly evaluate the performance of the inverters, a five-stage ring oscillator, the largest circuit based on complementary OECTs in terms of the number of OECTs, was implemented by cascading five inverters (Supplementary Figures Although typically implemented as digital devices, CMOS inverters can be used as analog amplifiers. A major advantage of using CMOS inverters as amplifiers in the push-pull configuration (Fig. where gmp and gmn are the transconductances and rop and ron are output resistances of the p-type and ntype transistors, respectively. The main challenge in operating OECT-based CMOS-like inverters is to correctly bias the inverter to position the operation point in the transition region (close to the switching threshold VM), where both transistors work in the saturation region and the inverter exhibits a large gain. Our push-pull amplifiers with printed complementary OECTs show a gain of 16 (V/V) (24 dB) when amplifying a 10 mV (amplitude) sinusoidal signal with a DC offset of 0.28 V (Fig. Hz with a 10 mV input signal. The detailed waveforms at each frequency are shown in Supplementary Figures These OECT-based single stage push-pull amplifier can serve as a building block for more complex amplifiers. Here, we demonstrate a two-stage amplifier to obtain a high voltage gain by cascading a number of single-stage amplifiers, as shown in Fig. This shows that our printed voltage amplifier has huge potential for self-powered devices. As we demonstrated, the voltage gain of the printed amplifier can be further increased by cascading multiple stages together. With two-stage printed amplifiers, we report DC gains of 193 V/V, which, to the best of our knowledge, are the highest not only among the OECT technologies and n-type MoS2) is 34 V/V at VDD = 1 V. b, DC voltage gain (V/V) among reported sub-1V CMOS-like technologies. We have developed flexible, printed digital and analog circuits composed of p-/n-type enhancement mode OECTs. The p-and n-type OECTs incorporate P(g42T-T) and BBL as the channel material, and polyanionic PQ-10 and polycationic PSSNa hydrogel as the electrolyte, respectively. By engineering the thickness of the active materials, we match the driving strengths of the p-type and n-type OECTs with identical channel dimensions. Both types of OECTs exhibit low VT (-0.22 V for P(g42T-T) OECTs and 0.16 V for BBL OECTs), which enables the single-stage amplifier to operate at a low voltage and with a power-normalized gain of up to 169 dB/μW, which is 53 times higher than current state-of-theart OECT amplifiers. Furthermore, the two-stage amplifier reaches a DC gain of 193 V/V, which is a record-high value among all emerging sub-1V CMOS-like technologies. With such a high power efficiency, we envisage that our flexible and fully-printable OECT-based voltage amplifiers may find several applications in recording/monitoring of weak voltage signals, such as IoT sensing, electrophysiological and other bioelectric infra-slow signals signals (as low as 100 μV) at low supply voltages (as low as 0.3 V). Power efficiency is crucial for selfpowered applications