Vanadium Dioxide (VO2) is a strongly correlated material, which exhibits insulator to metal transition at ~68 ̊C along with large resistivity and infrared optical reflectance modulation. In this work, we use atmospheric pressure thermal oxidation of Vanadium to synthesize VO2 films on glass and ITO coated glass substrates. With the optimized short oxidation durations of 2 min and 4 min, the synthesized VO2 film shows high optical reflectance switching in long-wavelength infrared (8-14 μm) on glass substrates and midwavelength infrared (3-5 μm) on ITO coated glass substrates, respectively. Peak reflectance switching values of ~76% (at 9 μm) and ~ 79% (at 4.6 μm) are obtained on the respective substrates, which are among the highest reported values. Using the reflectance data, we extract VO2 complex refractive index in infrared wavelengths, in both the insulating and metallic phases. The extracted refractive index shows good agreement with VO2 synthesized using other methods. This demonstration of high optical reflectance switching in VO2 thin films, grown on low cost glass and ITO coated glass substrates, using a simple low thermal budget process will aid in enhancing VO2 applications in the optical domain. VO2 is a phase change material, which shows a sharp reversible insulator to metal transition around 68 °C, with upto five orders of change in resistivity As multiple Vanadium oxide compounds are possible due to multiple valence states of Vanadium Atmospheric pressure thermal oxidation (APTO) is another synthesis method that does not need precise control of oxygen partial pressure as atmospheric oxygen is used to oxidize Vanadium thin films to synthesize VO2 APTO method is relatively simple as the oxidation time and the oxidation temperature are the only parameters requiring precise control to synthesize VO2 with good phase transition properties. Recently, we demonstrated low thermal budget synthesis of VO2 with good electrical and optical switching properties on c-plane Sapphire substrates using a modified APTO method with a step oxidation temperature profile, which allows for precise control of oxygen content in the films In section 2, we present the vanadium RF sputtering deposition conditions and the APTO process to synthesize the vanadium oxide films. In section 3, the optical characterization results of the samples using temperature-dependent Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) reflectance measurements are presented to find the optical switching performance as a function of oxidation time. Temperature-dependent electrical resistance as a function of oxidation duration and surface morphology Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM) images are also presented. For samples with highest infrared reflectance switching, optical modeling of the reflectance data to extract the VO2 complex refractive index in infrared wavelengths on glass and ITO coated glass substrates is also presented. Conclusions are presented in section 4. The complete experimental process to synthesize the vanadium oxide films is schematically shown in Fig. Prior to the deposition, the sputtering chamber was pumped to base pressure of 5 x10 -4 Pa. Vanadium thin films were deposited using RF magnetron sputtering from a 2-inch diameter Vanadium target of 99.9% purity. During the deposition, Argon gas flow rate was kept at 30 sccm using a mass flow controller to maintain the chamber pressure at 1 Pa and RF power to the sputtering gun was maintained at 90 W. Substrates were kept at room temperature during 90 minutes of V deposition. The deposited V film thickness was measured using KLA-Tencor stylus profilometer and was found to be ~130 nm. The V deposited substrates were unloaded from the sputtering chamber and diced into smaller pieces to have a total of 10 V/glass samples and 7 V/ITO/glass samples. These samples were then oxidized in open atmosphere at 450 ̊C for different durations (Toxd) upto 20 minutes followed by quenching on a cold plate (at room temperature). More details on the process can be obtained from our previous work Surface morphological characterization was done using AFM (Oxford Instruments MFP-3D). Atmospheric oxidation of V thin film proceeds with the formation of VO2 in the initial oxidation phase and V2O5 in the latter stage. This oxidation behavior has been confirmed by previous APTO works . Peak reflectance switching values of ~76% is obtained for Toxd = 2 minutes on glass substrate and ~79% for Toxd = 4 minutes on ITO coated glass substrate. Beyond these optimum oxidation times, optical reflectance switching decreases because of increasing V2O5 content of the films. The rate of decrease of optical reflectance modulation with increasing Toxd is observed to be much faster on glass substrate compared to ITO coated substrates. The resistance switching data and the infrared optical reflectance switching data are in agreement. Both characterizations suggest that Toxd = 2 min sample has the highest VO2 content. Fig. The room temperature and high temperature (100 ̊C) FTIR reflectance data (4.5-14 μm) for the sample with optimum oxidation duration on glass substrate (Toxd = 2 minutes) is shown in Fig. where, the first term of Ɛ∞ is the high frequency permittivity, the second term is Drude oscillator in which ωp corresponds to plasma frequency and ωc is the collision frequency. The third term is the Lorentz oscillator, where ωj is the resonance frequency, fj is the strength of oscillator, and γj is the line width. We have calculated reflectance spectra using the Drude-Lorentz oscillator to extract the complex refractive index (n,k) of the VO2 film in the insulating and the metallic states. To find the optimized oscillator parameters, we used constrained non-linear least-square fitting of the data. Three Lorentz oscillators are used to fit the measured reflectance spectra of VO2 thin films grown on glass in the insulating phase, whereas, Drude oscillator alone is used to fit VO2 reflectance in the metallic state. The optimized Lorentz and Drude oscillator parameters are summarized in table The extracted (n,k) values match reasonably well with the reported (n,k) values of VO2 films synthesized using other methods Table In this work, we used a simple atmospheric pressure thermal oxidation method to synthesize optically switching VO2 thin films on glass and ITO coated glass substrates. Highest optical switching of ~76% is obtained on glass substrate in LWIR and ~79% on ITO coated glass substrate in MWIR, with low thermal oxidation budgets of 450 oC/2 minutes and 450 oC/4 minutes, respectively. We also performed fitting of the reflectance data to extract the complex refractive indices of the VO2 films which matches well with the optical properties of VO2 synthesized using other methods. This demonstration of a simple VO2 synthesis process with low thermal budget and low RMS roughness while giving extremely good optical switching performance on low cost substrates should expand the optical applications space of this phase transition material. 