Dynamic color modulation in the composite structure of graphene microelectromechanical systems (MEMS)-photonic crystal microcavity is investigated in this work. The designed photonic crystal microcavity has three resonant standing wave modes corresponding to the three primary colors of red (R), green (G) and blue (B), forming strong localization of light in three modes at different positions of the microcavity. Once graphene is added, it can govern the transmittance of three modes. When graphene is located in the abdomen of the standing wave, which has strong light absorption and therefore the structure's transmittance is lower, or when graphene is located in the node of the standing wave, it has weak light absorption and therefore the structure's transmittance is higher. Therefore, the graphene absorption of different colors of light can be regulated dynamically by applying voltages to tune the equilibrium position of the graphene MEMS in the microcavity, consequently realizing the output of vivid monochromatic light or multiple mixed colors of light within a single pixel, thus greatly improving the resolution. Our work provides a route to dynamic color modulation with graphene and provides guidance for the design and manufacture of ultrahigh resolution, ultrafast modulation and wide color gamut interferometric modulator displays. Among many nanomaterials, two-dimensional (2D) materials have emerged as promising candidates for mechanical and optoelectronic applications In 2016, Dejan Davidovikj et al. visualized the motion of micrometerscale graphene nanodrums at ultrahigh frequencies with spatial resolution using a phasesensitive interferometer In this work, we studied the dynamic color modulation in the composite structure of graphene MEMS-photonic crystal microcavity. First of all, we designed a symmetric photonic crystal microcavity with three resonant standing wave modes corresponding to the three primary colors of red (R), green (G) and blue (B). The localized light fields are formed in three modes at different positions of the microcavity. Then, when graphene MEMS is coupled with photonic crystals, we found that graphene has a strong absorption when it is located in the abdomen of the standing wave, and therefore the transmittance of the structure is lower, whereas graphene has the opposite property when it is located in the node of the standing wave. Therefore, the graphene absorption of different colors of light can be regulated dynamically by applying voltages to tune the equilibrium position of the graphene MEMS in the microcavity, thus realizing the output of vivid monochromatic light or multiple mixed colors of light within a single pixel. Traditionally, a single pixel of a Liquid Crystal Display (LCD) screen is actually composed of RGB sub-pixels, the superposition of which comprise what is known as a single pixel. It means that an LCD screen with a horizontal resolution of N whole pixels is actually composed of a linear array of 3N monochromatic sub-pixels, setting obstacles to manufacture higher-resolution displays. Thus, multiple mixed colors of light within a single pixel can greatly improve the resolution and reduce the power consumption of the display. The schematic diagram of photonic crystal microcavity is shown in Fig. The deflection of graphene pixels can be used as a function of voltage, and the deflection can be used to correlate the electromechanical and ophotomechanical properties of the pixels , where δ c is the center deflection (equilibrium position), a is the radius of the pixel, and r is the radial distance away from the pixel's center Because the graphene is approximately parallel to the Bragg mirror, and the size of the graphene is much larger than the distance between the up and low Bragg mirrors. When a voltage is applied between the graphene and the conductive layer in the Bragg mirror below, the graphene deflects, but only slightly. Thus, the graphene can be divided into many small regions, each of which is approximately parallel to the layers, and the average transmittance of the structure can be calculated using the transfer matrix method Assuming standard illumination (CIE) D65 normally illuminate (white daylight) the proposed structure from the top, the generated colors can be characterized by the CIE XYZ color space with the tri-stimulus values given as where k = 100/ λ E(λ)y(λ)dλ, and it is a normalizing factor, λ is the wavelength, E(λ) is the relative spectral energy distribution of an illuminant, x(λ), y(λ) and z(λ) are the color matching functions for the CIE 1931 2 • standard observer, T (λ) is the spectral transmittance spectrum. The chromaticity coordinates can be computed from the tri-stimulus values by Each point (x,y) on the diagram represents a color described by its tristimulus value (X,Y,Z). In the CIE1931 chromaticity space, it is convenient to visualize the color trends Light can be coupled into the optical microcavity from the normal direction. The resonant state of the microcavity is sensitive to the thickness of the intermediate air gap layer, and the resonant wavelength λ c satisfies the following condition m i λ c /2 ∝ L c , where L c represents the optical path of the microcavity, and m i is a positive integer According to the three modes of R, G and B presented by the photonic crystal microcavity transmission spectrum, if the relative intensities of the three modes are adjusted according to the human eye's perception for these three colors, the colors of CIE gamut can be continuously covered As a typical example, four extraction equilibrium positions of graphene are: 0 nm, 70 nm, 170 nm and 320 nm, which are used as the research objects. The corresponding dashed line positions 1-4 in the microcavity are present in Fig. Furthermore, the electro-optical response of the proposed structure, when averaged over the graphene membranes, is radius independent. Therefore, changing the radius of the suspended graphene does not result in any qualitative change in the behavior of the pixels The system realizes the rich dynamic modulation of visible light color without introducing complex structure. As shown in Table In conclusion, dynamic color modulation in the composite structure of graphene microelectromechanical systems (MEMS)-photonic crystal microcavity is investigated. The designed photonic crystal microcavity has three resonant standing wave modes corresponding to the wavelength of red, green and blue, and the light of these three modes forms the localized light field at different positions of the microcavity. Once graphene is added, it can govern the transmittance of three modes. When graphene is located in the abdomen of the standing wave, which has strong light absorption and therefore the structure's transmittance is low, or shows opposite properties when graphene is located in the node of the standing wave. Thus, we can tune the absorption of light of different colors by voltage regulating the equilibrium position of the graphene MEMS in the microcavity. As a result, we use a single pixel to achieve the output of monochromatic light or multiple mixed colors, greatly expanding the gamut. This method can achieve a high resolution, ultrafast and dynamic color modulation by comparing the color rendering system with the metasurface plasma effect. Our findings reveal the physics behind dynamic color modulation with graphene and may provide guid-ance for the design and manufacture of ultrahigh resolution, ultrafast modulation and wide color gamut interferometric modulator displays. shown in Fig. 