Antisolvent crystallization methods are frequently used to fabricate high-quality perovskite thin films, to produce sizable single crystals, and to synthesize nanoparticles at room temperature. However, a systematic exploration of the effect of specific antisolvents on the intrinsic stability of multicomponent metal halide perovskites has yet to be demonstrated. Here, we develop a highthroughput experimental workflow that incorporates chemical robotic synthesis, automated characterization, and machine learning techniques to explore how the choice of antisolvent affects the intrinsic stability of binary perovskite systems in ambient conditions over time. Different combinations of the endmembers, MAPbI3, MAPbBr3, FAPbI3, FAPbBr3, CsPbI3, and CsPbBr3, are used to synthesize 15 combinatorial libraries, each with 96 unique combinations. In total, roughly 1100 different compositions are synthesized. Each library is fabricated twice using two different antisolvents: toluene and chloroform. Once synthesized, photoluminescence spectroscopy is automatically performed every 5 minutes for approximately 6 hours. Non-negative Matrix Factorization (NMF) is then utilized to map the time-and compositional-dependent optoelectronic properties. Through the utilization of this workflow for each library, we demonstrate that the selection of antisolvent is critical to the stability of metal halide perovskites in ambient conditions. We explore possible dynamical processes, such as halide segregation, responsible for either the stability or eventual degradation as caused by the choice of antisolvent. Overall, this high-throughput study demonstrates the vital role that antisolvents play in the synthesis of high-quality multicomponent metal halide perovskite systems. Considerable research attention has focused on metal halide perovskites (MHPs) over the recent years because of the combination of exceptional optoelectronic properties and low fabrication cost, making them ideal candidates for a variety of applications, such as solar cells Mixing halides, such as bromine (Br -) Antisolvent crystallization is an efficient solution-based method to produce high-quality perovskite thin films, to synthesize high-quality single crystals To date, much of these investigations have utilized manual trial and error approaches to decide which antisolvent is applicable for a particular perovskite system. Recently, automated experimentation has proven to accelerate this trial and error process through synthesis Here, we utilize our previously reported workflow We utilize an established workflow In this work, we explore 15 different multicomponent MHPs binary systems as shown in Figure To characterize compositional dependent optoelectronic properties, we utilize an automated Multi-Mode well plate reader with the capabilities to perform photoluminescence (PL). Details of these measurements are provided in the Supporting Information. By studying the evolution of optical properties, we extract information regarding dynamical processes related to MHPs formation, ionic movement, phase changes, and degradation To effectively map the time-and compositional-dependent PL properties and stability relationships concurrently, we adopt a multivariate statistical approach, in particular, Non-negative Matrix Factorization (NMF) SX are the spectrum of these compositions to confirm. From this initial measurement, we reach two conclusions: 1) neither toluene nor chloroform is the appropriate antisolvent choice for the formation of a pure phase α-FAPbI3, and 2) stabilization of the α-FAPbI3 phases can be achieved through small amount of MAPbI3 in agreement with previous studies 40 . Further, by exploring the time-dependent PL behavior, we conclude this double cation system is vastly more stable when toluene is utilized as the antisolvent instead of chloroform. As mentioned previously, the FAPbI3-rich compositions are likely a solid solution between the δ-FAPbI3 and α-FAPbI3 phases; therefore, when we examine the characteristic PL behaviors (Figures 2e) and 2l) and corresponding loading maps, Figures 2b) and 2i)) when either toluene or chloroform is used, we observe a broad peak at lower wavelengths spanning approximately 100 nm. With chloroform, this peak disappears quickly after roughly 30 minutes, whereas with the toluene system, we see this peak begin to narrow and shift towards lower wavelengths, indicating better stability of these mixed phases in toluene rather than chloroform. Next, we observe a similar trend when comparing the solid solution between FAPbI3-rich and MAPbI3 compositions in toluene and chloroform. Even with a small peak shift and slight decrease in intensity, toluene as the antisolvent produces a stable PL peak for the entirety of the characterization (roughly 6 hours in ambient conditions), as shown in Figure Our conclusions that toluene is a better choice for this system is further confirmed by analyzing the time-dependent PL behavior of the MAPbI3-rich compositions. As shown in Figures 2d) and ), these compositions demonstrate remarkable stability as their peak properties, such as position and width, remain constant throughout the characterization even after a small increase in PL intensity at the beginning, indicating possible filling of trap states Regarding the time-dependent PL behavior, from the NMF decompositions, it becomes apparent that toluene is a more beneficial antisolvent for MAPbI3 and chloroform is a better antisolvent for CsPbBr3. As shown in Figures 4b) and 4e), rapid degradation of the CsPbBr3-rich compositions is observed when toluene is used because the individual PL spectra could simply be characterized as noise, as shown in Figure Interestingly, the iodide-rich peak appears not to disappear as time increases but begins to shift towards lower wavelengths. Finally, as stated previously, MAPbI3-rich compositions are remarkably stable with toluene as the antisolvent, as shown in Figures 4d) and 4g), whereas when chloroform is used, these same compositions experience an increase in PL intensity before another decrease, as shown in Figures 4k) and 4n). Overall, although it was not unexpected that for CsPbBr3-rich compositions, toluene is not the appropriate antisolvent choice because of the polarity index disparity between DMSO and toluene The formation of this phase is not dependent on the antisolvent, as evidence by its presence when chloroform is used, as shown in Figure Regarding the time-dependent evolution of the PL for this system, we observe a variety of dynamical processes caused by either antisolvent. Firstly, the formation of CsPbI3, most likely the polymorph phases, when toluene is used produces an instable composition, as evidence by Figures 5b) and 5e). Surprisingly, chloroform produces a stable δ-CsPbI3, as shown in Figures 5i) and 5l). The band gap of this polymorph is roughly 2.82 eV Finally, we compare the solid solutions of the system, MAxCs1-xPb(IxBr1-x)3, and the system, MAxCs1-xPb(BrxI1-x)3, to compare the effect of the precursors as related to the antisolvent choice. To clarify, in the system, MAxCs1-xPb(IxBr1-x)3, MAPbI3 and CsPbBr3 are the precursors, while in the system, MAxCs1-xPb(BrxI1-x)3, the precursors are MAPbBr3 and CsPbI3. For both systems, it is demonstrated that toluene is not the appropriate choice for solid solutions of CsPbX3rich and methylammonium lead halide. In the MAxCs1-xPb(IxBr1-x)3 system, the polar index disparity between DMSO and toluene causes the formation of CsPbBr3 to be stagnated; whereas toluene produces an instable δ-CsPbI3 phases in the MAxCs1-xPb(BrxI1-x)3 system. Conversely, in both systems, chloroform produces initial mixed phase compositions; however, eventually, halide segregation begins to occur. Overall, this comparison is indicative of the precursor having an effect of the types of dynamical processes to occur as caused by the solvent in which the endmember is dissolved. In summary, we have demonstrated the effect of antisolvents on the initial photoluminescence behavior for multicomponent MHPs and on the dynamical processes experienced by these compositions over time when exposed to ambient conditions. Through the utilization of robotic synthesis, automated characterization, and machine learning, we effectively explore this effect on 15 different binary systems, analyzing approximately 1100 unique compositions. Figure We have shown remarkable stability in ambient conditions for microcrystals of MAPbI3rich compositions and solid solutions between FAPbI3 rich and MAPbI3 compositions when toluene is utilized. We observed different phases of FAPbI3 and CsPbI3 and demonstrated how antisolvents influence the stability of those phases. Dynamical processes, such as halide segregation, were explored for many systems. Finally, we compared the same compositions synthesized with different precursor solutions and illustrated how the precursor can also play a role in the stability. Through the utilization of our previously reported workflow As stated previously, we synthesized and characterized approximately 2880 different microcrystal samples, and all together the absolute synthesis and characterization time total only 1.5 weeks. Through this procedure, we made conclusions about which antisolvent was the appropriate choice for a particular compositional region, providing guidance for future studies by exploring the intrinsic material stability. Methylammonium iodide (Sigma-Aldrich, ≥99%, anhydrous), methylammonium bromide (Sigma-Aldrich, ≥99%, anhydrous), formamidinium iodide (Sigma Aldrich, ≥99%, anhydrous), formamidinium bromide (Sigma-Aldrich, ≥99%, anhydrous), cesium iodide (Sigma-Aldrich, anhydrous, beads, -10 mesh, 99.999% trace metals basis), cesium bromide (Sigma-Aldrich, 99.999% trace metals basis), lead iodide (Sigma-Aldrich, 99.999% trace metals basis) and lead bromide (Sigma-Aldrich, 99.999% trace metals basis) were used without further purification. We made 0.3 M solutions by dissolving the precursor materials into the solvent shown in Table 