The topological electronic properties of orthorhombic-phase Mo2C and W2C superconductors have been studied based on first-principles electronic structure calculations. Our studies show that both Mo2C and W2C are three-dimensional strong topological insulators defined on curved Fermi levels. The topological surface states on the (001) surface of Mo2C right cross the Fermi level, while those of W2C pass through the Fermi level with slight electron doping. These surface states hold helical spin textures and can be induced to become superconducting via a proximity effect, giving rise to an equivalent p + ip type superconductivity. Our results show that Mo2C and W2C can provide a promising platform for exploring topological superconductivity and Majorana zero modes. The coexistence of superconductivity and topological band structure in a material may induce novel physical phenomena such as topological superconductivity Several approaches for realizing equivalent topological superconductivity have been proposed based on Fu and Kane's work Following this strategy, we have studied the ξ-Fe 2 Ntype superconducting carbides Mo 2 C and W 2 C by using first-principles electronic structure calculations. We find that both Mo 2 C and W 2 C are a class of materials with nontrivial topological electronic band structures. Furthermore, previous experiments have shown that the superconducting transition temperatures (T c ) of Mo 2 C and W 2 C are 7.3 K 26 and 4.05 K 27 , respectively. The electronic structures of the ξ-Fe 2 N-type (orthorhombic-phase) Mo 2 C and W 2 C were studied based on the first-principles electronic structure calculations The transition metal carbides both Mo 2 C and W 2 C have two phases, namely orthorhombic and hexagonal phases. Here we focus on their orthorhombic phase, which adopts the ξ-Fe 2 N crystal structure with space group Pbcn. As illustrated in Fig. On the other hand, a careful examination of the band structure in Fig. One of the most significant phenomena for topologically nontrivial materials is the existence of topologi- cal surface states. Figure We have also studied the electronic structure of the orthorhombic-phase W 2 C, which has the same crystal structure as Mo 2 C. Due to the heavier atomic mass, the W atom has spin-orbit coupling stronger than that of the Mo atom. There are seven bands across the Fermi level (not shown) and the calculated topological invariant Z 2 of the orthorhombic-phase W 2 C is (1;000), indicating that W 2 C is also a strong topological insulator defined on a curved Fermi surface. The exploration for a single compound possessing both superconductivity and nontrivial topological properties is important for the realization of topological superconductivity. According to Fu and Kane's proposal In real materials, although the Dirac-type surface states are complicated, the key factor is the formation of spin-momentum locked spin textures as shown in Figs. In summary, we have investigated the topological electronic properties and surface states of the orthorhombicphase Mo 2 C and W 2 C superconductors by using firstprinciples electronic structure calculations. The calculated topological invariant Z 2 of (1;000) indicates that they are both strong topological insulators defined on curved Fermi levels. The nontrivial topological surface states are within the bulk band gaps and these Diractype surface states hold helical spin textures. Considering the fact that Mo 2 C and W 2 C had been reported to be superconductors in experiments, their bulk superconductivity may induce superconductivity in the nontrivial topological surface states via a proximity effect. Thus the orthorhombic-phase Mo 2 C and W 2 C provide an appropriate platform for investigating the interplay between superconductivity and topological properties as well as for manipulating Majorana zero modes in future experiments We performed the calculations on the nontrivial topological invariants of Mo 2 C in the presence of SOC 