The design of compact optical systems with large field of view has been difficult due to the requirement of many elements or a curved focal plane to reduce off-axis aberration. We propose a multi-aperture lens design to effectively resolve these issues. Metagrating-based deflectors are placed near entrance pupils of multi-aperture lens array to enhance field of view. A systematic design method is given in details. In design examples, a ±80°field of view using only two planar optical elements is achieved. Also, the system is extremely compact with total track lengths an order of magnitude smaller than conventional fish-eye lenses, while the imaging performance is comparable with conventional designs. Imaging system often prefers a large field of view (FoV) to acquire more information. In the context of surveillance camera, light detection and ranging (LiDAR) and tools for endoscopy, field performance is especially important and a FoV of ±90 • is often required Many methods have been proposed to reduce off-axis aberration and expand the FoV of optical systems In 2009, Brady et al. proposed a heterogeneous method or multiscale lens design To alleviate the difficulty of fabrication and enable miniaturization or even wafer-level camera, a design with planar focal plane is highly preferred. However, a planar focal plane contradicts the expansion of FoV. A compromise solution is multi-aperture design, which is exhibited in Fig. Recently, flat optics technology based on ultra-thin optical scatter arrays to shape wavefronts has been extensively studied, such as metasurface and diffractive elements. Flat diffractive lens and metalens are emerging optical components to achieve miniaturization In this paper, we propose to combine a metagrating array and a multi-aperture lens to fully eliminate the need of curved focal planes and facilitate a more compact, high-efficienty design for fish-eye optical system (see Fig. Fig. The proposed design contains a lenslet array and a metagrating array. To surpress stray light, two diaphragm array are added. For simplicity, first-order model is created as shown in Fig. Then we set the maximum field angle α 0 of each lenslet unit. Note that [-α 0 , α 0 ] now becomes the operating AOI range of all metagrating units, which is limited by metagrating design feasibility. Once α 0 is decided, the focal length f of the lenslet array is given by For a metagrating with grating period Λ, a incident beam with wavelength λ and AOI θ i will be deflected to an output angle θ o , which is given by the grating equation: where m is the operating order. When AOI θ i varies in the range of [-α 0 , α 0 ], the output angle θ o will cover the range of [arcsin(g m + sin α 0 ), arcsin(g msin α 0 )], where g m = mλ/Λ is the length of grating vector. The range of the output angle is thus the sub-FoV of a single unit. Then the fully stitched half FoV of all the N units is given by The length of the grating vector of the j-th metagrating unit counted from the center position is given by odd, i = 0, ..., N -1 2 ; j = 0 for center unit (2 j -1) sin α 0 , N is even, i = 1, ..., N 2 ; j = 1 for unit near center, where m j and Λ j is the operating diffraction order and the grating period of j-th unit, respectively. Using above relations, the system half FoV is decided by number of units N and metagrating Minimum F/# with FoV=80°F ig. 4. (a) Required metagratig AOI range [-α 0 , α 0 ] and number of units N to achieve a system half FoV. (b) Minimum achievable F number when different α 0 and N are chosen to achieve a system half FoV of 80°a cceptable AOI range [-α 0 , α 0 ] as is shown in Fig. Next, we need to decide the required F number (which is defined by the ratio between focal length and entrance pupil diameter, i.e. F/# = f /D ε ) of each lenslet. To improve light collection efficiency, the diameter of entrance pupil D ε should be maximized and F/# is thus minimized. However, non-overlap condition for metagrating units requires D ε < H/N. Combining the realation with Eq.2, we see minimum F/# of each lenslet is limited by both the AOI range of metagratings and fill factor of sub-images: Using the relation in Eq. 4, we can express 2 tan α 0 as a function of N at a certain target system half FoV: where the approximation holds when α 0 is not large. Then Eq. 6 can be written as With a fixed design FoV, smaller fill factor Γ or unit number N must be used to obtain smaller F/# for maximum optical collection efficiency. For a target system FoV of ±80°, the relation between minimum achievable F/#, Γ and number of units N is shown in Fig. To further decide F/#, Γ and N, analysis of spatial resolution is needed, which will be discussed in Section 3. Finally we consider the requirement of zero vignetting, which further limits the entrance aperture by in which d is the separation distance between the lenslet array and the metagrating array. This condition can be easily imposed during optic design process. Maximum pixed count with The target system FoV is ±80°. Only diffraction limit is considered. H, lateral imager height (see. Fig. Using Rayleigh criterion, minimum achievable F/# gives the diffraction limited spot size of the proposed system as δ d = 2.44λ • F/#. Therefore, the diffraction limited lateral pixel counts of an optical system is given by which provides the scaling performance of lateral pixel counts. The relation between the lateral imager height H with the diffraction limited pixel count N d is illustrated in Fig. To further consider geometric aberration and obtain a more accurate estimation of pixel count performance, estimation of geometric spot size δ g is needed. Then the maximum lateral pixel counts becomes As each lenslet unit is operated at relatively small sub-FoV, spherical aberrations will remarkable, leading to a empirical formula of geometric spot size where k is a constant decided by the shape and refraction index of a lenslet, and f 0 is a reference focal length which equals to 1 mm. If the system is scaled up by a factor of M, then the focal length of lenslets f will be M times larger, leading to a M-times larger geometric spot. Note that F/# and FoV keep unchanged during lens scaling. To check the effectiveness of the formula, a series of lenslets with a range of F/# and sub-FoV are optimized using an optical design software. The material is chosen as E48R (optical plastic) and up to 4-th order aspherical surface is used. The average geometric spot diameter of these optimized lenslets are shown in Fig. Here we use two design examples to demonstrate the superiority of the system and effectiveness of the design method described above. In our design examples, we assume wavelength λ = 0.9 μm and lateral imager size H = 10 mm, which is close to the the size of the modern mobile phone CMOS sensor. The FoV of the system is chosen as ±80°considering the feasibility of metagratings. From Eq.4, we then choose the needed number of units N and AOI range [-α 0 , α 0 ] to fully cover the ±80°FoV. Feasible parameters for FoV= 80°have been shown in Fig. Next, to further assess the effectiveness of the proposed solution, we compare the performance of the design examples with two typical conventional fish-eye lenses which are adopted from Zebase library. The two fish-eye lenses are both scaled to the same imager size with our design, i.e. 10 mm. We show design parameters, structures and spot diagrams of the two lenses in Fig. In above analysis, we only consider the design process in one dimension which is denoted as y-axis. The final two-dimensional arrangment can be obtained by repeating the design process in another dimension and apply an appropriate stitching strategy. As all lenslet units are identical, the lenslet array can be obtained by simply repeating a single unit. However, metagrating parameters varies along both dimensions. Grating vector along each axis is defined as . Spot diagram of two typical conventional fish-eye lens (adopted from Zebase library). They are all scaled so that the imager size is also 10 mm where k y is the same as one-dimensional case, and grating period Λ y along y-axis is given by Eq. 5. From grating equation, grating vector denotes the power and direction of deflection. For two-dimensional case, the desired metagrating units with a certain length of grating vector |k| can be obtained by rotation. For example, a 90-degree rotation of metagrating unit can generate a grating with a grating vector along the orthogonal direction, as shown in Fig. In the proposed design, chromatic performance is not considered because such metagratings used in the system are generally highly dispersive especially for large incident field angles. This is also the main drawback of our proposed method compared to fully lens-based solutions. However, in applications such as LiDAR, night-vision surveillance camera and microscopy, campact monochromatic lenses with large FoV is highly demanded and the proposed system will be a potential solution. Besides, various achromatic metasurfaces and metagratings have been reported and such device can operate as a broadband deflector without spatial dispersion In this paper, we proposed a very compact fish-eye lens design with a planer focal plane which contains only two planar elements, i.e. a metagrating array and a lenslet array. The proposed design method can effectively eliminate field-angle dependent aberration and thus possess superior imaging quality within a large FoV. A systematic design procedure of the lens system is provided. Two design examples with ±80°FoV are exhibited, which show a similar imaging performance with two typical conventional fish-eye lenses with more than 8 elements. Meanwhile, the total axial length of the design is an order of magnitude smaller than that of the conventional fish-eye cases. The proposed structure and corresponding design method has the potential to achieve ultrathin or wafer-level fisheye camera. Besides, it expands the field of view of miniaturized multi-aperture lens from less than ±30°to fish-eye regime that can benefit various applications.