This manuscript was compiled on Hubbard model | stripe | dynamical cluster approximation | ... A common element of strongly correlated materials is the existence of several nearly degenerate states, which compete or cooperate to produce novel phases of matter Addressing this question using nonpertubative methods remains challenging as even the simplest correlated electron models also contain near-degenerate orders, which can be difficult to discern from one another. For example, state-ofthe-art numerical studies have identified a plethora of lowenergy states in the single-band Hubbard and t-J models that contend for the ground state Here, we demonstrate that quantum Monte Carlo DCA (28) methods can detect short-range stripe correlations in the two-dimensional single-band Hubbard model. The QMC-based impurity solver captures the intra-cluster correlations exactly, The high-temperature superconducting cuprates are governed by intertwined striped magnetic and charge orders in addition to superconductivity. Remarkably similar behavior has also been seen in numerical calculations for the Hubbard model describing the copper-oxygen layers in these materials. Finite cluster methods typically find that spin and charge stripe order dominates, while embedded quantum cluster methods, which access the thermodynamic limit, often conclude that superconductivity does. Here, we report the observation of fluctuating spin and charge stripes in an embedded cluster calculation for the Hubbard model. This discovery demonstrates that striped states survive in the thermodynamic limit and allows us to study their influence on the model's superconducting properties, where we find evidence for pair-density-wave correlations intertwined with the stripe correlations. while longer-range correlations are treated in a mean-field that approximates the infinite system. The observation of fluctuating stripes with this method therefore provides crucial confirmation that such correlations persist in the thermodynamic limit. It also fixes the discrepancy between finite-cluster and quantum cluster methods. Our results allow us to examine the influence of fluctuating stripe correlations on d-wave pairing in the single-band Hubbard model using a unified framework, provided the clusters are large enough to accommodate the relevant periodicity such that the spatial modulations are not averaged out by the DCA mean field. Using this unified framework, we find evidence for short-range pair-density-wave (PDW) correlations, whose strength is correlated with the strength of the spin and charge stripe correlations. We consider the two-dimensional single-band Hubbard Hamiltonian defined on a rectangular N = Nx × Ny lattice Here, c † iσ (c iσ ) creates (annihilates) a spin-σ (=↑, ↓) electron on site i; n iσ = c † i,σ c iσ is the number operator; t ij is the hopping integral between sites i and j; μ is the chemical potential; and U is the on-site Hubbard repulsion. Throughout, we restrict t ij to nearest-(t) and next-nearest-neighbor (t ) hopping only and set U = 6t to facilitate comparisons to Ref. Previous DQMC calculations To study the fluctuating spin stripes, we measured the static staggered spin-spin correlation function S stag (r, ω = 0) = (-1) rx+ry 1 Ŝz i+r (τ ) Ŝz i (0) dτ , where r = a(rx, ry) is the position of each atom on the square lattice with lattice constant a and Ŝz ) destroys a singlet pair of electrons with d-wave symmetry. We also determined the structure of the pairing interaction by explicitly solving the Bethe-Salpeter equation (BSE) in the particleparticle singlet channel to obtain its leading eigenvalues and eigenvectors We have observed similar patterns for different cluster sizes and geometries, including 8 × 8, 8 × 6 and 8 × 4 clusters, and in the spin xx correlations (see SI Appendix). For comparison, Fig. Although we observe similar fluctuating spin stripes in both zero-frequency (Fig. The presence of the spin and charge stripes is more readily observed by examining the dynamical spin S(Q, ω) and charge N (Q, ω) susceptibilities To examine how the spin and charge stripes form, we also extracted the values of δc, δs, and r = δs/δc as a function of temperature for t = -0.3t, as shown in Fig. Previous DCA studies have observed a finite-temperature transition to the d-wave superconducting state These observations suggest that striped modulations in the pairfield correlations develop together with the spin and charge stripe correlations. At the temperatures we have studied, it is clear from Fig. Our results demonstrate that fluctuating spin and charge stripe orders are a property of the doped single-band Hubbard model in the thermodynamic limit. Moreover, by accessing these phases using an embedded cluster technique, we are able to examine the ways in which the stripe fluctuations couple to superconducting correlations in the model. Concomitant with the spin stripes, we find that the d-wave pairing correlations develop a similar periodic stripe modulation, indicative of a pair-density wave. Pd(Q, ω = 0) Fig. Dynamical cluster approximation. To study the single-band Hubbard model, we use the dynamical cluster approximation (DCA) With the assumption of short-ranged correlations, the selfenergy Σ(k, iωn) is well approximated by the cluster selfenergy Σ(K, iωn), where K are the cluster momenta. The coarse-grained single-particle Green's function , time, auxiliary-field, quantum Monte-Carlo algorithm (CT-AUX) In our DCA++ simulations, the expansion order of the CT-AUX QMC is typically in the range of 100 -3000, depending on temperature and t . Depending on the average fermion sign for a given parameter set, we have obtained 10 million -2 billion samples for the correlation functions. Usually 6 -8 iterations were needed to obtain good convergence for the DCA mean-field. Determinant quantum Monte Carlo. We also perform DQMC We perform equal-time measurements every other full spacetime sweep and unequal-time measurements every 4th sweep. We use 5000 independently seeded Markov chains and for each chain, we use 50,000 warmup sweeps and 400,000 measurement sweeps. This large amount of data set leads to reliable statistics despite the severe Fermion sign problem. | www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.XXXXXXXXXX Mai et al. | www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.XXXXXXXXXX Mai et al. | www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.XXXXXXXXXX Mai et al.