Rapid proliferation of hyperspectral imaging in scanning probe microscopies creates unique opportunities to systematically capture and categorize higher dimensional datasets, toward new insights into electronic, mechanical and chemical properties of materials with nano-and atomic-scale resolution. One of the central goals of hyperspectral imaging is the development of a consistent framework for data analysis that would be effective, reproducible and transferrable in resolving the structure of the datasets, conceptually resembling the success of integral transforms in image analysis. Here we demonstrate a similarity learning for tunneling spectroscopy acquired on superconducting material (FeSe) with sparse density of imperfections (Fe vacancies). Popular methods for unsupervised learning and discrete representation of the data in terms of clusters of characteristic behaviors were found to produce inconsistencies with respect to capturing the location and tunneling characteristics of the vacancy sites. The underlying reason for their ambiguity was traced to continuous variation of the electronic properties across the surface and therefore absence of clear structural boundaries in the low-dimensional latent spaces of the data. We supported this hypothesis by direct analysis of the distributions of Euclidean distances within the dataset, and proposed distance rescaling with probabilistic description as a possible approach to mitigate the detrimental effect of the long tails of the distributions on the performance of clustering methods. Subsequently, we applied a more general, non-linear similarity learning, where dimension reduction was explicitly trained to amplify similarities and dissimilarities between datapoints. This approach was found to outperform several widely used methods for dimensionality reduction and produce a clear differentiation of the type of tunneling spectra. In particular, significant spectral weight transfer likely associated with the electronic reconstruction by the vacancy sites, is systematically captured, as is the spatial extent of the vacancy region. Given the fact that a great variety of electronic materials will exhibit similarly smooth variation of the spectral responses due to random or engineered inhomogeneities in their structure, we believe our approach will be useful for systematic analysis of hyperspectral imaging with minimal prior knowledge, as well as prospective comparison of experimental measurements to theoretical calculations with explicit consideration of disorder. Electrical and mechanical measurements on the nanoscale underpin most widely used scanning probe microscopy methods as well as many future electronic devices. An outstanding challenge in such studies is systematic and quantitative interpretation of the measurements, often in the absence of well-defined analytical models. On the one hand, localizing the probed volume to near-atomic scale almost inevitably introduces unknowns into electronic, mechanical and chemical properties of the contacts, resulting in persistent and often time-varying uncertainty in the transfer function of the measurement. On the other hand, exponential amplification of physical properties in the measured observables is often the basis for enhanced sensitivity and spatial resolution achieved by imaging methods Here we demonstrate similarity analysis of hyperspectral data applied to detecting signatures of defects in tunneling spectroscopy of unconventional superconductors FeSe. Specifically, we identified the existence and electronic signature of iron defect sites in the hyperspectral cube, comprising spectra of energy-resolved density of states acquired over a spatial grid with near atomic-scale resolution. Despite apparent simplicity of the problem with just one kind of type of chemical vacancy, we show that conventional clustering methods may produce ambiguous if not conflicting results. We traced the origins of the ambiguity to the continuous and long-tailed structure of the distribution of Euclidian pairwise distances in the dataset. This conclusion was reinforced by the efficiency of ad-hoc rescaling of pairwise distances to identify the vacancy sites. Such analysis can be effective for low-defect scenarios even though it obscures well-defined geometric meaning of the latent space. To generalize, we applied effective weakly unsupervised neural network methodology, that explicitly learns pairwise similarities FeSe is an unconventional superconductor with a transition temperature of ~8K To characterize spectral signatures of the Fe vacancies, we acquired tunneling spectra on a grid of 100x100 points in a nearly pristine surface area with a few vacancies (Fig. Fe vacancies are already known to develop in-gap impurity states, and therefore increase the observed density of states inside the superconducting gap Although detecting vacancies in FeSe by visual inspection is remarkably easy, the multivariate workflow presented in Fig. Eventually, both real-space and spectral space information should be utilized to maximize efficiency of analysis. Fig. Application of two popular clustering methods to this latent space -k-means and agglomerative clustering -yields conflicting results: k-means points to few clusters in the dataset (Fig. It is immediately apparent that the distribution is long tailed, which at least partially is caused by relatively small number of vacancy sites. The sparsity of the vacancies in the dataset creates an immediate problem for the k-means clustering method, which is most efficient when the number of samples from distinct behaviors is comparable in the data-set Our reasoning can be further supported by an ad-hoc rescaling of the Euclidean distances between spectra. Fig. To aid in evaluation of the effectiveness of a specific technique we tracked the relevant geometry of the latent space by plotting the Euclidean distance of each spectrum from the average in data-set spectrum vs similar metric in the latent space (Euclidean distances of coordinates of these spectra in a given latent space from the coordinates of the average spectrum). Examples of such a distance correlation plot, in the form of the density histogram, are shown in Fig. Deviation from linearity in this case is the effect of partial loss of information due to dimensionality reduction). Meanwhile, the logarithmic rescaling appears as a log-function, by design (Fig. The transition from the long-tailed to the more symmetric distribution of the relative distances is also apparent by following the redistribution of the point density upon log-rescaling. Figure The twin architecture then enables categorization of the projected and latent spaces, as shown in Fig. The key prospective advantage of being able to identify distinct tunneling spectra as well as transitions between them is analysis of the spectral weight transfer associated with disorder in any doped, but particularly highly correlated electronic materials To conclude, we applied several dimensionality reduction techniques toward effective measurement of effects of disorder on the electronic properties of FeSe superconductor using tunneling spectroscopy. It is shown that a combination of continuous variation of the electronic density of states, expected for atomic and nanoscale defects and impurities, combined with relatively low defect density contribute to inconsistent performance of discretizing clustering approaches to the structure of the hyperspectral dataset as well as identification of the vacancy sites. Meanwhile, several common nonlinear dimensionality reduction algorithms were not effective in separation of the vacancy sites in the latent space, that could potentially improve the follow-on clustering. Instead, twin (Siamese) neural network architecture, that learns the similarity directly from the data and amplifies the similarities and dissimilarities during training was shown to be effective at both creating well-separated projected space of the tunneling spectroscopy dataset, as well as subsequently categorizing tunneling with continuous single-valued scores. The immediate advantage of this approach is the ability not only to detect and describe the properties of defects and impurities, but also those of the transition region between distinct behaviors in the dataset. This is arguably a key advantage over discretization of the hyperspectral dataset with clustering methods, wherein neither the uniform state within a cluster nor abrupt cluster boundaries are physically sound. Moreover, twin networks are well adapted to work with smaller size datasets characteristic of tunneling spectroscopy, due to N 2 scaling of the training set size with the N-size of the dataset. In the specific case of FeSe, we have found that Fe impurities modify the density of states in a broad window around Fermi level, far beyond the superconducting gap. This may be an indication of an even more dramatic electronic reconstruction, qualitatively similar to earlier predictions of the effect of Se vacancies. The flexibility of twin network architecture not only enables capturing such effects in a more rigorous and systematic approach, but prospectively further comparison of theoretical and experimental methodologies for analysis of disorder on similar grounds. Ultimately, these methods will serve to better understand the effects of disorder in complex electronic materials, toward tailored fundamental and applied properties for advancement of quantum electronics. Tunneling spectroscopy and microscopy was carried out using Specs Joule-Thomson STM microscope, operating at 4.5K base temperature. Freshly cleaved surfaces were obtained by delaminating a small sample of FeSe in low-vacuum of ~ 10 -6 Torr, followed by rapid sample transfer to the cryogenic chamber. Data analysis presented above was carried out using primarily Wolfram Language, with additional use of Python libraries for non-linear dimensionality reduction. All the data and codes are available upon reasonable request.