The influence of the buffer layer of hafnia dielectric (HfO 2 ) on superconducting properties of niobium nitride films (NbN), produced by the technique of the reactive magnetron depositing has been investigated for the first time. This study presents a comprehensive analysis of morphological, microstructural, and electrophysical parameters of thin NbN films. The dependence of transition critical temperature from the thickness of the HfO 2 buffer layer has been obtained. For the first time, it has been demonstrated that the superconducting properties of niobium nitride films at the HfO 2 buffer layer have high superconductive parameters, namely, Т c ~ 13 K (at the film thickness of approximately 30 nm) and high critical current density of approximately 10 7 A/cm 2 . The relation between the thickness of the HfO 2 buffer layer with the critical current density of niobium nitride films has been determined. It appeared that the values of critical current density increase significantly up to 13 MA/cm 2 when the thickness of the hafnia buffer layer is more than 2 nm. Niobium nitride is widely adopted in the manufacturing of superconducting nanoelectronic devices of various functionalities, such as single-photon detectors SNSPD Critical current density (J c ) and critical superconducting transition temperature (Т с ) are the integral parameters of a superconducting film. Microscopic parameters of a film, such as film thickness, size of particles It's worth remarking that some applied issues involving ultrathin NbN films require depositing to amorphous materials SiO 2 or Si 3 N 4 , using the CVD technique. It is also known that depositing of NbN films to amorphous substrates and substrates with a considerable discrepancy in parameters of unit cells with NbN results in the deterioration of superconductive properties Hafnium dioxide (HfO 2 ) can be used as another material for the buffer layer. Hafnium oxide has proven productive material in manufacturing nano-devices. Herewith, deposition of hafnium oxide requires a high temperature of a substrate High superconductive parameters of ultrathin NbN films are achieved when depositing using magnetron technique to hot substrates with a temperature from 600°С and higher. In this study, we investigate the properties of NbN films deposited at a relatively low temperature of substrates, approximately 300°С, as such temperature allows integrating the produced films into the sensitive processes of microelectronics. The samples under investigation comprised a multilayer composition Si(ntype)/SiO2/HfO2/NbN. Amorphous silicon oxide with a thickness of 500 nm was deposited to a single-crystal silicon wafer of n-type with a thickness of 4 inches. Then the HfO 2 dielectric layer was produced in-situ using the technique of atomic layer deposition. After that, the NbN layer was deposited ex-situ using the magnetron sputtering technique. The niobium nitride films were produced with varied thicknesses of the buffer sublayer of HfO 2 dielectric. A schematic representation of the investigated samples is given in Figure For the purpose of investigation of the influence of the buffer layer thickness on the properties of niobium nitride films, a number of samples with various thicknesses of HfO 2 from 0 to 30 nm were produced. The thickness of a layer was determined using the ellipsometry technique The surface morphology was investigated using an atomic-force microscope (AFM) operating in semi-contact and contact modes. The NbN surface roughness was analyzed on an area of 1 μm 2 in a semi-contact mode. After processing of results, parameters of roughness for defined areas were obtained, where R q -root mean square deviation of the surface height from the weighted average value, and R a -mean absolute deviation of the height value from the weighted average value. AFM images taken in a semi-contact mode for NbN films without a buffer layer (a) and with a buffer layer with a thickness t HfO2 of 2 nm, 15 nm, and 30 nm (b, c, d) are given in Figure Critical current density and critical superconducting transition temperature are the integral parameters defining the quality of films produced. That is the reason why measuring the critical superconducting transition temperature is an intrinsic part of the characterization of NbN films Dependencies of the rated power in the signal coil from the temperature are given in Figure Dependency of current density (J c ) from the thickness of the hafnium oxide buffer layer at a temperature of 4.2К is given in Figure Therefore, the investigation of microstructure and phase analysis have been performed. First, the influence of the sublayer thickness on the stoichiometry of the NbN films was investigated by the Auger electron spectroscopy using the ion beam etching. It has been determined that the film stoichiometry is the same both for the sample with the HfO 2 sublayer (30 nm) and without the HfO 2 sublayer. The precise stoichiometry of the NbN film was not analyzed in this study due to the complexity of the analysis of the thin NbN film composition. The development of the methodology for defining the precise stoichiometry of the thin NbN films will be the subject of the follow-up studies. Next, the X-ray diffraction analysis of the produced films was performed. Grazing Incidence X-ray Diffraction (GIXRD) was obtained by X-ray diffractometer with the Bragg-Brentano Focusing. The X-ray incident angle was 0.4 о . The diffraction patterns were carried out in parallel geometry using CuK α radiation, scanning was performed at angles 2θ. The scanning of the sample was through the range of 2θ angles 23-80 о , scanning step was 0.03 о . The coarsegrained aluminum film was selected as a standard sample for position calibration at an angle of 2θ (а=4.048±0.002Å). The microstructure of the NbN film specimen has been investigated by transmission and high-resolution electron microscopy techniques (TEM and HRTEM) using the JEOL JEM-2100 Plus microscope at an accelerating voltage of 200 kV. The two-dimensional Fourier transform technique has been used to obtain diffraction patterns and to minimize the noise of highresolution TEM images. The required sample preparation has been carried out for TEM investigation, i.e., lamellae in the cross-section of investigated films using the Focused Ion Beam technique (FIB). To enhance the image contrast and for convenience in future TEM investigations, a carbon layer was applied (about 30 nm). After that, to protect the specimen surface from the ion beam influence, a platinum layer was applied (about 150 nm). The layers mentioned above have not been considered in the structural analyses. Grazing Incidence X-ray Diffractions for the number of samples of thin NbN films of various thicknesses on the HfO 2 sublayer are given in Figure In this study, the influence of the buffer layer of hafnia dielectric (HfO 2 ) on superconducting properties of niobium nitride films (NbN) has been investigated. The hafnium oxide buffer layer considerably affects the character of growth of the niobium nitride film even with a slight thickness (~ 2-3 nm), increasing the critical superconducting transition temperature by 0.5K, and the critical current density by a factor of two. It appeared that the values of critical current density increase significantly up to 13 MA/cm 2 when the thickness of the hafnia buffer layer is more than 2 nm. Depending on the thickness of the HfO 2 buffer layer, structural characteristics of the NbN films did not vary significantly, which is due to the small size of the film crystallites.