Geometric frustration appears in a broad range of systems, generally emerging as disordered ground configurations, thereby impeding understanding of the phenomenon's underlying mechanics. We report on a continuum system featuring locally bistable units that allows for the controlled and self-sustained manifestation of macroscopic geometric frustration. The patterning of the units encodes a finite set of ordered ground configurations (spin-ice states) and a unique family of coexisting higher-order frustrated states (spin-liquid states), which are both activated upon unit inversion. We present a strategy for accessing any globally frustrated state on-demand by controlling the constitutive units' inversion sequence. This control strategy allows for observing the unfolding of geometric frustration as the microstructural features evolve due to the energy minimization of the constitutive units' interactions. More broadly, our model system offers a blueprint for "taming" macroscopic geometric frustration, enabling novel applications such as path-driven computation and solving optimisation problems using structural systems. Geometric frustration arises when a lattice system cannot simultaneously minimise all of its local interaction energies due to constraints [1, the intricacies of important processes such as natural protein folding Mechanical systems exhibiting deformation-driven frustration present an intriguing avenue for understanding the emergence of order in otherwise disordered systems. Cellular structures featuring beam Invariably, imperfections in practical realisations control the orientation of the bending axis. Hence, while the possibility of achieving bending in any direction is fascinating and desirable for shape morphing, uncontrolled degeneracy renders it as a prohibitively complicated controls problem. Furthermore, this concept and other examples of magnetic, colloidal and elastic frustrated systems rely on continuously applied external forcing fields for frustration to emerge, thus limiting the utilisation of geometric frustration in practical applications. We report on a lattice system that features controlled macroscale geometric frustration that is primarily driven by the bistability of the microscale units. The system is composed of bistable dome-like units arranged in a continuum metasheet. Local inversion (local buckling) of the domes introduces pre-stress in the system. The interactions between the inverted units' deformation fields result in global geometric frustration in the lattice (Figs. The inversion of local units results in the global out-of-plane bending of the metasheet, thus allowing for reversible 2D to 3D shape and property transformation (Figs. We employ a simple square pattern for the analysis and the schematic in Fig. θ), capturing the middle points' heights from the X 2 Y 2 -plane and assumed constant thickness t. Without loss of generality, we assume that cylindrical bending of the metasheet always occurs about the X 2 -axis; this assumption does not impose any limiting constraints as the orientation of the domes θ is set to be free with respect to the X 2 -axis. Consequently, the bending stiffness can be expressed as, where, E is the elastic Young's modulus of the material. Next, κ(Y 2 ) is defined as the singly varying curvature of the middle plane, and thus, the angle subtended by the bent metasheet is, where, M is any general bending moment leading to bending about the X 2 -axis, is a relative measure of the bending stiffness and linearity is assumed. With this setup, for any given z profile, the directions of least bending stiffness are identified by analysing the variation in as a function of the dome orientation θ. We assume an idealised biharmonic profile z = cos(nX 1 ) cos(nY ] and, n defining the dome packing density, that qualitatively captures the undulating profile for an inverted square metasheet (Fig. The observed cylindrical configurations bear close resemblance to the ground state configurations seen in other examples of geometrically frustrated systems -(i) they have bending axes aligned with the programmed preferential directions; (ii) they exhibit identical strain energy levels (Fig. Besides the two global minima in the (θ) plot, there are two additional local minima oriented orthogonally to the unit-patterning directions of the metasheet. To investigate this feature we perturb the ground states in both FE and experiments by applying external mechanical forces and find that the local minima indeed correspond to additional physically stable global states for the same dome inversion pattern, i.e., all domes inverted (Fig. Finally, we note that the emergence of hierarchical multistable states is conditional on the inverted units' ability to introduce preferential global bending directions in the metasheet. We find that this feature is directly dependent on the packing density of the domes. We predict the associated design limits necessary for the manifestation of geometric frustration in our metasheet using an analytical approach modelling the topology of an inverted unit, as detailed in SI section 3. An interesting consequence of the multiple global frustrated states is the emergence of local higher-order buckling modes on the individual domes All other tessellations form irregular patterns and introduce broken symmetries, but in the process enable the ability to program non-uniform directions of least packing resulting in unique, irregular global shapes. Along with the shape of the unit boundary, the metasheet's global deformed state also de- termines the post-buckling behaviour of the individual domes. In general, the global ground states are characterised mainly by "concerted local buckling" of the microscale units. This is illustrated in Figs. , corresponding to the order associated with each preferential direction as programmed by the unit arrangement. The units' tendency to naturally and collectively orient towards their NNN in the post-buckled configuration again confirms the role of long-range interactions in the emergence of ordered global states, as previously discussed in the homogenisation model results (Fig. Interestingly, the appearance of local order clusters is qualitatively reminiscent of the spin-liquid regime found in natural, temperature-driven frustrated systems Finally, local disorder can also be programmed into the microstructure by randomly patterning the domes in the metasheet (Fig. As noted before, the post-buckled shape and orientation of the units characterises the global frustrated states. These characteristics can be further leveraged to achieve on-demand access to any desired global frustrated state. A dome unit is stress-free in its base state and assumes a stressed configuration only upon inversion. When a single unit is inverted, it assumes the axisymmetric mirror-buckled shape (Fig. More generally, the ability to "tame" geometric frustration enables the design of machinelike structural systems that serve as physical embodiments of complex optimisation problems. The co-existing hierarchically multistable states discretize the system's configuration space into distinct, albeit finite minimum energy points. In this regard, the ground (ordered spin-ice) and higher-order frustrated (spin-liquid) states correspond to global and local minima, respectively. The ability to separate and achieve any global frustrated state on-demand as controlled by distinct sequences of discrete external events (i.e., the local dome inversions and their history) sets a physical paradigm for mechanical optimisation and information processing. In this regard, the presented dome metasheets open an avenue for implementing discrete optimisation paradigms, both exact algorithms like the branch and bound 