We propose a method for reconfiguring a relay node for polarization encoded quantum key distribution (QKD) networks. The relay can be switched between trusted and untrusted modes to adapt to different network conditions, relay distances, and security requirements. This not only extends the distance over which a QKD network operates but also enables point-tomultipoint (P2MP) network topologies. The proposed architecture centralizes the expensive and delicate single-photon detectors (SPDs) at the relay node with eased maintenance and cooling while simplifying each user node so that it only needs commercially available devices for low-cost qubit preparation. State-of-the-art QKD technologies suffer from a trade-off between transmission distance and key rates, therefore necessitating relays as the only way to extend the QKD coverage. While a trusted relay allows for simple implementation and long transmission distance, it becomes a security problem since it knows all the keys. An untrusted relay on the other hand, eliminates the security issues but suffers from a high requirement of detection efficiency and short distance propagation. So far as we know, neither trusted nor untrusted relaying can handle all network conditions independently, and yet there has been no effort to combine the advantages of both technologies. Since the security of cryptographic algorithms is based on the computational complexity of intractable mathematical problems, up-to-date algorithms are only secure against the state-ofthe-art computational power and will always need updates when the growth of computational power exceeds the complexity of those problems. Even post-quantum cryptographic algorithms are only safe against quantum computers with a certain number of qubits, which is not achievable in the near future, but redesigning algorithms is always required as quantum computers keep evolving. On the other hand, quantum key distribution (QKD) offers a disruptive technology to end this competition between computational power and algorithm complexity. It offers information-theoretic security, which is guaranteed by quantum mechanics, i.e. keys cannot be broken even if the adversary has unlimited computing power. Different from the software implementation of cryptographic algorithms, QKD technologies require specific hardware and suffer from a limited distance, low key rate, and high system cost in deployment. In quantum communication, single-photon pulses are used to carry qubits to avoid photonnumber-splitting (PNS) attacks. The absorption of photons in fibers makes the channel loss increase exponentially with distance. Most photons are lost during propagation and only a small portion of them arrives at the receiver. Therefore, the final key rate reduces exponentially with the channel loss and there is a tradeoff between the distance and secure key rate. For example, with fiber attenuation of 0.2 dB/km, after traversing 1000-km fiber (200-dB loss) only 0.3 photons can be detected per centenary even if a 10-GHz photon source was used. The current distance record of QKD in optical fibers is 500 km, reported by Toshiba, whereas the key rate is orders of magnitude lower than practical requirements. In real applications, QKD links in optical fibers are limited to ~100 km without a relay. An ideal way to extend the distance is to use quantum repeaters, but the three building blocks of a quantum repeater, entanglement swapping, entanglement purification, and quantum memories, are all far away from practical implementations. There have been demonstrations of entanglement swapping over 1000 km, but entanglement purification and qubit storage are still challenged, especially in terms of storage time and retrieval efficiency of qubits. Therefore, the use of relay nodes seems to be the only choice to extend the QKD distance. The operation principles of a trusted relay are shown in Fig. An untrusted relay can be implemented by either measurement-device-independent (MDI) QKD or using entangled photon pairs. We point out that entanglement-based protocols require an expensive photon source to generate entangled photon pairs (EPR) using nonlinear optics. Here we only focus on MDI-QKD, shown in Fig. Most prepare-and-measure QKD protocols are limited to point-to-point (P2P) connections and cannot handle complicated network topologies. Relay nodes not only extend the coverage of QKD links but also help to handle point-to-multipoint (P2MP) quantum networks. They are intrinsically desirable for metro and access networks with mesh, star, or tree topologies where the relay nodes are located at hubs where complicated and expensive quantum receivers are centralized and shared by multiple users. Other nodes only need low-cost commercial devices for qubit preparation. To add a new node, only lasers and modulators are needed and there is no upgrade at the relay node. Low hardware requirements and small upgrade costs make relaying networks scalable for a large number of users. In summary, a trusted relay features simple implementation, long distances, and high key rate, and also offers good compatibility to different QKD protocols, i.e., diverse QKD protocols could be used for the links from users to the relay node. On the other hand, an untrusted relay provides higher security by closing all loopholes at the detector side but suffers from a shorter distance and lower key rate. Instead of competing, the two relay technologies should complement each other to accommodate different network conditions. Comparing Fig. To date, neither trusted nor untrusted relaying can independently handle all network conditions and there has been no effort to combine the advantages of both technologies. We thus propose a reconfigurable relay node that can switch between trusted and untrusted modes without significantly increasing the system's cost. The proposed relay node is based on a simple modification of the existing BB84 receiver and makes both relay technologies complement each other to adapt to different network conditions. Most QKD protocols are limited to P2P connections and thus cannot handle complicated network topologies. Relay nodes not only extend QKD distance but also help to handle P2MP networks. In Fig. Fig. With the Pol-M, one user randomly prepares photons of four polarization states in two conjugate bases, rectilinear (0°, 90°) and diagonal (±45°), and send them to the relay node. To close the loophole of the photon-number-split attack, an intensity modulator (IMd) is used to adjust the photon number per pulse for decoy-state generation. At the relay node, a 50:50 beam splitter randomly selects the measurement bases. In the lower branch, a polarization beam splitter (PBS) projects the incident photon to horizontal or vertical polarization of the rectilinear basis. In the upper branch, a half-wave plate rotates the polarization of the incident photon by 45° and projects it to the diagonal basis. Fig. Fig. Fig. Table In this paper, we proposed a system and method for a reconfigurable relay node for polarization encoding QKD networks, which can be switched between trusted and untrusted modes to adapt to different network conditions, relay distance, and security requirements. The proposed relay node not only circumvents the tradeoff between distance and key rate of existing QKD networks but also enables P2MP network topologies. The resulting network architecture centralizes the expensive and delicate SPDs at the relay node to facilitate easy maintenance and cooling. Each user node is simplified and only needs low-cost commercial devices for qubit preparation. By exploiting the similarity between the quantum receiver of the BB84 protocol and the BSM setup of MDI-QKD, our reconfigurable design enables two different relaying modes without significant modification or cost increase. Moreover, it reduces the system cost since the expensive quantum receiver is shared by multiple users. In the trusted mode, the relay node first exchanges keys with each user before relaying keys among them, so the relay node becomes a security loophole since it knows all the keys. In the untrusted relay, the relay node facilitates key exchange between any two users as a public server for BSM but has no access to their keys. Since MDI-QKD relies on coincident detection events of two photons, it has higher requirements of detection efficiency of SPDs and is limited to a shorter distance than regular prepare-and-measure protocols. The two relaying modes have to be chosen according to the network conditions and security requirements. 