It is critical to characterize the carrier and instantaneous frequency distribution variation in ultrafast processes, all of which are determined by the optical phase. Nevertheless, there is no method that can single-shot record the intro-pulse phase evolution of pico/femtosecond signals, to date. By analogying holographic principle in space to the time domain and using the time-stretch method, we propose the dispersive temporal holography to single-shot recover the phase and amplitude of ultrafast signals. It is a general and comprehensive technology and can be applied to analyze ultrafast signals with highly complex dynamics. The method provides a new powerful tool for exploring ultrafast science, which may benefit many fields, including laser dynamics, ultrafast diagnostics, nonlinear optics, and so on. One of the most fundamental and challenging problems throughout ultrafast science is to fully characterize the complex electric fields of the ultrashort optical pulses. Nowadays, in laboratories and industry, the techniques called FROG (Frequency-Resolved Optical Gating) Recently, a technique independent of nonlinear effects called dispersive Fourier transform (DFT) The holography In spatial holography, the so-called Nyquist sampling frequency Ns F Az  is the frequency-domain description, D is the total dispersion used for stretching. On the other hand, the sampling rate of H I should ascends to the same level with ' ( , ) r A z T , it is achieved by zero-padding in the frequency domain , and the relative phase can be retrieved. In spectral interferometry, or FROG and SPIDER, the expansion terms are consisting of convolution or correlation functions in time-domain, requiring multi-point scanning to reconstruct the temporal phase. However, in DTH, the expansions are the products of the temporal terms, which can directly describe the signal. Hence, the single-shot measurement can be achieved. Besides, in spectral interferometry, the relative carrier phase and time interval are retrieved by the interference fringes location and spacing To test the proposed method, we use an ultrafast Er-doped fiber laser The first event (Fig. , it has a carrier modulation and causes oscillation in the phase. In order to visualize the phase evolution, what we draw in Fig. In the last event (Fig. We propose the DTH technique to reconstruct the phase and amplitude in ultrafast dynamics, which is a general and comprehensive single-shot ultrafast measurement method, and suitable for analyzing both phase and amplitude of ultrafast signals. Much rather than a supplementary for FROG, or SPIDER, it can also extract the phase and amplitude inside the pulse, and can be used in ultrafast dynamics, chemical reactions 