The dependence of the current density on the phase difference is investigated considering the layered superconducting structures of a SIS'IS type. To simplify the calculations, the quasiclassical equations for the Green's functions in a t-representation are derived. An order parameter is considered as a piecewise constant function. To consider the general case, no restrictions on the dielectric layer transparency and the thickness of the intermediate layer are imposed. It was found that a new analytical expression for the current-phase relation can be used with the aim to obtain a number of previously known results arising in particular cases. In the microscopic theory of superconductivity, a layered superconducting structure of a SIS'IS type (S and S' are the superconductors, I is an insulator) is also called a double-barrier superconducting junction. For certain values of the intermediate layer thickness, the so-called resonant tunneling modes Considering a double-barrier Josephson junction as a coupled three-level quantum system, a Feynmanlike method The effects of the phase coherence in the layered superconducting structures are also important in terms of practical application A double-barrier Josephson junction of a SIS'IS type is fabricated from Nb/Al-AlO x -Nb/Al-AlO x -Nb/Al structures deposited in the same vacuum with the aim to provide the identical material parameters of the films and the tunnel barriers. In the paper The main purpose of our paper is to explore the stationary properties in the layered superconducting structures of a SIS'IS type. An order parameter of the superconductor S' is different from an order parameter of the superconductor S. Unlike the above-mentioned papers, a general case will be considered in our investigation. This means that no restrictions on the dielectric layer transparency and the thickness of an intermediate layer are imposed. The main task of the investigation is to obtain the dependence of the supercurrent on the phase difference. The dependence of the supercurrent on the thickness of the intermediate layer S' must also be analyzed. A research is conducted using a Green's function method The proposed calculation scheme enables us to obtain a new analytical expression for the dependence of the current density on the phase difference. A current-phase relation is true for arbitrary values of the dielectric layer transparency and an intermediate layer thickness. A new analytical expression for the current-phase relation also enables us to obtain a number of previously known results for the following junctions: SNS, SINIS, SISIS and SIS. Thus, a thorough verification of the correctness result is performed. Let a plane XOY be a middle of an intermediate layer S'. The thickness of an intermediate layer is equal to d. The insulator films are placed on the planes z = ± (d/2). The left-hand superconductor and the right-hand superconductor have a location |z| > d/2. On the plane XOY, there is a translational invariance. The spatial homogeneity is broken in the direction of the OZ axis. It is significant to note that the insulator films can be modelled by a potential field In the microscopic theory of superconductivity, the Matsubara Green's functions are considered to be a powerful mathematical tool. The thermodynamic quantities of a superconductor can be represented via the Matsubara Green's functions. It is significant to note that these Green's functions Let us consider the absence of an external magnetic field ì A(ì r) and the presence of a potential field U (z). In this particular case, a matrix Green's function (2.1) is a general solution of the second order differential equation In the differential equation (2.2), there are the odd Matsubara frequencies ω n = πT (2n + 1) dependent on the numbers n ∈ Z. We also have a Pauli matrix 2m -μ and a matrix Δ(z) = 0 Δ(z) Δ * (z) 0 containing an order parameter Δ(z). In the superconductor, the motion of the Cooper pairs can be considered to be a quasiclassical motion, because the Fermi momentum p 0 is much greater than the momentum mv s related to the motion of a Cooper pair. Such a conclusion can be made considering an estimator of a physical quantity v c s ∼ Δ/p 0 ∼ T c /p 0 . As a result, there is a fraction mv s /p 0 T c /E F ∼ a/ξ 0 containing an atomic length a. In the theory of low temperature superconductivity, the above-mentioned fraction is an infinitesimal parameter. As a result, a spatial smoothing procedure on the length scales of an order of an atomic size can be performed for an order parameter and some other functions. This enables us to neglect the small-scale changes. Only the large-scale changes on the length scales of an order of a superconducting coherence length must be taken into account. The second order differential equations for the Green's functions can be transformed into the first order differential equations by a spatial smoothing procedure. We are now talking about the so-called quasiclassical equations. In the book Let us consider the second order differential equation containing a dispersion relation ξ ì p = p In the formula (3.2), a notation for the so-called transverse momentum ì p ⊥ = p x ì e x +p y ì e y is introduced. Substituting the three-dimensional wave function (3.2) into a second order differential equation (3.1), we can derive a one-dimensional second order differential equation with the following solutions: In the formula (3.3), there is a momentum p z > 0. We also have constant coefficients defined by the formula . Here, we have a notation K = mU 0 . The coefficient C 4 can be used with the aim to calculate the dielectric layer transparency 2) can be used with the aim to obtain an expansion of the matrix Green's function (2.1). Thus, The expansion (3.4) must be substituted into the second order differential equation In fact, the spatial homogeneity is broken only in the direction of the axis OZ. Thus, the order parameter Δ depends only on the coordinate z. As a result, the matrix elements Δ contain the function δ( ì p ⊥ -ì p ⊥ ). The Green's function in the momentum representation has the same property Ĝi,k . According to the above-mentioned, the equation for the Green's function in the momentum representation can be presented as follows: It is well known that the characteristic values of the momentum are close to the Fermi momentum p 0 . Hence, the identity ξ = p 2 /2m -p 2 0 /2m v 0 ( p -p 0 ) can be used with the aim to derive the following identities: p = p 0 + ξ/v 0 , p = p 0 + ξ /v 0 . Using the conservation law for the transverse momentum ì p ⊥ = ì p ⊥ or p sin θ = p sin θ , we obtain the following relationships between the angles: The derived identities are linear functions dependent on the difference ξ -ξ . The approximation for the difference p z -p z can be derived from the relation Thus, there are the approximations p z -p z ξ -ξ v 0 x and dp z dξ . Here, we have the following notation: cos θ ≡ x, 0 < x < 1. The derived approximations are used with the aim to derive the equations for the Green's functions dependent on the variables ξ and ξ . Then, the equation (3.6) can be transformed into the equation Then, we perform an inverse Fourier transformation into the space of variables conjugate to ξ and ξ . To do this, we introduce a full set of functions: e i ξ t (2πv 0 x) 1/2 , e -i ξ t (2πv 0 x) 1/2 . The equation (3.7) should be multiplied by 1 2πv 0 x exp (iξt -iξ t ) . The obtained equation should be integrated over the variables ξ and ξ . As a result, we can derive the equations for the Green's functions in the t-representation Here, we have the notation Ĝi,k ω n (t, t ) = p z (z) e i ξ t-i ξ t . Calculating the matrix elements t, i| Δ (z) |i , t , we obtain the following property: t, i| Δ (z) |i , t = δ (t -t) Δi,i (t, x) . This enables us to evaluate the integral over the variable t in the equation As a result, we can derive the quasiclassical equations for the Green's functions in the t-representation To calculate the matrix functions Δi,i (t, x), the spatial smoothing procedure on the length scales of an order of an atomic size must be performed. Considering the exponents exp i p z + p z z and exp i p z -p z z , we may note that the exponents of the first type are approximately equal to exp (2ip 0 cos θz) and oscillate on the length scales of an order of an atomic size. In the exponents of the second type, the large values of the Fermi momentum are annihilated. As a result, these exponents are approximately equal to exp {i [(ξ -ξ ) /v 0 x] z} and oscillate on the length scales of an order of the superconducting coherence length ξ 0 a. The goal of our investigation is to take only the large-scale changes into consideration. Thus, the exponents of the first type should be neglected. As a result, we obtain the following formulae: Here, we have a notation a = d/v 0 x . A physical quantity v 0 = p 0 /m is called a Fermi velocity. The constant coefficients C 1 , C 2 , C 3 , C 4 , R and D are calculated using the approximations p z p 0 x and p z p 0 x. In this paper, a spatial behavior of an order parameter is considered within the so-called model with a piecewise constant order parameter . (3.10) However, for the temperature close to the critical, such a reduced model cannot be used. In this region of temperature, the spatial nonhomogeneity of the order parameter near IS interface must be taken into account The approximation (3.10) of the order parameter Δ(z) enables us to calculate the matrix Here, we have the Pauli matrices σ x = 0 1 1 0 and σ y = 0 -i i 0 . The matrix (3.11) must be used with the aim to calculate the matrices Δ(v 0 xt), Δ(-v 0 xt) and Δi,i (t, x). The equation (2.2) is the second order differential equation, whereas the equation (3.9) is the first order differential equation. This is the main advantage of the so-called quasiclassical equations for the matrix Green's functions in a t-representation. It is significant to note that the first order differential equation (3.9) can be transformed into the first order differential equation i ∂ ∂t for the matrix Green's function Ĝi,k (t, t ) = Ĝi,k ω n (t, t )σ z . In the configuration representation, there is a matrix Considering the matrix (3.13), we can see that the element in the first column of the first row is the Green's function G ω n (ì r, ì r ). It is significant to note that the current density ì j (ì r) can be represented via the Green's function G ω n (ì r, ì r ). We have to find the current density expressed via the Green's functions in a t-representation. The representation of the current density ì j (ì r) via a Green's function G ω n (ì r, ì r ) is a well-known formula The expansion (3.4) of the Green's function G ω n (ì r, ì r ) must be substituted into the expression for the current density (4.1) with the aim to derive a formula ì j (ì r) = j (z) ì e z containing the notation Here, we have the electron density of states at the Fermi surface N (0) = m 2 v 0 /2π 2 and the integrals containing the four quantities because the superscripts i and k can acquire values of 1 and 2. To calculate the quantities J k,i p z , p z (z), a spatial smoothing procedure on the length scales of an order of an atomic size must be performed. Only the large-scale changes should be taken into account. As a result, we consider only the exponents dependent on the difference p z -p z (ξ -ξ ) /v 0 x. It is significant to note that we have to neglect the exponents dependent on the sum p z + p z . The constant coefficients should be calculated using the approximations p z p 0 x and p z p 0 x. The calculated quantities J k,i p z , p z (z) should be used with the aim to calculate the integrals I k,i (x, t, t ). After that, the calculated integrals I k,i (x, t, t ) should be substituted into the expression for the one-dimensional current density (4.2). Considering the one-dimensional current density j (z) on the plane z = d/2, we can derive a formula Thus, an expression for the current density at the junction is obtained. The four equations (3.12) can be separated into two independent systems of differential equations: the first system of two differential equations for the Green's functions Ĝ1,1 (t, t ) and Ĝ2,1 (t, t ); the second system of two differential equations for the Green's functions Ĝ2,2 (t, t ) and Ĝ1,2 (t, t ). It is significant to note that the first system can be transformed into the second system by the substitutions φ → -φ, Ĝ1,1 (t, t ) → Ĝ2,2 (t, t ) and Ĝ2,1 (t, t ) → Ĝ1,2 (t, t ). Let us consider a system of two differential equations for the Green's functions Ĝ1,1 (t, t ) and Ĝ2,1 (t, t ). In the case t < -a/2, we may write that In the formula (5.1), a notation for a matrix Â(φ) = ω n σ z -Δσ y cos (φ/2) -Δσ x sin(φ/2) is introduced. We can also derive a useful identity ( Â(φ)) 2 = ω2 n containing a notation for a frequency ωn = √︁ ω 2 n + Δ 2 . The system of two differential equations (5.1) has a general solution presented by the formula Ĝ2,1 (5.2) In the formula (5.2), a notation for a complex number b = i ωn +ω n Δ exp [-i (φ/2)] is introduced. Considering the case t > a/2, we can derive a system of two differential equations In the formula (5.3), a notation for a matrix Δφ = iΔ σ x sin (φ/2) + σ y cos (φ/2) is introduced. The system of two differential equations ( Ĝ1,1 (5.5) In the case |t| < a/2, we have a system of two differential equations (5.6) The system of two differential equations (5.6) has a general solution presented by the formula Ĝ1,1 In the formula (5.7), the index k can acquire values of 1 and 2. There is a matrix Âk We can also derive a useful identity In the matrix equality (5.7), the Green's functions Ĝ1,1 (-a/2, t ) and Ĝ2,1 (-a/2, t ) must be calculated using a formula (5.2). We can do this, because the Green's functions are considered to be continuous functions. Considering the elements in the first row and the first column of the matrix equality (5.7), we can derive the formula The unknown constants α 1 (t ) and γ 1 (t ) should be found with the aim to find the Green's functions (5.8). To do this, a general solution (5.7) in the case |t| < a/2 should also be considered on the bound t = a/2. As a result, we obtain a boundary condition The Green's functions Ĝ1,1 (a/2, t ) and Ĝ2,1 (a/2, t ) should be calculated using the formulae (5.4) and (5.5). The formula (5.2) should be used with the aim to calculate the Green's functions Ĝ1,1 (-a/2, t ) and Ĝ2,1 (-a/2, t ). Thus, the boundary condition (5.9) enables us to derive the equalities and The equalities (5.10) and (5.11) form a closed system of four linear equations for the following unknowns: α 1 (t ), α 2 (t ), γ 1 (t ) and γ 2 (t ). To find the Green's functions G 1,1 ω n (t, t ) and G 2,1 ω n (t, t ), the calculated constants α 1 (t ) and γ 1 (t ) should be substituted into a formula The four Green's functions should be calculated in the cases t = t = -a/2 and t = t = a/2. The obtained results should be substituted into the formula (4.3). As a result, we obtain a dependence of the current density on the phase difference in the layered superconducting structures of a SIS'IS type In the formula (6.1), there are notations 3) It is significant to note that the current-phase relation (6.1) is the main result of our investigation. It was found that the formula (6.1) can be used with the aim to consider the particular cases. In figure In the asymptotical case R 1, formula (6.4) can also be considered. This enables us to neglect the reflection coefficient R. We obtain a superconducting junction of a SNS type. In the asymptotical case d ξ 0 , the functions (6.2) and ( In this paper, a theoretical study is devoted to considering a three-dimensional superconducting junction of a SIS'IS type. It is significant to note that an order parameter is considered to be a piecewise constant function. It is understood that a model with a piecewise constant order parameter cannot be applicable at the temperatures close to the critical temperature T c . The spatial behavior of an order parameter must always be considered at the temperatures close to the critical temperature T c . As a result, a self-consistency condition must be applied. Using the Matsubara Green's functions, a mathematical description of a three-dimensional SIS'IS junction is realized by the second order differential equations that are also known as the Gorkov's equations. It was found that the model with a piecewise constant order parameter enables one to transform the Gorkov's equations into the quasiclassical equations for the Green's functions in a t-representation. It is significant to note that the quasiclassical equations are the first order differential equations. This is the main advantage of quasiclassical equations. The proposed calculation scheme enables one to obtain a new analytical expression for the dependence of the current density on the phase difference. It was also found that a new current-phase relation is much different from a sinusoidal current-phase relation. It is also important to note that a new current-phase relation is true for arbitrary values of the dielectric layer transparency and the intermediate layer thickness. -1