We demonstrate two-dimensional photonic crystal cavities operating at telecommunication wavelengths in a single-crystal diamond membrane. We use a high-optical-quality and thin (~ 300 nm) diamond membrane, supported by a polycrystalline diamond frame, to realize fully suspended two-dimensional photonic crystal cavities with a high theoretical quality factor of ~ 8×10 6 and a relatively small mode volume of ~2 (λ/n) 3 . The cavities are fabricated in the membrane using electron-beam lithography and vertical dry etching. We observe cavity resonances over a wide wavelength range spanning the telecommunication O-and Sbands (1360 nm-1470 nm) with Q factors of up to ~1800. Our method paves the way for onchip diamond nanophotonic applications in the telecommunication-wavelength range. Photonic crystal (PhC) cavities with high quality (Q) factors and small mode volumes (Vs), have attracted much attention because of their ability to strongly confine light in time and space. The enhanced light-matter interactions offered by PhC cavities can be utilized for the study of cavity quantum electrodynamics While diamond 1D PhC cavities have been the workhorse of quantum-photonics for years, 2D PhC cavities may offer additional advantages. For example, the highest Q PhC cavities reported to date are realized using 2D PhCs (Q~ 10 7 ) The lack of the telecom-wavelength 2D PhC cavities in diamond could be due to difficulties associated with the fabrication of high-quality and large-area, suspended, diamond planar structures. For example, angle etching In this letter, we fabricate and characterize telecommunication-wavelength 2D PhC cavities in a single-crystal diamond membrane (SCDM). We employ an ultra-thin and homogenous diamond membrane fabricated by a combination of ion implantation, chemical vapour deposition (CVD) overgrowth, and RIE The cavity fabrication process is illustrated in Fig 2 . A SCDM with a thickness of ~300 nm is prepared using a scalable fabrication technique previously reported in In this study, we employ a high-pressure high-temperature Type 1b single-crystal diamond substrate as a seed for the CVD overgrowth step. Our SCDM is supported by a 300 μm-thick polycrystalline diamond frame (1.2 mm × 1.2 mm) with nine circular windows (each has a diameter of 240 μm) [Fig. The inset of Fig. 