The possible symmetries of the superconducting pair amplitude is a consequence of the fermionic nature of the Cooper pairs. For spin-1/2 systems this leads to the SPOT = -1 classification of superconductivity, where S, P, O, and T refer to the exchange operators for spin, parity, orbital, and time between the paired electrons. However, this classification no longer holds for higher spin fermions, where each electron also possesses a finite orbital angular momentum strongly coupled with the spin degree of freedom, giving instead a conserved total angular moment. For such systems, we here instead introduce the J PT = -1 classification, where J is the exchange operator for the z-component of the total angular momentum quantum numbers. We then specifically focus on spin-3/2 fermion systems and several superconducting cubic half-Heusler compounds that have recently been proposed to be spin-3/2 superconductors. By using a generic Hamiltonian suitable for these compounds we calculate the superconducting pair amplitudes and find finite pair amplitudes for all possible symmetries obeying the J PT = -1 classification, including all possible odd-frequency (odd-ω) combinations. Moreover, one of the very interesting properties of spin-3/2 superconductors is the possibility of them hosting a Bogoliubov Fermi surface (BFS), where the superconducting energy gap is closed across a finite area. We show that a spin-3/2 superconductor with a pair potential satisfying an odd-gap time-reversal product and being non-commuting with the normalstate Hamiltonian hosts both a BFS and has finite odd-ω pair amplitudes. We then reduce the full spin-3/2 Hamiltonian to an effective two-band model and show that odd-ω pairing is inevitably present in superconductors with a BFS and vice versa. Properties of ordered matter are to a large extent set by the symmetry of the ordered state. For superconductivity, this means the symmetry of superconducting Cooper pairs. The symmetry of these Cooper pairs are classified following the antisymmetry of the Cooper pair wave function during exchange of all the quantum numbers between two constituent electrons, as a result of the fermionic nature of the electrons. This classification of superconducting pairs has become known as the SPOT = -1 classification, with S, P, O and T referring to the exchange operators for spin, parity, orbital, and time, and is now well established in the literature Following this classification, Cooper pairs with spinsinglet and spin-triplet spin structures are further identified as odd-frequency (odd-ω) or even-frequency (even-ω) pairs, depending on their spatial parity and their symmetry under orbital index exchange between the electrons. Odd (even)-ω superconductivity refers to when the Cooper pair amplitude is odd (even) under the exchange of the time coordinates, or equivalently frequency, of the two constituent electrons, as introduced by Balatsky and Abrahams The Cooper pair symmetry follows the SPOT = -1 classification in all systems where the constituent electrons have spin-1/2 character. There exist however recent reports on superconductivity in materials where the low-energy electrons also carry a finite orbital angular momenta, such that only the total angular momentum is a good quantum number Interestingly, superconductivity in spin-3/2 systems can be associated with a Bogoliubov Fermi surface (BFS); an inflated spheroidal or toroidal topologically protected region in momentum space across which the energy gap is identically zero The BFS manifests itself through a large DOS at zero energy in the superconducting state In particular, we first introduce a complete classification for higher-spin superconductors: J PT = -1, where J is the exchange operator for the quantum numbers associated with the z-component of the total angular momenta of the constituent electrons of the Cooper pairs. We then establish the applicability of this new classification by studying several generic and realistic models describing superconducting half-Heusler compounds and calculating the superconducting pair amplitudes and their symmetries. The J PT = -1 antisymmetry condition gives rise to a total of 32 different classes of Cooper pair symmetry, and we find that essentially all can exist in the half-Heusler compounds. In particular, we find all types of possible odd-ω pairs: spin-singlet oddparity, spin-triplet even-parity, spin-quintet odd-parity, and spin-septet even-parity, which in several cases are as large as any even-ω components. Following this, we derive a general analytical expression for the odd-ω pair amplitude in spin-3/2 systems, which we then use to derive a necessary and sufficient condition for finding both odd-ω pairs and a BFS. Finally, by using a low-energy effective two-band model, we show explicitly that the pseudomagnetic field responsible for the BFS also always induces odd-ω pairing and vice versa. This establishes a one-to-one correspondence between BFS and odd-ω pairs in a low-energy model of spin-3/2 superconductors. The rest of this work is organized as follows. We classify the superconducting pair symmetries in Sec. II and show the appearance of those symmetries in Sec. III by considering a generic Hamiltonian suitable for half-Heusler compounds (Sec. III A), followed by numerical results for the superconducting pair amplitude (Sec. III B). We then find a general analytical expression for oddω pair amplitudes applicable to any spin-3/2 system in Sec. IV and explore the connection of the odd-ω pair amplitudes to BFSs in Sec. V. Finally, we summarize and conclude our results in Sec. VI. We begin by developing the classification of the pair symmetry for any superconductor with low-energy electrons of spin-3/2 character. Central in any such discussion is the superconducting pair amplitude, or Cooper pair amplitude, given by the anomalous Green's function as where T t is the time-ordering operator and c σ,a (k, t) is the annihilation operator for an electron in orbital a with spin σ and momentum k at time t imposed by the fermionic nature of the electrons of the Cooper pair where the S, P, O, and T operators are defined as The antisymmetry condition of the pair symmetries can in short form be written as SPOT = -1 and applies to any spin-1/2 superconductor, where each electron of the Cooper pair possesses zero orbital angular momentum (l i = 0) and half spin (s i = 1/2) quantum numbers, with i (= 1, 2) being the electron number index. Thus, the total angular momentum for each electron is j i = l i + s i = 1/2. There are two possible spinsymmetries for spin-1/2 systems since 1 2 ⊗ 1 2 = 0 ⊕ 1: spin-singlet with total 'spin' j = s = 0 and m = 0 and spin-triplet states with total 'spin' j = s = 1 and m = 0, 1. Here m is the quantum number for the zcomponent of the total angular momentum, also referred to as secondary total angular momentum quantum number. The Cooper pairs with these spin structures can also be identified according to their spatial parities: explicitly, even parity (s-wave, d-wave etc.) and odd parity (p-wave, f -wave etc.) pairs. Given the spin structure and spatial parity, the Cooper pair symmetry can further be classified according to its evenness or oddness under the orbital index (if such exists) and then finally with respect to the time/frequency dependence. We note that pair amplitudes that are odd with respect to the change of the time (or equivalently frequency) of the two electrons are identified as odd-ω pair amplitudes. As an example, all spintriplet even-parity and all spin-singlet odd-parity states are necessarily odd-ω states when they are even with respect to exchange of the orbital index With the above outline of the pair symmetry classification for spin-1/2 fermions, we now move on to the generalization of the antisymmetry condition for higher spin systems, since the condition Eq. ( where the Clebsch-Gordon (C.G.) coefficients are scalar numbers In particular, we are here interested in strongly spinorbit coupled systems where the low-energy band structure has a spin-3/2 character With the concept of the spin structures of the Cooper pairs for spin-3/2 fermions clear, the next natural question is about the overall symmetry of the pairing. We note that, for spin-1/2 systems, we have four symmetry operators S, P, O, and T corresponding to the spin quantum number, spatial parity, orbital, and time for the Cooper pairs. However, due to the strong spin-orbit coupling in the spin-3/2 systems, we can now not separately identify the spin and orbital quantum numbers. Instead, the total angular momentum and its z-component are the only good quantum numbers. Thus, we now rewrite the anomalous Green's function of the Cooper pair of Eq.( (5) where c jm (k, t) is now the annihilation operator for an electron with the total angular momentum quantum numbers j, m and spatial momentum k at time t. Note that each total angular momentum quantum number j i allows various states identified by m i following Eq. ( On top of this, the pair amplitudes can again be even or odd with respect to the spatial parity P, as well as (relative) time exchange T operations ,exactly similar to spin-1/2 fermions, see Eq.( In short this complies with J PT = -1, which identify the evenness or oddness of all the possible pairing for tron having j 1 = 1/2 and another having j 2 = 3/2 character. We avoid considering this case as it is unlikely a Fermi surface includes two electrons of such different spin characters. spin-3/2 systems with respect to the angular momentum J , spatial parity P and time T or frequency. Having derived the J PT = -1 condition, we next illustrate how to classify the Cooper pair states following this explicit antisymmetry condition. For this, we first explicitly write out the possible states by using Eq. ( We next explicitly illustrate some of the symmetries of Table , also called as an extended singlet state Next we consider one of the triplet states, triplet t 1 , in Table 2 ) and -2 10 | -1 2 , -1 2 . When J operates on these combined states, the corresponding exchange operations are -3/2 ↔ 1/2 and -1/2 ↔ -1/2, in the first and last states respectively, and these exchange operations show that the pair amplitude for this triplet state t 1 is even with respect to J . Note that, in the latter case, the state is self-exchanging under the operation -1/2 ↔ -1/2, since both the electrons are characterized by the same z-components of the total angular momentum quantum numbers. The other two spin-triplets, triplet t 2 and t 3 , are also even states under the exchange operation J in the same way. Then, according to the J PT = -1 antisymmetry condition, all the spin-triplet states can be either even-parity odd-ω or odd-parity even-ω states. Similarly, we classify all the spin-quintet (q j ) and spin-septet (s j ) states. All the five spin-quintet states are odd in J . These spin-quintet states can thus further be categorized as either even-parity even-ω or odd-parity odd-ω, similar to the spin-singlet state. Similarly, all the seven spinseptets can be either even-parity odd-ω or odd-parity even-ω. Note that, septet s 1 and s 7 states are states that change into themselves under the exchange operation by J , thus always resulting in J = +1. All of these symmetries are explicitly written out in Table With the classification for spin-3/2 fermion systems in the previous section, we now show the existence of all those pair symmetries by considering a generic normal-state Hamiltonian suitable for half-Heusler compounds which are known to both host low-energy spin-3/2 fermions due to the strong spin-orbit coupling and be superconducting We start with the Bogoliubov de-Gennes (BdG) Hamiltonian given by where Ψ k = (c k , c † -k ) T is the Nambu spinor with c k being a four component spinor encoding the internal degrees of freedom for spin-3/2 fermions, where we label 8 × 8 and 4 × 4 matrices operator by ... and ..., respectively. We here consider cubic materials where the low-energy bands of a strongly spin-orbit coupled system can be described by a generic k.p model Hamiltonian appropriate for half-Heusler materials, but neglecting higher order terms as they do not affect our conclusions qualitatively where Î is the identity operator and Ĵν , with ν ∈ {x, y, z}, are the 4 × 4 matrices for spin- Even Even (j = 0; m=0) Triplet (t1) Even Odd (j = 1; m=-1) Triplet (t3) Even Odd (j = 1; m= 1) Quintet (q1) Even Even (j = 2; m=-2) Quintet (q2) Even Even (j = 2; m=-1) Quintet (q3) Even Even (j = 2; m=0) Quintet (q4) Even Even (j = 2; m=1) Quintet (q5) Even Even (j = 2; m=2) Even ----------Odd Even 11. Septet (s2) Even Odd (j = 3; m=-2) Septet (s3) Even Odd (j = 3; m=-1) Even ----------Odd Even 14. Septet (s5) Even Odd (j = 3; m=1) Septet (s6) Even Odd (j = 3; m=2) Even ----------Odd Even TABLE I. Complete symmetry classification of Cooper pairs for j = 3/2 fermions following the antisymmetry condition J PT = -1. Cooper pair configurations in column 3 follow Ref. shift operations on {x, y, z}. For each momentum k, Ĥ0 (k) thus has four electronic degrees of freedom, arising from the four channels with m = ±3/2 and ±1/2. Here, α, β, γ, and δ are all real constants and mate-rial dependent. The kinetic energy part involves α, while β and γ characterize the symmetric spin-orbit coupling strength. Moreover, δ is proportional to the asymmetric part of the spin-orbit interaction and it breaks the in-version symmetry of the normal state Hamiltonian and (as we will see) play a vital role for generating an oddparity pair amplitude. We here choose the parameter values: a = 1, α = 20.5(a/π) 2 eV, β = -18.5(a/π) 2 eV, γ = -12.7(a/π) 2 eV, and δ = 0.06(a/π) eV as they nicely capture all the essential features of the band structures for YPtBi, which is one of the superconducting materials showing spin-3/2 character Having the Hamiltonian in Eq. ( where Ĝ ( Ĝ) and F ( F) are the 4 × 4 normal and anomalous Green's functions in particle (hole) space, respectively. For superconductivity we are particularly interested in F, where each element are characterized by j 1 , m 1 ; j 2 , m 2 as explicitly written in Eq. ( To establish the existence of the symmetry classes in Table We start by considering a momentum independent swave superconducting pair potential as it is the simplest possible form. For spin-3/2 systems it takes the form with the s-wave gap ∆ s being a real constant and the unitary operator U T defined in Appendix A. We calculate the real and imaginary parts of the anomalous Green's function following Eq. ( We here take the summation over positive k from zero to a cut-off value of the momentum k c = π/2, but our results do not qualitatively depend on the cut-off. From both the real and imaginary parts of the pair amplitude in Figs. Similar to the spin-singlet pair amplitude, all five spinquintet pair amplitudes in Figs. Based on the results in Fig. Next, we move on to the scenario of the odd-parity (p-wave) spin-septet pair potential for spin-3/2 superconductors proposed in Refs. where k ± = k x ± ik y and the p-wave triplet gap ∆ p is a real constant. We again calculate the pair amplitude using the anomalous Green's function, Eq. ( Moving on to the odd-parity F P o , we find that all the spin-singlet and spin-triplet odd-parity pair amplitudes are zero. However, in Figs. On the whole, in addition to the pair amplitudes found for the s-wave pair potential, we here for p-wave pair potential find spin-triplet and spin-septet even-parity odd-ω pair amplitudes as shown in Figs. Finally, we consider the chiral even-parity superconducting pair potential proposed in where with ∆ 1 and ∆ 0 being real constants. This pair potential breaks time-reversal symmetry but retain inversion symmetry. Here, η s is a spin-singlet state with a form factor ψ k that is completely isotropic in the pairing channel, i.e., no mixing between m = 1/2 and m = 3/2 channel. The form factor ψ k breaks time-reversal symmetry but preserve inversion symmetry and is usually taken as k z (k x + ik y ). The gap matrix (η xz + iη yz ) is chiral and transforms under rotation similarly to the spherical harmonics Y 2,1 (k) FIG. To capture the general behavior of the chiral evenparity pair potential in Eq. ( We next plot the non-zero odd-parity F in Fig. Having extracted general results for the d-wave chiral pair potential in Eq. ( On the whole by studying three different and realistic pair potentials, we show that all different types of the pair symmetries: (1) odd-angular momentum even-parity even-ω, (2) odd-angular momentum odd-parity odd-ω, (3) even-angular momentum even-parity odd-ω, and (4) even-angular momentum odd-parity even-ω symmetry as classified in Table Having numerically found odd-ω pair amplitudes with all possible spin structures for spin-3/2 systems, we next derive a general analytical expression for the odd-ω pair amplitude in these systems. For that, we proceed by rewriting Eq. (11) using Eq. ( We can then write the anomalous Greens function as The pair amplitude can finally be rewritten as where -, with the subscript '-' denotes the commutation relation. The denominator D, being independent of odd powers of ω, is an even function of ω. Thus the odd-ω pair amplitude can be easily identified as We note that this general expression for the odd-ω pair amplitude is valid for any system where the pair potential ∆(k) is a matrix and not a scalar quantity. Thus, Eq. ( The odd-ω pair amplitude includes γ , which is the commutator of the normal-state Hamiltonian and the pair potential. A similar commutation relation has also been used earlier in the context of multiorbital superconductivity when discussing superconducting fitness With the above numerical results and general analytical expression for the odd-ω pair amplitude, we next look for whether there exists any general connection between the odd-ω pair amplitude and the BFS present in spin-3/2 systems. In particular, the existence of a BFS leads to a finite DOS around zero energy, thus offering an intriguing connection to odd-ω pair amplitudes, since a finite zero-energy DOS has previously been used as a characteristic feature of the odd-ω pairing It has recently been shown that the necessary and sufficient condition for the appearance of BFS in spin-3/2 superconductors is that the time-reversal gap product has to be non-zero Moreover, as discussed in Sec. IV, for any spin-3/2 superconductor the existence of a finite odd-ω pair amplitude depends on the non-commuting property of the pair potential ∆(k) with the normal-state Hamiltonian Ĥ0 of the superconductor, as expressed in by γ in Eq. ( where ε 0 (k) = (α + 5β 4 )k 2 and |ε (k)| is a compact form of writing the magnitude of a five-dimensional )}. As the chemical potential is usually found in one of the normal-state bands and assuming that the important physical properties of the system are then also coming from that band, we can extract an effective Hamiltonian for this band (here the 'ε -' band). The whole BdG Hamiltonian then simplifies into the form where with and energy dispersion given by This is thus a psuedo-spin description of the low-energy physics, which is equivalent to the low-energy basis of the original spin-3/2 system, where we modified the lower energy band by the effect of the higher energy band. In this effective low-energy model, the normal band ε -(k) is modified by the ζ(k) term and a momentum dependent pseudo-magnetic field h z (k). Moreover, ψ -(k) is the effective nodal superconducting gap potential with a chiral d-wave form. It produces a nodal ring on the k z = 0-plane, while a finite pseudo-magnetic field h z (k) inflates it into a BFS As the pseudo-magnetic field is in the z-direction, Eq. ( where c † σk is now the creation operator for the pseudospin σ, obtained by rotating the original full spin-3/2 basis of Eq. ( where with the Green's function of the other block, G 2 , obtained simply by changing (h z (k), ψ -(k)) → -(h z (k), ψ -(k)). Finally, we can extract the anomalous Green's function as the first block G 1 giving where we now easily find the odd-ω component as This result clearly illustrates how the odd-ω pair amplitude is directly proportional to the pseudo-magnetic field h z (k). At the same time, h z (k) is also the term explicitly responsible for the appearance of BFS. Thus, for this low-energy effective band model, we find that odd-ω pairing and BFS always exists together. This also confirms analytically our numerical results in Section III B 3. To summarize, we have introduced the J PT = -1 symmetry classification for superconductivity in spin-3/2 fermion systems, where the Cooper pairs are composed of two electrons with finite angular momenta j i = 3/2. Here, J , P and T are the symmetry operators for the z-component of the total angular momentum, spatial parity, and time (or equivalently, frequency), respectively. In addition to spin-singlet and spin-triplet pairing found in conventional spin-1/2 systems, there are here two additional spin structures namely, spin-quintet and spin-septet Cooper pairs or equivalently pair amplitudes. All of these Cooper pairs can further be classified into even-and odd-spatial parity as well as even-and oddfrequency pairing. Following the antisymmetry condition J PT = -1, this generates a total of 32 different classes of superconducting pair symmetries. To illustrate the existence of the different pair symmetry classes, we have also studied a model suitable to describe the superconducting half-Heusler compounds hosting low-energy spin-3/2 fermions, using several different superconducting pair potentials suggested in the current literature; even-parity s-wave, odd-parity p-wave, and chiral even-parity d-wave pair potentials. By calculating the anomalous Green's function we have numerically accessed the superconducting pair amplitudes for all cases and showed how the different classes can be present, including large odd-ω pair amplitudes. In particular, we have found that the chiral d-wave pair potential generates large spin-septet even-parity odd-ω pair amplitudes. We have also derived a general analytical expression for the odd-ω pair amplitude, applicable to any spin-3/2 superconductor as well as other multiband systems. Using this expression we have investigated the relation between the odd-ω pair amplitude and the appearance of a Bogoliubov Fermi surface (BFS). We have found that both BFS and odd-ω pairing are always present textcolorredtogetherfor superconducting pair potentials with an oddgap time-reversal product and non-commuting with the normal-state Hamiltonian. Using a minimal low-energy model of a spin-3/2 superconductor redwith a possible BFS, we have further been able to sharpen this criteria of co-existence of BFS and odd-ω pairing and shown that a BFS and a finite odd-ω pair amplitude are always appearing simultaneously redin this effective model. Based on these results, we speculate that any superconductor with a BFS hosts finite odd-ω pair amplitudes, albeit the reverse is already known to not be true. Note added: During the final stages of preparing this manuscript two other works appeared discussing various aspects of odd-ω pairing in spin-3/2 superconductors. In Ref. 