When both inversion and time-reversal symmetries are broken, the critical current of a superconductor can be nonreciprocal. In this work we show that in certain classes of two-dimensional superconductors with antisymmetric spin-orbit coupling, Cooper pairs acquire a finite momentum upon the application of an in-plane magnetic field, and as a result, critical currents in the direction parallel and antiparallel to the Cooper pair momentum become unequal. This supercurrent diode effect is also manifested in the polarity-dependence of in-plane critical fields induced by a supercurrent. These nonreciprocal effects may be found in polar SrTiO3 film, few-layer MoTe2 in the T d phase, and twisted bilayer graphene in which the valley degree of freedom plays the role analogous to spin. Introduction-Shortly after the advent of Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) theory of superconductivity, it was predicted that a superconducting phase with a spatially varying order parameter exists in a narrow range of magnetic fields above the Pauli limit Recently, a new type of finite-momentum superconducting state has been predicted in two-dimensional systems with strong spin-orbit coupling (SOC) and broken inversion symmetry In this work, we show that helical superconductors exhibit an intrinsic supercurrent diode effect: the depairing critical currents in the direction along and against the underlying Cooper pair momentum q 0 are different, as shown in Fig. Our work is motivated by the recent observation of nonreciprocal critical current in an artificial metal film under a parallel magnetic field Helical superconductivity-We consider a 2D electron system with spin-orbit coupling (SOC) under inplane magnetic field where k = (k x , k y ) is the 2D momentum, ξ k = k 2 2m -μ is the kinetic term, m is effective mass, μ is chemical potential, Pauli matrices σ = (σ x , σ y , σ z ) denote spin, g k is the SOC vector and B is the Zeeman energy due to the in-plane magnetic field. Such 2D electron gas has two spin-split energy bands and hence two spin-non-degenerate Fermi surfaces. The location, shape and spin configuration of both Fermi surfaces evolve with the in-plane magnetic field. We will take Rashba SOC g k = α R ẑ × k as an example , where N 0 = 4πm is the total DOS including spin degeneracy and v F = 2μ/m is the Fermi velocity. A small field B ∆ so ≡ mα R v F displaces the centers of inner (+) and outer (-) Fermi pockets to opposite momenta ±k 0 = ± ẑ × B/v F respectively, as shown in Fig. . Therefore each Fermi surface remains nearly symmetric with respect to its displaced center, and the spin configuration remains nearly helical. At B = 0, short-range attractive interaction leads to a BCS superconductor with zero momentum pairing, where states at ±k of opposite spins within each Fermi pocket are paired. At small B, the approximate inversion symmetry of the outer (inner) Fermi pocket with respect to its displaced center ∓k 0 naturally favors BCS-type intra-pocket pairing, which leads to a nonzero Cooper pair momentum ∓2k 0 . Since the outer pocket has larger DOS, the state with Cooper pair momentum q 0 ≈ -2k 0 is energetically favored. It has an isotropic gap on the outer Fermi pocket (see Eq.( Such helical state induced by Zeeman and SOC effects at small B is smoothly connected to the q = 0 BCS state in the limit B = 0. Provided that the SOC strength ∆ so is much larger than the BCS pairing gap ∆ 0 at B = 0, the field-induced helical state persists in the strong disorder regime ∆ 0 τ -1 ∆ so Origin of supercurrent diode effect-In this work we predict that as a direct consequence of nonzero Cooper pair momentum q 0 in equilibrium state, helical superconductors generally exhibit nonreciprocal critical current: the maximum current that can flow with zero resistance in the direction along q 0 differs from the one in the opposite direction. Here we consider the depairing critical current, which is associated with the reduction and eventual closing of the superconducting gap with increasing supercurrent. The origin of nonreciprocal critical current in a helical superconductor can be understood heuristically from the gap structure. Assuming a local attractive interaction the mean-field Hamiltonian of the helical superconductor reads where ∆(r) = ∆e iq•r is the superconducting order parameter, ∆ is the pairing potential, q is Cooper pair mo- T is the Nambu basis, and the Bogouliubov-de Gennes Hamiltonian H k takes the form By construction, the BdG Hamiltonian satisfies the antiunitary particle-hole symmetry PH * k P -1 = -H -k where P = τ x acts in Nambu space that double counts the degrees of freedom. The spectrum of H k consists of pairs of opposite eigenvalues E λ (k), -E λ (-k), see Fig. Due to the combined effect of field-induced Fermi surface displacement and Cooper pair momentum, the gap structure at B = 0 differs from the BCS state at B = 0. To the first order of q and B, where Note that in the Rashba case we have ĝk As shown in Fig. In the case of Rashba superconductors, q 0 ⊥ B and the superconducting gap is most strongly reduced in the direction perpendicular to the field. At low temperatures, passing a supercurrent through the system creates an additional phase gradient in the superconducting order parameter, so that the currentcarrying state has a Cooper pair momentum q different from the equilibrium one q 0 . When the current is along the axis of q 0 , the change of Cooper pair momentum δq ≡ qq 0 is roughly proportional to the supercurrent density J and further reduces the superconducting gap. As |J | increases, the gap eventually closes. This gap-closing condition provides a rough estimate of the critical current. In the case of helical superconductors considered here, the gap closes on the inner pocket when the current is in the same direction as q 0 (Fig. Our discussion so far of the supercurrent diode effect based on Bogouliubov band structures is heuristic. To rigorously demonstrate the supercurrent diode effect, one needs to work out the stable phase of superconductivity, which involves five energy scales: the bare pairing potential ∆ 0 at zero temperature and zero field, the spin-orbit coupling energy ∆ so = α R k F , the Zeeman energy due to the magnetic field B, the temperature T and Fermi energy μ. To determine the complete phase diagram in the five-dimensional parameter space is enormously difficult. Nonetheless, near superconducting-normal phase transitions Ginzburg-Landau theory applies, which may shed light on understanding the whole phase diagram. In the following we will present a theory of supercurrent diode effect. We first derive the explicit form of Ginzburg-Landau free energy from symmetry arguments, then calculate the nonreciprocal critical current from such free energy. Theory of supercurrent diode effect-We first review the supercurrent in a conventional BCS superconductor. Close to the superconducting phase transition, the free energy density f ≡ f N 0 as a functional of the superconducting order parameter ∆(r) reads and the supercurrent density is then ) where t ≡ (T -T c )/T c is reduced temperature, and a 0 , β > 0. When restricted to single-q order parameter ∆(r) = ∆e iq•r and zero vector potential A = 0, the corresponding free energy density and supercurrent density take the following forms (c) Supercurrent J = J q0 as a function of q = q q0 at T = 0.90Tc, B = 0.31BP . Under external current, red solid line denotes stable states, and blue dots denote unstable states. (d) Along the curve Bc(T ) in (a), field dependence of δm defined in Eq. ( where α q = t + a 0 q 2 . Notice that J = 2e∂ q f holds, and ∂ q α q = 2a 0 q represents the superfluid velocity. For 2D noncentrosymmetric superconductors under a parallel magnetic field, additional terms involving oddpower derivatives of ∆(r) are allowed in the free energy expression where α is a differential operator involving the spatial derivative ∂ r . For example, α = t -a 0 ∂ 2 r in the conventional BCS case. Its Fourier transform α q is obtained from pairing susceptibility of the normal state at wavevector q, as shown in the Supplemental Information. For spin-orbit-coupled superconductors considered in this work, β > 0 generally holds. When α q < 0, the above free energy is minimized by single-q order parameter: ∆(r) = ∆e iq•r . The corresponding free energy density takes the form The Cooper pair momentum q 0 in the equilibrium state is determined by minimizing α q over q, i.e., ∂α ∂q q0 = 0, and det The in-plane critical field B c (T ) is determined from the condition where α q is temperature-and field-dependent. Equivalently, one also determines the critical temperature T c (B) at finite field B in the same way. As shown above, the single-q order parameter is the stable phase near the superconducting phase transition. However, deep in the superconducting phase, either B B c (T ) or T T c (B), the multiple-q order parameter (e.g. LO phase) will compete with the single-q one, and might be the stable phase in some cases For the Rashba superconductor, the in-plane critical field B c (T ) and the corresponding Cooper pair momentum q 0 at the superconducting transition is calculated numerically and shown in Fig. By introducing vector potential A, the uniform supercurrent density J can be calculated from the free energy density f as follows with electron charge e < 0. The equilibrium state minimizes free energy density ∂ q f = 0 and hence carries zero current. By connecting the system to an external source, one can pass a nonzero supercurrent J through the system. Such current-carrying state has a Cooper pair momentum q = q 0 that is determined by J according to Eq. Clearly, the supercurrent is the product of the superfluid stiffness |α q | and the superfluid velocity ∂ q α q , both of which depend on the Cooper pair momentum q. We first consider the BCS case without SOC and obtain the superconducting phase diagram in B-J plane for temperatures close to the zero-field and zero-current critical temperature T c . At B = 0, α q = t+a 0 q 2 = t(1-ξ 2 q 2 ) with coherence length ξ ≡ a 0 /|t| ∝ (T c -T ) -1 2 , so that J ∝ (1 -ξ 2 q 2 )ξ 2 q. At q = 0, the superfluid stiffness is maximal but the superfluid velocity vanishes. At q = ξ -1 , the velocity is high but the stiffness vanishes. The maximal supercurrent or the critical current J c is achieved at an intermediate momentum When both B and J are nonzero, the boundary between superconducting phase and normal phase in B-J plane is defined by where exponents 2 and 2/3 follow from the temperature scaling of the zero-current critical field B c and the zerofield critical current J c . The phase boundary is in general smooth except the non-analytical region near J = 0 due to the fractional exponent 2/3. This phase boundary is symmetric in J due to inversion symmetry of a conventional superconductor B → B, J → -J , and also symmetric with respect to the origin J = B = 0 due to time-reversal symmetry B → -B, J → -J . In superconductors without inversion symmetry, the phase boundary in B-J phase space can become skewed as sketched in Fig. As a concrete example, we consider Rashba superconductors in the following and derive explicitly the nonreciprocal critical current at weak field and temperatures near T c . First, at small B we can expand α q as a power series in q and keep terms up to linear order in B with the parameters a 0 , b 0 , b 1 derived from Fermi surface integrals as detailed in the Supplemental Information: where C 0 = 1.04, C 1 = 0.38 are numerical constants. In deriving the expressions of a 0 , b 0 , b 1 we have assumed spin-orbit coupling strength ∆ so is larger than the superconducting gap ∆ 0 . In Eq. ( to the leading order in B. Substituting Eqs. ( with where B P = 1.25T c is the Pauli limit. The dimensionless quantity γ measures the strength of field-induced supercurrent diode effect at temperature T . γ(T ) is proportional to Rashba SOC and decreases to zero as T c -T near the critical temperature. Since More generally, at higher fields the Cooper pair momentum q 0 is no longer small and reaches the order of ξ -1 0 at B ∼ B P (see Fig. where A, a > 0 and δq = (q -q 0 ) • q0 . From this expression we find different critical currents J ± c in the direction along and against q 0 . The nonreciprocity of critical current can be characterized by a "supercurrent diode coefficient" which we define as At temperatures close to the superconducting phase transition, we find Our theory based on Eq. ( We numerically calculate and plot δ m along the critical field line B = B c (T ), as shown in Fig. It can be seen that δ m is linear in B at weak fields as expected in Eq. ( Next, we derive the polarity-dependent critical field at small current for temperatures near T c . This requires including the correction to α q at second order in B as in usual BCS superconductors without SOC. As shown in the Supplemental Information, we obtain the skewed phase boundary for Rashba superconductors in B -J plane: where γ is defined in Eq. where the factor 1/3 is from exponents 2 and 2/3. Since At low temperatures, the entire phase boundary in B-J plane can be determined numerically. From Eq. ( Besides Rashba systems, helical phase exists in noncentrosymmetric superconductors with the following point groups: D n , C nv , C n , D 2d , S 4 , C 1 (n = 2, 3, 4, 6). In these systems, crystal symmetry allows a linear coupling between the Cooper pair momentum q and Zeeman field B enabled by spin-orbit coupling. As a result, the fieldinduced Cooper pair momentum q 0 is linearly proportional to B at weak fields The form of spin-orbit vector g k and therefore the direction of Cooper pair momentum depend on crystal symmetry. While q 0 ∝ ẑ × B is perpendicular to the inplane magnetic field in Rashba superconductors, q 0 ∝ B is parallel to B in crystals with D n≥3 point groups, and q 0 ∝ (B x , -B y ) forms a mirror pair with B in crystals with D 2d point group. While the direction of Cooper pair momentum relative to the magnetic field depends on crystal symmetry, the supercurrent diode effect is generally allowed when the current is passed along the axis of Cooper pair momentum. For Ising superconductors with point group D 3h such as transition metal dichalcogenides with an odd number of layers, the supercurrent diode effect is absent for in-plane field and in-plane current, where the combined symmetry of vertical mirror I z : z → -z with respect to the basal plane and time-reversal T is preserved I z T : J → -J , B → B. However, one can realize nonreciprocal critical currents in an Ising superconductor by introducing an out-of-plane magnetization M z (e.g. by ferromagnetic proximity effect), so that and a 0 > 0, b are determined by Fermi surface properties of the Ising superconductor. Denoting θ as the angle between J and x-axis, the supercurrent diode coefficient is then We further consider supercurrent diode effect in the limit of vanishing SOC. In this case, finite momentum FFLO superconductivity occurs at high magnetic fields above the Pauli limit. In particular, the single-q FF state (which can be energetically favored over the LO state by weak SOC) breaks both inversion and time reversal symmetry, thus giving rise to the diode effect as shown in Fig. The magnitude of the supercurrent diode effect |δ| becomes very large near both B * (the tricritical point) and B c (the T = 0 end point of the FF phase). This can be understood from the behavior of GL coefficient α q . Near the tricritical point, we have with c 0 ∝ T -T * , c 1 ∝ B * -B, and c 2 > 0. At B just above B * , the Cooper pair momentum q 0 ∝ √ B -B * is small. Nonetheless, α q is highly skewed with respect to q 0 : it increases very slowly as q decreases from q 0 . As a result, J + c → 0 while J - c remains finite as On the other hand, near the transition between FF superconductor and normal phase at low temperature T → 0, we have Minimizing α q over q yields a large Cooper pair momentum q 0 = B/v F approaching 1/ξ 0 as B → B c . In this case, due to the non-analytic dependence of q, α q is highly skewed with respect to q 0 : it rises steeply as q decreases from q 0 . This leads to the maximum possible diode effect with δ = ( taking opposite sign as the one near tricritical point. Details of the supercurrent diode effect in the FF phase can be found in the Supplemental Information. Note that at low temperature away from the critical line B c (T ), singleq FF state may yield to multiple-q state. In the absence of SOC, the double-q LO state has a spatially modulated gap amplitude and constant phase, which does not show the diode effect. The supercurrent diode effect predicted in this work, including nonreciprocal critical current and polaritydependent in-plane critical field, may be observed in polar SrTiO 3 films Another interesting platform to search for supercurrent diode effect is magic-angle twisted bilayer graphene Last but not the least, the supercurrent diode effect should also exist when the superconducting state spontaneously breaks time-reversal and inversion symmetry. Thus nonreciprocal critical current at zero magnetic field and polarity-dependent critical field in the equilibrium state provide new probes of unconventional superconductivity with hidden orders. Data Availability. All study data are included in this article. We compute the the function α q microscopically within mean field theory. From Eqs. By expansion of free energy density f (q, ∆) in terms of ∆ we have where λ = ± denote contributions from inner (λ = +) and outer (λ = -) Fermi surfaces respectively, φ(x) = Re ψ 1+ix 2 -ψ 1 2 , and ψ is the digamma function. Here, v λ = ∂ k ξ λ k is the electron velocity, Q = v λ • q is the depairing energy of finite momentum pairing, E ± = |h + | ± |h -| is the depairing energy of Zeeman splitting for inter-(+) or intra-pocket (-) Cooper pairs with h ± = B + g 1 2 q±k , and the angle θ = h + , h -between h ± controls the ratio between inter-or intra-pocket Cooper pairs. Supercurrent affects q and hence depairing energy Q, while magnetic field B together with SOC affects depairing energies E ± and angle θ. Near T c , the temperature dependence of α q can be captured by the first term log(T /T c ), and we can set T = T c in the Fermi surface integrals. To evaluate the integral, notice that the field is weak B B P , one can expand the special function and then integrate order by order to obtain Eq. ( For α q = α + aδq 2 -bδq 3 , we find the supercurrent is βJ /e = |α q |∂ α q = 2aαδq -3 (αb) δq 2 (S3) +2a 2 δq 3 -5(ab)δq 4 + 3b 2 δq 5 . Notice that to the leading order of |α| Especially for Rashba superconductors at weak field, from Eq. ( where n = (q -q 0 )/|q -q 0 |, and under magnetic field Then we obtain the skewed phase boundary with zero-field critical current and the skewness parameter To include higher order contributions, the supercurrent diode coefficient is The special function is where When |x| < 2 3 √ 3 , 22 27 < t < 1 and z is complex. Denote t = cos θ, then z = e iθ/3 and n = 4 15 (cos θ 3 + 2 3 ) is real. Since D(x) ≈ x/ √ 3 we get the leading order contribution The expansion of α q near its minimum q 0 in general can be anisotropic x + a(1 -)q 2 y + 2aηq x q y (S14) -(b 1 q 3 x + b 2 q 3 y + b 3 q x q 2 y + b 4 q 2 x q y ), where a > 0 and 2 + η 2 < 1 for stability. The supercurrent diode coefficient for supercurrent J = J(cos θ, sin θ) can be worked out as Supercurrent diode effect near FFLO transition When magnetic field is high, near a phase transition where two or more local minima of α q compete, strong supercurrent diode effect can happen. As a concrete example, we consider the transition from BCS phase to FF phase near the upturning point (T * , B * ) (red star in Fig. where c 1 = c(B 2 * -B 2 ), and c, c 2 > 0. When B < B * , c 1 > 0 and the BCS phase with zero Cooper pair momen-tum is the ground state. When B > B * , c 1 < 0 and the ground state changes to the FF phase with Cooper pair momentum q * . As a result, when one lowers the temperature, the in-plane critical field B c (T ) exhibits an upturn across the upturning point and hence the name. To better understand the FFLO physics we need quartic order Ginzburg-Landau analysis. One can write the order parameter in Fourier form ∆(r) = d 2 q∆ q e iq•r and the free energy then reads By analyzing the quartic coefficients β qpp and the quadratic coefficients α q one can then distinguish FF and LO phases In the absence of SOC, quartic coefficient β in Eq. ( As shown in Fig. FF phase -q 0 and the other two at excited states where superconductivity vanishes α q = 0. We hence expect four extremal points q ± c , -q ± c of the supercurrent, and the resulting maximum and minimum are critical currents ±J ± c respectively. Near the metastable BCS phase, the function α q = α -q is fully symmetric, and there seems no diode effect. However, around the true ground state FF phase q = q 0 we have the expansion up to the nonzero third order α q+q0 = c 0 -c 2 1 4c 2 + 4c 2 (q • q 0 ) 2 + (q • q 0 )q 2 . (S19) Since |q 0 | ∝ Re B 2 -B 2 * , near the upturning point the third order term is more important than the second order one. Consequently, α q is highly asymmetric near q 0 , and J ± c can be very different. Moreover, as we approach the upturning point, J - c → 0 if superconducting phase stays in the q > 0 branch. In this case, the superconductor near FF transition is a perfect diode: Supercurrent cannot pass antiparallel to the Cooper pair momentum. To be precise, the diode coefficient for supercurrent along direction ± n is It is also possible that near the upturning point, when injected supercurrent switches its direction, superconducting phase changes from the q > 0 branch to the q < 0 branch. In that case there is no supercurrent diode effect. Similar discussions can also be found in Ref. Near the transition between FF superconductor and normal phase at low temperature T → 0, we have where ∆ 0 = 4πe -ψ(1/2) T c is the pairing gap at zero temperature and zero field. Thus in the absence of SOC, which can be worked out as α q = log(v F q/∆ 0 ) when v F q > B, and in general can be written as the following piecewise function Minimizing α q over q yields a large Cooper pair momentum q 0 = B/v F approaching 1/ξ 0 as B → B c . In this case, due to the non-analytic dependence of q, α q is highly skewed with respect to q 0 : it rises steeply as q decreases from q 0 . This leads to the maximum possible diode effect with δ = (J + c -J - c )/(J + c + J - c ) ∼ -1 near B c , taking opposite sign as the one near tricritical point.