Terahertz short pulses have been extensively employed in many frontier modern applications, where the transmitted signals are usually frequency-chirped or phase-modulated to increase the time-bandwidth product, leading to an increased propagation length. Thus, a key component for communication systems, the pulse-shaper, remains elusive outside the lab. Frequently, temporally short pulses are realized with linear dispersion or nonlinear dispersion compression using external dispersive elements that have large chromatic dispersion. This function might be performed by a variety of photonic components such as gratings, prisms, chirped-mirrors and gas-filled hollow-core fibers. Nevertheless, they lack tunability, which is crucial for communication applications, and maybe difficult to integrate with commercial systems. A promising solution may rely on low-loss dispersion-tunable waveguides, wherein graphene, with excellent tunability at THz frequencies is exploited. Such a waveguide can be realized with helically-corrugated circular waveguides which have been successfully used for "gyro" applications, whose helical corrugation is a hybrid metal-graphene ribbon that allows electrical tunability. In this thesis, the possibility of the linear tunable compression of chirped pulses in the positive group velocity dispersion (GVD) region of a dielectric-lined circular waveguide loaded with a helical graphene ribbon has been discussed. We will show that the proposed structure introduces a good tunability of the compression factor via the graphene electrostatic bias. In addition, this thesis also presents that the waveguide dispersion, as the first component of the chromatic dispersion compared to the second component, i.e. material dispersion that introduced by graphene, plays the main role which is caused by the shape the graphene-ribbon helix. It is demonstrated that there is an optimal compression waveguide length over which THz chirped pulses reach the maximum compression. It is shown that by applying an electrostatic controlling gate voltage (V g ) of 0 and 30 V on the helical graphene ribbon, the temporal input pulses of width 8 and 12 ps, propagating through two different lengths (700 m and 1700 m), can be tuned by 5.9% and 8%, respectively, in the frequency range of 2.15-2.28 THz. Another outstanding achievement of this research was to provide a comprehensive system model by incorporating the full-wave time-domain simulations and the numerical transfer function estimation approach. The use of the system transfer function to analyze the structure is preferable to the full-wave simulation because of saving the execution time. i Dedication I would like to dedicate this thesis to little prince of Imam Hussain (As), Baby Ali Asghar (As)... "Who was scarified in way of his grandfather Prophet Muhammed" and to: my beloved wife, mother and the precious memories of my father who was my biggest supporter in my life and in choosing telecommunication engineering as my major like himself, and to follow my dreams. Alas, no words can express my love, feelings for him. May God Bless Him. Variation of phase (radians) and intensity (dB) of the THz reflection of the devices with different DC-controlling voltages................................................................12 2.1 Temporal deformation of the intrinsically chirped THz pulse due to transmission through the 10 mm aperture. The dashed lines indicate squared, normalized electric-field wave functions, and the shaded area shows theGaussian envelopes of the pulses. Ratio of the peak intensity of the transmitted pulse to that of the incident pulse is 1.410 -(Fig. x waveform with duration of T 0 can produce a grater peak amplitude after traveling an optimal length of a the dispersive waveguide...................................................30 4.1 Schematic-diagram, 3D geometry, and side view of an internally dielectric-coated hollow-core waveguide loaded by a helical graphene ribbon (inset: the graphene ribbon is grown on a thin SiO 2 layer and sandwiched between two gold ribbons to facilitate the DC controlling of the device)..................................................................... This chapter provides the general background for specifics of pulse compression techniques, and graphene-based terahertz devices, motivating the work presented in the majority of this thesis. Pulse shaping, compression, and stretching is an important area of research in anywhere part of the electromagnetic spectrum of frequencies from microwave up to optical frequencies, with important applications for high-resolution imaging, linear accelerators, radar, and non-linear testing. Principles and methods of pulse compression are quite different, depending on its application Numerous uses of THz radiation have been explored, including trace gas detection, medical diagnosis, security screening, and defect analysis in complex materials. Many THz applications rely on the use of broadband pulses for time-domain analysis and spectroscopic applications In recent times, short pulses have received much attention owing to their applications in various areas such as optical sampling systems, time-resolved spectroscopy, ultrafast physical processes. Although several techniques are being used for generating short pulses Pulse shaping, compression, and stretching is an important area of research in anywhere part of the electromagnetic spectrum of frequencies from microwave up to optical frequencies, with important applications for high-resolution imaging, linear accelerators, radar, and non-linear testing. Principles and methods of pulse compression are quite different depending on their application. Here we survey some of the major approaches that can be common between microwave and optical frequencies. Numerous uses of THz radiation have been explored, including trace gas detection, medical diagnosis, security screening, and defect analysis in complex materials. Many THz applications rely on the use of broadband pulses for time-domain analysis and spectroscopic applications. In recent times, short pulses have received much attention owing to their applications in various areas such as optical sampling systems, time-resolved spectroscopy, ultrafast physical processes. Although several techniques are being used for generating short pulses In radar applications, for good system performance, a transmitted waveform is desired that has 1) wide bandwidth for high range resolution and 2) long duration for the high-velocity resolution and high transmitted energy. In a pulse-compression system, a long pulse of duration T and bandwidth B (product of T and B greater than one) is transmitted. The ration of the duration of the long pulse to that of a short pulse is an important system parameter called the compression ratio Pulse compression ratio (CR) in radar is the ratio of the range resolution of an unmodulated pulse length T to that of the modulated pulse of the same length and bandwidth B = = The quantity BT is called the "time-bandwidth product" or "BT product" of the modulated pulse. In modern radar systems, for increasing the radar range resolution and detection distance, where the transmitted signals are usually frequency-chirped or phase-modulated to increase the timebandwidth product (TBWP), the microwave pulse compression has been extensively employed In a dispersive medium with the anomalous-group velocity dispersion (GVD), the group velocity of any wave propagating through it is dependent, descending on the frequency of the wave. Therefore, if a microwave pulse is produced in which the wave is swept from a frequency with a low group velocity to a frequency with a high group velocity, the tail of the pulse will move to overtake the front of the pulse, resulting in pulse shortening and a corresponding growth in amplitude if the losses are sufficiently small. One example of performing of this approach is using the dispersive delay line (DDL). The Bo Xiang, was proposed through his PhD thesis GHz and is capable of compressing a 2 ns pulse into a 1 ns pulse. The use of a metal waveguide with a helically corrugated wall, as a dispersive medium, was proposed as a sole way to generate a multi-megawatts short pulse in ultra-high range radar applications. This produces an ideal dispersion i.e. has a large change in group velocity with frequency in the operating region, which is a required condition for an efficient high-intensity microwave pulse compression. The input down-chirped pulse had a frequency sweep from 9.6 to 9.2 GHz, with an initial pulse duration of 67 ns and 5.7 kW power at the fundamental TE 11 operating mode of the waveguide. Experimental optimization resulted in a compressed pulse of 2.8 ns duration and 68 kW peak power, giving a peak power compression ratio of 12 at the compressor length of 2.08 m. The major advantages of this method, in such metal waveguidebased, are high power capability and convenient sizes The helically corrugated waveguide Approximately 50% of the input energy is compressed to the main body of the compressed pulse (assuming the main body as a Gaussian-shaped waveform with 1.5 ns full width half maximum), and approximately 25% of the energy is retained in the train of lower amplitude secondary pulse. Several techniques are used for pulse shaping and pulse compression based on infrared radiation into the visible spectral range by linear and non-linear optics methods Methods of linear dispersion compression are then used to compress such pulses with optical elements having negative chromatic dispersion. A variety of optical components may perform this function, both discrete (diffraction or Bragg grating, prisms, chirped mirrors, etc.) and fiberbased In a non-linear pulse compressor, first of all, the optical bandwidth typically with a non-linear interaction such as self-phase modulation is increased. Spectral broadening of the optical pulses can be performed via self-phase modulation using noble-gas-filled hollow fibers. Subsequent compression with chirped mirrors shortens the pulses by more than a factor 10. Generally, non-linear pulse compression depends on the interplay between the self-phase modulation and group-velocity dispersion (GVD) Where I(t) is the pulse intensity. The optical Kerr effect is allowed for gases, liquids, and solids. Furthermore, the non-linear refractive index also leads to new effects due to self-phase modulation (SPM). For a medium with n 2 >0, SPM gives rise to lower frequencies (red shift) on the front edge of the pulse and higher frequencies (blue shift) on the trailing edge. This variation of instantaneous frequency as a function of time is called a chirp, in this case e.g. an up-chirp, means that this instantaneous frequency raises with time, while a down-chirp means that the instantaneous frequency decreases with time. Quasi-phase-matching (QPM) is a technique for compensating phase-velocity mismatch through periodic inversion of the non-linear coefficient. Chirped QPM structures have been used for the demonstration of non-linear crystals with engineered phase responses suitable for pulse compression and dispersion management where  is radian frequency,  C is the chemical potential [or Fermi level which can be controlled by an applied electrostatic bias field E 0 =E 0 a z , or by doping,  is a phenomenological electron scattering scattering rate that is assumed to be independent of energy, T is temperature, and B 0 is an applied magnetostatic bias field. Generally, based on bias applied on a graphene sheet, three cases of Eq.(1.2) be considered. Spatial dispersion, neither electrostatic nor magnetostatic bias (E 0 =B 0 =0), is applied on the grapheme. Electrostatic bias, no magnetostatic bias, nor spatial dispersion (E 0 0, B 0 =0 ). In this case, the conductivity matrix is diagonal: When the graphene sheet is applied by a magnetostatic external field (B 0 0), and possibly electrostatic bias (E 0 0), this case refers to the local Hall Effect regime. In chapter 4 we describe the modeling of graphene in detail. The tunability of the graphene has attracted tremendous research interests in the realization of tunable terahertz-graphene-based devices include plasmonic filter Terahertz frequency range (0.1-10 THz) has received considerable attention in recent decades, due to its huge bandwidth and broad applications. High-field terahertz radiation is important to probe for a variety of fundamental scientific investigations and a wide range of applications. The Terahertz radar has recently attracted great interest from both the academic and the industrial societies due to its applications of high center frequency, as well as large bandwidth, which possesses high penetration, and anti-stealth capabilities to support high-resolution imaging, under cloth detection, and so on Currently, intense THz radiation pulses exceeding tens of micro-Joules can be obtained from large accelerator facilities such as linear accelerators, synchrotrons, and free-electron lasers. However, due to the high cost of building and operating those facilities and limited access, there is a present and growing demand for high-energy, compact THz sources at a tabletop scale. Generally, in order to measure an event in the time domain, a shorter one has been needed. If a shorter reference pulse is available, then it can be used to measure the unknown pulse, such method is named as time-domain interferometry. The terahertz interferometric imaging systems (TIIS) is used to examine THz imaging of biological tissue using terahertz pulses These applications provide strong motivation to advance the state of the art terahertz graphenebased technology for DC-controlled pulse compression. In this thesis, we explore for the first time numerically possibilities and limitations of linear compression of chirped pulses in the positive dispersion region of a helical graphene ribbonloaded hollow-core waveguide. Interest in this type of temporal pulse compression stems from this fact that a graphene-based linear compressor complies with the concept of all waveguide configurations and may be simply integrated with a THz chirped pulse generator. This thesis starts with an overview of the pulse compression development in the microwave and optical frequencies, using the graphene in tunable optical and terahertz devices and a brief study of the dielectric and conductivity modeling of graphene in optics and terahertz region are given. In Chapter 2, a literature review in passive terahertz pulse compression has been presented. Literature Review Nowadays, broadband THz pulses have found a wide range of applications, from imaging to communications. Although in high-speed broadband systems, dispersion is one of the crucial factors in the performance degradation of microwave and optical transmission media With the proliferation of advanced solid-state laser technology, methods based on nonlinear optical frequency conversion of high power infrared or far-infrared laser radiation laser have gained ground. Certainly, they have produced the best optical-to-terahertz conversion efficiencies and peak electric fields to date [40], a monolithic on-chip compensation scheme is realized for a mode-locked QCL, permitting THz pulses to be considerably shortened from 16ps to 4ps. In this thesis, it was demonstrated that the tunable chromatic dispersive properties of a helical graphene ribbon could be exploited in a compact waveguide component to generate a DCcontrolled compressed pulse. To the best of our knowledge, there are a few published works on engineered dispersion devices made possible passively temporal THz pulse shortening. Moreover, no other studies have examined the combination of graphene and pulse-compression techniques in the THz regime. It is helpful, however, to review some relevant literature to quantitatively justify our work with different passive pulse compression using dispersion in THzgap and both lower and upper-frequency spectrums, microwave and optics, respectively. Short electromagnetic pulses experience significant spectral and temporal deformation when they are diffracted on subwavelength apertures. Temporal delay/advancement is one of the effects that occur when a pulse passes through the aperture. Mitrofanov and et al. The chirped pulses are naturally generated using 100 fs pulses from the Ti:sapphire laser, which excite a biased photoconductive antenna fabricated on the low-temperature grown GaAs. The same pulses are used to gate the detecting antenna. The spectrum of the detected pulse peaks at 0.5 THz with a bandwidth of 0.57 THz and the pulse duration is 2.0 ps. After transmission through a 10 μm circular aperture, the center of the chirped pulse shifts forward by 0.3 ps, as shown in Fig. One of the significant drawbacks of this structure is the extremely low output to input peak intensity ratio of1.4 × 10 -4 , as shown in Fig. In a series of publications The method is based on the generation of a frequency modulated FM pulse by a relativistic backward-wave oscillator (RBWO) following its compression due to propagation through a dispersive media (DM) in the form of a hollow metallic waveguide with helical corrugation of the inner surface. In In To design a terahertz pulse compression structure with simply electronically tunable pulse shaping, it would be found that graphene with the excellent dispersion characteristics tunability at THz frequencies In the next chapter we review the fundamental concepts and basic theory of dispersion and linear passive pulse compression. As noted in Chapter 1, control of dispersion is key to obtaining short pulse in both RF and optical pulse shaping systems, including high power LFM microwave pulse compressor and femtosecond pulse generation. One of the most frequently used ways to generate ultra-short temporal pulses is linear dispersion compression by means of external dispersion elements Before discussing using dispersion control devices in a pulse compression application, it is useful briefly to review dispersion fundamentals and concepts. Dispersion and attenuation are the key propagation properties determining the ultimate performance of any transmission medium used in telecommunication applications. It is worthwhile reviewing the fundamental mechanisms giving rise to pulse dispersion in waveguides and fiber systems. Pulse spreading or pulse dispersion results from both waveguide and material properties of a fiber. Dispersive effects are most important for optical and terahertz fibers. We may note that shorter pulses are affected more strongly by dispersion than longer ones. Longer pulses have a narrower spectrum and because of the Fourier-transform relation: fT=constant, where f is the spectral and T is the transform-limited temporal width. The important dispersion mechanisms are material dispersion, waveguide dispersion, nonlinear effects, and polarization mode dispersion, the two most important are material and waveguide dispersion when taken together, are referred to as chromatic dispersion. The dispersion in any single-mode waveguides originates from material dispersion and waveguide dispersion. Material dispersion arises from the frequency-dependent variation of the intrinsic material electrical and magnetic properties, whereas the waveguide dispersion part is due to the frequency-dependent power distribution in the non-homogenous cross-section of the waveguide. In optical dielectric-based waveguide such as single-mode (SM) and multi-mode (MM) fiber, alldielectric materials are dispersive, this means that the refractive index varies with wavelength, i.e., n=n(). There are several ways to measure dispersion in transparent materials. A simple measure is the Abbe number, V D . The Abbe number is obtained by measuring the index at several key wavelengths, or where n F , n D , and n c , are the refractive indices at three standard visible wavelengths :  F =486.1 nm (blue),  D =589.2 nm (yellow), and  c =656.3 nm (red). High dispersive materials have low V D, and materials with low dispersion introduce large V D . Another measure of dispersion is the derivative dn/d, which may be most easily obtained from dispersion data like dispersion coefficients vs. wavelength, once a curve fits the data has been made to determine n as a function of wavelength. It is quite common to fit the dispersion data using a Sellmeier power-law fit. The Sellmeier equation is of the form where A i and  oi are the Sellmeier constants,  oi is a vacuum wavelength related to natural vibrational frequencies  o/ v oi =c. The Sellmeier constants for many of the standard IR materials are given in the Handbook of Optical Constants Series by Palik The Drude model can be used to describe the dielectric function of a conducting medium as Γ is the momentum relaxation time of the material and the plasma frequency, , is defined as with m* being the effective mass. The waveguide dispersion affected by waveguide dimensions and geometry as well as the magnitude of material properties ( r and  r ) is a strong function of frequency. This phenomenon can be observed in several of the examples presented in literature, such asridged waveguide Propagation phase constant when the pulse propagates through an unbounded medium with a real part of the complex refractive index of n(), is commonly written in terms of its Taylor series expansion, around the center frequency  0 , as follows where = , and all the derivatives are evaluated at = . If only the dielectric constant data are available, the n() can be replaced with 1 (), where  1 () is the real part of complex electric permittivity. In a transmission system, the carrier travels at the phase velocity, whereas the envelope and also EM energy travel at the group velocity. Consider an input pulse ( ) with spectrum ( ). After passing through a dispersive system, the output pulse as follows Now if we introduce the typical notation for envelope function, where the positive frequency part of ( ) is replaced by ( ) and = -, we can rewrite the output pulse as follows where Thus ( )is the product of a carrier term ( ) and the envelope function ( ) . The carrier term propagates at the phase velocity and is unaffected by the variation of with . The envelope function ( ) , however, it is affected by the form of ( ). One significant case occurs when it is a linear function of . In this case, we find that Thus, the output pulse is an undistorted replica of the input pulse, which travels witha velocity . This velocity is called the group velocity , where We now proceed to give a useful formula for the group velocity, specifically the material dispersion, encountered during propagation in a bulk medium. Starting with We find that It turns out that it is also useful to express vg in terms real part of complex permittivity of ( ) (3-15) We can also look at the concept of group delay () using simple Fourier transform identities. The Fourier transform of a delayed pulse ( -) is given by ( ) , using this equation and eq.(4-8), we find that = = / , which isconsistent with our discussion above, where L is an electromagnetic wave is traveling distance. As in all full-wave, electromagnetic solvers, the scattering parameters results of [S] are available after frequency domain calculations, we can simply compute group delay (GD) parameters via phase angle of insertion loss of S 21 ( 21 ) using Eq. It is noteworthy that the other required dispersion parameters such as group velocity (GV) and axial phase constant () can be calculated in postprocessing using above mentioned relation  and V g incorporation with Eq. (3-16). When ( ) is not a linear function of [i.e., Eq.(3-10) does not hold], ( )is changed compared to ( ). The part of ( ) that is not linear in is called dispersion. The / term contributes a quadratic spectral phase variation, which leads to a linear variation in delay with frequency; this imparts a linear chirp to the output pulse. The / term contributes a cubic spectral phase leading to a quadratic variation in delay with frequency. This results in an asymmetric pulse distortion with an oscillatory or ringing on the tail part of the pulse. Group velocity dispersion (GVD) is important in any fast and ultrashort optical systems when the path lengths are relatively large and the pulses are very short. In the case of nonzero GVD, different frequencies have slightly different traveling times, and this can be an important pulse broadening mechanism. Now we turn our attention to the quadratic dispersion term. In this case we can mathematically treat the dispersion by considering the frequency dependence of the propagation constant , based on a second-order Taylor series expansion, as follow For a particular frequency component, the time required to propagate through a length L of a dispersive medium is / ( ). The propagation time relative to that corresponding to the frequency is given by Using Eq.(3.18), we obtain In some applications, notably fiber optics, it is customary to express V g and  in terms of the wavelength. Here we use The results using the chain rule are Fiber dispersion is usually described in terms of a dispersion parameter D with units ps nm -1 km - 1 , defined by where In the classical optics terminology, normal and anomalous dispersion appears to refer specifically to the sign of / . However, in the ultrafast optics community, one is usually more interested in temporal dispersion, which in the case of material dispersion is governed by It is therefore customary to utilize the terms normal and anomalous material dispersion to mean / > 0 or / < 0, respectively. However, these can lead to confusion since they are used differently by different communities. Within ultrafast optics, these terms usually refer to ∂τ/∂ω, whereas in fiber optics, they usually refer to D, which is proportional to / Refer to Eq. (called normal dispersion), higher frequencies (shorter wavelengths) travel more slowly and are displaced toward the trailing edge of the pulse. This leads to an up-chirped. For  2 <0 (anomalous dispersion), higher frequencies move faster and are displaced to the leading edge of the pulse, leading to down-chirp. Although in high-speed broadband systems, dispersion is usually considered as a negative effect, it could be a beneficial characteristic in many specific applications such as pulse shaping, including pulse stretcher or compressor. The use of waveguide operating close its cutoff frequency, as an approximation to a dispersive line, is one of the historical approaches in a passive generation a short pulse in high-resolution microwave radar systems. LFM pulse compression techniques based on using waveguide operating close its cutoff frequency, as an approximation to a dispersive line has been demonstrated in early radar systems. In such compression systems, the dispersive line being the vital component. R. A. Biomley and et al. The basic idea of pulse compression is based on Linear Frequency Modulation (LFM) which was invented by R. Dicke in 1945 for RADAR applications. The algorithm for LFM pulse compression involves mainly two steps which are: generation of LFM waveform and the management of the traveling time delay of the head and the tail of the square-shaped LFM pulse using a dispersive element. An LFM signal (Fig. To investigate the pulse-compression performance of a passive linear dispersion-based pulse compressor with the group velocity, which has a negative gradient as a function of the frequency component, it is assumed that the input pulse is a chirped sine function, as stated in Eq. (3-25), where f Hi is the upper-band frequency of the negative dispersion region, T 0 is the input pulse width, E 0 is the electric field amplitude, and μ is the chirp factor. The chirp factor for a uniform input pulse spectrum in the positive GVD region from f Lo to f Hi , respectively, can be calculated using Eq. (3-26): A pulse compressor uses a system with a proper time delay or equivalently group velocity profile in terms of frequency (Fig. A unique optimal compression length can be easily achieved based on a significant value of the chirped LFM pulse duration ( ) and the group velocity profile as follows: By using the relation of ( )given in (1), the optimal length for maximum compression is computed in terms of the LFM input pulse duration (T0) and the boarder values of group velocity values as follows: ( ) = and (3-28)  = ( ) (3-29) One of the important parameters in the pulse compression applications where the compressed pulse in the time domain is not symmetric is the broadening factor (F), which is defined as the ratio of full-width at half-maximum (FWHM) of the compressed pulse to the FWHM of the input pulse. The percentage of the spectral broadening change as a figure of merit of a tunable pulse compressor can be defined. This parameter is also known as the modulation depth defined by (F /F 0 )×100%, where F is the changes of F due to tuning factor, and F 0 is the average of the minimum and maximum obtainable F Absorption is caused by three different mechanisms: Impurities in material, intrinsic absorption, and radiation defects. The attenuation of an electromagnetic wave power flow through a lossy medium is followed an exponential form of exp(-L) where  is called the absorption coefficient, and L is the propagation distance. In general, the absorption coefficient () can be related to the imaginary parts of the effective refractive index by 2k 0 Im(n e f f ), where is effective refraction index of the medium or equivalent medium of a radiating system such as fiber or waveguide. In an equivalent radiating system, the conservation of energy leads to the statement that the sum of the transmission (T), reflection (R) ,and absorption (A) of electromagnetic power flow is equal to unity, i.e., T + R + A = 1 wherein the absence of nonlinear effect (i.e. Raman effect, etc), this equation is held for any angular frequency of as T() + R() + A() = 1 As the T() and R() are related to the square of the scattering parameters of |S 21 | and |S 11 |, respectively, the A() easily can be calculated. The generation of a high quality linear FM pulses for RADAR applications are commonly with frequency range centered at microwave and millimeter-wave bands from gigahertz to tens of gigahertz. In these frequency ranges the most common method to achieve LFM signals is using voltage controlled oscillator (VCO) circuits. Recently, practical generations of LFM waveforms in sub-millimeter and terahertz bands have been reported based on some optical techniques such as optical interferometer and optoelectronic oscillator (OEO). Novel ideas for tunable THz pulse compression using a graphene-based waveguide are proposed here. In this research, we explore for the first time numerically possibilities and limitations of linear compression of negatively chirped pulses in the positive group velocity dispersion (GVD) region of a dielectric-lined circular waveguide loaded with a helical graphene ribbon. We show that the proposed structure introduces a good tunability of the compression factor via the graphene electrostatic bias. This chapter is dedicated to explaining the design details and results for terahertz's direct pulse compression in a dielectric-lined circular waveguide with tunability based on a strong both waveguide and material dispersions introduced by helical graphene-loading. A theoretical investigation backed by transient numerical analysis has led to a thorough understanding of the passive pulse compression principles and constraints. Microwave, infrared, and optical regions have mature technologies as a result of extensive development. However, in the THz band, i.e., from 0.3 to 3 THz, components, system architectures and experimental techniques are still emerging. In the quest to develop the THz band, THz waveguides have become an active research area Recently, researchers have proposed, fabricated, and tested a variety of single-mode low-loss waveguides entitled "dielectric-lined hollow metallic waveguides (DL-HMWs)."DL-HMWs become a strong candidate for the effective single-mode terahertz propagation with possible transmission loss below 1dB/m Another important element of the structure is the helical ribbon. Helix generally used in slowwave structures (SWS) in high power microwave sources such as traveling wave tube (TWT) or Gyro which should have two crucial characteristics of low-loss and controlled dispersion in a wide operating bandwidth. In recent years, several reports can be found in the literature demonstrating the techniques to shape the dispersion characteristics of a helix RF circuit with acceptable electronic efficiency across the entire operating frequency band Figure These identical sections are two simple conical circular waveguides of length L 2 that gradually connect the helix to the ends of L 1 long circular waveguides. Next section provides initial concepts of design methodology principle of the proposed graphene-based tunable pulse compressor. As the first design parameters, we start with calculating the cutoff frequency of fundamental transverse electric field of TE 11 modes in a circular waveguide with a radius of R, filled with air as follows: ( ) When a waveguide is filled partially with dielectric with relative permittivity larger than air ( r >1), one can expect that the cutoff-frequency shifts to lower. Another factor that can be affected by the cutoff-frequency is internal loading waveguide with a helically wrapped conductive ribbon, which shifts up the cutoff-frequency inversely proportional to helix inner radius related to our proposed device. It should be noted that for a circular waveguide loaded with a dielectric-coated helically wrapped graphene ribbon, which is a material with Re[ r ]<0 and Im[ r ] >0, we cannot expect analytically to find an exact estimation of the cutoff-frequency. Hence, based on the initial value of R, which is calculated based on Eq.(4-1) for operating bandwidth around our target center frequency of 2 THz, the structure design numerically is optimized using a finite integral technique (FIT) As shown in Fig. Firstly, this dielectric film coating allows the propagation of the fundamental mode TE 11 for which the tangential electric field component on the metal boundary surface can be significantly reduced and minimizes the ohmic losses due to the reduced penetration of the electric field into the waveguide walls Miyagi and Kowakami where n d is the real part of the refractive index of the dielectric film. A dielectric coating layer much smaller than this estimated thickness may cause a condition for only traveling the TE modes, which is considered for our normal-sized DL-HCW The design procedure of helix as slow-wave structure (SWS) in TWTA application is based on the desired phase velocity (V p ≅V e ), where V p and V e are phase velocity and electron-beam velocities in TWT, respectively, and has been performed in terms of the radial propagation constant (k r ) of the traveling EM wave along the helix axis. There are many configurations of helix-SWS commonly used in TWT applications with or without metal shields as well as dielectric coatings. The important structural parameters in the design of all helix-SWS configurations are the inner helix radius (a), the metal shield inner radius (a sh ), the tape-width (w) for the tape-helix (or the diameter of a wire wounded helix), and the pitch size (p). The k r r is known as the most important parameter, where r is cylindrical radial coordinate which is in 0<r<a sh . It is due to the fact that the variation of the axial electric field inside the helix, in the radial direction, is a function of I o (k r r), where I o is the modified Bessel function of the first kind and zero-order. In order to minimize the field variations across the bore area of a helix, it is desirable to keep k r a above 1.5 As in THz frequencies, most materials, including metals and dielectrics, can show a frequencydependent or dispersive behavior, the next section is devoted to discussing all material considerations that we use in the proposed device. The demand for tunable or reconfigurable components at terahertz and optical frequencies increased during the last years. Tunable THz devices for controllable systems such as tunable filters, modulators, or phase shifter are becoming more and more important. At mm-wave frequencies, piezoelectric materials and actuators have been proposed for the dynamic reconfiguration of phase-shifting surfaces. At lower mm-wave frequencies, microelectromechanical systems (MEMs) component when is integrated to each element of the periodic structure, such as high impedance surface (HIS) or metamaterials, can be realized tunable phase shift. The actuators exhibit a displacement under a voltage bias, which is translated to a dynamic control of the reflection phase As this work deals with a passive compact pulse compression can be expected that the graphene relay in the linear regime, thus the graphene sheet can be modeled as an ultra-thin, nonlocal twosided surface characterized by a surface conductivity tensor ( , ( ), , , ) based on Kubo formalism For a graphene sheet (in xy-plane) under only an electrostatic field bias, the conductivity is a scalar: graphene's scalar conductivity ( g ) is described with the combination of two components of interband and intraband as follows: In the THz spectral region where the photon energy ħ ≪ , the interband part ( ) is negligible compared to the intraband part ( ). Accordingly, in the THz regime and in case of no magnetostatic bias, graphene could be well introduced by the Drude-like surface conductivity: Where k B is the Boltzmann constant, and ħ is the modified Plank constant (h/). The relaxation time at the band of interest (<10 THz), can be considered = ħ√ /( ) ≅ 10 where v F is the Fermi velocity (≅10 6 m/s), q e is electron charge and n is the carrier density. For the numerical simulation monolayer-graphene is usually represented as a layer of material of a very small thickness Δ with two in-plane( eff,t ) and normal-plane( eff,n ) effective permittivities as following The effective permittivity of a multilayer-graphene, which is frequently observed in the chemical vapor deposition (CVD) synthesis, can also be calculated using Eq. (4-6) with a good precision Silicon dioxide is a desirable choice for dc-controlled graphene-based terahertz device. The graphene ribbon lies on a thin SiO 2 layer with thickness t SiO2 . An internal helical narrow gold film (w gold ) and the fully covered back gold films facilitate the required DC-controlling bias of the graphene ribbon. The Fermi level E F can be controlled over a wide range by applying a transverse electric field using a gate voltage V g . An approximate expression to relate E F and V g is given by = / (ħ ) where q e is the electron charge, v F is the Fermi velocity, and ħ is the reduced Plank's constant. Generally, the Fermi level can be tuned within the range from -1.0 to 1.0 eV, but due to negligible variation of the group velocity for E F greater than 0.5 eV, such a value of E F is considered the maximum. The typical values of V g that ensure safe bias electrostatic fields on the order of several volts per nanometer applied on the graphene are in the range of 0-100 V. Figure FIG. High-density polyethylene (HDPE) is used for the dielectric tube given its good THz transparency (n = 1.524 and α = 0.2 cm -1 at 1 THz As shown in Fig. From a technological perspective, the effect of a substrate and the impurities therein cannot be ignored for graphene-based, microwave optical, and terahertz device applications. Sule and et al. The optimized dimensions of the proposed tunable graphene-based waveguide for optimal pulse compression performance and maximum tunability are listed in Table The inner dielectric layer of the circular waveguide and the helical graphene ribbon provides the main functionality in the proposed graphene-based pulse compressor. The propagation characteristics of an electromagnetic structure can be studied with two common approaches: one is directly focused on circuit theory using the equivalent circuit model, and the other is based on electromagnetic mode analysis. The circuit model of the helical waveguide, as shown in Fig. In a simple structure such as an internally coated circular waveguide with a lossy layer, the approximated analytical solutions of the characteristic equation in studying the physical features of the propagation constants have been presented in Ref. Rao To investigate the pulse-compression performance of the component, it is assumed that the input pulse is a y polarized chirped sine function, as stated in Eq. , where f 0 is the upper-band frequency of the negative dispersion region, T 0 is the input pulse width, E 0 is the electric field amplitude, and μ is the chirp factor. The chirp factor for a uniform input pulse spectrum in the positive GVD region from f Lo to f Hi , 2.15 to 2.28 THz, respectively, can be calculated using Eq. (3-26): The instantaneous frequency can be obtained from the time derivative of the phase argument of Eq. proves that the tail of the chirped pulses with low-frequency components and faster group velocities move to overtake the front high-frequency components of the pulses, resulting in temporal pulse shortening with growth in amplitude. To validate the performance of the device and highlight the presence of a unique optimal length for each arbitrarily selected pulse width, two optimal compression lengths corresponding to the two chosen pulse widths of 8 and 12 ps have been numerically obtained as720 and 1700 μm, respectively. The optimization goals in our design are maximum compression ratio and minimal residual pulse pedestal, which ensures a high-quality compression. Figures 4-9 and 4-10 show the temporal waveform evolution of the envelope of the device for these two optimal lengths, 720 and1700 μm, for the two bias states, zero-bias, and 30 V. One of the important parameters in the pulse compression applications is the broadening factor (F), which is defined as the ratio of FWHM of the compressed pulse to the FWHM of the input pulse. Table THz chirped-pulse after transmission through a 10 μm circular aperture in a gold-film GaAs. The pulse was compressed to 1.4 ps with FWHM of 0.07 THz. One of the major drawbacks of this structure is the extremely low output to input peak intensity ratio of 3.7 × 10 -5 . Another example is direct compression of ultra-fast laser pulses using a dispersive and nonlinear thick (550 μm) cholesteric liquid crystal sample Comparing the numerical results shown in Table In this study, a primary concern is to investigate the sensitivity of the proposed graphene-based pulse shaping device to the crucial device parameters including the geometric dimensions and the refractive index of the dielectric coating. As illustrated in Fig. Numerical techniques could be a great help in theoretical studies of challenging electromagnetic problems such as complex structures where exact analytical solutions are difficult to obtain. In this chapter, to confirm the accuracy of the previously achieved results of the proposed tunable graphene-based pulse compressor, first of all, the mesh size sensitivity is analyzed by modeling the of the proposed device with the optimal length of 720 μm, corresponding to an input pulse duration of 8 ps, when controlling DC voltage has been set at 30 V. Then we made a step forward for a passive fixed pulse-shaper by replacing the helical graphene ribbon with a gold ribbon, and compared with our previous work, graphene-based one. Moreover, to prove the validity of the numerical analysis, the proposed device has been examined using the finite element method (FEM) and the finite integral technique (FIT). The need for system identification in engineering is interesting Fast computer-based simulation tools that allow the designers them precisely model their ideas can be responsible for undiscovered model errors. The mesh size sensitivity and convergence test are of importance, so that broadly employed in the various engineering computer-aided designer tools to ensure high accuracy of the final numerical results. Moreover, using different numerical approaches can be helpful to verify the simulation results. Meshing a complex geometry (see Fig. Execution time is an essential factor in determining the effectiveness of the numerical analysis, which depends on two factors of the minimum machine requirements and mesh cells number of the electromagnetic problems after time-spatial discretization operations. The total mesh cell number, mesh methods, and corresponding computation-time of each mesh resolution are illustrated in Table In this section in order to prove the validity of the numerical analysis results, another example of our previous work (graphene-based pulse-compressor), a passive fixed pulse-shaper by replacing the helical graphene ribbon with a gold ribbon has been introduced. The idea of using helicalribbon loaded circular waveguide as a controllable dispersion device can be verified using two different numerical approaches finite element method (FEM) and the finite integral technique (FIT).We see that the results for both methods are in an excellent agreement. First of all, to prove the accuracy of the numerical analysis, the proposed device has been analyzed using the FEM and the FIT. FIG. The optimal bandwidth, which the proposed structure shows the normalized group velocity profile that has a relatively large negative gradient (f Lo to f Hi ), is equal to 2.14-2.34 THz, , as shown in Fig. The chirped-input signal is a y-polarized chirped sine function (E y ), as stated in Eq. , where f 0 is the upper-band frequency of the negative slope of the GV profile (2.34 THz), T 0 is the input pulse width , E 0 is the electric field amplitude, and μ is the chirp factor. The chirp factor for a uniform input pulse spectrum in the negative slope of the GV region from f Lo to f Hi , 2.14 -2.34 THz, can be calculated using Eq. (3-26) as 157.07910 21 [S -2 ]. As a theoretical background, it is evident that the energy of electromagnetic waves in a dispersive medium travels in a group velocity profile which is dependent on the frequency, as the proposed structure which is shown in Fig. where L 0 is the optimum length of the structure. If the input chirped-pulse duration is chosen as (T 0 =T d,Hi -T d,Lo ), one can be expected that the tail of the input pulse travel to overtake the front one. Based on the numerically obtained information of group velocity, shown in Fig. A transfer function is an important notion in signal processing, which allows one to relate an output signal and an input. System identification, which represents the transfer function allows a great deal of flexibility in building mathematical models by using measurements of the systems input and output signals in the terahertz spectrum where b 0 , b 1 , ..., b m , a 0 , a 1 , ..., a n are coefficients to be estimated, and  n are positive real valued exponents. The proposed identification approach is based on the transfer function estimation using the input/output temporal data, which are generated in the full-wave transient simulation of the proposed waveguide under a chirped input signal. In this work, the MATLAB signal processing toolbox was employed to estimate the transfer function coefficients given in Table In many optical devices, investigation of the impact of the material of comprised parts is a crucial part of the study. As an example, the helical-ribbon in the proposed pulse compressor, which was introduced and studied in Chapters 4 and 5, has an essential influencer. As shown in Fig. The possibilities of terahertz's direct pulse compression in a dielectric-lined circular waveguide with tunability based on a strong both waveguide and material dispersions introduced by helical graphene-loading have been demonstrated. We use helix in our structure as a primary waveguide dispersion controlling element. We show that the proposed structure introduces an excellent tunability of the compression factor via the graphene electrostatic bias (see Chapter 4). The circuit model of the helical waveguide can be expressed by one inductance per unit length and two radial and inter-turn capacitances per unit length (see Fig. It is shown that by applying an electrostatic controlling gate voltage (V g ) of 0 and 30 V on the helical graphene ribbon, the temporal input pulses of width 8 and 12 ps, propagating through two different lengths (700 m and 1700 m), can be tuned by 5.9% and 8%, respectively, in the frequency range of 2.15-2.28 THz. In chapter 5, to confirm the accuracy of the previously achieved results of the proposed tunable graphene-based pulse compressor, first of all, the mesh size sensitivity is analyzed,and then we made a step forward for a passive fixed pulse-shaper by replacing the helical graphene ribbon with a gold ribbon and compared to the previous proposed tunable pulse compressor, graphenebased one. Moreover, to prove the validity of the numerical analysis, the proposed device has been examined using the finite element method (FEM) and the finite integral technique (FIT).A good agreement was found between the results of the FIT and the FEM methods. Another outstanding achievement of this research was to provide a comprehensive system model by incorporating the full-wave time-domain simulations and the numerical transfer function estimation approach. The use of the system transfer function to analyze the structure is preferable to the full-wave simulation because of saving the execution time. Once the transfer function is determined, one could apply it for the subsequent time-domain analysis of the pulse shaper with various inputs. Based on a comparative study that was performed on the impact of helical-ribbon material on the proposed terahertz waveguide-based pulse compressor performance for different material of helical ribbon in cases of (i) PEC, (ii) Au, and (iii) graphene-coated Au, the material-dispersion of the structure was highlighted. As shown in Fig. Moving on from this thesis, there are three areas of further development that would be interesting for direct passive pulse compression. Firstly, work can be done with a comparison of different waveguide platforms based on geometry (planar/non-planar). In this thesis, a normal size hollowcore waveguide (HCW) as the main platform was used while usually the over-sized HCWs with the emphasis on the low loss transmission of the HE 11 mode in the infrared and THz regions should be used. In some applications that an integration development is required, the planar platform is the most popular solution. Another area in which additional research can be carried out is the THz sensing/spectroscopy experiments have been targeted at particular substances such as toxic materials or biological samples using conventional methods such as transmission spectroscopy. Comparatively, work done on THz materials sensing has been focused on detecting refractive index changes caused by using different materials to come into contact with the materials sensor. Among different types of the optical waveguide, hollow core, and porous core for sensing applications as it allows a greater analyte volume inside its core area are more suitable. Moreover, the guided mode in a hollow-core fiber is strongly confined in the core area that greatly reduces the effect of the background material in the waveguiding properties of the fiber In order to realize a compact high-speed optical communications system, nonlinear photonics is seen as a key technology. Optical fiber materials exhibit a nonlinear response to strong electric fields, such those of optical signals confined within the small fiber core Nobel metals such as Gold in optical regime can be modeled by using Drude model as follows: 1. Material Properties>Dispersion>Dielectric dispersion, from Disp. Model list choose Drude. 2. In the Epsilon infinity field type 9.1, and type 1.38e16 (rad/s) in Plasma frequency text field, then type in collision frequency text field 1.075e14 (1/s). Graphene can be defined as (i) a thin-layer dispersive dielectric with complex permittivity, or (ii) zero thickness surface boundaries with complex surface impedance. First of all, there is a common operation for both two cases, as follows: 1. As a common step go to Home>Macros>Material>Create Graphene Material for Optical Applications. 2. Type the required preconditions of the problem in their text fields in "Define Graphene Materials" window as the following Table: These items will be appeared in Parameter list table. Then, two subfolders of Graphene and Graphene1, including Dielectric constants and Surface Impedance data, can be used to assign the proper model. 1. Right-click on the helical ribbon with thickness of tgr, choose Change material. 2. In Change Material window, from Material list select Graphene_Eps. 1. Right-click on the helical ribbon with zero thickness, choose Change material. The linear frequency modulated sinusoidal pulse and its frequency spectrum. x(t) a.u. |X(f)|a.u. The modulated raised cosine pulse and its frequency spectrum. that using focusing lenses in combination with collimating lenses a high-efficient coupling between terahertz beam and waveguide aperture can be obtained. ‫می‬ ‫تایید‬ ‫تخصصی‬ ‫دکتري‬ ‫تحصیلی‬ ‫مقطع‬ ‫میدان‬ ‫مخابرات‬ ‫و‬ ‫اینجانب‬ ‫کار‬ ‫حاصل‬ ‫رساله‬ ‫این‬ ‫نتایج‬ ‫کلیه‬ ‫که‬ ‫نمایم‬ ‫نسخه‬ ‫موارد‬ ‫و‬ ‫است‬ ‫تصرف‬ ‫و‬ ‫دخل‬ ‫هرگونه‬ ‫بدون‬ ‫ذکر‬ ‫منبع‬ ‫مشخصات‬ ‫کامل‬ ‫ذکر‬ ‫با‬ ‫را‬ ‫دیگران‬ ‫آثار‬ ‫از‬ ‫شده‬ ‫برداري‬ ‫کرده‬ ‫ام‬ . ‫من‬ ‫خلاف‬ ‫اثبات‬ ‫صورت‬ ‫در‬ ‫حاکم‬ ‫مقررات‬ ‫و‬ ‫ضوابط‬ ‫با‬ ‫مطابق‬ ‫دانشگاه‬ ‫تشخیص‬ ‫به‬ ‫فوق،‬ ‫درجات‬ ) ‫قانون‬ ‫مقررات‬ ‫و‬ ‫ضوابط‬ ‫صوتی،‬ ‫آثار‬ ‫و‬ ‫نشریات‬ ‫و‬ ‫کتب‬ ‫تکثیر‬ ‫و‬ ‫ترجمه‬ ‫قانون‬ ‫و‬ ‫مصنفان‬ ‫و‬ ‫مولفان‬ ‫حقوق‬ ‫از‬ ‫حمایت‬ ‫انضباطی‬ ‫و‬ ‫پژوهشی‬ ‫آموزشی،‬ (... ‫حقوق‬ ‫احقاق‬ ‫درخصوص‬ ‫اعتراض‬ ‫هرگونه‬ ‫حق‬ ‫و‬ ‫شد‬ ‫خواهد‬ ‫رفتار‬ ‫اینجانب‬ ‫با‬ ‫مکتسب‬ ‫می‬ ‫سلب‬ ‫خویش‬ ‫از‬ ‫را‬ ‫مجازات‬ ‫و‬ ‫تخلف‬ ‫تعیین‬ ‫و‬ ‫تشخیص‬ ‫و‬ ‫نمایم‬ . ‫هرگونه‬ ‫مسئولیت‬ ‫ضمن،‬ ‫در‬ ‫ذي‬ ‫مراجع‬ ‫و‬ ‫حقوقی‬ ‫و‬ ‫حقیقی‬ ‫از‬ ‫اعم‬ ‫اشخاص‬ ‫به‬ ‫پاسخگویی‬ ‫اینجانب‬ ‫عهده‬ ‫به‬ ‫قضایی،‬ ‫و‬ ‫اداري‬ ‫از‬ ‫اعم‬ ‫صلاح،‬ ‫داشت‬ ‫نخواهد‬ ‫خصوص‬ ‫این‬ ‫در‬ ‫مسئولیتی‬ ‫هیچ‬ ‫دانشگاه‬ ‫و‬ ‫بود‬ ‫خواهد‬ . Change Material window, from Material list select Graphene.  COMSOL 5.2a (This page intentionally left blank)