In condensed matter systems, zero-dimensional or one-dimensional Majorana modes can be realized respectively as the end and edge states of one-dimensional and two-dimensional topological superconductors. In this top-down approach, (d -1)-dimensional Majorana modes are obtained as the boundary states of a topologically nontrivial d-dimensional bulk. In a bottom-up approach instead, d-dimensional Majorana modes in a ddimensional system can be realized as the continuous limit of a periodic lattice of coupled (d -1)-dimensional Majorana modes. We illustrate this idea by considering one-dimensional proximitized superconductors with spatially-modulated potential or magnetic fields. The ensuing inhomogeneous topological state exhibits onedimensional counterpropagating Majorana modes with finite dispersion, and with a Majorana gap that can be controlled by external fields. In the massless case, the Majorana modes have opposite Majorana polarizations and pseudospins, are conformally invariant, and realize centrally extended quantum mechanical supersymmetry. The supersymmetry exhibits spontaneous partial breaking. Consequently, the massless Majorana fermion can be identified as a Goldstino, i.e., the Nambu-Goldstone fermion associated with the spontaneously broken supersymmetry. In condensed matter, zero-dimensional (0D) Majorana modes Despite the fact that theoretical models are rather simple, the experimental quest for signatures of Majorana quasiparticles has been challenging This work aims to theoretically describe in a general framework the realization of dispersive Majorana fermions with emergent SUSY as the low-energy effective model of an inhomogeneous 1D topological superconductor in the presence of periodically-modulated fields This work is organized as follows. In Section II, we will briefly review the low-energy effective model (Majorana chain) describing Majorana modes localized on a 1D closed chain, and show how this model can describe dispersive massless or massive 1D Majorana modes. In Section III, we will show that these Majorana modes can be identified as Goldstinos. Consequently, in Section IV, we will show how the effective model introduced in the previous sections can be obtained as the low-energy limit of a 1D spinless topological superconductor with spatially-modulated fields. In Section V, we will describe a realistic implementation of the low-energy model in a quantum nanowire with Rashba spin-orbit coupling and proximitized with a conventional superconductor in the presence of spatially-modulated magnetic field or chemical potential. We consider an even number 2N of Majorana modes γ Aj and γ Bj on a closed chain as in Fig. with w, v ∈ R (i.e., we assume that the Hamiltonian is Hermitian), Γ = (γ A1 , γ B1 , . . . , γ AN , γ BN ), and where the Majorana operators satisfy γ † αj = γ αj and {γ αi , γ βj } = 2δ ij δ αβ . The system is translational invariant and forms a bipartite 1D lattice of N unit cells, with two inequivalent Majorana modes per unit cell, respectively on the two sublattices A and B. This Hamiltonian can be generalized into the socalled Majorana-Hubbard model with the inclusion of interactions up to a constant term. Thus the Majorana chain is equivalent to the Kitaev chain model where the momenta are quantized as k = 2πm/N with m = 1, . . . , N integer. The model is symmetric upon changing the signs of the parameters v and w, for example, v → -v by redefining the momentum as k → k +π, or equivalently by using the unitary transformation c j → (-1) j c j in real space. We can rewrite the Hamiltonian in Bogoliubov-de Gennes form as up to a constant term, and where τ = (τ x , τ y , τ z ) are the Pauli matrices in particle-hole space. The Hamiltonian in momentum space can be written in the form is the Anderson pseudovector. The Hamiltonian is diagonalized as up to a constant term, where d k are a new set of fermionic operators with dispersion where positive and negative energy levels correspond respectively to particle and hole states. The eigenstates operators are defined by the unitary Bogoliubov transformation where the coefficients α k and β k for E k = 0 are given by In the massless case |v| = |w|, the dispersion in Eq. ( The gap closes linearly at one of the two symmetry points k = 0, π, with E 0 = 0 or E π = 0 for v = w and v = -w, respectively. Notice that if the number of unit cells N is even, the quantized momenta k = 2πm/N include both symmetry points k = 0 and π, whereas if N is odd, they include only k = 0. Therefore, for N even, the gap closes for v = ±w, whereas for N odd, the gap closes only for v = w. The Hamiltonian becomes H(0) = 0 and H(π) = 0 respectively for v = ±w. Thus the zero-energy eigenstates at the gapless points are doubly degenerate and given by any combination of the fermionic operator c k=0 = (1/ √ N ) n c n and its Hermitian conjugate c † k=0 for v = w, or by any combination of ) n c n and c † k=π for v = -w. Alternatively, the eigenstates can be written as a superposition of a fermionic operator d M and its hermitian conjugate d † M , defined as where the nonlocal Majorana operators γ A,B are defined as which satisfy γ † α = γ α and { γ α , γ β } = 2δ αβ , and with k = 0, π respectively for v = w and v = -w [also notice that e ikj = (w/v) j ]. These are two delocalized 1D Majorana modes with finite support on the whole chain. The model exhibits two topologically phases corresponding to the topological invariant P eff = sgn pf A where pf A = w 2 -v 2 , which The dispersion is parabolic near the high-symmetry points k = 0, π, except for the cases w = v, with linear dispersion at k = 0 and w = -v, with linear dispersion at k = π. gives P eff = sgn (|w| -|v|) = sgn M eff . In the massless case, the 1D Majorana modes γ A,B describe a 1D free Majorana fermion which is equivalent to the 1+1D Ising model (via the Jordan-Wigner transformation) and thus described by a 1+1D conformal field theory in the Ising universality class with the central charge c = 1/2 Besides 1D Majorana modes, the Hamiltonian also exhibits Majorana end modes in the nontrivial phase |v| > |w| in the case of open boundary conditions. Up to exponentially small corrections, the two 0D end states are In the presence of disorder, the translational symmetry of the Hamiltonian in Eq. (1) breaks down, and the model can be generalized by considering site-dependent hoppings v, w → v j , w j , as in Ref. as derived in Ref. The closing of the particle-hole gap occurs with a change of the topological invariant when pf A = 0, i.e., when j w jj v j = 0. The Majorana end modes localized at the two ends of the chain in the topologically nontrivial phase are robust against disorder. In the presence of disorder, SUSY is realized if and only if Eq. ( The continuum limit of Hamiltonian in Eq. ( which coincides with a 1D Dirac equation with mass m = (v -w)/v 2 (i.e., mass gap mv 2 = v -w) and a quadratic correction in the momentum. The energy dispersion is which for w = v becomes linear at small momenta E k ≈ v|k|. The solutions of the Dirac equation above are described by two counterpropagating and degenerate eigenfunctions, i.e., with opposite momenta and same energy E k = E -k . The covariant form of the Dirac equation is obtained by multiplying Eq. ( which is a real equation with real solutions. Dirac equations with a quadratic correction in the form of Eq. ( We define the Majorana pseudospin operator as τ /2 in analogy to the spin operator σ/2 (we use natural units). Here, σ and τ are the vectors of Pauli matrices in spin and particle-hole space, respectively. Majorana fermions in particle physics are obtained by decoupling the Dirac fourcomponent bispinor into two independent right-handed and left-handed two-component spinors (chiral projections). The expectation values of the two operators calculated for each chiral projection Ψ L,R coincide, i.e., σ L,R = τ L,R . In the massless case, each chiral projection forms a pair of counterpropagating modes, which are symmetric under particlehole and time-reversal symmetry. As a consequence of timereversal symmetry, these modes have opposite spin, i.e., they form a helical pair of counterpropagating chiral modes. Moreover, due to particle-hole symmetry, they have opposite Majorana pseudospin (opposite particle-hole content), i.e., they form a pseudohelical pair. Analogously to the notion of helical modes, i.e., a pair of counterpropagating modes having opposite spin, we define pseudohelical modes as pair of counterpropagating modes having opposite pseudospin. Since the expectation values of spin and Majorana pseudospin coincide in the case of spinful and massless Majorana fermions, the two counterpropagating modes are both helical and pseudohelical. However, in the case of spinless particles, pseudochirality and pseudohelicity are still well-defined, whereas chirality and helicity are not. The eigenstates of the effective Hamiltonian H eff in Eq. ( In the massless case v = w and at k ≈ 0 (or alternatively for v = -w and at k ≈ π), one obtains τ /2 = sgn (v sin k)(0, 1/2, 0). In particular, for v = w > 0 one has τ /2 = ±(0, 1/2, 0) for k → 0 ± , while for v = -w > 0 one has τ /2 = ±(0, 1/2, 0) for k → ±π. Hence, in the massless case, the effective Hamiltonian H eff exhibits a pair of counterpropagating modes with opposite Majorana pseudospin. The projections of the Majorana pseudospin on the momentum direction are the same for both modes, i.e., the two modes form a pseudohelical pair with a well-defined pseudochirality. Consequently, elastic backscattering between the two branches is suppressed. The Majorana pseudospin τ /2 introduced here is a generalization of the Majorana polarization A 1D closed chain of 0D Majorana modes exhibits SUSY, as shown in the case of translationally invariant systems Alternatively, by using the Majorana operators, for any many-body state |ψ there exists at least another state γ A,B |ψ with the same energy. Moreover, the two degenerate states are distinguished by a different fermion parity. This is because creating or annihilating the zero-energy quasiparticle fermion d M does not change the total energy but changes the total number of fermions by one, and therefore changes the fermion parity. We define the fermion parity operator P = (-1) F = N j=1 iγ Aj γ Bj , where F is the fermion number operator. The parity operator commutes with the Hamiltonian and anticommutes with the Majorana operators { γ A,B , P } = 0. Hence, the many-body states |ψ and γ A,B |ψ have opposite fermion parity. The twofold degeneracy of the many-body energy spectra can be explained as the consequence of SUSY in quantum mechanics. In a nutshell, SUSY can be defined as a symmetry with respect to the change of the fermion parity of the manybody state with h > 1. We will show that the Hamiltonian H SUSY exhibits centrally extended quantum mechanical SUSY. In general, a many-body Hamiltonian H exhibits N = 2 SUSY One can also combine the supercharges Q 1 , Q 2 into a complex supercharge Q which commutes with the Hamiltonian and satisfy the superalgebra where The definitions of SUSY via the superalgebras in Eqs. ( Following Ref. where γ A,B are the nonlocal Majorana operators defined in Eq. which satisfies the superalgebra in Eq. ( The action of these supercharges on a generic manybody state is to annihilate or create the fermionic zero-energy state d M in Eq. SUSY explains the twofold degeneracy of the spectra. For any many-body particle state |ψ ± with definite fermion parity P |ψ ± = ± |ψ ± , there exists a supersymmetric degenerate state (superpartner) defined as with opposite fermion parity. The above expression is welldefined for all many-body particle states, since E φ > 0. In our case, the Hamiltonian H eff is diagonal in the many-particle basis |{n m } = |n 1 , n 2 , . . . , n N , where n m = 0, 1 are the occupation numbers of the fermionic single-particle state with momentum k = 2πm/N . Therefore the operator √ H SUSY is obtained by taking the square roots of the diagonal elements of H SUSY . SUSY persists in the presence of disorder as long as the particle-hole gap is closed, i.e., if Eq. ( In the translational invariant case realized in the absence of disorder and with |v| = |w|, one can also consider a second SUSY superalgebra by defining a set of supercharges in terms of a translational symmetry operator, as derived in Ref. (The case v = -w can be analyzed by using the unitary transformation c j → (-1) j c j , which gives v → -v.) The translation operator T anticommutes with the fermion parity operator {T, P } = 0, and commutes with the Hamiltonian [T, H SUSY ] = 0 in the case |v| = |w| and in the absence of disorder. We notice that the Hamiltonian in Eq. ( which satisfies the superalgebra in Eq. It is also possible to decompose the complex supercharge Q T into two Hermitian supercharges which satisfy the superalgebra in Eq. where U A,B = T γ A,B are unitary operators. In general, a supersymmetric Hamiltonian can admit several supercharges with a richer structure, which is known as extended SUSY where Z ij are the so-called central charges, which commute with all elements Q i , Q † i , and H of the superalgebra satisfy the centrally extended superalgebra in Eq. ( where P = (-1) Hence, the Hamiltonian exhibits N = 4 centrally extended SUSY. An important question is whether the SUSY is spontaneously broken. To see this, we consider the Witten index The spontaneously breaking of SUSY can be interpreted as the breaking of the extended N = 4 SUSY down to N = 2 SUSY. To show this, let's consider the action of the supercharges on the two degenerate groundstates, i.e., the vacuum |0 and the state |1 = d † M |0 , having respectively even and odd fermion parity. The supercharges Q 1 , Q † 1 annihilate both groundstates However, the two groundstates are superpartners with respect to the supercharges Q 2 , Q † 2 . Indeed, since T commutes with the Hamiltonian and anticommutes with the parity operator, the eigenstate T |0 has the same energy but opposite parity of |0 , and therefore T |0 = |1 and also T |1 = |0 , which gives Hence, the supercharge Q 1 remains unbroken while the supercharge Q 2 is spontaneously broken resulting in a Goldstino (or Nambu-Goldstone fermion) Thus, we identify the gapless Majorana fermion as the Goldstino of the spontaneously broken SUSY. In extended superalgebras with zero central charges Z ij = 0, the partial supersymmetry breaking is forbidden by the nogo theorem by Witten There have been several proposals for realizing SUSY in condensed matter systems, such as in Bose-Fermi mixtures of ultracold atoms In the absence of disorder, the translational invariance is a necessary and sufficient condition for closing the mass gap M eff = 0, and it is also a necessary and sufficient condition for the emergence of SUSY. The mass gap is zero if and only if the Hamiltonian exhibits SUSY: In other words, the closing of the mass gap is protected by SUSY. For systems with disorder and no translational symmetry, a necessary and sufficient condition for the closing of the mass gap and the emergence of SUSY is given by Eq. ( Finally, we consider the case of a 1D chain with open boundary conditions. In this case, the Hamiltonian still exhibits SUSY in the limit of infinite system size, or in the case where one of the overlaps is zero w = 0 (or if any w n = 0, such that Eq. ( which again satisfy the superalgebra in Eq. ( The Majorana chain Hamiltonian in Eq. ( where ψ is the real-space spinless fermionic field, p = -i ∂ x is the momentum operator, ∆ the p-wave superconducting pairing, m the effective mass, and μ(x) the space-dependent chemical potential measured with respect to the bottom of the conduction band. If the superconducting pairing is uniform, one can always gauge away the phase of the superconducting pairing and assume Im∆ = 0: In this case, the Hamiltonian is in the BDI symmetry class where t = 2 /2ma 2 and ∆ = ∆/2a. This is a generalization of the Kitaev chain model Hamiltonian In the case of uniform fields μ n = μ, and for small chemical potentials |μ| 2t, the topologically trivial and nontrivial phases are realized respectively for μ < 0 and μ > 0, and the particle-hole gap is equal to |μ|. In other words, the topological mass gap and the topological invariant are defined as M = -μ and P = sgn M, with trivial and nontrivial phases realized respectively for M = -μ > 0 and M = -μ < 0 (P = ±1). We assume thus a periodic variation of the chemical potential with wavelength λ = M a equal to M lattice sites, which can be written in general as a sum of Fourier harmonics as where q = 2π/λ is the characteristic wavenumber of the periodic modulation. Via Fourier transform, c n = (1/ √ N ) k e ikn c k , the Hamiltonian in Eq. ( where h k = 2t -2t cos k, and with the momenta restricted to the first Brillouin zone k ∈ [0, 2π/λ]. Notice that the unit cell in the presence of a finite periodic chemical potential is equal to M lattice sites. Using the fermionic anticommutation relations, one can rewrite the Hamiltonian in the Bogoliubovde Gennes form, which reads up to a constant term with where diag(a m ) is the diagonal matrix and where the Kronecker delta δ nm is defined modulo M , such that δ 0M = δ M 0 = 1. In the case of a purely harmonic potential μ(x) = μ 0 +δμ sin(qx), the Hamiltonian above simplify with μ mq-nq = δ mn μ 0 +iδμ(δ m-n,1 -δ n-m,1 )/2. Notice that the superconducting pairing couples electrons with opposite momenta k + mq and -k -mq = -k + (M -m)q. Moreover, one has Ĥ(k) * = Ĥ(k) (hermitian) and ∆(k) † = -∆(-k) * (due to the antisymmetry of the superconducting coupling between fermions). The parameters w, v of the effective model are defined by projecting the Hamiltonian in Eq. ( where f (μ(x)) is an unknown function of the chemical potential, and where the two domains of integration are the segments connecting contiguous quasi-Majorana states. The two overlaps are equal in magnitude if the corresponding distances are equal, i.e., L AB = L BA and if To verify the localization of the quasi-Majorana modes, we numerically diagonalize the Hamiltonian in Eq. Figures Figures Figures The dispersion of the 1D Majorana modes and the probability density at low-energies, which we calculated numerically, can be easily described in terms of the effective lowenergy model described by the Hamiltonian in Eq. ( The dispersion of the 1D Majorana modes closely resembles the dispersion of the effective low-energy theory in Eq. ( Probability density of the Majorana modes calculated for a p-wave spinless 1D superconductor with harmonic, soft-wall, and hard-wall periodic potential, with modulation amplitude δμ and ∆ = t. Different rows correspond to different values of the uniterm μ0 = 2δμ (a), μ0 = δμ/2 (b), and μ0 = 0 (c) respectively. The peaks of the probability density correspond to (a) Majorana end modes localized at the opposite ends of the system, with localization length ξM ≈ 0.1λ, (b) Majorana end modes localized at the opposite ends of the system, with localization length ξeff = 1/| ln |w/v|| ≈ λ > ξM, and (c) quasi-Majorana modes localized at the boundaries between the topologically trivial and nontrivial segments in the bulk of the system. We consider now the case the system has open boundary conditions. As analyzed before, the system is topologically trivial or nontrivial with P = P n = ±1 respectively for μ 0 > |δμ| and μ 0 < -|δμ|. In the latter case, the system exhibits Majorana end modes γ L and γ R localized at the left and the right ends of the system. For μ 0 |δμ| the localization length of these Majorana end modes coincide with the localization length ξ M of the quasi-Majorana modes γ Aj and γ Bj , as shown in Fig. However, for |δμ| > |μ 0 |, the local topological invariant is not uniform, and the system exhibits quasi-Majorana modes localized at the boundaries between contiguous trivial M n > 0 and nontrivial M n < 0 segments. In this regime, the system is described in terms of coupled Majorana operators (Majorana chain) in the Hamiltonian in Eq. ( We now describe a realistic model, i.e., a semiconducting nanowire with spin-orbit coupling (e.g., InAs, InSb) in a magnetic field and proximitized superconductivity induced by coating the wire with a conventional s-wave superconductor (e.g., Al, Nb) as shown in Fig. where ψ = [ψ ↑ , ψ ↓ ] is the real-space electronic spinor field, σ = (σ x , σ y , σ z ) the Pauli matrices in spin space, m the effective mass of the semiconducting wire, α the spinorbit coupling strength, μ(x) the chemical potential measured with respect to the bottom of the conduction band, b(x) = (g/2)μ B B(x) the Zeeman field, and ∆(x) the superconducting pairing due to proximization. The Hamiltonian is in the D symmetry class where is the spinor whose components are the fermionic operators with up and down spin on each lattice site. In the case of uniform fields and assuming that the magnetic field in the zx-plane, the topologically nontrivial phase is realized for b 2 > μ 2 + ∆ 2 We consider a periodic modulation of the chemical potential, magnetic fields, and superconducting order parameter, with wavelength λ = M a equal to M lattice sites, given by Eq. ( where q = 2π/λ is the wavenumber of the periodic modulation. We assume that the wavelength λ of the periodic modulation is much larger than the lattice parameter, so that the discrete lattice can be a good approximation of the continuum. Via Fourier transform, the Hamiltonian in Eq. ( where h k = 2t-2t cos(k)-(α/a) sin(k)σ y and with the momenta restricted to the first Brillouin zone k ∈ [0, 2π/λ]. The length of the unit cell is equal to the wavelength λ = M a of the periodically-modulated fields. Again, using the fermionic anticommutation relations, one obtains the Hamiltonian in the Bogoliubov-de Gennes form, which reads with up to a constant term. Again, due to the antisymmetry of the superconducting coupling between fermions, one has Ĥ(k) * = Ĥ(k) (hermitian) and ∆ † = -∆ * . The values of the parameters entering the Hamiltonians in Eqs. To realize a periodic array of spatially separated but overlapping quasi-Majorana modes along the wire, the periodic fields need to have a wavelength λ larger than but comparable with the Majorana localization length ξ M . Indeed, the overlaps v, w between contiguous quasi-Majorana modes are exponentially small in the distance d between the states, i.e., |v|, |w| ∝ e -d/ξM . Therefore, for shorter wavelengths λ ξ M , these overlaps v, w become larger, and the groundstate and low-energy excitations of the system cannot be described in terms of spatially separated Majorana modes, as in the effective Hamiltonian in Eq. ( Estimating the parameters w, v of the effective model in a realistic system with spatially-modulated inhomogeneous fields is not straightforward (see, e.g., Ref. 132). Analogously to the previous case [see Eq. ( where f (M(x)) is an unknown function of the Majorana mass M(x), and where the two domains of integration are the segments connecting contiguous quasi-Majorana states. In first approximation, the two overlaps are equal when the corresponding distances are equal, i.e., L AB ≈ L BA . Hence, in order to have massless 1D Majorana modes with emergent SUSY (|v| = |w|) one needs to satisfy the condition where L AB + L BA = λ. We first consider the case where the magnetic field is uniform along the wire, but the chemical potential is periodicallymodulated with periodicity comparable with the Majorana localization length. In a nanowire, this can be realized using a regular and periodic array of electrical gates at positions x n = nλ, as illustrated in Fig. In this setup, by tuning the magnetic field b or the uniform term of the chemical potential μ 0 , one can realize a regime where the mass gap M n = μ 2 n + ∆ 2 n -|b n | assumes alternatively positive and negative values along the chain, which correspond to topologically trivial and nontrivial segments. Figures We now consider the case where the chemical potential is uniform along the wire, but the magnetic field is periodicallymodulated and perpendicular to the spin-orbit coupling direction. A periodic magnetic field with periodicity comparable with the Majorana localization length can be realized in at least two experimental setups. In one setup, the periodic magnetic field is induced by a periodic arrangement of nanomagnets In another possible setup, the periodic magnetic field is given by the fringing fields induced by a magnetic thin film (e.g., Co/Pt-multilayer) in the magnetic stripe phase A different approach to localize quasi-Majorana modes is to consider magnetic fields with periodic discontinuities, which may arise from topological defects of magnetic textures The periodic magnetic fields induced by a periodic array of nanomagnets or by a periodic magnetic texture can be calculated in a closed-form by using the dipole approximation. Neglecting higher-order multipole terms, the magnetic field induced by each nanomagnet or magnetic stripe is approximately equal to the field of a magnetic dipole m n in the zdirection, i.e., B = (μ 0 /4π)[3r(m • r)/r 5 -m/r 3 ]. Thus the field along the wire can be written analytically as where μ 0 is the vacuum permeability (not to be confused with the uniform component of the chemical potential used in the previous sections). The dipole approximation is accurate for large d since dipole contributions dominate at large distances. On top of the periodically-modulated magnetic field, we consider the additional presence of a uniform external field B a in the z-direction, which can be used to control and tune the lengths of the topological nontrivial and trivial segments along the wire. Figures tively by a periodic arrangement of parallel magnetic dipoles m n = |m|ẑ at positions x n = (n + 1)λ, and of alternating dipoles m n = -(-1) n |m|ẑ at positions x n = nλ/2 calculated using Eq. ( , where B c is the critical field of the superconducting coating, and we take B c = 1 T in numerical calculations. Using an externally applied and uniform magnetic field B a , it is possible to realize a setup where the mass gap M n = μ 2 + ∆ 2 -|b n | assumes alternatively positive and negative values along the chain. Figures Figure the boundaries between the trivial and nontrivial segments decreases. This results in larger overlaps between quasi-Majorana modes, which finally merge into a bulk delocalized fermionic Andreev-like mode. In this regime, the low energy physics cannot be described anymore as a 1D lattice of quasi-Majorana modes. We notice that, also in the case of an s-wave proximitized topological superconductor in 1D, the low energy physics can be described in terms of the effective low-energy model described by the Hamiltonian in Eq. (1). Again, the overlaps between the wavefunctions of the quasi-Majorana modes at the ends of the nontrivial and trivial segments are proportional to w and v, respectively. In the general case, these overlaps are different |v| = |w| and, consequently, the mass gap |v|-|w| of the 1D Majorana modes in Figs. We will now briefly comment on the case of open boundary conditions. If the mass gap M n has the same sign on the whole wire, then the system realizes an insulating phase which is either topologically trivial or nontrivial, respectively for M n > 0 and M n < 0. In the nontrivial phase, the wire exhibits Majorana end modes γ L , γ R with localization length ξ M ≈ (b z /E SO )α/∆ or ξ M ≈ α/∆ respectively in the weak and strong spin-orbit coupling regimes. However, if the mass gap M n changes its sign along the wire, the system can be described as a chain of quasi-Majorana modes, as in Eq. ( The direct signature of SUSY is the degeneracy of the many-body spectrum, i.e., the presence of supersymmetric partners with opposite fermion parities for all many-body states. This degeneracy is present if and only if the particlehole gap is closed. The particle-hole gap closing can be experimentally revealed by a finite LDOS at zero-energy localized along the whole length of the wire measured, e.g., via tunneling probes placed at the bulk of the nanowire Moreover, the emergence of SUSY can also be revealed by the differential conductance. Following Ref. where Γ is the tunneling rate with the external lead. This zerobias peak corresponds to the tunneling into the 1D Majorana modes at zero energy and becomes quantized G = 2e 2 /h in the regime where the couplings between contiguous 0D quasi-Majorana modes becomes smaller than the tunneling rate |v| Γ. For v = w instead, the energy of the Majorana modes is lifted and, consequently, the zero-bias conductance vanishes. Hence, for long wires or wires in a loop geometry (i.e., with closed boundary conditions), a dip-to-peak transition in the zero-bias differential conductance is a fingerprint of the SUSY at v = w. We also notice that electronic interactions with the external environment may stabilize SUSY in an extended window of the parameter space. Since contiguous 0D quasi-Majorana modes have a finite overlap, they acquire a finite charge density In summary, we described the realization of a dispersive (massive or massless) 1D Majorana fermion which can be constructed using a periodic lattice of 0D Majorana fermions with finite overlaps in the continuum limit, and we showed in detail the emergence of SUSY in this model. Moreover, we described the realization of this 1D Majorana fermion model as the low-energy effective theory of 1D inhomogeneous topological superconductors, considering spinless models with pwave superconducting coupling and with spatially-modulated potentials, as well as spinful models with spin-orbit coupled s-wave superconductivity and with spatially-modulated potentials or magnetic fields. Our proposal can be experimentally realized by adding a single ingredient, i.e., a spatiallymodulated Zeeman field or chemical potential, to a typical nanowire setup and varying the externally-applied uniform magnetic field. Spatially-modulated Zeeman fields can be experimentally realized by periodic arrangement of nanomagnets or by employing the fringing fields induced by magnetic thin films in the magnetic stripe phase. On the other hand, spatially-modulated chemical potentials can be realized by periodic gating in nanowires or with periodical modulations of the width of the superconductor in 2D epitaxial heterostructures. Moreover, we established the physical requirements that allow the emergence of the 1D Majorana fermion, particularly concerning the competition of the different length scales which characterize the system. In the massless case, these 1D Majorana modes have some remarkable properties, i.e., it exhibits conformal invariance and emergent SUSY. We identified these massless Majorana modes as Goldstinos, i.e., the Nambu-Goldstone fermions associated with spontaneously broken SUSY. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first example of extended SUSY with central extensions in a condensed matter system. The experimental fingerprint of this supersymmetric massless (gapless) 1D Majorana fermions is the presence of a dip-to-peak transition in the differential conductance, a finite density of states at zero energy, and a zero-bias peak delocalized along the whole length of the wire. This is experimentally distinguishable from the case of zero-energy peaks of 0D Majorana end modes, which are localized only at the ends of the wire. Moreover, we emphasize that zero-energy peaks are not expected in the case of several quasi-Majorana modes at a finite distance, since the groundstate degeneracy is generally lifted by their finite overlaps, which contributes to a sizable energy shift away from zero. A finite zero-bias peak in the presence of several quasi-Majorana modes is therefore a direct signature of the supersymmetric and massless 1D Majorana fermions.