The field of electron spin resonance (ESR) is in constant need of improving its capabilities. Among other things, this means having better resonators to reach improved spin sensitivity and enable larger microwave-power-to-microwave-magnetic-field conversion factors. Surface microresonators, made of small metallic patches on a dielectric substrate, provide very good absolute spin sensitivity and high conversion factors due to their very small mode volume. However, such resonators suffer from relatively low spin concentration sensitivity and a low-quality factor, a fact that offsets some of their significant potential advantages. The use of superconducting patches to replace the metallic layer seems a reasonable and straightforward solution to the quality factor issue, at least for measurements carried out at cryogenic temperatures. Nevertheless, superconducting materials, especially those that can operate at moderate cryogenic temperatures, are not easily incorporated into setups requiring high magnetic fields due to the electric current vortices generated in the latter's surface. This makes the transition from normal conducting materials to superconductors highly nontrivial. Here we present the design, fabrication, and testing results of surface micro-resonators made of yttrium barium copper oxide (YBCO), a superconducting material that operates also at high magnetic fields and makes it possible to pursue ESR at moderate cryogenic temperatures (up to ~80 K). We show that with a unique experimental setup, these resonators can be made to operate well even at high fields of ~1.2 T. Furthermore, we analyze the effect of current vortices on the ESR signal and the spins' coherence times. Finally, we provide a head-to-head comparison of YBCO vs copper resonators of the same dimensions, which clearly shows their pros and cons and directs us to future potential developments and improvements in this field. The field of electron spin resonance (ESR) is in constant need of improving its capabilities. Among other things, this means having better resonators to reach improved spin sensitivity and enable larger conversion factors of microwave-power-to-microwave-magnetic-field (denoted as Cp). The sensitivity of electron spin resonance is determined, among other factors, by the quality factor, Q, of the resonator used in the experiment. From a quantitative standpoint, the sensitivity per unit of time is improved as √Q Most relevant to this paper are works on surface micro-resonators that employ superconducting patches deposited on a dielectric substrate. For example, Lyon's group has employed a very thin and long (/4) microstrip resonator, made of Nb spattered on sapphire at a frequency of ~10 GHz, Q factor of ~1000-2000, temperature of ~4.2 K, and magnetic field of ~0.33 T to measure electron spins in P-doped isotopically enriched 28 Si The above-mentioned literature sources clearly show that while superconducting resonators have definitely been used in ESR in the past, they have mainly been employed in fundamental physics studies or proof of principle processes and are yet to penetrate more practical applications in mainstream ESR. This is because most studies have employed superconductors with very low critical temperatures, and mainly because unfortunately, superconducting materials and magnetic fields do not mix well. When a superconducting material is placed in a static magnetic field, it tends to lose its useful properties. Type I superconductors lose their superconductivity abruptly at rather low fields of a few millitesla. Type II superconductors are more forgiving, and materials such as yttrium barium copper oxide (YBCO) can maintain their superconductivity even at a field of ~150 T Typical values of Hc1 for YBCO range at ~5-15 mT In view of these issues, most of the previous studies on ESR with superconducting resonators, such as those cited above, are limited to very low static magnetic fields and extremely low temperatures Our overall motivation is to develop optimized resonators for mainstream pulsed ESR applications. By "optimized" we refer to resonators having excellent spin and concentration sensitivity that can also provide a high conversion factor, Cp, from microwave input power to microwave magnetic field (B1), to obtain an efficient pulse operation. The term "mainstream ESR" is of course not well defined, but our subjective definition relates to static fields in the range of 0.3-3.5 T and temperatures in the range of ~4-80 K, where one could probably find more than 80% of contemporary pulsed ESR works used in biology, chemistry, and materials science. Clearly, most, if not all, of the above-mentioned experiments with superconducting resonators in ESR are irrelevant to mainstream pulsed ESR. This is either because of the required extremely low temperatures, the devices' limitation of magnetic fields to the lower ranges, the resonators' Q values that are too large to excite large bandwidths, problems of nonlinearity while handling high microwave power, and/or because of their very poor concentration sensitivity. We argue that surface micro-resonators designed for the measurements of sample volumes of ~1 nL are possibly the best candidates for such mainstream pulsed ESR experiments Here, we present our efforts to answer the challenges brought forward in the Motivation section above. We show the design, production, and testing of a superconducting version of the "ParPar" family of surface micro-resonators recently introduced by us i. Test sample: All ESR measurements were carried out with a test sample of phosphorus-doped isotopically-enriched 28 Si (denoted as 28 Si:P). The P: 28 Si epilayer is 50 m thick and was grown using 28 SiH4 on a Si(100) p-type highly resistive substrate made by ISONICS Corporation (USA). The concentration of 29 Si in the P: 28 Si epilayer is below 0.1%. The phosphorus concentration was measured using the Hall effect and found to be 3.3(4)10 16 cm -3 ii. ESR system and cryogenic probe head: Test sample measurements were carried out using a spinUP system equipped with spinUP-Q Q-band transconverter module (spinflex, Israel), with a Varian E-12 magnet and E-7700 power supply. The cryogenic measurements employed a homemade cryogenic probe head for Q-band (see Fig. The resonators are designed by means of a custom-made integral equation electromagnetic software we recently developed in our lab. Full details of this program are provided in Briefly, it employs a method-of-moments (MoM) solver based on the electric field integral equation. The software can account for either conducting or superconducting layers deposited on a dielectric substrate. Conductor or superconductor materials are modeled through their surface impedance, which is given by eqs. ( (1) where  is the dielectric medium impedance,  is the complex conductivity,  = (1+j)√(  )√  and L is the London penetration depth of the superconductor. Here we used L = 500 nm, which gave good correspondence between the calculated and measured results of the resonance frequencies. (Literature data on L vary a lot Resonator properties relevant to this work (refer to Fig. The measured Q values and resonance frequencies are typical values since they are couplingdependent. The calculated resonance frequency is based on a plane wave excitation model. The ParParCopper resonators were produced using the process described in ref LaAlO3 was chosen as a substrate because of its fairly large permittivity that is almost temperatureindependent and its low dielectric losses ( ~ 24, tan  <10 -4 ) Following the fabrication of several types of resonators, individual devices were glued to a custom-made Rexolite resonator holder using a cryogenic adhesive (Stycast 1266) for use in our cryogenic ESR probe head a. Tests of electromagnetic properties Fig. properties: Our hypothesis was that current vortices cause magnetic field distortion near the resonator's surface that can broaden the ESR signal and also affect its coherence properties. To test this hypothesis, we employed the 28 sample described above, which has two very narrow lines in its spectrum and a long coherence time (T2). Therefore, such sample would be very sensitive to magnetic field distortions. Fig. Having realized that current vortices greatly affect our sample's ESR signal, attempts were made to mitigate their effect. As noted above, the usual practice is to employ a resonator with a thin superconducting layer and align its plane along the direction of the static magnetic field. However, while previous works provided mainly mechanical solutions involving a repeated process of aligning → reducing the temperature below Tc → measuring Q → elevating the temperature above Tc to anneal out the vortices → realigning Typical results of such tests conducted with the ParParYBCO-100 resonator at 10 K are provided in Fig. Possibly, the approach to Q-value monitoring that was used in the past for mechanical alignments is more useful to identify the optimal bias in higher Q-value resonators (achievable at lower temperatures). Nevertheless, as noted above, in our case the ESR signal itself served directly as our feedback input and we had no need to apply this Q-value-based aligning approach. After eliminating almost all of the effects of the current vortices, the main question remains: is it worth it? Is the use of YBCO surface resonators justified, at least for the conditions we tested here and for the type of sample we measured? To answer this question, we carried out a head-to-head comparison of ParParCopper-20 and ParParYBCO-20 resonators. Both have the same bridge size and similar resonance frequency but slightly different overall dimensions, due to the issue of kinetic inductance, which is taken into account by our electromagnetic solver. Both resonators were tested with the exact same sample of 28 Si:P, as shown in Fig. In terms of absolute spin sensitivity, we can provide the following estimations: For the copper resonator, the maximal signal was obtained with an input microwave power of ~3.6 mW and, as noted above, it gave an optimal SNR of 8330. Considering our microwave magnetic field simulations and past magnetic resonance imaging performed with resonators with the same dimensions This work presents a methodology to design, fabricate, and test YBCO-based superconducting surface micro-resonators. Such resonators can potentially contribute to the sensitive ESR measurement of many types of samples under modest cryogenic conditions as used in mainstream ESR. The Q value we obtained (up to 1670) is more than one order of magnitude better than the one measured for a similar device made of copper. While this value seems to be relatively low compared to previous works with superconductors for ESR, it should be analyzed in view of the relevant context of our motivation. Thus, as noted in the Introduction, some experiments with ESR using miniature superconducting resonators made of Nb achieved similar Q values, but they were limited to very low temperatures and/or very low magnetic fields and thus are irrelevant for most mainstream ESR applications. This is especially true for experiments with aluminum resonators that obtain Q values of more than 10 5 , but require millikelvin temperatures and very low magnetic fields. An additional issue to consider is the fact that we work at relatively high frequencies (~3-7 times higher than other superconducting designs for ESR appearing on the literature), which may also cause increased losses. It is thus clear that although our Q value seems to be low compared to that of other surface superconducting micro-resonators, it is actually very reasonable given the fact that our resonators can operate at much higher temperatures and much higher static field than previous designs. Furthermore, having a Q that is too large would limit the available bandwidth of pulse excitation, which again would not be useful for most mainstream pulsed ESR applications. For example, with the highest Q value we achieved, at ~35 GHz, one can expect to excite a bandwidth of only ~21 MHz. It is possible, of course, to over-couple the resonator, enable a larger bandwidth, and still gain in sensitivity from the high Q values, but the net gain would become negligible as the difference between the over-coupled Q and the unloaded Q becomes very large Our results also clearly show significant effects caused by a static magnetic field of about 1 T. Such data, which is reported for YBCO resonators for the first time, include decreasing the resonator's quality factor, reducing the ESR signal, broadening its spectrum, and reducing the coherence time of a narrow-line sample placed on the resonator. The latter type of data (reduction in T2) is probably the first-ever investigation of this interesting aspect for superconducting resonators in ESR. The measurement of T2 also opens up the possibility of measuring the current vortices' frequency spectrum (which is an important research field One aspect in which we already saw a clear improvement in performance is the significant increase in the resonator's microwave-to-magnetic-field conversion factor, which enabled us to work at power levels that are a factor of ~3.5 smaller than those we needed for the copper resonator. This is in good agreement with the theoretical dependence between this parameter and √Q Note about absolute spin sensitivity: In previous work carried out with a ParParCopper-50 resonator, we demonstrated spin sensitivity of ~6.3 × 10 5 spins/√Hz Two additional important aspects of our work are the use of an integral miniature cryogenic Hall sensor inside the cryostat to report the off-axis magnetic field close to the sample, and the variable coupling mechanism. The first proved to be very helpful in assessing the level of alignment of our probe head and aided us in the mitigation of the vortices. The second aspect is new with respect to the use of superconducting surface resonators, which often have fixed coupling mechanism. To the best of our knowledge, enabling variable coupling mechanism at cryogenic temperature that can control the coupling rate has not been demonstrated in previous superconducting ESR resonator designs. Variable coupling is also important for the placement of different types of samples on the resonator and to accommodate their different dielectric properties with optimized precision. It can be concluded that YBCO resonators are essentially "good" in terms of their high Q value and large conversion factor. However, they are "bad" due to the vortices produced on their surface that affect ESR signals. Indeed, this aspect requires additional optimization so that superconductors such as YBCO could be used as a basis for micro-resonator design in mainstream pulsed ESR. Luckily, there seem to be ways to mitigate these issues without too much trouble, so that general-purpose pulsed ESR measurements could potentially be performed with significant net gain at the bottom line. For example, in our current procedure, we cancel the out-of-plane static field component in a specific static field but do not have an automatic mechanism to cancel it in other fields. In the future, such automatic proportional cancellation procedures may be used toto further improve the performance of the device. Other methods that could be employed in the future include incorporating additional means to mitigate static field effects in the resonator's design, such as the use of small strips and patterned surfaces Thin and long resonators are good for mitigating the effects of static magnetic fields. However, they are far from optimal for measuring "normal" samples that often have the same dimensions in all axes rather than being thin and long themselves.