A 1D mechanical model for nanogranular films, based on a structural interface, is here presented. The analytical dispersion relation for the frequency and lifetimes of the acoustics breathing modes is obtained in terms of the interface layer thickness and porosity. The model is successfully benchmarked both against 3D Finite Element Method simulations and experimental photoacoustic data on a paradigmatic system available from the literature. A simpler 1D model, based on an homogenized interface, is also presented and its limitations and pitfalls discussed at the light of the more sophisticated pillar model. The pillar model captures the relevant physics responsible for acoustic dissipation at a disordered interface. Furthermore, the present findings furnish to the experimentalist an easy-to-adopt, benchmarked analytical tool to extract the interface layer physical parameters upon fitting of the acoustic data. The model is scale invariant and may be deployed, other than the case of granular materials, where a patched interface is involved. Nanogranular ultrathin films are at the forefront of a wide range of technological applications A 1D mechanical model for nanogranular thin films adhered on a flat substrate is here proposed. The model, addressed as pillar model, is based on a structural interface ical parameters: interface porosity and layer thickness. The model is successfully benchmarked both against a full 3D FEM model and against experimental photoacoustic data available from the literature on a paradigmatic model system, in which knowledge of mechanical properties at the interface is a key asset in a variety of applications The pillar model rationalises the acoustic to structure relation in materials affected by disordered interfaces. The physics is here shown to be ruled by the integral of the stresses exchanged across the interfaces rather than their detailed distribution. The pillar model, on one side, furnishes to the experimentalist an experimentallybenchmarked, easy-to-adopt analytical tool to extract the interface layer physical parameters upon fitting of the acoustic data. On the other side, upon previous knowledge of the interfacial layer parameters, the model allows retrieving the breathing modes frequencies and lifetimes of a nanogranular coating adhering on a substrate. All these aspects bear both a fundamental and applicative interest across a wide range of fields ranging from condensed matter, material science to device physics. The mechanical response of a nano-particle film resting on an infinitely extended substrate (Fig. where u # z (z, t) is the displacement component in the z direction, the hash refers to each layer, and v # z is the velocity of the P-wave travelling in such materials. The solution of Eq.( with where i, ω, and k # are the imaginary unit, the frequency and the wave vector, respectively. Substituting Eq.( The first and the second terms of U # (z) are the regressive and the progressive components of the wave, respectively. The regressive component of the wave in the substrate is neglected since this layer is considered as infinitely extended in the z direction, a fact accounting for the radiative attenuation of the film's breathing mode towards the substrate. When dealing with granular solids, like the aforementioned nano-particle film (Fig. To overcome this issue, the pillar model is introduced (Fig. The velocity, v N P z , of a P-wave in the NP film layer is proportional to the coefficient C N P 11 since transversal contraction is prevented: while the velocity of a P-wave in the pillars is proportional to the Young modulus E bk since they are free to expand transversely: For the pillar model, the boundary conditions are the following: 1. free standing at the top of the effective NP-layer (z = h): 2. equilibrium at the interface between the effective NP-layer and the pillars layer (z = q): 3. continuity of the displacement at the interface between the effective NP-layer and the pillars layer: 4. force equilibrium at the interface between the pillars layer and the sapphire substrate (z = 0): 5. continuity of the displacement at the interface between the pillars layer and the sapphire substrate: It is pinpointed that the continuity of the stresses at the interfaces between the pillars and the two continuous layers is replaced with the balance of their resultant forces, F , as can been appreciated in Eq.( Eq.( respectively, where α is the contact ratio between the areas of the two homogeneous layers (substrate and effective NP film) and that of the pillars (see Fig. where Z N P , and Z sub are the acoustic impedances of the effective NP-layer and the substrate, respectively. Actually, Eq.( The total thickness h of the actual real film assigned, the free parameter in Eq.( The intuitive idea underlying the pillar model stands in the possibility to reduce the full 3D acoustic scattering problem, involving a disordered interface, to a more amenable 1D one. This approximation is meaningful provided the detailed distribution of stresses across the interface does not affect the solution in terms of quasimode period and lifetime. As a matter of fact, the 1D model retains information on the integral of the stresses exchanged across the interfaces rather than their detailed distribution. This key point finds its microscopic justification on the fact that the acoustic problem is not affected by the specific interface configuration, as earlier addressed. The pillar model is more evolved with respect to spring-based interface models, which are commonly exploited to mimic imperfect interfaces, see for instance the seminal work of Ref. The pillar model is here exemplified for the case of a real granular thin film The oscillation period T n and lifetime τ n for the first two modes of the pillar model, n={0, 1}, are reported versus α as full lines in Fig. and those of the "perfect adhesion" (pa) model: Attention is drawn on the fact that actually τ n,pa (α) is mode independent. Indeed, as α approaches zero so does the pillars cross-sectional area and the pillar model converges to that of a free standing NP film of thickness h -q. On the contrary, as α approaches one, and assuming a square cross-section for the pillars, the situation converges to that of a perfectly adhering film (continuity of displacement and normal stress component at the interface) of thickness h. Specifically, for n=0, T 0 diverges (meaning a film rigid shift) as α approaches zero, as expected for the fs film, and is 70 ps for α=0.8, that is converging to the period of the fundamental mode, T 0,pa , for the pa case, see Fig. The present discussion clearly demonstrates that the mode lifetime, rather than its oscillation period, is mostly sensitive to the interface morphology. For instance, with reference to n=1, varying α so as to evolve from the fs to the pa film, the relative variation in the oscillation period is ∆T 1 /T 1 ∼17% whereas the relative variation in lifetime ∆τ 1 /τ 1 is infinite. This also explains why, in previous photo-acoustics experiments performed on granular thin films, the pa model was able to correctly address, within the error bar, the breathing mode oscillation period but failed in reproducing the lifetime Solutions obtained over a wider α and h span are reported in Fig. These resonances stand out also in the mode's Q factor, a feature recently observed also in the context of a single nanodisk adhered on a substrate The pillar model is now deployed to fit photoacoustic data acquired on nanogranular films of different thicknesses in terms of compositional, structural, morphological and mechanical properties. On a general basis, the interface layer properties are the one which prove harder to access. Whereas the NP film layer filling factor may be retrieved employing a variety of techniques, such as X-ray reflectivity The pillar model is benchmarked by letting q and α as fitting parameters and maximising the likelihood between the h-dependent functions T 1 (h; q, α) and τ 1 (h; q, α) and the experimental values, T 1,exp (h) and τ 1,exp (h), reported in the best fitting parameter being fully consistent with the values expected from previous knowledge. We now compare the analytical 1D pillar model, addressed so far as the pillar model for brevity, against FEM simulations performed on the 3D pillar model. The scope is twofold. A first quest is whether the reduction from a full 3D pillar model (see Fig. We then proceed as follows. As a validation step, we first implement FEM simulations on the 3D pillar model, mimicking the situations for which experimen- tal data are available. That is we excite a specific film breathing mode, n= 1, and, subsequently, simulate its temporal evolution throughout the sample, now comprising the substrate as well, thus accessing the quasieigenmode oscillation period, lifetime and quality factor. As a matter of fact, once the substrate is accounted for, the film breathing mode becomes a quasi-mode radiating acoustic energy into the substrate. The results will be benchmarked against both those of the pillar model and the experimental ones. We then run similar simulations varying the pillar layer filling fraction, α, for a fixed film thickness, h=50 nm, and compare the results against the values obtained from the pillar model. To this end we first consider the 3D pillar model (see Fig. Materials properties. As for the domains mechanical properties, the densities and elastic constants for Sapphire and polycrystalline Ag are taken for the substrate and for the pillar, respectively, whereas the effective NP layer is attributed the density ρ N P and the elastic tensor components c 11 =6.96×10 10 GPa, taken from with ρ (r) and c (r) the position-dependent mass density and elastic stiffness tensor, respectively, and with zero displacement enforced at the boundary z=0. The latter is a good approximation for an impulsive excitation of the film (for instance upon absorption of an ultrashort laser pulse) when Z sub > Z pil , as in the present case. The first subscript, n, identifies the film's eigenmode, the second, h, the film's thickness expressed in nm. We then define the initial displacement on the entire simulation domain 'sub' ∪ 'pil' ∪ 'NP': where the displacement amplitude A will cancel out in the following analysis. We pinpoint that, u n,h (r, t = 0) is not an eigenmode of the acoustic eigenvalue problem for the domain 'sub' ∪ 'pil' ∪ 'NP', nevertheless, for h ≥ 0, it matches the eigenmode of domain 'pil' ∪ 'NP'. The initial velocity field is un,h (r, t = 0) = 0 . Propagating the initial displacement on the entire unit cell via the Navier equation, we obtain u n,h (r, t). For the sake of retrieving the film's quasi-eigenmode decay time we calculate the normalized projection coefficient between modes u n,h (r, t = 0) and u n,h (r, t): where the integrals are actually calculated on the film's volume, V f ilm , since the initial displacement in the sub- For instance, for the case of a sample with h=40 nm and focusing on n=1, Fig. For low α values simulations were also performed varying the pillar position within the unit cell xy plane and the pillar cross-sectional geometry (a square instead of a circle while keeping the same surface area), the results remaining unaltered. Those of low α values constitute the worse case scenarios for these tests since a slender pillar can be substantially displaced within the unit cell, The first two modes n = 0, 1 are addressed. EMA model (full lines) and limit cases (dashed lines) obtained for the f s and pa scenarios, respectively. The y-axis in the graph of panel (a) is broken for sake of graphical clarity. The scales above and below the brake are different for ease of representation. Tn diverges for β →0.5, an artefact ascribable to the pitfalls of Budiansky formulas. The f s scenario yields, for mode n = 0, an infinite period (corresponding to a film translation), hence it is not reported in panel (a). The f s scenario yields an infinite decay time, hence it is not reported in panel (b). whereas only small translations can be tested for the case of plumped pillars. i.e. greater α values. These evidences suggest that results are invariant with respect to the specific disordered interface realization. Specifically, the detailed knowledge of the stresses distribution across the interface does not affect the solution in terms of quasi-mode period and lifetime, the relevant aspect rather being the integral of the stresses exchanged across the interfaces. The latter supports the physical ansatz implied in the 1D pillar model. For the sake of completeness, in SI we also report the modulus of the displacement |{ũ n,50 (r)}|, for the first (n=0) and the second (n=1) film breathing modes for α=0.05, 0.4 and 0.75. These plots give an idea of the quasi-breathing mode evolution from the quasifree standing to the quasi-perfect adhesion scenarios. In order to display the potential of the pillar model, its broad validity range and its added value with respect to more traditional approaches, a simpler 1D model, addressed as Effective Medium Approximation model (EMA) and based on an homogenized interface layer, is now introduced and its dispersion relation calculated. Its limit of validity, restrained to small porosities, are discussed at the light of the pillar model, showing the need for the latter to correctly access the acoustic to structure relation in granular ultra-thin films. The interface layer, previously identified with the pillar layer, is now accounted for via a continuum, isotropic and homogeneous slab, addressed as effective interface layer, see Fig. where the value of A and B are in which the Poisson's ratio is expressed via K * (β) and G * (β)) by the standard relation In Eq.(20) c i , K i , and G i are the volume fraction, the bulk modulus and the shear modulus of the phase i, respectively, where, in the present case, N = 2, i = 1 stands for vacuum and i = 2 for the material constituting the NPS (bulk silver in the following), i.e. c 2 =β. A major pitfall of Budiansky formulas stands in the fact the elastic coefficients vanish when β reaches 0.5, thus setting a limit to the applicability of the EMA model, as will be discussed shortly. Since the transversal contraction is prevented in the effective interface layer, the P-wave velocity is v * (β) = The interface boundary conditions for the EMA model are the "perfect adhesion" ones. In the following we summarize the full set of boundary conditions for the EMA model: 1. free standing at the top of the NP-layer (z = h): 2. continuity of stresses at the interface between the NP-layer and the effective homogeneous layer (z = d): 3. continuity of the displacement at the interface between the NP-layer and the effective homogeneous layer: 4. continuity of stresses at the interface between the effective homogeneous layer and the sapphire substrate (z = 0): 5. continuity of the displacement condition at the interface between the effective homogeneous layer and the sapphire substrate: Enforcing the boundary conditions Eqs.( Mutatis mutandis from the pillar mode case, Eq.( Comparison of Eq.( We now exemplify the EMA model considering the same situation addressed in the case study for the pillar model, the only exception being the replacement of the pillar with the effective homogeneous film of d=12 nm. The oscillation period T n and lifetime τ n for the first two modes of the EMA model, n={0, 1}, are reported versus β as full lines in Fig. We here repeat the same parametric study, previously performed for the pillar model, for the case of the EMA model. T 1 (h; d, β) and τ 1 (h; d, β) are reported versus the total thickness h of the NP-layer for a fixed value of β = 0.73 (the value that gives optimal fitting of the photoacoustic data, see SI) while varying the pa- The pillar model is more adherent to physical reality than the EMA model and, contrary to the latter, is reliable across the entire spectrum of interface filling factor values. The EMA model suffers a major drawback in that both the oscillation periods and decay times diverge as the interface layer filling factor approaches 0.5. The EMA and pillar models yields the same results for a very specific value of the layer filling fraction, which happens to be ∼ 0.77 for the case here investigated. The EMA model yields reasonable predictions for small departures of β from this values and, in this range, its control parameters work alike the ones of the pillar model. For greater departures of β from the optimal value the EMA model fails. Fig. The results here reported are relevant both under a fundamental and applicative stand point. As for the former, the pillar model provides a vivid physical representation of the acoustic of porous thin films and its controlling parameters. More generally, it may be deployed to access the acoustic to structure relation in materials affected by disordered interfaces. The model showed that the physics is primarily dictated by the integral of the stresses exchanged across the interfaces rather than their detailed distribution. Being fully analytical and 1D, the model is computationally very efficient and particularly amenable to fit experimental quasi-breathing mode periods and lifetimes. The model allows accessing the interface layer parameters, which proved challenging to retrieve otherwise. On the other hand, should the porous film morphology been known a-priori, the model correctly predicts its acoustic response. As for applications, knowledge of granular thin films interfaces adhered on a substrate is of paramount importance in a variety of sectors. Just to mention a few, the NP interface layer rules the adhesion properties of bactericidal coatings The pillar model also provides a connection to the adhesion forces. Even though a direct comparison with the pull-off force, as provided by the most common adhesion models (JKR 