Higher-order quasi-longitudinal (QL) Lamb waves have been reported for sensor application in liquid media at a higher thickness-to-wavelength (h/) ratio than the fundamental symmetric modes, with the main advantage of having higher operating frequency and reduction in the total size of the device without reducing the plate thickness. However, the trade-off in the reduction of the electromechanical coupling coefficient (K 2 ) is a hinder in utilizing QL Lamb waves with higher-order numbers. Here we performed finite element simulation and verified experimentally the possibility of utilizing S5 and S6 QL Lamb wave modes in liquid media based on a two-port delay line device on a thick GaAs substrate. While the K 2 values are lower for QL modes at higher-order numbers, the signal amplitude of S21 transmission parameter at the resonant frequency is still distinguishable from the noise floor. The result demonstrates the feasibility of higher-order modes at higher h/ ratio for sensor application in liquid media, thus allowing further reduction in the wavelength and the total size of the sensor device. Plate acoustic waves (PAW) with two free surfaces have an advantage over surface acoustic waves (SAW) with only one free surface for sensor application in liquid media Fundamental antisymmetric (A0) and symmetric (S0) modes of LW are commonly used for sensors in liquid media without significant radiation of acoustic energy into the liquid under specific conditions. For the A0 modes, the phase velocity (vph) must be lower than the sound velocity of the liquid so that the acoustic energy is not converted into longitudinal pressure waves in the liquid. In the case of S0 modes, the particle displacement components must be a dominantly longitudinal component (u1) with close to zero shear vertical (u3) component. Both conditions are achieved at a low plate thickness-to-wavelength ((h/) ratio, typically below 0.1). Therefore, for A0 and S0 modes sensor in liquid media, the reduction in the plate thickness is necessary which causing the device to be fragile, or by using a larger wavelength with a tradeoff in operating frequency and sensitivity reduction. The limitations of low h/ ratio for A0 and S0 modes were solved by using higher-order symmetric modes with quasi-longitudinal polarisation (QL-Sn). Anisimkin et al The occurrence of higher-order QL-LW modes at (100)-cut GaAs plate propagating along the <110> direction is previously reported for S1 and S2 modes at h/ ratio of 0.6 and 1.2, respectively Two-port delay line devices were fabricated on (100)-cut GaAs wafer with the thickness of 500 μm and 625 μm and thickness variation of +/-25 μm. For both wafers, the design of the IDTs is identical and the wavelength of the IDTs are 168 μm. Considering the thickness variation of the wafer, the h/ ratios are ranging from 2.82 to 3.12 for S5 mode and 3.57 to 3.86 for S6 mode. The waves propagate at <110> direction parallel to the wafer flat. The IDTs have 50 pairs of source and ground with an aperture of 50. The delay length is 200, thus the centre-to-centre distance from the IDT receiver to the IDT transmitter is 250 or equal to 42 mm. The metal electrode of 100 nm Al with 10nm Cr adhesion layer was deposited by a liftoff process. Gold metal layer was deposited at the back of the substrate to obtain the M-S-IDT coupling configuration. Furthermore, the metal layer at the sensing surface will neutralise the effect of liquid permittivity on the sensor responses. The GaAs wafers are attached to PCBs with a circular hole so that the delay line structures and the IDTs are suspended. 4194A Impedance/Gain-Phase Analyzer was used to obtain the frequency response and the power received in the IDT receiver normalised to the power sent from the IDT transmitter (S21 scattering parameter). The S21 frequency responses of the sensor devices with the thickness of 500 μm and 625 μm are shown in figure IV. CONCLUSION The feasibility of utilizing quasi-longitudinal modes at higher-order numbers (QL-S5 and QL-S6) for a sensor in liquid media is reported in this paper using (100)-cut GaAs substrate. The employment of modes with higher-order numbers allows the reduction of wavelength thus increases the resonant frequency without reducing the thickness of the plate and improves the robustness of the device. While the reduction in K 2 is inevitable, the S21 amplitude at the resonant frequency is distinguishable from the noise floor. The improvement in K 2 can be achieved by depositing highly piezoelectric thin film such as ZnO on GaAs 