Portable mid-infrared (mid-IR) spectroscopy and sensing applications require widely tunable, narrow linewidth, chip-scale, single-mode sources without sacrificing significant output power. However, no such lasers have been demonstrated beyond 3 μm due to the challenge of building tunable, high quality-factor (Q) on-chip cavities. We demonstrate a tunable, single-mode mid-IR laser at 3.4 μm using a high-Q silicon microring cavity with integrated heaters and a multi-mode Interband Cascade Laser (ICL). We show that the multiple longitudinal modes of an ICL collapse into a single frequency via self-injection locking with an output power of 0.4 mW and achieve an oxide-clad high confinement waveguide microresonator with a loaded Q of 2.8 × 10 5 . Using integrated microheaters, our laser exhibits a wide tuning range of 54 nm at 3.4 μm with 3 dB output power variation. We further measure an upperbound effective linewidth of 9.1 MHz from the locked laser using a scanning Fabry-Perot interferometer. Our design of a single-mode laser based on a tunable high-Q microresonator can be expanded to quantum-cascade lasers at higher wavelengths and lead to the development of compact, portable, high-performance mid-IR sensors for spectroscopic and sensing applications. Chip-scale, widely tunable, narrow-linewidth lasers in the mid-infrared (mid-IR) are critical for a variety of sensing and spectroscopic applications. The 3-5 μm wavelength range is of particular interest for biomedical and environmental gas sensing since this region is the Earth's transparency window where important greenhouse gases and hydrocarbons have their strong absorption signatures 1 . Tunable narrow-linewidth lasers must be developed to achieve fast and precise spectroscopy of gas-phase molecules that are typically narrower than 1 GHz 1 . The goal is to build compact, field-deployable sensors with high performance chip-scale lasers. Such lasers beyond 3 μm wavelength, however, have not been developed up to this point in time. Previous work includes distributed feedback-Quantum/Interband Cascade lasers (DFB-QCL/ICL) 2-4 that can provide high-power and single-mode output for compact mid-IR applications, but wavelength tuning of these lasers is achieved at the cost of significant output power variation related to direct tuning of gain medium. Mid-IR tunable lasers based on external cavities have been demonstrated Building high-performance, chip-scale mid-IR lasers requires the design and development of high quality factor (Q) on-chip cavities in the mid-IR. While chip-scale lasers with frequency tunability and narrow linewidth have been demonstrated using high-Q on-chip cavities Our suspended inverse taper is designed to be robust to any mechanical vibrations by fabricating anchors to the 4 μm of top and bottom oxide cladding. In addition to ensuring low reflections of the output facet, we also design the waveguide to ensure low reflections at the input facet. To decrease Fresnel reflections at the input facet from 30 % to 17 %, we design a Si/SiO2 faceted horn taper with a mode distribution that matches the ICL fundamental mode and clad the taper facet by several microns of SiO2. To prevent leakage of light into the silicon substrate through the 2 μm-thick buried oxide layer, we etch the silicon substrate under the input taper region at the edge of the silicon chip over a length of 5 μm. interference between the external cavity mode and the ICL mode, leading to the collapse of the ICL multi-mode spectrum into a single-mode. Fig. Figure In summary, we demonstrate a high-Q tunable microresonator integrated with an off-the-shelf ICL/QCL diode platform for realizing widely tunable, single-mode and narrow-linewidth lasers beyond 3 μm. Our laser design has significant implications for the development of chip-scale spectrometers and gas sensors in the mid-IR since it does not require complex material fabrication or bulky external cavities. In addition, our self-injection locking based approach can be applied to other types of laser cavities as shown in NIR We fabricate the oxide-clad silicon microring resonator and waveguides with integrated heaters using standard CMOS manufacturing processes. We start with a silicon on insulator (SOI) wafer with 2 μm oxide and 2 μm silicon layer thicknesses. To fully etch the 2 μm thick silicon layer with a small coupling gap between the ring and the bus waveguide, we spin ma-N 2410 electron beam (e-beam) resist on the wafer to form a 1.5 μm thick resist layer. To reduce the sidewall roughness, we pattern waveguides using multi-pass e-beam lithography followed by an inductively coupled plasma (ICP) dry etching based on C4F8 and SF6. After cleaning the wafer with Piranha etchant, we deposit a 2 μm oxide layer using plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition (PECVD) for top cladding. We pattern the microheaters by e-beam lithography and sputter layers of 10 nm of titanium and 800 nm of aluminum, followed by a lift-off process in Acetone. We then spin SPR 220-7.0 photoresist and dice the wafer into mm-size chips. After a mild hard bake at 120 oC, we use xenon fluoride (XeF2) to etch away the silicon substrate near the tapers for efficient coupling. We couple the output beam of the ICL to the bus waveguide on a silicon chip using a pair of aspheric lenses that are transparent in the mid-IR. To obtain spectral data, the output of the silicon chip is sent to an optical spectrum analyzer (OSA) after an aspheric lens for beam collimation. The optical spectrum spectral resolution was 4.0 GHz (equivalent to 0.15 nm in wavelength), limited by the OSA. We also co-align an OPO through the chip and send its output to a photodetector connected to an oscilloscope for characterizing the linewidth of the microresonator. For all experiments we measure the output from the mirroring through-port. To measure the linewidth of the locked-state laser, we couple the output beam to a scanning Fabry-Perot interferometer (1.5 GHz FSR, 9 MHz resolution) controlled by a piezo-controller. When the laser is self-injection locked to the microresonator, we expect a linewidth reduction from the freerunning laser linewidth according to the ref. where ∆locked and ∆free are the linewidth of the laser in the locked and free-running state, respectively. The quality factors QICL and QRing are those of the ICL and ring resonator, respectively. We estimate the ICL quality factor QICL as Q ICL ≈ 2πντR ICL 1-R ICL 2 where  is the ICL cavity round trip and RICL is the reflection coefficient (amplitude) from the front facet of the ICL. We estimate the QICL to be 3.1 × 10 3 . The parameter R is the reflection from the Sagnac loop mirror that reflects about 10% of light to the laser diode. In addition, we have assumed an ICL linewidth enhancement factor of α ≈ 2.2, similar to the reference where Ktot is the total enhancement factor, nsp is the population inversion factor, and vg is the group velocity of the ICL. Considering the output power P out ≈ 0.4 mW and coupling efficiency η ≈ 10 dB, we estimate the linewidth of the free running state ICL as Δν free ≈ 0.45 MHz, giving the estimated linewidth of the locked state laser Δν locked ≈ 580 Hz.