We evaluate near-field thermophotovoltaic (TPV) energy conversion systems focusing in particular on their open-circuit voltage (Voc). Unlike previous analyses based largely on numerical simulations with fluctuational electrodynamics, here, we develop an analytic model that captures the physics of near-field TPV systems and can predict their performance metrics. Using our model, we identify two important opportunities of TPV systems operating in the near-field. First, we show analytically that enhancement of radiative recombination is a natural consequence of operating in the nearfield. Second, we note that, owing to photon recycling and minimal radiation leakage in near-field operation, the PV cell used in near-field TPV systems can be much thinner compared to those used in solar PV systems. Since non-radiative recombination is a volumetric effect, use of a thinner cell reduces non-radiative losses per unit area. The combination of these two opportunities leads to increasingly large values of Voc as the TPV vacuum gap decreases. Hence, although operation in the near-field was previously perceived to be beneficial for electrical power density enhancement, here, we emphasize that thin-film near-field TPVs are also significantly advantageous in terms of Voc and consequently conversion efficiency as well as power density. We provide numerical results for an InAs-based thin-film TPV that exhibits efficiency > 50% at an emitter temperature as low as 1100 K. Global terawatt-scale energy needs call for renewable energy harvesting approaches operating close to thermodynamic limits The potential for efficiency improvement by use of TPV systems can be seen by comparing the efficiencies of solar PV systems with solar TPV systems. In the latter case, sunlight is used to provide the heat to the thermal emitter. Since both systems are photonic heat engines, their efficiencies can be compared to the Carnot efficiencly limit, η Carnot = 1 -T C /T H , where T H/C is the temperature of the heat pump/sink of the heat engine. For solar energy conversion, T H refers to the temperature of the sun, T Sun ≈ 6000 K, and T C refers to the temperature of the cell commonly taken to be 300 K. For such a choice of T H and T C , the Shockley-Queisser efficiency limit of a single junction solar cell is 30% In addition to solar energy harvesting, TPV systems can also be used to harvest heat that is provided to the thermal emitter by other means. For example, a recordhigh TPV efficiency of 30% was recently reported experimentally for a heat source at T H = 1455 K Despite the promising performance metrics of TPV systems, practical challenges in terms of materials and optoelectronic design remain to be resolved. In particular, a key challenge in the development of TPV systems is to recycle low-grade (low-T H ) waste heat into electricity Motivated by the significant oppotunties as well as challenges of TPV systems, in this paper, we carry out a detailed balance analysis of near-field TPV systems, where the spacing between the hot emitter and the cell is smaller than the thermal wavelength. In this range, the thermal energy transfer to the cell is dominated by near-field evanescent modes. Near-field TPV systems have been extensively considered in previous works for their potential to enhance the TPV current and therefore the extracted electrical power density, owing to an enhancement in the photonic thermal power density delivered to the cell as compared to far-field systems We identify two important opportunities in near-field TPV systems for the enhancement of the open-circuit voltage. First, in the near-field, the density of photon states that the cell can emit into is significantly enhanced as compared to the far-field. This enhancement can lead to a significant increase of the radiative recombination rate in the cell. Second, since non-radiative recombination is a volumetric effect, the use of a thinner cell leads to a reduction of the non-radiative recombination rate per unit area of the cell. Therefore, in a near-field TPV system with proper design, including the use of a highreflectivity mirror behind the cell that re-directs photons that are not absorbed by the cell to the emitter where they are re-absorbed (Fig. A key innovation in our work is the development of an analytic model of a near-field TPV system. Unike research on solar PV systems, where there have been substantial efforts in developing insightful analytic frameworks The rest of the paper is organized as follows: In Section II, we carry out a detailed balance analysis of the open-circuit voltage, which is discussed in terms of radiative and non-radiative processes taking place in the cell, discussed separately in Sections III and IV. In these sections we discuss our analytic theory of near-field TPV systems and compare to the standard treatment with fluctuational electrodynamics. Finally, in Section V we carry out numerical calculations of an InAs-based thinfilm near-field TPV system, where we show that the aforementioned opportunities associated with operating a TPV in the near-field can yield covnersion efficiencies > 50% at practically relevant emitter temperatures. We start by considering a hot emitter at a temperature T H that faces a PV cell. The cell has a band gap of energy ω g and is maintained at a temperature T C . The emitter could be either a thermally emitting material in a TPV system or the sun in a solar PV system. Based on the principle of detailed balance, the current density in the cell, J(V ), is expressed as where q is the electron charge, k is the Boltzmann constant and V is the voltage of the cell. The term J e expresses the radiative generation of electron hole pairs from the influx of photons from the emitter, referred to as the pump current henceforth, whereas R o is the non-radiative generation of electron-hole pairs per unit area in the cell. The term J o is the current density generated from radiative recombination (spontaneous emission) in the cell, or luminescence current, whereas R(V ) is the non-radiative recombination current. Following Shockley-Queisser analysis ). (2) qV oc is the maximum amount of electrical energy that could be extracted from the cell, per incident photon. Hence, computing V oc is important for determining the thermal radiation-to-electricity conversion efficiency. The first term in Eq. 2 depends solely on radiative processes, namely the absorption of thermal photons from the emitter and the radiative recombination of the cell. We define the radiative open-circuit voltage as: qV oc,rad = kT C ln(J e /J o ). (3) For a typical TPV system, the emitter temperature is sufficiently high such that J e R o , therefore the second term in Eq. 2 is omitted henceforth. The third term in Eq. 2 depends on the interplay between radiative and non-radiative processes of the cell. By defining the external luminescence efficiency as: we see that the presence of nonradiative recombination yields a negative contribution to the open circuit voltage, namely: So far, we have separated the open-circuit voltage into a radiative term, V oc,rad > 0, and a non-radiative one, V oc,nrad < 0, and we can write: In the following sections, we will analyze these contributions separately. The pump current (J e ) and luminescence current (J o ) in Eqs. 1, 2 are determined with fluctuational electrodynamics where ω is the angular frequency, Φ C (ω) and Φ H (ω) are the thermal emission spectra of the cell and the emitter, respectively, and n(ω, T ) is the photon occupation number, which we approximate here by n(ω, T ) = e -ω/kT , assuming ω g kT C/H . By considering emission from a planar surface, we can write the spectra Φ C/H (ω) as where β refers to the in-plane wavenumber of the modes participating in the radiative heat exchange between the emitter and the cell. The term ξ in Eq. 8 is the probability of a photon emitted by body C/H with frequency ω and wavenumber β to be absorbed by body H/C. The upper limit of integration in Eq. 8, β max,C/H , refers to the maximum in-plane wavenumber that participates in the radiative heat exchange between the emitter and the cell. Below, we examine the the pump current (J e ) and luminescence current (J o ) for the cases of a solar PV, a far-field TPV system, and a near-field TPV system. 1. Schematics of (a) solar PV cell (without concentration), (b) a planar far-field TPV system, and (c) a near-field TPV system. The quantities ΘSun, ΘEmitter, Θ Cell define the light cones of emission of each body, and βmax is the corresponding maximum in-plane wavenumber of the electromagnetic modes that participate in the delivery of thermal photons. The exchange of thermal radiation for a solar PV cell, shown schematically in Fig. In either case, concerning the luminescence current, J o , thermal radiation from the PV cell is emitted into a hemisphere, therefore the solid angle of emission is 2π steradians, corresponding to an apex angle of Θ Cell = π. Hence, the maximum in-plane wavenumber is β max,C = (ω/c)sin(Θ Cell /2) = ω/c where c is the speed of light (see Fig. Eq. 9 connects the radiative recombination, in other words the spontaneous emission, of a far-field PV cell with its temperature and band gap, and will be used in the following sections in estimating its open-circuit voltage. Regarding the pump current, J e , the cases of a solar PV and a far-field TPV are fundamentally different. First, we consider the case of solar thermal emission as shown in Fig. where T Sun = 6000 K. As we shall see in Section III, the last factor in Eq. 10 significantly restricts the radiative open-circuit voltage of solar PV cells. In the case of a far-field TPV system, a planar thermal emitter (Fig. Eqs. 9, 10, 11 will allow us to estimate the radiative open-circuit voltage, as defined in Eq. 3, in Section IV. The case of a near-field TPV system is shown schematically in Fig. It is broadly considered that the maximum wavenumber for near-field heat transfer is β max,nf ≈ C/d, where C is a constant with a magnitude on the order of unity As a simple model of near-field heat transfer The case ξ = 1 pertains to perfect thermal emission, and by reciprocity, perfect absorption, in the near-field. The equivalent properties in the far-field correspond to a perfect blackbody. Even though the notion of a blackbody generally refers to far-field thermal radiation, in what follows, we shall refer to this case as the blackbody model, and index relevant parameters with "BB" as in Eqs. 12, 13. For C = 1 as in Unfortunately, the blackbody model does not accurately describe the heat transfer spectrum in typical nearfield TPV systems. To illustrate this, as a typical nearfield TPV case, we consider a PV cell coupled to a thermal emitter that supports a plasmonic mode, as has been the case in recent literature in near-field TPVs As a benchmark for evaluating the accuracy of the blackbody model introduced above, we perform exact calculations of near-field heat transfer via fluctuational electrodynamics, following the original formalism in In introducing such a model, we consider that nearfield radiative heat transfer is significantly more narrowband in nature as compared to far-field thermal radiation, as has been shown previously for ω ≥ ω g and β ≤ ρ/d 0 for ω ≥ ω g and β > ρ/d, (14) where the index "NR" refers to narrowband near-field emission. The parameter Γ is the bandwidth of the near-field interaction, and ω o is slightly smaller than ω g . Therefore, from Eq. 14, as ω approaches the band gap, the photon tunneling probability increases, whereas away from the band gap it rapidly decreases to values far below unity, as is the case for realistic material systems. In the model of Eq. 14, ρ 1, hence the maximum wavenumber participating in near-field heat transfer is now scaled by this quantity, i.e. β max,NR = ρ/d. This captures the fact that that the maximum in-plane wavenumber in near-field heat transfer between realistic material systems is significantly smaller than 1/d. Furthermore, it also reduces as the thickness of the materials decreases. The former has been previously discussed for the case of near-field heat transfer between identical polaritonic materials where ξ(ω, β) is the exact photon tunneling probability as obtained with fluctuational electrodynamics. This definition of ρ ensures the agreement between the spectral characteristics of thermal radiation obtained via the narrowband model and those obtained via fluctuational electrodynamics. Due to the narrowband nature of near-field heat transfer, setting ω = ω g in Eq. 15, suffices. In practice, β max,NR can be approximated by searching for the value of β for which ξ(ω, β), obtained via fluctuational electrodynamics using, for example, Fresnel's equations or a computational package like To complete this section, we compute the luminescence current for the narrowband model (Eq. 14). From Eqs. 7, 8, for Γ kT C this is (see Supplemental Information): From Eq. 16, the near-field luminescence current increases with both the bandwidth of the near-field thermal radiation, Γ, as well as the parameter ρ that controls the cutoff value of the maximum wavenumber, as expected. We evaluate the term V oc,rad of Eq. 3 for the case of near-field TPV systems, and compare it with that of solar PV systems and far-field TPV systems, as introduced above. Solar PVs. The case of solar PVs is shown schematically in Fig. The last term in Eq. 17 reaches nearly -0.35 eV, corresponding to over 25% of the band gap of standard solar PVs (e.g. Si, GaAs). Far-field TPVs. In the case of a far-field TPV system as the one shown in Fig. By comparing Eqs. 17, 18, it becomes apparent that unconcentrated solar PV systems are limited by an additional angle-corrected loss mechanism, represented by the last term in Eq. 17, which is absent in TPV systems (Eq. 18). This term originates from the narrow light cone of the sun as compared to that of the cell. To mitigate these losses in solar PV systems, a standard approach is the use of solar concentrators However, in the presence of non-radiative recombination, this approach additionally limits the luminescence efficiency (Eq. 4). In contrast, in the case of TPV systems, the planarity of the emitter and cell warrant a view factor of unity, resulting in perfect matching between the light cone of the emitter and cell. Furthermore, from Eq. 18, we see that that the open-circuit voltage of a TPV system can exceed the product ω g η Carnot , which is often regarded as an upper bound to V oc Near-field TPVs. The case of a near-field TPV system in shown in Fig. By considering the narrowband near-field model and exchanging T C with T H in Eq. 16 to obtain the pump current, the radiative open-circuit voltage is: We note that the result of Eq. 19 is in agreement with previous TPV literature in the limit of narrowband thermal emission In this section we computed the portion of the opencircuit voltage that pertains to radiative generation and recombination of charge carriers (Eq. 3). We quantified an important difference in the entropic losses of solar PV systems as compared to TPV systems, arising from the mismatch between the light cone of a planar PV cell and the angular range of unconcentrated solar thermal radiation (see Eq. 17). Due to a view factor of unity, such losses are absent in planar TPV systems. Finally, we note that, in the absence of non-radiative losses, via Eq. 18, operating in the near-field does not provide an advantage in terms of V oc,rad , as compared to the far-field, thereby the radiative open-circuit voltage does not strongly depend on the vacuum gap thickness IV. NON-RADIATIVE V oc,nrad AND LUMINESCENCE ENHANCEMENT In this section, we evaluate the term V oc,nrad of Eq. 5 for TPV systems in the presence of non-radiative recombination. From Eqs. 13, 16, both the blackbody model and the narrowband model predict that, in the near-field, the luminescence current, J o , increases inversely proportionally to d 2 . This suggests that operating in the near-field can significantly enhance the external luminescence efficiency as defined in Eq. 4, and hence the overall performance of the TPV system. In this section, we demonstrate this analytically as well as numerically, by studying the interplay between radiative and non-radiative recombination, i.e. terms J o and R o in Eq. 4. Previous work in We start by considering the case of the blackbody model as introduced in Sections II B and II C, pertaining to the far-field and near-field, as discussed in Eqs. 9, 13, respectively. From these equations, one can write J o,nf,BB = α 2 BB J o,ff , where α BB = (1/2π)(λ g /d) expresses the enhancement of the luminescence current in the near-field, with λ g being the band gap of the PV cell in units of wavelength. For moderate-temperature TPV systems, the band gap of the cell is smaller than 1 eV, hence λ g is on the order of few microns. Therefore, for a near-field TPV system with a vacuum gap thickness, d, on the order of tens of nm, the enhancement factor α BB is on the order of tens to hundreds. Hence, the near-field luminescence current is increased by a factor of tens of thousands with respect to the far-field. One can express the near-field luminescence efficiency, Q e,nf,BB , in terms of the far-field luminescence current as: From Eq. 20 we see that, by operating in the near-field, the effect that non-radiative recombination has on the external luminescence is effectively suppressed by α 2 BB . As outlined in Section II C, the assumptions considered in the blackbody model are largely unrealistic. Hence, we consider next the narrowband model which, as discussed with respect to Fig. Since ρ 1, and since Γ is typically comparable or smaller than kT C , the narrowband model predicts an enhancement factor that is considerably reduced compared to the one predicted with the blackbody model, i.e. α NR < α BB . Thereby, the narrowband model predicts reduced external luminescence efficiency with respect to the blackbody model. We note that, in solar PV systems, large external luminescence is seen for very few semiconductors, for example GaAs-based heterostructures To demonstrate the results of the theory presented above, as discussed previously, we consider the near-field TPV system of Fig. The dependence of Auger and SRH non-radiative recombination on the voltage, V , deviates from the nonradiative model we considered in Section II, namely R(V ) = R o e qV /kTC In Figs. To apply the narrowband model, we first compute the scaling parameter ρ at each vacuum gap following the same procedure as discussed in Fig. In Fig. In Fig. In Fig. where P e and P o are the power densities of photon flux emitted by the emitter and cell, respectively. These are expressed as: where Φ C/H were defined in Eq. 8. The below-band gap heat exchange is obtained in a similar manner to Eq. 22, however the voltage V is set to zero and the integration range in Eq. 23 pertains to the frequencies below-band gap. In InAs, contributions to below-band gap near-field heat transfer originate largely from a surface phonon polariton mode that occurs at the Reststrahlen band at roughly 30 meV In the previous section we demonstrated that the nearfield photonic interaction between the cell and thermal emitter yields a significant enhancement in luminescence efficiency, and we quantified this enhancement with the parameter α NR (Eq. 21). From Fig. In the previous sections we assumed that non-radiative recombination is approximated by R(V ) = R o e qV /kTC (Eqs. 1-6) The most prominent non-radiative recombination mechanisms in low-band gap materials are Auger recombination and SRH recombination. Since SRH is strongly dependent on the quality of the crystal and can be suppressed by improving material quality, we only account for Auger recombination here. The Auger non-radiative current is expressed by: where C n and C p are the Auger coefficients, n i is the intrinsic carrier concentration in the cell, and n(V ) and p(V ) are the electron and hole densities, respectively, given by: and E F,n/p are the quasi-Fermi levels for electrons/holes, connected to the applied bias V via V = E F,n -E F,p . E F,n is determined via the charge neutrality condition across the semiconductor's thickness. E c/v are the conduction/valence band edges, respectively. We continue to consider the InAs/ITO system discussed in the previous sections (Fig. The results of the calculations with the realistic Auger recombination (Eq. 24) are shown with the black crosses in Figs. Here, we plot the luminescence efficiency at the voltage for which the maximum extracted electrical power density occurs. One can observe a qualitative agreement between the realistic results that consider Auger recombination and the narrowband model that considers R(V ) = R o,iNaS e qV /kTC . For the rest of this section, the results are computed with Auger recombination. From Eq. 24 it can be seen that Auger recombination is linearly dependent on the cell thickness, hence a thin cell will experience reduced non-radiative losses. To understand the selection of a PV cell as thin as t c = 20 nm, we first analyze the TPV performance as the thickness of the InAs cell varies, while the vacuum gap is fixed. Here, we set d at 10 nm. In Fig. From Fig. As a benchmark, we compare the response of this nearfield TPV system to its far-field counterpart, for which the vacuum gap is set to d = 10 μm, the ITO emitter is 30 nm thick, and the thickness of the cell is 400 nm to maximize photon absorption as in To better understand the interplay between the voltage-dependent luminescence current (J o e qV /kTC ), and the Auger current, R(V ) (Eq. 24), we first show in Fig. In Fig. In Fig. With the red solid curve and point C in Fig. Finally, we compare between optically thin near-field TPV cells and optically thick ones. We therefore examine the case of the same material system, but for an InAs cell of thickness t c = 400 nm, as initially proposed in In conclusion, we presented the theory of thin-film near-field TPV systems that are advantageous in terms of the open-circuit voltage and conversion efficiency as compared to their far-field counterparts. Our theory accurately predicts the performance metrics of near-field TPV systems in terms of both current and voltage, and consequently power density and conversion efficiency. This is to be contrasted with previous analyses that were mainly carried out with numerical simulations based on fluctua- tional electrodynamics. We highlighted two important aspects of TPV operation in the near-field. First, we showed that, due to an increase in the photon density of states near the cell, one obtains an enhancement in the radiative recombination rate. We therefore demonstrated analytically (Eqs. 20, 21) that, despite the significant increase in nonradiative recombination in the near-field as compared to the far-field, the external luminescence efficiency is considerably improved. This effect is practically important in particular for low-temperature TPV energy conversion, where low-band gap semiconductors are usually required but typically suffer from large non-radiative losses such as Auger recombination As a numerical example, we demonstrated that a nearfield TPV composed of a 20 nm InAs cell and an ITO plasmonic emitter yields an open-circuit voltage that can exceed ω g (1 -T C /T H ), which has been often considered as an upper bound on the open-circuit voltage of various PV and TPV systems. Additional factors that will play a role in the performance of a realistic TPV system, beyond the ones considered here, include the increase in the cell temperature as the pump current increases, non-idealities of the back-side reflector, and the effects of electrical contacts on radiative exchange between the emitter and the cell. Here, we provide details about the calculation of the luminescence current in Eq. 16 of the main text. This current pertains to the "narrowband" near-field emission model that we have introduced. Starting from Eqs. 7, 8 and 14, the luminescence current is given by: J o,nf,NR = q 4π 2 ρ 2 Γ 2 2d 2 I NF e -ωg/kTC . The term I NF is given by where μ = /(kT C ). This integral is given by [ci(μΓ)sin(μΓ) -si(μΓ)cos(μΓ)], x + O(x 3 ) 1 + 10 -2 x 2 ≈ - where γ ≈ 0.57722 is the Euler-Mascheroni constant 