High power light emitting diodes (LEDs) suffer from heating effects that have a detrimental impact on the devices characteristics. The use LED carriers with high thermal conductivity promotes the extraction of heat away from the LED junction. Different materials can be used for this purpose, such as alumina, aluminium nitride, and silicon. Diamond has also been gaining momentum for demanding heat management applications. In order to evaluate the impact of the different carriers on the reliability of the devices, the junction temperature of Cree® white Xamp® XB-D LEDs was obtained with Ansys for various carrier at different LED current levels. The impact of the junction temperature on the LED's lifetime, emission intensity, footprint and wavelength stability was then evaluated for each carrier based on the datasheet of the devices. The results provide additional knowledge regarding the impact of the carrier on the performance of the LED. High power light emitting diodes (LEDs) have revolutionized lighting applications. LEDs are compact devices with high lighting capability and spend only a fraction of the energy of filament bulbs. Nevertheless, these devices suffer from self-heating issues. Non-radiative recombination in the LED active region generates most of the heat at low current levels and, at high current levels, the parasitic resistances of the contacts and cladding layers provide an additional source of heat. Considering all these contributions, the efficiency of the LEDs stays below 30%. As a rule of thumb, LED lumen output typically decreases 0.3-0.5% for each 1°C increase in the junction temperature (T J ) In order to facilitate the extraction of light from the device, the LED die is typically encapsulated inside a dome-shaped material with a large refractive index; however, dome materials are typically poor heat conductors, and this hinders the removal of heat by convection. To promote the efficient removal of the heat from the die, researchers and manufacturers have proposed different solutions that minimize the thermal resistance of the package. As an example, the integration of a copper (Cu) heat spreader increases the power efficiency by 3% when compared to a conventional package The carrier has an obvious impact on the thermal resistance of a LED package. In the case of surface mount devices (SMD), for instance, if one neglects the die attach and solder layers, the heat generated in the LED die active layers has to travel through the die substrate and carrier (when die and carrier are assembled via wire bonding) or through the carrier alone (in case of flip-chip architecture) before it reaches the back side of the LED package. Thus, for a given package layout, T J depends on the carrier and materials with high κ are desired. Carbon-based materials, such as diamond, highly oriented pyrolytic graphite (HOPG), and graphene, are obvious candidates. Due to its structure, HOPG is an anysotropic thermal conductor (κ in-plane 2000 W/(m•K) while κ out-plane is two orders of magnitude lower Diamond is an isotropic material that features simultaneously a high thermal conductivity (2200 W/(m•K), increasing to 3300 W/(m•K) in the case of isotopically pure material) while being an electric insulator, with a breakdown field as high as 2×10 7 V/cm Diamond has also been used to improve the thermal management of power LEDs at different levels. Horng et al. Despite the promising results of these different approaches, the use of a diamond plate as the carrier of power LED dies has not, to the authors' best knowledge, been reported yet. This paper aims at estimating the expected benefits of such an approach. To this end, the temperature profile of Cree® white XLamp® XB-D power LEDs were obtained with Ansys. Different carriers were considered in the simulations: AlN (the actual carrier, as described by the manufacturer), Al 2 O 3 , Si, and diamond. The results were used to estimate the acceleration factor (AF) and the change in the relative luminous flux (RLF) when the AlN carrier is replaced with a material with different thermal properties. The dependency of the wavelength on the current level of monochromatic LEDs mounted on different carriers was also estimated. The thermal analysis was performed for the package of Cree® white XLamp® XB-D LEDs. These devices have a small footprint (2.45×2.45 mm 2 ), a maximum current rating of 1 A and are available in different colors (white, blue, green, amber, and red). The cross-section schematic view of the LEDs can be seen in Fig. To evaluate the impact of the carrier on the reliability of the LED, the simulations were performed for different materials. In addition to Al 2 O 3 , AlN, and Si (materials typically used for this purpose), diamond carriers were also considered. Al 2 O 3 and AlN are available in ceramic and crystalline forms, with significantly different values of κ. In order to account for this variation, the simulations were performed with the minimum and maximum values of κ found in the literature for the ceramic and crystalline forms The simulations were performed using Ansys multiphysics software (package Mechanical). The structure of the LED was created using the information from manufacturer as in Table 1) ceramic; 2) single crystal; 3) polycrystalline; 4) rectangle thickness; 5) volume; 6) dome radius. After being generated, the mesh was validated using Ansys built-in validation tools. An element quality measure lower than 5×10 -6 was used; this metric is based on the ratio of the volume to the sum of the squares of the edge lengths for the three-dimensional (3D) mesh elements, which, according to the Ansys Meshing User's guide, has proven to be effective for thermal problems. The thermal power P Th , calculated as 75% of the electric power P El The simulations were performed for current levels I between 100 and 800 mA with a step of 100 mA and for 350 mA (nominal current value according to the manufacturer). The electric power P El was calculated as the product of the diode forward current I and the forward voltage V , which, in turn, were determined from the LTSpice model for the Xamp® XB-D LED The simulated values of T J are plotted as a function of I for each carrier in Fig. The impact of the carrier on T J can also be evaluated by calculating the slope of the T J (I) curves, which is depicted in Fig. It should be mentioned that the apparently linear dependence of T J with I is a consequence of the assumptions made in the implementation of the simulations. The first assumption is the validity of the LTSpice model used to calculate the voltage drop across the LED for the different levels of I. This model is valid for T J =25°C, whereas in our case the values of T J are higher. In addition, for a given I, T J varies with the carrier. Since the LED voltage also depends on T J , the use of this simple LTSpice model introduces an error in the determination of the electric power P El for a given I. Nevertheless, for this particular model, an increase of 10 times (900%) in the current is accompanied by a change in the LED voltage smaller than 20%, so this is not considered to be the main source of error. The most relevant assumption is the consideration that P Th is 75% of P El for all levels of I. The 25% efficiency is valid for nominal operating conditions The carrier also influences the thermal footprint of the LED die. This can be seen in Fig. Similarly to other p-n junctions, the current that flows through an LED increases with increasing temperature due to (among other factors) the dependency of the carrier concentration on the temperature given by the Boltzmann equations and for electrons and holes, respectively. In these equations, N C and N V are the impurity densities in the n and p sides of the junction, respectively, E C and E V are the bottom and top of the conduction and valence bands, respectively, E F is the Fermi level, k B is the Boltzmann constant and T is the junction temperature. However, in the case of LEDs, the temperatureinduced increase of the current does not translate to an increased emission intensity because, as temperature rises, non-radiant recombination (such as Shockley Read Hall and Auger recombination) increases, whereas radiative recombination (the source of the LED light emission) decreases. Carrier loss over the heterostructure barriers, which also contributes to the decrease of the LED emission efficiency, also increases with temperature. For more details on the related physical phenomena the readers are referred to works such as The carrier also influences the lifetime directly. It is generally accepted by the semiconductor industry to determine the Time-to-Failure (TTF) of a device using the Black model where I 0 is a constant, J is the current density, n is a scaling factor, q is the electron charge, E a is the activation energy of the failure mechanisms (in eV), k B is the Boltzmann constant, and T is the junction temperature (in K). As expected, the TTF decreases as the junction temperature increases. Typically manufacturers do not provide the numerical values of the constants I 0 , n, and E a , so the lifetime of the device cannot be calculated directly. Instead, it is common to consider the lifetime under nominal operating conditions, and to evaluate the impact of elevated operating temperatures on the lifetime by calculating the so-called acceleration factor (AF). The AF based on the Black model can be defined as: where J nom (and T nom ) and J st (and T st ) are the current density levels (junction temperature) at the nominal and stress conditions, respectively, and E A is the activation energy of the failure mechanisms of the semiconductor material. Defined this way, the AF correlates the actual high temperature operating life (HTOL) stress test data points, taken at elevated temperatures and/or current levels, to the expected lifetime under the actual operating conditions in a given application. In the current case, we can use the AF to estimate the increase/decrease in the lifetime when a given carrier is replaced with another one with higher/lower κ. For a given I, if one considers the T J obtained with AlN (κ=193 W/(m•K)) as a reference, the AF can be defined as: where T J,AlN193 is the junction temperature with the AlN (193 W/(m•K)) carrier and T J,car is the junction temperature obtained with the other carriers. The values of E A reported in the literature for GaN devices range between 1.05 and 2.5 eV, reflecting the differences in the processes and materials used by the different laboratories and companies around the world Red, Diam Wavelength coefficient (nm/A) Thermal conductivity (W/(mK)) Fig. For the same current, replacing the AlN with the diamond carriers reduces the aging of the LED by 25%. If operated at 800 mA the difference becomes more evident: the LED ages 60 times faster with Al 2 O 3 and two times slower with diamond. This means that when operated at this higher current level, the lifetime of a GaN LED with 2.5 eV activation energy mounted on a diamond carrier will double relatively to an LED mounted with an AlN (193 W/(m•K)) carrier. Again no significant difference is observed between the performance of SCD and PCD diamond carriers. On the other hand, the crystalline form of AlN increases the lifetime of the LED die by 10% (350 mA) and 20% (800 mA) with respect to the ceramic AlN with κ=193 W/m•K. For an activation energy of 1.05 eV, the impact of the holders is not as large (Fig. The final parameter that is directly influenced by T J is the wavelength of the emitted radiation, λ. When the thermal energy of the charge carriers k B • T (k B being the Boltzmann constant and T the temperature) is small compared to the bandgap energy E g , the frequency of the emitted photons (ν) is given by: where h is the Planck's constant. On the other hand, the wavelength of the emitted photons can be calculated as λ = c/ν, where c is the velocity of light. Combining this with Eq. ( The dependency of the bandgap energy E g on the temperature T is commonly expressed by the empirical Varshni equation where E g (0) is the bandgap energy at a temperature of 0 K and α and β are empirical parameters characterizing the particular semiconductor material. To estimate the dependency of the wavelength of the blue, green and red Cree® LEDs on the carrier material, the wavelength at 300 K was initially determined from the device datasheet. The bandgap energy at 300 K (E g (300)) was calculated by replacing the wavelength in Eq. Following the extraction of these parameters, the values of E g for the blue, green and red LEDs and the different carriers/current levels were calculated by replacing the simulated values of T J in Eq. ( As expected, all the LEDs characteristics improve when materials with higher κ are used as die carriers and the choice of a given material over the others should be made taking into consideration the required performance of the LED. Lower cost Al 2 O 3 and AlN ceramic holders with different κ are available from a variety of manufacturers. Diamond holders can be purchased from a few vendors and are available in two forms. SCD plates with κ as high as 2200 W/(m•K) are manufactured by high power high temperature (HPHT) method The replacement of the currently used AlN carrier with a diamond one would improve the reliability of the Cree®LEDs at different levels. In terms of light intensity, the impact of the carrier is minimum. The amber LED hows the largest change in the light intensity. When compared to the RLF of a LED mounted on an AlN carrier with κ=193 W/(m•K), replacing it with an AlN carrier with 193 W/(m•K) or a diamond carrier results in 96.4% and 101.7% of the intensity of light. It can thus be concluded that the κ of the carrier has a minor impact on the intensity of the emission. The impact of the carrier on the lifetime, is quite relevant. For nominal current level and considering the 193 W/(m•K) AlN carrier as a reference, replacing it with diamond increases the lifetime to 10%/25% at 350 mA for the lowest activation energy, and 25%/50% at 800 mA for the highest activation energy. The diamond carriers also improve the stability of the λ of the emitted light with the temperature; the drift of the λ is as low as 0.2 nm/A for the red LED and 0.1 nm/A for the blue and green LEDs. With the AlN (193 W/(m•K)) carrier, the drift increases to 0.7, 0.5 and 0.4 nm/A for the same LEDs, respectively. Finally, the use of diamond carriers minimizes the LED footprint. The temperature at the edge of the AlN (193 W/(m•K)) carrier is 40.23 and 40.58°C for 350 and 800 mA, respectively (Fig. CVD diamond can be the material of choice for very demanding applications, such as the space industry. As an example, let us consider the Lisa (Laser Interferometer Space Antenna) Pathfinder ESA mission, that intends to test in flight the concept of gravitational wave detection by putting two test masses in a near-perfect gravitational free-fall and controlling and measuring their motion with unprecedented accuracy The impact of the thermal conductivity of the GaN-SiC die carrier on the lifetime, relative luminous flux and wavelength stability of a Cree® power LED was evaluated through thermal simulations performed with Ansys. Different materials were considered, such as ceramic and single crystalline Al 2 O 3 and AlN, crystalline Si, SCD, and PCD. The difference in the junction temperature obtained with Al 2 O 3 (27 W/(m•K)) and SCD (2200 W/(m•K)) is 7.2°C and 17.6°C for a current level of 350 and 800 mA, respectively. The coefficient of variation of the junction temperature with the current for both materials is 24 and 1.4°C/A, respectively. The dependence of the RLF of blue and green LEDs on the carrier material is not relevant, unlike the amber LED that shows a decrease of 10% and an increase of 2% when an AlN carrier (193 W/(m•K)) is replaced with Al 2 O 3 (27 W/(m•K)) and diamond (2200 W/(m•K)), respectively. The lifetime of the LEDs varies considerably with the carrier material. Using the lifetime of the LED mounted on the AlN (193 W/(m•K)) carrier as a reference and an activation energy of 2.5 eV, the AF increases with the Al 2 O 3 (27 W/(m•K)) holder by almost 6 times and by more than 60 times for a current level of 350 and 800 mA, respectively, whereas for the same current levels it decreases to 0.75 and less than 0.5 with the diamond (2200 W/(m•K)) carrier. Finally, the impact of both materials on the drift of the wavelength with the current level was also evaluated, being minimum for the blue LEDs and maximum for the red LEDs. For the later LEDs the drift was 3.8 and 0.2 nm/A with Al 2 O 3 (27 W/(m•K)) and diamond (2200 W/(m•K)), respectively. The quality of Al 2 O 3 and AlN carriers has a considerable impact on all the figures, unlike what happens with both SCD and PCD carriers, that have comparable thermal performance. Given the tremendous impact of the carrier material on the junction temperature and consequently on all the LED figures, the choice of the carrier material is highly dependent on the required performance of the LED. For applications such as the gravitational wave detection, the use of PCD carriers may increase the lifetime and improve the performance of the UV LED light sources, which are critical for the success of the mission.