The quest to improve transparent conductors balances two key goals: increasing electrical conductivity and increasing optical transparency. To improve both simultaneously is hindered by the physical limitation that good metals with high electrical conductivity have large carrier densities that push the plasma edge into the ultra-violet range. Transparent conductors are compromises between electrical conductivity, requiring mobile electrons, and optical transparency based on immobile charges to avoid screening of visible light. Technological solutions reflect this trade-off, achieving the desired transparencies by reducing the conductor thickness or carrier density at the expense of a lower conductance. Here we demonstrate that highly anisotropic crystalline conductors offer an alternative solution, avoiding this compromise by separating the directions of conduction and transmission. Materials with a quasi-two-dimensional electronic structure have a plasma edge well below the range of visible light while maintaining excellent in-plane conductivity. We demonstrate that slabs of the layered oxides Sr2RuO4 and Tl2Ba2CuO6+δ are optically transparent even at macroscopic thicknesses >2μm for c-axis polarized light. Underlying this observation is the fabrication of out-of-plane slabs by focused ion beam milling. This work provides a glimpse into future technologies, such as highly polarized and addressable optical screens, that advancements in a-axis thin film growth will enable. Transparent conductors are key to electronic components that interact with visible light, such as displays, photovoltaics and light-emitting diodes. Creating a transparent metal requires a fine-tuning process of materials parameters in the optically visible range of the spectrum. On the one hand, one needs to ensure that interband transitions only occur above the ultra-violet to avoid absorption. On the other hand, the itinerant electrons should react slowly compared to the incoming light wave, to avoid screening and reflection. The latter is parametrised by the plasma frequency = * 1 , where denotes the electron charge and the vacuum permittivity. The dielectric constant , charge carrier density and effective electron mass * are material specific parameters. Pure metals such as copper, gold and palladium possess high carrier densities and high conductivity, Figure One of the most widely used transparent conductors is indium tin oxide (ITO) which presents a good compromise between conductivity and optical transmission. However, the field continues its search for alternative materials with lower cost, better mechanical properties Here we report a different way of obtaining transparent conductors based on the separation of conducting and transmitting directions in highly anisotropic metals. To demonstrate this generic behavior expected for strongly anisotropic conductors, we focus on the metal Sr2RuO4 (SRO). The crystal structure of SRO consists of RuO-layers separated by strontium, Figure The challenge of this conceptually simple idea lies in the device fabrication. While devices that are sufficiently thin along the c-axis can be produced by exfoliation, e.g. graphene, the fabrication of a slab with thin b-axis goes against the natural growth direction and is hence more challenging. Mechanical techniques to thin down a crystal, such as polishing, inevitably induce unwanted cleaving and hence device cracking. The focused ion beam (FIB) is a kinetic micro-machining method and exerts only negligible force onto the sample, and thus is ideal to carve out-of-plane slabs out of bulk single crystals The resulting experimental setup is shown in Figure The optical conductivity of SRO for linearly polarized light is shown in Figure In order to demonstrate the wider prospect of this approach we prepared a 1μm thick ac-slab of the high temperature superconductor Tl2Ba2CuO6+δ (Tl2201). Tl2201 has the same crystal structure as SRO, replacing the conductive RuO-layers by CuO-layers and an almost twice as long c-axis lattice constant For any application as a transparent conductor, the frequency response across the visible spectrum is important. To check this, we placed the device in Figure To evaluate the polarization properties of the SRO slab in more detail, we conducted broad-band Mueller polarimetry using a home-built polarization microscopy setup, as depicted in Figure The intrinsic polarizing capability of these layered oxides clearly sets them apart from other transparent conductors that are applied as thin films and possess no resistivity anisotropy within the film. An interesting novel approach to achieving transparent conductivity is the use of random metallic nanowire networks, but they also do not allow the linear polarization of light Our work demonstrates the power of anisotropic conductors as transparent metals, by separating the spatial directions of high conductivity and of light propagation. In addition, b-oriented thin films add further functionality that isotropic thin films cannot provide. The transmitted and reflected light is naturally linearly polarized, hence eliminating the need for anti-reflective coating and the associated optical losses. In addition, the strong in-plane conductivity anisotropy can also be used for novel device concepts. Conceptually, the material resembles an atomic wire grid, highly conductive parallel wires separated by a poorly conductive matrix. Adding multiple electric contacts to such a slab that connect only to a subset of the wires would render parts of a continuous film individually addressable. The main challenge towards technological implementation is the reliable and scalable synthesis of highquality thin films which are oriented along an unfavourable growth direction while avoiding the chemically favored layer-by-layer growth. While clearly challenging, there are numerous reports of high temperature superconductor films with this orientation, showing that this endeavor is feasible The here demonstrated concepts showcase powerful technologies that will become accessible once such microscopic control over large-area deposition of advanced materials is mastered in the future. Crystal Growth and Orientation. Bulk single crystals of Sr2RuO4 were grown using methods as described in Ref Preparation of Slab of Quantum Material. Large slabs of SRO and Tl2201 were cut from bulk single crystals using a Xe-plasma focused ion beam (PFIB) system. Trenches on either side of the slab were cut using an acceleration voltage of 30kV and a current of 2.5μA. The slabs were subsequently undercut at 200nA. In order to achieve a smooth surface a protection layer was deposited on the slab by codeposition of Pt and C. Finial polished under a grazing incidence was performed at 15nA. All slabs were prepared with the grazing incidence beam close to the crystallographic c-axis. Low Strain Setup for Temperature Dependent Measurements. In order to perform temperature dependence resistivity measurements a slab of SRO was transferred to a copper-grid using an in-situ lift out process within the PFIB. The slab was fixed using FIB assisted Ptdeposition. The grid and slab were cleaned using a broadband Argon plasma and subsequently coated with 5nm Ti and 150nm gold using a power source at 200W. The slab was then transferred to the center of a 100x100μm 2 gold coated silicon-nitride membrane (200nm thick). A rectangular hole, slightly smaller than the slab, was cut prior to placing the sample. Fixing the slab above the hole was achieved by FIB assisted Pt-deposition at 12kV/7nA allowing for a rigid connection with the membrane and electrical contact to the gold film. Patterning the membrane allows for a flexible connection of the sample to the silicon frame of the membrane where the sample can be electrically connected using silver wires and silver epoxy. Mueller Matrix. A slab of SRO was mounted on the edge of a silicon frame using two component epoxy. A part of the slab was hanging free over the hole in the frame allowing for transparency measurements. Broadband Mueller polarimetry was performed on a home built dual rotating retarder Mueller matrix polarimeter. The setup consists of a broadband light source (Thorlabs MWWHF2), a polarization state generator (PSG), a polarization state analyser (PSA), and a fiber coupled spectrometer (Princeton Instrument Acton 750i, Roper Instrument CCD camera). The PSG consists of a fixed linear polarizer (Thorlabs LPVIS100) followed by an achromatic quarter-wave plate (Thorlabs AQWP05M-600) mounted in an automated rotation stage (Thorlabs ELL14). The PSA has the same optical elements as the PSG but in reverse order. The optical microscope is composed of two Nikon objectives (0.55NA, 10mm working distance), allowing to probe the sample with a diffraction limited spot of ~1um. The sample image is recorded in transmission on a CCD camera (FLIR PointGrey). The rotation of the fast axes of the quarter-wave plates in the PSG and PSA using the automated mounts modulates the intensity of the output beam in a way that reflects the optical polarizing properties of the sample. Transmission intensity measurements are taken for different angle combinations of the two waveplates. The Mueller matrix of the sample is then retrieved by fitting a theoretical model of the polarimeter to the data, accounting for the calibrated chromatic retardances and ellipticities of the waveplates, and taking the coefficients of the sample's Mueller matrix as free parameters. By averaging the Mueller matrix over the visible range of the electromagnetic spectrum we obtain The component is normalized to 1 at all wavelengths. Another series of measurements was performed to accurately quantify the linear polarization properties of the sample and obtain its extinction ratio. To this end, the sample was placed after a reference rotating linear polarizer (Thorlabs LPVIS100) and the pair extinction ratio was measured. Under the assumption of good linear polarizers (extinction ratios close to 0), the extinction ratio of the sample is retrieved as the difference between the pair extinction ratio and the extinction ratio of the reference polarizer. The pair extinction ratio is given by the square of the deviation angle at which the transmitted intensity is equal to twice the transmitted intensity at optimal extinction. The extinction ratio of the reference polarizer is obtained by substituting the sample by another, nominally identical linear polarizer (LPVIS100), and dividing this pair extinction ratio by 2.