Elusive as dark matter particles are, they are not the only entities that can produce small energy releases deep inside the most sensitive detectors. Cosmogenic and residual radioactivity as well as other factors can produce and slowly accumulate long-living excitations and defect configurations in materials. Unsteady and avalanche-like releases of accumulated energy can limit the dynamic range of detectors and the sensitivity of experiments. This type of mechanism, while not widely discussed in the dark matter and neutrino detectors community, got a lot of attention in discussions about systems with energy flow in the context of non-equilibrium thermodynamic. This paper explores avalanche hypothesis using published data on low-energy background in detectors and available condensed-matter physics information on excitations, defects, and energetic molecules which can be produced in detector materials and examine ways to use these models to understand the origin of low-energy background in dark matter and other detectors and for suppression of this parasitic background. Significant interest in the dark-matter problem and physics beyond the Standard Model has encouraged experimenters to "turn all stones" For dual-phase noble liquid detectors, these small background signals consist of approximately 1-8 detected ionization electrons, which lie in the signal range expected for coherent elastic scattering of neutrinos on nuclei (CEvNS) for low-energy reactor antineutrinos scattering on Xe or Ar nuclei . In the course of reviewing the low-energy response and background observed within a range of different particle detectors, we found a striking commonality: the number of background events rises sharply for energies approaching those required to produce photon or electron in the detector materials The dual-phase detectors are, as a rule, designed specifically to reduce such low-energy noise and have had impressive success in this regard. Underground assembly and deployment are often employed to reduce direct cosmogenic backgrounds and induced radioactivity, and high levels of purification are essential to the performance of many of these detectors. Self-shielding and socalled fiducialization-deliberate exclusion of events identified in the outermost shell of the detection medium-are employed to inhibit the ingress of low-energy gamma or beta particles deep inside detectors. Low-angle Compton scattering of high-energy gammas and low-energy beta-active impurities in the materials should yield a practically flat or even slightly decreasing (toward zero) low-energy spectra of events inside the detector (as modeling of backgrounds in In dual-phase detectors, the parasitic electron emission is stronger after large ionization events (decay of this emission with time was the subject of multiple studies, including recent work from Purdue While it is expected that ionization energy or single UV photon energy-not to mention fewphotons or -electrons events-are too large to be caused by thermal fluctuations at the detector operation temperature, this expectation assumes that detector materials are in thermal equilibrium, which may not be the case if "hot," long-living excitations with lifetimes longer than the time in between ionization events can be produced in materials. The observations about background patterns resemble a specific dynamic process known as selforganized criticality. SOC initially appeared in computer simulations of large ensembles of interacting particles What makes this notion plausible is that when avalanches are present, in many cases they lead to specific correlations and effects in the systems It has long been known and widely applied-see Photon bursts have been observed in NaI(Tl) after exposure to UV light. This behavior is critical for the application of scintillator crystals for particle detection. A Saint-Gobain technical note [25] on the scintillation crystals observed that "with mild UV exposure, several pulses per second can be seen in the 6-10 keV region of a spectrum. If the crystal is stored in a dark area, this mild UV exposure will eventually disappear, although it may take from several hours to several days for the effects to stop." This observation is consistent with our main hypothesis: Due to the small activation energy needed to release stored energy from trapped charges, defects, or other metastable excitations, and because of the effects of clustering of defects, impurities, and trapped charges, in all materials where TSL, TSEE, or TSC are present, avalanche-like relaxation events that create bursts of electrons or photons, or bursts of conductivity can also be present. In alkali metal halides-such as NaI(Tl) scintillators-the presence of TSL is documented Energy storage in solid materials can extend to days (as has been seen in solid Xe or Ar) and years, and there is some evidence that oppositely charged ions can stay trapped close to each other Defect and impurity clustering occur for many reasons. Ions and defects resulting from ionizing radiation will yield inhomogeneous initial distributions of excitations in the material (i.e., along particle tracks). Alternatively, the diffusion of defects and impurities out of single-crystal grains and their accumulation on grain boundaries and around other defects-e.g., dislocations, dislocation loops, boundaries, and interfaces-will trap ions and defects within the media. Importantly, a small temperature increase will yield TSL in most common detector materials, i.e., the energy threshold for ion de-trapping/ion-pair recombination is low-below a fraction of an eV. Once initiated, the lattice relaxations after the recombination of an ion pair can produce local lattice deformations and phonons, which, in turn, can liberate another ion. As the clustering of defects and impurities are common effects, such relaxations can prompt avalanche-like recombination, especially of ions and other energy-bearing states stored within clusters. These behaviors match our hypothesized SOC-like dynamics in these materials. The original SOC model It is important to mention here that TSL and TSEE effects in solids are strongly dependent on the number of lattice defects in materials, and both formation and recombination of molecular ions inside a crystal lattice may produce lattice defects-even when the initial ionization was caused by UV light. Thus, relaxational processes will be dependent on the number of ions/excitations present and the history of the sample (as illustrated in Fig. The dynamics occurring alongside metastable excitations in particle detectors are more complicated than in the case of energy steadily pumped into a system. Energetic particles can both produce and destroy the states responsible for energy storage. The low-energy nuclear recoils (below the ionization threshold)-such as those caused by the scattering of low-energy solar neutrinos-produce hot phonons and can trigger releases of stored energy but cannot produce new energetic excitations (new ions). Furthermore, tunneling, thermal excitations, and environmental factors-such as thermo-mechanical stress or ambient pressure variations-can also trigger relaxation events. Thermal cycling and mechanical stress/ deformation also can lead to energy accumulation and storage in materials; we will discuss later that relaxational dislocation motion can cause photon and exaelectron emission. At low temperatures, energy can be stored in much smaller portionslike energies of interactions of electron and ion magnetic moments or energies stored in quantized vortexes in superconductors and superfluids, textures of the order parameter, etc. While these energies are low, avalanche relaxation events can result in energy releases significant concerning temperature and cause unwanted and somewhat unexpected effects in detectors and quantum information devices. We acknowledge that the SOC-like dynamic is not a universal rule in systems with energy flow and may not be the leading source of noise and background. Still, when the discovery of dark matter particles or other new physics is at stake, dynamic effects in a driven system (i.e., nonequilibrium thermodynamics effects) must be considered. Even with very limited knowledge of the involved microscopic processes, some interesting qualitative predictions can be done using the assumption of SOC-type dynamics in scintillators like NaI(Tl). Any ionizing radiation can cause effects similar to those produced by irradiation with UV light: after irradiation, one should expect to see an increase in the number of lowenergy events looking like irradiation with 1-10 keV electrons; these signals should go away after some time after radiation exposure. It is known that exposure to red or IR radiation is leading to the suppression of TSL in alkali halides, including NaI(Tl) Given the operation principles and design of the dual-phase detector (Fig. The incomplete extraction of electrons from the liquid phase into gas and trapping of electrons and ions in an electrostatic potential trap at the liquid-gas interface with a subsequent release, as well as electron trapping and release by electronegative impurities in liquid are the often-listed problems. Note, that the potential trap for electrons at the liquid-gas boundary of liquid Xe is about 0.8 eV Metal and dielectric surfaces are a possible source of long-delayed single-and multiple-electron emission events. Field emission of electrons from metal becomes nonlinear and complex as one approaches breakdown conditions, but experimenters avoid operating detectors in these regimes. However, even when the electric field at the surface is far away from breakdown or absent and even when the probability of thermally excited electron emission is low because of low temperatures, multiple effects are known to produce electron and photon emissions. One family of these effects, the previously described TSEE, occurs when ionizing radiation pumps energy into materials. Other sources of energy as mechanical stress and dislocation motion in materials can trigger electron and photon emission from surfaces of dielectric and oxide layers on a metal surface; There is another important possibility: dislocation motion or grain re-arrangements can cause microscopic local changes of the structure of the oxide layer on the metal surface and lead to self-organization and subsequent distraction of microscopic electron-emitting structures on the surface capable to efficiently emit electrons in a low electric field. are not yet sufficiently understood; using coatings with low secondary electron emission, like those in development for space microwave antennas Up to 8-10 monolayers of solid physisorbed layers of Ar and Xe are present on all internal surfaces and electrodes in dual-phase detectors The Russian Emission Detector (RED) group performed a series of experiments to locate and suppress mechanisms of the delayed electron emission. For their small Xe detector operating above ground, they observed that the S2 pulse from strong ionization events (like muons) often was followed by another light production event at the perimeter of the detector, which they named S3 light pulse In a 200 kg (about 160 kg active volume) Xe dual-phase detector operating above ground, the RED team installed an additional gate grid just under the extraction grid, which enabled the applicating a positive potential to this gate relative to the extraction grid to prevent electrons in the drift space (active volume) from reaching the liquid surface The presence of impurities in the bulk liquid likely plays a role here, and we can point to two distinct channels for producing single and multiple delayed electron-emission events in bulk liquids when impurities are present. The most obvious channel is due to the formation of slow atomic and molecular ions, and chemical radicals in presence of impurities. Slow ions, both positive and negative, move 1,000 to 10,000 times slower than free electrons The other channel relates to the possibility that impurities and radicals from molecular aggregates in liquid Xe and Ar, and these aggregates can accumulate sufficient energy to produce several electrons and photons simultaneously. This channel likely necessitates a brief discussion of experimental evidence for the "donor impurities" responsible for a variety of positive ions in Xe and Ar detectors. The liquid in dual-phase detectors continuously circulates by evaporating, passing as a gas through heated chemical getters, and condensing back into liquid. Thus, impurity concentrations stay at few ppb levels in liquid Xe and even lower in Ar detectors. While concentrations of electronegative impurities are usually monitored by measuring free-electron pulses decaying with travel distances in liquids, revealing the presence of positively charged impurity ions requires different techniques. In experiments Charge exchange (electron and proton exchange) in between ions (like Xe ions getting electrons from the donor impurities) is taking place in gases and have practical applications: it allows detection of trace impurities in Ar and Xe at ppt (part per trillion) level in atmospheric pressure ionization mass-spectrometers (APIMS) Positive ions arriving on the cathode and extraction grid in liquid Xe and Ar detectors are not Xe or Ar ions, but rather donor impurity ions. The kinetic energy of atomic or molecular ions drifting in an electric field in liquid is low, so only chemical energy (recombination energy) of these ions can cause electron emission (secondary electron emission) from electrodes. Dependence of secondary electron emission and multiple electron emission on chemical energy of slow ion recombination on the metal surface was studied in We posit the existence of another channel producing delayed multiple-electron and/or -photon events specific to liquid gases (and much less probable in the gas phase): the formation of molecular aggregates/clusters with excessive chemical energy. This hypothesis is based on known examples. Liquid noble gases-especially Xenon, which can be liquified at rather high temperatures-have long been considered a convenient solvent for chemical and photochemical reactions The most recent examples of energetic stable molecules containing Xe are observations of the H-Xe-O-H and H-Xe-O-Xe-H molecules formed in solid Xe under the action of UV light in presence of water impurity Another possibility for energetic aggregates production is the formation of stable clusters by impurity molecules and the production of excitations in these clusters due to ionization events in the detector. It was recently discovered that cold clusters (droplets) formed by He atoms in the presence of several electronic excitations (i.e., excimer molecules) can result in spontaneous emissions of several free electrons, and the probability of this relaxation channel is higher than other channels Water molecules are known to form hydrogen bonds, and water clusters can be present in liquid Xe or Ar. It is reasonable to expect that water clusters can be floating on the liquid Xe or Ar surface. These clusters can attach one or several unextracted electrons which also are bounded to the liquid surface. Charged claster can be easier extract to the gas, where it can evaporate and release electrons, UV light can produce excitations in these clusters or energetic molecules like in The possibility (at least hypothetical) of chain reactions, impurity cluster formations, and SOCtype dynamics in dual-phase Xe and Ar detectors and scintillation liquid Xe and Ar detectors leads us to several conclusions. First, delayed multiple photon-emission events in liquid Xe and Ar scintillation detectors could be possible-like observed in a NaI(Tl) scintillator after UV exposure. A spectrum of low-energy events peaking toward zero energy was observed in experiments where the effectiveness of PTFE UV light reflectors was evaluated Second, in dual-phase detectors, delayed events with simultaneous emissions of a few photons and electrons could be possible. For these events, both S1 and S2 lights could be observed. Formations of clusters with large chemical energies would be rare "chemical events," but the number of "excessive" low-energy electron-like recoils observed by Xenon1T over its runtime is also small Importantly, in low energy neutron scattering experiments, when detection of neutrons scattered in the Xe (Ar) dual-phase detector active volume is possible with backing detectors, one can select a class of events where no energy depositions were detected during 30-100 ms before a neutron scattering event, so the efficiency of electron production by low energy recoils of Xe (Ar) atoms in liquid can be calibrated up to single-electron accuracy On the other hand, the authors are optimistic about lowering the parasitic electron emission rate. Most of the mechanisms for the delayed electron emission discussed above are extrinsic: impurities are required in bulk or on surfaces to cause delayed electron emission. Removing all plastics (including PTFE) from the detector active volume and making the detector bakeable to effectively remove water films before cooling detectors seems to be reasonable steps to try. Cleaning gases to PPT level of impurities using getters was demonstrated While effects of wire material and wire conditioning on electron emission in dual-phase detectors were extensively studied (studies for LUX are the most recent example The Author believes that additional efforts in detector physics research and broader cooperation with the condensed matter physics community will help to avoid misinterpretations and resolve background problems to accelerate future discoveries. There is a growing number of projects using superfluid, superconducting, and other lowtemperature, solid-state detector technologies to continue the quest for dark matter particles and coherent scattering of low-energy neutrinos on nuclei. Though we cannot review this fast and dynamically growing field of research in this paper-interested readers may pursue At low temperatures, where photon detectors with energy threshold in the meV range operate, many subsystems in materials demonstrate complex and history-dependent relaxation properties. As illustrations, we can mention charges localized on boundaries and interphases in SQUIDs In a paper analyzing attempts to model scenarios of spontaneous symmetry breaking during early universe cooling by experiments with superfluid He3 overheated above superfluid transition temperature by energetic particles We would like to stress here the connections of the background problem in low-energy threshold detectors with non-equilibrium thermodynamic ideas and concepts developed to describe systems under energy flow-such as those introduced by Ilya Prigogine: the appearance of dissipative structures, the appearance of order from chaos, and the generation of complexity The dynamic properties of atomic or molecular clusters and other processes discussed in this paper are multi-particle quantum mechanics problems where first-principles calculations and modeling are difficult. This justifies using analogies with known effects and calls for experimental techniques to study energy accumulation and relaxation pathways. In this sense condensed noble gases and detectors are good model systems for studying such effects. The energy range of excitations of interest here can be accessed with absorption and emission spectroscopy and many other techniques; "exotic" or otherwise rare excitations in other systems, like cryogenic detectors at temperatures below 1K are much more difficult objects for experiments. The fact that sources of parasitic low energy background are not yet unambiguously identified, though the problem was present already in the early dark matter particles detection experiments, like Xe10 Finally, the author wishes to raise a potential bridge for this dark matter and neutrino detectordriven science into the domain space of superconducting devices and qubits. Given our expectation that SOC-type dynamics can take place in materials where interacting metastable states are present, we propose that non-thermal noise and decoherence effects may signal relaxation events within the metastable states and configurations that are present in materials at low temperatures. Our general expectations are that choosing materials with a lower number of low-energy states and operating detectors in a way that minimizes energy depositions in materials should universally lead to lower noise and a lower rate of parasitic events. While this short discussion necessitates further study far beyond the scope of this paper, we raise the point to illustrate that future cross-pollination may yield significant results for all these fields. Fig. Potentially, arriving of positive ions to the cathode can cause electron emission, but there were no observations of long-delayed (more than 1 second) or re-appearing electron emission after large ionization events.