We investigate the ultrastrong tunable coupler for coupling of superconducting resonators. Obtained coupling constant exceeds 1 GHz, and the wide range tunability is achieved both antiferromagnetics and ferromagnetics from -1086 MHz to 604 MHz. The ultrastrong coupler is composed of rf-SQUID and dc-SQUID as tunable junctions, which connected to resonators via shared aluminum thin film meander lines enabling such a huge coupling constant. The spectrum of the coupler obviously shows the breaking of the rotating wave approximation, and our circuit model treating the Josephson junction as a tunable inductance reproduces the experimental results well. The ultrastrong coupler is expected to be utilized in quantum annealing circuits and/or NISQ devices with dense connections between qubits. The superconducting quantum circuit is one of the most outstanding platforms for quantum information processing and quantum sensing devices However, major issues remain to be resolved before the realization of a practical universal quantum computer that implements quantum error correction A flexible coupler enabling many qubits to be connected at once would be effective in such situations. There are two approaches, using either a tunable or fixed coupler to connect circuit components, but the fixed coupling method is limited to applications in which the parasitic coupling can be neglected while keeping quantum states Among the various types of coupler, using an ultrastrong inter-resonator coupler is one way to connect many qubits at once. By inter-resonator coupling, we expect circuit schemes that integrate full coupling circuits, such as in Ref. where ω q , ω r , g q , and g r represent the qubit frequency, the resonator frequency, the coupling constant between a qubit and a resonator, and the coupling constant between resonators. Also, σz j is the Pauli operator of qubits, and âj and â † j are the annihilation and creation operators for resonators, respectively. The effective qubitqubit coupling constant obtained from diagonalizing this Hamiltonian is J 12 = 4g r g 2 q /(ω 2 r -4g 2 r ) In this work, we realize an inter-resonator ultrastrong coupler and achieve antiferromagnetic (-1086 MHz) to ferromagnetic (604 MHz) coupling tunability. Our coupler consists of an rf-SQUID, which is connected to resonators via shared meander lines to gain a large mutual inductance. This could enables the simultaneous coupling of multiple qubits for quantum annealing and NISQ devices The circuit model (Hamiltonian) of the system with two resonators connected by the tunable coupler is derived from circuit equations. Figure where Φ 0 is the flux quantum. Using the star-delta (Y -∆) transformation Then, the Lagrangean for this circuit is derived as where When Q k is taken to be the canonical coordinates, the conjugate momentum P k can be written as Consequently, we obtain the Hamiltonian of the whole circuit as where the effective mass of each resonator Moreover, to quantize the circuit, we define annihilation and creation operators â, â † , b, and b Then, Hamiltonian Eq. ( where the resonator frequency ω k (φ ex ) and the coupling constant g r (φ ex ) are defined as Since the resonator is connected to SQUID, these dressed frequencies depend on external flux bias φ ex . As discussed later (especially in section V), we define the bare resonator frequency ω k0 as a specific ω k at a point of g r = 0 (M * = 0). However, this bare frequency does not correspond to 1/ √ L k C k due to the existence of L * (galvanically coupled to SQUID). If M * is sufficiently smaller than L k + L * , the coupling constant can be expressed as g r M * I zpfa I zpfb using the zero point fluctuation current of resonators I zpfk = ωk /2(L k + L * ), where the approximated frequency ωk ( Hamiltonian Eq. ( Then, the two harmonic modes are obtained as where {u In the two-resonator-coupled system, these eigenmodes ω ± (φ ex ) are observable, but not each resonator frequency ω k (φ ex ) lim In terms of a physical aspect, when M * is sufficiently large, electric current can no longer flow in M * . Then, ω -= 0 and ω + is an LC resonance arising from the combined two inductors and capacitors in the circuit, where I a = I b in Eq. ( Figure The circuit shown in Fig. because we consider the SQUID to always be in the ground state. For the circuit shown in Fig. To evaluate the ultrastrong coupling between resonators, we consider the effect of the rotating wave approximation (RWA), which is not clearly visible in the spectral measurements in the weak and the strong coupling regimes. Applying the RWA to the coupling term in Hamiltonian Eq. ( When we consider the simple case ω a = ω b = ω r , the squared frequency difference due to the RWA is written as , and the shift (frequency difference) is roughly 0.5g 2 r /ω ± . The approximated modes ω RWA ± are plotted in Fig. , and our coupler has S (g) a 0.09. As mentioned in section II, the upper limit of the coupling constant between the resonators is 0.5ω r , and the mean photon number diverges at 0.5ω r in the calculation. However, in this limit, there is only one resonant mode in the circuit, and we can no longer define two resonators. Third, the Wigner function of resonator A is defined as where â = q a + ip a , and is shown in Fig. For the coupling devices, the function to turn off the coupling is as important as the ability to set a strong coupling constant for quantum devices. Undesired interactions between circuit components during the computation process can cause errors and have been studied as a factor that can significantly reduce gate fidelity Figure ±11 MHz, as can be seen in Fig. To confirm the effect of crosstalk, we consider a driving Hamiltonian and observables in the spectrum measurement with crosstalk. After a microwave drive is applied from the input port, we detect the signal emitted to the output port from the whole system as their decays. Taking into account the crosstalk, the microwave drive Hamiltonian input from port A on a rotational frame with probe frequency ω p is described by where ξ is the intensity of the drive and η is the rate of crosstalk. Since the left and right (A, B) sides of the circuit are designed to be equal except for the local flux line, we assume that the crosstalk also symmetrically affects each port and resonator. Even though the two resonators cannot be considered to be completely separate systems except at g r = 0, we assume that each resonator can be treated separately at g r 0. Thus, the drive tone with crosstalk from port A would excite resonator A with an intensity of (1η)ξ and resonator B with an intensity of ηξ. The measured signal is assumed to be the sum of decays from resonators, and is described as the imaginary part of the annihilation operators Im â and Im b from the input output-theory where κ a,b is the decay rate of resonators. And analytical descriptions of Eqs. ( where, and the drive frequency ω d . The measured signal shows the absolute values of these coefficients. In the numerical simulation, we solve the Lindblad-type master equation using the Hamiltonian H 2r + H dA with energy decays κ a,b to the port, and we obtain the state density matrix of the steady state ±11 MHz, which corresponds well to the measurement result in (a). In contrast, Fig. We implemented and evaluated the ultrastrong tunable coupler between resonators using an rf-SQUID. Our circuit model treating junctions as tunable inductances reproduces the experimental results very well. The fitting of the spectrum shows the high tunablity of the coupling constant g r /2π from -1086 MHz (antiferromagnetic) to 604 MHz (ferromagnetic). Thus, our coupler achieves an ultrastrong coupling regime, and we observe a breaking of the rotational wave approximation in the spectrum measurement. Turning off the coupling is an important function to the construction of quantum devices. By comparison with crosstalk simulations, we confirms the existence of a zero-coupling point. We assume that this ultrastrong coupler is compatible not only with lumped element resonators but also with other shape of resonators such as coplanar waveguide resonator. On the basis of these results, our coupler could be used in a full coupling annealer, as well as in NISQ devices and quantum simulators that require more dense connections and/or coupling qubits far apart. It is also expected to be applied to the up-and down-conversions devices of photons or to research on quantum phenomena using ultrastrong coupling such as the generation of entanglement states. and (4) and also the offset of inductance modulation γ in LJ(φ) = LJ0/(cos φ -γ) + L0 (see Appendix C). Bare resonator frequencies ωa0 = 6.522 GHz and ω b0 = 6.551 GHz are also obtained from this fitting parameters.