Here we present the first demonstration and in-depth study of unreleased acoustic resonators in 14nm FinFET technology in the IEEE X band, which offer a zero-barrier-to-entry solution for high Q, small footprint, resonant tanks integrated seamlessly in advanced CMOS nodes. These devices leverage phononic waveguides for acoustic confinement, and exploit MOS capacitors and transistors inherent to the technology to electromechanically drive and sense acoustic vibrations. Sixteen device variations are analyzed across thirty bias points to discern the impact of phononic confinement, gate length, and termination scheme on resonator properties. The limiting factor in FinFET resonator performance among design variations tested is shown to be Back End of Line (BEOL) confinement, with devices with acoustic waveguides incorporating Mx and Cx metal layers exhibiting 2.2x higher average quality factor (Q) and peak amplitude, with maximum Q increasing from 115 to 181 and maximum amplitude scaling from 0.8 to 4.5 μS. A detailed analysis of biasing in the highest performing device shows good fit with a derived model, which addresses the velocity saturated piezoresistive effect for the first time in active resonant transistors. Peak differential transconductance that is dominated by changes in the silicon band-structure, as expected from an analysis that includes contributions from the piezoresistive effect, electrostatic modulation, and silicon bandgap modulation. As demand for wireless services grows, so too does the demand for higher frequency radio communication where bandwidth is more plentiful. With 5G FR2 bands extending beyond 10 GHz and FR1 intra-band congestion growing, novel solutions are required to enable high performance, adaptable radios. As a key element of both the filters and voltage controlled oscillators used in radios, high frequency resonators represent an active area of research, with recent developments including thin film bulk acoustic resonators with novel ferroelectric materials, as well as high frequency Lamb and Lamé wave resonators using piezoelectric lithium niobate or aluminum nitride thin films The beam-forming enabled by such an antenna array is particularly promising for higher frequency bands, where propagation conditions are less stable due to increased RF absorption. These RF front-ends of increasing complexity require many more analog components to be integrated in a compact form factor, leading to active research in RF integration into traditional digital processes. Many high performance technologies require integration in MEMS-first or MEMS-last process schemes The designed resonator structure, shown in Fig. 1.1 BEOL Phononic Confinement Fig. In order to study and optimize the bandgap induced by the phononic crystals, several 2D simulations were performed in COMSOL Multiphysics. Specifically, by mapping the real coordinates to reciprocal coordinates and searching for the eigenmodes along the first irreducible Brillouin zone in the 2D reciprocal lattice, a 130 nm by 60 nm PnC (such as can be designed within the constraints of the Mx layers in the 14 nm process) yields a calculated bandgap from 8 GHz to 12 GHz (shown in Fig. While the PnCs in the main resonant cavity enhance energy confinement and wave reflection from the BEOL, there also exists wave scattering at the two ends of the resonator. Reducing this scattering further increases the horizontal confinement, reduces the insertion loss, and hence increases the Q. The adiabatic theorem in photonic waveguide design is leveraged here, which states that when the wave is propagated down the waveguide, scattering will vanish because of the limitation of sufficiently slow perturbation To understand the conversion from stress to drain current in the sense transistors, modulation of three separate FET properties is examined: oxide capacitance, channel mobility due to piezoresistivity, and silicon bandgap. For ease of visualization, an initial analysis is performed with the source-referenced simplified strong-inversion model with α = 1 (the traditional "square-law model", or SPICE level 1) where I d is the drain current, μ is the carrier mobility, C ox is the gate capacitance, V DS and V GS are the drain-to-source and gate-to-source bias, respectively, W and L are the channel width and length, and V T is the threshold voltage required for significant channel conduction. Capacitance modulation in these devices is the same mechanism used in electrostatic drive of these devices, except that rather than sensing the gate current directly, the capacitance modulation is being amplified through transistor action into a change in drain current. The piezoresistive effect, whereby the semiconductor carrier mobility is modulated through stress in the transistor channel, likewise appears as a multiplier on the transistor drain current. Semiconductor bandgap modulation, on the other hand, largely effects the threshold voltage of the transistor. For a complete derivation of these effects, the reader is directed to the derivation in Appendix B. Modified to include the effects of stress on μ, C ox , and V T (modeled as μ(σ) = μ 0 + ∆μ), the original expression for current in the linear region becomes the following: where Likewise, in saturation where λ represents the channel length modulation coefficient (0.05 to 0.25 typical) and For modern sub-micron devices, carriers do not exhibit constant mobility but rather undergo velocity saturation at high fields. A simplified way to model this analytically is through a piece-wise equation which, solved at v d = v sat , gives and leads to a modified expression for drain current where An important nuance for acoustic resonators is that both the saturation velocity and the change in mobility (piezoresistive effect) are related to the change in carrier effective mass caused by acoustic deformation of the crystal lattice -saturation velocity by m * -1/2 and mobility by a factor between m * -1/2 and m * -5/2 , depending on doping (for a detailed analysis, see Appendix C). This relation means that, while DC current may saturate, the AC piezoresistive effect can still change drain current to an extent, even in the saturation region. For this reason, a compound model is utilized that incorporates velocity saturation in the calculation of DC drain current but allows mobility to vary freely. Under this approach, the contribution to RF output from both electrostatic forces and mobility modulation should scale linearly with drain current. The contribution from any threshold voltage shift is seen to be related to drain bias only in the linear regime and is scaled by the impact of mobility and capacitance changes. In the saturation regime, on the other hand, the threshold voltage shift is primarily a function of gate bias and is modified by drain bias only through channel length modulation. These expressions for ∆I d represent one half of the device transfer function g mdd , discussed in Eq. 1, with the other half being given by the voltage-to-strain conversion and subsequent strain confinement/resonance. While direct measurement of strain in the solid-state resonator in the front end of line poses a challenge, all three of these aspects are subsequently investigated using measured electrical results. DC results, shown as an example for the 80 nm gate length device A1 in Appendix F, indicate that the sense transistors in all devices were working as intended. The large current values of approximately 2 mA when gate and drain are biased at V dd are due to the parallel DC connection of the two sense transistors and large effective width of the individual transistors, where 40 fins span the resonance cavity (in y-direction) and are electrically connected in parallel. While DC results were similar for all devices (outside expected differences due to gate length), resonance mode confinement was highly dependent on the design variations studied. A summary of all measured devices as well as a comparison of their differential transconductance spectra from 9.5 to 13.5 GHz are shown in Fig. These differences are quantified in Table To investigate phononic crystal confinement, analysis was limited to designs with 80 nm gate length (A1-A4 and B0-B1) and the confinement treated as a three-level categorical factor. This analysis showed no significant change in center frequency of the modes, but it did show significantly improved transconductance (204, 379, 451 nS) and quality factor Compared to the other factors studied, L gate is unique in that it is the primary design variable for selecting center frequency due to the mode being defined by source/drain spacing. This means that the different values studied dramatically change the cavity shape and thus all peaks detected in the studied frequency span of 9.5 to 13.5 GHz cannot be used in the analysis, as they are not present in this range in all devices. To overcome this, a much smaller comparison of A3 and A4 (L gate =80 nm) to A5 and A6 (L gate =106 nm) was performed using only the prominent modes with transconductance above 500 nS and Q above 25 that were present towards the center of the spectra. The downside of this approach is that gate length is confounded with a change in phononic crystal design that is necessary for the different device geometries due to design rule challenges. Despite this, the fact that confinement method showed no significant change in center frequency for 80 nm devices points towards this shift being dominated by gate length as would be expected. As the device with the highest performance, resonator A2 was selected for further analysis, with the maximum transconductance of the ≈11.75 GHz mode examined as a function of device biasing. This was done at a drive bias of V dd , as g mdd was seen to increase linearly with the increase in MOS capacitance at higher drive bias (see Appendix F). The dependence of g mdd on sense transistor biasing, shown in Fig. For NMOS devices oriented in the ¡110¿ direction, the negative piezoresistive coefficients ensure that the contribution of the threshold voltage shift and mobility is additive. If fRBT devices are implemented with PMOS devices or in processes with different fin orientations, care should be taken to ensure that the dominant stress-dependent effects do not compete against each other. This may not be as much of an issue for long channel RBT devices, as piezoresistive modulation dominates for long channel devices that are not supply voltage constrained. The highest magnitude peak fit occurred in device A2 (L gate of 80 nm, gradually terminated, dual PnC) at 11.73 GHz with a differential transconductance of 4.49 μS and a Q of 69.8, for an f * Q product of 8.19*10 11 at drain, gate, and drive biases of 0.6, 0.8, and 0.8 V, respectively. While previous unreleased Figure This work provides an in-depth experimental investigation into the influence of several design parameters on the performance of unreleased Resonant Fin Transistors in standard 14nm FinFET technology. Phononic crystal confinement, shown experimentally here to be the most important variation in improving unreleased resonator performance (2.2x improvement on average), provides significant opportunity for integrating acoustic devices into standard CMOS platforms. The highest performing resonator, a gradually terminated 80 nm gate length device with both Mx and Cx phononic crystal confinement, shows a transconductance amplitude and Q of 4.49 μS and 69.8 respectively, with an f * Q product of 8.19*10 11 . At the same time, an analytical model has been demonstrated that predicts resonator performance across sense transistor biasing conditions, utilizing a combined velocity saturated current at DC and unsaturated mobility variation at AC, where acoustic perturbation of carrier effective mass modulates saturation velocity and mobility simultaneously. This highlights the importance of understanding the assumptions that go into developing advanced electrical models for short channel transistors, which may not accurately depict effects present in active electromechanical devices. While creating these phononic confinement schemes in a standard process with strict design rules poses a unique challenge, we have established a methodical way to predict and design resonator performance across multiple CMOS platforms. This technology combined with parallel advancements in CMOS-compatible ferroelectric and piezoelectric thin films, presents the opportunity to develop compact, low-cost, CMOS-integrated, and electrically-controllable resonators with no additional packaging required, opening the door for acoustic processing alongside traditional electronics in advanced CMOS nodes. S-parameter measurements were taken at room temperature and pressure, with an input power of -10 dBm using an Agilent Technologies N5225a PNA, with biasing provided by three Keithley 2400 SMUs as shown in Fig. Wincal software from Formfactor Inc. was used to facilitate pre-measurement calibration, with a Hybrid LRRM-SOLR performed utilizing an Impedance Standard Substrate (ISS 129-246). Infinity GSSG Probes were used to allow for a compact biasing scheme, saving die real estate at the expense of increased cross-talk between adjacent signal lines. Gate bias for the sense transistors was provided via a separate DC needle probe. Acquired Touchstone files were first analyzed using Scikit-RF, which was used to transform the single-ended parameters collected into their mixed mode equivalent matrices Examination of expected device performance using the derived analytical model was performed in Python. Contribution for each of the three components (bandgap, mobility, and capacitance modulation) was taken as the difference between the positive and negative stress components. Lmfit was used to perform the optimization routine, using a basinhopping algorithm to find a global minimum for the DC current. The fit of g mdd was performed using the Levenberg-Marquardt algorithm as this had less tendency to settle to a poor-fitting local minima. The simplified 1D model of a 3D transistor led to significant cross-correlation between stress directional components, however magnitude of the total stress remained relatively constant across fit iterations. To understand the conversion from stress to drain current in the sense transistors, modulation of three separate FET properties is examined: channel mobility due to piezoresistivity, oxide capacitance, and silicon bandgap. The piezoresistive effect is typically modeled as a linear change in resistivity (ρ) as a function of applied stress (σ) and the longitudinal and transverse piezoresistive coefficients (π): Low-field mobility (μ) is related to the resistivity as follows, where q is the elementary charge and N is the doping concentration per unit volume. A stress-dependent mobility can be defined in terms of the initial mobility μ 0 , and the initial value of mobility subtracted out to obtain the net change Oxide capacitance changes due to the physical thickness change of the oxide (t ox ) under strain. This strain (∆t ox /t ox0 ) is given by the applied stress divided by the Young's modulus, E, of the dielectric, assuming the film is stressed in the elastic regime. Such a relation results in the following expressions: Strain dependence of the bandgap of silicon (E g ) is given by where E 1g represents the sensitivity of the bandgap to total strain ξ, where Using this relation, the theoretical dependence of threshold voltage on strain can be derived using a typical expression for extrapolated threshold voltage that is referenced to the approximate onset of strong inversion where V SB is the source to body voltage, V F B is the flat-band voltage governed by the metal-semiconductor work function φ ms and effective oxide charge per unit area Q 0 , by φ 0 is a value a few (2 < n < 5 typical) thermal voltages φ t above the onset of strong inversion where s is the semiconductor permittivity N A is the semiconductor acceptor doping per unit volume (assuming p-type substrate), and with n i being the intrinsic carrier concentration in the semiconductor (≈ 10 10 in silicon at room temperature). Combining all of this together, The dependence of C ox on strain has already been discussed. The other terms, however, require further examination. Starting with the expression for n i , where N c/v are related to the effective mass of carriers in the semiconductor conduction and valance band as follows: Neglecting the change in √ N c N v since it will have less impact than the change in the exponential term, Carrier concentration exhibits a simple dependence on strain as the stretching/compression of the lattice merely changes the number of charges within a fixed volume. To a first order approximation, These expressions, along with bandgap dependence on strain, are now inserted into the expression for φ f to obtain where Examining the change in threshold voltage as a function of gate dielectric stress and strain in the silicon substrate, the only term that does not have a well defined relation is Q 0 . This is because the term is the projection of all parasitic charges in the gate stack onto the semiconductor surface. Thus, while this term is itself an effective sheet charge, it in reality encompasses a mixture of sheet and volume charges which respond differently to strain, the ratio of which is not well defined. This term is thus left alone in the expression below, being defined as an initial (Q 0 0 ) and change in (∆Q 0 ) value. Substituting the derived relations into Eq. 26 and subtracting out the initial threshold voltage value gives the following expression for ∆V T : The source-referenced simplified strong-inversion model with α = 1 gives the traditional square-law model Modified to include the effects of stress on μ, C ox , and V T , this becomes the following: where Likewise, in saturation and Observing Eq. 4 combined with the expressions for change in mobility and capacitance (Eqns. 14 and 16), it can be seen that the initial values for mobility and capacitance can both be factored out of the non-∆V T term, resulting in a change in drain current as follows (for the linear regime): with a similar expression likewise derivable for saturation. In sub-micron devices with high lateral fields in the channel region, carrier drift velocity does not exhibit a linear dependence on electric field (constant mobility), but rather saturates as V DS increases Once the field becomes sufficiently large, carriers may obtain enough energy (E p ) to emit optical phonons. When this kinetic energy is transferred to optical phonons, the carriers must subsequently accelerate again to regain kinetic energy To simplify modeling of velocity saturation in compact models, an empirical formula is typically used to encapsulate these effects into a simple equation: For simplicity in deriving an analytical equation for transistor operation with the presence of velocity saturation, a piece-wise approximation may also be utilized which, solved at v d = v sat , gives A comparison of these drift velocity models is shown in Fig. (46) Of note is the fact that both mobility and optical phonon emission depend on effective mass, meaning the change in transistor current due to an effect that alters effective mass (such as acoustic deformation of the crystal lattice) will not be subject to velocity saturation like its DC component. Thus, the approach taken in this work is to use a compound model, with unsaturated long-channel expressions used to derive the relative AC change in transistor current and a saturation model, developed hereafter, to obtain the steady-state drain current used for the unstrained initial condition. Utilizing the previously mentioned piece-wise model for carrier drift velocity leads to a modified version of the long channel model: where In the long channel limit, V DSsat tends towards V GS -V T and Equation 45 can be used to substitute in for v sat . Furthermore, linearizing the channel length modulation via Taylor expansion gives the original long channel expression, shown in Equation The end result of this is that the DC saturation current no longer scales quadraticly with V GS -V T but rather linearly reduces the overall current. While the simultaneous change in mobility and saturation velocity with stress prevents AC current waveforms from clipping, this does reduces the magnitude of the mobility and oxide capacitance modulation terms that are linearly proportional to steady-state drain current. # f i t t i n g method = b a s i n h o p p i n g # f u n c t i o n e v a l s = 1309 # data p o i n t s = 81 # v a r i a b l e s = 6 c h i -s q u a r e = 6 . 2 4 6 4 e -08 r e d u c e d c h i -s q u a r e = 8 . 1 8 3 0 9 2 . 8 0 1 +/-1 9 4 5 6 . 8 3 8 0 ( 1 0 . 6 3 % ) ( i n i t = 2 0 0 0 0 0 ) clm : 0 . 4 7 3 6 6 4 9 7 +/-nan ( nan%) ( i n i t = 0 . 3 ) Weff0 : 3 . 0 0 0 0 e -06 +/-nan ( nan%) ( i n i t = 3 . 2 e -06) Model ( d e l I d v s a t l m f i t ) [ [ F i t S t a t i s t i c s ] ] # f i t t i n g method = l e a s t s q # f u n c t i o n e v a l s = 67 # data p o i n t s = 81 # v a r i a b l e s = 3 c h i -s q u a r e = 2 . 4 2 1 9 e -12 r e d u c e d c h i -s q u a r e = 3 . 1 0 5 0 e -14 Akaike i n f o c r i t = -2516.41319 Bayesi an i n f o c r i t = -2509.22984 [ [ V a r i a b l e s ] ] s t r e s s x : 1 0 0 4 0 2 1 . 2 5 +/-1 1 8 6 8 9 8 . 7 2 ( 1 1 8 . 2 1 % ) ( i n i t = 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 ) s t r e s s y : 1 0 0 0 0 . 0 6 9 1 +/-1 0 7 2 8 2 8 . 0 8 ( 1 0 7 2 8 . 2 1 % ) ( i n i t = 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 ) s t r e s s z : 1 0 0 0 0 . 0 0 0 1 +/-7 6 6 0 9 . 1 7 0 9 ( 7 6 6 . 0 9 % ) ( i n i t = 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 ) [ [ C o r r e l a t i o n s ] ] ( u n r e p o r t e d c o r r e l a t i o n s a r e < 0 . 1 0 0 ) C( s t r e s s x , s t r e s s y ) = -0.998 C( s t r e s s x , s t r e s s z ) = -0.294 C( s t r e s s y , s t r e s s z ) = 0 . 2 4 1 This model has only a handful of parameters to describe device operation, as opposed to the more advanced BSIM models used commonly in industry, which include many empirically fit parameters to give the best device models for commercial applications