Quantum anomalous Hall insulator (QAH)/s-wave superconductor (SC) hybrid systems are known to be an ideal platform for realizing two-dimensional topological superconductors with chiral Majorana edge modes. In this paper we study QAH/unconventional SC hybrid systems whose pairing symmetry is p-wave, d-wave, chiral p-wave, or chiral d-wave. The hybrid systems are a generalization of the QAH/s-wave SC hybrid system. In view of symmetries of the QAH and pairings, we introduce three topological numbers to classify topological phases of the hybrid systems. One is the Chern number that characterizes chiral Majorana edge modes and the others are topological numbers associated with crystalline symmetries. We numerically calculate the topological numbers and associated surface states for three characteristic regimes that feature an influence of unconventional SCs on QAHs. Our calculation shows a rich variety of topological phases and unveils the following topological phases that are no counterpart of the s-wave case: crystalline symmetry-protected helical Majorana edge modes, a line node phase (crystalline-symmetry-protected Bogoliubov Fermi surface), and multiple chiral Majorana edge modes. The phenomena result from a nontrivial topological interplay between the QAH and unconventional SCs. Finally, we discuss tunnel conductance in a junction between a normal metal and the hybrid systems, and show that the chiral and helical Majorana edge modes are distinguishable in terms of the presence/absence of zero-bias conductance peak. Unconventional superconductors (SCs) with nonzero topology, dubbed topological SCs, have been the subject of intense study Alongside those efforts, quantum anomalous Hall insulator (QAH)/SC hybrid systems have attracted a lot of interest as another platform of topological SCs. QAHs are two-dimensional (2D) topological insulators that exhibit quantized Hall conductance without an external magnetic field and host chiral fermions on the edge Recently, QAH/SC hybrid systems have been generalized to hybrid systems with antiferromagnetic topological insulators In this paper, we study topological phases of QAH/unconventional SC hybrid systems as a generalization of the QAH/s-wave SC hybrid system. Unconventional SCs, which have non-s-wave pairing, can be real-ized in cuprate Numerically calculating surface states and topological numbers peculiar to QAH/unconventional SC hybrid systems, we show that the hybrid systems exhibit versatile topological phases with no counterpart of the QAH/swave SC hybrid system; these topological phases are attributed to nontrivial topology or spin structures in unconventional Cooper pairs. For instance, chiral SCs manifest itself a nontrivial Chern number (N = 0). Thus, a nontrivial topological interplay may emerge in the hybrid systems. We discuss possible topological phases for three characteristic parameter regimes: (i) E g > 2|∆ 0 |, (ii) E g < 2|∆ 0 |, and (iii) metallic state, where E g is the amplitude of the insulating gap in the QAH and the metallic state is the situation where the chemical potential lies above or below the insulating gap. The topological properties of hybrid systems for each parameter regime are briefly summarized as follows. Hereafter, we assume the topologically nontrivial states in the underlying QAHs. (i) Only a chiral edge mode is contributed to the superconducting state for E g > 2|∆ 0 |, whereby leading to two chiral Majorana edge modes irrespective to pairing symmetries. (ii) Different topological phases appear for some pairing symmetries when the gap function satisfies E g < 2|∆ 0 |. We find a crystalline-symmetryprotected helical Majorana edge mode when the pairing symmetry is a p-wave pairing. Moreover, a gapless phase appears when there occurs an inconsistency between the spin structures of QAH and spin-triplet pairing. In view of a topological invariant, the gapless phase is regarded as a crystalline symmetry-protected Bogoliubov Fermi surface. (iii) Topological phases inherent to unconventional pairings appear when the chemical potential lies at the bulk bands; if the pair potential has nodes, zeroenergy flat bands or sine-curved states are realized on the surface. On the other hand, if it has a full gap, we find multiple chiral Majorana edge modes, the number of which is determined from a sum rule of the Chern number. In addition, the gapless phase mentioned above appears again since it is attributed to the mismatch of the spin structures. Finally, we discuss tunnel conductance in a normal metal/(QAH/SC) junction as a probe to distinguish the crystalline symmetry-protected helical Majorana edge modes from the chiral ones; the former exhibits a sharp zero bias conductance peak being mediated by the zero energy states protected by crystalline symmetry, whereas the latter does not due to the interference of the zero energy states We start from a minimum two-dimensional Hamiltonian describing QAH states, where m(k) = m+B(k 2 x +k 2 y ), A, and σ i are a mass term, a spin-orbital coupling term, and the Pauli matrices in the spin space, respectively. The mass term breaks TRS and open a gap at k = 0; the energy spectrum is given by 2 , leading to the insulating gap E g = 2|m|. For m/B < 0, the system belongs to the QAH phase with a single chiral edge mode on the boundary Using Eq. (1), we model the QAH/SC hybrid system, where the QAH is supposed to be stacked on an SC; see Fig. where μ is the chemical potential and ∆(k) the induced gap function. In the following, we consider unconventional SCs, and thus ∆(k) describes non-s-wave Cooper pairings such as p-wave, d-wave, chiral p-wave, and chiral d-wave pairs. For spin-singlet Cooper pairings, we define the gap function as where the form factor f (k) depends on Cooper pair sym- metry such that We note that the d xy (d x 2 -y 2 )-wave pairing hosts point nodes at k x = 0 and k y = 0 (k x = k y and k x = -k y ) on the Fermi surface, whereas the chiral d ± id-wave pairing have a full gap and breaks TRS spontaneously. On the other hand, the gap function in spin-triple Cooper pairings is formally described as and d j = 0 when j = i, where ν = x, y and i = x, y, z. For the chiral p ± ip-wave pair, we fix the d vector along the z direction. Note that the p x -and p y -wave pairings have a pair of point nodes at k x = 0 and k y = 0 on the Fermi surface, respectively. In the following, we summarize symmetries of the QAH/SC hybrid systems, which are useful to define topological numbers in Sec II C. First, let us consider symmetries of the normal Hamiltonian (1). In the QAH, TRS (T = iσ y K) is absent, but there exist crystalline symmetries that keep the Hamiltonian (1) invariant. Equation (1) satisfies two-fold rotation symmetry in the z axis, In addition, though two-fold rotation symmetries in terms of the x and y axis (C 2x and C 2y ) are not symmetry of the Hamiltonian, the combination with TRS keeps the Hamiltonian invariant. That is, the combined which we call magnetic-reflection symmetry in this paper. Here K is the complex-conjugation operator. Next, we consider symmetries of the QAH/SC hybrid systems (2) that breaks TRS but preserves particle-hole symmetry (PHS): where τ i are the Pauli matrices in the Nambu space. Hence, our systems belong to class D of the Altland-Zirnbauer symmetry classes. In addition, the crystalline symmetries ( where D g obeys the change of momentum in Eqs. ( where +(-) comes from the parity of gap functions in Eq. ( where the sign reflects the parity of the gap function in Eq. where we choose the phase factors φ and φ as Γ 2 Ax = Γ 2 Ay = 1 4×4 , with 1 N ×N being the N ×N identity matrix. These chiral operators are defined for all gap functions; see the rightmost columns in Table We here discuss possible topological numbers inherent to the symmetries of the QAH/SC hybrid system. Since the QAH/SC hybrid systems break TRS, we can define the Chern number N as when the energy spectrum is fully gapped over the twodimensional (2D) Brillouin zone (BZ). Here, |u n,k is an eigenstate of H BdG (k) with a band label n and momentum k and the summation is taken over the occupied states. The Chern number corresponds to the number of chiral Majorana edge modes through the bulk-boundary correspondence and its sign is related to the direction of edge currents; for instance, chiral Majorana edge modes associated with the Chern number N = 1 and -1 propagate in the opposite direction. In the QAH/s-wave SC hybrid systems, the Chern number takes N = 0, 1, and 2. See Fig. The QAH/SC systems host additional crystalline symmetries ( winding number where we fix k x = 0 for Γ Ay and k y = 0 for Γ Ax . The nonzero 1D winding number ensures the existence of zero energy modes at edges of the 1D subspace through the bulk-boundary correspondence. The 1D winding number intrinsically relates to the Chern number so that |W[Γ Ai ]| counts the number of chiral Majorana edge modes that cut across k x = 0 or k y = 0 in the surface BZ. For instance, when we consider the QAH/s-wave SC hybrid system and impose the open (periodic) boundary condition in the x (y) direction, W[Γ Ax ] describes zero modes at k y = 0 in the surface BZ; the 1D winding number takes W[Γ Ax ] = 1 when N = 1, while W[Γ Ax ] = 0 when N = 0, 2 In addition, the QAH/SC hybrid systems satisfy twofold rotation symmetry, which leads to a crystalline symmetry-protected zerodimensional (0D) Z 2 invariant when the parity of the gap function is odd under C 2z , i.e., {C 2z , C} = 0. Combining Eq. ( where we add -i to make the operator real. Equation Here, k and k are arbitrary wave numbers in the 2D BZ. If ν = 1 mod 2, there exists a gapless point on a line connecting k and k ; namely, one of the wave number is enclosed by a line node. In view of topology, the line node is analogous to the Bogoliubov Fermi surface We numerically calculate the surface density of states (SDOSs) and those topological numbers to explore topological surface states through the bulk-boundary correspondence. We perform the numerical calculation on TABLE II. Summary of surface states (SSs) and bulk gap structures (GSs) in the QAH/ unconventional SC hybrid systems, where we assume that the QAH is topologically nontrivial (m < 0) and the semi-infinite (periodic) boundary condition is imposed in the x (y) direction. Here, N and W represent the Chern number Eg > 2|∆0| a square lattice by replacing k i → sin k i and For SDOSs, we impose the periodic boundary condition for the y axis and the semi-infinite boundary condition for the x axis; see Fig. with the retarded Green's function, where E is the energy of the semi-infinite system, η is an infinitesimal positive number, and P e = (τ 0 + τ z )/2 is the projection onto the electron states. The surface Green's function in the semi-infinite system is obtained using the Umerski's method For topological numbers, the Chern number ( In the following, we fix A = 0.1 and B = 1 and choose other parameters as (m, ∆ 0 , μ) = (±0.05, 0.025, 0), (±0.05, 0.025, 0.01), (±0.05, 0.175, 0), (±0.05, 0.175, 0.01) and (±0.05, 0.025, 0.06). The first and second parameters belong to the regime E g > 2|∆ 0 |, the third and fourth to E g < 2|∆ 0 |, and the fifth to the metallic states, where E g = 2|m| is the insulating gap and m < 0 (m > 0) describes the topologically nontrivial (trivial) phases of the QAH. For E g > 2|∆ 0 | and E g < 2|∆ 0 |, we also check the dependence of the chemical potential because an accidental degeneracy of surface zero energy states occurs when μ = 0, while it disappears when μ = 0 We apply the numerical methods to the QAH/unconventional SC hybrid systems. The results are summarized in Table In this regime, topology of the QAH is mainly contributed to the surface states. We observe two chiral Majorana edge modes for all the hybrid systems when m < 0. Their stability is ensured by the Chern number N = 2. Once the magnitude of the pair potential exceeds the insulating gap, we find topological phases unique to unconventional pairings. For the p x -wave (d x), p y -wave (d ŷ), and d-wave pairings, the two chiral Majorana edge modes appear again. On the other hand, a helical Majorana edge mode emerges for the p x -wave pairing (d ŷ). In this phase, the Chern number is zero, while the 1D crystalline-symmetry-protected winding number is nonzero. Thus, only the magnetic-reflection symmetry protects the helical Majorana edge mode. Note that the crystalline-symmetry-protected helical Majorana edge mode is distinguished from one protected by TRS since the system breaks TRS; see Sec. III B for more discussion. Moreover, we find a line nodal phase, i.e., a completely gapless phase, for the p x -wave (d ẑ), p y -wave (d ẑ), and chiral p-wave pairings even when ∆ 0 is finite. The line node originates from the mismatch of the spin structures between the QAH and the d vector. We will show that the line node is protected by the 0D topological number in Sec. III C. We tune the chemical potential to the metallic regime, i.e., the Fermi level lies above or below the insulating gap. In this regime, the hybrid systems realize superconducting states inherent to unconventional pairings; the gap structures reflect the pairing symmetries except for the gapless phase. For gap functions with point nodes, surface states associated with point nodes emerge On the other hand, a fully gapped SC with multiple chiral Majorana edge modes is realized when the SC side has chiral d ± id-wave pairings, which host the nontriv- It is known from the K-theoretical classification that 2D class-D SCs with a magnetic-reflection symmetry are classified by double integer numbers Z × Z From the calculation of topological numbers, we find the topological phase with (N , W) = (0, 2) when the pairing symmetry in the SC side is the p x wave pairing (d ŷ); see Table We show a topological phase diagram of the QAH/p x wave (d ŷ) SC hybrid systems in Fig. Our numerical calculations show a line node phase, i.e., a completely gapless phase, when the d vector is parallel to the z axis. See Fig. To verify that the line node is protected by the crystalline-symmetry-protected Z 2 invariant, we numerically calculate Eq. ( When the chemical potential lies above or below the insulating gap, the normal Hamiltonian forms a Fermi surface and a superconducting gap arises on it. Then, there arise superconducting states inherent to pairing symmetries in conjunction with a modification by the spin-orbit coupling in the QAH. In this regime, we find multiple chiral Majorana edge modes in the QAH/chiral d ± idwave SC hybrid systems since the chiral d ± id-wave SCs have nonzero Chern numbers, which manifest itself chiral Majorana edge modes. However, the number of chiral Majorana edge modes in the hybrid system is different from that in the chiral d ± id-wave SC. This is because the Chern number in the QAH also affect the bulk topology, and thus the number of chiral Majorana edge modes obeys a sum rule of the Chern numbers in the QAH and the chiral d ± id-wave SC. Figure To understand the sum rule of the Chern numbers, we employ the analogy between superconducting Dirac Hamiltonians and spinless chiral p-wave superconductors where θ k = arctan(k y /k x ). The projected Hamiltonian with the basis ck,↑ is then described as Combining with Eq. ( The results are consistent with the numerical calculation and show that the sum rule of the Chern number is interpreted as the change of the phase winding in the effective gap function. In a similar way, in the hole-doping regime (μ -E g ), we also have the sum rule of the Chern number by reversing the sign of the phase winding in the QAH. Note that the similar results hold true even when m(k) = 0. In this case, the effective gap function is obtained as IV. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION In this paper, we have studied the QAH/unconventional SC hybrid systems with p x -wave, p y -wave, d xy -wave, d x 2 -y 2 -wave, chiral p ± ip-wave, and chiral d ± id-wave pairings. By focusing on the three characteristic parameter regimes and numerically calculating the SDOSs and the topological numbers, we have found a variety of topological phases, with exotic topological phases enabled by the interplay between the QAH and unconventional SCs. The gap structure, surface states and topological numbers are summarized in Table Finally, we discuss tunnel conductance in a junction between a normal metal (x > 0) and the QAH/unconventional SC hybrid systems (x < 0) as a probe of the topological phases, which can be determined from the SDOSs and the topological numbers • Tunnel conductance depends on the 1D winding number when the QAH/SC hybrid systems have a full gap and show topological surface states • Tunnel conductance directly reflects the bulk density of states when the superconducting state has nodes but a surface state is absent • Tunnel conductance exhibits a sharp zero-bias conductance peak (a broadened zero-bias conductance peak) when the superconducting state has point nodes involving a surface flat band (a surface sinecurve state). Such behaviors have been studied in the context of unconventional SCs We numerically calculate tunnel conductance in a junction between a normal metal (x > 0) and the QAH/p xwave SC (d ŷ) hybrid system (x < 0) using the Lee-Fisher formula Figure and thus the chiral and helical Majorana edge modes are distinguishable though the tunnel conductance.