Hot carrier solar cells aim to overcome the theoretical limit of single-junction photovoltaic devices by suppressing the thermalization of hot carriers and extracting them through energy selective contacts. Designing efficient hot carrier absorbers requires further investigation on hot carrier properties in materials. Although the thermalization of hot carriers is responsible for a large portion of energy loss in solar cells, it is still one of the least understood phenomena in semiconductors. Here, the impact of excitation energy on the properties of photo-generated hot carriers in an InGaAs multi-quantum well (MQW) structure at various lattice temperatures and excitation powers is studied. Photoluminescence (PL) emission of the sample is detected by a hyperspectral luminescence imager, which creates spectrally and spatially resolved PL maps. The thermodynamic properties of hot carriers, such as temperature and quasi-Fermi level splitting, are carefully determined via applying full PL spectrum fitting, which solves the Fermi-Dirac integral and considers the band-filling effect in the nanostructured material. In addition, the impact of thermalized power density and carrier scattering with longitudinal optical phonons on the spectral linewidth broadening under two excitation energies is studied. Designing hot carrier absorbers capable of inhibiting hot carrier relaxation through electron-phonon interactions is of significant importance in advanced photovoltaic devices. In conventional solar cells, a large portion of absorbed solar energy is dissipated via thermalization of photo-generated hot carriers. Research on the properties of hot carriers has been carried out using various characterization techniques, such as steady-state photoluminescence (PL), Relaxation dynamics of hot carriers excited to different allowed energy levels in the band structure provides information about their relaxation mechanisms and their interactions with phonons. At a such condition, it is also possible to evaluate the performance of a hot carrier absorber in inhibiting the thermalization of hot carriers. In this work, discussions on the influence of excitation energy on the properties of photo-generated hot carriers at various lattice temperatures and excitation powers are provided. In addition, a new approach for fitting the full PL and absorption spectra is presented, which reduces the degrees of freedom of the fitting parameters, leading to a simplified analysis and more accurate results of the carrier temperature and the quasi-Fermi level splitting. The properties of photo-generated hot carriers in the InGaAs MQW structure are investigated using a hyperspectral luminescence imager under various continuous wave excitation wavelengths and lattice temperatures. By applying various calibration methods, the absolute photon flux emitted by the sample is determined. where "I PL " is the PL intensity, "A(E)" the energydependent absorptivity, "h" the Planck constant, "k B " the Boltzmann constant, "c" the speed of light, "T" the carrier temperature, and "∆μ" the quasi-Fermi level splitting. By fitting the full PL spectrum, the absorptivity of the sample and the hot carrier properties can be determined. This fitting method considers the band-filling effect in the absorptivity term, which is important especially at high excitation powers. In addition, driven by solving the Fermi-Dirac integral, Here, the fitting processor is as follows: first, the temperature of carriers is found from the high energy side of the PL spectrum. Next, the relative quasi-Fermi level splitting of the PL spectra under various excitation powers is found. This relationship imposes a constraint on the degrees of freedom of the fitting parameters. Finally, by applying the full spectrum fit, the absolute values of the quasi-Fermi level splitting and the absorptivity of each individual spectrum are determined considering the impact of the band-filling effect on the absorptivity of the MQW structure as a function of the excitation power. It is possible to estimate the carrier temperature from a spectrally calibrated PL spectrum by applying a linear regression to its high energy side in the range of energies in which the absorptivity is constant. This analysis can be performed by taking the derivative of Equation 1 respect to the photon energy under the Boltzmann approximation (e E-∆μ k B T ≫ 1), which is: Therefore, by plotting the left side of Equation 2, it is possible to determine the carrier temperature from the energy ranges where the slope of the graph is zero, which is attributed to the constant absorptivity. In other words, the offset of the region with a zero slope value is inversely proportional to the temperature of carriers. The key advantage of this method is to determine the range of energies with constant absorptivity, required for the basic linear fitting method. In bulk semiconductors, the absorptivity is (almost) constant above the bandgap, however, for quantum-well (QW) structures, the absorptivity has a step-like behavior, but it is still constant in the energy ranges between discrete energy levels. In Figure Finding the temperature of carriers from the derivative method requires the PL spectrum possesses a region with a constant absorptivity. However, if the absorption spectrum does not show an energy-independent behavior above the bandgap, this method cannot be applied. This can be the case in a QW structure with multiple discrete energy levels with low energy separation or in a sample with optical resonances (Fabry-Pérot oscillations) in its emission spectrum. To address such cases, a second method is proposed, which finds the carrier temperature directly from the absorption spectrum, as given by: ). ( In Equation ) is constant at a given excitation power and it only changes the magnitude, but not the shape of the absorption spectrum. However, E k B T in Equation In this method, as shown in Figure where E′ and E" are the range of energies where the absorption spectrum is not influenced by the band-filling effect, as shown in Figure In Equation From Equation In Equation By applying Equation and the absorption coefficient "α b0 " of the barrier: where "a" is the amplitude, "E" the energy of the optical transition, "Γ" the spectral linewidth broadening, and "R y " the effective Rydberg energy of the material. The first term in Equation 8 is attributed to the excitonic transition and it has a large contribution at zero wavenumber (k = 0). The band-filling effect in the QW structure is described by: [6, 27] where "f v e " and "f c e " are respectively the electronic distributions in the valence and the conduction bands. "m h " and "m e " are the effective mass of holes and electrons, respectively. Due to the band-filling effect, by increasing the excitation power, the number of states available in the conduction and valence bands decreases, resulting in a drop in absorptivity. The absorptivity of the MQW structure under various excitation powers is plotted in Figure At very high excitation powers, when the quasi-Fermi level splitting is of the order of the bandgap or even larger ( ∆μ ≥ E g ), it is still possible to apply this method. However, first it is required to find the absorptivity of the sample at lower excitation powers, then, at higher powers the value of ∆μ can be determined by considering the band-filling effect and by solving the Fermi-Dirac integral in generalized Planck's law. The results of the carrier temperature difference (∆T: the difference between the carrier and the lattice temperatures) as a function of the absorbed power density, "P Abs ", at two lattice temperatures (300 K: green triangles and 230 K: red dots) and two excitation wavelengths (980 nm: solid symbols and 405 nm: open symbols) are plotted in Figure Figure To assess the performance of the sample in inhibiting the thermalization of hot carriers, it is required to consider the fraction of the absorbed power density above the band edge, i.e. the intra-band thermalized power density, "P th " , which is given by: where "ħω LO " is the longitudinal optical (LO) phonon energy of the QW structure. This empirical coefficient estimates the strength of the thermalization rate of hot carriers through phonon-mediated relaxation pathways in the system. In Equation The quasi-Fermi level splitting versus the thermalized power density is plotted for various lattice temperatures and excitation wavelengths in Figure where "A", "B", and "C" are the coefficients attributed to Shockley-Read-Hall (SRH), radiative, and Auger recombination mechanisms, respectively. According to Equation The dynamics of hot carriers is also reflected in the spectral linewidth broadening of their optical transitions in the system. The origin of linewidth broadening of a PL spectrum can be associated with the scattering of carriers with longitudinal optical (LO) phonons, acoustic phonons, ionized impurities, excitons, and charge screening effects. Figure To study the impact of carrier scattering by LOphonons on the PL spectrum, the linewidth broadening of the first band-to-band transition emitted by photogenerated carriers at thermal equilibrium with the lattice (T C = T L ) is determined. This low excitation power data is determined from PL spectra emitted by carriers far from the laser spot, which are detected by the hyperspectral luminescence imager. The indication of emission by thermalized carriers is shown in Figure Figure In conclusion, the effects of excitation wavelength on the properties of hot carriers in InGaAs MQW structure are studied. First, a developed model for the full PL spectrum fit is proposed, which facilitates the analysis and improves the accuracy of the fitting results. In this approach, it is discussed how to determine the unique values for the carrier temperature, the quasi-Fermi level splitting, and the absorptivity of the MQW structure from the PL spectrum by reducing the degrees of freedom of the fitting parameters. The experimental results indicate that considering the absorbed power density, an excitation wavelengthdependent behavior is observed for ∆T. However, the change of ∆T as a function of the thermalized power density is the same under both excitation wavelengths (405 nm and 980 nm), for different lattice temperatures. The results of ∆μ as a function of the thermalized power density indicate that under low excitation powers, where the dominant recombination mechanism is attributed to radiative recombination, the gradient of ∆μ is larger than when the Auger mechanism is dominant at high excitation powers. Finally, the impact of the thermalized power density on the spectral linewidth broadening is studied and the Fröhlich coupling constant of the MQW structure is determined.