Dynamically switchable half-/quarter-wave plates have recently been the focus in the terahertz regime. Conventional design philosophy leads to multilayer metamaterials or narrowband metasurfaces. Here we propose a novel design philosophy and a VO2-metal hybrid metasurface for achieving broadband dynamically switchable half-/quarter-wave plate (HWP/QWP) based on the transition from the overdamped to the underdamped resonance. Results show that, by varying the VO2 conductivity by three orders of magnitude, the proposed metasurface's function can be switched between an HWP with polarization conversion ratio larger than 96% and a QWP with ellipticity close to -1 over the broad working band of 0.8-1.2 THz. We expect that the proposed design philosophy will advance the engineering of metasurfaces for dynamically switchable functionalities beyond the terahertz regime. Polarization is an important characteristic of electromagnetic waves, and the manipulation of the polarization is desirable in a diverse range of applications, such as sensing, imaging, encryption, and communications In the terahertz regime, metamaterial-or metasurface-based polarization converters, especially HWPs and QWPs, are of particular interest due to the lack of suitable natural materials. Over the years, these terahertz metadevices have evolved from narrowband Although the structures for terahertz switchable HWP/QWP, as well as for other switchable bifunctionalities, such as switchable HWP and perfect absorber Following the above design philosophy, there exist a few exceptions In this letter, we propose a VO 2 -metal hybrid metasurface for achieving broadband switchable HWP/QWP in the terahertz regime. This metasurface is designed following a novel philosophy based on the transition from the overdamped to the underdamped resonance. We will show that by varying the VO 2 conductivity by three orders of magnitude, which can be done through thermal, optical or electrical stimulus Based on Jones matrix and Poincaré sphere analyses, Ma et al. for an HWP, and for a QWP, Here r xx and r yy (or r xx and r yy ) are the reflection coefficients for the E x and E ŷ polarizations, respectively, and the sign "+/-" denotes right-or left-circular final polarization state. Therefore, in order to realize a metasurface that can be switched from an HWP to a QWP, here we propose a novel design philosophy. We first design a metal/insulator/metal (MIM) configuration with r xx working in the underdamped regime whereas r yy in the overdamped regime, such that all the reflection coefficients have near-unitary amplitude, indicating low absorption, and that r xx can exhibit a 360 • reflection phase coverage as frequency varies. This can lead to a high performance HWP according to Eq. ( and meanwhile r yy transits from the overdamped to the underdamped regime so that Satisfying Eqs. ( The polarization-dependent reflection resonance characteristics as well as the near-field distributions were numerically simulated using the frequency-domain solver in CST Microwave Studio. The reflection coefficients were obtained with r xx = S 11 and r yy = S 22 . We modelled gold using the lossy metal model with conductivity of 4.56 × 10 7 S/m, and set the relative permittivity of the polyimide to be ε PI = 3.5 × (1 + 0.0027i). We adopted Drude model to describe the frequencydependent permittivities of VO 2 , where ε ∞ is the permittivity at high frequency limit, ω p (σ) = σ/σ 0 ω p (σ 0 ) is the conductivity-dependent plasmon frequency, σ is the conductivity, ω p (σ 0 ) = 1.4 × 10 15 rad/s for σ 0 = 3 × 10 5 S/m, and γ = 5.75 × 10 13 rad/s is the collision frequency. We first examine the dynamic transition from the overdamped to the underdamped regime for r yy , as the VO 2 conductivity increases from σ = 200 S/m to 2 × 10 5 S/m. Fig. To understand the distinct resonance characteristics of the proposed metasurface with different VO 2 conductivities and under the two orthogonal polarizations, we plot the surface current maps and the magnetic field distributions in Fig. In conclusion, we have proposed a novel design philosophy and a VO 2 -metal metasurface for achieving a broadband switchable terahertz HWP/QWP. Results have shown that by varying the VO 2 conductivity from 200 S/m to 2 × 10 5 S/m, r xx remains in the underdamped regime whereas r yy undergoes a transition from the overdamped to the underdamped regime. Therefore, when σ = 200 S/m, r xx can exhibit a 360 • reflection phase coverage as frequency varies and thus Eq. ( 