The Cherenkov effect enables a valuable tool, known as the Cherenkov detector, to identify highenergy particles via the measurement of the Cherenkov cone. However, the sensitivity and momentum coverage of such detectors are intrinsically limited by the refractive index of the host material. Especially, identifying particles with energy above multiple gigaelectronvolts requires host materials with a near-unity refractive index, which are often limited to large and bulky gas chambers. Overcoming this fundamental material limit is important for future particle detectors yet remains a long-standing scientific challenge. Here, we propose a different paradigm for Cherenkov detectors that utilizes the broadband angular filter made from stacks of variable onedimensional photonic crystals. Owing to the Brewster effect, the angular filter is transparent only to Cherenkov photons from a precise incident angle, and particle identification is achieved by mapping each Cherenkov angle to the peak-intensity position of transmitted photons in the detection plane. This unique property of the angular filter is exceptionally beneficial to Cherenkov detection as it enables the realization of a non-dispersive pseudo refractive index over the entire visible spectrum. Moreover, such a pseudo refractive index can be flexibly tuned to arbitrary values, including those close to unity. Our angular-selective Brewster paradigm offers a feasible solution to implement compact and highly sensitive Cherenkov detectors especially in beam lines and it can cover a wide momentum range using readily available dielectric materials. A charged particle travelling in a transparent host medium emits photons when it travels faster than the phase velocity of the photons in that medium. This phenomenon is known as Cherenkov radiation, which is first observed experimentally by P. A. Cherenkov (under the guidance of S. Vavilov) According to Frank and Tamm's theory of Cherenkov radiation where n is the refractive index of the host medium, and c is the speed of light in vacuum. Although larger refractive indices give rise to lower Cherenkov thresholds and higher photon yield, they are not always desirable in Cherenkov detectors. The reason is that large refractive index decreases the sensitivity of the Cherenkov angle to small changes in the velocity. In general, the highest detection sensitivity is obtained at θ CR → 0 or n → c/v (The detection sensitivity is defined as , which reaches its maximum at θ CR → 0 ). In other words, to identify high-energy particles (i.e. v → c ), transparent dielectrics with a near-unity refractive index are often required. Such a constraint limits the host materials used in many Cherenkov radiators to low-index. This is for example the case in ring imaging Cherenkov (RICH) detectors that use gases for the identification of particles with momenta larger than 10 GeV/c Another limitation in state-of-the-art Cherenkov detectors is related to the photon emission efficiency: the use of low-index materials inevitably leads to low efficiency (i.e. the photon yield is n 2 v 2 according to Frank and Tamm's theory). Especially when operating nearthreshold (i.e. v → c/n ), the photon yield approaches zero. Consequently, traditional gas radiators generally require bulky gas chambers to produce sufficient photons for detection Recently, several theoretical attempts have been made to relax the material limitations in Cherenkov detectors by using modern concepts from nanophotonics and metamaterials Here we propose a new paradigm for Cherenkov detectors by exploiting a broadband angular filter. This broadband angular filter is comprised of stacks of many 1D photonic crystals of different periodicities but identical constituent materials [Fig. We now proceed to analyze the essential role of the Brewster effect in our proposed particle detectors. As schematically shown in Fig. According to the Brewster effect, |k ̅ BCR | = √ ε r1 ε r2 ε r1 +ε r2 ω c ( We highlight that the broadband angular filter is treated as a realistic multilayered structure, instead of an effectively homogeneous material, and hence n BCR [see Methods for its derivations] is completely different from the effective refractive index obtained using the standard homogenization theory. Interestingly, n BCR is related to the pseudo Brewster-Cherenkov angle θ BCR [see inset of In what follows, we shall explore the potential applications of this generalized Frank-Tamm formula for particle identification. As our approach exploits the Brewster effect, we refer to the particle detector depicted in Fig. To facilitate the conceptual demonstration, Fig. and ε r2 for the two constituent materials of the broadband angular filter. For example, according to equation (2), ε r1 = 2.18 (e.g., SiO2) and ε r2 = 3.07 (Al2O3) A key feature of Brewster-Cherenkov detectors is that the pseudo refractive index n BCR determines their sensitivity and momentum range. Figure Another important advantage of our Brewster approach in comparison with all previous nanophotonic approaches has tanθ Brewster = √ε r2 /ε r1 Design of the broadband angular filter. The broadband angular filter [Fig. Cherenkov radiation in the detection plane. For Cherenkov radiation passing through the broadband angular filter, while the direction of their in-plane wavevector k ̅ BCR = x ̂kx + zk z has a pseudo Brewster-Cherenkov angle with respect to the particle trajectory [Fig. Influence of the finite thickness of the broadband angular filter on the performance of Brewster-Cherenkov detectors. More discussions on the performance of Brewster-Cherenkov detectors are provided in section S7 and Figs. S8-S9 of the supporting information. When the stack number M of 1D photonic crystals and the periodicity number N of each 1D photonic crystal are finite, the p-polarized light incident at the angles very close to the Brewster angle can also safely pass through the broadband angular filter. This way, there is a small angular (and thus spatial) spread of the transmitted Cherenkov radiation in the detection plane, such as those shown in Fig. 