Metal additive manufacturing (AM) by laser powder bed fusion (L-PBF) builds upon fundamentals established in the field of laser welding which include the influence of gas and plume dynamics on weld depth and quality. L-PBF demands a thorough investigation of the complex thermophysical phenomena that occur where the laser interacts with the metal powder bed. In particular, melt pool turbulence and evaporation are influenced by the ambient gas chemistry and pressure. This paper presents the design and validation of high pressure laser melting (HPLM) testbed; this accommodates bare metal plate samples as well as manually-coated single powder layers, and operates at up to 300 psig. The open architecture of this testbed allows for full control of all relevant laser parameters in addition to ambient gas pressure and gas flow over the build area. Representative melt tracks and rasters on bare plate and powder are examined in order to validate system performance, and preliminary analysis concludes that pressure has a significant impact on melt pool aspect ratio. The HPLM system thus enables careful study pressure effects on processing of common L-PBF materials, and can be applied in the future to materials that are challenging to process under ambient pressure, such as those with high vapor pressures. Laser powder bed fusion (L-PBF) is a category of additive manufacturing (AM) in which laser energy is focused onto a flat bed of powder to progressively fuse together horizontal cross-sections of a three-dimensional component. Figure In L-PBF, absorption of laser energy is governed by the powder material itself, as well as the prevalence of secondary reflections as impacted by powder layer properties and previously fused geometry In addition to liquid flow, gas-liquid interaction plays a significant role in melt pool behavior and resulting L-PBF part quality. Khairallah et al. In summary, an ideal melt pool receives enough energy to maintain a single, continuous track which reaches the previously-solidified layer below to fuse the layers together, yet not so much energy that the melt pool becomes unstable, resulting in non-uniformity and/or embedded porosity. Much work has gone into mapping the parameter space for various materials in order to establish optimal processing conditions, sometimes called a process window, for high quality L-PBF parts. Recent work focusing on laser welding and L-PBF in sub-atmospheric conditions suggests that ambient gas pressure may be used to expand such process windows. Specifically, weld penetration increases and melt pool width decreases with decreasing pressure below 1 bar To our knowledge, there is only one report in the literature of L-PBF at pressures greater than 1 bar. Bidare et al. Modifying an existing commercial L-PBF machine to achieve pressures significantly above one atmosphere would be challenging, and perhaps impossible given the gas flow and sealing requirements. Here, to investigate elevated pressure effects on L-PBF, we present a custom-built high pressure testbed. The system's open architecture gives complete control over all relevant process variables, including laser power, scan speed, scan strategy, spot size, inert gas flow over the print area, and ambient pressure. In particular, the gas flow over the build area is simulated and validated, and the system is calibrated to ensure precise measurement of the laser spot size, and uniformity of exposure. Studies of melt track dimensions versus laser power and speed, and ambient pressure validate the system's baseline performance, and present preliminary insights as to the influence of elevated pressure on the L-PBF process window. 2 Description of the HLPM Testbed The high-pressure laser melting (HPLM) system was constructed upon a custom chamber (Parr Instrument Company) with a maximum operating pressure of 1900 psig, and a cylindrical 2.5 inch (diameter) by 6.5 inch (length) bore. The chamber features an oblong window flange, a removable Figure Alignment between the laser's focal plane and the powder bed is crucial for achieving uniform quality across the entire build area; misalignment will cause a change in effective laser spot size. To this end, a kinematic positioning system, displayed in Figure Achieving high quality L-PBF requires a steady, uniform flow of inert gas across the build area One unique challenge arises as a result of the small size of the pressure chamber. Some amount of local recirculation is common in L-PBF, as the gas flow spreads and is not always fully captured by the exit port. Recirculating gas in the chamber may carry with it soot and particles from the melt pool, which may cross the path of the laser, deposit on the laser window, or alight on the powder bed Toward preventing recirculation, Chen Additionally, the refractive index of argon is known to increase with density according to the Lorentz-Lorenz equation: ( where n is refractive index, ρ is the density (mol/cm 3 ), and α is the polarizability of argon at atmospheric pressure (cm 3 /mol). Using a ray-tracing software (OpticStudio 16.5, Zemax), we found that the change in refractive index imparts a vertical shift in the location of the beam waist, effectively changing the spot size of the laser at a chosen focal plane. At 300 psig the argon increases the spot size by approximately 16 μm. This shift was not compensated for in our interpretation of pressure-dependent results, but we expect it accounts for a portion of the observed influence of pressure on apparent melt track dimensions under identical (input) laser parameters. A flow-through system was devised using a standard Ultra High Purity (UHP) argon bottle with a regulator to supply inert gas to the chamber at pressures as high as the rated pressure of the chamber. The system diagram is shown in Figure For any desired experimental chamber pressure, a certain mass flow of gas through the entire system is required to establish the desired flow velocity over the build area. The backpressure resulting from that flow in the chamber with valve 2 fully open must then be minimized to enable the largest possible operable range of pressures and flows in the system. In Figure Starting with valve 1 fully closed and the valve 2 fully open, opening valve 1 gradually moves the system's operating point outward along the blue curve, and closing valve 2 changes the resistance of the system, sending the blue curve upward to bring higher pressures into reach. We use the van der Waals equation to characterize the relationship between pressure and mass flow required for adequate gas knife performance, Here, P is the gas pressure (atm), V is the gas volume (L), n is the number of moles (mol), R is the ideal gas constant (L-atm)/(mol-K), T is the temperature (K), and a and b are empirical gas constants. Holding V constant, using T = 298, R = 0.08206 and empirical constants for argon (a = 1.355 and b = 0.03201), and solving iteratively for n, the mass flow of argon required to meet the steady-state velocity design objective at any given pressure can be calculated. This calculation is represented by the black solid line in Figure A custom-built mirror-based 2D scanning head is used to focus and direct the output of a fiber laser onto the build surface of the HLPM system. The laser (SP-0500-C-W-020-15-PIQ-011-001-001, SPI Lasers) produces 30 -525 W at a wavelength of 1075 -1080μm. The laser's output is directed via its output fiber into a collimator (106402X01, Coherent) where the beam is straightened. This beam then reflects off an angular alignment mirror (38-900, Edmunds Optics), passes through an AR-coated enclosure window (VPWW42-C, Thorlabs), and then reflects sequentially from a pair of orthogonal galvanometer mirrors (6240H, Novanta) before finally passing through an F-theta lens (FTH254-1064, Thorlabs), which focuses the straight beam down to a flat, horizontal focal plane below (see Figure Unlike commercial L-PBF systems where the optics are fixed inside the upper portion of the machine to prevent dust exposure, a goal of the present design was to enable the scanning head to be precisely repositioned over multiple testbeds, including the HLPM apparatus. Therefore, the entire laser system is outfitted with kinematic couplings (VB-75-SM and CS-1125-CPM, Bal-tec) The galvanometers, F-theta lens, and enclosure (optics head) pivot jointly on two rotation stages (860-0150, Eksma Optics) whose axes of rotation intersect at the centroid of the first galvanometer mirror. This ensures that no matter the tip/tilt adjustments made by the user, the laser will strike the first galvanometer mirror at the center of its aperture. A top-mounted bubble level (2198A72, McMaster Carr) is used to level the optics head angle with an accuracy of approximately 1 minute in the two rotation stage axes. The third axis of rotation is built rigidly into the overall construction, as it only affects the rotation angle of the projected laser focal plane, not its tip nor tilt, and can thus be easily corrected for in the software or in the positioning of the HLPM chamber. The collimated laser beam must be precisely aligned to the galvanometer mirrors and F-theta lens to produce repeatable results. To this end, the laser fiber terminal, collimator, and angular alignment mirror are jointly suspended on a vertically oriented 2-axis stage (LX20, Thorlabs), which allows for precise translational alignment, and the angular alignment mirror is held in a kinematic mount (KCB2, Thorlabs) to give full control of the laser angle as it enters the galvanometer enclosure. As the laser beam exits the F-theta lens, its diameter decreases toward a minimum focal diameter (beam waist) before expanding again. Viewed as a volume, the focusing laser energy would take the shape of a hyperboloid of one sheet, with the diameter changing linearly along the axis of laser travel except near the beam waist, where diffraction drives a non-linear relationship. The laser spot size can therefore be changed by translating the entire laser head assembly vertically using the system's motorized vertical rail (SIMO, PBC Linear). The vertical rail's carriage position is tracked using a Mitutoyo 500-171-30 digital caliper (McMaster Carr) with an accuracy of 0.025 mm. One jaw of the caliper is bolted securely to the guide rail's stationary frame and the other jaw is pulled down to touch the carriage for a highly repeatable measurement. Data correlating relative carriage position to laser spot size is presented in Figure As a first demonstration of HPLM system functionality, we show an array of vertical lines melted into a solid plate at 0 psig. As noted on Fig. A high resolution height map of the melt track array was obtained using a laser confocal microscope (Keyence VK-X1050). The centerlines of all melt tracks were found to be within 10 μm of their intended lateral location within the print area. The position of the melt tracks is influenced by many factors, and thus any error in that spacing represents the accumulated contributions of errors associated with those factors. Important considerations include: • Alignment of all optical components (collimator, angular alignment mirror, galvos, F-theta lens, chamber optical window) must be maintained to ensure that no laser light is reflected or refracted away from the desired beam path across the full range of galvanometer rotation. • Software must output properly scaled commands via the analog output module to produce appropriate galvanometer positioning. • The analog output module must produce high fidelity analog signals to the galvanometer control board. • The galvanometer control board must precisely convert voltage inputs into galvanometer positions. • The F-theta lens must remain well aligned and clean to ensure a galvanometer's angular position translates precisely to the expected laser X,Y position. • Parallelism of the build platform and laser focal plane is needed to ensure actual location of laser incidence on the plate is not distorted. The ability to precisely direct the laser spot on the print bed is an important first step, but to delve deeper into system performance, one must inspect the melt track morphology. Nine sections were made in the plate as denoted by white lines in Figure The resulting data points, shown in Figure Next, experiments were performed at elevated pressure. Specifically, arrays of 8 mm long melt tracks were printed on SS316L plate, with each track oriented perpendicular to the gas flow. A matrix of laser parameters (P = 50, 150, 250, 350 W, ν = 800, 1039, 1351, 1755, 2280, 2962, 3848, 5000 mm/s) was sorted randomly and printed sequentially starting closest to the chamber outlet, and therefore incrementally farther upstream with respect to the flow direction. As such, the spatter and fumes from each melt track were not swept over the location of upcoming melt tracks. Six control lines (P = 200 W, ν = 4300 mm/s) were added to the array at fixed positions across the entire print area in order to check for systematic errors in each experiment. Identical arrays were printed at 0 psig, 150 psig, and 300 psig. The sample plates were then sectioned near their midpoints and characterized as described previously. The resulting data are shown in Figure where ∆H is the change in enthalpy, h s is the specific enthalpy of melting, A is laser absorptivity, P is laser power, D is thermal diffusivity, κ is thermal conductivity, ρ is density, c is the specific heat, ν is the laser scan speed, and σ is the laser spot diameter. We assume a constant value for absorptivity, A = 0.4. Values for enthalpy at melting, h s = 821 kJ/kg, density, ρ = 7107 kg/m 2 , and solidus temperature, T m = 1675 K, are used according to the measurements of Pichler et al. At elevated pressure, melt pool penetration depth decreases and width increases, relative to the nominal results at 0 psig. This is consistent with sub-atmospheric studies of L-PBF and laser welding experiments, where weld depth increased and width decreased with lower pressure As a final demonstration of the HPLM system in the specific context of L-PBF, an array of melt tracks was printed on a 76 μm thick powder bed at both 0 psig and 150 psig. Gas atomized SS316L powder (John Galt Steel) was used, with a particle size distribution of 15-45 μm reported by the supplier. The underlying SS316L sample plate was prepared as before for bare plate studies, then bolted to the build platform with the addition of a thin steel shim which sets the powder layer thickness by forming a well in the print area. The shim was cut to fit the sample plate bolt pattern and desired powder deposition area, then lapped to remove burrs and reach a uniform thickness of 76 ± 3 μm. Once the sample plate and shim were bolted to the platform, powder was dispensed manually to the mid-line of the sample well, and a 0.125 inch thick machinist's edge was held against the shim and drawn length-wise across the print area to spread the powder. A flashlight was shone at a slight angle across the powder bed in two orthogonal directions to check for unacceptable streaks or defects in the powder surface. An illustration of this procedure is given in the Supporting Information. At 0 psig the gas knife performed as designed, reaching the desired flow rate without disturbing powder. At 150 psig a 40% reduction in mass flow was required to prevent disturbance of the powder bed during processing. Resulting powder bed melt track properties at 0 psig and 150 psig are shown in Figure To achieve high pressure multi-layer L-PBF, a larger chamber is required to allow room for a vertical stage and recoating mechanism without impinging on the clear path required for a stable, effective gas knife. Critically, greater distance between the powder bed and the laser optical window above will reduce the danger of direct impacts of spatter on the window and greatly alleviate the consequences of recirculation. Finally, a gas system which reuses inert gas via a continuous circuit will be required, as at the highest pressures currently reachable by the HPLM system (1200 psig), a standard bottle of argon could be drained in as little as 10 minutes, producing a very short window within which to conduct experiments. This paper presents the design and validation of an instrument that enables research on the influence of elevated ambient pressure on laser materials processing, specifically guided to laser powder bed fusion and laser welding. Exemplary bare plate and single layer powder bed experiments demonstrate the testbed's performance at pressures up to 300 psig. The HPLM system will enable direct observation of the impact of elevated pressure on the process windows of commonly processed materials, and will enable the exploration of new materials which cannot currently be processed with sufficient quality in L-PBF. Financial support for this project was provided by Honeywell Federal Manufacturing & Technologies (Honeywell FM&T). We thank Paul Carson (MIT), Dan Gilbert (MIT), Joe Wight (MIT), Ben Brown (Honeywell FM&T), and Rachel Grodsky (Honeywell FM&T) for their valuable input. J.S.G. and S.P.B. also acknowledge financial support of their graduate studies from the United States Navy and MIT Lincoln Laboratory, respectively. There will necessarily be some amount of laser power lost to reflections or scattering in the optical components. The laser's power output was measured with all relevant optics in the beam path (including the sapphire pressure window and quartz slide), such that all optical losses that would occur in normal use are directly represented. Measurements at laser power commands from 30 W to 150 W were made with an Ophir Starbright meter and 30(150)A-LP1-18 sensor. The high linearity of these measurements (R 2 = 1) allows for extrapolation of expected laser power at the sample plate across the entire power range of the laser, from 30 W to 500 W. Thus, all mentions of laser power in this paper refer to the actual laser power which reaches the sample. The spot size of the laser was imaged at various laser head relative positions using a DMM 37UX226-ML CMOS camera (The Imaging Source) with a pixel size of 1.85μm× 1.85μm, and IC Capture software (The Imaging Source). The sensor is mounted directly to the HPLM build platform at a height measured precisely with a dial indicator, such that measurements can be translated directly to any sample of known thickness. The laser is fired in low-power mode at a minimum output of 30 W. The angular alignment mirror is replaced with a beam sampler (BSF20-C, Thorlabs) such that approximately 90-99% of the energy (depending on polarization) is transmitted to a beam dump, while the remaining laser energy enters the galvanometer enclosure and is focused by the F-theta lens as in normal operation. A combination of reflective and absorptive neutral-density filters (Thorlabs) are placed in the focusing beam path to reduce the energy further to a brightness appropriate for the CMOS sensor. Images are taken at a rate of twenty frames per second both to capture dark frames before the laser engages and the spot appears, but also in order to capture the laser spot quickly and thus minimize the impact of thermal warping of the ND filters on spot measurements. A Matlab script was created to subtract dark energy from resulting images, then locate the laser spot centroid and plot a two-dimensional Gaussian fit to determine the D4σ diameter of the laser beam. The laser used in the HPLM has a Gaussian energy distribution with an M 2 value of 1.1 ± 0.1. The resulting D4σ measurements, shown in Figure The detailed process of preparing a single powder layer is portrayed in To standardize the analysis of melt track geometry, a semi-automated routine was developed to identify the boundaries of the melt track and measure important track parameters. To efficiently accommodate a wide range of melt-track aspect ratios with a minimal number of measurements, we employ numerical integration using Simpson's first method in polar coordinates. This method lends itself well to dividing the surface and sub-surface track geometry which frequently diverge in size and shape. The program employs a masking technique to remove the upper dark region (the mounting media) in the section image and the lower light region (the undisturbed plate) below the melt-track. Further, the surface level was estimated and a rotational transformation was applied to the image to correct for any rotational misalignment of the base plate in the section image. Figure A.7 depicts this level surface estimate as a red line. The melt track is then identified by the analyst using a separate region-of-interest bounding box for "above grade" and the "below grade" regions. An array of 32 guide lines, evenly spaced ∆θ = 11.25°apart, are superimposed on the image radiating outward from the centers of these two boxes where they meet the grade line to aide in identifying each radii to the top or bottom boundary of the melt track. Radii are first estimated using the light-dark transitions present in the masked image and then manually adjusted by eye by the analyst. The parameters obtained include depth of the melt track below the plate grade, height of the track above the grade, width at grade, width of the above grade (more used in powder-bed studies) and the areas of each region, A. A is approximated numerically by applying Simpson's first method in polar coordinates using the n = 17 radii, ρ i , obtained for each angle of the shape as follows: For high aspect ratios, such as instances of severe keyhole morphology, this method was adapted slightly to include 4 additional radii at half the global angular step-size. This may be seen in Figure A.7 in the increased density of points (and guide lines) at the bottom and top of the melt track. 2 