Superconductivity in graphene-based systems has recently attracted much attention, as either intrinsic behavior or induced by proximity to a superconductor may lead to interesting topological phases and symmetries of the pairing function. A prominent system considers the pairing to have chiral symmetry. The question arises as to the effect of possible spin-orbit coupling on the resulting superconducting quasiparticle spectrum. Utilizing a Bogolyubov-de Gennes (BdG) Hamiltonian, we explore the interplay of different interaction terms in the system, and their role in generating complex Berry curvatures in the quasiparticle spectrum, as well as non-trivial topological behavior. We demonstrate that the topology of the BdG Hamiltonian in these systems may result in the appearance of edge states along the zigzag edges of nanoribbons in the appropriate regime. The intriguing properties of topological matter, especially superconductivity, have greatly motivated the ongoing search for such behavior in different material classes The quantum anomalous Hall (QAH) regime has received a great deal of attention at the level of singleparticle behavior. An intrinsic magnetization in the system resembles to some extent the effect of a magnetic field on the electronic dynamics with peculiar results The addition of superconducting correlations on a QAH system has been predicted to give rise to intriguing new properties and possible Majorana edge states which may be used as robust platforms in quantum computation In contrast, the proximitized honeycomb lattice of graphene may result in broken lattice inversion symmetry and strong spin-orbit coupling that induces an effective Ising (or Zeeman-like) spin field that preserves TRS. Such an effect results in the spin projection perpendicular to the plane being a good quantum number but with opposite value in each valley to preserve TRS The classification of superconducting pairing symmetries residing on the honeycomb lattice has been discussed previously The study of either a QAH or a Zeeman-like sytem in the presence of induced chiral d-wave superconductivity has received little attention, and we focus on this issue here. Our primary interest is to explore the relationship between the chiral superconducting pairing functions and topological properties of the corresponding Bogoliubovde Gennes (BdG) Hamiltonian that couples electron and hole subsystems through the superconducting pairing. We explore this effect with a focus on inducing topologically nontrivial character in the proximitized system. We study the quasiparticle (QP) band spectra of the superconducting states, and demonstrate that the topology of the BdG Hamiltonian is different from the constituent subsystems. To this end, we study the topological properties using both the Berry curvature of the QP dispersion and their relation to the appearance of edge states in finite nanoribbon systems. For suitable chemical potential and superconducting pairing strength, we find the appearance of robust midgap states at zigzag edges, well protected by large excitation gaps and momentum transfer. In Sec. II below we describe the low-energy electronic Hamiltonian for the QAH and Zeeman-like regimes of the honeycomb lattice system, and describe the main features and differences of the resulting single-particle band structure. We then discuss the effect of spatial range on chiral superconducting pairing in Sec. II B, by considering coupling for nearest and next-nearest-neighbors in the lattice, and what symmetry this entails. Section III explores the main features of the QP spectra for the different regimes and superconducting symmetries, including the appearance of topologically protected edge states on zigzag-terminated nanoribbons. Section III D is devoted to a discussion of realistic model parameters and the possibility of realizing the discussed topological phases experimentally. Finally, we discuss the importance and the prospects of these findings in the concluding section. The Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) Hamiltonian for superconducting pairing on the graphene honeycomb lattice is described in momentum space as where s y is a Pauli matrix acting on spin space, η is the chemical potential of the system, and H e is the effective electronic Hamiltonian for proximitized graphene (without superconductivity), which in the basis Φ = (A ↑,B ↑,A ↓,B ↓) T can be written as Here, k is the 2D momentum vector, and where a 1 , a 2 , and a 3 are the real-space vectors of graphene (defined explicitly in the next section). The A constant in Eq. ( Panels (a) and (b) of Fig. We want to consider a chiral pairing amplitude Γ(k) that breaks time-reversal symmetry in Eq. 1. Moreover, we want to explore the differences on superconducting QP spectra arising from either nearest neighbor (NN) and next nearest neighbor (NNN) coupling, as the spatial content results in different momentum-space pairing symmetries. The pairing intensities are accompanied with different variables/factors for different directions, as shown in Fig. where k = (k x , k y ), and the graphene lattice constant a is set to 1. We have defined the honeycomb vectors connecting nearest neighbors (sublattice A to sublattice B) as ( The corresponding lattice vectors connecting sublattice A (or B) to its NNN are given by and Notice that the symmetries of the singlet pairing function dictate that Figure We study the role of the chemical potential in the QP spectrum as the superconducting pairing strength changes. We focus on energies close to the Dirac points and keep both η (chemical potential) and γ (superconducting pairing strength) relatively small, η, γ < t/4. This focuses on doping in the vicinity of the K valleys. Notice that heavy doping requires a more complicated structure, with consideration of different regions in momentum space. For large doping, the topological properties are dependent on the Γ and/or M points near van Hove singularities, as well as possible band renormalization effects As illustrated in Fig. Figure In the NNN A-System, an excitation gap persists even for large γ, as long as the chemical potential is close to zero, Fig. To further distinguish/identify the characteristic features of these phases, we plot the QP band structure at selected parameters in these regions in Fig. Figure In the case of NN coupling shown in Fig. A and all values of pairing strength γ. For larger η, a superconducting gap emerges and grows with both η and γ values, similar to the Z-System. This indicates that in these regimes the bands near the Fermi level couple strongly through the pairing potential, opening a sizable superconducting gap. The opening large gap as the chemical potential increases can be seen as arising from the overlap of singleparticle states with different symmetry. These bands couple through the pairing function and open a broad QP excitation gap. The Z-System in 2(d) exhibits a sizable gap that persists for all non-zero superconducting coupling and small chemical potential, η < λ = 0.05; the gap is associated with the single-particle gap in Fig. The QP band structure behaves differently as well. The bands around zero excitation energy are nearly fully spin-polarized around the K (or K') valley, whereas bands at higher energies mix. This is a direct consequence of the NN pairing that couples A and B sublattices. The total density of states acquires sharp peaks around the Fermi level, as well as for energies γ, indicating the emergence of low-dispersive bands, as shown on the right panel of 2(d). Comparison of the QP dispersions in both regimes further illustrates differences, such as the spin content of the states. While the A-System shows strongly mixed states, the QP bands in the Z-System are fully polarized, except around zero energy, where the states mix due to the Ising and Rashba spin-orbit coupling terms. As we will see be- low, the superconducting gap that appears on opposite sides of gap closing regimes have different characteristics. Since the pairing function Γ(k) has nodal points in the first BZ, Fig. Notice the expected enhancement of the DOS near the superconducting QP gap, generally larger in the Z-System than in the A-System. [The latter is not evident in Fig. We analyze further the topological properties of these systems using the Berry curvature of the QP dispersions. Differences in Berry curvature would help us distinguish their physical features, as it has implications on the linear response and overall spintronic and valleytronic behavior where v x (v y ) is the velocity operator along the x(y) direction, and n, n are band numbers As stated earlier, at this level of doping the physics of the honeycomb lattice system is controlled by the two nonequivalent valleys, with identical Berry curvature content. One can calculate the Chern number per valley and double it, or equivalently define the total Chern number by integrating over the entire Brillouin zone, We notice that in systems of low-doping graphene, the BdG Chern number changes by even numbers across topological phase transitions. This typically indicates the appearance (or suppression) of pairs of propagating edge states whenever a gap closing transition occurs. After the gap closing topological transition in Fig. The NNN Z-System shows C BdG = 0 for small γ values, which then changes to C BdG = 2 at higher η over a small window, and finally goes to C BdG = 4 after gap opening at higher η. Similarly, both the NN A-and Z-Systems show a BdG Chern number of 4 after the gap closing transition. One finds in the Z-System that the gapped region at low η yields zero Chern number-in contrast to the A-System-as expected from the single-particle picture that respects TRS; the chiral superconducting parameter seems to produce an effective weak electron-hole coupling. The Chern number in single-particle systems represents the number of chiral fermionic edge states It is known that a QAH system with onsite superconducting singlet pairing yields a topological phase with edge states in a finite size system that cross the excitation gap In the NNN pairing for the A-System, the region of the phase diagram in Fig. The states change drastically for the NNN Z-System. Although edge-less for most of the phases shown here, this regime shows a complex structure of edge states for large γ values, as seen in Fig. A more complicated edge state configuration is found in cases of NN pairing. In both A-and Z-Systems, edge states are present, dispersing across the gap and connecting the two non-equivalent valleys, before eventually merging with the bulk bands. The edge states are well protected by the bulk excitation gap, which makes them robust against perturbations. The phase appears to be topological for large enough values of η and γ that drive the system through the gap-closing phase transition. There are four edge states crossing the gap, with wavefunctions localized at the left (right) boundaries of the nanoribbon, as shown by the red (blue) colors in Fig. Experimental realization of chiral topological superconductors is actively pursued. New opportunities to study and observe topological superconductivity have been identified in different material systems, especially in 2D crystals. Localized Majorana states exist at the boundaries of topological superconductors, and can be created by placing chains or islands of magnetic atoms on an s-wave superconductor Superconducting states at low electron doping are observed below 1 K in WTe 2 monolayers Hybrid systems such as WSe 2 /bilayer-graphene/ WSe 2 These works and others continue to open novel possibilities for topological superconductivity in van der Waals materials with spin-orbit coupling, representing promising platforms to realize and probe non-trivial phases as the ones we have discussed. Starting from graphene-like honeycomb lattice models, we study systems with singlet chiral superconductivity to explore the interplay between different topological phases and superconducting range. The NNN correlations result in pairing channels that are rotationally symmetric in momentum space near each valley, whereas for NN correlations the symmetry is three-fold. The chiral superconducting pairing function studied here is the result of the complex orbital combination of d xy and d x 2 -y 2 . This combination breaks time reversal symmetry and is shown to be the preferred channel in some graphene models, including those with strong doping (or intercalation). Tuning the chemical potential produces possible phase transitions that are accompanied by gapless regimes. The topological aspects of these phases are identified and studied by looking into the formation of edge states in finite size systems, as well as their connection to the Berry curvature of the quasi-particle spectrum and associated Chern numbers in the 2D bulk. Across topological transition points, the system changes between trivial and non-trivial phases, with different features of edge states in different parameter ranges. We trust the present work would lead to further interest and work in these systems. The general nature of the model suggests that it can be applicable, with suitable variations, to a wide class of honeycomb lattice systems that involve different proximity effects.