Superconductivity with transition temperature T c above 40 K was observed in protonated FeSe (H y -FeSe) previously with the ionic liquid of EMIM-BF 4 used in the electrochemical process. However, the real superconducting phase is not clear until now, and detailed structural, magnetization and electrical transport measurements are lacking. By using similar protonating technique on FeSe single crystals, we obtained superconducting samples with T c above 40 K. We show that the obtained superconducting phase is not H y -FeSe but actually an organic-ion (C 6 H 11 N 2 + referred to as EMIM + )-intercalated phase (EMIM) x FeSe. By using X-ray diffraction technique, two sets of index peaks corresponding with different c-axis lattice constants are detected in the protonated samples, which belong to the newly formed phase of intercalated (EMIM) x FeSe and the residual FeSe, respectively. The superconductivity of (EMIM) x FeSe with T c of 44.4 K is confirmed by resistivity and magnetic susceptibility measurements. Temperature dependence of resistivity with different applied magnetic fields reveals that the upper critical field H c2 is quite high, while the irreversibility field H irr is suppressed quickly with increasing temperature till about 20 K. This indicates that the resultant compound has a high anisotropy with a large spacing between the FeSe layers. Iron-based superconductors have attracted vast interest in condensed matter physics and material science since it was discovered in 2008. In the beginning, the alkali metals were intercalated into FeSe by solid state reactions, through which AxFe2-ySe2 (A = K, Rb, Cs, Tl, x<1, y<1) was synthesized with Tc around 32 K. In this work, we give detailed investigation on the above material, named as protonated FeSe, obtained through the same method and interactant, 1-ethyl-3methylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate (EMIM-BF4), as reported by Cui et al. The Tc of this new FeSe-based superconductor is 44.4 K, as evidenced by the results of temperature dependent magnetic susceptibility and resistivity measurements. Note that our intercalated (EMIM)xFeSe samples are also not very stable in atmosphere, very similar to the (TBA)0.3FeSe, The schematic experimental setup of the electrochemical intercalation experiment is illustrated in Fig. The XRD is conducted on a Bruker D8 Advanced diffractometer with the Cu Kα radiation at room temperature. The temperature dependent resistivity is measured by a physical property measurement system (PPMS-16 T, Quantum Design) through the typical four-probe method at different magnetic fields. The temperature dependent magnetic susceptibility is carried out by Quantum Design PPMS with Vibrating Sample Magnetometer (VSM), while magnetic field is applied parallel to the c-axis of the sample. No matter before or after the experiment, the sample remains in having good crystallinity. Hence, the XRD patterns show an obvious c-axis orientation and all peaks are indexed perfectly as (00l) on the basis of tetrahedral structure. The black solid line represents a series of (00l) peaks of FeSe single crystal, which indicates a c-axis lattice parameter of 5.52 Å. Meanwhile, the red solid line contains two sets of peaks. One set of them shows the same diffraction peaks as the black line, belonging to the residual FeSe of sample. The other set represents a new phase, in which the c-axis lattice constant is found to be 10.45 Å taking the space group of P4/nmm. Such an obvious increase of c-axis lattice parameter suggests that some kind of molecules with big size in the experiment has been inserted into the sample and the spacing between adjacent FeSe layers is expanded. Considering the fact that the pristine FeSe is held on the negative electrode, we intend to conclude that the inserted molecules are most likely organic ions EMIM + from the ionic liquid. The schematic structure of this new phase is shown in Fig. with t = T T c ⁄ , b = H H c2 ⁄ , which is deduced from the Lindermann criterion. We report superconductivity with transition temperature Tc above 40 K by electrochemically reacting FeSe with the ionic liquid of EMIM-BF4. This phenomenon was recently reported as a process of protonating the FeSe crystals, but it was not clear what is the real superconducting phase. By doing X-ray diffraction measurements, we found a new set of diffraction peaks arising from the intercalated samples, these newly emergent peaks coexist with those of residual FeSe. We conclude that the newly emergent superconducting phase is the organic-ion (C6H11N2 + , EMIM + )-intercalated FeSe phase, namely (EMIM)xFeSe. Our results rule out the possibility that the high temperature superconducting phase is the simple protonated one Hy-FeSe. We also find that the upper critical field Hc2 is quite high, indicating a strong pairing potential. While the irreversibility field Hirr is suppressed quickly with increasing temperature showing a large region of vortex liquid in the phase diagram. By fitting the irreversibility line to the vortex melting formula deduced from the Lindermann criterion, we get a quite large mass ratio (M z M ⁄ ) 1 2 ⁄ ≈ 44.5, which is comparable to the value of a Quasi-2D high-Tc superconductor Bi2.2Sr2Ca0.8Cu2O8. This also supports that the resultant material should be highly anisotropic, as expected for a system with a large spacing between the FeSe layers.