Exotic quantum phase transitions in metals, such as the electronic nematic state, have been discovered one after another and found to be universal now. The emergence of unconventional density wave (DW) order in frustrated kagome metal AV3Sb5 and its interplay with exotic superconductivity attract increasing attention. We find that the DW in kagome metal is the bond-order, because the sizable inter-site attraction is caused by the quantum interference among paramagnons. This mechanism is significant in kagome metals since the geometrical frustration prohibits the freezing of paramagnons. In addition, we uncover that moderate bond-order fluctuations mediate sizable pairing glue, and this mechanism gives rise to both singlet s-wave and triplet p-wave superconductivity. Furthermore, characteristic pressure-induced phase transitions in CsV3Cb5 are naturally understood by the present theory. Thus, both the exotic density wave and the superconductivity in geometrically frustrated kagome metals are uniquely explained by the quantum interference mechanism. Rich quantum phase transitions in strongly correlated metals with multiple degrees of freedom and geometrical frustration have been discovered one after another recently At ambient pressure, AV 3 Sb 5 exhibits charge-channel DW order at T DW = 78, 94 and 102 K for A=K, Cs and Rb, respectively Below T DW , exotic superconductivity occurs at T c = 1 ∼ 3 K at ambient pressure The current central issues would be summarized as: (i) Origin of the DW state and its driving mechanism, (ii) Mechanism of non-phonon SC state, and (iii) Interplay between DW and superconductivity. Such nontrivial phase transitions would be naturally explained in terms of the quantum interference mechanism. The interference among spin fluctuations In this paper, we present a unified explanation for the DW order and exotic SC state in geometrically frustrated kagome metal AV 3 Sb 5 that is away from the magnetic criticality, by focusing on the beyond-mean-field electron correlations. The DW is identified as the "intersublattice bond-order" that preserves the time-reversalsymmetry. It originates from the paramagnon interference mechanism that provides sizable inter-sublattice backward and umklapp scattering. In addition, we uncover that the smectic DW fluctuations induce sizable "beyond-Migdal" pairing interaction that leads to the singlet s-wave SC state. The triplet p-wave state also appears when spin and DW fluctuations coexist. The origins of the star of David order, the exotic superconductivity, and the strong interplay among them are uniquely explained based on the quantum interference mechanism. This mechanism has been overlooked previously. In the discussion section, we study the P -T phase diagram and the impurity effect on the SC states. The commensurate-incommensurate (C-IC) DW transition is obtained at 1GPa based on the realistic model constructed by the first-principles study. Based on this C-IC transition scenario, we put the following theoretical predictions (i)-(iv): (i) For 0 ≤ P < 1GPa, the commensurate DW emerges. (ii) For P > 1GPa , the DW state turns to be incommensurate due to the pressure-induced self-doping on the b 3g -orbital FS (about 1.5 %). (iii) As the highest-T c dome at P ∼ 2GPa, anisotropic s-wave SC state is realized by the bond-order fluctuations. (iv) In another SC dome at P ∼ 0.7GPa, both s-and p-wave states can emerge since the spin and bond-order fluctuations would be comparable. Thus, impurity-induced p-wave to s-wave transition may occur. The present key findings will stimulate future experiments on AV 3 Sb 5 . We analyze the following six orbital kagome lattice Hubbard model introduced in Ref. (a) FIG. where l, m = A, B, C, A ′ , B ′ , C ′ . In the paper the unit of energy (in Coulomb interaction, hopping integral, and temperature) is eV. The nearest-neighbor hopping integrals are t b3g = 0.5, t b2g = 1 and t b3g,b2g = 0.002, and the on-site energies are E b3g = -0.055 and E b2g = 2.17 Next, we introduce the "on-site Coulomb interaction" term H U . It is composed of the intra-(inter-) orbital interaction U (U ′ ), and the exchange interaction J = (U -U ′ )/2. Below, we fix the ratio J/U = 0.1. The 4 × 4 matrix expression of on-site Coulomb interaction at each site, Û s(c) for spin (charge) channel, is explained in the SM A. In the mean-field-level approximation, the spin instability is the most prominent because of the largest interaction U . Figure bond-order derived from DW equation Nonmagnetic DW orders cannot be explained in the RPA unless large nearest-neighbor Coulomb interaction V (V > 0.5U ) exists. However, beyond-RPA nonlocal correlations, called the vertex corrections (VCs), can induce various DW orders even for V = 0 ) where I L,M q (k, p) is the "electron-hole pairing interaction", k ≡ (k, ǫ n ) and p ≡ (p, ǫ m ) (ǫ n , ǫ m are fermion Matsubara frequencies). L ≡ (l, l ′ ) and M i represent the pair of d-orbital indices A, B, C, A ′ , B ′ , C ′ . λ q is the eigenvalue that represents the instability of the DW at wavevector q, and max q {λ q } reaches unity at T = T DW . f L q (k) is the Hermite form factor that is proportional to the particle-hole (p-h) condensation σ c † k+q,l,σ c k,l ′ ,σ , or equivalently, the symmetry breaking component in the self-energy. It is important to use the appropriate kernel function I L,M q , which is given as δ 2 Φ LW /δG l ′ l (k)δG mm ′ (p) at q = 0 in the conserving approximation scheme Here, we apply the one-loop approximation for Φ LW Then, δt lm (r ir j ) cos(q n • r i + θ) represents the modulation of the hopping integral between r i and r j , where r i represents the center of a unit-cell i in real space, and θ is a phase factor. The bond-order preserves the time-reversal-symmetry because it satisfies the relation δt lm (r) = δt ml (-r) = real. (Note that the current order is δt lm (r) = -δt ml (-r) = imaginary.) Figure To summarize, we obtain the single-q smectic bondorder depicted in Fig. We stress that the bond-order originates from the inter-sublattice VC in the kernel function I in Eq. ( In Fig. Therefore, the FS portion away from vHS points is indispensable in deriving the smectic order. Finally, we study the unconventional superconductivity mediated by bond-order fluctuations. Here, we solve the following linearized SC gap equation on the FSs: where ∆ k (ǫ n ) is the gap function on FSs, and v k is the Fermi velocity. The eigenvalue λ SC reaches unity at T = T c . The diagrammatic expression of Eq. ( where fq (k) is the Hermite form factor in the band-basis, and | fq1 (k A )| = 1. Both λ bond and g um are already obtained in Fig. Figure Here, we discuss the origin of the s/p-wave SC state. Triple-q bond-order fluctuations work as attraction between FSi and FS(i + 1), where FSi (i = 1 ∼ 6) is the FS portion around vHS points shown in Fig. The nodal gap structure shown in Fig. To summarize, large attraction between different vHS points is induced by the bond-order fluctuations due to the paramagnon interference process. In contrast, the repulsion between different vHS points due to spin fluctuations is small, by reflecting the fact that the vHS points k A , k B , and k C are respectively composed of single orbital A, B, and C (= sublattice interference We have studied the exotic density-wave and beyond-Migdal unconventional superconductivity in kagome metal AV 3 Sb 5 (A=K, Rb, Cs), by focusing on the paramagnon interference mechanism. This beyond-mean-field mechanism provides sizable "inter-sublattice" scattering, and therefore the smectic bond-order is realized in the presence of experimentally observed weak spin fluctuations. The bond-order fluctuations naturally mediate strong pairing glue that leads to the s-wave state, consistently with recent several experiments A great merit of the present theory is that the bondorder is robustly obtained for a wide range of model parameters, as long as the bandstructure near the three vHS points is correctly reproduced. U is the only model parameter in the present theory. To clarify this merit, we make the comparison between the DW equation theory and mean-field theory. In the mean-field theory, the instability of the charge bond-order is always secondary even if large nearest-neighbor Coulomb interaction V is introduced. In contrast, in the DW equation theory, the charge bond-order solution is robustly obtained even when V = 0. This is a great merit of the present DW equation analysis. This merit remains even if both charge-and spin-channel VCs are taken into account as explained in SM F. We also discuss interesting similarities between kagome metal and other strongly correlated metals. The paramagnon interference mechanism has been successfully applied to explain the nematic and smectic orders in Febased and cuprate superconductors The impurity effect is one of the most significant experiments to distinguish the symmetry of the SC gap function. However, experimental reports of the impurity effect on AV 3 Sb 5 and its theoretical analysis have been limited so far. Here, we study the nonmagnetic impurity effect on both s-wave and p-wave SC states predicted in the present theory in Fig. , where ĝA is the 2 × 2 local Green function on A-site. In this case, the normal selfenergy is given by Σn = n imp ( T A + T B + T C ), where n imp is the impurity concentration. The anomalous self-energy is also given by the T-matrix. Here, we consider the unitary limit case (I imp = ∞). More detailed explanation is written in Ref. Figure The obtained impurity-induced drastic change in the gap anisotropy is a hallmark of the s-wave SC mediated by the bond-order fluctuations. Thus, measurements of the impurity effects will be very promising toward the whole understanding of the SC phase. Note that when the p-wave SC state appears at n imp = 0, the transition from p-wave to s-wave state is caused by introducing dilute impurities. We discuss the P -T phase diagram of CsV 3 Sb 5 , in which the SC phase shows the highest T c ∼ 8K at the critical pressure P c2 ∼ 2GPa (T DW = 0) "nearly-commensurate CDW (NCCDW)" in 1T-TaS 2 , which is realized when the correlation-driven incommensurate DW order at the FS nesting vector To support this NCCDW scenario for P > P c1 Based on the derived realistic models, we perform the DW equation analysis. Figure In SM B, we examine the filling-dependence of the bond-order solution in the present six orbital kagome lattice model. As shown in Fig. Next, we propose a possible scenario for the doubledome SC phase on AV 3 Sb 5 . The phase diagram based on the present scenario is schematically represented in Fig. In another SC dome for P < P c1 , both p-and s-wave SC can emerge because bond-order and spin fluctuations would be comparable. If the p-wave SC state is realized at n imp = 0, the p-wave to s-wave SC transition will occur at n imp ∼ 0.01 as understood in Fig. In kagome metals, the bond-order state is the platform of various exotic phenomena. In this respect, the mechanism of the bond-order state should be clarified in kagome metal. The discovered quantum interference process in the present study triggers the bond-order formation, and this process would be important even below T DW . Thus, the present study paved the way for understanding the whole phase diagram. A central open problem in the bond-order state is the time-reversal-symmetry-breaking (TRSB) state. In AV 3 Sb 5 , the TRSB state has been reported by STM, Kerr effect and μSR measurements in Refs. The coexistence of the LC and the bond-order is predicted based on GL theory in Ref. Another important issue is the anomalous transport phenomena below T DW . For instance, giant anomalous Hall effect Here, we derive the kernel function in the DW equation, I ll ′ ,mm ′ q (k, k ′ ), studied in the main text. It is given as δ 2 Φ LW /δG l ′ l (k)δG mm ′ (p) at q = 0 in the conserving approximation scheme where a s(c) = 3(1) and p = (p, ω l ). V b is the b-channel interaction given by V b = Û b + Û b χb Û b . Û b is the matrix expression of the bare multiorbital Coulomb interaction for channel b. Under the uniform (q = 0) DW state, the one-loop Tr ln( 1 -Û c χ0 (p))] with the correction terms up to O(U 2 ). When the wavevector q of the DW state is nonzero, χ0 (p) is replaced with χ0 (p; q). The first term of Eq. ( The DW instability driven by nonlocal beyond-meanfield correlation Îq (k, k ′ ) is obtained by solving the DW equation introduced in Refs. which is depicted in Fig. An arbitrary phase factor e iα can be multiplied to the solution of the linearized DW equation fq (k). However, the phase factor should be determined uniquely so that fq (k) = ( fq (k, πT )+ fq (k, -πT ))/2 satisfies the Hermite condition f lm q (k) = [ f ml -q (k + q)] * . Finally, we discuss the effective interaction driven by the bond-order fluctuations. By solving the DW equation As we will discuss in SM E, the pairing interac-tion due to the bond-order fluctuations is given by the full four-point vertex: , which is depicted in Fig. It is noteworthy that both the DW equation and the fRG method explain the nematic and smectic bond-order in single-orbital square lattice Hubbard models In the main text, we present the numerical results for n = 3.8. In this case, the b 3g -orbital FS is very close to the vHS points on the BZ boundary as shown in Fig. First, we study the case of n < 3.8. Figures . Then, the DW equation at q = q 3 is given as where N (0) is the density-of-states at the Fermi level. As we explain in the main text, both g back and g um are positive. Thus, the largest eigenvalue and the eigenvector are λ ∼ N (0)(g back + g um ) and f = (1, 1), respectively. After the Fourier transformation, the real-space form factor in the triangular lattice model in equation, the eigenvalue is given as λ q = Īq χ 0 f (q), where Then, the full four-point vertex is given as Therefore, the pairing interaction is , where q = k ′k. Note that the relation f * q (-k ′ ) = f -q (-k) holds for q = k ′k due to the Hermite condition of the form factor. Considering that the q-dependence of the form factor is moderate, the total pairing interaction due to triple-q bond-order fluctuations is approximately given as Here, u l,b (k) = l, k|b, k is the unitary transformation matrix element between orbital l and conduction band b, and f q (k) ≡ (f q (k, πT ) + f q (k, -πT ))/2. We also approximate λ q ≈ λ bond -b(qq n ) 2 with b ≈ ξ 2 (1 -λ bond ) for q ∼ q n . Here, we set f BA q1 (k B ) = 1. Then, the coupling constant Ībond is directly given by g um that is obtained in the main text. We stress that fqn (k) f-qn (-k) is positive for even-parity bond-order. In the main text, we set Ībond = g um | fq1 (k A )| = 1 in the pairing interaction in Eq. (S10). Figure In the main text, we solve the gap equation in the presence of bond and spin fluctuations. It is noteworthy that the present bond-order fluctuating pairing mechanism is outside of the Migdal approximation, in which the form factor is assumed to be kindependent. The present bond-order fluctuating mechanism has a close similarity to the multiple-fluctuation pairing mechanism developed in Refs. A great merit of the present paramagnon-interference theory is that the star of David bond-order is naturally obtained based on a simple Hubbard model without introducing any off-site Coulomb interactions. Here, we briefly review the results of the mean-field theory based on the U -V Hubbard model, where V is the nearestneighbor Coulomb interaction. For this purpose, we solve the linearized mean-field equation with the optimized form factor, which is given by Eq. ( By solving the spin-channel DW equation DFT calculation of CsV 3 Sb 5 under pressure P [GPa], using the crystal structure data in Ref. We will fix these discrepancies by introducing minimum changes in the Hamiltonian. Here, we shift 15 5porbital levels by ∆E p = -0.2 [eV] and introduce the hole-doping by 0.1 to make E vHS closer to E F . (The orbital-dependent energy shift method is frequently applied in Fe-based superconductors to reproduce experimental FSs 