We theoretically show that a two-band system with very different masses harbors a resonant pair scattering that leads to novel pairing properties, as highlighted by the Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) to Bose-Einstein condensation (BEC) crossover. Most importantly, the interband pairexchange coupling induces an effective intraband attraction in each band, enhancing the superfluidity/superconductivity. The effect, a kind of Suhl-Kondo mechanism, is specifically enhanced when the second band has a heavy mass and is incipient (lying close to, but just above, the chemical potential, μ), which we call a resonant pair scattering. By elucidating the dependence of the effective interactions and gap functions on μ, we can draw an analogy between the resonant pair scattering and the Feshbach resonance. One of the central issues in superconductivity/superfluidity is the crossover between the Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) and Bose-Einstein condensation (BEC) regimes, or a crossover between weak and strongcoupling regimes A specific point of interest in multi-band superconductors is what is called the "incipient band" situations. Namely, in some of the iron-based superconductors, the hole band has its edge located close to, but slightly away from, the chemical potential, which is called "incipient" Further feature in the iron-based superconductors is that a compound Fe 1+y Se x Te 1-x realizes crossover from the weak-coupling BCS regime to the BEC condensation of tightly-bound pairs when the iron content y is varied If we turn to cold-atom systems, on the other hand, the unitarity limit in the BCS-BEC crossover has been intensively investigated for usual single-orbital, single-species ultracold Fermi gases teratomic interaction, which absorbs the ultraviolet divergence arising from the singular contact-type interaction. The quantity a can be controlled by an external magnetic field with the magnetic Feshbach resonance associated with the electron-spin degree of freedom with S = 1/2 The Feshbach resonance can also be invoked for inducing the Kondo effect by manipulating the spin exchange interaction in a two-band system With the above background, the purpose of the present work is to explore specific features in the BCS-BEC crossover that arise when we have a fermion system (single-species, spin-1/2) that consists of a lighter-mass band (called Band 1 hereafter) and a heavier-mass band (Band 2). We focus on what will happen when we engineer the system by varying a band offset, E 0 , along with the position of the chemical potential, μ, on top of the mass ratio of the two bands. For the reason mentioned above and elaborated below, we are specifically interested in the situation when Band 2 is "incipient", i.e., close to, but detached from, the chemical potential, as schematically depcited in Fig. We shall particularly clarify how the superfluid/superconducting gaps and number densities behave in the presence of the resonant pair scattering by varying the mass ratio between the two bands. There, a point of interest is the effective scattering length Within the mean-field theory, the number density and the effective scattering length in each band are calculated. In Sec. III, we show numerical results for the chemical potential dependence of the superfluid/superconducting gaps, number density ratio, and effective scattering lengths. Section IV summarizes the paper. Throughout the text, we use units in which = k B = 1, while the system volume is taken to be unity. As depicted in Fig. We assume a parabolic dispersion ξ i (k) against momentum k for each band labelled by the index i = 1, 2 having a mass (i.e., an effective mass for a lattice) m i , E 0 is the band offset, and μ is the chemical potential. For a given value of E 0 , we regard the chemical potential as a control parameter. The Hamiltonian reads where c † k,σ,i creates a fermion with momentum k and spin σ(=↑ or ↓) in band i, and B † k,i is the pair-creation operator in band i. The second term in H describes intraband (i = j) and interband (i = j) interactions. For the interaction V ij , we assume in this paper, with cold-atom systems in mind, the contact-type attractive interaction, where U ij ≥ 0 and Λ is a (spherical) momentum cutoff, which is required to avoid an ultraviolet divergence due to the contact-type interaction To renormalize the intraband interaction U ii against Λ, we can define, as a measure of U ii , an s-wave intraband scattering length a i in Band i as We apply the mean-field approximation to both the intra-and inter-band pair scattering processes in the Hamiltonian Eq.( where is the quasiparticle dispersion in the superfluid/superconducting state. For applying the mean-field approximation, the effect of inter-band pair-scattering processes is non-perturbatively included in our two-band gap equation ( We note that Eq. ( Since we are interested in the incipient situation, we tune μ around μ = E 0 where μ touches the bottom of Band 2, in which the occupied number density n i in Band i changes with μ as where f (±E i (k)) = 1/ e ±Ei(k)/T + 1 is the Fermi-Dirac distribution function, while the BCS coefficients are given as In the presence of the interband interaction U 12 , we have the resonant pair-scattering, as shown in Fig. Here Γ i is the interaction vertex, and U eff ii is the effective interaction in Band i that can be obtained by rewriting Eq. ( with for (i, j) = (1, 2) or (2, 1). The BCS-BEC crossover is characterized in terms of the dimensionless coupling parameter, 1/(k 0 a i ), as A. Superfluid/superconducting gaps and particle densities The result for the gap functions against the chemical potential μ/E 0 , calculated from the mean-field Eq. ( where n = k 3 0 /(3π 2 ) is the total particle density as defined for a zero-temperature ideal Fermi gas having a mass m 1 and a Fermi energy E 0 . For each value of m 1 /m 2 we vary the interband interaction Ũ12 from 0.0 to 2.0. The result for the inverse effective scattering length 1/a eff i , which serves as a measure of the interaction strength, is also shown in the lower panels of each figure. We can see that both ∆ 1 and ∆ 2 increase with μ, but in a way vastly dependent on m 1 /m 2 and Ũ12 , both in their magnitude and the functional form against μ. The enhancement of ∆ 1 , ∆ 2 by the presence of the interband pair-exchange coupling U 12 can be regarded as a Suhl-Kondo mechanism If we look at the band dependence more closely, ∆ 1 is always nonzero, while ∆ 2 vanishes for μ < E 0 when U 12 = 0, which is because Band 2 is unoccupied as depicted in the result for the band occupancies in Fig. In the presence of U 12 , on the other hand, ∆ 2 also becomes finite even for μ < E 0 . There, ∆ 1 and ∆ 2 become simultaneously finite through the coupling in Eq. ( Fig. U 12 , implying the acquisition of pair condensation in the incipient band located above μ. Another characteristic feature is that both ∆ 1 and ∆ 2 remain finite even at μ = 0 when the mass ratio is small and the pair-exchange coupling is sufficiently large. Al-though this may seem strange, a bound state prevails in such a case as suggested in the context of a twobody problem. In this regime, the pair formation originates from the two-body bound state formation (as seen from the pole of the T -matrix discussed in Appendix A) rather than the Cooper instability. Indeed, we obtain finite two-body binding energies E bind at Ũ12 = 1.5 and 2.0 therein. The finite binding energy in the two-body problem is related to positive values of 1/(k 0 a eff 1 ) at μ = 0 in Fig. We have revealed in Figs. The effective intraband attraction in Band 1 as measured by 1/(k 0 a eff 1 ) significantly and monotonically increases with μ, where the value changes from negative to positive (i.e., a eff 1 itself diverges) typically in Fig. In the latter, the effective scattering length a Feshbach eff between atoms in the two-channel model is given by where m A is the atomic mass, μ A chemical potential, and U bg the background interaction. The attraction is induced by the Feshbach coupling g between openchannel atoms and closed-channel molecules that have an energy level at ν. One can see in the above equation that a Feshbach eff diverges at μ A = ν/2 due to the resonance tuned by μ A . In the present two-band system, a eff 1 diverges and changes sign (with a eff 2 also rapidly changing; see Fig. The enhanced pairing effect associated with analogy between the two-band model and two-channel atomic system occurs in both cases of the system coulpled with bosonic and fermionic bands. We also note that in Ref. If we turn to the incipient, heavy-mass Band 2, on the other hand, the effective intraband interaction within the incipient band reaches the unitarity limit, that is 1/(k 0 a eff 2 ) → 0 for μ → 0 in Fig. Note that the right-hand side of the above equation does not depend explicitly on Ũ12 , a feature related to the aforementioned universal behavior of 1/(k 0 a eff 2 ) for small μ and Ũ12 . At μ → 0 and ∆ 2 /E 0 ≃ 0, Eq. ( , leading to 1/a eff 2 → 0 in Eq. ( On the other hand, when Ũ12 is small, the 1/(k 0 a eff 2 ) depends sensitively on the position of μ relative to E 0 . The qualitative behavior of 1/(k 0 a eff 2 ) around μ = E 0 can again be understood by analogy with the Feshbach resonance. Namely, the light-mass band and the heavymass (incipient) band correspond, respectively, to the closed and open channels, as depicted in Fig. which indicates 4πa Feshbach eff /m A → U bg for μ A → ∞. Correspondingly, by regarding the scattering continuum in Band 1 as the low-energy closed channel located at -E 0 below the Band 2 bottom, and by identifying U bg with the bare intraband interaction in our two-band model, we can again establish a correspondence with the atomic model. This way, one can obtain analogy in terms of the effective scattering lengths between the two-channel model and the Feshbach resonance in atomic systems. Indeed, despite various differences between the two models, 1/(k 0 a eff 2 ) still approaches 1/(k 0 a 2 ) (taken to be -2 here) for μ > ∼ E 0 , as shown in Figs. In this paper, we have investigated effects of resonant pair-exchange coupling and the resultant BCS-BEC and unitarity-BCS crossover in a two-band model consisting of dispersive and incipient nearly-flat bands. Within the mean-field theory, we elucidate the chemical potential dependence of the superfluid/superconducting gaps and effective intraband interactions induced by the interband pair-exchange processes at various strengths of the pair-exchange coupling and effective mass ratio between the two bands. We have found that superfluid/superconducting gaps in both bands are strongly enhanced when the incipient band becomes flat. The effective scattering lengths which characterize the pairexchange-induced effective attraction in the dispersive band are tuned from the weak-coupling to strongcoupling regimes only by increasing the chemical potential, leading to the BCS-BEC crossover without invoking any change in the coupling parameters. We have discussed the analogy between the magnetic Feshbach resonance and the present two-band model in the presence of the incipient band. Moreover, the nontrivial realization of the unitarity limit in the incipient band has been pointed out in the case of the small chemical potential, leading to the unitarity-BCS crossover with increasing μ. From an experimental point of view, while the effective scattering lengths cannot directly be measured in electronic systems, the BCS-BEC crossover can be observed by measuring energy spectra in tunneling spectroscopies (STM/STS), which should exhibit quite different behaviors between the BCS and BEC regimes. Moreover, ARPES (angular-resolved photoemission spectra) should give detailed information on quasiparticle spectra, as has actually been done for the iron-based superconductors for detecting a BCS-BEC crossover Although our model is rather simplified in describing real materials such as iron-based superconductors and bilayer graphenes, our results would be useful for understanding strong-coupling properties of multi-band superfluid/superconductors. Moreover, our approach could be applied to the topological flat band system as well as lattice models. Thermal pairing fluctuations also play a crucial role throughout the BCS-BEC crossover. These remain as important future work. where is the two-body effective intraband interaction in Band i. In the strong-coupling regime, we can obtain the twobody binding enegy -E bind < 0 in Band 1 (which gives -E bind + 2E 0 for the two-body binding energy in Band 2) from the pole of Eq. (A4) as as shown in Fig. We can further consider a situation in which the twoband system is in the BEC limit (μ < 0, ∆ 1 , ∆ 2 ≪ |μ|) even when only the interband interaction exists with no intraband ones (large interband-coupling limit). Equation (10) rewritten from Eq. ( in the BEC limit for i = j. The chemical potential in the BEC limit satisfies the same equation (A6) as that for the two-body binding energy in the absence of intraband interactions. Therefore, we obtain This equation is similar to the single-band case, where the chemial potential asymptotically approaches the result for half the two-body binding energy in the BEC limit at zero temperature. Appendix B: The low-density limit of 1/(k0a eff i ) Let us here clarify the mechanism by which 1/(k 0 a eff 2 ) approach the unitarity limit despite the small pairexchange interactions as long as U 12 is nonzero, while 1/(k 0 a eff 1 ) is in the BCS regime for μ < E 0 . First, note that U eff ii can be cast into a form for i = j. In the low-density region (μ < E 0 , ∆ 1 /E 0 ≃ 0, ∆ 2 /E 0 ≃ 0), Eq. (B1) becomes where we have defined μ ≡ μ/E 0 and Λ ≡ Λ/k 0 . Since we take a large cutoff such that √ μ ≪ Λ, √ μ -1 ≪ Λ, we end up with Hence U eff 22 depends strongly on the ratio ∆ 1 /∆ 2 , while U eff 11 depends conversely on ∆ 2 /∆ 1 . As shown in Fig. 