We study the interlayer pairing states in layered systems of two different 2d electronic subsystems, one with relativistic linear and the other with non-relativistic parabolic spectrum. The complex order parameter of the paired state has a two component structure. We investigate the pairing state formation on the mean-field level, determine the critical interaction strength and evaluate the effective potential. The anisotropic three-band spectrum of quasiparticles depends explicitly on the phase difference of the order parameter components, rotates in momentum space as it changes, and exhibits the strong band deformation due to the pairing. The pairing leads to the fusion and hybridization of initially decoupled bands. The quasiparticle spectrum has the shape of deformed Dirac cones in the vicinity of the two touching points between neighboring bands. The density of states exhibits a number of specific features due to band deformation, such as a van Hove singularity. Often, the layered electronic systems disclose physical phenomena, which are neither present in a single 2d layer, nor in isotropic 3d systems. The role of the layered structures is or might be important for understanding physical phenomena as different as the formation of interlayer exciton condensates in semiconducting devices Layered structures consisting of two 2d electronic systems, one with linear relativistic (Dirac) dispersion and another with non-relativistic parabolic (conventional) dispersion have received some attention in the past. Suggestions were made that sandwiches of graphene and gallium arsenide layers can host similarly inhomogeneous excitonic electron-hole condensates FIG. The proposed system is composed of a charge neutral graphene layer and a layer of a layer hosting the conventional 2d electron gas with the Fermi level risen into the band. By bringing them close to each other both 2d electron gases feel the mutual Coulomb repulsion, which results in a formation of an ordered interlayer state of paired particles as shown in Fig. where ψ = (ψ 1 , ψ 2 ) and φ are the annihilation (and the corresponding creation) operators acting in the layers with the relativistic and non-relativistic spectrum respectively; ∇ 1,2 are spatial derivatives in respective direction and ∇ 2 = ∇ 2 1 + ∇ 2 2 ; v is the Fermi velocity of the Dirac electron, μ the chemical potential of the conventional electron gas, m the band mass of conventional electrons, and σ 1,2,3 are the Pauli matrices in usual representation, which act on the Dirac space. ∆ D denotes the Dirac mass, which might be attributed to the intrinsic spin-orbit coupling. Its sign is not fixed, i.e. ∆ D can be negative. We do not specify the interlayer Coulomb interaction term I g [ψ, φ] here, which might be very general and only has to be given in terms of particle densities of both species. Finally, the dot operator denotes the integration in the 2-dimensional position space. In both layers, the intralayer Coulomb interaction is supposed to be strongly suppressed due to screening and therefore negligible in first approximation. For conventional electrons the screening is due to the finite density of states at the Fermi surface, while in the case of Dirac electrons the screening is due to the Schwinger particle-hole production at the Dirac point, cf. Ref. In the mean-field approximation the electron pairing appears in form of the two-component order The critical interaction strength of pairing transition as function of y = mv/q F , where v, m and q F represent the Fermi velocity of Dirac particles, as well as the band mass and the Fermi momentum of the conventional particles, respectively. parameter with spinor structure. The anticipated mean-field Hamiltonian reads where q = q 2 x + q 2 y , φ = atan , q x and q y being the components of the momentum vector, and with the Fermi momentum related to the chemical potential μ = q 2 F 2m . ∆ 1 and ∆ 2 are positive amplitudes and χ 1 and χ 2 the global phases of the two-component complex order parameter corresponding to each respective sublattice. The Hamiltonian (2) is invariant under a simultaneous global U(1) transformation of both order parameters. It is rather generic and does not rely on any particular interlayer interaction term. As an example, in Appendix 1 we show how the order parameter of Hamiltonian (2) emerges from the simplest contact density-density interaction. The global rotation ψ j = e iχ j ψ j , j = 1, 2 and ψ † j = e -iχ j ψ † j in the Hamiltonian Eq. ( The generation of the order parameter is captured by the zero temperature effective potential of the paired phase, which for the contact interaction is defined as where g is the interaction strength and the integration over the imaginary frequency q 0 stretches from -∞ to +∞ and the radial momentum integration stretches from 0 to the upper cutoff Λ. The variation of this functional with respect to each of ∆'s provides us with the system of mean-field equations, from which the critical interaction strength for the pairing (i.e. for ∆ D = 0, ∆ 1 = ∆ 2 = 0) follows. The critical interaction strength condition reads The evaluation of the integral on the right hand side is presented in the Appendix 2. The result of the integration is where y = mv/q F , and λ = Λ/q F . The inverse of the left hand side (∼ mg c ) is plotted in Fig. A persisting challenge of graphene physics concerns the question whether the intralayer Coulomb interaction is strong enough to open a gap in the spectrum of Dirac particles. It is therefore important to estimate the competition between the two tendencies. The actual quantity, which measures the dimensionless Coulomb interaction strength is the effective fine structure constant α = e 2 /v, which takes in the suspended graphene the value α ∼ 2.17. The size of the critical value of gap opening α c is somewhat arguable and spreads in the literature in a range α c ∼1-10, cf. Ref. The approximate evaluation of the effective potential Eq. ( The first insights into the spectral properties of the Hamiltonian (2) are gained by inspection of the determinant of its kernel matrix. With ∆ D = 0 it reads where again q = q 2 x + q 2 y and φ = atan . The determinant and therefore the spectrum depends on the combination χ 2 -χ 1 + φ. This implies that the change of the phase difference of the order parameters χ 2 -χ 1 is equivalent with the rotation of the momentum vector q by this phase difference in FIG. The determinant is a quartic polynomial in q. When μ = 0 the determinant is proportional to q 4 for ∆ 1 = ∆ 2 = 0 and for ∆ 1 , ∆ 2 = 0 proportional to q for small momenta. Since the determinant is the product of the energy eigenvalues, this behavior reflects a drastic change of the dispersion at small q when electron pairing occurs, resulting in the destruction of the Dirac double cone ±vq and the parabolic spectrum q 2 /2m. Finally, at larger momenta the determinant tends to -v 2 q 4 /(2m), that is the product of the eigenvalues of the Hamiltonian without pairing in the large q-limit. The determinant and therefore the eigenvalues of the mean-field Hamiltonian depend explicitly on the phase difference of both components of the order parameter. It is only in the case of an asymmetric solution ∆ 1 = 0 or ∆ 2 = 0 that the determinant becomes phase independent in the momentum space. With variational solutions ∆ 1 = ∆ = ∆ 2 , χ 2 = χ = χ 1 and with q y = 0 the eigenvalues become: (7) For large positive q x (i.e. φ = 0) the eigenvalue E 2 approaches ξ q ∼ q 2 x , thus recovering the dispersion of the conventional particle, while the eigenvalue E 3 starts at -(μ + μ 2 + 8∆ 2 )/2 for small and goes ∼ vq x ξ q /∆ for large momenta, i.e. it changes from the negative into the positive halfplane. Therefore it will always cross the negative Dirac branch E 1 . This crossing point represents the deformed original Dirac part of the starting model and is always present in our model irrespective of the particular choice of parameters. For small negative q x (i.e. φ = π) the eigenvalue E 2 starts at (-μ + μ 2 + 8∆ 2 )/2, goes initially linearly as ∼ -v|q x |, reaches at some momentum a global minimum and approaches ξ q for large momenta. The eigenvalue E 3 approaches -v|q x | for large momenta, which is the negative branch of the Dirac spectrum, cf Appendix 4. Since both E 1 and E 2 lie at least partially in the positive half-plane, they can cross. This is possible if the condition is fulfilled, where q * x is the position of the global minimum of E 2 in momentum space, which follows from In the case of strict equality in Eq. ( The eigenvalues of the Hamiltonian (2) for zero Dirac mass are found by solving the cubic equation and represent the Cardano formulae, cf. Appendix 4.1. In Fig. We evaluate the density of states (DOS) of the mean-field Hamiltonian from the usual functional where E is the energy and the momentum summation if performed over the rectangular Brillouin zone. The DOS for both spectra depicted in Fig. In this paper we study a model with a single spinless Dirac fermion in one layer and a single spin projection of conventional electrons in the other. The mean-field Hamiltonian in Eq. ( The formation of the pairing state is influenced by an interplay of different model's parameters such as the Dirac mass and the Fermi velocities of both fermion species. The critical interaction strength of the pairing transition is a function of the Fermi velocities of both electron species. The effective potential which is associated with the pairing transition turns out to be a complicated function of system's parameters. The effective potential exhibits pronounced local minima. We identify several factors which determine the position of these minima. In the system consisting of two layers with Dirac and conventional electrons respectively, there is an interlayer electron-electron pairing transition due to strong interlayer repulsion. The main concern of this paper are the studies of the spectrum of quasiparticles and details of the pairing transition. Several problems are left for the future, e.g. the intra-and interlayer transport in such layered systems, for which the fluctuations beyond the Gaussian order are necessary, or physics of time-reversal symmetry breaking by e.g. external magnetic fields or sharp sample boundaries, cf. Ref. where g is the interaction strength and the rest of the parameter set is already defined in the main part. The kinetic part represents a 3×3 quadratic form which gives a hint in which position in the matrix the order parameter can appear. To see if this guess is compatible with the form of the interaction at hand we rewrite it in the following way where v t ↑ = (1, 0) and σ 0 the 2d unity matrix. The operators ψ and φ anticommute and single operator bilineals are neglected since they do not contribute to the pairing and are generally the artifact of this operator ordering. To prove our guess, the bilineal φ † φ can be pulled out the sum over j in Eq. ( and Combining them as in Eq. ( In particular, each of the order parameters reads Obviously, these correlators can only be finite in the paired state. 2. Evaluation of the critical interaction strength from Eq. ( At zero temperature, the integration of the frequency in Eq. ( or upon reordering and introducing dimensionless quantities x = q/q F , y = mv/q F , and where a ± = y ± 1 + y 2 . Utilizing the partial fraction decomposition and performing the integrals we get to the expression Eq.( The effective potential to zeroth order in gradient expansion reads where we trivially integrated the momentum. We express the order parameter in units of the chemical potential which leads us to In order to perform the momentum integral we write the logarithm as Performing the partial fraction decomposition we further get using the following expression where Therefore the effective potential Eq. ( with the effective dimensionless interaction strength For γ > γ c = 2 √ 2 the effective potential develops the local minima corresponding to the paired state, cf. left panel of Fig. Now we include the Dirac mass and study how it may change the shape of the effective energy to the considered approximation, whereas it suffices to only consider the effect of the mass in leading order of perturbative expansion in ∆ D . The free energy functional changes as and the next power of ∆ D under logarithm being quadratic. We recognize that the small Dirac mass breaks the sublattice-symmetry between the components of the pairing gap. The leading order effect is captured by expansion of the logarithm part We evaluate the integral in the correction term: where E ± are taken over from Eq. ( Since the sign of the Dirac mass is not fixed as such, the Dirac mass breaks explicitly the sublattice symmetry of the order parameter. For very small momenta (q 2 ≪ q 2 F ) and in absence of the Dirac mass we can approximate the mean-field potential Eq. (3) as The suggested smallness of the momentum enables us to use it as an expansion parameter and consequently to perform the angular integration with respect to the angle φ. This makes all odd-power contributions vanish. The resulting expression is rotationally invariant and isotropic with respect to both the momentum and the order-parameter, i.e. the phase of the order parameter disappear from the final result as consequence of the 'gauge invariance'. Using the notation X = -iq 0 (q The log-term was evaluated above. The sum term in Eq. ( The momentum integration is easily performed The remaining frequency integral is difficult because every term in the series diverges for q 0 = 0. On the other hand, putting q 0 = 0 in Eq. ( where we introduced the infrared cutoff λ which will be sent to zero at the end of calculations. The imaginary part of the numerator is an odd function of the frequency and therefore disappears from the integral by symmetry. The contribution from the integral at the lower integration boundary consists of divergent terms, while the regular ones all disappear. The divergent terms are Hence we recognize an involved hierarchy of alternating series in odd inverse powers of λ, each starting at each n. The most divergent, which starts at n = 1 has elements 1 λ∆ 4 , - The alternating sign hints to the possible convergence. The sequence gives rise to an infinite series which can be summed over separately giving the leading order term in powers of v: MATHEMATICA finds the sum to be a generalized hyper-geometric function which grows linearly for large x (i.e. small λ). Therefore, the limit λ → 0 exists: Hence, the leading correction from the lower integral boundary (i.e. with a global minus sing) is linear in mixed terms of ∆ 2 ∆ 2 : The contribution from the upper cutoff is not important, since it is at least quadratic in powers of v and therefore subdominant to the just obtained term. The free energy functional to this order and zero Dirac mass reads where , and In units of 2 √ 2π/μΛ 2 all evaluated contributions to the effective potential become We plot this expression in the main part in Fig. 4. The spectrum of the Hamiltonian (2) The eigenvalues E i of the mean-field Hamiltonian (2) for zero Dirac mass are found from the secular equation which becomes with The solutions of the secular equation are given by the Cardano formulas: where The three eigenvalues do fulfill the usual constrain conditions: The form of modes E 2 and E 3 suggests that they may become equal if which occurs for special values of vq and ξ q . The plot of this numerically evaluated curve at the energetically lower touching point is shown in Fig. Here we define the conditions for crossing points which appear between the two upper bands defined in Eq. ( (70) We make a decomposition guess dictated by the expected asymptotics of the eigenvalues det[H MF ] = -v 2 q 4 F 2m q(q 2 + Aq + B)(q + C), which yields by comparison with Eq. (70) the following relations for the decomposition coefficients which furthermore leads to the solutions and an equation for There is only one real solution for A A = -2 • 3 which is shown in Fig. which allows us to determine the position of the touching points in the momentum space from which leads to the quadratic equation which has the solutions q± = 1 2 q -corresponding to the crossing point at smaller and q + at larger energies. Taken into account that A is actually negative, cf. Fig. from which the condition for the critical value of the pairing order parameter ∆ can be found. The strict equality in Eq. (80) defines the critical order parameter for the given system realization at which the gap between the two bands closes. The numerically evaluated order parameter as function of the ratio y = mv/q F is shown in Fig. 