Stochastic inhomogeneous oxidation is an inherent characteristic of copper (Cu), often hindering color tuning and bandgap engineering of oxides. Coherent control of the interface between metal and metal oxide remains unresolved. We demonstrate coherent propagation of an oxidation front in single-crystal Cu thin film to achieve a full-color spectrum for Cu by precisely controlling its oxide-layer thickness. Grain boundary-free and atomically flat films prepared by atomicsputtering epitaxy allow tailoring of the oxide layer with an abrupt interface via heat treatment with a suppressed temperature gradient. Color tuning of nearly full-color RGB indices is realized by precise control of oxide-layer thickness; our samples covered ~50.4% of the sRGB color space. The color of copper/copper oxide is realized by the reconstruction of the quantitative yield color from oxide "pigment" (complex dielectric functions of Cu 2 O) and light-layer interference (reflectance spectra obtained from the Fresnel equations) to produce structural color. We further demonstrate laser-oxide lithography with micron-scale linewidth and depth through local phase transformation to oxides embedded in the metal, providing spacing necessary for semiconducting transport and optoelectronics functionality. Surface oxidation of copper (Cu), one of the oldest problems in metallurgy, occurs naturally when Cu is exposed to air. The oxidation depends on the imposed environmental conditions. Color modulation of metals has been attempted by exploitation of electrochromism, laser coloration using marking, piezochromism, and plasmonic effects. In this report, we present a breakthrough in the surface oxidation of Cu, using a grain boundaryfree, ultra-flat single-crystal Cu thin film (SCCF) prepared by atomic-sputtering epitaxy (ASE). Inhomogeneous oxidation in the SCCF was highly suppressed by introduction of a treatment to minimize the temperature gradient in the film, resulting in the production of a full-color spectrum by precise control of the oxide-layer thickness. This approach is further extended to localized oxidation by laser-oxide lithography for photonic-electronic applications. Figure A uniform, controllable oxide layer was obtained from the SCCF in a separate heating furnace. We annealed both SCCF and PCCF films at 330 °C for 1 min under a mixed-gas atmosphere of Ar (83%) and O 2 (17%). The SCCF exhibited an oxide layer with a highly crystalline Cu 2 O layer and nanometer-scale abrupt interfaces. Figure By dramatically improving the interface quality with controllable oxidation in the SCCF, we realized a wide-color spectrum through exclusive use of simple heat treatment via temperaturegradient minimization. Figure The underlying mechanism for the emergence of various colors can be explained in terms of the multiple reflections that occur at the oxidized film surface and interface between Cu 2 O and Cu, We investigated the critical variables for homogeneous color with a given initial Cu thickness (d) by controlling the annealing temperature (T) and annealing time (t). The systematic color variation from brown to purple was obtained with the corresponding red/green/blue (RGB) digital color codes by modulating T from 250 °C to 340 °C for t = 60 s and d = 200 nm (upper panel (a1-a4) in Figure After establishing focal oxidation (zero-dimensional, 0-D) as a dot, we investigated whether line (one-dimensional, 1-D) or area (two-dimensional, 2-D) oxidation could be achieved. To deliver the controlled exposure in a predefined pattern, we scanned the sample stage in sync with the laser shutter. Figure The AFM images (Figure Our results demonstrate that oxidation of the SCCF can be controlled coherently with atomically flat precision. The thickness of the Cu 2 O layer on the SCCF was manipulated to within an accuracy of 2-3 nm, with a well-defined interface between the oxide and the metal. The colors realized on the SCCF, as demonstrated in our findings, represent the coherence of oxidation front propagation in the Cu lattice, which is a good indicator of oxidation thickness. As an application of Cu oxidation to the photonic-electronic area, we introduce a laser-oxide lithography technique by local oxidation that can be tuned from 1 micron to several tens of microns in diameter for 0 -D, 1-D, and 2-D patterns. Preparation of oxidised Cu thin film: Atomic sputtering epitaxy (ASE) was adopted to grow a pristine single-crystal Cu thin film (SCCF), which is an improved method achieved by modifying the technical limits of a conventional sputtering system. ASE deposition enhances the quality of the metal film and supplies nearly defect-free and grain boundary-free SCCFs. The system was improved by minimization of signal noise originating from grain boundary scattering of electrons in conductors through replacement of the conventional configuration with a single-crystal Cu wiring network. previous study]. Ellipsometry spectra were obtained using a rotating-compensator ellipsometer (M-2000; J.A. Woollam, Co., Lincoln, NE, USA) and a rotating-polarizer ellipsometer (VVASE; J.A. Woollam, Co.) at room temperature. A photon energy range of 0.74-5.5 eV was employed, with incident angles of 60°, 70°, and 80°. To obtain the layer structure and dielectric functions of oxidized Cu thin films, we performed optical analyses step-by-step using WVASE software. Figure Consistent fitting of Ψ(ω) and Δ(ω) for the different samples provided reliable ε 1 (ω) and ε 2 (ω) values for Cu 2 O (Figure Setup of laser-oxide lithography and characterization: To build up oxide lithography on the SCCF, the following parts were assembled into a microscope. A continuous laser (LBX-488-500, Oxxius, Lannion, France) with 500 mW power at 488 nm was used to heat the SCCF, given that Cu has a relatively high absorbance below wavelengths of 532 nm. A motorized shutter (SH05, Thorlabs, Newton, NJ, USA) was controlled using software provided by the manufacturer. A 10× objective lens (numerical aperture: 0.45; CFI Plan Apo lambda, Nikon Corp., Tokyo, Japan ), a 50:50 beam splitter (BS013, Thorlabs), and a tube lens (TTL200, Thorlabs) for a scientific complimentary metal-oxide-semiconductor (sCMOS) camera (Kiralux CS895CU, Thorlabs) were also included in the lithography system. To oxidize the metal film using the laser, a 2-μm-diameter (1/e 2 ) laser beam was focused onto the SCCF and the power density was varied (200, 400, 800, and 1600 W/mm 2 ) with 100 ms of irradiation. Notably, 100 W/mm 2 irradiation was attempted, but clear pattern generation could not be achieved. In addition, laser irradiation with a power density >1600 W/mm 2 produced irregular circular shapes, possibly indicating melting of the metal. A supercontinuum broadband laser beam (EXW-12, NKT Photonics, GmbH, Cologne, Germany) was focused on the pattern with a 1-μm 2 spot size. The reflected signal was relayed to a spectrophotometer (Semrock SR-303i Spectrograph and Newton DU970-bv EMCCD, Andor/Oxford Instruments). Scanning of the laser pattern was performed using a motorized microscope stage (Ti2-e, Nikon Corp.), controlled by software (NIS-Elements, Nikon Corp.). Figure In this highly lattice mismatched system, it is expected that the in-plane lattice strain is majorly released by repetitive introduction of geometrical misfit dislocation (MD) because lattice mismatch can be more efficiently accommodated by a combination of elastic strain and MDs rather than elastic strain alone. The theoretical average spacing (S) of MDs was estimated as ~1. them is in very good agreement with a predicted spacing of about 1.5 nm. This result clarifies that most of the misfit strain was relieved by the periodic array of the interface misfit dislocations. The interface misfit strain is steeply relaxed over about 2 nm or less by the presence of MDs and the residual strain is gradually relieved over about 4 nm into the Cu 2 O layer. (Figure 