Flexoelectricity is a type of ubiquitous and prominent electromechanical coupling, pertaining to the response of electrical polarization to mechanical strain gradients while not restricted to the symmetry of materials. However, large elastic deformation in most solids is usually difficult to achieve and the strain gradient at minuscule is challenging to control. Here we exploit the exotic structural inhomogeneity of grain boundary to achieve a huge strain gradient (~ 1.2 nm - 1 ) within 3 ~ 4 unit-cells, and thus obtain atomic-scale flexoelectric polarization up to ~ 38 μC/cm 2 at a 24 о LaAlO3 grain boundary. The nanoscale flexoelectricity also modifies the electrical activity of grain boundaries. Moreover, we prove that it is a general and feasible way to form large strain gradients at atomic scale by altering the misorientation angles of grain boundaries in different dielectric materials. Thus, engineering of grain boundaries provides an effective pathway to achieve tunable flexoelectricity and broadens the electromechanical functionalities of non-piezoelectric materials. Flexoelectricity is an emergent phenomenon that describes the electric polarization controlled by inhomogeneous deformation, i.e. strain gradients, with the broken inversion symmetry The flexoelectric effects have two basic features. One is its inherently universal property, which allows the appearance of net polarization from strain gradients for every dielectric material, breaking the limits of piezoelectricity that merely exits in piezoelectric material of 20 noncentrosymmetric groups Particularly, the dielectric oxides have large flexoelectric coefficients and thus hold broad promising potential applications for the future nanosized devices Grain boundaries (GBs), which consist of distinct periodic arrangements of structural units, can exhibit novel properties that are not presented in the intrinsic bulk crystal Here, we verify this speculation and develop a general strategy to generate atomic-scale flexoelectric polarization via GB engineering. From a 24 о tilt LaAlO3 (LAO) GB, we directly visualize the atomic arrangements by advanced atomically resolved scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) and spectroscopy techniques and find huge strain gradients (~1.2 nm -1 ) and remarkable flexoelectric effect inducing atomic displacement within 3 ~ 4 unit cells around the GB. The first-principles density-functional theory (DFT) calculations suggest that in such a confined GB region a large local polarization (~38 μC/cm 2 ) exists and a "head-tohead" polarization configuration forms. The electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS) illustrates stronger hybridization in La-O and Al-O interaction in the GB, facilitating the flexoelectric formation of the nanostructure. Furthermore, when extrapolated to SrTiO3(STO) GB, huge strain gradients also exist in the 22.6 о GB and larger strain gradients are observed in the 36.8 о GB, exhibiting the alteration in misorientation angle and material for tunable flexoelectricity. The presence nanoscale flexoelectricity modifies the electrical activities and is expected to play considerable roles in the transport properties in electroceramics. Our work proves the generality and viability for atomic-scale flexoelectricity tuned by GBs, which may find potential applications in nanoelectronics and nano-electromechanical systems. Fig. To better characterize the flexoelectric effect at the GB, a map of atomic displacements is extracted based on the iDPC image illustrated in Fig. Based on the DFT calculation in Fig. Interestingly, the polar vectors around the GB are directed towards the GB core, forming a "head-to-head" configuration with averaged ~10 μC/cm 2 from each side, analogous to the charged domain wall in ferroelectrics. Such a scenario certainly plays an important role in determining the electrical activities of GB in these electroceramics. Therefore, we perform EELS of the oxygen K-edge and the aluminum L-edge to investigate the electronic structures of the flexoelectric phase in the GB. The oxygen K-edge (Fig. illustrates similar peaks at 536.5 eV in the bulk and GB core which is related to La 5d-O 2p hybridized states To validate the generality of engineering flexoelectricity in the GB, we then investigate SrTiO3 (STO) GB to present the universal structural information associated with adjustable flexoelectricity. As shown in Fig. We would like to point out that such enhancement of displacements might not only be caused by flexoelectricity but also partly comes from the nonstoichiometry which are usually strongly coupled with each other On the other hand, the polarized GB core further influences the electrostatic potential and the electronic density in the GB, modulating the electrical activities. Taking LAO as an example, a stronger hybridization state is in the GB core, favoring and promoting the formation of the ferroelectric phase. The decrease of Al L3 onset energy indicates the disordered configuration complexity which may allow weak p-d hybridized states that are forbidden in perfect AlO6 octahedral configuration, possibly causing a small amount of defective states between valence band maximum (VBM) states and CBM states. The shifts of band gap towards lower energy via linear fitting imply a small band gap reduction (~ 0.4 eV). Such intriguing effects decorate the trivial bulk properties, yielding potential new applications in the future nanoelectronics for GB. In fact, although it is well-known that the GBs play critical roles in the properties of oxide ceramics, the underlying mechanism is far from clear due to the complexity. Among of all the proposed mechanisms, the elemental segregation induced local non-stoichiometricity In summary, we propose a strategy to enhance the flexoelectricity through GB engineering, where tunable and large strain gradients can be achieved at an atomic scale. By advanced STEM technique and theoretical DFT calculations, we determine the atomic structure of the exotic trapezoidal-like structure in the GBs, evaluate the strain gradients, quantify the atomicscale flexoelectricity, reveal its electronic structure, and demonstrate the generality. Strong 