We report an investigation of the superconducting properties of the hexagonal noncentrosymmetric compound LaPdIn. Electrical resistivity, specific heat and ac susceptibility measurements demonstrate the presence of bulk superconductivity below Tc = 1.6 K. The specific heat, together with the penetration depth measured using transverse-field muon spin rotation and the tunnel diode oscillator based method, are well described by single gap s-wave superconductivity, with a gap magnitude of 1.8kB Tc. From zero-field muon spin relaxation results no evidence is found for the spontaneous emergence of magnetic fields in the superconducting state, indicating that time-reversal symmetry is preserved. Band structure calculations reveal that there is a relatively weak effect of antisymmetric spin-orbit coupling on the electronic bands near the Fermi level, which is consistent with there being negligible singlet-triplet mixing due to broken inversion symmetry. On the other hand, isostructural LuPdIn and LaPtIn do not exhibit superconductivity down to 0.4 K, which may be due to these systems having a smaller density of states at the Fermi level. Since the discovery of superconductivity in the noncentrosymmetric heavy fermion compound CePt 3 Si [1], there has been considerable interest in superconductors with broken inversion symmetry in the crystal structure, due to the potential for unusual superconducting properties Besides CePt 3 Si, non-centrosymmetric heavy-fermion superconductiviy is also found in CeTX 3 (T = transition metal, X = Si/Ge) Signatures of time-reversal symmetry breaking (TRSB), where spontaneous magnetic fields emerge in the superconducting state, have also been detected in some noncentrosymmetric superconductors, including LaNiC 2 A large number of intermetallic compounds crystallize in the ZrNiAl-type structure (space group P 62m) Polycrystalline LaPdIn was synthesized via arcmelting stoichiometric quantities of the starting materials La, Pd and In under an argon atmosphere. The sample was annealed at 700 • C for one week in an evacuated quartz tube. In addition, polycrystalline samples of LuPdIn and LaPtIn were synthesized using the same method. The crystal structure and phase purity were checked at room temperature using powder x-ray diffraction with Cu-Kα radiation. The electrical resistivity down to 0.4 K was measured using a standard four probe method in a Quantum Design Physical Property Measurement System (PPMS) Dynacool equipped with a 3 He insert, using a 1 mA 15 Hz excitation current. Heat capacity measurements down to 0.4 K were also performed in the PPMS with a 3 He insert, using the relaxation method. Alternating-current (ac) magnetic susceptibility measurements were carried out in an Oxford Instruments 3 He refrigerator equipped with a commercial magnetometer with a frequency of the excitation field of 633 Hz. Muon spin relaxation/rotation (μSR) measurements were carried out on the MuSR spectrometer at the ISIS facility of the Rutherford Appleton Laboratory, UK. The sample was powdered, mounted on a silver plate, and cooled in a dilution refrigerator. μSR measurements were performed in both zero-field, where the magnetic field was canceled using an active compensation system to within 1 μT, as well as in various transverse fields, applied perpendicular to the initial polarization direction of the muons. The temperature dependence of the London penetration depth was also probed using the tunnel-diode oscillator (TDO) based technique carried out in a 3 He cryostat Calculations of the band structure and electronic density of states were performed using density functional theory (DFT), as implemented in the Vienna ab-initio simulation package, with the Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhoff (PBE) functional in the generalized gradient approximation (GGA). The Brillouin zone was sampled with 6 × 6 × 12 K mesh and the energy-cutoff was selected to be 450 eV to ensure convergence. Figures The main panel of Figure , where n = 3 is the number of atoms per formula unit and R = 8.314 J mol -1 K -1 is the molar gas constant. The electron-phonon coupling constant λ el-ph can be estimated using McMillan's theory, which relates T c and θ D via For LaPdIn, using the typical range of values for μ * of 0.1 -0.15, λ el-ph = 0.48 -0.57 are obtained, corresponding to weakly coupled superconductivity. After subtracting the phonon contribution from the total specific heat, the temperature dependence of the electronic contribution C e /T is shown in Fig. , and ∆(T ) is the superconducting gap, given by ∆(T ) = ∆(0) tanh 1.82[1.018(T c /T -1)] 0.51 . The C e /T vs T curve in the superconducting state can be well fitted by the single gap s-wave model with ∆(0) = 1.80 k B T c , after taking into account a small non-superconducting fraction. The gap size is slightly larger than the isotropic weak coupling value from the BCS theory. Therefore, the specific heat results indicate that LaPdIn is a conventional superconductor with a single s-wave gap. Figures where t is the reduced temperature T /T c . μ 0 H GL c2 (0) is determined to be 115 mT, far less than the Pauli limit μ 0 H P auli c2 = 1.86 T c = 2.95 T. The Ginzburg-Landau coherence length ξ GL was calculated using μ 0 H GL c2 (0) = Φ 0 /2πξ 2 GL to be 53.5 nm, where Φ 0 is the magnetic flux quantum. From the specific heat measurements under various fields, the residual electronic specific heat coefficient γ 0 (H) can give information about the low-energy quasiparticle excitations near the Abrikosov vortex cores and thus characterize the superconducting pairing state μSR measurements were carried out to investigate the superconducting state of LaPdIn. Zero field (ZF) μSR spectra are shown at two temperatures in Fig. where A is the initial asymmetry, σ ZF and Λ are the Kubo-Toyabe and Lorentzian relaxation rates. At 0.1 K, values of σ ZF = 0.168(1) μs -1 , Λ = 0.014(2) μs -1 are obtained, while at 2.2 K, σ ZF = 0.166(1) μs -1 , Λ = 0.015(2) μs -1 . Since the values are very similar above and below T c , this indicates that time-reversal symmetry is preserved in the superconducting state of LaPdIn. Transverse field (TF) μSR measurements were performed in several magnetic fields from 100 Oe to 400 Oe. Figures where A s and A bg are the amplitudes of the asymmetries corresponding to the sample and background, respectively, and γ μ /2π = 135.53 MHz/T is the muon gyromagnetic ratio. B s and B bg are the local fields corresponding to muons stopping in the sample and background, respectively, while φ is a common phase and σ is the Gaussian depolarization rate. The increase of the depolarization rate upon entering the superconducting state indicates the onset of bulk superconductivity. The temperature dependence of σ obtained in various fields is displayed in Fig. where κ is the Ginzburg-Landau parameter, λ is the penetration depth, and b = H/H c2 . The temperature dependence of λ -2 (T ) derived from this analysis is displayed in Fig. where ∆(T ) is the same as used in the specific heat analysis. The solid line shows the results of fitting with such a model, yielding ∆(0) = 0.245 The TDO method was also utilized to probe the gap structure of LaPdIn. The temperature dependence of the magnetic penetration depth change ∆λ(T ) in Fig. The calculated band structure and electronic density of states of LaPdIn are displayed in Fig. a value of λ corr = 0.7 is obtained, which corresponds to weak electronic correlations in LaPdIn. To explore more possible new isostructural superconductors and to examine the effects on superconductivity of tuning the ASOC, we synthesized various other compounds with the ZrNiAl-type structure, including LuPdIn and LaPtIn. Upon cooling down to 0.4 K, no superconducting transition was found in LuPdIn and LaPtIn from resistivity and specific heat measurements, as shown in Fig. Since LaPdIn is a NCS, the ASOC can lift the electronic spin degeneracy and possibly result in the mixture of spin-singlet and spin-triplet pairing. The μSR measurements down to low temperature show that LaPdIn is a fully gapped superconductor well described by a single gap s-wave model, which is consistent with results from the TDO-method and specific heat. DFT calculations show that there is a relatively small splitting of the bands due to ASOC, which is in line with the apparent lack of singlet-triplet mixing in this compound. In particular, the size of the band splitting by the ASOC compared to T c , E ASOC /k B T c = 44, is small compared to many other noncentrosymmetric superconductors In summary, we characterized the superconducting order parameter of the noncentrosymmetric superconductor LaPdIn, with T c = 1.6 K. Specific heat, TF-μSR, and measurements using the TDO method are all consistent with a single s-wave superconducting gap, with a magnitude of 1.8k B T c slightly larger than that of weak coupling BCS theory. The upper critical field of 115 mT is much smaller than the Pauli limit, and as such LaPdIn is a type-II superconductor with a relatively low Ginzburg-Landau parameter κ = 3.23, and time-reversal symmetry is preserved in the superconducting state. From DFT calculations, the ASOC leads to a relatively small splitting of the bands of around 6 meV, which is considerably less than those NCS exhibiting unconventional properties, which is consistent with the behavior resembling conventional s-wave superconductivity. LaPdIn FIG.