band is considered as the next frontier in wireless communications. The emerging THz multiplexing techniques are expected to dramatically increase the information capacity of THz communications far beyond a single channel limit. In this work, we explore the THz frequencydivision multiplexing modality enabled by novel add-drop multiplexer (ADM) design. Based on modular two-wire plasmonic waveguides fabricated using additive manufacturing and metallization techniques, we demonstrate four-port THz ADMs containing grating-loaded side couplers for operation at ~140 GHz carrier frequency. Particular attention is payed to the design of plasmonic waveguide Bragg gratings and directional couplers capable of splitting broadband THz light in spectral and spatial domains, respectively. Finally, we demonstrate multiplexing and demultiplexing of THz signals with bit rates up to 6 Gbps using the developed ADMs. We believe that proposed plasmonic circuits hold strong potential to provide robust integrated solutions for analogue signal processing in the upcoming THz communications. The global mobile data traffic is expected to reach 77.49 exabytes per month by the year 2022 According to Shannon-Hartley theorem Among them, the frequency-division multiplexing (FDM), in which several discrete carrier frequencies support distinct users, is routinely used in fiber optic communications to multiply the data-throughput capacity. In optical networks, one typically uses carrier waves in C-band (infrared) with channel spacing less than 10 GHz, thus allowing simultaneous transmission of hundreds of channels with hundred MHz bandwidth each The key component in designing FDM systems is the add-drop multiplexer (ADM). It allows multiple carrier frequencies to share the same frontend, thus reducing the overall size and complexity of the communication networks Using the directional coupling between two adjacent waveguides or the leaky wave of a single deformed waveguide, THz ADMs have been proposed based on parallel-plate waveguides and silicon substrates In what follows, we report the design and characterization of four-port THz ADMs for FDM communications. The core of our system is modular micro-encapsulated two-wire plasmonic waveguides fabricated using stereolithography (SLA) 3D printing and wet chemistry metal deposition techniques reported recently in One key element of our system is a waveguide Bragg grating (WBG) that serves as a wavelengthselective mirror Compared with other ADM designs of similar configurations, such as grating-assisted contra-directional coupler As we will see in what follows, operational bandwidth of the ADM is determined by that of the WBGs used in its design. In this work, by comparing optical properties of WBGs we find the optimal ridge height of truncated cones to be H=0.21 mm to ensure large operational bandwidth, reproducible optical performance, and manageable loss of ADMs. With the period length of a 20-periods WBG set to Λ=1.03 mm, the resultant stopband center frequency is 140 GHz with the corresponding bandwidth of ~18 GHz (full width at half maximum (FWHM)) in numerical simulations. shallower transmission spectra comparted to the numerical simulations, which is attributed to imperfections in the geometrical structure of 3D printed gratings. Nevertheless, the experimental WBG with 20 periods exhibits a pronounced transmission dip near 140 GHz featuring a bandwidth of ~14 GHz (FWHM) and a minimal transmittance (by power) of less than 1%. Additionally, WBG transmission spectra are virtually symmetric when switching the input and output ports despite the WBG nonsymmetric structure. Furthermore, we confirm designability of the WBG spectral response by varying grating periodicity (see Fig. The reflection spectra of WBGs were experimentally characterized using a continuous-wave (CW) THz spectroscopy system together with a two-wire waveguide-based Y-coupler. Although there is a qualitative agreement between the measurements and theoretical predictions with spectral reflection peaks located within the WBG stopband, we also note strong ripples that are presented in the experimental reflection spectra (see Fig. Experimental realization of directional coupling using free-standing THz waveguides is typically challenging. This is due to the need of precise alignment of such waveguides to maintain a fixed interwaveguide separation (normally on a sub-mm scale), which necessitates the use of cumbersome holders, spacers, etc. The effective refractive indices (ne and no) of the even and odd supermodes supported by the side coupler are computed using 2D mode solver tool of COMSOL Multiphysics, while the corresponding coupling length Lc between the two modes is estimated as Lc= λ/2(ne-no) (see Fig. To spatially separate the THz light at the output end (Plane 2) and allow a two-port input (Plane 1), two Y splitters were added at both ends of the side coupler element (see Fig. Optical performance of the complete directional coupler circuit as a function of the side coupler length (distance between Planes 1 and 2) was carried out using 3D module with ports of COMSOL Multiphysics. Particularly, we are interested in finding the relative signal intensities at Output ports 1 and 2 (OP 1,2) of the directional coupler circuit containing side couplers featuring different lengths when assuming that all the power is launched into Input port 1 (IP 1). An immediate complication is that two branches of the Y splitter used at the output side of side coupler have significantly different losses as one of them is curved and longer compared to the straight one. Therefore, instead of simply plotting the power transmittance in the OP 1 and OP 2 assuming excitation at the IP 1 expressed via the corresponding elements of the scattering matrix (Top 1,2=|SOP 1,2; IP 1| 2 ) (see Supplementary Note 2), we characterize the performance of side coupler section by estimating the ratio of power carried by the two waveguides (Waveguide 1 and Waveguide 2) at its end (Plane 2) using, where TY-branch 1,2 are numerically computed power transmittances of the two stand-alone branches of a Y splitter (see Supplementary Note 3). The maximum power of THz light at 140 GHz operational frequency transfer from Waveguide 1 to Waveguide 2 is achieved by a 16.5 mm-long coupler, while the power is cycled back into Waveguide 1 in a 40.6 mm-long coupler. The corresponding electric field distributions of the two directional coupler circuits on the plane that is marked by violet dashed line in Fig. Compared to the beat length between the two supermodes (2Lc~ 49 mm) which is computed theoretically using 2D model solver, we find that the full-cycle coupling is realized by the directional coupler circuit containing a side coupler with a somewhat smaller length (40.6 mm) (see Fig. Experimental characterization of such circuits confirms sinusoidal behavior of the power coupling coefficients as a function of the side coupler length (see Fig. , due to limited resolution of 3D printer, the two waveguides remain joint for several mm at the entrance of a Y splitter, which results in stronger than expected inter-waveguide coupling in the fabricated Y splitters. Due to the contribution of Y splitters to coupling between the bus and dropping waveguides, we design the ADM circuit using a 35mm-long side coupler section that enables the full-cycle coupling at ~140 GHz operational frequency with a broadband operation of over 60 GHz owing to the modest variation in the coupling length (see Supplementary Note 2). It should be noted that the relative position of the 20.6mm-long gratings inside the 35mm-long side coupler section (controlled by the Ld in parameter) gives rise to different interference conditions between the two supermodes of a coupler, which we use to find optimal coupler designs. Particularly, to optimize the drop action we choose Ld in that results in the highest power at Drop port (Plane 1) within the grating stopband. Defining Lg to be the light penetration distance into gratings, the desired relative position of the grating section Ld in can be found from: Another optimal ADM design is to reduce the difference between spectral performance of the add and drop action in expense of their absolute performance, thus resulting in the balanced ADM. In this optimization, one minimizes the difference between transmission through the Through port under Add port launching and transmission through the Drop port under In port launching. By comparing the ADM circuits featuring different Ld in , the grating-loaded side couplers featuring Ld in of 1.5 mm and 6.9 mm are chosen to enable the ADM circuits with optimized drop action and balanced drop/add action, correspondingly. Figs. These two ADM designs were then experimentally characterized using CW-THz spectroscopy system. Firstly, we present the normalized power transmittances at Planes 1 and 2 to characterize the performance of the grating-loaded side coupler section while decoupling it from the losses incurred in Y splitters of an ADM. By using lower loss Y splitters one can significantly improve the loss characteristics of complete ADM devices, which are ultimately limited by those of the grating-loaded side coupler sections. While in this work, we use relatively lossy Y splitters comprising straight and curved branches. Further research is to develop more performant splitters, which is, however, beyond the scope of this paper. When inserting the complete ADM circuits containing these two grating-loaded side couplers (see Fig. Finally, we present the BER response of these two ADM circuits (see Fig. Additionally, losses of various ADM subcomponents significantly affect the BER of the device due to negative effect of the noise on the detection accuracy. We observe that the highest loss in our device ~9 dB comes from the 6.3cm-long curved branch of a Y splitter. This loss is mainly due to radiation from a curved waveguide and ohmic losses of plasmonic modes. Next, the grating-loaded side coupler section typically results in ~7 dB loss for operation in grating passband (for through action), as well as >4 dB loss for operation in grating stopband (for drop and add action). This loss is mainly due to mismatch between the modal fields of straight two-wire waveguides and gratings, ohmic losses, as well as imperfections in the grating structure. Next, there is butt-coupling loss of ~3 dB at each interface between ADM and waveguide-coupled THz emitter and detector We demonstrated four-port ADM circuits capable of channel adding and dropping for applications in THz communication systems operating within FDM modality. We used 3D-printed two-wire plasmonic waveguide as a base technology to develop reconfigurable plasmonic circuits comprising WBGs, directional couplers, grating-loaded side couplers, and Y splitters. We believe that the air-core two-wire waveguides offer many advantages for THz circuit development, including: low losses due to high modal presence in air, device tunability due to ease of access to modal fields, 3D integration potential, modular nature and low coupling loss between modules, as well as capability for robust and cost-effective prototyping and fabrication. Two ADM types were studied, one is a drop action optimized design, the other one is a balanced drop/add design, both featuring experimental bandwidths of 12 GHz (grating stopband) in the vicinity of 143 GHz. For the drop optimized ADM circuit, drop action with data rates of up to 5 Gbps at 143 GHz carrier and add action with data rates of up to 3 Gbps at 148 GHz carrier were confirmed to result in bit error rates lower than 10 -3 (forward error correction (FEC) limit). For the balanced add/drop multiplexer design, both add and drop actions supported data rates of up to 4 Gbps at 151 GHz carrier with BER<10 -3 . Through action in the grating passband (ex. 128 GHz) was shown to support bitrates exceeding 6 Gbps for both designs. The main challenge for the proposed ADM designs was relatively high insertion losses (~10 dB for through action and larger than 14 dB for drop and add action) together with the butt-coupling loss of ~6 dB. Main reasons for such losses, in order of importance, are: suboptimal Y splitter (~9 dB), insertion losses of Bragg gratings and scattering in gratings due to fabrication imperfections (~7 dB for grating passband and >4 dB for grating stopband), butt-coupling loss at each interface (~3 dB), transmission losses of straight two-wire waveguides (~0.4 dB/cm). We believe that further work on relatively straightforward optimization of ADM circuits, including employing more efficient splitter design and better fabrication strategies, as well as reducing coupling losses to detector and emitter by geometry optimization of output ports, could reduce the insertion loss by 5-10 dB. It can also improve and balance the performance of add and drop actions, thus rendering ADM devices highly suitable for the ultra-fast analogue signal processing in THz communications. For the ease of fabrication, each proposed micro-encapsulated two-wire plasmonic waveguide component such as straight and curved waveguide section, WBG module, directional coupler, and grating-loaded side coupler, is split into two complementary parts. Each part comprises of one or two joint wires (depends on the waveguide component) that are attached to a half cage using deeply subwavelength dielectric support ridges of width 150 μm (see Figs. 1, 2(a), and 3(a)) The proposed micro-encapsulated two-wire WBGs were characterized using the CW-THz spectroscopy system (Toptica Photonics) The relative reflection coefficient of WBG was characterized as follows. Firstly, the two-wire Y-coupler and the WBG were assembled using the interconnects at the end facets of both components. Then, two WR6.5 conical horn antennas were connected to the unused ports, namely input and output ports of the Y-coupler. The THz light was launched into the input port of Y-coupler, guided through a curved arm of the coupler, and reflected from the WBG under study. The reflected light was then divided equally by the Y junction and directed towards both the input and output ports. The transmission spectrum of THz light at the output port was recorded. Next, the WBG was replaced by a plano metallic mirror to completely reflect the THz signal at the Y-junction. The transmission spectrum recorded at the output port was used as the reference. Finally, the relative reflection coefficient (by field) of WBG was obtained by comparing these two measured transmission spectra. The THz side coupler containing two two-wire waveguides was characterized as follows. Firstly, the side coupler was placed between two Y splitters (see Fig. The transmittance (by power) of grating-loaded side couplers and the insertion loss (by power) of complete THz ADM circuits (see Fig. The two-wire plasmonic ADM circuits were also characterized using an in-house photonics-based THz communication system. The schematic diagram of the experimental setup is shown in Supplementary Note 10 and briefly explained as follows. In the transmitter section, two independently tunable DFB lasers (Toptica Photonics) operating in the infrared C-band with slightly different center frequencies are combined using a 3 dB coupler as the source of THz generation. The baseband signal source of pseudorandom bit sequence (PRBS) with a varying bit rate from 1 Gbps to 6 Gbps and pattern length of 2 31 -1 is generated by the pulse pattern generator (PPG) unit integrated in the test equipment (Anritsu-MP2100B). The baseband signal is then amplified using the RF amplifier (Thorlabs-MX10A) which drives the Mach-Zehnder modulator (Thorlabs-LN81S-FC) to modulate the intensity of laser beams. Then the modulated laser beams are amplified using an erbium-doped fiber amplifier (EDFA) (Calmar laser-AMP-PM-18) and injected into a waveguide coupled uni-traveling-carrier-photodiode (UTC-PD) photomixer (NTT Electronics) to generate modulated THz carrier wave with operation frequency corresponding to the beat frequency of the two tunable DFB lasers. In the receiver section, the THz carrier wave is detected and demodulated by a zero bias Schottky diode (Virginia Diodes-WR6.5-ZBD-F), and then amplified using a high gain low noise amplifier (LNA) (Fairview Microwave-SLNA-030-32-30-SMA). Finally, the eye pattern and BER are recorded using the test equipment (Anritsu-MP2100B) In experiments, the THz carrier wave within the spectral range of 110 -170 GHz having the power in the range between 125 μW and 250 μW was butt-coupled into the THz ADM circuit via a 1-inch-long WR6.5 rectangular waveguide (Virginia Diodes WR6.5). A similar arrangement was used to connect the output port of the THz ADM circuit and the Schottky diode (see Supplementary The numerical studies of the proposed WBGs, directional coupler circuits, and ADM circuits were carried out using the commercial finite element software COMSOL Multiphysics within the 3D finite element frequency domain module with ports. Within this formulation, transmission and reflection can be characterized by using scattering matrix coefficients (S-parameters) related to each defined port. In our simulations we used frequency-dependent refractive index (nresin(f)=1.654-0.07f [THz]) and material absorption (α(f) [cm -1 ]=0.64+13.44(f [THz]) 2 ) of resin (used in 3D printing) in THz spectral range of 0.1-0.3 THz, which were obtained in a prior experimental study detailed in Ref. The scattering matrix coefficient (S 2 ) at the four defined ports are computed under various launching conditions, i.e. OP 1 and OP 2 under IP 1 launching for directional coupler circuit (see Fig. were then obtained using Eq. ( 