Since the invention of the laser, adoption of new gain media and device architectures has provided solutions to a variety of applications requiring specific power, size, spectral, spatial, and temporal tunability. Here we introduce a fundamentally new type of tunable semiconductor laser based on a phase-change perovskite metasurface that acts simultaneously as gain medium and optical cavity. As a proof of principle demonstration, we fabricate a subwavelength-thin perovskite metasurface supporting bound states in the continuum (BICs). Upon the perovskite structural phase transitions, both its refractive index and gain vary substantially, inducing fast and broad spectral tunability (1.35 nm/K rate, Δλ>15 nm in the near-infrared), deterministic spatial mode hopping between polarization vortexes, and hysteretic optical bistability of the microlaser. These features highlight the uniqueness of phase-change perovskite tunable lasers, which may find wide applications in compact and low-cost optical multiplexers, sensors, memories, and LIDARs. A little more than half a century after the first demonstration of the laser, its varieties and applications have grown enormously. From fundamental spectroscopy, astronomy and quantum optics to atmospheric sensing, optical communications, biomedicine and defense counter measures Functional metasurfaces relying on phase-change media like chalcogenides Halide perovskites are an emerging class of photonic materials that combine, in a single platform, excellent luminescence properties and high refractive index. This has allowed realization of efficient light emitting devices In this work, we demonstrate a new type of spectrally and spatially tunable semiconductor microlaser, using a subwavelength-thin halide perovskite film as phase-change tunable gain medium and high-quality factor cavity. The cavity design is based on a dielectric metasurface embossed in the perovskite that supports bound states in the continuum (BICs) For the demonstration of the phase-change perovskite tunable polarization-vortex microlaser, we select a prototypical halide perovskite, methylammonium lead iodide CH3NH3PbI3 (MAPbI3). MAPbI3 has proven to be a dependable high refractive index platform for all-dielectric perovskite metasurfaces and exhibits a tetragonal-orthorhombic structural phase transition at 130-160 K The metasurface microlaser consists of a square lattice of circular holes patterned in a 250 nm thick MAPbI3 film, sandwiched between a thick polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) layer and a quartz substrate (n=1.5), as depicted in Fig. The lasing mode changes from a MDz-BIC (λ = 797 nm) to a MQ-BIC (λ = 791 nm) across the MAPbI3 phase transition (Fig. Shifting and switching of the laser modes by decreasing and increasing the temperature. Bistability (hysteresis behavior) can be observed in the phase-transition region (130-160 K). (B) Peak position of the bistable laser within two cooling and heating cycles between 135 K and 155 K at the rate of 6 K/min while keeping a constant pump power of 0.64 μW. The two modes are denoted by red and blue colors, respectively. The insets denote their corresponding far-field radiation patterns after a y-polarized linear polarizer at different time period. Cyclability of the tunable microlaser is studied between 298 and 130 K (Fig. Interestingly, the temperature dependence of the laser emission wavelength does not follow the same path during the cooling and the heating cycles, forming a hysteresis loop. This is underpinned by the hysteresis of the dielectric permittivity of MAPbI3 across the phase transition Overall, the unprecedented combination of reversible spectral and spatial tunability with optical bistability of the subwavelength-thin phase-change perovskite polarization-vortex microlaser makes it a unique concept for emergent applications of wavelength and space division multiplexing in classical and quantum optical communications, compact optical memory and neuromorphic devices, optical readout sensors and embedded LIDAR systems. MAPbI3 thin films are fabricated from 1.2 M precursor solution of CH3NH3I (Dyesol) and PbI2 (99.99%, TCI) (molar ratio 1:1) in anhydrous dimethylformamide (DMF, Sigma-Aldrich). As prepared solution is magnetically stirred overnight at room temperature in N2 filled glovebox, then filtered by a polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) syringe filter (0.45 μm) and left on the hot plate at 373 K for one hour before spin-coating. Prior to perovskite deposition, quartz substrates are cleaned by immersing in the following solution: 2 mL of Hellmanex II (Hellma Analytics) in 200 mL of deionized (DI) water at 353 K for 10 min. Subsequently substrates are rinsed with DI water and dried with the flow of nitrogen followed by oxygen plasma cleaning treatment. The perovskite precursor solution is spin-coated onto the quartz substrates with a speed of 4900 rpm for 30 s using antisolvent engineering method. Toluene is drop-casted on the substrates 5 s after the start of the spin-coating program. The resulting films are finally annealed at 373 K for 15 min. Master mold fabrication. A thickness of 170 nm HSQ (Hydrogen silsesquioxane, XR-1541-006) is spin-coated on Si substrate at 1500 rpm for 60 sec. The designed patterns are exposed with an e-beam lithography system (ELS-7000, Elionix) at an acceleration voltage of 100 kV, current of 500 pA and dose of 7600 μC/cm 2 . The exposed sample is developed in salty developer (KOH 1%, NaCl 4%, DI water 95%) for 60s, and rinsed with DI water for 60s. The Si is etched by ICP (Inductively Coupling Plasma, Oxford plasmalab 100 ICP/DRIE) with mixture of HBr (50 sccm) and O2 (3 sccm) gases at 5 mTorr, CP power of 800 W and RIE power of 150 W. After Si etching, the HSQ mask is removed by soaking the sample in buffered hydrofluoric acid for 5 minutes and then rinsed with DI water. Thermal Nanoimprinting. The master mold is coated with silane as anti-sticking layer. Thermal nanoimprinting process is performed with Obducat NIL-60-SS-UV-Nano-Imprinter at 30 bar and 90°C. The master mold is putting on top of the perovskite film, covered with plastic sheet as protection layer. The imprinting time is 30 min, and then the sample is cooled down to 30°C before demoulding process. The printed sample is manually demoulded from the master mold. The optical bands and quality factor of perovskite metasurfaces are calculated using threedimensional finite-element method (COMSOL). One single unit cell, consisting of a circular hole at the center, is simulated when embedded in a homogeneous background (n = 1.5). Periodic boundary conditions are adopted in both x and y directions and perfectly matched layers (PML) along the z-direction are constructed. The optical bands and the corresponding far-field vector distributions in the momentum space are calculated by eigen-frequency solver by sweeping inplane wavevectors. The angle-resolved photoluminescence (PL) spectra are measured by back focal plane (BFP) spectroscopy. The sample is placed in a cryostat (Janis Research ST-500), cooled by liquid nitrogen and connected to a temperature controller (Scientific Instruments Model 9700). The sample is positioned at the image plane of an inverted optical microscope (Nikon Ti-U) with a long working distance objective (50X, NA 0.55). The pump beam from a continuous-wave laser at l = 405 nm is expanded by a lens before exciting the sample through the 50X objective, giving a pump spot diameter of ~ 30 mm. The PL signal from the sample is collected through the same 50X objective and a long-pass filter, followed by a series of lenses that image the back focal plane of the objective onto the entrance slit of a spectrometer (Andor SR-303i). The slit is 100 mm in width and is aligned with the x axis of the sample, i.e. collecting the emission in the x-z plane. A grating with 150 lines/mm, blazed at 800 nm disperses the light past the slit, resulting in an angleand wavelength-resolved PL map, eventually captured on a 2D EMCCD camera (Andor Newton 971). (2) Laser characterization Photoluminescence of the metasurface is measured by a frequency doubled Ti:Sapphire laser (400 nm, using a BBO crystal) from a regenerative amplifier (repetition rate 1 kHz, pulse width 100 fs, seeded by Mai Tai, Spectra Physics). The pumping laser is focused by a convex lens (with focus length of 3 cm) onto the top surface of the sample and the spot size on the sample is about 50 μm. Emitted light and corresponding fluorescence microscopy image are collected on the backside of the metasuface by a 5X objective lens coupled with a CCD coupled spectrometer (Acton IsoPlane SCT 320) and a camera, respectively. An attenuator and an energy meter are used to tune and measure the pumping density. For laser characterization under different temperatures, the metasurface is mounted inside a Linkam Stage with temperature controller. The temperature is changed by 5 K/min and stabilizes at each target temperature for 5 mins before conducting measurement. In Fig. In Figs. Figure Bound states in the continuum (BIC) correspond to no emission into the far field, which means it is a singularity point of far-field polarization vectors in the momentum space and carries conserved and quantized topological charges as vortex centers. The topological charge (q) carried by BIC (i.e., topological winding number) is defined as ( Where φ(k) is the angle of polarization vector versus the x-axis and C denotes a closed loop around BIC counterclockwisely in the momentum space. q indicates how many rounds the polarization vector winds around the BIC, which must be an integer. 