Surface waves play important roles in many fundamental and applied areas from seismic detection to material characterizations. Supershear surface waves with propagation speeds greater than bulk shear waves have recently been reported, but their properties are not well understood. In this Letter, we describe theoretical and experimental results on supershear surface waves in rubbery materials. We find that supershear surface waves can be supported in viscoelastic materials with no restriction on the shear quality factor. Interestingly, the effect of prestress on the speed of the supershear surface wave is opposite to that of the Rayleigh surface wave. Furthermore, anisotropy of material affects the supershear wave much more strongly than the Rayleigh surface wave. We offer heuristic interpretation as well as theoretical verification of our experimental observations. Our work points to the potential applications of supershear waves for characterizing the bulk mechanical properties of soft solid from the free surface. Surface wave motion in solids is a classical problem in mechanics, acoustics and seismology, and has found broad applications to nondestructive testing (NDT) of materials In this letter, we reveal several underappreciated properties of supershear waves in soft materials via experimental and theoretical investigations. Firstly, we show the supershear surface waves can be supported over a broad frequency range, with no restriction on dissipation of the material. This invalidates the previous notion that supershear surface waves are only supported in highly dissipative materials. We visualize supershear surface waves in three dimensions in transparent rubber using optical coherence elastography. The measured wave profiles are in excellent agreement with our theoretical model. Secondly, we show that the stress on the soft material alters the speed of the supershear surface wave opposite to what is commonly known for Rayleigh surface waves. We account for this apparently surprising result using the acoustoelastic theory, finite-element (FE) simulation, and simple heuristic explanation. Extending this finding, we show how material anisotropy affects supershear surface waves distinctly different from Rayleigh surface waves. In Fig. where R and SS in the sub-and super-scripts indicate the Rayleigh and supershear waves, respectively, J 1 is the Bessel function of the first kind, and H (1) 0 is the Hankel function of the first kind. For large r, H 0 (-kr) → e -ikr r -1/2 ; Equation (1) describes the two propagating waves with wavenumbers, k R and k SS , which are the solutions of a secular equation: where k S = 2πf s ρ/μ is the wavenumber of the bulk shear wave, and F = dF/dk. The two physical solutions are k R = 1.047k S and Here the negative sign in the imaginary coefficient results in an exponential decay of the supershear wave amplitude over r. The phase velocity c of a wave is related to its wavenumber k, via c = 2πf s / Re(k). For pure elastic materials with a real value of k S , the supershear wave is leaky with a complex value of k SS and has c SS = 2.13c T 0 , where c T 0 = [Re( ρ/μ)] -1 is the phase velocity of the bulk shear wave. For general viscoelastic materials, we find that the ratio c SS /c T 0 increases slightly as the shearwave quality factor Q (= Re(μ)/ Im(μ)) decreases; for example, it is 2.18 at Q = 6 and 2.99 at Q = 0. The two terms in Eq. ( In Figs. 1(f) and (g) we plot the experimentally measured surface displacements u R z (r) and u SS z (r). As shown in Fig. We further investigated the effect of viscoelasticity by varying the stimulus frequency. Figure From the measured wavenumbers, the phase velocities of the two waves are computed. The results are shown in Fig. Typical soft materials including rubber has nonlinear elastic properties or hyperelasticity. Both Young's modulus along the direction of strain and shear modulus facing the direction of the strain increase with the magnitude of strain. In these hyperelastic materials, an extensional prestress increases the velocity of waves propagating along the direction of stretch, and compression decreases the wave speed. This general characteristic has been observed and well documented for the Rayleigth surface wave both experimentally and theoretically. However, little is known about the effect of prestress on the supershear surface wave. To describe the supershear wave, we use the acoustoelastic theory in continuum mechanics ). Among several different hyperelastic models, we consider the Mooney-Rivlin model that is widely used for rubbery , where p is the Lagrange multiplier for the incompressibility constraint (or pressure to maintain constant volume). For a small uniaxial stress, The constitutive equation for acoustoelastic waves in the pre-stressed, deformed material can be written with the Eulerian elasticity tensor A 0 defined as , where the subscripts i, j, p, q, α, β represent different coordinates. The infinitesimal elastic wave u in the deformed material coordinates is governed by the incremental dynamic equation where , and C = 2πf s /k. In the absence of prestress (N = 0), α = β = γ = μ, and Eq. ( where c T 0 = μ/ρ is the shear wave speed in the stressfree configuration. Note that the coefficient of the linear ε term for the supershear wave is always negative for Using a custom-built mechanical setup and the OCT system (Fig. To understand the negative sensitivity of c SS to uniaxial extension, we performed FE simulation (Supplemental Material). Figure From the angular interpretation, we expect c SS to be sensitive to material anisotropy. In an orthotropic material with the symmetry orientation aligned with the coordinate system, the shear wave speed is given by Eq. ( This study was supported by grants from National Institutes of Health (P41-EB015903, R01-EY027653, DP1-EB024242). As shown in Fig. where ρ is the density. λ and μ are Lamé constants and λ μ for soft solids studied here. To solve this problem, we introduce φ = ∇ • u 0 and ψe θ = ∇ × u 0 , where e θ denotes the unit vector along θ direction. (S-2) Inserting Eq. (S-2) into Eq. (S-1) we can obtain Eliminating φ and ψ from Eq. (S-3) respectively yields following decoupled equilibrium equations where k L = ω/ (λ + 2μ)/ρ and k S = ω/ μ/ρ. The in-plane components of the Cauchy stress σ, expressed in terms of φ and ψ, are (neglecting the time harmonic terms) where we again neglect the time harmonic terms. Inserting Eq. (S-6) into Eq. (S-5) we thus get the boundary conditions expressed in terms of φ and ψ. To solve Eq. (S-4), here we follow the Miller's work where φ0 and ψ1 are the 0 and 1-order Hankel transformations of φ and ψ, i. where J 0 and J 1 are the Bessel function of the first kind of order 0 and 1, respectively. Similarly, we perform Hankel transformations of Eqs.(S-5) and (S-6) to get and σzz,0 = ap 0 J 1 (ka) k , σzr,1 = 0, (S-10) where σzz,0 and σzr,1 are the 0 and 1-order Hankel transformations of σ zz and σ zr , respectively. Solving Eq.(S-7) with the boundary conditions given by Eqs. (S-9) and (S-10), for Rayleigh surface wave we get φ0 where (S-12) In Eq. (S-11), we have taken e -z √ k 2 -k 2 S for ψ1 to make sure ψ1 → 0 when z → +∞. For supershear surface wave, we should take e z √ k 2 -k 2 S for ψ1 (S-14) The displacement u 0z and u 0r can be obtained by performing inverse Hankel transformations to Eq. (S-14). Here focus on u z , which is measured in our experiments. Accordong to Royston et al. where K 0 is the modified Bessel function of the second kind. The superiority of Eq. (S-16) is that the Cauchy principal value theorem is applicable. There are some comprehensive discussions on how to deal with the contributions from the poles and the branch cuts where F = ∂F/∂k, and k denotes the root of F(k) = 0. For soft materials (λ μ) we considered in this study, k, k S k L . In this case Eq. (S-13) reduce to Taking the two roots of Eq.(S-18) that correspond to the Rayleigh and supershear surface waves, i.e., k R = 1.047k 2 and k SS = (0.4696 -0.1355i)k 2 , we get the Eq. ( (1) 0 (x) to take the place of K 0 (x) (note that K 0 (x) = iπ/2H (1) 0 (ix)). The other root of of Eq.(S-18) has a positive imagery part, which denotes an exponential increase in wave amplitude along the radial direction. This root thus is excluded. Figure Figure 