The detection and analysis of defects in objects having complex shape is difficult using theoretical modeling. In present communication, we report our investigations undertaken towards detection of defects and non-destructive evaluation of low-modulus sample of Poly Methyl Metha Acrylate (PMMA) material using phase measuring deflectometry. Collimated light from He-Ne laser illuminates a sinusoidal grating. The resulting sinusoidal fringe pattern is projected onto the PMMA sample. The light reflected through the sample is recorded using Charge Couple Device (CCD) camera. When the sample was loaded along z-axis, the surface slope of the defective portions varies in an anomalous manner with respect to un-defective portions of the specimen. The prominent location and visualization of defects have been identified using windowed Fourier transform technique (WFT). The 3D phase plots reconstruct the profile of the specimen with presence of defects. The slope of the phase provides the information regarding defects and surface variation of the object. Experimental results conclusively establish the viability of the technique. In recent years, due to technology advancement and interdisciplinary work culture, fabulous improvement has been made in field of non-destructive testing using optical techniques. Non-destructive testing comprises the test methods which are used to examine an object, material or system without impairing its future usefulness. Hence, it has been used for measurement of wide range of parameters in science and engineering. Various techniques have been reported for non-destructive testing. Major among them may be categorized as Optical testing, testing based on X-ray and Gamma ray, Acoustic waves, Electrical and electrostatic field variations, etc. Each of the technique has its area of influence within which it is most useful. Optical based techniques comprise of moiré methods The PMMA material has been investigated widely for various applications. Trivedi et al. proposed the use of Talbot interferometer for real time mapping of slope In this communication, we report our investigations undertaken towards detection of defects and NDE of low modulus triangular shaped specimen of Poly Methyl Metha Acrylate (PMMA) material using deflectometry in conjunction with 4 windowed Fourier fringe analysis. The experimental setup is simple and uses only a single grating. The accurate measurement of slope and detection of defect has been achieved by determining the phase plots of recorded fringe pattern. Only a single fringe pattern is required to extract the phase information and the phase plot. Defect detection has been successfully undertaken. Good agreement between theory and experiment is also observed. Schematic of the experimental arrangement for defect detection using deflectometric set-up has been shown in Fig. The sinusoidal fringe pattern is projected onto a specimen (triangular plate of low modulus PMMA material). Depending on the applied load onto specimen from the back surface, the reflected pattern is distorted. The reflected pattern is captured using CCD camera. The recorded fringe pattern can be described as , we obtain a continuous phase map. Unwrapped phase map has been obtained using the strategy followed by Kemao et al. and is effectively the measure of the slope of the rays in the direction perpendicular to the grating lines. When the test surface is without defects, a characteristic fringe pattern due to the slope of the surface is obtained. However, if there are an area of stress concentration, the slope around those regions varies in non-isocentric fashion, and hence, these areas of defects etc are prominently visualized. Thus, based on the change in the slope pattern, the nature of defects and their effect on the stress field of bent plate can easily be predicted. When a light beam is reflected from the object under study, the beam acquires a phase change, depending on the surface slope. The surface slope varies as the object was stressed by known amount. Low modulus specimen of PMMA material has been used during the experimentation. To analyze the defects, an equilateral triangular plate has been tested under flawless and defective mode. The equilateral-triangle-shaped plate has each side of 40mm and thickness of 2mm. It was mounted using a specially fabricated mechanical mount such that it was bound along the three corners. Artificial defects were created by making holes of approximately 1mm diameter and depth varying from 0.5mm to 1.5mm, at the back surface of the plate. Collimated light from the laser after passing through grating is incident onto the front surface of traingular plate. Under unstressed condition of the traingular plate, the back-reflected light beam remains collimated and parallel lines were observed onto the screen. When the specimen was loaded centrally along the negative z-direction by an amount of 0.3mm using a precision translating device, the slope fringes appeared on the screen. superimposed to obtain the complete spectra of the fringe pattern. In the next step, the fundamental spectrum of the whole fringe pattern's spectrum is extracted. Taking the inverse FT, the phase information of the fringe pattern is retrieved. Undertaking WFT by appropriate filtering scheme and thresholding, the wrapped phase has been determined. To obtain reliable phase map, the field corresponding to the wrapped phase map is scanned and 2 is added or subtracted every time an edge is detected. The phase values so obtained are plotted against the pixel values using MATLAB toolbox. In case of centrally loaded traingular plate bounded along its circumference, as per the thin plate theory, slope pattern is represented by where, wmax denotes the maximum out-of-plane displacement along negative zdirection, a denotes plate radius and (x, y) denote the coordinates of the traingular plate. There is a good agreement between theoretical slope and measured slope. An averaged error of 2.2% was obtained with respect to the theoretical prediction. In conclusion, we have successfully demonstrated the application of windowed Fourier fringe analysis technique for measurement of slope and defect detection of bent plates. Ttriangular shaped PMMA plates have been tested using the Defect detection Page nr. 9 of 10 9 technique. Based on the variation in slope values for regions where defects are located with respect to the flawless regions region, the defects are prominently visualized. Improved accuracy in the measurement of slope and defect detection was obtained using automated fringe analysis technique. f are the spatial carrier frequency in the x and y direction, respectively. They are usually constant. It is assumed that the input fringe pattern