We investigate the sideband spectra of a driven nonlinear mode with its eigenfrequency being modulated at a low frequency (<1 kHz). This additional parametric modulation leads to prominent antiresonance lineshapes in the sideband spectra, which can be controlled through the vibration state of the driven mode. We also establish a direct connection between the antiresonance frequency and the squeezing of thermal fluctuation in the system. Our work not only provides a simple and robust method for squeezing characterization but also opens a new possibility toward sideband applications. Micro-and nanomechanical resonators have been shown to be ultra sensitive for charge, force and mass measurements in the nonlinear regime Recently, there has been rising interest in the sideband response of resonantly driven nonlinear modes In this Letter, we present a so far undescribed sideband response of a nonlinear vibrating membrane resonator using a two-tone measurement. In addition to the drive tone that resonantly excites the system, we also apply an additional probe tone with a very low frequency (<1 kHz). We find that this probe tone modulates the eigenfrequency of the system and leads to a sideband response markedly different from previous studies Specifically, both their amplitudes and lineshapes show strong asymmetries and, most saliently, the sidebands exhibit a typical antiresonance response. We further show that the antiresonance frequency can be used to determine the squeezing parameters of the system, and they are tunable through the control of vibrational states of the driven mode. Such a tunable sideband response offers a new possibility for future device applications. Our results may also give insight into other sideband related phenomena such as the energy transfer via mode coupling in the nonlinear and the chaotic regime The measured device is composed of a ∼ 500 nm thick silicon nitride (Si-N) membrane suspended on a massive silicon frame attached to a piezo ring. The vibration of the freestanding membrane is excited by applying an AC voltage onto the piezo ring at a drive frequency f d close to the eigenfrequency f 0 of the membrane resonator. To detect the vibrations, we fabricate 27 nm thick aluminum structures on the membrane using a standard ebeam lithography technique and measure the inductive voltage across the structures under an external uniform magnetic field, as depicted in Fig. Figure We then sweep the probe tone from 10 to 1000 Hz with a step size of 10 Hz under a fixed drive tone, and the sideband response is plotted in Fig. To model the observed sideband response, we use the following equation of motion: where F, ω 0 = 2πf 0 , ω d = 2πf d , and ω p = 2πf p denote the driving force, the angular frequency of the flexural mode, the drive tone and probe tone, respectively. The probe tone also modulates the eigenfrequency with a strength of a 2 which can be characterized via a DC measurement with the method in the SM Using the standard rotating wave approximation, we can switch from the lab frame into the rotating frame with two new quadratures y and y * . We can approximate the solution by expanding the quadrature y into a main response y 0 and the perturbed response y 1 . The former describes the response at ω d while the latter is responsible for the sidebands. We find that y 0 is governed by the well-known Duffing equation, and the equation of motion for y 1 is ẏ1 = -Γ(1+iδω-2i|y 0 | 2 )y 1 +iΓy 2 0 y * 1 -iΓ cos(ω p t)y 0 , ( with δω = (ω dω 0 )/Γ. Here, the first two terms on the right hand side of the equation describe the vibrations when the resonator deviates from the stable states and the last term represents a force induced by the parametric modulation. By solving this equation, we obtain the sideband amplitudes as well as their phases at different probe frequencies. Further details of the theoretical calculation can be found in the SM [28]. In Fig. From here, we can clearly see that the silent region in experiment corresponds to an antiresonance dip M in the sideband response. In fact, the emergence of a clear antiresonance dip requires ω pk /Γ 1, and in this weak damping limit [36] , we find that f ar can be well approximated by ( This relation suggests that the position of the M point is susceptible to the vibration state of the driven mode, as y 0 is determined by both the drive and the detuning of the drive tone (see SM Figure Further insights can be gained by comparing our results with the sidebands induced by thermal fluctuations where Im indicates the imaginary part of the argument. The emergence of an antiresonance in the sideband spectrum reveals the different character of the drive forces: a deterministic coherent single-frequency force that periodically changes the system parameters (appearing as combined amplitude-frequency modulation here, see SM [28]) destructively interfere with sideband while this effect is absent in the sidebands induced by broadband stochastic noise. Based on this observation, these sidebands can be delineated as "quasi-modes" characterized as eigenstates controlled by the vibration states of the mechanical system in the nonlinear regime. Even though the sidebands induced by parametric modulation is a deterministic one, we can nevertheless relate it with the squeeezing effect of the fluctuations in the system. In the weak damping limit, there is a simple connection between the squeezing parameter φ that measures the transfer of fluctuations between a pair of conjugate variables and the antiresonance frequency in the spectrum: We note that the above relation only applies when the system is in the upper branch. In principle, a similar expression for the lower branch can be derived. However, in experiment, it is difficult to identify an antiresonance structure in sideband spectrum due to its low amplitude. (see SM Finally, we wish to comment on the robustness and simplicity of our method. In the previously reported method In conclusion, we measured the sideband response of a free-standing Si-N membrane using a two-tone measurement in its nonlinear regime with the drive frequency much larger than that of the probe tone. We observed a typical antiresonance lineshapes in the sideband spectra. The amplitude and the phase of these sidebands can be well described by a Duffing equation with its eigenfrequency being parametrically modulated at the probe-tone frequency. The antiresonance results from a destructive interference between the probe tone and the resulting sideband. We further demonstrate that the antiresonance can be controlled by the vibrational state of the driven mode, thus providing a new possibility for future application of sidebands. For example, these sidebands can act as "quasi-modes" and couple with other vibrational modes for energy reshuffling in a nonlinear system. Finally, we provide a robust and simple method to characterize the squeezing effect even for resonators with a moderate Q, evidenced by the excellent agreement between the squeezing parameter extracted with the antiresonance frequency and those with the sideband-area method. The first order correction ( 1 ) describes the sideband motion arising from vibrations around stable states Substituting Eq.(S5) into Eq. (S4), we get The above equations determines the complex amplitudes From these expression, we can extract both the phase and the amplitude of the sideband vibrations. We note that if one takes into account a phase delay between the drive and probe tone i.e. cos(ω p t + ψ), it would generate a different phase shift between the blue and red sidebands, which follows To find out the antiresonance frequency position ω ar , one can solve for the frequency that sets the first derivative of the vibration amplitude zero. However, this approach is not easy as it requires solving a fifth order polynomial equations. Alternatively, we can define a contrast function g(ω p ) that gives the magnitude ratio at ±ω p , and ω ar can be approximated by the solution that satisfy dg(ω p )/dω p = 0. With this approach, we find ω ar as and the dip power is P ar = |A + (ω ar )|. We note that the contrast function approach is accurate when the dip is very sharp. Roughly speaking, this corresponds to the weak damping limit (i.e., ω pk /Γ 1). To connect ω ar to the squeezing parameter φ, we note that in weak damping limit, the squeezing parameter can be calculated through Since |y 0 | 2δω is positive (negative) for the upper (lower) branch, we have Here, the ± corresponds to the high and low amplitude state of the system, respectively. The Si-N membranes are fabricated from a 0.5 mm thick commercial (100) silicon wafer. Both sides of the silicon substrate are coated with ∼ 500 nm thick low-pressure chemical vapor deposited (LPCVD) Si-N. The membrane is fabricated on the front layer. The backside layer serves as an etch mask. Laser ablation is used to open the etch mask with a typical size of 1.5 × 1.5 mm 2 . Using anisotropic etching in aqueous potassium hydroxide (KOH), a hole is etched through the openings of the mask. After the KOH solution reaches the topside layer, a membrane is formed, supported by a massive silicon frame. In the present work, the membrane is ∼ 500 nm thick and 542 × 524 μm 2 in lateral size. The chip with about 1 × 1 cm 2 lateral size carrying the membrane is glued to a piezo ring of 20 mm diameter and 5 mm thickness using a two-component adhesive . In this work, we use the magnetic induction method to characterize the amplitude of the membrane. As depicted in both Fig. where A is the amplitude, B = 0.45T , and V out is the voltage before the differential amplifier. As an example, the noise-driven spectrum response of the (1,1) mode is shown in Fig. We first summarize the mode parameters used in our experiments and the mechanical properties of the membrane characterized. The Si-N membrane has a lateral size of 524 μm × 545 μm and its thickness is ∼500 nm. For the (1,1) mode, the eigenfrequency f 0 is around 250.8 kHz; slight shifts may occur due to the drift in the environmental temperature Figure According to the equation of motion for an driven linear resonator: The eigenfrequency f 0 = ω 0 /2π is determined by the effective stiffness of the resonator, k eff = mω 0 2 . The change of f 0 at various V DC indicates that k eff can be controlled by an additionally applied voltage on the drive system. In our two-tone measurement, when a low-frequency probe tone ω p is introduced, k eff oscillates with the low-frequency excitation as: Here we neglect higher orders in cos(ω p t), since the frequency modulation in our experiment is much smaller than the eigenmode frequency. The effective stiffness of the vibrating mechanical system can be approximated as: Thus, we can obtained the stiffness modulation parameter a 2 = 2ω 0 • V p • ∆ω, here ∆ω = 2π∆f . The origin of the stiffness tuning is due to the transverse component of the Rayleigh wave of the piezo actuator, which modulates the tensile stress of the membrane and hence the ω 0 . However, the transverse Rayleigh wave is known to have a π/2 delay from the longitudinal excitation cos(ω p t) we send into the piezo We showed additional experimental results of the spectral response of sidebands under different drive frequency f d and driving strength V exc . By comparing Fig. The dependence between the drive and the antiresonance can be better explored using Eq.(S10). Figure We wish to make two comments before ending this section. First, depending on whether the drive slowly sweeps from a negative detuning to f d or directly jump to f d , the resonator could be at different stable states and hence different sideband response. As a demonstration, Fig. Second, we emphasise that if f d is set to far-off-resonance, only the two signals f d and f p are present with no evidence of any other tones. Spectral purity is crucial to the accuracy of the measurement. The sideband response in the frequency domain is also evidenced by its time-domain power spectrum with an amplitude frequency modulation [S6, S7], shown in Fig. The amplitude modulation can be better resolved using an imaging white light interferometer (IWLI). Detailed setup information is presented in our previous publications [S1, S3, S5, S8, S9]. The membrane resonator is first driven into a stable nonlinear vibration state of the (1,1) mode with f d = 985 kHz and V exc = 1 V. The additional probe tone of V p = 0.5V is added into the piezo actuator with the method described in Fig. The sideband responses described above are consistent with those reported in Ref. 