The spatial modulation of the Fermi velocity for gapless Dirac electrons in quantum materials is mathematically equivalent to the problem of massless fermions on a certain class of curved spacetime manifolds. We study null geodesic lensing through these manifolds, which are dominated by curvature singularities, such as nematic singularity walls (where the Dirac cone flattens along one direction). Null geodesics lens across these walls, but do so by perfectly collimating to a local transit angle. Nevertheless, nematic walls can trap null geodesics into stable or metastable orbits characterized by repeated transits. We speculate about the role of induced one-dimensionality for such bound orbits in 2D dirty d-wave superconductivity. 1 Introduction Many of the most important quantum materials discovered in the past several decades feature electrons, confined to two spatial dimensions, with effective ultrarelativistic band structures. Massless 2D Dirac electrons arise as quasiparticles in the d-wave cuprates Recently, the focus has begun to shift from discovering Dirac materials to precisely manipulating them. In twisted bilayer graphene, for example, the moiré potential flattens the Dirac cones near the magic angle, facilitating Mott insulating and superconducting phases While it is possible to deform the velocity in normal Dirac materials like graphene using strain Figure Random quenched gravity arises when the Dirac velocity modulation occurs due to disorder ("quenched gravitational disorder," QGD). Nanometer-scale inhomogeneity observed by tunneling into BSCCO Motivated by the prospects for inducing gravitational effects in 2D Dirac materials, and by the numerical observation of robust quantum criticality induced by QGD To be precise, we consider only artificial gravitational potentials, i.e. perturbations that mimic gravity by coupling to the stress tensor, but for Dirac electrons propagating through physically flat spacetime. Technically, this translates into a special temporal flatness condition, which simplifies the metric and the analysis of null geodesics. Temporal flatness provides a restriction on the types of spacetime geometries that can be realized with emergent Dirac-type Hamiltonians existing in a physically flat spacetime. We emphasize that many of the famous spacetime metrics of general relativity (e.g. the Schwarzschild metric) do not satisfy temporal flatness. This also means that there is a preferred coordinate system that measures physical Euclidean distances in the plane; geodesic distances are "experienced" by the Dirac carriers, but would not be easily extracted from an experiment. Examples of the static gravity studied here include nematic deformations of the Dirac cone, as can arise from spatial inhomogeneity in the pairing potential of a d-wave SC, or isotropic flattening of the Majorana cone due to impurities at the surface of a topological SC In the gravitational language, curvature singularities arise whenever one or both components of the Dirac carrier velocity vanish. We study two different types of singular loci. Nematic singularities occur when only one component of the Dirac velocity passes through We find that there are strong qualitative differences between the geodesics corresponding to nematic and isotropic QGD, as shown in Fig. Although the null geodesics do not "stick" to singular nematic contours, there is a horizon effect due to the latter. In particular, nematic singularity walls can produce stable and metastable gravitationally bound orbits, wherein null geodesics repeatedly lens back and forth across the wall (at the local geodesic collimation angle). This is illustrated for a "nematic circular billiard" spacetime shown in Fig. Our manuscript is organized as follows. Sec. 2 introduces the 2D Dirac Hamiltonian for artificial quenched gravity. Mapping this to the covariant formulation of massless fermions on curved spacetime, we extract an associated metric. We discuss symmetries and describe the nature of curvature singularities that can arise in this spacetime. In Sec. 3, we develop the geodesic equation and reformulate it several times to gain insight into the geometric properties of geodesics, especially in the vicinity of curvature singularities. The most useful formulation employs the projection of the tangent vector onto the local dreibein. Sec. 4 introduces the purely isotropic and purely nematic submodels, which allow separate study of nematic and isotropic Dirac cone modulation. In Sec. 5 we present an array of simple, highly-symmetric but singular spacetime geometries that admit analytical solutions and give a window into properties of the null geodesic interactions with singularities. Finally, Sec. 6 revisits the spacetime geometries of Sec. 5 from a fully quantum perspective to provide some intuition for the ways in which geodesics can approximate the true quantum picture. Sec. 7 summarizes our results and discusses future directions. Many supporting details and calculations are relegated to appendices. Appendix A summarizes various useful reformulations of the geodesic equation. Appendix B explains that the geodesic dynamics do not depend qualitatively on the length scale of a QGD potential, and Appendix C introduces two other submodels that aid connection with previous work Our focus is a 2+1-dimensional massless Dirac model in the presence of artificial quenched gravity: perturbations that mimic gravity by coupling to the spatial-spatial components of the stress tensor, and which preserve time-reversal symmetry. These flatten, steepen, or rotate the components of the Dirac velocity. Despite the spatial modulation of the Dirac cone, we assume that the Dirac electrons propagate through physically flat spacetime; in practice, this means that we exclude transport across a curved 2D sample (such as a corrugated graphene sheet). As explained in the Introduction 1, this is hardly a restriction in the context of 2D Dirac materials. As an example, for Dirac or Majorana quasiparticles that arise at the boundary of 3D topological or in 2D d-wave superconductors, inhomogeneity due to charged impurities or modulation of the pairing gap can both manifest as quenched gravitational coupling to the stress tensor Our model is defined by the Hamiltonian where x = {x, y} are Cartesian coordinates that measure physical Euclidean distances in the sample plane, ψ = ψ σ is a two-component spinor, σ1,2 are Pauli matrices, and the doubledirected derivative is defined by (f The functions {v b a (x)} couple to the spatial components of the Dirac-electron stress tensor T a b . In the unperturbed limit, we can take {v We will find it useful to define the "disorder vectors": which will let us write the action of our fermion theory as where σ = [σ 1 , σ2 ] T . In going from Eq. (3a) to Eq. (3b), we integrate by parts to remove the double-directed derivative in Eq. (3a), which we see gives rise to a spatially-dependent imaginary vector potential in the Lagrangian. Hermiticity requires that such terms exist to balance the spatially modulated Dirac velocity; preserving Hermiticity is crucial, since non-Hermitian versions of the spatial stress tensor arise instead for reparameterization ghosts in 2+0-D T , which allows us write the Hamiltonian as In momentum space, the Dirac cone is spanned by the vectors {u j }. We pursue a gravitational analogy to shed light on the Dirac Hamiltonian in Eq. ( where x = {t, x, y}, μ ∈ {0, 1, 2} is a coordinate index, A, B, C ∈ {0, 1, 2} are local Lorentz indices, the 2×2 Dirac matrices satisfy the Clifford algebra γA γB + γB γA = -2η AB 1, is the flat Minkowski metric, g μν is the spacetime metric and g is its determinant. Further, E μ A is the dreibein, central to the tetrad (here: "triad") formalism, defined by the relation Finally, ŜBC generates local Lorentz transformations on the spinor index of ψ, and ω BC μ is the spin connection, defined by Our goal is to identify a spacetime metric [g μν (x)] such that Eqs. (3b) and ( With this choice, the Cartesian coordinates x in Eqs. (3b) and (5) measure physical Euclidean distances in the plane. Temporal flatness allows the identification of the disorder potentials directly in terms of the dreibein, We may then construct the metric in terms of v b a and E 0 0 via Eq. ( To determine E 0 0 , we take the determinant of the metric and again invoke temporal flatness to compute We thus find that Eq. ( The result in Eq. (11c) defines the quenched gravitational metric. This metric is quite general, although it has three important structural properties that constrain the geometry: (1) It is everywhere block-diagonal in time and space [a consequence of time-reversal symmetry for static potentials {v j (x)}]. Our theory can thus be studied in two different settings. On one hand, it is an effective low-energy Dirac theory due to perturbations that couple to spatial-spatial stress tensor components in a condensed matter system. On the other hand, we can study it as a theory of free massless fermions on a corresponding curved spacetime. The metric in Eq. (11c) becomes ill-defined at points where the cross-product v 1 ×v 2 vanishes. This condition corresponds to a failure of the temporal flatness condition [Eq. where N v b a , ∂v d c is a (complicated) homogeneous quadratic polynomial in spatial derivatives of the disorder-vector components. While it is possible for the numerator to vanish so as to give finite curvature at a point where v 1 × v 2 = 0, we will generically find curvature singularities along the sets defined by this condition. We can characterize singularities in terms of Dirac cone geometry: at a point where v 1 × v 2 = 0, we have for some v ≡ [v 1 , v 2 ] T and an angle θ * = arctan(|v 2 |/|v 1 |). In the notation of Eq. ( where S.C. is the spin connection term. At the singularity, the energy only depends on the derivative of the field in the direction of θ * : there is a flat band in the perpendicular direction, forming a "Dirac canyon." A singularity can thus be partially characterized in terms of the angle θ * and the vector v, as defined above. At a singularity point, we have a flattening of at least one axis of the Dirac cone, in the direction perpendicular to θ * . We see that there are two types of possible curvature singularities: nematic singularities correspond to nonzero v [Eq. We can gain more insight with some topological reasoning. The quantity v 1 × v 2 can vary continuously with x, taking on both negative and positive values. Thus, the regular singularities will generally form 1-manifolds that act as domain walls, partitioning the plane into regions of v 1 × v 2 > 0 and v 1 × v 2 < 0. Even at a singular point |v| ≥ 0, and so isotropic singularities will generally arise only at isolated points. We will see in later sections that both flavors of singularity strongly impact geodesic behavior. Geodesics that collide with an isotropic singularity are arrested and remain captured for the rest of time. These isotropic singularities also turn out to exert a strong pull on nearby geodesics. Conversely, geodesics that collide with a nematic singularity pass through in finite time; they are all driven to pass through the singularity in the direction θ * and at the speed |v|, a singularity-induced geodesic collimation effect. We stress that, unintuitively, this fixing of both the geodesics' direction and speed does not uniquely define the geodesic. Before moving on to a study of the spacetime manifolds defined by the metric in Eq. (11c), we pause to consider the properties of the quantum theory [Eq. (3b)] under a local pseudospin rotation. We claim that the dynamics of the theory are invariant under a local U (1) pseudospin symmetry. Specifically, let the unitary transformation encode the in plane rotation v → R(v) via the canonical SU(2) → SO(3) double cover. That is, where the rotation operator R is given by The unitary fermion field transformation ψ → Uψ sends the action [Eq. (3b)] to While the action is not invariant, the new theory is not qualitatively different from the old. The disorder vectors have been rotated through the same angle and their relative geometry is preserved. Since the metric for the corresponding spacetime manifold [Eq. ( The quantum dynamics are also invariant under the transformation. To see this, note that the quantum states of the original theory can be recovered from knowledge of the quantum states of the pseudospin-rotated theory by enacting the inverse pseudospin rotation [U † (x)] on the eigenstates. The same can be said of the time-dependent wave function. Since the timedependent wave functions are related by a unitary pseudospin rotation, the corresponding time-dependent density functions are identical. The main focus of this paper is the study of the geodesics on the manifolds defined by the quenched gravitational metric in Eq. (11c). In this section, we introduce the geodesic equation and reformulate it into a more manageable form that allows an analytical understanding of the effects of curvature singularities, and also facilitates efficient numerical evaluation. The geodesic equation is given by the second order ODE [9] where s is an affine parameter for the curve and {Γ μ αβ } are the Christoffel symbols derived from the metric [Eq. (11c)]. In our case, these take the form The Christoffel symbols {Γ ρ μν } left undefined above are complicated functions of v 1,2 and derivatives thereof. When parameterized by proper time (or an affine parameter), solutions of the geodesic equation [Eq. ( -1 ("timelike geodesics"), 0 ("null geodesics"), +1 ("spacelike geodesics"). ( Null geodesics correspond to the trajectories followed by massless particles (e.g., light in general relativity). Since we are interested in massless Dirac particles, we will focus on this case. The structure of the quenched spacetime in Eq. (11c) yields a general first integral for the time coordinate along a geodesic. Inserting Eq. (20a) into the geodesic Eq. ( This is integrable and the first integral for time follows: Above, E/m is the constant of integration, which we identify as the energy of the geodesic according to an observer at rest at the same location. To see this, note that the standard expression for this is E/m = -g 00 [x(s)](dt/ds). The fact that energy is conserved along a generic geodesic is due to the fact that the "at rest" three-vector t ≡ [1, 0, 0] T gives a global timelike Killing field for the quenched gravitational manifold. For null geodesics, the constant E/m formally diverges, but it can be scaled arbitrarily without affecting the geodesic. In light of Eq. ( which is the gravitational time-dilation factor. Since dt/ds = γ[x(s)] > 0 [setting E/m = 1 in Eq. ( so that tangent vectors of geodesics with respect to the global time coordinate are just spatially-dependent dilations of the original tangent vectors with respect to the affine parameter. The geodesic equation in terms of the global time coordinate is [with ẋj ≡ dx j /dt] These equations offer some interesting interpretations. Firstly, the Γ 00 terms appear as potentials in what is effectively a Hamiltonian dynamics problem with many friction-like dissipative terms. We note that the global time reparametrization introduces several new terms combining with the Christoffel symbols, adding new friction-like terms to the geodesic equation, corresponding to the drag-like effects of time-dilation. These dissipative terms play a key role in the geodesic capture by isotropic curvature singularities, which would otherwise be forbidden by conservation of energy. We discuss this again in Sec. 4.1. Introducing notation for the speed [σ ≡ | ẋ|] and velocity angle [θ(t) ≡ arctan[ ẏ(t)/ ẋ(t)]], we can use Eq. ( where again, θ Solving instead for the squared-speed of the geodesic, we find In the flat-space limit, these reduce to the familiar equations of special relativity: E 2 (1-σ 2 ) = m 2 for a timelike geodesic. Note also that if m = 0, then E plays no role, reflecting that fact that null geodesics are unaffected by a scaling of the affine parameter. Eq. ( While our focus is on null geodesics, we see that timelike and spacelike geodesics have speed-position relations derived from those of null geodesics by a simple multiplicative factor. From Eq. ( Equation ( While Eq. ( where φ ≡ [cos φ, sin φ] T is an auxiliary unit vector that rotates along the geodesic trajectory. In the zero-disorder limit, φ reduces to the velocity unit vector θ. The angle φ expresses the alignment of the tangent vector relative to the spatial components of the dreibein triad. We note that the implementation of the null geodesic constraint reduces our two second-order geodesic equations [Eqs. From Eq. (30a)-(30c), we can now better understand geometric features displayed by geodesics in the vicinity of a nematic curvature singularity, what we have been calling geodesic collimation. As discussed in Secs. 2.3 and 3.4, all geodesics impinging on a nematic singularity are driven to pass through at the direction defined by the angle θ * and at the speed |v|. This is depicted for a simple circular geometry in Fig. We have seen that at a singularity, the vectors v 1 and v 2 are parallel, and can be parametrized as in Eq. Via Eqs. ( A geodesic on a Riemannian differentiable manifold is uniquely specified if its position and velocity (tangent vector) at a point are given. Since geodesic collimation at a nematic curvature singularity dictates the velocity of a geodesic at a specific singular point, it would appear that only a single geodesic may pass through each nematic singular point. This turns out not to be the case. A continuum of distinct geodesics may pass through the same singular point at the same time, coinciding in both position and velocity, without contradiction, as shown in Fig. To see how geodesic collimation avoids uniquely specifying the geodesics, we linearize Eqs. (30a)-(30c) about a singular point to first order in t. This linearization requires the use of a convective derivative; we evaluate potentials along the geodesic and take a total derivative with respect to t. We let v and θ * correspond to the singularity as defined by Eq. ( We also expand the unit vector φ about a singularity with collimation angle θ: Plugging these expansions into Eq. (30c), we obtain where Carrying out the cross products, we find that v × D = 0 and that Eq. (30c) simply reduces to The t → 0 limit leaves φ(0) completely undetermined. The fact that φ(0) is left undetermined at the singularity opens up the possibility that distinct geodesics can share an instantaneous position and velocity. To see that this actually happens, we construct explicit examples from an exactly solvable model-this is done in Sec. 5, but the results are plotted in Fig. The form of the geodesic equation in Eqs. (30a)-(30c) provides such a simplification that it is worth checking how this approach fares for time-dependent gravitational potentials. We surprisingly find that this leaves the geodesic equations are almost unaltered. With v j → v j [t, x(t)], we still have ẋj (t) = φ • v j . The equation for φ is slightly modified, We see that the time-dependent generalization of the geodesic equation is relatively simple as well, including only a single correction term with a quadratic φ dependence. Further, this form makes it apparent that the singularity-collimation effect survives to the time-dependent generalization. At a singular point, we still have strong driving of φ to v. While our focus in this paper is on quenched (static) potentials, this result applies generally to any timedependent gravitational spacetime expressible in the from given by Eq. (11c), and could have potentially useful applications in future work. We will revisit this in our concluding discussion Sec. 7. In order to qualitatively differentiate the effects of isotropic and nematic fluctuations on the geodesics, we identify two subclasses of quenched gravitation that we will study alongside the general metric in Eq. (11c). The pure isotropic model will be defined by where v D , v N are the diagonal and off-diagonal potentials, respectively. This model has been designed so that v 1 • v 2 = 0 and |v 1 | = |v 2 | at every point; it encodes isotropic fluctuations and pseudospin rotations, but does not allow for nematic compression of the Dirac cone. In particular, there will be no nematic singularities-all singular points will host a fully flat local Dirac cone. In light of the pseudospin invariance of the theory, the dynamics of this model are fully determined by the related model with v j = v(x)ê j , where êj is a coordinate unit vector and v(x Singularities occur only at points where {v D = -1, v N = 0}, as depicted in Fig. In the case of the isotropic model, we find a dramatically simpler form of the metric and Christoffel symbols, From Eq. ( With respect to the affine parameter s, these equations represent a non-relativistic classical-Hamiltonian system with the effective potential Conservation of energy for the Hamiltonian system takes the form 1 2 Above, E determines both the Hamiltonian energy of the classical system and the length of the spacetime interval: A null geodesic is a trajectory with E = 0. In this picture, the factor γ = 1/v 2 (x) [Eq. The analogue of Eqs. (30a)-(30c) for the isotropic model is also much simpler, In this case, we see that φ simply gives the velocity direction of the geodesic, and v(x) is the speed. The velocity vector rotates when it is not aligned with the gradient of v(x). Finally, in the case of the isotropic model the Ricci scalar curvature is simple enough to state: The fully quantum-mechanical formulation of the pure isotropic model can be re-written so that its time-dependent wave function is determined by the solution of an auxiliary Hermetian differential equation. To see this, note that pseudospin invariance asserts that the dynamics of the general isotropic model can be studied by the action from which we can extract the Schrödinger equation. We can deal with the spin connection terms [the second line in Eq. ( Dividing by v(x), we see the energy eigenstates are determined by the "spatially-random energy" Dirac equation The pure nematic model will be defined by where v D , v N are the diagonal and non-diagonal potentials, respectively. This model has been designed to encode nematic fluctuations, but does not allow for isotropic compression of the Dirac lightcone. In particular, there can be no isotropic singularities. We note that so that the curvature singularities fall along the unit circle in {v D , v N }-space, as depicted in Fig. We see that for the nematic model, there is an angular dependence of σ and the collimation angle of a singularity is closely tied to the geometry of the unit circle in {v D , v N }-space. Unlike the pure isotropic model, the pure nematic model neither yields a significantly simplified form of the geodesic equation nor a partial solution to the quantum problem analogous to Eq. (50). It is related to the T T deformation of 2D quantum field theories In this section we present several "toy models" of quenched gravitation, that is, highly symmetric realizations of the velocity potentials v 1,2 (x) in Eq. (11c) that allow (full or partial) analytical solution to the geodesic equation. We have several motivations here. Firstly, we observe in numerical solutions that geodesics are often captured by isotropic singularities or drawn into meta-stable gravitationally bound orbits along nematic singularity walls. We would like to understand these phenomena through the lens of some exactly solvable models. In particular, we want closed form solutions that shed light on the nature of bound state orbits and on the asymptotic approach to a singular point. Further, we can use analytical solutions to benchmark our numerical solver. We observe in numerical results that isotropic singularities tend to be highly attractive, and that geodesics can be captured by these. One may ask if this is an artifact of the numerical solver or if the geodesics truly asymptote to the singularities. Here we study a family of integrable examples of the purely isotropic model to see how the geodesics approach such a singularity. We will consider the pure isotropic model with v(r) = r α for α > 0 (in the notation of Sec. 4.1). Adapting to polar coordinates (r, θ) in the plane, one finds that the geodesic equations read ṙ(t) = r α cos φ(t) -θ(t) , (53a) θ(t) = r α-1 sin φ(t) -θ(t) , (53b) φ(t) = αr α-1 sin φ(t) -θ(t) . (53c) We stress that here θ denotes the positional angle in the plane, not the orientation of the tangent (velocity) vector, as employed elsewhere in this paper. The Eqs. (53) are easy to solve; integrating gives φ(t) = αθ(t) + c 0 for some initial-value constant c 0 . In the marginal α = 1 case (see below), the null geodesics are given by r(t) = r 0 e cos(c 0 )t (54a) These geodesics rotate with a constant angular velocity and they either decay towards the origin or explode outwards exponentially. Geodesics that start out heading towards the singularity are always captured and those that start out heading away always escape. This is depicted in Fig. For a generic potential that can be Taylor-expanded in r about an isotropic singularity, the α = 1 case considered above captures the lowest-order term in the expansion. This result provides intuition that a geodesic that enters a sufficiently small neighborhood of an isotropic singularity heading towards it will be asymptotically captured. We can also treat the general case. For α = 1, define the function β(t) ≡ φ(t) -θ(t) = (α -1)θ(t) + c 0 . With this, the geodesic equations then have a first integral of the form We can see from this formula that for α > 1, all geodesics with sin β 0 = 0 are bound for these manifolds. This allows to solve for β(t) and r(t): where c 1 is a constant determined by the t → 0 limit. We see from Eq. (56) that r(t) approaches zero in an α-dependent power law for α > 1, and that the asymptotic angle of approach to the singularity is only dependent on θ 0 , φ 0 . This is depicted in Fig. where l = r 2 (dθ/ds) is the angular momentum. For α < 1, the effective radial potential diverges to +∞ as r → 0, and no trajectories cross the singularity. For α > 1, the effective potential diverges to -∞, and all trajectories cross the singularity. This all agrees with the closed form solution for null geodesics, Eqs. (56a) and (56b). While Eq. (57) implies that the kinetic term diverges when a geodesic crosses a singularity, this is only with respect to the affine parametrization; time dilation effects overwhelm that divergence and when parameterized in terms of global coordinate time t, the geodesics slow and asymptote to the singularity. The case α = 1 is marginal, and only trajectories with l 2 > 1 are blocked from the singularity by the centrifugal barrier. We can see how this works from the solution in Eq. (54). Naively calculating l 2 from these would give a non-constant angular momentum, because these solutions are given in terms of the global coordinate time. Re-expressing Eq. (54) in terms of the affine parametrization, we have We see that l 2 = sin(c 0 ) 2 ≤ 1, so that in this case, none of our geodesics are centrifugally prevented from crossing the singularity. As a result, the solution in Eq. ( In this section, we present a class of 2D toy models that is solvable due to a "factorization" into independent 1D structures. It provides a class of example manifolds on which both nematic and isotropic singularities attract geodesics; all geodesics asymptote towards nematic singularity walls, and run along these walls until finally being captured by an isotropic singularity. We are interested in the class of models with v 1 • v 2 = 0 and ∂ 2 |v 1 | = ∂ 1 |v 2 | = 0 everywhere. In light of the pseudospin invariance of the geodesic dynamics, we may reduce to the model defined by the disorder vectors v 1 = v 1 1 (x)ê 1 and v 2 = v 2 2 (y)ê 2 . We then have y), so that singularities fall along the vertical and horizontal lines defined by the zeros of {v 1 1 , v 2 2 }. Let {x j } and {y j } denote the zeros of v 1 1 and v 2 2 , respectively; we note that they partition the plane into rectangular boxes, B ij = (x i , x i+1 ) × (y j , y j+1 ) (see Fig. We solve for the geodesic dynamics. In this setting, the geodesic equations (30a)-(30c)] reduce to That φ is constant along all geodesics allows the geodesics to be written in closed form. We define the functions The mapping (x, y) ↔ (F i (x), G j (y)) provides a diffeomorphism between the box B ij and the which we see implies that geodesics never escape the B ij regions that they originate in; they asymptotically approach the isotropic singularities in the corners of the B ij regions, riding along the nematic singularity walls. We plot an example in Fig. We next consider a model with a dreibein wall. The goal is to understand gravitationally bound orbits of geodesics that cross a nematic singularity wall many times, as observed often in numerical solutions (e.g., Fig. (62a) which admit a general first integral of the form We note that along a trajectory we must have |m[x(t)]| < |m 0 / sin φ 0 |. This condition will provide a very simple way to understand and compute trapping horizons for gravitationally bound orbits. In particular, we can see that for unbounded m(x), all geodesic trajectories with sin φ 0 = 0 are bound. We may use Eq. ( We can extract the behavior of null geodesics near a trapping horizon by linearizing Eq. ( where t * is a shifted time coordinate defined so that the impact with the horizon occurs at t * = 0. Importantly, we see that the trapping horizon is not an asymptote, but a turning point that sends the geodesic back the other way in finite time. This gives an example by which we can understand gravitational bound-state orbits of geodesics along singularity walls. We consider the case of a linear dreibein wall, with m(x) = x. In this case, we can directly integrate Eq. ( All geodesics (with sin φ 0 = 0) are bound states, oscillating back and forth across the singularity wall while drifting along it, as shown in Fig. We also consider the case m(x) = tanh(x). This model still has a nematic singularity wall along the y-axis, but since m(x) is bounded, not all trajectories will be bound states. In fact, the condition for a bound-state null trajectory is where θ 0 is the initial launch angle of the geodesic, initially located at x 0 . We see that the initial launch angle and initial distance from the singularity wall together determine if a geodesic is asymptotically bound or free. We plot geodesic trajectories in Fig. Again, these toy model solutions add perspective to the results of numerical simulation. They give an analytical understanding of the ability of nematic singularity walls to trap geodesics into oscillatory, gravitationally bound orbits. We expect that the linear profile represents the lowest-order approximation to the curvature profile in the vicinity of a generic nematic singularity wall. These models are designed so that the collimation angle of the geodesics is orthogonal to the singularity manifold at all points, and we see that these orbits are fully stable. The previous section on dreibein wall geometries shows that nematic singularity walls can host states of permanently bound geodesics. An interesting question is whether this is a feature unique to infinite singular walls. In this section, we construct a class of geometries hosting gravitationally bound geodesics along a finite, closed contour. Our model will be a rotationally symmetric version of the purely nematic model defined by Eqs. (51a) and (51b), with Here θ denotes the positional polar angle in the plane, not the orientation of the tangent (velocity) vector, as employed elsewhere in this paper. The metric [Eq. (11c)], converted to polar spacetime coordinates (t, r, θ), takes the form which becomes singular at ρ(r) = 1. The metric is invariant under rotations θ → θ + θ 0 ; the angular θ-direction is flattened along each radial contour with ρ(r) = 1, corresponding to a nematic curvature singularity. The Ricci scalar curvature is given by where ρ (r) = dρ/dr. Converting the geodesic equations (30a)-(30c) to polar coordinates, we find Defining β ≡ θ -φ, as before, these equations are separable. The orbit equation relating r to β can be directly integrated, yielding For the case ρ(r) = r, which hosts a singularity wall at r * = 1, the orbit equation becomes This is a conic section orbit in the (r, β) plane with semilatus rectum α = 1 and eccentricity The condition for a bound orbit is e < 1. For the class of power-law models, ρ(r) = r α , Eq. (72) implies that showing that geodesics with sin β 0 = 0 are forbidden from reaching the origin by a centrifugal barrier and that for α > 1, these geodesics are also bounded. This class of models show that closed, finite singular manifolds can host permanent bound states. 6 Quantum treatments of toy models Our work's focus is the geometry of geodesics as a route towards understanding the semiclassical effects of QGD on 2D Dirac fermions. However, it is important to raise the question of just what effects the geodesic flow field of the underlying manifold have on the fully quantum solution to the QGD problem. Some general statements can be made: individual spinor components of the solution of the curved-space Dirac equation are themselves also solutions to a second-order wave equation on the same manifold. (This is the curved-space analog of "squaring" a Dirac equation to a Kline-Gordon equation.) As mentioned in the Introduction, it is well known that the null geodesics of the underlying manifold constitute the bicharacteristics for both the curved-space Dirac equation and the associated wave equations. In the theory of curved space wave equations, discontinuities and shock fronts propagate along bicharacteristics and a study of bicharacteristics is generally equated to a "geometric optics" approximation to the wave equation In this section, we revisit the "toy models" introduced in Sec. 5 from the fully quantum picture. We present results on exact energy states in these models that are generally in harmony with the geodesic picture from Sec. 5. Since we expect the geodesics to relate to quantum dynamics, which for the most part we are unable to treat analytically, direct comparison of the two pictures is difficult. However, in two exceptions -the "isotropic power law model" in the special case α = 2 and the "xy-factored orthogonal model" -we can get analytical quantum dynamics results and find strong agreement with the geodesic picture. We discuss these qualitative similarities in our concluding remarks in Sec. We first look at the quantum mechanics of the isotropic power-law model in Sec. 5.1. We have seen [Eq. ( For radially symmetric v(r), we introduce the angular momentum eigenstates: ψl,E (r, θ) = e ilθ 1 0 0 e iθ ψl,E (r). The surprisingly elegant solutions to the time-independent Schrödinger equation for the isotropic power-law model are then given by [see Appendix. D.1]: where E, l are energy and angular momentum quantum numbers, J m denotes a Bessel function of first kind of order m, with We've also introduced the notation We note that the above solution breaks down in the α → 1 limit, where we instead find non-normalizable power-law solutions to the Dirac equation. For α > 1, the wavefunctions [Eq. ( It is interesting that while all geodesics for these models (α > 1) are bound [Eq. ( We revisit the "xy-factored orthogonal model" from Sec. (5.2) from the quantum perspective. The time-dependent curved-space Dirac equation reads We can make progress by using the functions F j , G j defined in Eqs. (60a,60b) and the same "prefactor trick" that works to handle the spin connection in the purely isotropic model [see the discussion above Eq. ( and the variables ξ = F j (x), υ = G j (y), we can see that We can use this to write the time-dependent wavefunction in terms of its flat space analogue. Recall [Sec. 5.2] that {x i }, {y j } are the zeros of v 1 1 (x) and v 2 2 (y), respectively, and that B ij = (x i , x i+1 ) × (y j , y j+1 ). Let ψ 0 (x, y) be the initial wavefunction. For each i, j, we define for all (ξ, υ) ∈ R 2 , and we let ψ ij f lat (t, ξ, υ) be the flat-space time-evolution of ψ 0,ij f lat (ξ, υ) under the Dirac equation [Eq. ( where and Θ is the Heaviside indicator function. The existence of a global coordinate chart for each non-singular region allows us to write down the time dynamics in terms of the familiar flat-space Dirac massless propagation, which we can understand via classical 2D wave propagation. Each spinor component of the timedependent wavefunction for a massless Dirac fermion on flat space satisfies the (2+1)-D classical wave equation; the corresponding Cauchy problem can be expressed simply in terms of Poisson's integral formula. Huygens' principal famously fails for even-dimensional wave equations, so the density does not strictly propagate on the light cone, but the "wake" left in the interior of the lightcone decays and the density propagates to infinity in the long run. As a wavefront approaches a singular wall, the F (x) [or G(y)] functions blow up, distorting its trajectory parallel to the wall and keeping it from reaching the wall, corresponding extremely well with the geodesic dynamics. As in the geodesic picture the singular walls carve the manifold up into a "multiverse" grid, in this case made up by the boxes ("universes") B ij , and even quantum tunneling is unable to transfer quantum density from one box to another. We now give a quantum treatment of the Dreibein wall models of Sec. 5.3. In this case, the spin connection vanishes and translational invariance in the y-direction lets us move to y-momentum eigenstates. The equation to solve is where k denotes the conserved y-momentum. Squaring the Dreibein wall Dirac equation [Eq. ( We assume k > 0, noting that if k < 0 we may simply swap ψ 1 and ψ 2 . For E = 0, we can always solve these with the "zero mode" solutions: If m(-∞) < 0 < m(∞), the ψ 1 (ψ 2 ) solution is normalizable for k < 0 (k > 0). However, if m(-∞) and m(∞) have the same sign, then there are not normalizable zero modes, giving a Z 2 topological condition on the existence of a continuum of zero-mode solutions. Eq. ( In the linear case, m(x) = x, Eqs. (88) are simply harmonic oscillator Hamiltonians with frequency k 2 and energy Ẽ1,2 = E 2 ± k, and the familiar normalizable solutions are in terms of Hermite polynomials. There is a bound state solution for In turn, we find Ẽ1 = E 2 -k = 2k[(n-1)+1/2], corresponding to the preceding energy level. Building a spinor out of adjacent harmonic oscillator wavefunctions, using Eq. (87) to determine the relative coefficients, and normalizing, we find where H n is the n th Hermite polynomial (and we set H -1 = 0 for notational convenience), n ∈ {0, 1, 2, 3, ...}, and acts on the spinor space. The energy states are simply In particular, the whole spectrum consists of bound states. When n=0, we recover the zero-modes which could also have been obtained from Eqs. (89). While we do not calculate quantum dynamics in this model, the appearance of the harmonic oscillator wavefunctions in the spinor solution is highly suggestive of oscillatory motion similar to our geodesic trajectories, depicted in Fig. In the other case, m(x) = tanh(x), we find that the energy states take the form where P -μ k is an associated Legendre function of the first kind (technically, a "Ferrer's function"), μ = √ k 2 -E 2 , Pk is as in Eq. ( When E 2 < k 2 , we find discrete normalizable bound states for k -μ ∈ {0, 1, 2, ...}, giving the k + 1 bound state energies , there is a crossover to a continuum of scattering states described by imaginaryorder Ferrer's functions. As E → 0, the identity Finally, we consider the quantum solution of the circular nematic model of Sec. 5.4. Introducing angular-momentum eigenstates [Eq. ( In the zero-energy case, we can directly integrate to find 1 + ρ(1) 1 + ρ(1) Suppose for simplicity that ρ(0) = 0 and that asymptoically ρ(r) → ρ ∞ . Near the origin, we have but far from the origin, where ρ(r) ≈ ρ ∞ , we have where A, B are constants. We thus have distinct, normalizable zero-energy wavefunctions for ψ 1 E,l (r) for all l > 0 if ρ ∞ > 1. That is, there are infinitely many zero-energy states if and only if there is an odd number of singularity rings, giving another Z 2 topological condition on zero-modes. [Compare with Sec. 6.3.] In the case of the power-law models, ρ(r) = r α , which host singular manifolds on the unit circle, we can simply evaluate Eqs. (98): The A i are normalization constants. Thus, for any α > 1, we have a whole series of zero-energy states corresponding to different angular momenta. To gain an understanding of the energy spectrum, we focus on the α = 2 case, which admits a nice solution due to a symmetry under the transformation r ↔ 1/r. The spinor eigenfunctions are given by where F 2,1 (a, b; c; z) is the Gaussian hypergeometric function and we have introduced the variable Above, the energy levels are given by so that we again have a full spectrum of bound states. We have provided quantum treatments of the curved-space Dirac equation for the simple spacetime geometries in Sec. ( In the dreibein wall geometries, we saw that while all geodesics are bounded for the linear wall, only some are bounded for the tanh wall. We see this situation mirrored in the quantum spectra of these manifolds; the linear wall model hosts an entire spectrum of bound states, while the tanh wall model's spectrum features a crossover from a bound-state region to a continuum of scattering states. Similarly, we have seen that the α = 2 version of the circular nematic power-law model has only bounded geodesics, and that its spectrum also consists entirely of discrete bound states. On the other hand, we have seen that models that host only bounded geodesic orbits can also host continuous spectra entirely of scattering states -the isotropic power-law models and the xy-factored model both provide examples of this. However, in these cases, we are able to also look at the quantum dynamics of the problem, and we see that the dynamics is in extremely close correspondence with the geodesic picture. The effects of "artificial" quenched gravity (as defined in the Introduction) on 2D massless Dirac carriers could have important consequences for understanding and manipulating lowdimensional Dirac materials. The action in Eq. (3b) is equivalent to a theory of massless electrons on a certain class of static, curved spacetime manifolds, described by the metric in Eq. (11c). The geometry of null geodesic trajectories is heavily affected by the presence of both isotropic and nematic curvature singularities that can arise in these spacetimes. Isotropic singularities can asymptotically capture geodesics that pass sufficiently close. On the other hand, null geodesics can traverse nematic singularity domain walls, but experience a geodesic collimation effect that fixes their transit velocity. These domain walls can exhibit a horizon effect, trapping null geodesics as bound states that perpetually lens back and forth across the nematic singularity line. In a semiclassical picture of the quantum dynamics, the influence of nematic singularity walls on null geodesics presents a compelling potential mechanism for pairing enhancement in Dirac superconductors along these singular manifolds. On one hand, states gravitationally bound to domain wall horizons could provide a link to quasi-1D physics. The latter has been long suspected to play a role in enhancing strong correlations in quantum materials, and possibly in the mechanism for high-T c superconductivity in particular If singularity walls in the spacetime manifold could enhance or even induce superconducting pairing, then quenched artificial gravity could underlie a simple, universal mechanism for gap enhancement in 2D Dirac superconductors (SCs). In the scenario where quenched gravitational disorder arises from gap fluctuations in a d-wave SC, the prevalence of nematic singularities is dictated by the ratio of gap fluctuations to the size of the gap. Therefore, singularities could be more common in a weak-pairing SC state given a fixed degree of fluctuation, possibly induced by a low-temperature pairing mechanism. Pairing enhancement due to nematic singularity walls could then create a negative feedback loop, terminating when the gap has hardened sufficiently so as to suppress singularities and their concomitant 1D bound states. This paradigm allows disorder to play a constructive role, which could offer insight into the puzzling indifference of the cuprates to dopant-induced disorder Finally, while static gravity is the focus of this paper, Eq. ( The angular formulation has a built-in error-resistance for numerical solution. By using the nullity condition to reduce the equations to first order, we guarantee that the particle moves along a null geodesic. Even as the solver inevitably accumulates errors due to the angular update, the particle may move along a different geodesic than the one it started on, but it will still be on a null geodesic. We can express the geodesic equation concisely in terms of the dreibein. We project the tangent (3-velocity) vector onto the dreibein, We can then re-express the geodesic equation as the time-evolution equation for u, which can be written simply in terms of E A μ as For null geodesics, we have so that we may parametrize the vector u as The special structure of the quenched gravitational metric in Eq. (11c) allows us to make further progress. In particular, using the temporal first integral equation ( [see Eq. ( )]. As before, we implement the global time reparametrization via Eq. where φ ≡ [cos φ, sin φ] T is a unit vector. This gives Eqs. (30a) and (30b), but it remains to determine the dynamics of φ(t). We may use the parametrization of u A [Eq. ( [We note that the term in brackets in Eq. ( Let a denote the length scale on which the lightcone modulations fluctuate, for example in a random quenched gravitational potential (QGD). We will extract the dependence of geodesic trajectories on a. Let g (a) μν be the metric corresponding to disorder potentials fluctuating on length scale a, and let g Next, let Γ Now, let [t (a) (s), x (a) (s)] denote a solution to the geodesic equation at length scale a: The variable transformations s = as, x μ = ax μ and Eq. (114) map Eq. ( ] is a solution with length scale a = 1, so that geodesics on different length scales are related by a simple inflation transformation. The pure isotropic and nematic models introduced in Sec. 4 are studied alongside the general QGD Hamiltonian in the quantum setting via numerical exact diagonalization in Ref. In that paper, these are referred to as models "c" and "d," respectively. That work also introduces two other models ["a," "b"]. While these models aren't of primary interest for us here in light of the pseudospin invariance of Sec. 2.4, we introduce them here and present some properties of their geodesics, for comparison with Ref. The pure off-diagonal model is defined by This corresponds to "model b" in Ref. so that we have singularities whenever v 2 1 v 1 2 = 1. The constant-interval speed condition [Eq. ( We can parametrize a point on the singularity manifold by (v 2 1 , v 1 2 ) = (cot φ, tan φ) [Fig. This appendix collects additional details of the quantum solutions presented in Sec. 6. Using the angular momentum states [Eq. ( Iterating these Dirac equation, we find that the spinor components satisfy the associated second-order curved-space wave equations l,E (r), (124a) For α = 1 he general solutions are Where m is given by Eq. (79) and J m is a Bessel function of order m. Only the solution with m > 1/2, (which is equivalent to l > -1/2) is normalizable and physical. (In the cases α ∈ {0, 2}, m is integral, and the non-physical solution is a Neumann function.) Plugging the normalizable solutions of Eqs. (125) back into Eqs. (76) then determines the relative spinor structure. Restoring the 1/r α/2 prefactor from spin connection removal [see Eq. (49)] and providing normalization finally gives Eq. (78). To see that states with equal angular momenta and distinct energy are orthogonal, note that [with z = r 1-α /(1 -α)] In the case m(x) = tanh(x), Eqs. (88) take the form The substitution z = tanh(x) actually turns these exactly into generalized Legendre equations: and the solutions can generally be expressed in terms of the associated Legendre functions (specifically "Ferrer's functions of the first kind"): where μ = √ k 2 -E 2 . (If μ is an integer, we must replace P μ k with Q μ k , the Ferrer's function of the second kind, but we'll see that this is unimportant.) For k 2 > E 2 , μ ≥ 0, and only P -μ k [tanh(x)] is normalizable at x → ∞. At x → -∞, we use the identity and the fact that Q -μ k (z) diverges at z = 1 for μ ∈ [0, k] to find the bound state energy condition n ≡ k -μ ∈ {0, 1, 2, ...}, giving the spectrum in Eq. (95). Enforcing compatibility of (the normalizable part of) Eqs. (129) with the original curved-space Dirac equation [Eq. (87) gives the relative spinor prefactors, yielding Eq. (94) in the main text. The curved-space Dirac equation follows from Eq. (97) by setting ρ(r) = r 2 . In this case, the spin connection can be removed [see Eq. Iterating and manipulating this, we find the curved-space wave equation for ψ 1 : r + 1 r (r∂ r ) 2 -l (l + 1) r -1/r r + 1/r -1 ψ1 E,l (r) = -E 2 ψ1 E,l (r). The related equation for the ψ2 component is obtained from Eq. ( Eq. ( which gives bijective maps from both r ∈ [0, 1] and r ∈ [1, ∞] to ω ∈ [0, 1]. Re-writing Eq. (133) in terms of ω and solving, we find the 2D solution space is spanned by the functions where only the first (second) solution is normalizable near ω ≈ 0 for l ≥ 0 (l ≤ -1). For now set l ≥ 0. While ψ 1 (r) is a multiple of K + (ω) on the intervals [0, 1] and [1, ∞], some care must be taken in gluing these two solutions together. Writing Repeating the above analysis for l ≤ -1, and then again for the ψ1 solution, we find the energy spectrum in Eq. (104) in the main text. Further, the solutions for ψ1 , ψ2 are always compatible with the same energy spectrum, though they have opposite parity under the inversion transformation. Enforcing compatibility with Eqs. (97) then gives the relative prefactors of the spinor components. Finally, restoring the prefactor [Eq. ( E Quantum dynamics for α = 2 isotropic power-law model We will asymptotically solve the Cauchy problem (for α = 2), showing that all probability density of an arbitrary "away from zero" initial wavefunction eventually flows into the singularity. We let ψ 0 (r, θ) be an initial wavefunction at t = 0. We will assume that the quantum density starts out away from zero -specifically we assume that there is an η > 0 so that ψ 0 (r, θ) = 0 for r < η. Finally we let > 0 and δ > 0 be given. We will show that there exists a time t * so that for all t > t * where the term in large brackets defines the retarded Green's function. (Convolution with the retarded Green's function gives time evolution of an initial wavefunction.)