We performed temperature-and doping-dependent high-resolution Raman spectroscopy experiments on YBa2Cu3O 7-δ to study B1g phonons. The temperature dependence of the real part of the phonon self-energy shows a distinct kink at T = TB1g above T c due to softening, in addition to the one due to the onset of the superconductivity. T B1g is clearly different from the pseudogap temperature with a maximum in the underdoped region. The region between T B1g and T c resembles that of superconducting fluctuation or charge density wave order. While the true origin of the B1g phonon softening is not known, we can attribute it to a gap on the Fermi surface due to an electronic order. Our results may reveal the role of the B1g phonon not only in the superconducting state but also in the intertwined orders in multilayer copper oxide high-T c superconductors. In strongly correlated electron systems, instabilities with complex order parameters are often accompanied by electronic orders that cause various broken symmetries and Fermi surface instabilities in the ground state. The instabilities generically lead to an energy gap at the Fermi surface to lower the energy of the system. The most representative cases are Cooper pair and Peierls instabilities which are associated with superconductivity and charge density wave (CDW), respectively. In the former case, the superconducting ground state is created through coherent superposition of Cooper pairs and the superconducting gap is opened in the presence of a weak attractive interaction between electrons. Similarly in the latter case, coherent electron-hole pairs create CDW gap The gap opening driven by an electronic instability affects not only the electronic but also phononic excitation spectra. For example, it is well known that the B 1g oxygen bond-buckling phonon in copper oxide high-T c superconductors shows a drastic softening when the temperature is lowered below T c Among the various phonon modes in copper oxide superconductors, only the B 1g phonon shows a drastic renormalization in the Raman spectra as we mentioned above. This result drew much interest since it may reflect the intimate link between superconductivity and B 1g phonon. Indeed, the coupling matrix between electrons and B 1g phonon at the Brillouin zone center (q=0) possesses a d-wave nature, which is the symmetry of the superconductivity as well as CDW form factor in cuprates In spite of the predicted close relationship between the B 1g phonon and electronic orders, a direct evidence for the relationship has not been observed. Discovery of such evidence may allow us to unify the understanding of the novel multiple orders in the phase diagram of high T c materials. In this Letter, we present results of comprehensive doping-and temperature-dependent high-resolution Raman spectroscopy studies on YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7-δ . Owing to the very high-statistics data, our results clearly show that phonon softening occurs not only in the superconducting state, but also at a temperature higher than T c which has not yet been reported. The softening is robust in the underdoped region but is not observed for the most overdoped sample. The onset temperature of the phonon anomaly, T B1g , is distinguished from the pseudogap temperature T * . It is rather close to the CDW temperature T CDW We performed Raman spectroscopy with backscattering geometry using 532 nm (2.3 eV) diode pumped solid state (DPSS) laser (Cobolt). The incident light was focused on the surface of the sample by a ×40 (N.A. 0.6) objective lens (Olympus). A spot size of the focused light was approximately 2 × 2 μm 2 and laser power was set below 0.6 mW to avoid laser-induced local heating. To reject the stray light close to 10 cm -1 , BragGrate notch filters (OptiGrate) were used. The superachromatic waveplate (Thorlabs) was used for polarization resolved Raman spectroscopy. The polarization of the incident and scattered light was set to be perpendicular to each other and parallel to the diagonal direction of the CuO 2 plaquette [Fig. . However, an additional weak phonon softening was observed for a temperature range just above T c [Fig. 2(e) and (f) show the frequency and linewidth of the B 1g phonon, respectively, as a function of temperature. The black dashed curves represent the simulated frequency and linewidth behavior using a phonon anharmonicity model To verify the doping dependence of T B1g , we performed the same experiment and analysis on samples with various dopings. We find that not only the optimally doped sample but also underdoped samples (UD62, UD68 and UD85) [Fig. Plotted in Fig. From the point of view that T B1g corresponds to T pair , it can be understood that the phonon softening above T c is caused by phonon self-energy effect due to formation of preformed Cooper pairs. Above T c , preformed Cooper pairs open a gap at the Fermi surface and enhance the quasiparticle DOS at ω = ±∆ which has been clearly observed in a recent angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) study on Bi2212 Although T B1g does not match previously reported T CDW If the observed B 1g phonon softening is indeed due to a CDW order, it is suggestive of an important role played by the B 1g phonon in both the high temperature superconductivity and charge order. This notion is indeed supported by the result of a recent electronic Raman study in which the energy scale of 2∆ CDW was found to be the same as that of antinodal superconducting gap 2∆ AN Regardless of its origin, it is likely that the B 1g phonon softening occurs due to a gap at the Fermi surface. Both Cooper pairing and Peierls instabilities result in an energy gap at the Fermi surface in their single particle excitation spectra even though the pairing channels for superconductivity (electron-electron) and CDW (electronhole) are different It is also worth noting that both electronic orders have a d-wave nature. The link between d-wave symmetry and B 1g phonon has been considered for a long time The remaining question is why B 1g phonon anomaly is not observed in the pseudogap phase. A possible explanation may come from the different nature of the pseudogap. Spectroscopic studies have shown that the pseudogap phase are not accompanied by a sharply depleted Fermi surface gapping (and thus no quasiparticle DOS enhancement at ω = ±∆), which should result in a smooth change in the phonon self-energy. Such effect can be expected in the pair density wave (PDW) scenario, where the spatial modulation of the d-wave pairing should lead to an almost cancelled coherence factor 