Hydrogen is one of the prime candidates for clean energy source with high energy density. However, current industrial methods of hydrogen production are difficult to provide hydrogen with high purity, thus hard to meet the requirements in many application scenarios. Consequently, the development of large-scale and low-cost hydrogen separation technology is urgently needed. In this work, the gas separation properties of a newly synthesized two-dimensional nanoporous graphene (NPG) membrane material with patterned dumbbell-shape nanopores are investigated. The permeation energy barriers of different gases through this membrane are calculated using the density functional theory (DFT) calculations. Molecular dynamics (MD) simulations are also employed to study the permeation behavior of H 2 in binary mixtures with O 2 , CO 2 , CO, and CH 4 . Both the DFT and MD calculation results show that this newly synthesized NPG membrane material can provide a high permeability as well as an ultrahigh selectivity simultaneously, making it a prospective H 2 separation membrane with superior performance. Hydrogen is one of the prime candidates which may replace fossil energy sources for its cleanliness, low cost, environmental friendliness and high energy density However, the well-established industrial hydrogen production methods produce a variety of gaseous byproducts, such as carbon monoxide, carbon dioxide and methane from methane steam reforming, and nitrogen from ammonia decomposition The mainstream technologies for industrial hydrogen separation including variable pressure adsorption, cryogenic separation and membrane separation, among which membrane separation has been expected to be less mechanically complex, less energy demanding and less costly in terms of capital Therefore, the aim of high permeability can only be achieved by graphene with nanopores. In 2012, Koenig et al. Although the hydrogen permeability of two-dimensional (2D) porous graphene membranes are several orders of magnitude higher than that of pristine graphene, their selectivity is still limited In 2018, César Moreno et al. The dumbbell-shaped nanopore may restrict the passage of gases with large kinetic diameter while provide abundant penetration routes for gas molecules with small kinetic diameter, thus achieving a high permeability and selectivity simultaneously. In this work, we investigated the adsorption properties of common light gases on NPG by means of first principle calculations, and then further calculated the energy barriers for the permeation of these gases through NPG to estimate their permeability. Molecular dynamics simulations were employed to investigate the permeation behavior of H 2 in mixtures with O 2 , CO 2 , CO and CH 4 , and to investigate the mechanisms affecting the permeation rate of H 2 . Our results show that this newly synthesized NPG can provide both high permeability and high selectivity for H 2 when serving as a H 2 separation membrane. First principles calculations are performed using the ABINIT software package The behavior of gas permeation through NPG was further investigated using MD simulations. The molecular dynamics simulations were carried out using LAMMPS software package The C-C and C-H bonding interactions in the NPG were characterized using AMBER force field The geometry of NPG was constructed based on the experimental reports where E NPG+Gas is the total energy of NPG adsorbed with gas molecule, and E NPG , E Gas are the total energy of NPG and gas molecule respectively. We studied the adsorption behavior of different gas molecules on the pore region as well as on various high symmetry points of the surface region. For diatomic and triatomic molecules, adsorption modes with gas molecules parallel and perpendicular to the NPG surfaces were considered. The highest adsorption energies in both regions are shown in Table Based on the calculation results, the adsorption energies of the gas molecules on NPG are generally small. O 2 has the highest adsorption energy on the pore region of NPG (0.37 eV), which is much higher than that on pure graphene, while its adsorption energy on the surface region of NPG is close to the case of pristine graphene In order to evaluate permeation capability of different gases, we calculated the permeation energy barrier of gases through NPG. Gas molecules may pass through the NPG from either the "side site" or the "middle site" of the pore as shown in Figure where X and Y represent the two gases, r is the permeability, B is the gas coefficient, E is the permeation energy barrier, T is the temperature, and R is the molar gas constant. Here it is assumed that all gas coefficients are equal. The selectivity between different gases are listed in Table The calculations show that NPG is superior in the selective transportation of H 2 and He, especially for H 2 . When calculating the energy barriers, we only considered the extreme case where the gas molecules are perpendicular to the NPG and did not take into account of other possible penetration modes, therefore the selectivity estimated can only provide a qualitative reference. where N is the number of permeable molecules, N A is Avogadro's constant, and A NPG is the membrane area. ∆P is the pressure difference between the gas chamber and feed chamber, which is a function of the number of gas molecules on both sides of the membrane, and can be calculated as: where P IN is the initial pressure and N ad is the number of molecules adsorbed on the NPG surface, which can be obtained from simulations. It can then be deduced that N as a function of time τ: Based on Equation The lower H 2 permeability in the case of H 2 /O 2 can be attributed to the higher adsorption energy of O 2 on NPG surface. We counted the gas distribution along the z-direction in the gas feed chamber and divided it into three different regions following the definition in the study of Sun et al. If the adsorbed gas molecules are difficult to permeate through the pore, then they will impede the adsorption and penetration of other gas molecules In Figure In summary, we investigated the gas separation properties of NPG using first principles calculations and MD simulations. Firstly, the adsorption behavior of different gases on the NPG surface were calculated using DFT method, and it was found that NPG shows a relatively higher adsorption energy towards O 2 . Secondly, the gas permeation energy barriers across NPG was calculated, and it suggests that only H 2 and He show a relatively lower energy barrier which can allow roomtemperature permeation. The selectivity of H 2 and He towards other light gases were also estimated. Finally, the permeation behavior of H 2 in gas mixtures was studied by MD simulations, and the simulation results prove that NPG can provide a high H 2 permeability and a superior selectivity simultaneously in various gas combinations. There are no conflicts to declare.