The quest for efficient and versatile microwave and optical isolators has recently spawned several novel space-time-modulated isolator structures. However, such space-time isolators suffer from a large profile and complex architecture caused by progressive nonreciprocal space-time coupling properties. To overcome these limitations, we propose a nonmagnetic phase-engineered temporal-loop-based isolator featuring large isolation levels, weak undesired time harmonics, and a low profile. The proposed isolator is composed of two temporal loops that provide desired constructive and destructive interferences of different time harmonics. Furthermore, these two loops are designed in a way to assure that the circulation and reflection of different time harmonics strengthen a low insertion loss unidirectional signal transmission. An experimental demonstration of the proposed time-modulated isolator at microwave frequencies is provided, featuring strong unidirectional wave transmission through the isolator with more than 27 dB contrast between the forward and backward waves across a fractional bandwidth of 14.3%. The proposed isolator outperforms the nonlinear-based and transistor-based isolators by featuring a highly linear response with OP 1dB of higher than 31 dBm, high power rating of more than 47 dBm, and a low noise figure of 3.4 dB. Isolators are components that block electromagnetic wave signals in one direction but allow them to pass in the opposite direction. Such a critical task is required in numerous applications, including protecting microwave, millimeter wave, terahertz and optical sources from back reflections disturbing the source operation, or mitigating multi-path interference in communication systems. Additionally, isolators generally improve the designability of the overall system as they eliminate spurious interferences, interactions between different components and undesired signal routing. Isolators can be realized by the simultaneous breaking of time-reversal symmetry and spatial inversion Figure Furthermore, the right temporal loop is composed of two (upper and lower) temporal transmission lines, where the capacitance of the transmission lines is modulated in time and incurring a π phase difference between the upper and lower temporal transmission lines, i.e., In (1a) to (1d), C av-1 and C av-2 are the average permitivitties of the first and second loops, respectively, δ 1 and δ 2 denote the modulation amplitudes of the first and second loops, respectively, and Ω is the temporal modulation frequency. Here, the right temporal loop assumes a stronger modulation amplitude, that is, δ 2 >> δ 1 . We will show that by proper design of the phase and amplitude of the time modulation of the two loops, an appropriate constructive interference for the forward wave incidence (left to right propagation) and a proper destructive interference for the backward wave incidence (right to left propagation) may be achieved through the three (gray-colored in Fig. To best understand the effect of the phase and amplitude of the time modulation on the output voltage of the temporal transmission lines, we first investigate the variation of the voltage through a temporal-varactor-loaded transmission line. Figure where C av is the average capacitance of the time-varying varactor. The total capacitance of the transmission line reads , where C 0 is the mean capacitance per unit length of the transmission line. It may be shown that, by proper engineering of the dispersion of the transmission line, the output voltage acquires a frequency transition (up/down-conversion) accompanied by a phase transition. Such frequency and phase transitions are shown in the dispersion diagram in the right side of Fig. We assume the dispersion bands of the structure are engineered so that only the fundamental and the first higher-order time-harmonics are excited, whereas all higher-order time-harmonics are suppressed. Hence, the voltage is defined based on the superposition of the n = 0 and n = -1 space-time harmonics fields, i.e., Since the transmission line is modulated only in time, and not in space, we consider an identical wave number k 0 for both the fundamental and the higher-order harmonics. As it is shown in Fig. As a result of such temporal periodicity, electromagnetic transitions are vertical in the dispersion diagram (Fig. where L 0 and C 0 are the inductance and capacitance per unit length of the unloaded transmission line, respectively. Equations (4a) and (4b) yield where v p = 1/ √ L 0 C 0 . The up-conversion assumes the initial conditions of a 0 (0) = V 0 and a 1 (0) = 0, which gives (see Supplementary Information) Equations (6a) and (6b) show that the change of the frequency and phase of the up-converted signal corresponds to the frequency and phase of the temporal modulation signal, Ω and +φ. In addition, the maximum amplitude of the up-converted signal a 1 (z) occurs at δk 1 /C av = 2π. This reveals that one can control the amplitude of the up-converted signal by changing the modulation amplitude δ. Following the same procedure, we can determine the input and output voltages for the down-conversion. The downconversion assumes the initial conditions of a 0 (0) = 0 and a 1 (0 and Equations ( Figure The isolator is composed of two temporal loops, each of which formed by two sinusoidally time-varying transmission lines. In order to achieve the desired constructive and destructive interferences at the two ports of the isolator, for both forward and backward signal injections, two power splitters/combiners possessing two quarter-wavelength arms are utilized at the two ends of the isolator. In addition, a halfwavelength transmission line is placed at the middle of the isolator to separate the two loops from each other and provide desired constructive and destructive interferences at different time harmonics. We aim to achieve a unidirectional signal transmission by proper engineering of the forward (Figures For the backward signal injection, shown in Fig. Figure We next demonstrate the experimental results for the scattering parameters of the isolator for different bias voltages when the modulation is off (Ω = 0). Figure In this study, we have successfully demonstrated a phase-engineered temporal-loop-based isolator. This isolator is featuring large isolation levels, weak undesired time harmonics and a low profile. The experimental demonstration of the proposed time-modulated isolator is carried out at microwave frequencies. The experimental results show strong unidirectional wave transmission through the isolator with more than 27 dB contrast between the forward and backward waves across a fractional bandwidth of 14.3%. Such an isolator outperforms the nonlinear-based and transistor-based isolators by featuring a highly linear response with OP 1dB of higher than 31 dBm, high power rating of more than 47 dBm, and a low noise figure of 3.4 dB. This isolator is designed at the center frequency of 1.48 GHz with the modulation frequency of Ω = 2π × 103.8 MHz and modulation power of 20 dBm. The isolator is implemented on a RT6010 substrate with permittivity r = 10.2, thickness h = 50 mil and tan δ = 0.0023. The two 50 Ohm coplanar waveguide (CPW) transmission lines at the back of the structure possess a width of W=45 mils and a gap of G=20 mils. We have used four BB837 varactors manufactured by Infineon Technologies for realizing the phaseshifted time modulation. We utilized two ZFBT-6GQ+ minicircuits bias-tees. , 