Additive manufacturing, called 3D printing, starts to play an unprecedented role in developing many applications in industrial or personalized products. The conductive composite structures require additional treatment to achieve an electroactive surface useful for electrochemical devices. In this paper, the surfaces of carbon black/poly(lactic acid) CB-PLA printouts were activated by electrolysis or enzymatic digestion with proteinase K, or a simultaneous combination of both. Proposed modification protocols allowed for tailoring electrochemically active surface area and electron transfer kinetics determined by electrochemical techniques (CV, EIS) with [Fe(CN)6] 4-/3-redox probe. The X-ray photon spectroscopy and SEM imaging were applied to determine the delivered surface chemistry. The CB-PLA hydrolysis in alkaline conditions and under anodic polarization greatly impacts the charge transfer kinetics. The enzymatic hydrolysis of PLA with proteinase K has led to highly efficient results yet requiring an unsatisfactory prolonged activation duration of 72 h, efficiently reduced by the electrolysis carried out in the presence of the enzyme. Our studies hint that the activation protocol originates from surface electropolymerization rather than synergistic interaction between electrolysis and enzymatic hydrolysis. The detailed mechanism of CB-PLA hydrolysis supported by electrolysis has been elaborated since it pawed a new route towards a time-efficient and environmentally-friendly activation procedure. The advent of Additive Manufacturing (AM), also called three-dimensional printings, which is a layer by layer manufacturing fabrication process, has an unprecedented impact on development in various fields, including science, engineering, and industry. Nonetheless, affordable desktop threedimensional printers, which have used fused deposition modeling (FDM), have become a popular tool for fabricating personalized consumer products. Fused deposition modeling or fused filament fabrication (FFF) is one of the most commonly utilized and commercially successful method by consequence of their low cost, easy-to-use interface and graphic software. Furthermore, the expiration of the original FDM patents led to growing extrusion-based printers. The development of desktop extrusion-based printers does open up new ways to approach areas including biomedical sensors Polylactic acid (PLA), is one of the most promising materials used nowadays. It is biodegradable, recyclable, highly processable, and degrades into non-toxic products Carbon Black is a material made of finely divided carbons produced by the thermal decomposition of a hydrocarbon. Conductive carbon particles in CBs are chemically bound and form agglomerates by weak Van der Waals interactions New carbon/polymer 3D-printout electrodes present poor electrochemical properties until surface activation treatment is performed. The activation treatments remove the excess of the polymeric matrix and expose conductive fillers at the electrode surface. It has been well documented that the chemical activation of carbon/polymer electrodes improves the efficiency of electrochemical processes. Palenzuela et al. reported the surface treatment of graphene/PLA by immersion in dimethylformamide (DMF) for 10 min to expose the graphene fillers Solvent-free activation by laser ablation was recently proposed by This work aims to present and understand the electrochemically active surface area development of the CB-PLA through the controlled electrolysis, with the goal to increase the electrode's utility as an electrochemical sensor platform. Various polarization protocols were studied to evaluate the optimum conditions for CB-PLA activation. First, the anodic and cathodic polarization depth were evaluated, for the PLA electrolysis carried out in acidic and alkaline media, discussing the resultant modification in surface chemistry and the activation mechanism. A separate study was conducted to elaborate the CB-PLA activation protocol by proteinase K enzymatic interaction. Finally, the efficiency of the synergistic interaction of the enzymatic hydrolysis and the electrolysis were reported. To the authors best knowledge, this is the first attempt to explore activation possibility through both of these processes, carried out simultaneously. 3D printout electrodes: Flat electrodes with dimensions 10x10x2 mm were 3D-printed from conductive, commercially available PLA, Proto-Pasta, on an Ender 3 Pro 3D printer (Ender, China). The printing temperature was 200 °C. According to the thermogravimetric analysis (presented in the Supplementary Information file, Section S1), the CB-PLA filament contains 26.4 wt.% carbon filler, which results in 30 Ωcm electric resistivity. The filament, as well as the electrodes, were stored under atmospheric conditions. The activation procedure was started immediately after the printing process. Chemical, electrochemical and enzymatic activation protocols were investigated. The electrochemical activation was performed in cyclic voltammetry regime, applying the polarization at a constant rate of 50 mV/s in the below-defined polarization range. Each electrode was subjected to a total of 10 polarization cycles. The chemical and enzymatic activation treatments were carried out simply by soaking the electrode in the target electrolyte. Solvent treatments were performed by soaking the 3Dprinted electrodes in one of the studied electrolytes for 24 hours. For determination of the effect of the enzyme activity on the CB-PLA, two tests were performed. In the first, each 3D-printed specimen was immersed in a 0.6 mg /mL proteinase K solution prepared in Tris-HCl buffer (Tris 100 mM, CaCl2 1 mM, pH 8.0) and incubated at 37°C for 24h, 48h, 72h and 96 h. In the second, each 3D-printed specimen was immersed in a proteinase K solutions with 0.2 mg/mL, 0.4 mg/mL, 0.6 mg/mL and 0.8 mg/mL prepared in Tris-HCl buffer (Tris 100 mM, CaCl2 1 mM, pH 8.0) and incubated at 37°C for 72 h. The enzyme/buffer was replaced every 24 h to restore enzymatic activity, avoiding the pH value decrease. After CB-PLA electrochemical activation was finished, the samples were rinsed thoroughly with distilled water at 4 °C to stop further degradation and then dried until constant mass. The mass loss (%) was calculated according to (m0 -mt)/m0, where m0 and mt represent the dry weights of the specimens before and after degradation, respectively. Electrochemical studies: All the electrochemical measurements, including electrochemical activation and electrochemically active surface area (EASA) determination of the electrode, were carried out in a three-electrode setup with the 3D-printed working electrode, Ag|AgCl as the reference electrode and platinum wire as the counter electrode. The electrochemical measurements were done using a Reference 600+ potentiostat/galvanostat (Gamry Instruments, USA) and controlled by Gamry Framework software. Determination of the surface activation efficiency was based on charge transfer kinetics evaluation in electrolyte composed of 2.5 mM [Fe(CN)6] 4-/3-as the electroactive redox species dissolved in 0.5 M Na2SO4. Two techniques were used, namely electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) and cyclic voltammetry (CV). The EIS experiment was carried out at open circuit potential (OCP) conditions (0.25 ± 0.04 V vs Ag|AgCl), with voltage perturbation amplitude of 10 mV, and in the frequency range of 100 000 to 0.1 Hz, 10 points per frequency decade. The CV experiments were done at a scan rate of 50 mV/s. The [Fe(CN)6] 4-/3-species were used as the most commonly referred redoxactive probe. Moreover, the inner sphere electron transfer (ISET) mechanism of the ferrocyanides is known to be largely dependent on the electrode surface chemistry Physicochemical studies: The X-Ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) studies were carried out with Escalab 250Xi multispectroscope (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA), equipped with monochromatic AlKα source (spot diameter 650 μm). The high-resolution spectra of CB-PLA electrodes after various surface activation routes were collected in the core-level binding energy range of C 1s and O 1s peaks. The pass energy was 15 eV. Charge compensation was controlled through a low-energy electron and low-energy Ar + flow. Next, the scanning electron microscopy (SEM) examination of surface activated samples was carried out using S-3400N VP-SEM microscope (Hitachi, Japan), using secondary electron mode and 20 kV accelerating voltage. Prior to the examination, the CB-PLA electrodes were sputtered with 10 nm gold layer. Results and discussion The efficiency of the electrochemical activation of each studied CB-PLA electrode, illustrated through the CV curves, is shown in Fig. Ferrocyanides oxidation proceeds more efficiently at the CB-PLA electrode activated in the alkaline media than in acidic media. The reversibility of the studied process improves significantly in these conditions, testified by Ep = 112 mV and iA:iC = 0.96 (A = 1.0 V, scan rate 50 mV/s). Given the CB-PLA activation is carried out at sufficiently high anodic polarization, the electrolysis leads to higher values of k 0 and more effective redox kinetics. This effect is observable in particular at A exceeding 0.6 V, when the observable value of k 0 increases by order of magnitude, peaking at 0.003 cm/s, the exact values to be found in Table where  is the kinetic parameter estimated based on peak potential separation EP, D0 is the diffusion coefficient (6.67*10 -6 cm 2 /s), n is the number of electrons transferred,  is the applied scan rate, R is the gas constant, F is the Faradaic constant and T is the temperature. The highest value of the heterogeneous rate constant after activation in acidic media was two times lower and achieved after activation at the highest anodic overpotentials applied during the activation process, with oxidation peak current iA reaching 57.5 μA (at 50 mV/s scan rate). Nevertheless, the peak separation potential at the most efficient studied A was EP = 151 mV, which, together with a slightly unbalanced anodic-to-cathodic current ratio iA:iC = 0.89, hints at the irreversibility of the electrochemical process. Notably, the activation performed in both studied electrolytes may lead to obtaining the quasi-reversibility regime of the redox process A key observation should also be made based on the analyses of the above-presented results. The CB-PLA electrodes should be handled with great care since the polarization regime of commonly used CV procedures when using the most popular redox probes often exceed the polarization limits sufficient for CB-PLA surface modification throughout the measurement. On the other hand, most research groups dealing with 3D printed electrodes study the electron charge transfer using potassium hexacyanoferrate(II) as the redox probe. The impedimetric measurements may be found a more suitable approach to investigate the electrochemical response of the 3D-printed PLA-based electrodes, which is due to the mV polarization range of the perturbation amplitude. While the anodic activation treatment leads to the pronounced CB-PLA EASA development, performing the activation process at cathodic polarization to a certain extent increases the faradaic charge transfer. Yet, the activation efficiency is dramatically lower, and the resultant heterogeneous rate constant barely competes with the k 0 value obtained after activation at the lower studied anodic polarization. These results prove the smaller utility of cathodic polarization treatment as a part of the 3D-printed electrodes activation protocol A similar observation regarding the CB-PLA EASA development efficiency was drawn based on the electrochemical impedance spectroscopy measurements of the studied electrodes. These results were carried out in a 1M NaOH solution, found highly effective for the activation process. The Nyquist plots are depicted in Fig. where Q is the quasi-capacitance, j is the imaginary number, and  is the angular frequency. For α = 1, the CPE represents the ideal capacitor, and lower α values are introduced by frequency dispersion of capacitance due to heterogeneous charge transfer at the electrode/electrolyte interface On the other hand, the deeper the anodic polarization range, the lower the RCT value. In particular, for A > 0.6 V, the RCT drops by another order of magnitude and reaches 160.3 Ω at A = 1.0 V, which exceeds 99.9% activation efficiency. Notably, the EIS-measured RCT characteristic of the surfaceactivated CB-PLA electrodes corroborates the CV-measured iA and k 0 . An interesting feature was observed when analyzing the CPE-exponent α changes, suggesting that the electric heterogeneity of each cathodically-activated CB-PLA electrode surface is similar and only decreases if the activation procedure is carried out with deep anodic polarization limits (A > 0.6 V). There are few possible explanations of such characteristics. Most likely, highly efficient uncovering of the conductive CB particles leads to the appearance of the surface distribution of the time-constant dispersion, falling in the mechanism of heavily overlapping diffusion layers at spatially heterogeneous electrodes The high-resolution XPS spectra were recorded in the C 1s (Fig. The most prominent component (C1) recorded in the untreated PLA C 1s spectra lies in the energy range characteristic to the sp 2 -carbon in CB The oxygen chemistry analyzed for the untreated sample may also be divided to four different types of interactions. The dominant two, O2 and O3, are characteristic of C=O and C-O bonds, respectively, originating primarily from the polylactide matrix. Two minor oxygen components were also identified, first the O1 at 529.9 eV, a value typical for metal oxides, impurities to commercially available PLA filaments originating from thermal stabilizers and plasticizers The exposure of the electrically conductive carbon black filler at the CB-PLA surface is evident based on the increase of charge transfer kinetics through the activated electrode. Yet, this observation is not assisted by the rise in C 1s carbon black nanofiller C1 component share. This is an important yet unexpected observation, confirmed by each studied activation procedure, either through PLA hydrolysis or electrolysis. The possible explanation of this mechanism may originate from partial oxidation of the sp 2 -carbon filler material. The excessive oxidation of the electrode surface during the electrolysis process was presumably the cause of more irreversible charge transfer observed after anodic electrochemical activation of 3D printed CB-PLA electrodes by Vaněčková et al. The optional explanation of the above-defined phenomenon is the rapid surface area development of the CB-PLA electrode due to PLA hydrolysis process, leading to breaking the ester bond and an increase in the amount of aliphatic C-C bonds at the surface, confirmed with a rapid decrease of C=O bonds (C4, O2 peaks), in particular in an alkaline environment. The development of the surface area will also consequence in the increased amount of surface-adsorbed adventitious carbons. Surface area development is visible on SEM micrographs, in Figs. The hydrolysis of the PLLA (poly(L-lactic acid) ester bonds occurs in acidic and alkaline environment. It is well known that the hydrolytic degradation of ester bonds is slow in aqueous conditions, while it is much faster in alkaline environments than in acidic ones The mechanism of PLA hydrolysis performed in acidic solution involves the protonation of hydroxyl groups end groups, which lead to the formation of intramolecular hydrogen bonds and contribute to the hydrolysis reaction and the formation of free lactic acid, causing the decrease the length of PLA. On the other hand, the acidic conditions lead to the random protonation of the carbonyl group at the oxygen of PLA leads to the intramolecular hydrolysis of ester bonds in the PLA chain. This reaction cause the degradation of polymer and the formation of PLA chains consisting of lower molecular weights (Fig. The alteration of the electrode polarization causes the alkalization of the electrode surface in the anode area and acidification in the cathode area. Additionally, the solution pH has a significant influence on the alkalization or acidification at the electrode surface. The total effect, dependent on the implementation of electrochemical process conditions, can lead to a local pH change towards effective acidic or alkaline hydrolysis of PLA. Therefore, the overall efficiency depends on the sum of both overlapping processes. Thus, the applied polarization significantly influences the PLA hydrolysis, as shown in Figure Proteinase K is an enzyme to catalyze the hydrolysis of PLLA (poly(L-lactic acid) since the structure of the PLLA monomer is similar to alanine proteases and lipases. One of the best known efficiently hydrolyzing PLA alkaline proteases is proteinase K. A successful Proteinase K-catalyzed graphene-PLA digestion was recently reported by Manzanares-Palenzuela et al. Due to the reported long time required for the enzymatic hydrolysis, we have decided to verify the possibility of achieving the synergistic interaction between enzymatic and electrochemical PLA surface activation for a more time-efficient protocol. In order to do so, first, we have studied the enzymatic-driven surface activation of the carbon black-PLA electrodes, achieving the tailorable electrode performance, dependable on the Proteinase K digestion conditions. The results of the enzymatic hydrolysis on the CB-PLA electrode are summarized in Fig. These results corroborate the mass loss measurement presented in the inset of Fig. The CB-PLA mass-loss studies after enzymatic action in the inset of Fig. The short, one-day-long activation procedure as reported by Manzanares-Palenzuela et al. Because of the lack of adhesiveness of the fillers mentioned above to the PLA phase, they should have been readily released from the film surface, forming a porous structure, increasing the surface area for the action of the enzyme (facile release). They also confirmed that conventional carbons have minimal effects on the enzymatic degradation rate The XPS analysis (Fig. Prolonged activation duration of CB-PLA electrodes under proteinase K digestion is unattractive when considering this activation protocol to be used effectively in laboratory studies. Therefore, we have verified the applicability of electrochemically-catalyzed enzymatic action to shorten the activation duration. Due to their chemical structure, enzymes are proteins. Like other proteins, they are endowed with a net charge, which is determined by the quantitative and qualitative composition of amino acids in the primary structure, spatial arrangement in higher-order structures, and the conditions of the environment in which it is located. The action of an electric field in an enzyme solution may cause the conformational change of the active site, the inhibition of the binding of substrate to protein, and the destabilization of the protein structure, which ultimately decreases the protein's activity The synergistic action of enzymatic hydrolysis and electrolysis on the CB-PLA etching was studied at elevated temperature (37 C) and in Tris-HCl buffer (pH = 8), necessary for successful enzyme incubation. The results of this treatment are shown in Fig. A second experimental approach was carried out in a more narrow potentiodynamic polarization range with the anodic overpotentials not exceeding the value of the anodic polarization peak (CV scans upon A = 0.3 V, seen in Supplementary Information file, Fig. The XPS analysis was carried out to study the surface chemistry of the sample after the combined enzymatic hydrolysis and electrolysis (A = 0.3 V). The surface carbon chemistry reveals a high resemblance to the previously studied electrodes after enzymatic hydrolysis (72 h) and alkaline electrolysis due to the similar electrochemical surface area development level as testified by the electrochemical EASA examination. The essential differences observed are the decreased share of the C-O bonds (C3 drops by a factor of two, down to 5.4 at.%) and an increased amount of C-N species (C5+N1 increases by half, reaching 4.6 at.%). Moreover, another form of nitrogen appears, N2, peaking at 400.1 eV, attributed to hydrogen-bonded/protonated NH2/NH3 + amine species The studies carried out on the combined enzymatic and electrolysis action towards the increase of CB-PLA electrochemical activation confirm that simultaneous activation of the CB-PLA electrodes via this modification route may be the new valuable direction of enhancing enzyme activity which requires a separate research path. The CB-PLA electrolysis by potentiodynamic polarization is the most efficient when carried out in an alkaline environment, delivering higher EASA and improved electron transfer rate. In particular, for anodic overpotentials reaching A = 1.2 V the oxidation peak current iA of 86.3 μA (at 50 mV/s scan rate) and the peak-to-peak separation of EP = 112 mV were recorded. At the same time, the surface chemistry analysis by XPS revealed a significant decrease in oxygen content down to 12 % when compared with the untreated surface (32.3 at. %). However, the surface activation is less affected when the cathodic polarization range is modified, with the most efficient activation achieved at C = 1.6 V. The solution pH significantly influences the alkalization or acidification of the electrode surface, which is further enhanced by changes in electrode polarization. The total effect, dependent on the implementation of electrochemical process conditions, can lead to a local pH change towards effective acidic or alkaline hydrolysis of PLA. The hydrolytic decomposition mechanism of PLA in strong alkaline conditions was attributed to the end chain degradation by intramolecular transesterification. The enzymatic hydrolysis by proteinase K is less efficient for CB-PLA than in the case of previously reported graphene-PLA composite. The difference most likely originates from small gaps between CB and PLA phases, hindering proteinase K diffusion. The optimized digestion conditions were as follows: 72 h exposure at a 0.6 mg/mL proteinase K concentration, which resulted in very high ferrocyanide oxidation currents iA = 222 μA and higher reversibility (EP = 91 mV). Our results allow reporting enzymatic hydrolysis to be a significantly more effective protocol for CB-PLA electrochemical activation than electrolysis in either NaOH or HCl. However, prolonged treatment duration hinders the possible laboratory applications of this approach. Finally, we have demonstrated a novel strategy of electro-activation of 3D-printed carbon black/poly(lactic acid) electrodes based on the simultaneous surface treatment by electrolysis and enzymatic hydrolysis with proteinase K. This allows for a unique synergistic interaction of electrolysis and enzymatic hydrolysis tailoring both electrochemically active surface area and electron transfer kinetics. This activation protocol has led to EASA development comparable to alkaline electrolysis activation (iA = 90 μA), and irreversible redox process. Furthermore, the XPS analysis reveals a high resemblance of the CB-PLA electrodes after enzymatic hydrolysis (72 h) and alkaline electrolysis, thanks to analogous electrochemical surface areas. The enhanced charge transfer kinetics was attributed to proteinase K electropolymerization under the cathodic currents. The optimized values of the electrochemical parameters obtained for each studied activation protocol were summarized in Table The CV characteristics of the [Fe(CN)6] 4-/3-redox at CB-PLA electrodes, obtained after various polarization treatments in 1M HCl or 1M NaOH electrolyte, measured at polarization scan rate 50 mV/s. Altering of the cathodic polarization potentials during the electrochemical activation of CB-PLA electrodes influences the charge transfer resistance. Compared with the previously presented untreated CB-PLA electrode (RCT = 326 kΩ), the RCT parameter drops by one order of magnitude yet