In this work we briefly overview various options for Josephson junctions which should be scalable down to nanometer range for utilization in nanoscale digital superconducting technology. Such junctions should possess high values of critical current, Ic, and normal state resistance, Rn. Another requirement is the high reproducibility of the junction parameters across a wafer in a fabrication process. We argue that Superconductor -Normal metal -Superconductor (SN-N-NS) Josephson junction of "variable thickness bridge" geometry is a promising choice to meet these requirements. Theoretical analysis of SN-N-NS junction is performed in the case where the distance between the S-electrodes is comparable to the coherence length of the N-material. The restriction on the junction geometrical parameters providing the existence of superconductivity in the S-electrodes is derived for the current flowing through the junction of an order of Ic. The junction heating as well as available mechanisms for the heat removal is analyzed. The obtained results show that an SN-N-NS junction with a high (sub-millivolt) value of IcRn product can be fabricated from a broadly utilized combination of materials like Nb/Cu using well-established technological processes. The junction area can be scaled down to that of semiconductor transistors fabricated in the frame of a 40-nm process. The promised end of Moore's law However, further progress has slowed down. The main reason was the low integration density. It caused, e.g., implementations of superconducting memory to be of impractical storage capacity One of the most difficult puzzles of the scaling is the reduction of the size of the Josephson junction In this paper, we examine the most common types of Josephson junctions on their scalability. We argue that a planar SN-N-NS junction (S stays for a superconductor, and N -for a normal metal) with variable-thickness bridge geometry is promising for miniaturization. We calculate temperature dependencies of the supercurrent and the characteristic voltage of the SN-N-NS junction for various transparencies of the SN interfaces. Further, we consider limitations on the junction critical current providing stable superconducting state in the S-electrodes. We also discuss the heat balance in the SN-N-NS structure and estimate the heating during junction operation. Finally, we discuss the achievable range of areas of the studied structures and possible ways of their fabrication. A workhorse of digital superconductor technology is a sandwich Superconductor/Insulator/Superconductor (SIS) Nb/Al-AlO x /Nb Josephson junction. Due to the good wetting of Nb with Al, one can obtain a high uniformity of barrier transparency which provides just a few percents of the technological spread Since the sandwich type of tunnel Josephson junction possesses relatively high self-capacitance, c ≥ 60 fF/μm 2 , the resistive shunt, R s , is always used to damp Josephson oscillations occurring after the junction switching. A workable operation regime is achieved with Steward-McCumber parameter value, β c = (2π/Φ 0 )j c cR 2 s a 2 ≈ 1. Corresponding R s ≈ 5 Ω is commonly implemented with MoN x having resistance ∼ 5 Ω per square A natural approach to scale the junction area below micron size is to increase the critical current density. Starting from j c = 0.5 mA/μm 2 the junction becomes self-shunted Double-barrier, SINIS, Josephson structures were pro-posed to mitigate the difficulties of the scaling (dirty limit), where T c is the superconductor critical temperature, D n = v F l/3 is the diffusion coefficient, v F is the Fermi velocity and l is the electron mean free path in the normal metal, then the cotunneling across INI weak link may prevail over sequential SIN+NIS tunneling process resulting in I c R n product even larger than that of SIS junction with the same I barrier Unfortunately, due to difference in Al growth over Nb and AlO x surfaces, the implementation of equal barriers in Nb/AlO x /Al/AlO x /Nb structure appeared to be intractable task with increase of the barriers transparency Another option is to artificially synthesize the interlayer material by doping semiconductor up to a degenerate state At nanometer scale, where area of Josephson junction is a ∼ 0.01 μm 2 , the Josephson junction critical current should be j c ∼ 10 mA/μm 2 , taking into account the required critical current I c = 0.1 mA at the working temperature T = 4.2 K. Such high values of the critical current density together with the considered inhomogeneity of the barriers of SIS and SDS junctions makes SNS junction to be the preferred type for scaling. SNS structure obviously does not require shunt resistor. It is important to choose N-material so as to minimize the suppression of superconductivity in S-electrodes while maximizing the induction of superconductivity in N-interlayer for high values of I c R n product and critical current, correspondingly. For transparent SN interface the proximity effect is described where ξ s is decay length in S-material and ρ s,n are normal resistivities of S-and N-materials. The desired value, γ < 1, means that the amount of normal electrons diffusing per second from N to S is smaller than the same value of correlated electrons moving in the opposite direction. This case is commonly realized with pairs of materials like Nb (S) and Ti, Hf or Pd x Au 1-x (N), where ξ n ξ s ≈ 10 nm while resistivity of normal metals is larger or of an order of the one of niobium, ρ n ρ s ≈ 8 μΩ cm. For sandwich type SNS junction and the N layer thickness larger than ξ n , it is necessary This problem is inherent for commonly used sandwichtype Josephson junctions. However, it can be circumvented by modification of the weak link region geometry with corresponding redistribution of current flowing therein Metals with relatively large decay length are preferred to obtain high critical current value of SN-N-NS junction. Unfortunately, such metals generally possess relatively small resistivity, since ξ n ∼ √ D n while ρ n ∼ 1/D n . However, if the thickness of N layer is smaller than the decay length, d n ≪ ξ n , then the suppression parameter is decreased corresponding to the decreased number of normal electrons diffusing from N to S. Thus, the SN-N-NS structure size ratio, d n ≪ ξ n ≈ L b , seems to be optimal choice to provide both: high critical current and normal state resistance of the junction. Below we consider SN-N-NS junction with specified ratio of geometrical parameters as the promising candidate for scaling, since the decay length, ξ n , of the broadly utilized metals, like Al or Cu, lies in the range of a few tens of nanometers. Our model of SN-N-NS junction contains a normal metal film connecting two massive superconducting electrodes of the length, (L -L b )/2 each, located at the distance ±L b /2 from the center of this film, see Fig. The proximity effect in this system can be considered in the frame of Usadel equations Here Φ n , G n = ω/ ω 2 + Φ n Φ * n are modified Usadel Green's functions, and ω = (2m + 1)T /T c are Matsubara frequencies, m is integer. Φ n , are normalized on πT c . We apply standard boundary conditions at the edges of the structure [74] and Kupriyanov-Lukichev boundary condition By integration of equations ( In the area of the bridge we have the following equations, The solution of the problem is simplified in the limit of a small gap between superconducting electrodes, L b ≪ ξ n . We also suppose that in the practically interesting case, the length of superconducting electrodes is much larger than the characteristic scale, L -L b ≫ ζ, which arise in the frame of analytical solution of the problem [74]. This characteristic scale is ζ ≈ √ γ BM ξ n in the limit of small γ BM for arbitrary normalized temperature, t = T /T c . In the opposite limit of large γ BM , it is ζ ≈ ξ n at small temperatures and ζ ξ n at t 0.5. Under these assumptions, we obtain [74] the following expression for the product of superconducting current, J s , across the junction and its normal state resistance, R n , where η = √ γ BM ξ n /L b , C are the constants determined by matching solutions in the ranges of electrodes and the bridge [74], and Re Φ n is the real part of the functions Φ n , while is the sum In the limit of small suppression parameter, (rigid boundary conditions), the expression (7) for supercurrent takes the following form, where R n = R nb , ∆ is the magnitude of superconducting order parameter normalized on πT c , φ is superconducting phase difference across the junction, and For a vanishingly small suppression, γ BM → 0, the expression (9) transforms into the formula obtained by Kulik and Omelyanchuk (KO-1) In the opposite limit of large γ BM , ) where R n is mainly determined by the resistance of SN interfaces. Characteristic voltage of SN-N-NS junction can be obtained directly from expression ), as a function of normalized temperature, t. The normalizing coefficient value is 2πk B T c /e ≈ 5 mV for niobium critical temperature, T c = 9.2 K. The bridge length is L b = 0.1ξ n . The curves obtained in both limits are well consistent. The presented dependencies are limited from above by the curve obtained using KO-1 expression Fig. In the considered approximation, the characteristic voltage is nearly independent on the length of the bridge up to L b ξ n for arbitrary γ BM . The critical current, I c , is the larger the smaller are L b and γ BM . The current flowing through the junction (I ≈ I c ) must not destroy the superconductivity in its electrodes. Below, we formulate the restriction on geometrical parameters of SN-N-NS structure coming from this requirement. In accordance with experimental data obtained in MIT LL where W 0 ≈ 50 nm is a doubled thickness of the contaminated surface layer. The linear dependence of the critical current on the width means that in the interesting for us range of the thickness, W 250 nm, the supercurrent is distributed uniformly over the film width. This fact allows us to seek the solution of the Usadel equations in the depth of the electrodes (|x| L) in the form Φ s,n (x, y) = Φ s,n (y) exp {ikx} independent on coordinate z (see Fig. For supercurrent densities, J S and J N , in the S and N films we get where parameter k in ( is determined by the magnitude of the full current, , flowing through the SN electrodes, while q in ( so that 1 + q = I SN /J S d s W . At T ≈ 0.5T c , the Matsubara frequencies ω are larger than ∆. We can neglect ∆ in comparison with ω when estimating the magnitudes of sums S 1,2 in (15) and get, The current flowing through the S film must be small in comparison with S-film critical current, where β ≪ 1 is the desired smallness coefficient. The magnitude of I c in ( where the coefficient C for niobium is We should note that for ρ n ≈ ρ s the ratio of the currents flowing through the N and S films is small, q ≪ 1, and so 1 + q ≈ 1. An important requirement to the design of circuits based on the SN-N-NS junction is that the normal component, I n , of the total current must not lead to overheating of the SN-N-NS structure. Here we calculate the power dissipated in the junction during a clock period of a digital circuit and the power that can be absorbed by the junction environment. Then we evaluate the heating of niobium-copper SN-N-NS structure. The heating effect arises due to Joule dissipation. The energy dissipated during the junction switching, t sw ≈ Φ 0 /I c R n , can be estimated as where V = ( /2e)∂φ/∂τ is a voltage drop across the junction and I n = V /R n . By assuming that the phase increase rate is ∂φ/∂τ ≈ 2π/t sw and that the junction is switching once in a clock period, T clk , we obtain the dissipated energy and average dissipated power, The energy E is transferred to normal electrons located in the region of concentration of the electric field which includes the bridge between SN electrodes. The hot electrons may diffuse from the heated region on the characteristic time scale value of Fermi velocity, v F ≈ 10 6 m/s, electronic mean free path, l ≈ d n ≈ 10 nm, and the bridge length, L b ≈ ξ n ≈ 40 nm, a rough estimation of τ esc gives the value ∼ 3 × 10 -13 s. This is an order larger than the scattering time, τ sc = l/v F ≈ 10 -14 s. Such a short value of τ esc means that for a time equal to a clock period lying in picosecond time scale, hot electrons diffuse along the N film into the SN electrodes over a distance of the order of the current leakage length, ξ n √ γ BM . This process is shown schematically by the red arrows in Fig. Within the standard model of electron energy relaxation, the electron-electron collision rate is assumed to be large so that the electrons maintain an equilibrium distribution characterized by the temperature, T loc , which is different from the lattice temperature T . The hot electrons may relax the excess energy making use of the two channels schematically shown in Fig. The first channel for relaxation is the diffusion of hot electrons into superconducting electrodes. The heat conductance of the SN interface with small specific boundary resistance, R B , is given by the expression where δT = T loc -T, A is the effective area through which the heat flow takes place. For a finite transparency of SN interface (γ BM ≈ 1), the area A ≈ 2ξ n W. The second channel is the transfer of excess energy to phonons. In dirty metals, the rate of this process , P e-ph , is given by Further phonon heat propagation along the N film can be described similar to the heat spread in an infinite rod from the inner heated segment, -ξ n -L b /2 ≤ x ≤ ξ n + L b /2, which has a temperature T loc exceeding the temperature T of its ends in the initial moment, where erf (z) is the error function, μ 2 n = λ n /C vn d f n , λ n and C vn are thermal conductivity and thermal capacity of the N metal. During a clock period, δT e-ph decreases from its initial value down to The product η n = μ n √ T clk determines the characteristic scale of the heat propagation. The excess phonon temperature may further relax to the substrate (see green arrows in Fig. where δT ph-s = T ph -T, K k depends on the materials, and A ph ≈ (L b + 2ξ n + 2η n ) W is the effective interface area of the heat transfer marked by brown arrow in Fig. Nb/Cu material combination The SN-N-NS variable thickness bridge proposed in this work can be fabricated using commonly used materials like Nb, MoRe, V as a superconductor and Cu, Au, Al as a normal metal. Below, we estimate the parameters of NbCu-Cu-CuNb structure in accordance with the restriction Substitution of the typical values For γ BM = 0.5 we obtain v c ≈ 0.14 (see Fig. The specific boundary resistance is where K sn ≈ 2 × 10 -7 W/K. By substituting the typical Cu parameters, v F = 1.57× 10 6 m/s, d f n = 8900 kg/m 3 , c t = 4.8 km/s, c l = 2.3 km/s, T * = 1.8 K, l = 10 nm, m e = 9.1×10 -31 kg, E F = 1.13 × 10 -18 J into where K e-ph ≈ 1.9 • 10 -9 W/K. Further power transfer between the normal metal and the substrate phonons is given by the Kapitza coupling where K kk ≈ 1.5 10 -9 W/K. In accordance with the heat balance described in the previous section, the power dissipated in the junction can be absorbed by the S-electrodes and the phonons of the N-film with subsequent partial power transfer into the substrate. Since K kk ≈ K e-ph ≪ K sn , one can estimate the heating of the structure as follows, Such temperature increase can lead to a slight decrease in the value of the critical current by the amount see Fig. In summary, we argue that SN-N-NS junctions with variable thickness bridge geometry are promising for miniaturization. The presented theoretical analysis shows that the junction I c R n value reaches sub-millivolt level even when the rigid boundary conditions are not fulfilled at the SN interfaces. According to the obtained analytical expressions, the junction current-phase relation is close to a sinusoidal one at the operation temperature, T /T c ≈ 0.5. This allows the use of standard computer-aided design tools for superconducting digital circuit simulations. The suppression parameter value, γ BM ≈ 1, can be taken as the upper threshold for the fabrication of Josephson junctions intended for operation at liquid helium temperature, T ≈ 4.2 K. The corresponding normalized characteristic voltage, v c ≈ 0.08, turns into I c R n ≈ 0.4 mV and characteristic frequency, I c R n /Φ 0 ≈ 200 GHz. Since the clock frequency of complex circuits is usually a fraction of the characteristic one, the chosen value of γ BM 1 provides the possibility of operation with frequencies up to several tens of GHz. Based on available experimental data An increase of W leads to undesirable inhomogeneity of the supercurrent distribution in the S electrodes. Its decrease results in the fast suppression of the S-film critical current. The use of additional technological steps aimed at the decrease of SN interface transparency may be required to decrease the junction critical current density in this case. One of possible ways of controllable reduction of the SN interface transparency is the technique that has proved itself in the fabrication of Nb/Al-AlO x /Nb tunnel junctions The decrease of the transparency of the SN interfaces corresponds to a decrease in the characteristic voltage in proportion to γ -3/2 BM and in the critical current in proportion to γ -2 BM . Ultimately, the width limitations is determined by the quality of the edges of the superconducting electrodes. In the presence of "dead" edges ∼ 25 nm wide, the width can hardly be less than 150 nm. An effective area of SN-N-NS junction, a JJ , can be determined according to the length within which the dominating heat transfer from hot electrons to superconducting films takes place, L ht = L b + 2ξ n . Thus a JJ = 3ξ n W for L b = ξ n so that with W = 150 nm we obtain a JJ ≈ 18000 nm 2 . This is close to the area of semiconductor transistor, a t , fabricated in the frame of a 40 nm technological process, under the assumption that a t ≈ 50λ 2 , where λ is the minimum feature size In this supplementary material we present the details of a SN-N-NS junction superconducting current calculation. The model of SN-N-NS junction contains a normal metal film connecting two massive superconducting electrodes of the length, L -L b , located at the distance ±L b /2 from the centre of this film, see Fig. In the calculation of the critical current, we suppose that the condition of the dirty limit is fulfilled for all metals, the critical temperature of the N-material is equal to zero and its width, W , and thickness, d n , is much smaller than Josephson penetration depth, λ J , and decay length, ξ n = D n /2πT c , respectively. The proximity effect in this system can be considered in the frame of Usadel equations x n where permit us to neglect the suppression of superconductivity in the S-film due to the proximity effect even in the case of a fully transparent SN interface. We consider the Usadel Green's functions, Φ s , equal to their equilibrium values in a superconductor at a given temperature, correspondingly. Here ∆ is the magnitude of superconducting order parameter normalized on πT c , φ is the superconducting phase difference across the junction. The conditions (S6) also allow considering functions Φ n independent of the coordinate y, in the first approximation on the parameter d n . By integration of the equation (S1) over the coordinate y, and using the boundary conditions ( In the area 0 ≤ x ≤ L b /2 we have the equations The solution of equations (S8), (S9) is simplified in the limit of a small gap between the superconducting electrodes, L b ≪ 1. The obtained functions Φ n allows to calculate the supercurrent J s across the junction where t = T /T c is the normalized temperature. In the first approximation on L b ≪ 1, we may neglect the right-hand side of the equations The functions Re Φ n are independent of the coordinate x, as it follows from the boundary conditions (S2), the condition of continuity of the functions Φ n at x = L b /2, and the equations (S11). For the imaginary part of Φ n we obtain where C are integration constants. By taking into account that Re Φ n are constants (S12), we may find the solution of (S13) in the form The solutions of this boundary problems are obviously constants independent of x, The equations for the imaginary parts of Φ n can be written as follows, where By taking into account that Re Φ n are constants (S20), we again may find the solution of equation (S22) in the form (S14). Its substitution into (S22) leads to This results in the following equation for the θ functions, where The first integral of the equation (S24) gives which, in turn, determines the product of the superconducting current, J s , across the junction and its normal state resistance, R n , Here η = √ γ BM /L b , while is the sum From the equations (S24) and (S26) it follows that the characteristic scale, ζ, of spatial variation of the functions θ along the coordinate x is At small temperatures, the sum in (S28) converges at ω ≈ ∆. According to (S30), we obtain From (S30) -(S32) it follows that in the limit of small γ BM the characteristic scale is ζ ≈ √ γ BM , while for a large γ BM it is ζ ≈ ∆ -1/2 ≈ 1 at small temperatures and ζ ≈ ω -1/2 at t 0.5. In a practically interesting case, the length of the superconducting electrodes is much larger than the characteristic scale, Here the magnitude of the functions θ(x) at x = L/2 can be easily found from (S26) as 