We follow the evolution of Copper and Oxygen two-hole excitations, in optimally doped (CaxLa1-x)(Ba1.75-xLa0.25+x)Cu3Oy for x = 0.1 and x = 0.4. The spectra have contributions from band states as well as a localized multiplet structure. From their identification, we determine the intrashell Coulomb interaction U for Oxygen and Copper sites. These results allow us to estimate the atomic superexchange coupling J suggesting a positive correlation between the maximal superconducting critical temperature T max C and J. Copper-based materials (cuprates) emerges from a charge transfer insulator, a state dominated by electronic correlations. In the charge compensated compound (Ca x La 1-x )(Ba 1.75-x La 0.25+x )Cu 3 O y (CL123), it arises from an antiferromagnetic phase upon hole doping Nevertheless, none of these experiments were completely decisive. Magnetic measurements were done in the non-SC part of the phase diagram and whether their measured trend is extended out to the SC state could be questioned. RIXS suffers from interpretation of the data in terms of J, although the arguments seems to converge with Pärschke et al. The purpose of this study is to evaluate the evolution of the local superexchange interaction J with x in CL123, and to compare it with T max C (x). The structure of CL123 is almost identical to YBa 2 Cu 3 O y (Y123) . Here, we focus on optimally doped single crystals of CL123 from two families: x=0.1 and x=0.4 where the superconducting transition occurs at 63 and 77 K, respectively. These are the highest critical temperatures achieved for the different x values in a single crystal form. An analysis of the Cu-L 3 and O-K absorption spectra for compositions x=0.1 and x=0.4 nearly optimally doping shows that both samples have the same amount of holes, which is consistent with previous reports The measurements were performed at the Spherical Grating Monochromator (SGM) beamline located in the Canadian Light Source (CLS) in which the samples were cleaved in a Ultra High Vacuum (UHV) environment better than 5 × 10 -9 mbar. To enhance the Auger signal we measure the spectra at the maximum of the absorption line. The X-Ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS) technique was performed in the Total Electron Yield (TEY) mode, where the current needed to compensate for emitted electrons is acquired. The incoming light beam was linearly polarized parallel to the scattering plane defined by the incoming beam and the outgoing electrons. These were detected using a Hemispherical Scienta analyzer. The samples were oriented with the [001] reciprocal lattice vector perpendicular to the analyzer entrance (in a normal emission configuration) which was also parallel to the normal of the in situ cleaved sample surface. Prior to photoemission spectroscopy, we study the doping concentration by x-ray absorption. The absorption spectra of the the spin-orbit split states near the Cu L 3 edge are composed by two lines: a main line at 931.3 eV and a satellite at 932.7 eV Based on the intensity of the main line and the satellite, the hole concentration can be estimated The doping concentration could also be estimated from an analysis of the Oxygen K (O-K) absorption edge. In the similar compound Y123 The charge transfer gap ∆ -defined as the energy separation between 3d 9 and 3d 10 L states-can be estimated from the energy difference between the satellite and main line of the Cu-L 3 absorption edge [arrow in Fig. The PES structure in the region BE = 0 -8 eV is associated with Oxygen and Copper states whose main spectral features are centred around -2 and -4 eV. This assignment is consistent with previous reports on HgBa 2 Ca 2 Cu 3 O 8+δ The electron emission spectra acquired close to the maximum of an absorption edge will include -besides the normal PES-contributions from different decay channels of the excited core-hole. The interference between these channels will mostly be observed in the photon energy evolution of the emission spectra Within 200 meV of the Cu-L 3 absorption threshold [Fig. The extracted spectroscopic information is interpreted using Cini-Sawatzky theory (CST) Based on these considerations, we can extract the effective intrashell Coulomb interaction for Cu and O elements from the two-hole spectra. First, the centre and width of the band states are extracted from a fit to the broad features. This assignment is further supported by linking these values with the corresponding pDoS obtained before; the band states are theoretically described by the self-convolution density of states (SCDoS) of the respective pDoS. For x=0.1 composition, the band states related to Cu are centred at 4.27±0.03 eV with a full width at half maximum (FWHM) of 3.64±0.06 eV. Second, by associating the lines at increasing twohole energy with the multiplets E( 1 D)=9.06±0.01 eV, E( 1 G)=11.72±0.01 eV, and E( 1 S)=15.67±0.03 eV, we determine the Slater-Condon parameters The atomic antiferromagnetic superexchange coupling J is revealed as one manifestation of the electronic correlations. This coupling would mediate the spin-spin interaction between two adjacent Cu atoms through an intermediate O. Based on a simple atomic transition model In summary, guided by CST and the propensity rules for Auger transitions, we have identified the band states as well as spin-singlet multiplet excitations of the extracted two-hole spectra of Copper and Oxygen elements on the high-T C compound (Ca x La 1-x )(Ba 1.75-x La 0.25+x )Cu 3 O y . Based on their energy, the Coulomb repulsion for electrons in the O-2p (U p ) and Cu-3d (U d ) states was determined for the compositions x=0.1 and x=0.4 in the optimally doped regime. Using these values together with the chargetransfer gap extracted from the X-Ray absorption spectra, we have indicated that the atomic superexchange interaction J increases with x as does T max C . This relation is consistent with the recently reported 