As the energy problem becomes more prominent, research on thermoelectric (TE) materials has deepened over the past few decades. Low thermal conductivity enables thermoelectric materials better thermal conversion performance. In this study, based on the first principles and phonon Boltzmann transport equation, we studied the thermal conductivities of single-layer WSe2 under several defect conditions using density functional theory (DFT) as implemented in the Vienna Abinitio Simulation Package (VASP). The lattice thermal conductivities of WSe2 under six kinds of defect states, i.e., PS, SS-c, DS-s, SW-c, SS-e, and are 66.1, 41.2, 39.4, 8.8, 42.1, and 38.4 W/(m•K), respectively at 300 K. Defect structures can reduce thermal conductivity up to 86.7% (SW-c) compared with perfect structure. The influences of defect content, type, location factors on thermal properties have been discussed in this research. By introducing atom defects, we can reduce and regulate the thermal property of WSe2, which should provide an interesting idea for other thermoelectric materials to gain a lower thermal conductivity. With the shortage and quality degradation of resources becoming increasingly prominent, the development of new sustainable green energy has become an important issue WSe2, one kind of 2D transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDCs), has low lattice thermal conductivity, thus has gained a lot of attention Through the delicate design, the thermal conductivity can be greatly changed by applying a small mechanical strain. Also, by constructing heterostructures, the thermal conductivity can be effectively adjusted VASP installed in high-performance supercomputer clusters was used to perform all first principle calculations with DFT as the basis. The interaction between electrons and ions was described by the projector augmented wave (PAW) pseudopotentials. The generalized gradient approximation (GGA) of the Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof (PBE) form was used to explain the exchange and correlation interactions between electrons. 400 eV energy cutoff was selected to characterise the Kohn-Sham wavefunctions. The first Brillouin zone was divided by 4 × 4 × 4 k-mesh. All associated structures could be fully relaxed until the energy convergence conditions of 10 -5 eV was fulfilled. By solving phonon Boltzmann transport equations (BTE), the lattice thermal conductivity could be calculated by the ShengBTE software First, the crystal structure of unit cell WSe2 has been optimized, with the lattice constant being a=3.32524 Å. WSe2 has a hexagonal lattice structure with stacked Se-W-Se layers. The W atom layer is sandwiched between two Se atom layers. Fig. Phonon scattering has a very important influence on the heat transport properties of materials. Figure To understand the effect of defects, defect content, type, and location on the thermal conductivity of WSe2, we set some kinds of defect conditions. The six defect structures are shown in Figure Through assessing PS, SS-c, SW-c, the influence of defect atom types on thermal conductivity will be revealed. Finally, by contrasting SS-c and SS-e, DS-s and DS-d, the impact of defect location on thermal conductivity will be explained. The temperature dependence of phonon thermal conductivity in monolayer WSe2 is shown in Fig. The lattice thermal conductivity of PS at 300 K is 66.1 W/(m•K) (Table The thermal conductivities of WSe2 at 300 K are 66.1, 41.2, 39.4, 8.8, 42.1, and 38.4 W/(m•K), respectively for PS, SS-c, DS-s, SW-c, SS-e and DS-d. Sample with defects have much lower thermal conductivity compared with perfect structure, up to 87% decrease (SW-c) The content of defects has an important influence on thermal conductivity. By comparing the thermal conductivity of the three structures of PS, SS-c, and DS-s (Figure For instance, at 300 K, the thermal conductivities of the three structures of PS, SS-c, and DS-s are 66.1, 41.2 and 39.8 W/(m•K), respectively. Single-atom defects can reduce the thermal conductivity to 62.3%, and diatomic defects can reduce the thermal conductivity to 60.2%. Due to the introduction of defects, the phonon-defects scattering mechanism leads to the reduction of phonon transmission coefficient The types of defects also influence thermal transport property The impact of the location of the defects on the thermal conductivity has also been investigated. Comparing the thermal conductivity of SS-c and SS-e, it is learnt that at 300 K, the thermal conductivity of SS-e is 42.1 W/(m•K), while that of SS-c is 41.2 W/(m•K). The location of the defect has an important influence on the efficiency of heat transport efficiency By comparing the termwise decrease ratio, as shown in Figure Therefore, the defective structure can not only block the phonon heat transfer path and reduce the thermal conductivity, but also be more sensitive to temperature changes. A small temperature change can bring about a greater decrease in thermal conductivity. One possible reason for the large thermal conductivity drop caused by defects is that the existence of vacancies causes the lifetime (or the mean free path) of certain phonon modes to decrease The thermal properties of monolayer WSe2 with several kinds of defect structures have been studied by first-principles calculations. By solving Boltzmann transport equations implemented in ShengBTE package via inputting the second-order harmonic and third-order anharmonic IFCs, the temperature-dependent thermal conductivities of WSe2 of defect structures can be calculated. The thermal conductivity of perfect-structure WSe2 at 300 K is 66.1 W/(m•K), while the defect samples T (K) PS SS-c DS-s SW-c SS-e DS-d T (K) PS SS-c DS-s SW-c SS-e DS-d 100 247.2 217.9 205.9 38.5 224.5 199.8