We investigate the effect of light soaking and forward electric bias treatment on SHJ solar cells and modules, and in particular the influence of the thermal treatment occurring during lamination. A substantial performance increase is observed after electric bias or light soaking, which is shown to be potentially partly reset by the lamination process. This reset is reproduced by annealing the cells with the same thermal budget. A second treatment after lamination again improves performances, and similar final performance is reached independently of the pre-lamination treatment. Therefore, a single treatment after lamination enables maximal module output without any benefit from a cell pre-treatment. Whereas cells react overall better to forward bias, modules show a slightly better response to light soaking. Silicon heterojunction (SHJ) solar cells Contradictory reports exist on the effect of thermal annealing on the benefits of light soaking. Some reports show mostly stable benefits upon annealing at 200°C for 100 minutes, however small lifetime decrease for ip/ip structures All the cells used in this study are 6'' SHJ solar cells, purchased on the industrial cell market. The system used for the light soaking process is a Solaronix Solixon A-65 degradator, delivering a class A AM1.5G spectrum at 1000 W/m 2 , with a spatial nonuniformity of class B (IEC 60904-9). The sample temperature is regulated to 50 °C using an aluminium chuck with a water circulation system connected to a Julabo FC600S chiller, allowing for a temperature accuracy of ±0.2 °C. The light soaking treatment (LS) is performed on cells under open-circuit (OC) conditions during one week. The forward electric bias treatment (FWB) consists of applying a forward current density of 40 mA/cm 2 (corresponding to the minority carrier injection level reached at Voc under an AM1.5G illumination) in the dark during one week. The power supplies (TPAE IC-triple) were connected to cells through aluminium foil contacts and the modules were directly plugged using their metallisation. FWB is applied at ambient temperature without active temperature control and minimal sample heating (~30 °C) coming from dissipation of the applied electric power was observed. The IV properties of the cells were measured using a Wacom WXS-220S-L2 with a standard deviation of the different IV parameters as follows: Eff: ± 0.05 %abs, Voc: ± 0.5 mV, FF: ± 0.15 %abs, Jsc: ± 0.04 mA/cm 2 . The modules were measured using a horizontal Pasan LED flasher with a 162x162 mm 2 mask and connected with a four-probe configuration. The standard deviation of the setup is estimated at ±3%, and the reproducibility at ±1%. The experimental procedure, shown in figure As the effects of the subsequent treatments are expected to affect the Voc and the FF, the cells were sorted by their FF*Voc product and then distributed evenly in the different groups before each treatment phase. This sorting is done to prevent sampling bias. Five cells were selected as global references free from any treatment to calibrate the measurement system along the entire experiment. The initial IV measurements on cells show a narrow distribution of parameters, shown in the Annex in table Figure Part of the cells were then laminated into single-cell modules while another group of cells went through annealing mentioned as pseudo-lamination. Figure Cells exposed to a pseudo-lamination (thermal treatment) after the first treatment show a similar behavior to the laminated cells, as shown in figure According to these results, the structural changes induced by carrier injection are partially reversible with temperature. This observation contrasts with some studies, where the LS benefits were either stable upon annealing C) Second treatment: light soaking and forward bias on modules Figure After detailing each experimental iterations, this paragraph focuses on the overall IV parameters variations, between the initial cell state and the final cell and module state, i.e. after treatment 1 -(pseudo) laminationtreatment 2. The conclusions differ a bit between cells and modules. For cells, as shown in Figure The results for modules are shown in Figure These differences between cells and modules are yet to be fully understood and can be separated into two phenomena. Whereas the Jsc of cells slightly degraded under LS, stronger degradation is seen for modules which suggest an additional optical effect from the encapsulation. This should be resolved to fully benefit from LS on modules. The differences in Voc and FF could possibly stem from the differences in temperature during LS and FWB, and between cell and module states. A dedicated experiment with more samples or a more accurate measurement system would be needed to identify these small differences accurately. Also, keeping a reference module would be helpful to better track absolute variations caused by the different treatments. IV. CONCLUSION We investigate the effect of a light soaking (LS) and forward electrical bias (FWB) treatment on cells and modules before and after a lamination (for modules) or an equivalent thermal treatment (for cells). The first treatment shows an improvement of the cell performance for both LS and FWB, as commonly reported in the literature for SHJ cells. We report a partial reset of the IV properties during the module lamination, which could be replicated on cells with an annealing mimicking the thermal treatment applied during lamination. The second treatment significantly improves all samples again, with noticeable differences between the cells and modules. Whereas the cells react overall better to FWB thanks to a larger Voc gain, the modules show a better Voc and FF after LS, but a lower Jsc. The causes of these small differences deserve further studies. Therefore, to maximise the watt output of a module, applying a single treatment after lamination appears as the best choice.