Topological insulating phases are usually found in periodic lattices stemming from collective resonant effects, and it may thus be expected that similar features may be prohibited in thermal diffusion, given its purely dissipative and largely incoherent nature. We report the diffusion-based topological states supported by spatiotemporally-modulated advections stacked over a fluidic surface, thereby imitating a periodic propagating potential in effective thermal lattices. We observe edge and bulk states within purely nontrivial and trivial lattices, respectively. At interfaces between these two types of lattices, the diffusive system exhibits interface states, manifesting inhomogeneous thermal properties on the fluidic surface. Our findings establish a framework for topological diffusion and thermal edge/bulk states, and it may empower a distinct mechanism for flexible manipulation of robust heat and mass transfer. 2), enabling novel phenomena across a variety of fields (3-7), such as anomalous edge states (8, 9), mode switching (10), unidirectional wave propagation Recently the Hamiltonian associated with classical thermal diffusion was discovered to follow a skew-Hermitian relation (26), which may offer a hint to realize a topological insulating phase for thermal diffusion. On the other hand, the absence of a periodic potential and dynamic coherence for thermal transport fundamentally hinders this pathway. To synthesize a topological insulating phase in purely dissipative diffusion mechanism, it is of utmost importance to imitate the periodic potential and coherent interference in thermal transport, such that Bloch theory could be revived and diffusive topological transport could be thereby expected as those photonic and acoustic counterparts (17-25). Here, we resort to judiciously time-modulated Hermiticity features in both space and time to introduce an advective paradigm for the very first demonstration of thermal topological transport in periodically stacked fluid surfaces. We incorporate spatiotemporally modulated advections to enable an additional real dimension to thermal diffusion, while alternating advection arrangements offer the imitated coherences and periodic potentials. Depending on the advective configuration, the effective bandgap can be either topologically nontrivial or trivial. We experimentally discover thermal topological modes with edge and interface states as well as conventional bulk states, respectively manifested as stationary and deviated temperature distributions. The findings provide a feasible way of creating the effective periodic lattice on an advective fluidic surface, unlocking more opportunities and applications for topological thermal diffusion. Our proposed recipe for diffusive topological modes can further enlighten the manipulation of general diffusive fields (27- 31). We consider a fluidic surface possessing periodic advections, as shown in Fig. . In Eq. ( where kt denotes the effective Bloch wave number (Supplementary Note 1). Here, = denotes the diffusivity, while we further assume = = for simplification under the hypothesis of small thickness of the fluidic surface d (Fig. This system can support topological modes, since Eq. ( Nonzero and zero winding numbers respectively correspond to the presence or absence of edge states at the boundaries. In order to verify their presence, we consider 40 units forming 10 effective lattices in the schematic model shown in Fig. In contrast, the thermal features of the scheme with trivial lattices (the lower insert of Fig. The topological edge and bulk states suggest the possibility of flexibly manipulating the thermal properties of a fluidic surface. Here, we further explore two cases with tunable butting of topologically nontrivial and trivial lattices, respectively possessing the nonzero (±1) and zero winding numbers, to demonstrate controllable edge, interface and bulk states, while the advections are also modulated in the same gapped phase (Supplementary Note 2). For Case I, we respectively configure five nontrivial lattices (20 units) and five trivial lattices (20 units) to the fluidic surface as shown in Fig. For Case II, we adjust the configuration strategy by respectively inserting one nontrivial lattice (4 units) at the two system boundaries, while eight trivial lattices (32 units) are further filled in the regions between the two nontrivial lattices as illustrated in Fig. This work introduces an advective route to reveal for the first-time thermal topological modes by stacking periodic advections on a fluid surface. These spatiotemporal-modulated advections introduce manipulation in momentum space for a purely dissipative phenomenon like thermal diffusion, enabling effectively nontrivial and trivial lattices. Thermal topological edge, interface, and bulk states were observed upon modulating the advections within these effective lattices in a gapped phase. Our findings point to a direction beyond conventional topological physics based on oscillatory fields, and offer a unique platform to study unexpected non-Hermitian topological modes in pure diffusive systems. Besides, this work also suggests a distinctive mechanism of arbitrary diffusive manipulations with the combinations of nontrivial and trivial lattices. 