Fast, room temperature imaging at THz and sub-THz frequencies is an interesting feature which could unleash the full potential of plenty applications in security, healthcare and industrial production. In this Letter we introduce micromechanical bolometers based on silicon nitride trampoline membranes as broad-range detectors, down to the sub-THz frequencies. They show, at the largest wavelengths, room-temperature noise-equivalent-powers comparable to state-of-the-art commercial devices (~100 pW Hz -1/2 ); adding the good operation speed and the easy, large-scale fabrication process, the trampoline membrane could be the next candidate for cheap, room temperature THz imaging and related applications. Terahertz (THz) radiation detectors have been developed for over a century The setup we used to characterize our device is sketched in Fig. where ω0 is the laser frequency without feedback, α is the linewidth enhancement factor, k a matching constant, GG nn the modal gain factor and RR the carrier injection rate. nn eeh and nn 0 are the carrier densities at threshold and transparency, respectively. τc , τs and τext are the cavity round-trip time, the carrier lifetime and the feedback time, respectively, the latter representing the time necessary for the photons to return into the cavity after emission. A small vibration of the reflecting target translates in a change in τext, changing the solution of eq. ( We fabricated and characterized two different membranes starting from a 300-nm-thick Si3N4 film: the first one (M1) has a 300x300 μm central plate and 490x20 μm tethers, while the second (M2) has a smaller 200x200 μm plate and longer 560x20 μm tethers. Both membranes are clamped to a square Si supporting frame, 1x1 mm in size. A SEM micrograph of device M2 is shown in Fig. Starting from device M1, we placed the microresonator on a piezoelectric actuator inside a vacuum chamber with a transparent window in order to grant light access (both visible, infrared and THz). We shined the laser light at the trampoline center and used a sinusoidal voltage as bias for the piezo actuator as well as reference for the lock-in demodulation, similarly to the fixed mirror configuration. When the voltage frequency was resonant with one of the membrane modes, a clear signal appeared in the lock-in amplifier, as can be seen in Fig. In order to explore the dependency of responsivity on the trampoline geometry, we repeated the characterization on device M2. As the beam spot size of the infrared laser is considerably smaller (36 μm) than the central plate size (200-300 μm), the amount of absorbed radiation is the same for both M1 and M2, but the latter has longer tethers, resulting in a lower thermal conductance and therefore, higher responsivity. This observation was indeed confirmed by a measured responsivity of 187 kHz/W for device M2, resulting in a 2.05 W -1 normalized responsivity (Figure After this initial characterization in the infrared range, we continued exploring the bolometric effect of our thermomechanical device using an external source illumination, while keeping the probe laser as weak as possible (1.5 mW, slightly above the lasing threshold). To show the broadband operation of our device, we used a green laser diode (563 THz, or 532 nm) and a sub-THz microwave source (0.14 THz). Both sources have been mounted following the scheme of Fig. Looking at the modulation frequency dependence, both devices show qualitatively similar trends, with a 3 dB cut-off frequency of about 40 Hz and 20 Hz, for the sub-THz and visible source, respectively. The bottleneck here is represented by the thermal dynamics; the main source of dissipation for the membrane is through the tethers. By changing the tethers geometry one can expect to be able to increase the dissipation and device operational speed, at the expense of a possible reduction in the responsivity. The slight difference in the results from the two sources illuminating device M2 can be ascribed to the very different spot sizes, as described earlier in this text. In fact, the broad illumination from the sub-THz source implies that the incident power is dissipated faster, having a shorter average path to the thermal heat sink. Another consequence of the larger illumination area is that the sub-THz responsivity of device M1 is always higher than device M2, opposite to what we observed with the infrared laser. Here the straightforward explanation comes from the larger surface of device M1 respect to M2, implying a higher total absorbed radiation. To be more specific, the approximate 2.2 ratio between the areas of the central plates is compatible with the 2.5 ratio between the measured responsivities. Examples of detected signals in time domain are reported in Fig. We repeated the FEM simulations with the sub-THz source and obtained 200 kHz/W (M1) and 130 kHz/W (M2), close to the measured absolute values but with a 1.5 ratio which is smaller than the experimental one. Lastly, the simulated green laser responsivity resulted in a much higher value of 2700 kHz/W (M2), due to the combination of higher absorption (17%, see Methods) and focused beam. To better estimate the thermomechanical bolometer performances, we considered the noise equivalent power (NEP), which represents the incident power producing a unitary detected signal-to-noise ratio. This has been obtained by taking the ratio of the measured spectral noise density and the responsivity reported in Fig. NEP was also found to be strongly dependent on the amplitude of the membrane's vibration, which can be adjusted via the sinusoidal driving voltage sent to the piezoelectric actuator. In particular, the minimum NEP (in the 7-14 Hz region) is inversely proportional to the driving voltage, as shown in Fig. In conclusion, we have shown how Si3N4 trampoline membrane resonators can be an optimal platform for thermomechanical bolometric detection at room temperature in a broad range, down to the sub-THz frequencies. Direct detection experiments have shown NEP comparable with state-of-the-art, commercial devices. To increase the device responsivity in the THz range, absorption could be enhanced by tailoring the surface of the trampoline resonator with different materials and geometrical patterns. For example vanadium oxide metasurfaces Sample Fabrication. The trampolines were fabricated starting from a 300 nm thick, high stress (~900 MPa), stoichiometric LPCVD Si3N4 film, grown on top of a 250 μm thick Si wafer. The trampoline shape was patterned with optical lithography (DMO MicroWriter ML3), carefully smoothing all sharp corners to reduce stress in critical points, such as the tethers' clamping to the Si frame. The unmasked Si3N4 was removed by a Reactive Ion Etching (RIE) step with CF4 and H2 gas mixture. Then the trampolines were released with hot KOH etching solution (30% concentration). Finally, a 5/30 nm Cr/Au metallic layer was thermally evaporated on top of the whole device surface. The position of the various elements in the setup is shown in Figure The Si chip containing the Si3N4 membranes was mounted inside a small vacuum chamber (2 × 10 -3 mbar), sealed with a cyclic-olefin copolymer (COC) window, transparent to both visible and THz radiation (87.7% transmission in the infrared and visible range, 80% in the sub-THz range). The whole chamber could be moved with step-motors in the x-y plane, orthogonally to the optical beam axis. Inside the chamber, the Si chip was glued on top of a piezo actuator, used to excite the membrane vibrations, which was then attached with double-sided tape to the chamber itself. A Littrow External Cavity Diode Laser (ECDL), model DL100-L from Toptica, 945 nm wavelength, was used to sense the membrane displacement via self-mixing interferometric technique. The ECDL beam was focused on the membrane with an objective lens (Mi-tutoyo M Plan Apo 10x/0. The radiation generated by the green laser and sub-THz source was focused on the membrane using an off-axis parabolic mirror (gold-coated, 2" focal length). The 0.14 THz beam was generated by a commercially available source (TeraSense Group) based on an Impact ionization Avalanche Transit Time (IMPATT) diode, equipped with a conical horn antenna. The 564 THz (λ=532 nm) source was a commercial green laser pointer, attenuated with an additional 2.1 ND filter in order to keep a lower incident power on the trampoline. With a calibrated pyrometer we measured the output power of both sources after the reflection in the parabolic mirror and the COC window, resulting in 10.6 mW for the sub-THz beam and 2.0 mW for the green laser, the latter reduced to 0.016 mW after the ND filter. In order to measure the responsivity of the membrane-detector as function of the source modulation frequency, a mechanical chopper (maximum 200 Hz rotation) and a TTL signal were used for the green laser and the sub-THz source, respectively. The responsivity, expressed in dddddd/pp, was measured using two separate lockin amplifiers in cascade (Zurich Instruments MFLI and Stanford Research SR830). The membrane was excited at a fixed frequency, set at the middle point between the resonance measured with and without radiation, and the phase output of the first lock-in was sent to a second lock-in amplifier, which used the chopper (or TTL) as reference. This configuration was chosen in order to maximize the phase variation respect to the incident power. However, with this configuration the linearity of the response is guaranteed only for small incident powers, where the slope of the phase plot is steepest (see Figure We performed the Finite Element simulations with COMSOL Multiphysics v 5.5. The 2D trampoline shape was meshed with a free triangular mesh, then swept vertically to mesh the 3D structure. The Cr/Au layer was simulated as a single 35-nm-thick Au element. The mechanics and heating were simulated simultaneously, using the "thermal expansion" multiphysics coupling. The heating due to the lasers and THz source was simulated with the "Deposited Beam Power" option, using a Gaussian beam profile. A "time-dependent" study simulated the initial temperature spatial profile, followed by a "pre-stressed eigenfrequency" study to extract the frequency of the fundamental drum mode. The material parameters used for Si3N4 and Au are listed in Table 