We theoretically analyze the collective modes in unconventional superconductors focusing on Bardasis-Schrieffer (BS) mode and its contribution to the third harmonic generation currents. Starting from a model with competing superconducting pairing instabilities we add fluctuations of the fields beyond saddle point approximation and calculate their response to an applied pulsed electric field. To model phase fluctuations appropriately we take into account the effect of the long-range Coulomb interaction. While the phase mode is pushed into a plasmon frequency, as known from the literature, we show that the BS mode remains unaffected. Furthermore, it has a characteristic polarization dependence and, unlike the Higgs mode, generates a current in perpendicular direction to the applied field. We find that the Bardasis-Schrieffer excitations contribute a sizable signal to the third harmonic generated current, which is clearly distinguishable from the charge density fluctuations due to Cooper pair breaking effects and can be straightforwardly detected in experiment. The recent technological development of THz spectroscopy makes it possible to probe properties of quantum matter, which cannot be observed in equilibrium. This is of considerable interest in the field of unconventional superconductivity, where controlled probing of the relaxation dynamics yields access to understanding ground state properties of the underlying system. Since the current response of a system is given by the variation of the action S with respect to the applied vector po-arXiv:2107.02834v1 [cond-mat.supr-con] 6 Jul 2021 tential j = -∂S/δA one can obtain the third-harmonic generated current from an action, which is quartic in the vector potential where V s and V d are the superconducting interaction strength in the corresponding channels. We choose the d-wave form factor as γ d,k = √ 2 cos(2φ), while the s-wave interaction is chosen isotropic. Here, we introduce the singlet pair operator B k,q (τ ) = c -k+q/2,↓ (τ )c k+q/2,↑ (τ ) to keep notation simple. Performing a Hubbard-Stratonovic transformation in B k,q introduces the superconducting field, which has the form ∆ k (q) = ∆ s (q) + ∆ d (q)γ d,k , where ∆ s is the s-wave component transforming like A 1g and ∆ d is the d-wave component transforming as B 1g with the corresponding form factor. Note that both ∆ s (q) and ∆ d (q) are complex with an arbitrary overall phase. We focus on the s-wave ground state by focusing on V s /V d < 1. By performing a gauge transformation c rσ → c rσ e iθ(r)/2 one can choose the ground state field ∆ s (q) to be real. As mentioned in the Intrduction, the superfluid phase is known to show a sound-like phase (Goldstone) mode ω G ∼ |q|, which couples to the Coulomb field of the lattice and becomes a plasmon Here V q = 2πe 2 /|q| is the Coulomb potential for charged fermions confined to our 2D lattice. This interaction can be decoupled in the density channel via a Hubbard-Stratonovic transformation introducing the density fluctuations field ρ(q). Finally, the effect of a vector potential can be added to the action via a Peierls substitution c † r,σ c r+δ,σ → e ieA•δ/c c † r,σ c r+δ,σ . After a straightforward derivation the total action acquires the form where -1 is the saddle point Green's function and the self-energy correction ), which contains the fluctuations of the corresponding fields ∆ s (q), θ(q), ∆ d (q), ∆ d (q), ρ(q) and the vector potential A 2 i (q) around their saddle point value. Here, the d-wave superconducting field is separated into real and imaginary parts, ∆ d (q) = ∆ d (q) -i∆ d (q). The explicit calculation is shown in Appendix A. We integrate out the fermions to obtain the effective action and keep fluctuations up to quadratic level (Gaussian fluctuations) Here, we use the short hand notation for the vector η(q) = (∆ s (q), θ(q), ∆ d (q), ∆ d (q), ρ(q)) T , which includes all fluctuating fields. The corresponding matrix response function, χ(q), is given by χ αβ = Tr(G 0 Σ ηα G 0 Σ η β ). In addition, the coupling of the fluctuating fields to the vector potential is mediated via the response functions χ ηα,A 2 i (iν m ). The fluctuations of the vector potential itself is mediated via the ) with i, j ∈ {x, y}. Here, we take the limit q → 0. The collective modes of this system are given by the condition det( χ(q)) = 0. In the simplest approximation we neglect the off-diagonal coupling terms and focus on the diagonal terms of χ. After analytic continuation, one finds for the propagator of the s-wave order parameter amplitude and the function ) carries the information of the Higgs (amplitude) mode ω H = 2∆. The propagator of the global phase fluctuations is given by where n s is the superfluid stiffness. This propagator contains the Goldstone (phase) mode, which is gapless and can be excited with an arbitrary small amount of energy. Finally, there is a contribution of the the Bardasis-Schrieffer mode. As was shown previously in Ref. 47 this mode corresponds to the fluctuations in ∆ d , which, in linear approximation, is the relative phase between the s-wave field and the d-wave field. The corresponding propagator has the form This function has a single root for 0 < ω < 2∆ depending on the exact strength of the d-wave interaction V d relative to V s . Note that the propagator of the amplitude ∆ d carries no collective mode at all. In principle the frequency positions of these three modes is slightly affected by the coupling between the fluctuations. However, our analysis shows that the the cross-coupling between s-wave amplitude fluctuations and the global phase χ ∆sθ (ω) = 2ω k ξ k ∆F k (ω) is present but is very weak. This is similar for the cross-coupling between ∆ d and ∆ d . The coupling between the d-wave fields ∆ d and ∆ d and the s-wave fields ∆ s and θ vanishes because these two channels are orthogonal by symmetry, which implies that these three modes are indeed given by the solution χ ηαηα = 0. Correspondingly, in Fig. where one can identify the plasmon mode position, ω P l = 2πe 2 n s q. The charged field is a density type fluctuations and therefore its fluctuations have the same A 1g symmetry as the s-wave ground state. Thus, these fluctuations are orthogonal to the subdominant field fluctuations ∆ d and leave its propagators and with them the Bardasis-Schrieffer mode, unaffected χ r . Note that while the subdominant field fluctuations fully decouple from the ground state it can be expected that they still give a finite contribution to the third harmonic generated current, as the applied vector potential temporarily breaks C 4 rotational symmetry and therefore it allows for a finite mixing in these channels. As mentioned in previous works is very small as the sum is linear ξ k . However, this is not the case for the coupling between Bardasis-Schrieffer mode and the vector potential and therefore one can expect that unlike the Higgs mode, this mode is easily observable even in the clean limit, where the charge density fluctuations, which are given by dominates the intensity of the third harmonic generation current. The current kernel K = K0 + Kρ + K∆s + Kθ + K∆ d + K∆ d now contains contributions due to each field and in the following we compute the current j i (t) = -δS δAi(t) . We assume that the vector potential can be modelled by harmonic driving A(t) = A 0 cos(Ωt) with the driving frequency Ω. Using φ as the polar angle in the momentum space with respect to the k x axis we write A 0 = A 0 (cos(φ), sin(φ)) T . Here, A 0 is the strength of the driving field and the angle θ denotes the polarization direction. The third-harmonic generation current can be expressed as with components in multiple directions depending on the components of the kernel K ij . Therefore, it is useful to introduce the vectors n = (cos(θ), sin(φ)) T and n ⊥ = (-sin(φ), cos(φ)) T to filter out the parallel and perpendicular component of the induced current. Although the kernel has in total four components, only two of them are independent by symmetry, i.e. we write K yy = K xx and K yx = K xy . Thus, one finds for the parallel and the perpendicular components of the induced current Before explicitly evaluating these expressions numerically, we summarize the polarization dependence of each excitation, i.e. the charge density fluctuations (CDF), the Higgs and BS modes as well as phase fluctuations in Table I and TABLE I. Summary of the polarization dependence of each contribution to the induced third-harmonic generation current for the parallel and the perpendicular orientation to the applied vector potential. the expressions for K ij are explicitly derived in Appendix B. As was shown in Refs. It is important to notice that the polarization profile of each contribution is not affected by the renormalization of the propagators by the Coulomb field, as they follow the intrinsic symmetry properties of the fields. Instead, the effect of the renormalization is visible in the explicit dependence on the driving frequency Ω. Observe also that although we assumed the isotropic order parameter in the s-wave ground state, our results hold for the general A 1g -symmetric ground state (like anisotropic s-wave) as they follow from the properties of the A 1g and B 1g irreducible representations under rotation by π/2 angle. Thus, the presence of a Bardasis-Schrieffer mode signal can be easily detected by the analysis of the polarization dependence of the current. A signal, which is present at φ = 0 but absent at φ = π/4 should be a strong indication of the Bardasis-Schrieffer mode (or Bardadsis-Schrieffer nematic mode) and clearly distinguishable from other types of modes. In particular, in Fig. The third harmonic generated current induced in perpendicular direction to the vector potential A is shown in Fig. To conclude we analyzed theoretically the signatures of the Bardasis-Schrieffer mode excitation in the third harmonic generated currents. Including the long-range Coulomb interaction to ensure a correct treatment of the phase fluctuations, we showed that the Bardasis-Schrieffer mode excitation are clearly visible as a resonance in the third harmonic generated current. Unlike the Higgs mode signal, which is orders of magntiude smaller in the clean limit than the charge density fluctuations contribution due to the Cooper pair breaking, we demonstrated that the Bardasis-Schrieffer mode signal is of similar strength and can be clearly visible in the magnitude as well as the phase of the current. We further showed that the contribution of the BS mode to the polarization dependence of the third harmonic generated current j 3 has very characteristic features, different from the Higgs, charge-density fluctuations and phase fluctuations modes. This polarization dependence can serve as a smoking gun for the experimental observation of this mode. Furthermore, the Bardasis-Schrieffer mode contributes also to the perpendicular component of the third harmonic generated current and its intensity is also of similar magnitude as the charge density fluctuations. These results clearly open the perspective to observe this mode in unconventional superconductors. The remaining self-energy contributions are given by q1,q2,i θ(q 1 )θ(q 2 ) sin q 1,i 2 sin q 2,i 2 To ensure correct renormalization of the phase fluctuations we include the effect of the long-range Coulomb interaction to our system and add the action S C to the system where V q = 2πe 2 /|q| is the Coulomb interaction between quasiparticles projected onto the 2D lattice. Performing a Hubbard-Stratonovic transformation introduces the field ρ(q), and one obtains the self-energy due to the charged field with the self-energy contribution Finally, we include the effect of an applied pulsed electric field by introducing a time-dependent vector potential A(t). This couples to the electric field via the Peierls substitution c † r,σ c r+δ,σ → e ieA•δ/c c † r,σ c r+δ,σ , which translates into a shift for the dispersion ξ k → ξ k-e c A . Note that we neglect spacial variation of the vector potential, which implies that it carries zero kinetic momentum transfer q = 0. This is justified, because the wavelength of the light used in THz experiments is much larger than a typical coherence length in unconventional superconductors. Expanding the dispersion up to a second order in the vector potential Since the third-harmonic generated current stems from contributions to the effective action, which are quartic in the vector potential A the self-energy correction in eq. A17 does not contribute to the third-harmonic generated current up to quadratic order. Therefore we only focus on the contribution given by Eq. A18. The total action now reads with the saddle point Greens function G 0 (k) = (iω n σ 0 -ξσ 3 -∆σ 1 ) -1 and the combined self-energy contributions (A20) Integrating out the fermions and expanding the action for small fluctuations around the saddle point yields Since the coupling of ρ to the d-wave field is zero, all functions which describe the fluctuations of ∆ d and ∆ d remain unaffected. This means the contribution of the Bardasis-Schrieffer to the third-harmonic generation current remains unaffected by these fluctuations. As known from Ref. 50 they do effect the Higgs mode depending on the precise from of the band structure As argued above, due to the near linear band dispersion ξ k near the Fermi level this effect in neglegible and one can therefore approximate χ r ∆s∆s χ ∆s∆s . As a result, the position of the Higgs mode remains roughly at ω H ≈ 2∆. Unlike the Higgs-mode and the Bardasis-Schrieffer mode, the global phase mode is strongly affected Identifying Ω P l (q) = 2πe 2 ρ sc (T )|q| as the plasmon frequency for a quasi-2d metal, we find that indeed this phase fluctuation mode becomes a plasmon. Similar to the bare propagator of the phase mode, also its couplings to the s-wave field ∆ s and to the vector potential are strongly renormalized The coupling between the Higgs mode and the vector potential is renormalized to The current kernel K 0,ij gains an additional contribution K ρ,ij due to integrating out the charged field ρ with Now we are in the position to integrate out other fields one after another. In principle this process leads to multiple additional renormalizations of all remaining propagators χ. However, as mentioned above the strength of the coupling between the remaining fluctuating fields is marginal compared to their bare propagators. Therefore integrating out the remaining fluctuations yields the renormalization of their coupling to the vector potential. Each field then yields additional contribution to the current-current kernel, such that in total it reads where the additional contributions are and Before evaluating these kernels we note that F k = tanh(βE k /2) k -(iνm) 2 transforms trivially under rotation by π/2 according to the A 1g representation. Using this we immediately find that for all contributions to the kernel the relations K ηα,xx (iν m ) = K ηα,yy (iν m ) and K ηα,xy (iν m ) = K ηα,yx (iν m ) hold. From Eq. A22 it is clear that this is also true for the bare kernel. For the kernels K ρ,ij , K ∆s,ij and K θ,ij one additionally finds K ηα,xx (iν m ) = K ηα,xy (iν m ), such that for these contributions all components of the kernel are equal. This is different for the contributions due to the d-wave field K ∆ d ,ij and K ∆ d ,ij . Since the d-wave form factor changes its sign upon rotation by π/2 one finds that K ∆ / d ,xx (iν m ) = -K ∆ / d ,xy (iν m ). For the bare kernel K 0,ij such a relation between the xx and the xy component depends on the specific band structure. These relations lead to the specific polarization dependencies discussed in the main text.