Improving lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) safety remains in a challenging task when compared with the tremendous progress made in their performance in recent years. Embedding thermo-responsive polymer switching materials (TRPS) into LIB cells has been proved to be a promising strategy to provide consistent thermal abuse protections at coin-cell level. However, it is unrealistic to achieve large-scale applications without further demonstration in high-capacity pouch cells. Here, we employed tungsten carbide (WC) as a novel conductive filler, and successfully overcame the intrinsic processing difficulty of polyethylene (PE) matrix in a scalable solvent-based method to obtain ultra-thin, uniform, highly conductive TRPS. Moreover, by integrating TRPS directly into LIB electrodes, no extra fabrication facilities or processes are required for making the cells. As a result, multi-layer pouch cells with consistent electrochemical performance and thermal abuse protection function were fabricated using industry relevant manufacturing technique, which brings TRPS one step further to the real application scenarios. Great advances have been made in lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) since they were first invented in 1970s. Significant efforts have been also devoted to designing internal safety strategies at the materials level. Functional separators, In this work, we developed an efficient and scalable method to fabricate polyethylene (PE)-based ultra-thin, uniform, highly conductive TRPS for potential large-scale applications in LIBs. Using commercially available tungsten carbide (WC) nanopowder as the conductive filler, we elucidated that the embedded conductive network, which determines the performance of TRPS, largely depends on the size distribution of the conductive fillers and the fabrication process. Systematic studies on fillers and polymer selection, slurry preparation and film manufacturing were conducted to illustrate the correlation between fabrication process, filler distribution and TRPS properties. TRPS films were assembled under various conditions and inspected by surface and bulk characterization to exhibit filler distribution in the polymer matrix. Furthermore, electrical properties and thermal-responsive properties were measured. Successful assembly of TRPSintegrated cathodes can protect pouch cells from thermal abuse conditions, which paves the way for scalable manufacturing and application of TRPS in LIBs. To ensure that the TRPS films can function well, a good conductive filler should reach the following properties: (1) high intrinsic electrical conductivity at room temperature (R.T.), (2) good electrochemical stability in the battery operation window, and (3) small thermal expansion coefficient in a wide temperature range (R.T. to 200 o C). Based on the above requirements, WC stands out as a promising candidate. WC is one of the most conductive materials among the carbide family, which has a bulk electrical conductivity ~ 5.2 × 10 4 S cm -1 . Swelling is the volume expansion of polymer due to the penetration of solvent molecules, which can deteriorate the switching capability. Hansen solubility parameters (HSB) where R a is the Euclidean distance between the HSP for the solvent (s) and polymer, and it can be calculated by 3 solubility parameters: (1) δ d , dispersion forces, (2) δ p , polarity, and (3) δ h , hydrogen bonding; R 0 is the interaction radius. To estimate the physical compatibility of polymer in the electrolytes, ethylene carbonate (EC)/ diethyl carbonate (DEC) (50/50 vol.%) was selected as the target system to evaluate the polymer-solvent interaction. The results are presented in Table Common PE films are fabricated by film extrusion, injection molding and rotational molding, The spatial distribution of fillers in the polymer matrix, which determines the TRPS properties, highly correlates to the fabrication process. Depending on the drying temperature, evaporation rate and slurry viscosity, fillers will continually rearrange their distribution before their position being fixed. To demonstrate filler reorganization during the drying process, time-based experiments were designed (Figure Moreover, the size distribution of WC is also a decisive parameter of TRPS properties. Figure Further investigation from the SEM images in Figure TRPS films were prepared and the surface conductivity on both sides as well as the vertical resistance were measured as a function of WC contents. As shown in Figure to 85%, with a conductive threshold of 60 wt.%. There is 1 order of magnitude difference in terms of conductivity between the top and bottom surface at low WC contents (below 75 wt.%), which might be attributed to the non-uniform distribution of WC in the PE matrix. However, the conductivities become consistent as WC content increases due to the formation of a robust conductive network. On the other hand, the vertical resistance rapidly reaches the same order as the robust network forms, and the resistance slightly decreases to ~ 3 Ω. Such anisotropic conductivity property of the as-prepared TRPS may provide more possibilities for other applications such as electronic sensors. The TRPS barely shows switching response if continues raising WC contents to 85 wt.% (PTC = 0.3). Considering both the PTC intensity and the R.T. conductivity, TRPS films with 80 wt.% seems to be a good composition for real battery applications. To further exam the switching response rate corresponding to various thermal-abuse conditions in different scenarios, TRPS films were integrated into both coin-cell and pouch-cell structures to be tested using a hot-air gun under different heating temperatures (Figure Ideally, TRPS films should maintain a high resistance under extreme temperature conditions (e.g., aging at 100 o C) for extended operation time while exhibiting stable resistance under normal temperature for battery operation, which are further demonstrated. As show in Figure To verify the safety properties of the TPRS for LIB applications, LiNi1/3Co1/3Mn1/3O2 (NCM111)/graphite pouch cells were fabricated with a temperature sensor embedded inside to monitor the temperature variations (Figure In addition, the evolution of resistance and temperature were recorded during a simulated overheating process (Figure To more comprehensively inspect the safety protection capabilities of TRPS, electrical abuse tests were also conducted, and the results are shown in Figure In summary, a scalable solvent-based fabrication process of TRPS films from slurry preparation to casting was designed and optimized specifically for PE matrix. WC was employed as conductive fillers to assemble highly conductive thermo-responsive switching composites. Systematic studies on fillers and polymer selection were conducted to illustrate the essential requirements for a good filler-polymer matrix system for TRPS materials. The fabrication process and the size distribution of fillers were investigated extensively to demonstrate their decisive roles in the properties of TRPS. By integrating a thin TRPS directly into the current collector, LIB pouch cells with thermal abuse protection features can be assembled without additional modification of current industrial fabrication processes, which brings TRPS one step closer to large scale applications in LIBs. TRPS film fabrication: WC (Alfa Aesar, 99.5%) were dispersed into isopropyl alcohol (Sigma-Aldrich) and filtered through a 1000-mesh screen followed by drying out in a convection oven 