The quantum confinement effect on the spectrum of near-field thermal radiation by periodic and random arrays of quantum dots (QDs) is investigated. The local density of states (LDOS) thermally emitted by QD arrays made of three lead chalcogenides, namely, lead sulfide, lead selenide, and lead telluride, is computed at a near-field distance from the arrays. The dielectric function of the QDs is extracted from their absorption spectra by utilizing an optimization technique. The thermal discrete dipole approximation is used for computing the LDOS. It is shown that the peak wavenumber of near-field LDOS emitted by periodic arrays of lead chalcogenide QDs can be significantly modulated (up to 4490 cm -1 ) by varying the size of the dots. The LDOS is proportional to the imaginary part of the QDs' polarizability which peaks at the bandgap energy of the QDs. The bandgap energy of the QDs (and thus the LDOS peak) is significantly affected by the quantum confinement effect which is size-dependent. While the magnitude of thermal radiation by random arrays of QDs can be different from the periodic arrays with the same filling factor by up to ┬▒26%, the LDOS spectrum and peak location are the same for both periodic and random arrays. The peak wavenumber of near-field radiative heat transfer between the QD arrays is also strongly affected by quantum confinement in the QDs, and thus it can be tuned by changing the size of the QDs. Thermal radiation at sub-wavelength distances from an emitting medium, which is referred to as the near-field thermal radiation, can exceed the far-field blackbody limit by several orders of magnitude and be quasi-monochromatic Thermal radiation of these engineered materials, known as metamaterials, significantly differ from those of the corresponding bulk materials and can be tuned by modifying the geometry and size of the sub-wavelength features. A variety of metamaterials, such as periodic gratings , photonic crystals Thermal radiation by hyperbolic metamaterials shows a broadband enhancement due to the contribution of electromagnetic waves with very large wavevectors. Nanoporous materials Another less explored but promising mechanism for tuning the spectrum of near-field thermal radiation is modulating the electronic structure of the emitter by capitalizing on the quantum confinement effect. The quantum confinement effect arises when the size of the emitter becomes comparable to the atomic length scales at least in one dimension. Quantum dots (QDs) are an example of these quantum-sized emitters which experience quantum confinement in three dimensions. They are quasi-spherical nanocrystals composed of tens to a few thousand atoms Because their dimensions are comparable to or smaller than the Bohr exciton radius, the electronic structure of QDs becomes quantized in the form of an ensemble of discrete energy levels. This quantization of energy levels results in modification of the bandgap and electromagnetic properties of the QDs compared to the bulk material in which energy levels are continuous The size-dependent electromagnetic properties of quantum materials present an opportunity for designing thermal emitters with desired near-field emission spectra. In addition, QDs can be manufactured in bulk quantities and with high quality and size monodispersity using cost-efficient, solution-based techniques A schematic of the problem under consideration is shown in Fig. The electromagnetic (and thus thermal radiative) properties of QDs are determined from their dielectric function, ’üź, which is dependent on the size of the QDs. The size-dependent dielectric function of the QDs can be extracted from their measured absorbance spectra 140,141,143 by utilizing the Maxwell-Garnett effective medium theory (EMT) and the Kramers-Kronig (KK) relation 146 . The absorption spectra of dilute solutions (filling fractions of ~10 -3 -10 -5 ) of lead chalcogenides quantum dots in a transparent solvent have been measured using spectroscopy techniques The solvent for PbS and PbTe QDs is tetrachloroethylene (C2Cl4), while carbon tetrachloride (CCl4) has been used for the PbSe QDs. For dilute solutions of QDs, the volume fraction of the QDs is very low and thus the absorption coefficient, ’ü¼ ’üĪ , of the solution can be related to the dielectric function of the QDs using the Maxwell-Garnett EMT as 147 : ( ) where ’ü¼ is the wavelength, s n is the solvent refractive index (1.53 for C2Cl4 148 and 1.46 for CCl4 148 ), and ’üź ’éó and ’üź ’éó’éó are the real and imaginary parts of the dielectric function of the QDs, respectively. The measured absorbance spectra have arbitrary units, and therefore do not directly provide the magnitude of the absorption coefficient, ’ü¼ ’üĪ . The magnitude of ’ü¼ ’üĪ is determined from the measured absorption spectra using the following procedure. It has been experimentally observed that the quantum confinement effect in the lead chalcogenide QDs is negligible at wavelengths below 400 nm 149 . As such, the dielectric function of the lead chalcogenide QDs for wavelengths shorter than 400 nm is equal to that of the bulk. This allows calculating ’ü¼ ’üĪ of the QD solutions in the spectral range of 0 -400 nm using the dielectric function of the bulk and Eq. (1) 140,141 . For wavelengths longer than 400 nm, first the absorbance spectra are normalized by their value at ’ü¼ = 400 nm. Then, the normalized spectra are multiplied by the absorption coefficient at 400 nm, 400nm ’ü¼ ’üĪ = , as found using Eq. ( Equation ( where N’ü¼+1 is the number of discretized wavelengths, and ’üź ’éź is the high-frequency dielectric function which equals 1.5 for PbSe 150 and 1.7 for PbS 151 and PbTe 152 . The real and imaginary parts of the dielectric function of the QDs are found using Eqs. ( and by utilizing an optimization technique. A block diagram of the optimization technique is shown in Fig. ’üĪ is estimated by Eq. ( ) and computed ( , ) absorption coefficients over the discretized wavelengths, i.e., ,, Based on the error found from Eq. (3), ’üź ’éó’éó is corrected for all discretized wavelengths. Then, ’üź ’éó and ’ü¼ ’üĪ are reevaluated in another iteration until the difference between ’üź ’éó’éó in two consecutive iterations becomes less than 6 10 -for all discretized wavelengths. To implement this optimization process, MATLAB's built-in fmincon function, which is a constrained nonlinear and multivariable minimization function, is utilized in which the interior-point method (IPM) is used for correcting ’üź ’éó’éó in each iteration. The objective function of fmincon is the total error defined by Eq. ( Once the size-dependent dielectric function of the QDs is found, the local density of states (LDOS) thermally emitted by a periodic array of QDs at a near-field observation distance from the array is computed using the periodic thermal discrete dipole approximation (T-DDA) , representing the electric (magnetic) field generated in the unit-cell sub-volumes due to a point source at the observation location is obtained by solving a discretized form of Maxwell's equations as 153 : 11 ’üź is the free-space permittivity, 0 k is the magnitude of the wavevector in the free space, subscript o refers to the observation point, and 0 ( ), , is the electric (magnetic) periodic Greens function between points k and l in the free space ( ) Then, the total electric (magnetic) Greens function between replica (m, n) of sub-volume i and the observation point o, () , , can be found from the wavevector-dependent electric (magnetic) Greens functions as: ( ) Finally, the spectral LDOS emitted by the array at the observation distance, ’üĘ ’ü▓ , is found using the total electric and magnetic Greens functions computed using Eq. ( where ’üĘ is the angular frequency, N is the number of sub-volumes used for discretizing the unit cell of the array, ’āä shows the outer product, and Nk is the number of wavevectors used for discretizing the Brillouin zone. The dielectric function of PbS, PbSe, and PbTe QDs with various diameters D ranging from 3.3 nm to 6.8 nm is extracted from their absorption spectra using the optimization technique described in Section II (see Fig. , are used for the decision variable when running the fmincon function. All initial guesses result in the same dielectric function for QDs. However, a faster convergence is achieved when ’üź" of the bulk material is used as the initial guess. The ’üź ’éó’éó of the bulk materials is obtained from literature 150-152 . As an example, the real and imaginary parts of the dielectric function of PbSe QDs are shown in Figs. Unlike bulk lead chalcogenides, ’üź" of the QDs is negligible for wavenumbers slightly larger than the bandgap causing a peak in ’üź" at the bandgap energy. Quantum dots have negligible ’üź" above the bandgap energy since their energy levels are discrete due to the quantum confinement effect. As such, photons with energy slightly higher than the bandgap are less likely to be absorbed as their energy needs to exactly match the difference between two energy levels in the valence and conduction bands. This causes ’üź" of the QDs to peak at the bandgap energy of the QDs. The bandgap energy of the QDs is strongly dependent on their size and so is the peak of their ’üź". The peak of ’üź" of the QDs significantly shifts toward smaller wavelengths as the diameter of the QDs increases. It is seen from Fig. Using the extracted dielectric functions, the spectral LDOS due to thermal radiation of periodic arrays of PbS, PbSe, and PbTe QDs is computed at an observation distance d of 50 nm. The QDs in the arrays are separated by a distance of 4D in both x-and y-directions (i.e., the array pitch is L = 5D). Since the diameter of the QDs is much smaller than the wavelength, the observation distance and the interdot spacing, there is no need to discretize the QDs into smaller sub-volumes. The respectively. It is seen from Fig. to 8265 cm -1 (6969 cm -1 ) for a diameter of 3.3 nm (4.9 nm). The peaks observed in the LDOS spectra can be explained by considering the fact that thermal radiation by the QDs is proportional to the imaginary part of their electric polarizability given by the Clausius-Mossotti relation as . It is seen that ’üĪ ’éó’éó is directly proportional to the imaginary part of the dielectric function, ’üź ’éó’éó , which represents absorption by the QDs. As discussed before, ’üź" peaks at the bandgap energy of the QDs (see Fig. It should be noted that changing the pitch (or the filling factor) of the array mostly affects the magnitude of the LDOS rather than the spectral location of its peak. For example, the LDOS spectra for two arrays of 5.7-nm PbSe QDs with pitches of 5D (f = 0.021) and 6D (f = 0.015) are compared in Fig. The effect of increasing the number of QD layers in the array on the magnitude and the spectrum of the LDOS is also studied. The LDOS thermally emitted by an array made of NL layers of PbSe QDs (see the inset of Fig. It should be noted that the peak of near-field radiative heat transfer between two identical arrays of QDs can also be strongly tuned by changing the diameter of the QDs. The peak of thermal radiation by the emitting array is located at the same wavenumber as the peak of absorption by the receiving array (both are located around the bandgap energy of the QDs). As such, the near-field radiative heat transfer between the two arrays also peaks around the bandgap energy of the QDs. As an example, near-field radiative heat flux between two periodic arrays of PbSe QDs with a pitch size of 5D separated by a gap of d = 50 nm is computed using the T-DDA for three different QD diameters. The emitting array is at 1200 K, while the receiving array is kept at 300 K. The near-field radiative heat flux between the two arrays is shown in Fig. Quantum dots can be fabricated in large quantities using cost-effective solution-based methods. The solution-based fabrication techniques result in random, rather than periodic, arrays of QDs. To study how the magnitude and spectrum of thermal radiation by random arrays are different from the periodic ones, the thermal LDOS for 100 random monolayer arrays is modeled using the non-periodic T-DDA 156 . The PbSe QDs with a diameter of 5.7 nm are considered for this study. The number of QDs in the random arrays is selected such that the filling factor of these arrays is the same as that of a periodic array with L = 6D (i.e., f = 0.015). Similar to the periodic array, a minimum interdot spacing of 5D is assumed between the QDs. The LDOS is calculated at a distance of d = 50 nm above the array. Initially, the LDOS is calculated for a 5L by 5L random array of QDs. Then, the array size is increased until no considerable change in the LDOS calculated at the distance of d = 50 nm is observed. An array size of 20L by 20L is found to be sufficient for modeling the LDOS at d = 50 nm. The spectral LDOS for the random arrays is compared with that for the periodic array in Fig. The thermally emitted LDOS by lead chalcogenide QD arrays at a near-field distance from the array as well as near-field radiative heat transfer between two identical lead chalcogenide QD arrays were calculated for various QD sizes using the T-DDA. The size-dependent dielectric function of the QDs was extracted from the measured absorption spectra found in the literature using the Maxwell-Garnett EMT, the KK relation and an optimization technique. It was shown that the near-field LDOS and heat flux have a peak around the bandgap energy of the QDs which strongly varies with the size of the QDs due to the quantum confinement effect. This peak is due to the large imaginary part of the polarizability of the QDs at the bandgap energy where interband transitions is the dominant absorption mechanism. This study shows that the spectrum of nearfield thermal radiation can be tuned by capitalizing on the size-dependent quantum confinement effect. 