Macroscopic ensembles of nanocarbons, such as fibres of carbon nanotubes (CNT), are characterised by a complex hierarchical structure combining coherent crystalline regions with a large porosity arising from imperfect packing of the large rigid building blocks. Such structure is at the centre of a wide range of charge storage and transfer processes when CNT fibres are used as electrodes and/or current collectors. This work introduces a method based on wide and smallangle X-ray scattering (WAXS/SAXS) to obtain structural descriptors of CNT fibres and which enables in situ characterisation during electrochemical processes. It enables accurate determination of parameters such as specific surface area, average pore size and average bundle size from SAXS data after correction for scattering from density fluctuations arising from imperfect packing of graphitic planes. In situ and ex situ WAXS/SAXS measurements during electrochemical swelling of CNT fibre electrodes in ionic liquid provide continuous monitoring of the increase in effective surface area caused by electrostatic separation of CNT bundles in remarkable agreement with capacitance changes measured independently. Relative contributions from quantum and Helmholtz capacitance to total capacitance remaining fairly constant. The WAXS/SAXS analysis is demonstrated for fibres of either multi-and single-walled CNTs, and is expected to be generally applicable to operando studies on nanocarbon-based electrodes used in batteries, actuators and other applications. Carbon-based materials are present in virtually all energy-storing devices. They can combine light weight, high electrochemical stability, electrical conductivity and large surface area. Their basic units are small crystalline ("graphitic") domains of hexagonal sp 2 conjugated carbon atoms, together with defects such as topological (e.g. pentagons), edges, heteroatoms. 1 However, in traditional graphitic materials there is an inherent compromise between crystal size and porosity, which implies a trade-off between transport properties and electrochemical stability, and specific surface area (SSA). Highly graphitic carbons used in batteries and fuels cells, for example, have a crystal size of around 20-100 nm, conductivities as high as 2 ×10 4 Scm -1 , but little porosity. vent stacking of graphitic layers, which increases SSA, a driver in electrical double-layer (EDL) supercapacitors. A porous activated carbon with an average crystal size of 6-18 nm, has a very high SSA of 900-2500 m 2 g -1 , but electrical conductivity of 25-75 Scm -1 . However, in spite of the strong technological interest in CNT fabrics and yarns as electrodes in energy-storage related processes, their structure remains poorly understood. There is generally a lack of accurate descriptors of the pore structure that can be linked to basic electrochemical properties, including those providing a better understanding of suspected volumetric changes upon liquid infiltration, The starting point of this study is to analyse a thin non-woven fabric of multiple CNT fibres. A typical CNT fibre electrode is produced by overlapping multiple individual CNT fibre filaments into a (> 1000 cm 2 ) non-woven fabric (Fig. It is also a similar format to sheets produced semi-industrially in scaled-up facilities. As shown in the electron micrograph in Fig. Fig. 2D WAXS/SAXS patterns capture the coexistence of crystalline domains and irregular pores in the network structure, as shown in the examples in Fig. ) there is a small peak associated with the form factor of the CNTs, ) there is a change in slope, which we attribute to contributions from the mesoporous structure. For reference, N2 measurements indicate a pore distribution starting from mesopores around 20 nm and extending to the macropore range. graphitic layer stacks with respect to Bernal graphite (d002,graphite = 3.35 Å -1 ). As such, they are present in virtually all materials made up of graphitic domains irrespective of their pore structure or degree of crystallinity, including glassy carbon, Equipped with adequate correction of the data to account for density fluctuations, it is possible to calculate descriptors of the pore structure, some of which are shown schematically in Fig. lc corresponds to the average lateral distance over which the correlation length is present. It is sensitive to electron density fluctuations at the periphery of the voids. Q is the invariant, equivalent to the scattering power (k) per volume probed (V ) and experimentally determined as Through its dependence on the volume fraction of the two phases in the system (i.e. CNT and air) and the difference in electron density ((∆ρ) 2 ), it provides a measure of sample porosity P. These density fluctuations, proposed and widely analysed by Ruland, Kp is the Porod's constant, obtained experimentally as q→∞ And which is related to the surface to volume ratio SV From equation 6 it is possible to obtain the surface area per unit mass, i.e. the specific surface area (SSA) by taking the ratio of SV over the material's density, and compare with gas adsorption measurements, for example. In such case, the density used for normalisation must be the apparent density; for the samples in this work close to 0.33 gcm -3 . Lp is related to the lateral size of scattering elements and thus to average pore size lpore, average bundle lateral size, lbundle (Fig. Finally, the magnitude of density fluctuations can be calculated based on the expression previously used to describe similar needle-shaped pores in various CFs. hence the substantial differences in SSASAXS values for MWCNTs and SWCNT fibres in Table density is with respect to a stack of graphitic planes, given by d 002graphite size ⟨∆ 2 L⟩ , although their contributions cannot be separated using only SAXS data. The values for structural parameters obtained by SAXS analysis ρ CNTyarnTh = 2.268 d 002CNT f ibre (10) on fibre made up of either MWCNTs or SWCNTs, are presented in Table Overall, the corrected structural parameters derived from SAXS Where 2.268 gcm -3 is the density of single-crystal graphite 44 and d002 the interlayer spacing. This gives a porosity of 0.85, which is higher than the value in Table Electrochemical swelling of CNT fibres was induced by applying a constant electrochemical potential of -3.5 V vs Ag/Ag + inside a custom built three-electrode cell with ionic liquid. 1-Butyl-1methylpyrrolidinium (bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide, PYR14TFSI, was chosen as inert electrolyte exclusively because of its high chemical stability (3.5 V in a device, 9,50 6.1 V according to supplier). Amongst the myriad of methods developed to modify carbonaceous electrodes, A general indication of the effectiveness of the swelling process is gained by direct optical observation of the large increase in sample volume and reduction in apparent volumetric density upon swelling (Fig. The interest then, is in quantifying the increase in surface area and identifying the structural elements or length-scales relevant in the swelling process. This information from SAXS is summarised in Fig. Pristine and swollen MWCNTs-based fibre electrodes were further analysed by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (Fig. In agreement with these data, cyclic voltammograms, CVs, (Fig. These results are in line with the structural changes of the electrodes observed by SAXS, confirming that the porosity increase in swollen CNT fibres does not come from the opening of micropores (e.g. the inside of the CNTs), pseudocapacitive reactions or intercalation. More importantly, the implication is that SAXS can be effectively used to analyse electrochemical processes in mesoporous nanocarbon ensembles. An example is the contribution of low-dimensional properties of nanocarbons to the bulk electrochemical properties of their macroscopic ensembles. After swelling, the CV still shows the distinctive butterflyshape for CNTs ensembles due to their small quantum capacitance Finally, we present a schematic (Fig. Highly graphitised CNT yarns were synthesized continuously by the direct spinning chemical vapor deposition method from a vertical reactor at a winding rate set at 5 mmin -1 , the source of carbon was butanol, ferrocene was used as iron catalyst and thiophene as promoter. The concentration of precursors butanol:thiophene:ferrocene (97.7 : 1.5 : 0.8) was chosen to produce CNTs predominantly made up of 3 -5 layers (multiwall CNTs, MWCNTs) with average diameter of 2.5 5 nm, and (99 : 0.2 : 0.8) to produce SWCNTs of diameter around 1.5 nm. SEM and TEM analysis were carried out with a FIB-FEGSEM Helios NanoLab 600i (FEI) at 15 kV and a JEOL JEM 3000F TEM at 300kV, respectively. Simultaneous 2D WAXS/SAXS patterns of CNT yarns samples were collected at ALBA synchrotron facilities (Barcelona, Spain) at NCD-Beamline 11. The radiation length was 1 Å and a microfocus spot diameter of 10-microns, approximately, was used. Samples consisted in yarns of multifilaments, typically of ≈ 1 mm thickness. Scattering of the samples was acquired in the range of 0.0035 < q (Å -1 ) < 0.15. Sample holder positions are calibrated using a reference material: silver behenate (AgBh) and chromium oxide (Cr2O3) for SAXS and WAXS measurements, respectively. Data were corrected for background scattering. SAXS radial profiles were obtained after full 360 o integration. Samples for electrochemical swelling consisted of arrays of multiple MWCNTs fibre filaments, similar to a yarn or a tow, with length of 1 -6 cm (depending on the electrochemical cell used), diameter around 1 mm and a mass loading of 2 -4 mgcm -2 . Asformed MWCNTs fibres were shaped into a yarn and placed between Mica windows within the electrochemical cell and then, filling with PYR14TFSI to carry out an appropriate impregnation of MWCNTs fibres with this electrolyte before swelling. The solvent-induced swelling process consists in the adsorption of PYR14TFSI ionic liquid (bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide, >99.5% Solvionic) between the carbon structures of the MWC-NTs network under chronoamperometry (CA) conditions (-3.5 V for 60 minutes in situ WAXS/SAXS measurements or different swelling times, ex situ study) in a three-electrode configuration. IL was chosen as an inert electrolyte to carry out the swelling due to its high chemical stability (3.5 V in a device, 9,50 , 6.1 V according to supplier, Solvionic). A pristine MWCNTs yarn (≈ 2.5 mg of active material mass) was set as working electrode, platinum mesh as counter electrode and a silver wire was used as a pseudo reference electrode. Pristine (pMWCNTs, pSWCNTs) and swollen (sMWC-NTs,sSWCNTs) CNTs fibres were electrochemically characterised based on cyclic voltammetries (CV) and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements to obtain specific capacitance (Cs) and Nyquist plot, respectively. CVs at a scan rate of 20 mVs -1 in PYR14TFSI were performed within an operating voltage window of 3.5 V. Cs was calculated by integrating area under the anodic and cathodic curves and then, dividing by active material mass. Measurements of capacitance in polarized conditions, before and after MWCNTs yarn swelling, were performed to determine potential of zero charge (PZC) from EIS at 10 mHz and different bias voltage, following methodology fully described before. A central characteristic of CNT fibre electrodes and related nanocarbon ensembles is their complex mesoporous structure, resulting from imperfect packing of highly conjugated and long CNTs. SAXS and WAXS are ideal techniques to probe this highlycrystalline, yet porous and hierarchical structure. SAXS shows a deviation from Porod's law, which arises due to density fluctuations of the stacks of graphitic domains. This work shows that it is critical to subtract these fluctuations from the observed scattering intensity in order to obtain accurate structural descriptors for fibres made up of CNTs with several layers, with SWCNTs fibres showing a much lower contribution. After such correction, the SSA determined by SAXS is remarkably similar to that observed by gas-adsorption. This provides very strong support for the analytical treatment of the data proposed here, while also highlighting the inherently predominant open porosity in nanocarbon ensembles, effectively molecular solids. The density fluctuations observed in CNTs fibres have been widely reported in other graphitic systems, such as carbon fibres. However, whereas in CF and traditional carbons stack size parallel and perpendicular are strongly related and compounded in the degree of graphitisation of the material, in CNTs fibres molecular conjugation and stack formation are in principle independently fixed at the points of synthesis and assembly, respectively. As such, CNTs fibre longitudinal fibre properties are likely to be linked to density fluctuations by virtue of their relation to interbundle stress and charge transfer processes. Current efforts are directed at exploring such possible correlation between density fluctuations and longitudinal mechanical and electrical properties. Electrochemical charging of a CNTs fibre in ionic liquids produces swelling of the CNTs fibres and roughly doubling of capacitance, without significant loss of electrical conductivity. In situ WAXS/SAXS measurements during the process show that the process is dominated by opening of bundles, but without individualisation of the CNTs. The increase in surface area determined by SAXS both in situ and ex situ are in agreement with the increase in capacitance determined independently in an electrochemical cell. This supports the use of WAXS/SAXS for the study of CNTs fibre and related nanocarbon electrodes in various other electrochemical processes, such as in electrochemical actuation and in batteries. Work is in progress to relate fibre morphology (e.g. CNTs type, degree of alignment) to the changes in electrode properties under different electrochemical stimuli. Finally, combined electrochemical and WAXS/SAXS measurements during swelling show no major changes in the contributions to the total capacitance from the Helmholtz and quantum capacitances. According to these results, altering this balance to access predominantly the quantum capacitance and thus the JDOS will require some degree of individualization of the CNTs. * l bundle or l matter