The smuggling of special nuclear materials (SNMs) across national borders is becoming a serious threat to nuclear nonproliferation. This paper presents a feasibility study on the rapid interrogation of concealed SNMs by combining scattering and transmission nuclear resonance fluorescence (sNRF and tNRF) spectroscopy. In sNRF spectroscopy, SNMs such as 235,238 U are excited by a wide-band photon beam of appropriate energy and exhibit unique NRF signatures. Monte Carlo simulations show that one-dimensional scans can realize isotopic identification of concealed 235,238 U when the detector array used for interrogation has sufficiently high energy resolution. The simulated isotopic ratio 235 U/ 238 U is in good agreement with the theoretical value when the SNMs are enclosed in relatively thin iron. This interrogation is followed by tNRF spectroscopy using a narrowband photon beam with the goal of obtaining tomographic images of the concealed SNMs. The reconstructed image clearly reveals the position of the isotope 235 U inside an iron rod. It is shown that the interrogation time of sNRF and tNRF spectroscopy is one order of magnitude lower than that when only tNRF spectroscopy is used and results in a missed-detection rate of 10 -3 . The proposed method can also be applied for isotopic imaging of other SNMs such as 239,240 Pu and 237 Np. The smuggling of special nuclear materials (SNMs) across borders and through ports of entry is one of the greatest threats to global security. The Incident Trafficking Database, which was developed by the International Atomic Energy Agency to record incidents of illicit trafficking in nuclear and other radioactive materials, was notified of several hundred incidents that involved the deliberate trafficking or malicious use of certain nuclear and radioactive materials Passive detection systems, which exploit the γ rays and/or neutrons naturally emitted from radioactive isotopes, can be easily deployed to identify SNMs by delivering a low radiation dose to the inspected target Recently, nondestructive detection methods based on nuclear resonance fluorescence (NRF) have been proposed in the context of industrial applications However, tNRF-CT relies on a narrow-band beam with suitable energy for accurate evaluation of the attenuation factors associated with both atomic processes and NRF interactions. Without prior isotope identification, it seems difficult and time-consuming to interrogate SNMs with multiple nuclei and isotopes by scanning the beam energy and thus checking for every suspicious nuclear species. In this paper, we propose combining scattering NRF (sNRF) and tNRF spectroscopy to rapidly realize isotope identification and tomographic imaging of SNMs such as 235,238 U. A schematic illustration of the proposed method is shown in Fig. The NRF cross section for absorption via the resonant energy level E r can be expressed by the Breit-Wigner distribution where Γ is the width of the level at E r , Γ 0 is the partial width for transitions between E r and the ground state, h is the Planck constant, and c is speed of light. In practice, the NRF cross section should be calculated taking into account Doppler broadening. If the true Voigt profile is approximated as a Gaussian profile, Eq. 1 then becomes Here Because of conservation of energy and momentum, a free nucleus undergoing NRF will recoil with kinetic energy E rec , which is determined by the Compton-like formula where θ is the scattering angle of the photon relative to its incident direction. NRF is generally considered to occur only between states that differ by two or fewer units of angular momentum. The angular distribution of NRF γ rays is analogous to that of γ-ray cascades. For an NRF interaction of transitions J a (L 1 )J b (L 2 )J c , where L 1 and L 2 are the multipole orders of excitation and de-excitation, respectively, the angular distribution W (θ ) can be written as where P 2n (cosθ ) is the Legendre polynomial expansion, and A 2n is given by Fig. where F 2n (L 1 J a J b ) and F 2n (L 2 J c J b ) are constants that depend on the spin states of the transitions and photon multipolarities To realize SNM identification and isotope ratio prediction, 1D sNRF spectroscopy is applied. As shown in Fig. In sNRF spectroscopy, one can use the NRF cross section σ NRF (E) and angular distribution W (θ ) to construct a semianalytical expression for the expected NRF counts. For a photon beam of incident flux I(E) interacting with the target, a small part of the photon flux near the resonant energy E r will undergo resonant (NRF) and non-resonant (atomic) interactions. The resulting NRF yield then produces a doubledifferential rate of NRF detections in the infinitesimal solid angle dΩ, ) where E and E are the energy of the incident photons and scattered NRF photons, respectively; L is the thickness of the irradiated target; ε(E ) is the intrinsic photopeak detection efficiency; μ NRF (E) = Nσ NRF (E) denotes the linear attenuation coefficient, with N being the number density of interrogated isotopes; and μ e f f (E, E ) is the effective attenuation coefficient, which is given by Here μ nr (E) and μ nr (E ) are the non-resonant attenuation coefficients of the incident photons and NRF photons, respectively. After sNRF spectroscopy is performed, a tNRF-CT technique is applied to perform tomographic imaging (see Fig. The attenuation factor of on-resonance γ rays at (x, θ r ) can be expressed as where (μ/ρ) ave is the average mass attenuation coefficient of the CT target (i.e., the interrogated target) on the incident beam path, and L is the diameter of the CT target. σ NRF is the NRF reaction cross section of the isotope of interest, and N t (x, θ r ) is the isotope number density on the γ-ray incident path. For the off-resonance γ rays, σ NRF is negligible; thus, the attenuation factor of the off-resonance γ rays is The NRF resonant attenuation factor at (x,θ r ) can be derived as follows where -ln(ε ON ) and -ln(ε OFF ) are the attenuation factors of the on-resonance and off-resonance γ rays, respectively. C ON (x, θ r ) and C ON,blank denote the NRF yields recorded by the transmission detectors with and without the CT target, respectively. C OFF (x, θ r ) and C OFF,blank are the integration yields of the spectral region of interest (ROI) recorded by the LaBr 3 (Ce) detector with and without the CT target, respectively. Note that ε OFF is an approximate estimate of the atomic attenuation effect of on-resonance γ rays in Eq. 10 when a narrow-band γ-ray beam is used. Consequently, the NRF attenuation factor depends only on N t (x, θ r ), which is required to reconstruct the CT images of SNMs. To model the NRF process in this study, we developed a new class, G4NRF, in the Geant4 toolkit In sNRF spectroscopy, the target is irradiated by a photon beam with a Gaussian energy distribution [centroid energy of 1.76 MeV and energy spread of 3% in standard deviation (SD)] and a photon intensity of 10 10 photons per second, which can be readily delivered by a state-of-the-art LCS γ-ray source The NRF peaks at 1687, 1734 (or 1737), and 1782 keV are then fitted with four Gaussian distributions on top of an exponentially decaying continuum background. The fitting func-tion for these NRF peaks is written as where c 1 and c 2 describe the shape of the background, and a k , E k , and σ k are the area, mean, and SD fit parameters of the k th peak. The fitting curve is shown in Fig. The isotope ratio of 235 U to 238 U, 235 U/ 238 U, is related to the NRF yield ratio, 235 Y / 238 Y , by the following equation: where 235 Y / 238 Y is the peak yield ratio, and I(E238 U )/I(E235 U ) is the ratio of the incident γ-ray intensity. ε238 U /ε235 U is the detection efficiency ratio of the HPGe detector calculated using the MCLCSS code σ238 U (E)dE/ σ235 U (E)dE is given by Eq. 2. W238 U (θ )/W235 U (θ ) is the angular momentum ratio of 238 U and 235 U NRF emission In tNRF imaging, the uranium rod is ideally assumed to be composed of pure 235 U, and its default density is set to 19 g/cm 3 to reduce the computational requirements. The interrogating γ-ray beam has a Gaussian distribution (a centroid energy of 1734 keV and an energy spread of 1% in SD) and a photon intensity of 10 10 photons per second. Fig. As mentioned above, 65 sets of spectra were obtained. On the basis of the NRF peak yields at 1687 and 1734 keV, the ε ON (x, θ r ) values for these scan points are obtained. Similarly, the values of ε OFF (x, θ r ) are obtained on the basis of the integration of the spectral ROI recorded by the LaBr 3 (Ce) detector [see Fig. To evaluate the dependence of the attenuation factors on SNM density, we reconstructed CT images of 235 U at artificial target densities of 14, 19, and 24 cm 3 . Reconstructed images similar to those in Fig. In SNM interrogation, two errors can occur: a false alarm, where the test indicates that the SNM is present when in fact the "all clear" hypothesis is correct, and a missed detection, where the test shows "all clear" but the SNM is in fact present. We attempt to demonstrate the scientific justification of our proposed method by comparing it with the use of the tNRF method alone in the context of balancing the measurement time and the missed-detection rate in an SNM interrogation. ∆ sNRF as a function of sNRF scan time t sNRF can be expressed as ∆ sNRF = ∆ 0 sNRF × t sNRF /t 0 sNRF , considering only the statistical fluctuation because the background is negligible. Similarly, ∆ tNRF for a tNRF imaging time t tNRF can be given as ∆ tNRF = ∆ 0 tNRF × t tNRF /t 0 tNRF . To determine whether an interrogated object contains 235 U, the decision rule is to alarm if ∆ sNRF or ∆ tNRF exceeds a test threshold ∆ th . The missed-detection rates β are easily obtained using ∆ sNRF and ∆ tNRF as β sNRF = Φ(∆ th -∆ sNRF ) and β tNRF = Φ(∆ th -∆ tNRF ). Here Φ is the cumulative distribution function of a normal distribution centered at zero with variance unity where t s+t is the total interrogation time for both sNRF scanning and tNRF imaging. In addition, t 0 is given by t 0 = t 0 tNRF + t 0 sNRF . Fig. We performed additional simulations to evaluate the influence of W (θ ) on the sNRF yields because the excitation and de-excitation of the 1734 keV state of 235 U are affected by spin selection uncertainty and mixing ratio unavailability. In the simulations, the non-uniform distributions of W (θ ) obtained from the transition sequences 7/2 → 9/2 → 7/2, q-q and 7/2 → 9/2 →9/2, q-q (see Fig. The interrogation of SNMs is an essential technique to prevent global nuclear proliferation. In this work, we combined sNRF and tNRF spectroscopy to achieve the rapid identification and tomographic imaging of SNMs. It was shown that the isotopic composition of 235,238 U and their isotope ratio can be determined from the photon emission of the resonant states at 1734 and 1782 keV using sNRF scanning. The spatial distribution of 235 U concealed in a 3-cm-diameter iron rod can be well visualized using tNRF imaging. We conclude that the combination of sNRF scanning with tNRF imaging has the advantage of achieving a significantly lower misseddetection rate within a realistic interrogation time compared to that obtained using only tNRF spectroscopy.