Coupled magneto-mechanical wrinkling has appeared in many scenarios of engineering and biology. Hence, soft magneto-active (SMA) plates buckle when subject to critical uniform magnetic field normal to their wide surface. Here, we provide a systematic analysis of the wrinkling of SMA plates subject to an in-plane mechanical load and a transverse magnetic field. We consider two loading modes: plane-strain loading and uni-axial loading, and two models of magneto-sensitive plates: the neo-Hookean ideal magneto-elastic model and the neo-Hookean magnetization saturation Langevin model. Our analysis relies on the theory of nonlinear magneto-elasticity and the associated linearized theory for superimposed perturbations. We derive the Stroh formulation of the governing equations of wrinkling, and combine it with the surface impedance method to obtain explicitly the bifurcation equations identifying the onset of symmetric and antisymmetric wrinkles. We also obtain analytical expressions of instability in the thin-and thick-plate limits. For thin plates, we make the link with classical Euler buckling solutions. We also perform an exhaustive numerical analysis to elucidate the effects of loading mode, load amplitude, and saturation magnetization on the nonlinear static response and bifurcation diagrams. We find that antisymmetric wrinkling modes always occur before symmetric modes. Increasing the pre-compression or heightening the magnetic field has a destabilizing effect for SMA plates, while the saturation magnetization enhances their stability. We show that the Euler buckling solutions are a good approximation to the exact bifurcation curves for thin plates. Soft magneto-active (SMA) materials, such as magneto-active elastomers, are a particularly promising kind of smart materials that can respond to magnetic field excitation. In general, these SMA materials are prepared by mixing micron-sized magnetizable particles (such as carbonyl iron and neodymium-iron-boron) into a non-magnetic elastomeric matrix such as rubber or silicone Owing to these superior magneto-mechanical coupling behaviors, SMA materials have recently attracted considerable academic and industrial interests, prefiguring various potential applications which include remote actuators and sensors A challenging problem that arises in the study of SMA materials is how to model the strong nonlinearity and the magneto-mechanical coupling. Thus, a lot of academic interest has been devoted over the years to establish a general theoretical framework of nonlinear magneto-(visco)elasticity in order to describe appropriately the magneto-mechanical response of SMA materials In a large variety of practical applications, the mechanical and magnetic loads (prestretch, magnetic field, etc.) influence the working performance of smart systems made of SMA materials and may lead to instability and even failure. In fact, it has long been observed that a magneto-elastic beam or plate in a uniform transverse magnetic field will buckle once the field reaches a critical value On the other hand, local buckling and other instability phenomena can be exploited to realize active pattern switching devices and reconfigurable metamaterials. Hence Thus, it is vital to theoretically study the stability of SMA structures and composites subject to coupled magneto-mechanical loads, so that we can provide solid guidance for simulations and experiments. From a theoretical point of view, the classical buckling problem of a magneto-elastic beam-plate was first addressed by The present work revisits the stability problem of SMA plates subject to an in-plane mechanical load and a uniform transverse magnetic field, and evaluates explicitly the onset of wrinkling instabilities. This work differs from previous works We first present the basic equations governing the finite magneto-elastic deformations of an incompressible soft magneto-elastic body, as developed by In the undeformed stress-free state, the body occupies in the Euclidean space a region B r (the boundary being ∂B r , with the outward normal N), which is taken to be a reference configuration. Any material point inside the body is then identified with its position vector X in B r . The application of both mechanical load and magnetic field deforms quasistatically the body from B r to the current configuration B (the boundary being ∂B, with the outward normal n). The particle located at X in B r now occupies the position x = χ(X) in B, where the vector function χ is a one-to-one, orientation-preserving mapping with a sufficiently regular property. The associated deformation gradient tensor is F = Grad χ = ∂χ/∂X (F iα = ∂x i /∂X α in Cartesian components) with Grad being the gradient operator in B r . Note that Greek indices are associated with B r and Roman indices with B. The Jacobian of the deformation gradient is J = det F, and it is equal to 1 at all times for incompressible materials. The left and right Cauchy-Green deformation tensors b = FF T and C = F T F are used as the deformation measures, where the superscript T signifies the transpose. In the Eulerian description, the equilibrium equations in the absence of mechanical body forces, and the Maxwell equations in the absence of time dependence, free charges and electric currents, are where τ is the total Cauchy stress tensor including the contribution of magnetic body forces, B is the Eulerian magnetic induction vector and and H is the Eulerian magnetic field vector; curl and div are the curl and divergence operators in B, respectively. The conservation of angular momentum implies that τ is symmetric. The Eulerian magnetization vector M is defined by the standard relation where μ 0 = 4π × 10 -7 N • A -2 is the magnetic permeability in vacuum. In vacuum, there is no magnetization and Eq. ( where I is the identity tensor. The external fields B and H satisfy div B = 0 and curl H = 0, which leads to div τ = 0. The traction and magnetic boundary conditions are written in Eulerian form as where t a is the applied mechanical traction vector per unit area of ∂B. Note that the magnetic traction vector t m induced by the external Maxwell stress τ is t m = τ n. Using Nanson's formula, we can transform the governing equations (1) and boundary conditions (4) into the Lagrangian form. Following the theory of nonlinear magneto-elasticity where T = F -1 τ is the total nominal stress tensor, the nominal magnetic field vector B L = F -1 B and the nominal magnetic induction vector H L = F T H are the Lagrangian counterparts of B and H, respectively, and p is a Lagrange multiplier related to the incompressibility constraint, which can be determined from the equilibrium equations and boundary conditions. The Eulerian counterparts of Eq. ( For an incompressible isotropic material, the energy function Ω can be reduced to a function depending only on the following five invariants: According to Eqs. ( where Ω n = ∂Ω/∂I n (n = 1, 2, 4, 5, 6). We now specialize the above equations of nonlinear magneto-elasticity to the homogeneous deformation of an SMA plate subject to an in-plane mechanical load and a uniform magnetic field along its thickness direction. In this work, we consider two mechanical loading modes: plane-strain loading (see Fig. We point out that to simplify the mathematical modelling and obtain explicit analytical solutions to the nonlinear response and the bifurcation criteria of SMA plates, we make the following assumptions. (i) The plate is entirely immersed in the external magnetic field and subjected to an applied uniform magnetic field in the thickness direction. (ii) The plate is of infinite lateral extent, i.e., the plate lateral dimensions are much larger than its thickness. (iii) The magnetic poles are very close to the plate, see Fig. Let (X 1 , X 2 , X 3 ) and (x 1 , x 2 , x 3 ) be the Cartesian coordinates in the reference and current configurations, respectively, along the (E 1 , E 2 , E 3 ) and (e 1 , e 2 , e 3 ) unit vectors. In the undeformed configuration, the plate has uniform thickness 2H along the X 2 direction and lateral lengths L 1 , L 3 in the (X 1 , X 3 ) plane. The pure homogeneous deformations corresponding to the two loading modes are defined by x 3 = λ 3 X 3 , where λ i (i = 1, 2, 3) is the principal stretch in the X i direction and λ 2 = (λ 1 λ 3 ) -1 by incompressibility. The resulting deformation gradient tensor is the diagonal matrix in the e i ⊗ E j basis. The current thickness and lateral lengths of the deformed plate are 2h, 1 and 3 , respectively. We take the underlying Eulerian magnetic induction vector B to be in the The five independent invariants in Eq. ( Thus, we can define a reduced energy function ω as ω (λ 1 , λ 3 , I 4 ) = Ω (I 1 , I 2 , I 4 , I 5 , I 6 ). Based on Eq. ( where ω λ 1 = ∂ω/∂λ 1 , ω λ 3 = ∂ω/∂λ 3 , and ω 4 = ∂ω/∂I 4 . They satisfy Note that H 1 = H 3 = 0 from Eq. ( It follows from the magnetic boundary conditions (4) 2,3 that the non-zero components of B and H are B 2 = B 2 and H 2 = μ -1 0 B 2 , respectively. Thus, the non-zero components of the Maxwell stress (3) are These Maxwell stress components generate the magnetic traction vector t m = τ n. For uni-axial mechanical loading in the x 1 direction (Fig. where s 1 is the nominal mechanical traction per unit area of ∂B r applied on the faces x 1 = ± 1 /2. Thus, we deduce from Eqs. ( Note that Eq. ( For plane-strain mechanical loading in the x 1 direction (Fig. There is no mechanical traction applied on the faces x 2 = ±h, but lateral mechanical tractions, applied on the faces x 1 = ± 1 /2 and x 3 = ± 3 /2, are required to maintain the plane-strain deformation. As a result, Eq. ( By introducing the reduced energy function ω as ω (λ, I 4 ) = Ω (I 1 , I 2 , I 4 , I 5 , I 6 ), it follows from the constitutive relations (8) that where ωλ = ∂ ω/∂λ and ω4 = ∂ ω/∂I 4 . They are determined by For this loading mode, the traction boundary conditions (4) 1 read where s 1 and s 3 are the nominal mechanical tractions applied on the faces x 1 = ± 1 /2 and x 3 = ± 3 /2, respectively. In view of Eqs. ( where τ 33 -τ 22 is given by Eq. ( In this section we employ the linearized incremental theory of magneto-elasticity Consider an infinitesimal incremental mechanical displacement u = ẋ along with an updated incremental magnetic induction vector ḂL0 , superimposed on the finitely deformed configuration reached via x = χ(X). Here and henceforth, a superposed dot indicates an increment. The incremental balance laws and the incremental incompressibility condition are formulated in Eulerian, or updated Lagrangian, form as where Ṫ0 = F Ṫ, ḂL0 = F ḂL and ḢL0 = F -T ḢL are the push-forward versions of the corresponding Lagrangian increments Ṫ, ḂL and ḢL , respectively, and L = grad u is the incremental displacement gradient. The resulting push-forward quantities are identified with a subscript 0. The linearized incremental constitutive equations for incompressible SMA materials read where A 0 , Γ 0 and K 0 are, respectively, fourth-, third-and second-order tensors, which are referred to as instantaneous magneto-elastic moduli tensors (see where A, Γ and K are the relevant referential magneto-elastic moduli tensors, which are the instantaneous moduli tensors have the symmetries A 0piqj = A 0qjpi , Γ 0piq = Γ 0ipq , and Using the incremental form of the rotational balance condition FT = (FT) T , we have the following relation between A 0 and τ for an incompressible material The incremental fields exterior to the material read where Ḃ and Ḣ are to satisfy div Ḃ = 0 and curl Ḣ = 0, respectively, and hence τ * is divergence-free, i.e., div τ = 0. The mechanical and magnetic boundary conditions for the incremental fields can be expressed, in updated Lagrangian form, as where ṫA 0 da = ṫA dA, with t A being the applied mechanical traction vector per unit area of ∂B r (i.e., t A dA = t a da). Note that dA and da are area elements of the reference and current configurations, respectively. In this work we focus on incremental two-dimensional solutions independent of x 3 , such that u 3 = ḂL03 = ḢL03 = 0, and hence From Eq. ( The incremental balance laws and incompressibility condition (20) 1,2,4 become For pure homogeneous deformation of the SMA plate subject to the transverse magnetic field, we have F ij = 0 for i = j and B 1 = B 3 = 0. The magneto-elastic moduli tensors A 0 , Γ 0 and K 0 satisfy Consequently, using Eqs. ( and where the effective material parameters c ij , e ij and μ ij are defined as The two-dimensional incremental solutions, for the wrinkling instability with sinusoidal shape along the x 1 direction and amplitude variations along the x 2 direction (see Fig. and 1(e)), are sought in the form where i = √ -1, U 1 , U 2 , Φ, Σ 21 , Σ 22 and ∆ are non-dimensional functions of kx 2 only, k = 2π/L is the wrinkling wavenumber with L being the wavelength of the wrinkles, and G is the initial shear modulus (in Pa) of the SMA plate in the absence of magnetic field. Following a standard derivation procedure where For the constant Stroh matrix N considered here, we seek solutions to Eq. ( Substituting Eq. ( It is clear that the characteristic equation and hence the eigenvalues do not depend on τ 22 (appearing in the Stroh matrix (A.1)) for any choice of energy density function, despite the presence of external magnetic field. Thus, the two-dimensional wrinkling solutions to Eq. ( where A j (j = 1, . . . , 6) are arbitrary constants to be determined, q j (j = 1, . . . , 6) are the eigenvalues, and η (j) (j = 1, . . . , 6) are the eigenvectors associated with q j . The eigenvalues are complex conjugate pairs because of the real coefficients of Eq. ( So far, there is no restriction on the specific form of energy density function Ω. To proceed further and demonstrate the possibility of obtaining concise and analytical eigen-equation and eigenvectors, we henceforth consider the magneto-elastic material to be characterized by the following Mooney-Rivlin magneto-elastic model, where F is an arbitrary function of I 5 only and β ∈ [0, 1] is a constant. Note that Eq. ( with β = 0 reduces to the neo-Hookean magneto-elastic model, including, for example, the ideal model with no saturation and the magnetization saturation Langevin model, which we consider in Sec. 4. Using Eqs. ( where B 2 = B 2 / √ Gμ 0 is the dimensionless applied magnetic induction; F 5 and F 55 are defined as Then we find that the characteristic equation ( which yields six pure imaginary eigenvalues as where the real numbers p 1 , p 2 , and p 3 are The associated eigenvectors are derived as where the asterisk * denotes the complex conjugate. We observe from Eq. ( where η (j) i is the i-th component of the eigenvector η (j) . We take the applied mechanical traction t A as a dead load (i.e., ṫA 0 = ṫA = 0), so that the general incremental boundary conditions ( From curl Ḣ = 0, we deduce the existence of an incremental magnetic scalar potential Substituting Eq. ( To satisfy the decay condition φ → 0 as x 2 → ±∞, we take the solutions to Eq. ( where A + and A -are arbitrary constants. Thus, the associated incremental Maxwell stress tensor (24) 2 has non-zero components and for x 2 > h and x 2 < -h, respectively. Inserting Eqs. ( where A + = A + μ 0 /G. Using Eqs. ( where is a surface impedance matrix connecting the vectors S(kh) and U(kh) at the face x 2 = +h. Similarly, at the plate bottom surface x 2 = -h, we obtain and where the surface impedance matrix in the lower half-space is Using Eq. (A.6), we rewrite Eqs. ( Substituting Eqs. ( where By conducting some simple linear matrix manipulations of Eq. ( where the 3 × 3 coefficient matrices P sym and P anti have non-zero components /2 tanh (p j kh) , tanh (p j kh) , and for j = 1, 2, 3. For non-trivial solutions of Eq. ( Substituting Eqs. (A.4), ( where kh = λ -1 1 λ -1 3 kH. The bifurcation equation for symmetric modes is the same as Eq. ( In the thick-plate or short-wave limit (kH → ∞), the tanh functions in Eq. ( Note that the bifurcation equation ( In the thin-plate or long-wave limit (kH → 0), we find that the antisymmetric bifurcation equation ( For B 2 = 0, Eq. ( For definiteness, we now specialize the previous results to the neo-Hookean (β = 0) ideal magneto-elastic model and the neo-Hookean magnetization saturation Langevin model, which are characterized by the following energy functions, respectively, and where m s is the saturation magnetization and χ is the magnetic susceptibility that is associated with the relative magnetic permeability μ r by μ r = 1/ (1 -χ). The neo-Hookean ideal model ( has been adopted to investigate instability-induced pattern evolutions of the heterogeneous materials and structures Note that the magneto-elastic material models (67) and ( Using Eqs. ( for the ideal model, and for the saturation Langevin model. In the limit of small magnetic field (B → 0), one can verify that the saturation magnetization response ( G and the vacuum magnetic permeability μ 0 : Inserting Eqs. ( for the ideal model, and for the saturation Langevin model. Thus, the magnetization responses ( where Substituting Eqs. ( for uni-axial loading, and for plane-strain loading. Practically, we determine the response by prescribing the prestretch λ 1 or λ and solving (75) for s 1 and λ 3 (uni-axial loading) or solving (76) for s 1 and s 3 (plane-strain loading). For the neo-Hookean saturation Langevin model, the bifurcation or buckling equations ( For the neo-Hookean ideal model, we find from Eqs. (42) 3 and (72) that p 3 = 1. As a result, the bifurcation equation ( Equations ( for the thick-plate limit (kH → ∞), and for the thin-plate limit (kH → 0). We first conduct numerical calculations in Sec. 5.1 to investigate quantitatively the nonlinear static response of incompressible SMA plates subject to mechanical and magnetic loads. Section 5.2 then focuses on the bifurcation analysis to calculate the critical mechanical and/or magnetic field generating the wrinkling instability. We consider two different loading modes (plane-strain and uni-axial loading) and two neo-Hookean magneto-elastic models (( The nonlinear static response of an SMA plate subject to mechanical and magnetic loads is calculated from Eqs. ( For plane-strain loading, the effect of the magnetic induction field B 2 on the nominal mechanical traction s 1 applied to the SMA plate is plotted in Fig. We now examine the critical values of stretch in the x 1 direction and of transverse magnetic induction field for which antisymmetric (see Fig. modes of wrinkling instability appear. For plane-strain loading, antisymmetric modes are identified by bifurcation equations ( (66) or Eqs. ( Since it is found that antisymmetric modes always occur first, Fig. We first focus on the results for the ideal magneto-elastic model in Fig. For a fixed non-zero B 2 , the variation trends of the critical stretch λ cr or λ cr 1 with increasing kH are qualitatively the same as that for B 2 = 0. Besides, the critical magnetic field B cr 2 , for a given stretch λ or λ 1 , increases monotonically with kH, resulting in enhanced stability. Furthermore, for a given kH, Fig. for uni-axial loading. We now evaluate the effect of saturation magnetization on the stability. Fig. For a prescribed magnetic induction field, we first determine the critical stretch of the underlying deformed configuration for which antisymmetric and symmetric wrinkling modes are induced. Specifically, for plane-strain (uni-axial) loading, Fig. For a fixed B 2 , the critical stretch λ cr (or λ cr 1 ) required to initiate the antisymmetric instability decreases monotonically with increasing kH, asymptotically approaching the surface instability of the thick-plate limit when kH → ∞. However, the symmetric bifurcation curves exhibit an opposite trend. Thus, the stable range of combinations of λ (or λ 1 ) and kH is determined by the region above the solid line for a fixed B 2 . Moreover, the critical stretch λ cr (or λ cr 1 ) for any value of kH is shifted upwards when raising B 2 , thus indicating that the SMA plate is destabilized by the application of an increasing magnetic field. In particular, for plane-strain loading with B 2 = 0, 2.5, 5.0, the critical stretches λ cr of a plate with kH → 0 are 1.000, 1.426, 2.282, while those with kH → ∞ are 0.544, 0.608, 0.961, respectively. For uni-axial loading with B 2 = 0, 2.5, 4.0, the critical stretches λ cr 1 of the thin-plate limit are equal to 1.000, 2.016, 3.080, while those of the thick-plate limit are 0.444, 0.639, 0.918, respectively. The effect of small magnetic field on the stability is more significant for uni-axial loading than for plane-strain loading. Figure For antisymmetric modes, Figs. 5(b) and 6(b) illustrate how the saturation magnetization affects the bifurcation curves (λ cr versus kH and λ cr 1 versus kH) for plane-strain and uni-axial loading, respectively. We see that the bifurcation curves based on the two material overlap in the entire range of kH for B 2 ≤ 2.5. This means that the critical stretch is hardly affected by the saturation magnetization for small to moderate values of the magnetic field. However, the saturation magnetization plays an important role in determining the critical stretch λ cr or λ cr 1 for large values of B 2 : the figures show that it then stabilizes the SMA plate, and that its effect is much stronger for plane-strain loading than for uni-axial loading. We now evaluate the effect of pre-stretch on the bifurcation curves (B symmetric modes, both asymptotically tending to the surface instability of the thick-plate limit. The stable region of B 2 and kH for a fixed pre-stretch is enclosed below the solid line for antisymmetric modes. Furthermore, an increase in the pre-stretch results in a larger value of B cr 2 for a given kH. This means that increasing the pre-stretch enhances the stability of SMA plates. Besides, we see from Figs. 7(a) and 8(a) that in the absence of pre-stretch (i.e., λ = 1 or λ 1 = 1), a thin plate (kH → 0) buckles immediately when subject to an extremely small transverse magnetic field. By contrast, for a thin plate with a pre-stretch (say λ = 1.25 or λ 1 = 1.25), a non-zero magnetic induction field B cr 2 2.0 (plane-strain loading) or B cr 2 1.25 (uni-axial loading) is required to trigger the buckling instability. Interestingly, if an SMA plate with small values of kH is subject to a pre-compression (i.e., the pre-stretch is less than 1), the underlying configuration is unstable for any applied B 2 . For example, a plate with λ = 0.8 or λ 1 = 0.8 is unstable for kH 0.97 under plane-strain loading and for kH 0.85 under uni-axial loading. Physically, this means that plates with small values of kH do not support pre-compression even if there is no magnetic field. For antisymmetric modes, the effect of saturation magnetization on the bifurcation curves (B cr 2 versus kH) is highlighted in Figs. For the magneto-elastic coupling case, it is useful to establish thin-plate approximate equations (i.e., the Euler buckling solutions) of the antisymmetric wrinkling modes, as they always occurs first. The derivation procedure is provided in Appendix C in detail. We specialize the analysis to the neo-Hookean ideal magneto-elastic model ( For plane-strain loading, we find that the critical stretch is approximated as where Note that if there is no magnetic field (B 2 = 0), then λ 0 = 1, the correction of order one vanishes, and λ cr = 1 -(kH) 2 /3, in agreement with the classical Euler solution for the buckling of a slender plate under plane-strain loading Fig. In the framework of nonlinear magneto-elasticity theory and its associated incremental formulation, we presented a comprehensive theoretical analysis of the wrinkling instability of SMA plates under the combined action of transverse magnetic field and in-plane mechanical loading. We discussed two loading modes (plane-strain loading and uni-axial loading) and two types of neo-Hookean magneto-elastic material models (ideal model and magnetization saturation model). Employing the Stroh formulation and the surface impedance method, we derived explicit bifurcation equations of symmetric and antisymmetric modes and obtained their corresponding thin-and thick-plate limits analytically. Finally, we conducted detailed calculations to demonstrate the dependence of the nonlinear static response and bifurcation diagrams on the loading mode, load amplitude, and saturation magnetization. Our main observations are summarized below: (1) In contrast to the ideal model, introducting saturation magnetization results in a nonlinear magnetization response. Its effect on nonlinear mechanical response and critical buckling fields is more significant for plane-strain loading than for uni-axial loading. (2) Antisymmetric wrinkling modes always appear before symmetric modes are expressed. (3) Increasing the pre-compression and the magnetic field weakens the stability of SMA plates. However, the saturation magnetization effect strengthens their stability, especially for large pre-stretch or high magnetic field. (4) The thin-plate approximate formulas agree well with the exact bifurcation curves for thin plates. Note that we made the assumption of uniform magneto-mechanical biasing fields in this work to simplify the mathematical modelling of infinite SMA plates and to derive explicit analytical solutions. One factor that influences the uniformity of biasing fields is the shape and geometrical size of the SMA specimen. The mechanical and magnetic field distributions are usually non-uniform for ellipsoidal and cylindrical SMA specimens (see, for example, The three 3 × 3 real sub-matrices N i (i = 1, 2, 3) of the Stroh matrix N in the Stroh formulation (33) are where the dimensionless parameters a -g and τ 22 are defined as with the magneto-elastic material parameters a -g being where A 0 , Γ 0 and K 0 are the magneto-elastic moduli tensors. Note that we have used Eq. ( The total Cauchy stress tensor used in the Stroh matrix (A.1) is obtained from Eqs. ( where B 2 = B 2 / √ Gμ 0 is the dimensionless applied magnetic induction. Using the incremental theory of magneto-elasticity 3 Ω 56 + λ -4 1 λ -4 3 Ω 66 . (A.5) After obtaining the eigenvalues q j and eigenvectors η (j) , the generalized displacement and traction vectors at the faces x 2 = ±h are expressed, according to Eq. ( where E ± j = e ±iq j kh (j = 1, . . . , 6). Thus, we note from Eq. ( Assume that the SMA half-space in the reference and current configurations occupies the region X 2 ≥ 0 and x 2 ≥ 0, respectively. To satisfy the decay condition at x 2 → +∞ in the half-space, we only keep the eigenvalues in Eq. ( A j η (j) e iq j kx 2 = 3 j=1 A j η (j) e -p j kx 2 , (B.1) where q j = ip j (j = 1, 2, 3) with p j > 0. In matrix form, Eq. (B.1) is expressed as where where Z = -iP 2 P -1 1 is the surface impedance matrix of the half-space, through which the generalized traction and displacement vectors at the face x 2 = 0 are connected. In view of Eqs. ( 9λ 4 10 λ 5 30 1 + λ 4 10 λ 2 30 (χ -1) 9λ 