Adiabatic quantum-flux-parametron (AQFP) logic is an energy-efficient superconductor logic family. The latency of AQFP circuits is relatively long compared to that of other superconductor logic families and thus such circuits require low-latency clocking schemes. In a previous study, we proposed a low-latency clocking scheme called delay-line clocking, in which the latency for each logic operation is determined by the propagation delay of the excitation current, and demonstrated a simple AQFP buffer chain that adopts delay-line clocking. However, it is unclear whether more complex AQFP circuits can adopt delay-line clocking. In the present study, we demonstrate AQFP logic gates (AND and XOR gates) that use delay-line clocking as a step towards implementing large-scale AQFP circuits with delay-line clocking. AND and XOR gates with a latency of approximately 20 ps per gate are shown to operate at up to 5 and 4 GHz, respectively, in experiments. We also demonstrate that delay-line clocking enables phase skipping operation, in which some of the AQFP buffers for phase synchronization are removed to reduce the junction count and energy dissipation. The results indicate that delay-line clocking can enable low-latency, low-energy, large-scale AQFP circuits. Josephson junctions can be used as superconducting switching devices with a few-picosecond characteristic time and a sub-aJ energy barrier height. Superconducting digital circuits based on Josephson junctions Adiabatic quantum-flux-parametron (AQFP) logic In a previous study, we demonstrated an AQFP buffer chain with a latency of approximately 10 ps per gate achieved using delay-line clocking In the present study, we conduct a simulation and experiments as a step toward implementing large-scale AQFP circuits with delay-line clocking. Specifically, we show that (i) delay-line clocking can be used to operate AQFP logic gates with low latency and that (ii) delay-line clocking can reduce the number of buffers required for phase synchronization. Because delay-line clocking adoption has been limited to buffers Figure In general, most logic gates in a large-scale AQFP circuit are buffers For instance, Tmax is approximately 70 ps at 5 GHz for a buffer, as shown in figure Figure We demonstrated AND and XOR gates that use delay-line clocking at clock frequencies in the gigahertz range to show that delay-line clocking is applicable to complex AQFP circuits. We also demonstrated phase skipping operation to show that some of the buffers for phase synchronization can be removed when using delay-line clocking, which results in a reduction in the junction count and energy dissipation. Our simulation and measurement results indicate that delay-line clocking can reduce both the latency and energy dissipation of large-scale AQFP circuits. To clarify the advantage of delay-line clocking, here we compare AQFP logic using delay-line clocking with that using four-phase clocking and another superconductor logic, rapid single-flux-quantum (RSFQ) logic 