Weakly bound, physisorbed hydrocarbons could in principle provide a similar water-repellency as obtained by chemisorption of strongly bound hydrophobic molecules at surfaces. Here we present experiments and computer simulations on the wetting behavior of water on molecularly thin, self-assembled alkane carpets of dotriacontane (n-C 32 H 66 or C32) physisorbed on the hydrophilic native oxide layer of silicon surfaces during dip-coating from a binary alkane solution. By changing the dip-coating velocity we control the initial C32 surface coverage and achieve distinct film morphologies, encompassing homogeneous coatings with self-organized nanopatterns that range from dendritic nano-islands to stripes. These patterns exhibit a good water wettability even though the carpets are initially prepared with a high coverage of hydrophobic alkane molecules. Using The wetting and spreading of liquids on planar silicon surfaces and in porous silicon, with and without native silicon oxide layers, plays a crucial role in a large variety of technologies ranging from nanofluidics via energy storage to energy harvesting and the design of new materials via 3-D printing Whereas hydrogen-terminated silicon is hydrophobic, the formation of native oxide layers and subsequent hydroxylation leads to polar, hydrophilic surfaces There are several chemisorbed hydrophobic surfaces that adapt in response to liquid interaction, i.e., they reversibly change their conformation Motivated by our own findings on the spontaneous formation of ultra-thin physisorbed nanopatterns of n-alkane films with distinct, preparation-dependent morphology on silicon-silica surfaces, we present here a study on the wetting of weakly bound, i.e. physisorbed, molecular films by water. In the past, the self-assembly of n-alkanes has been studied on dry surfaces, such as graphite In a recent study, we have shown that C32 can form controllable nanopatterns on silicon substrates by dip-coating the sample at different velocities in binary alkane solutions Since native silicon oxide is hydrophilic and the C32 molecule hydrophobic, we can fabricate a well-defined, self-organised mesoscale wetting heterogeneity. In the following we employ this controllable nano-pattering process to study the wetting of water droplets on such chemically heterogeneous surfaces. Hydrophobic molecules covering a hydrophilic background should affect the macroscopic contact angle. To that end we present contact angle measurements of water droplets on such n-alkane nanopatterns and relate them with Molecular Dynamics computer simulations. The wetting changes are rationalised by considering the heterogeneous wetting geometry (Cassie model) as well as the fractal dimension of the formed C32 patterns and their dynamic restructuring when interacting with water. We perform contact angle measurements using an in-house built sessile drop setup which is composed of a 5.32x 1.89 cm 2 steel-plate, on which the Si substrates are placed. Beneath the plate, a goniometer is installed to rotate the sample. The goniometer plus steel-plate are coupled to a system of platforms moved by micrometer screws. This allows us to move the sample in three dimensions plus rotation. Ultra-pure water droplets (Merck, 18 MΩcm) of 2 μL were placed on the substrate centers with different coverages using a micropipette (Optipette). The micropipette was coupled using laboratory clamps to a labjack which allowed us to gently place the drop on the surface. The camera utilised for contact angle measurements was a digital microscope (Digi-Microscope 0.3 MP, 50-500X) and the calibration established for droplet images was 14 μm/px. All analysed images had sizes of 640x480 px. Contact angles were calculated by fitting a circle to the droplet contour and measuring its curvature radius and height. From the measured height and radius of the drop, we calculate the contact angle using the equation taken from Where θ * is the measured apparent contact angle, h is the height of the drop and r is the fitted circle radius. Coverages and morphology were measured by scanning electron microscopy (SEM). All SEM images are taken at 3000x magnification and 25 kV beam energy (LEO VP1400 operated in high vacuum). Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM) is operated in tapping mode, both in air and liquid conditions using a NanoWizard 3 BioScience AFM (JPK Instruments). The resonance frequency of the AFM cantilevers (Nano and More, USA) was 300 kHz with a constant force of 50 N/m. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of all samples are binarised using imageJ. After image binarization, the number of white pixels that represent the C32 perpendicular layer, are counted and divided by the total pixels to obtain the surface coverage percent. Meanwhile, the fractal dimension of our samples was measured using a box counting method implemented in ImageJ. The fractal dimension is defined here as: Where N is the number of boxes used to cover our nanopatterns and is the size of the boxes. All MD simulations were performed with the Large-scale Atomic/Molecular Massively Parallel Simulator (LAMMPS) Interactions between the silica surface, water and hydrocarbon chains are described using parameters as given in Butenuth et al. Silicon spontaneously forms an amorphous silicon dioxide layer under ambient conditions Only x and y dimensions are periodic for which a k-space solver with an accuracy of 10 -6 and corrections for slab geometries is used The system was then brought into thermal equilibrium at 300 K within a few nanoseconds and either a spherical or a cylindrical water droplet, the latter flat on the surface, was added after reaching a steady state. The amount of water in the droplet and the column ranged between 4000 and 12000 H 2 O molecules. To measure the contact angle, a circle is fitted to the isovalue of a two-dimensional density profile, averaged over several nanoseconds, at which the density is approximately a quarter of the bulk density of water After preparing samples in duplicate by dip-coating at a fixed velocity, one of the samples is taken to the scanning electron microscope (SEM) and the other twin-sample to the contact angle experiment. SEM images reveal the influence of the pulling velocity on the surface coverage and the morphology of the single perpendicular layer of molecules. In Figure1a-c we show representative electron micrographs for samples prepared at 3 different pulling velocities. All images are 60x60 μm 2 in size and show the differences in mesoscopic assembly of the C32 film, in particular the distinct patterns of the perpendicular layer. To quantify Figure the coverage, all prepared samples were measured with SEM. Three samples per velocity were taken to SEM. For each sample, 5 corner regions and the center are imaged, resulting in 15 SEM images for each preparation velocity. All images are binarised and white pixels are counted over these regions to obtain an average surface coverage for each preparation velocity. SEM images, for all samples prepared between 0.017 to 3.3 mm/s, are shown in supplementary information (Fig. The surface coverage and fractal dimension reach a minimum at 0.17 mm/s (Fig. These two regimes are related to distinct C32 deposition modes. Below a dip-coating velocity of 0.17 mm/s, no liquid film is pulled from the solution and the material is deposited by molecular diffusion and evaporation at the triple phase contact line of the meniscus (substrate/bulk solution/vapor). We refer to this deposition mode as the evaporation regime (see Ref. Visual inspection of the nanopatterns exhibit a morphological change from seaweed-like structures via compact dendritic island structures to stripes. This structure formation results from a complex interplay of evaporation, crystallization, diffusion and hydrodynamic flow, similarly as has been observed for other dip-coated organic films Using AFM after sample preparation, we can analyze the film thickness of our dendritic structures. AFM images are taken in amplitude-modulation mode on a sample prepared at the lowest pulling velocity v =0.017 mm/s (Fig. Are these distinct 2-D nanopatterning regimes, i.e., v < v crit and v > v crit , also reflected in the macroscopic wetting behaviour with water? To answer this question, contact angle measurements are performed on all samples using our home-built sessile drop experiment. The apparent contact angle θ * as a function of preparation velocity v and surface coverage with the perpendicular layer are shown in Figure To understand why the contact angles in Figure In Figure We have no detailed information on the crystallographic arrangement in the perpendicular C32 layer(s) after contact with water. In our previous study we presented grazing-incidence X-ray diffraction data that indicate a herringbone- type backbone ordering in the dry perpendicular layer In the following we will consider these important simulation insights along with the in-liquid AFM results to perform a quantitative analysis of the wetting behaviour. To model the contact angles, we first consider the classical Cassie equation for heterogeneous (hydrophilic, hydrophobic) surfaces where θ 1 is the contact angle of the C32 nanopattern and θ 2 is the contact angle for the substrate. The terms f 1 and f 2 are the coverage of the nanopattern and native silicon oxide respectively. Considering f 1 + f 2 = 1, equation 3 can be rewritten as: where we have introduced the reduction parameter α, which represents how much the nanopattern coverage decreases from its original value due to its interaction with the liquid interface, i.e. f 1 = f * 1 α, where f * 1 is the original coverage. This means, there is more restructuring of the nanopattern as the α parameter becomes smaller. We fit our apparent contact angles (Fig. The microscopic interfacial structure and its time evolution is overall quite complex. Nevertheless surface thermodynamics should provide mechanistic insights on the causes for the restructuring process and the resulting film structure. According to wetting thermodynamics the interface strives torward a situation with minimal surface energy. Therefore three cases in terms of layering arrangement have to be compared with respect to their energetics and the sum of the corresponding interfacial energies: (i) the bare silica-vapour surface, (ii) the hydrated silica/C32/water/vapour and (iii) the non-hydrated silica/C32/water/vapour layering. Values for the corresponding interfacial energies are reported in the literature for the bare amorphous silica-vapour,γ Si02/v = 260±13 mN/m These energetic considerations also suggest that the observed physisorbed C32 layers may be rather metastable, observable only on the exploration times of hours after contact with water, as typical for our experiments. Eventually, a complete removal of physisorbed C32 layers from the silica substrates would be the energetically and thus thermodynamically most favoured equilibrium state. This highlights the peculiar self-hydrophilisation tendency of water at hydroxylated silica surfaces with respect to physisorbed hydrocarbons that eventually should lead to perfect wetting of the initially rather hydrophobic surface coatings. Finally, we also added SEM images of a sample prepared at 0.033 mm/s after complete evaporation of the droplet (Figure We have studied the wetting properties of self-organised n-alkane nanopatterns prepared by dip-coating. We show that both the coverage and morphology of the nanopatterns can be controlled by the sample preparation velocity. Furthermore, we find a coating transition at 0.83 mm/s between two types of organic growth structure, which is reflected in both the surface coverage as well as the fractal dimension of the resulting nanopatterns. The transition between the two coating regimes affects the wetting properties of water, i.e., the measured contact angles also group into two regimes. By using complementary Atomic Force Microscopy and Molecular Dynamics simulations we see that the nanopatterns are not completely stable. The water layer is capable of removing the parallel bilayer that is uncovered by the perpendicular layer, as well as the coverage consisting of perpendicular layers, leading to the formation of terraces with up to 3 perpendicular monolayers. This water-induced restructuring results in a substantial reduction of the hydrophobic surface coverage. Based on these mesoscopic insights on the molecular rearrangement of the hydrophobic alkane molecules, we have quantified the resulting hydrophilization process using a modified Cassie model. It incorporates a reduction parameter that quantifies the observed restructuring of the nanopatterns. We use the contact angles seen in simulations as fixed parameters in the modified Cassie model and obtained a reduction parameter for the two contact angle regimes. We deduce from this model that the reduction parameter is larger for samples prepared below the critical velocity than samples prepared at higher velocities. We can correlate this with the morphology of the nanopatterns. Patterns with dendritic shape, as prepared in the evaporation regime, restructure less than samples prepared at higher velocity in the entrainment regime, with a more compact stripe appearance. Thus, we propose that the lateral roughness of the nanopattern can influence the effective hydrocarbon displacement capacity of the water molecules. Given the omnipresence of physisorption of hydrocarbons from the environment, in particular from airborne sources There are several publications presenting experiments, theoretical considerations and computer simulations that indicate a similar monolayer structure for physisorbed medium-to long-length n-alkanes on silicon surfaces with a native oxide layer (15 Å) This observation is of particular relevance for interface-dominated structures and thus for processes in nanoporous media or at nanostructured surfaces, where the hydrocarbon displacement mechanism explored here at planar surfaces acts like a self-cleaning mechanism and could substantially alter self-diffusion dynamics There are no conflicts to declare.