This paper reviews recent progress and key challenges in process and reliability for high-performance vertical GaN transistors and diodes, focusing on the 200 mm CMOS-compatible technology. We particularly demonstrated the potential of using 200 mm diameter CTE matched substrates for vertical power transistors, and gate module optimizations for device robustness. An alternative technology path based on coalescence epitaxy of GaN-on-Silicon is also introduced, which could enable thick drift layers of very low dislocation density. GaN power devices have been widely recognized as promising candidates for next generation power electronics. High voltage blocking capability is key for efficiency gains in GaN power electronics. Currently, both lateral GaN HEMT and vertical GaN MOSFET are considered for achieving high breakdown voltage beyond 650V. When aiming at high voltage, lateral GaN devices are limited by the area occupancy and surface trap related reliability concerns. Contrary to the lateral GaN devices, vertical GaN devices do not require enlarged chip size for increased breakdown voltage. The breakdown voltage in vertical GaN devices can be increased by increasing the thickness of the drift region while keeping a compact chip size. Moving the peak electric field from the surface into the GaN bulk potentially minimizes the surface trapping effect and dynamic Ron in the vertical devices Today, GaN technology has presented transistors achieving breakdown voltages up to 1700 V and diodes with breakdown voltage up to 4000 V We present 2 possible large diameter substrates for vertical GaN fabrication, which pave the way for industrial fabrication of this type of devices. Furthermore, the optimization of the doping level in the GaN device stack is discussed and finally the trench gate processing and the reliability of the fabricated MOSFETs are discussed. State-of-the-art vertical GaN devices are fabricated on bulk GaN substrates, thanks to the high quality of the substrates in terms of low dislocation density and low impurity concentrations Qromis Substrate Technology (QST ® ) has been a pioneer in developing engineered substrates with SEMI standard thickness. The QST ® substrate, depicted schematically in Fig. With respect to vertical GaN device fabrication, we demonstrated a crack-free MOCVD-grown 5.4 μm-thick GaN stack grown also in an AIX G5+ C Planetary Reactor ® . The stack, shown in Fig. The blocking voltage capability of these two generation stacks were evaluated by quasi-vertical NP diode test structures. In comparison of generation 1, generation 2 resulted in an increased breakdown voltage from 440 V to 680 V, as shown in Fig. GaN-on-Si using nanowire technology is another potential route towards thick, planar GaN drift layers with low dislocation density. The method is scalable up to 200 mm wafers, at lower cost than standard technology due to the very thin buffer and coalesced layers needed, enabling 1200 V devices at a competitive price. In this technology, key challenges are the preprocessing of growth templates for nanowire selective area epitaxy and coalescence of the GaN nanowires Having a low background concentration in the drift layer is key for well-performing devices in the 1200 V-class and beyond. To reach the 1200 V breakdown voltage target, doping levels need to be below 1.5x10 16 cm -3 , ideally even at 1×10 16 cm -3 While designing the p-GaN layer, a good blocking capability of the reverse biased PN-diode and a low channel resistance at the p-GaN/gate trench interface must be combined. The channel contribution to the device on-resistance, depends on both the channel length (which is defined by the p-GaN layer thickness) and on the inversion channel mobility (which increases with the p-doping). Fig. On the other hand, the doping of the p-GaN layer can strongly impact the breakdown voltage. The p-GaN doping must be sufficiently high to avoid punch-through, and sufficiently low to reduce the peak electric field for device robustness The gate dielectric in a (semi-) vertical trench MOSFET, shown in Fig. In this review paper, we have proposed two promising substrate choices to enable industrial fabrication of vertical GaN devices on large diameter substrates. In a first part, 5.4 μm-thick high quality MOCVD-grown GaN epitaxial layers on 200 mm engineered substrates, with a diode blocking capability of 680 V were demonstrated. A second substrate choice, being coalesced GaN nanowires on Si, is scalable up to 200 mm and has potential to demonstrate GaN growth with very low dislocation density. In the second part we have discussed the doping level optimization in the GaN device stack. On engineered substrates a net doping level of 1.5×10 16 cm -3 has been achieved in the n-drift layer. A reference device using an 800 nm p-GaN channel with a 1.2×10 19 Mg/cm 3 doping has been demonstrated, showing a current density of 0.35 kA/cm 2 and a reasonably low RON of 10 mΩ•cm 2 . In the last part the trench gate reliability has been discussed, for which it is essential to implement a process which results in a smooth trench gate sidewall, combined with the use of a sufficiently thick gate dielectric.