A passive underwater acoustic marker is presented and its feasibility for underwater recognition, positioning, and navigation is proved by a numerical method and experimental results. These markers are composed of acrylic elastic objects designed by backscattering strong peaks associated with the subsonic Rayleigh wave resonance of a polymer target excited by a broadband pulse, and having a unique acoustic signature for a selected frequency band, akin to acoustic barcodes. Therefore, the backscattering response of markers can be regulated by changing the geometry of elastic objects. These acoustic barcodes naturally operate in a wider frequency band, and have a longer lifetime and lower cost, compared with active acoustic markers. Underwater acoustic communication technology is the most effective in water, and acoustic fiduciary markers have been applied for recognition, positioning, and navigation in various fields of offshore operation in addition to the black box on aircraft and ships. It is particularly important to aid in navigating autonomous underwater vehicles, and localization of undersea mines, multi-target cooperation, and the salvage of crashed planes and sunken ships using underwater acoustic beacons. Since the designed marker is planar, any off-normal incident wave cannot be detected by a monostatic source-receiver configuration. To overcome this effect, a modified passive marker designed with radially stratified spherical shells is proposed, the specular backscatter of which is independent of the incidence orientation. Inspired by SonarBell, 8 many studies on the acoustic scattering of polymer targets have been carried out. It is shown that the backscattering response exhibits strong resonance peaks that arise from the resonance of subsonic Rayleigh waves in the frequency domain. Based on this characteristic, a passive acoustic marker (also referenced as "acoustic barcode" in this study), composed of double acrylic spheres, is proposed, which has a unique acoustic signature for the selected frequency regime. A specific elastic structure is designed to generate single or multiple resonance peaks in the bandwidth B of the echo divided into m uniform subbands, and these peaks are distributed in different subbands, as shown in Fig. Based on the approximate ray synthesis, Hefner and Marston 9 explained the physical mechanism of a large backscattering enhancement for a solid acrylic sphere that is associated with the subsonic Rayleigh wave, and found that the resonance peaks of the backscattering form function are strong at low frequency. In view of the Rayleigh wave phase-matching method, the approximate formula of resonance frequencies for an acrylic sphere is given by 10 where n=0, 1, 2, 3..., c R is the Rayleigh wave speed, and a the radius. It can be seen that the resonance frequencies of the backscattering form function are dependent on the Rayleigh wave speed and the radius of the sphere according to Eq. (1). The phase velocity of the Rayleigh wave increases with increasing frequency and finally tends to a constant when the effects of Rayleigh wave dispersion can be ignored. The Rayleigh wave velocity is a determined value for a desired frequency range, and thus the backscattering resonance peaks can be regulated by varying the radius of spheres or the combination of spheres of different radius. The acoustic scattering signature is unique for each combination, so the acoustic coding can be realized over the entire frequency range of interest. A passive acoustic marker composed of double spheres [see Fig. The frequency spectrum of the broadband signal over the range 6-10.5 kHz is divided into three uniform subbands, and each subband width is Δ f = 1.5 kHz. Based on the first resonant peak of the backscattering form function for an acrylic sphere (i.e., ka ≈ 1.74), spheres with radii of a1 = 0.045 m, a2 = 0.05 m, a3= 0.06 m, and a4 = 0.065 m are separately selected. After the combination of two spheres with a radius selected as above, seven combinations and acoustic coding results are obtained, as shown in Table To validate the proposed concept for the design of the passive underwater acoustic marker composed of two acrylic spheres, a water tank measurement of acoustic scattering was conducted. According to the combinations of sphere radius in Table The time-domain signal for an incident angle of θ = 90° corresponding to the backscattering response was extracted. Using broadband signal processing, the backscattering form functions of the experimental model in various combinations in the frequency range 6-10.5 kHz were obtained, as shown in Fig. However, the results of numerical calculation [black solid line in Fig. The acoustic barcodes devised by combining two acrylic spheres presented in this paper constitute a proof of concept for the design of passive underwater acoustic markers that can produce a unique acoustic scattering signature arising from the subsonic Rayleigh wave resonance. The backscattering response from these markers is determined by the radius and material characteristics of the combined-sphere markers. Furthermore, it was demonstrated that the acoustic signatures of these multispherebased acoustic markers can be predicted rapidly using a simple approximate formula that allows one to select optimal combinations of material parameters and the radius of each sphere in composing a tag to ensure the uniqueness of the acoustic signatures for a given frequency band, akin to a traditional bar code, according to the intended purpose of acoustic markers (e.g., navigation or information coding). Subsequently, experiments on the acoustic scattering of two spheres were conducted to experimentally validate the proposed concept by comparing the measured responses with simulation results. In addition, the geometry based on the resonance characteristics of elastic waves is used for passive acoustic marking, including, but not limited to, a composite cylinder, cylinder shell, or spherical shell, which can also be studied in a similar way. Therefore, through the fine design of the elastic structure, the resonance peaks of the scattering response within a certain bandwidth can be adjusted and then used for acoustic coding. The underwater acoustic barcode generator can be installed on the underwater target, such as an autonomous underwater vehicle, underwater aquaculture cage, and others, which can be used as the identification mark of an underwater target.