In this short review, some bulk threshold phenomena of the unconventional superconductivity in the strontium ruthenate compound (Sr2RuO4) are mentioned. Particularly, in Sr2RuO4, the Ehrenfest relations, the velocity propagation of the elastic field modes, and the ultrasound attenuation find a common point to study elastic anisotropic lattice field effects at the transition temperature (Tc) between the normal and the superconducting state. Ehrenfest relations are suitable for establishing a phase diagram of the Tc point according to symmetry consideration of the electrons pairs in unconventional superconductors. Further studies in this direction could turn into a new role for the spin polarization of the transverse phonon field and its interaction with the conduction electrons in anisotropic crystals with several conducting/superconducting bands such as Sr2RuO4. The physical kinetics (PK) or physics of the transport properties is defined as the science that studies the macro and microscopic transport processes by quasiparticles in crystals that are out of thermodynamic equilibrium For example, the experimental and theoretical study of the directional ultrasound attenuation below the superconducting temperature (Tc) helps to predict the symmetry properties of the pair wave function, and the visualization of the nodes in anisotropic superconductors Finally, the Ehrenfest thermodynamic relations (ETR), namely those that link the thermal expansion, the specific heat, and the isothermal compressibility (see table ETR occurs for example, in the second-order transition from a normal metallic state to a superconducting or ferromagnetic/antiferromagnetic ordered phase. Ehrenfest relations are suitable for 4 th rank elastic tensors as was shown in the study of spin density waves in Chromium Therefore, in the discussion section of this note, we will make a brief review of results obtained thanks to the analysis of the ETR and the ultrasound attenuation in the bulk of the compound Sr2RuO4 for a particular superconducting phenomenological model In the additional remarks section, it is proposed to carry out certain theoretical studies related to three threshold phenomena of interest. First, the propagation of the transverse elastic phonons and their spin value and polarization direction in the normal state of Sr2RuO4, whether the z-projection of the of the transverse elastic phonons spin in a tetragonal crystal is equal to ±1, since in principle for anisotropic crystals, the spin only will be well defined in certain directions of propagation. Second, the role of the elastic polarization modes for the different sheets of the FS, and third, the changes in sound speed on the dispersion phonon curve at Tc. These studies could give unexpected results inherent to the propagation, polarization, and attenuation of transverse elastic waves by conduction electrons, in compounds with an anisotropic lattice, and several sheets on the FS, such as the crystal for strontium ruthenate. Let's discuss the subject. The strontium ruthenate crystal (Sr2RuO4) has a body-centered tetragonal lattice (D4h) with a layered square structure for the ruthenium atoms, Figure In addition, Sr2RuO4 is an unconventional superconductor with Tc ≈ 1.5 K. Tc that strongly depends on the non-magnetic disorder in the crystal sample. Sr2RuO4 presents some intriguing superconducting properties. For example, temperature power laws were observed in several transport experiments measuring the attenuation of phonons by electrons, the electronic thermal conductivity and the electronic heat specific heat. From the beginning, it was proposed that Sr2RuO4 is an unconventional superconductor Additionally, a series of theoretical and experimental works proposed the existence of a superconducting gap in the triplet state Moreover, according to several authors, in Sr2RuO4 the symmetry of the superconducting gap structure is a state of broken time inversion symmetry, with a point symmetry, that transforms as the irreducible two-dimensional representation E2u of the tetragonal point group (see table Therefore, all the works indicated in their time, the existence of some type of nodes in addition to the time symmetry breaking state in the pair wave function. Using ultrasound fits, it was found for that the γ band has 8 point nodes symmetrically distributed in the {100} planes, and 8 point nodes symmetrically distributed in the {110} planes. For the α and/or β bands, were found 8 point nodes symmetrically distributed in the {100} planes, and 8 point nodes symmetrically distributed in the {110} planes. Also, it was found that the nodal structure of the α/β sheets is different from the γ sheet. The gap on a line along the Fermi surface for α/β sheets is an order of magnitude smaller than that on the γ sheet (see Figure In the normal state of Sr2RuO4, it was shown that to explain the weakness in the attenuation present in the γ sheet of the FS In recent years, new experimental studies were performed. They took into account the uniaxial elastic tension in order to determine the gap, and also the time symmetry broken state They studied the transverse elastic propagation velocity polarized in the direction [010] which expanded the studies about the behavior of the sound velocity at the normal-to-superconducting phase previously developed, see also in To complete the picture, Table In the same order of ideas, and in order to account for the time symmetry broken state, it was necessary to propose Ehrenfest relationships capable of predicting the jump in the elastic tensor C66 observed experimentally It is necessary to clarify that to reach the singlet state experimentally, elastic stress different from zero must be applied, capable of splitting the transition temperature into two Tc, according to the Ehrenfest diagram shown in Figure For example, an additional result that is hardly discussed in the literature is that the resulting thermal expansion due to this type of breaking symmetry is zero for zero elastic uniaxial stress Additionally, the study of ultrasound attenuation allowed visualizing the position of the nodes of the superconducting gap using an "accidental" nodes model shown in Figure In plane basis functions Body-centered basis functions Fig. In this note, it is proposed to consider additional theoretical studies in the normal state and at Tc of Sr2RuO4 aiming at expanding the knowledge about the role of threshold phenomena such as the polarization of the transverse elastic waves and their interaction with the conduction electrons in this multiband superconductor. These studies would be mostly related to the polarization and the quantization of the z-value of the spin of the transverse elastic field in body centered tetragonal crystals of the type of Figure Additionally, in Sr2RuO4 the stiffness C66 is related to the speed of the elastic transverse wave vs [100] with polarization direction [010] Therefore, a second quantization program of the elastic field in a tetragonal lattice based on the formalism of the phonon quasiparticles creation and annihilation operators might show that the spin of the transverse waves has an integer value of ± 1. For this study, we could use the Lagrangian L obtained by subtracting the Helmholtz free energy F In particular, Vonsovskii and Svirskii pointed out in 1961 that for elastic isotropic waves the spin component projection S3 can be theoretically calculated using the expression Where u τ +/-describe the transversal elastic field displacement for +/-frequencies in Fourier components. Using the second quantization and the respective diagonalization of the field, Vonsovskii and Svirskii showed that longitudinal phonons in an isotropic crystal have an energy ħland a mean spin value < S 3 >= 0 , meanwhile for transverse phonons, the energy is given by ħ and spin value < S 3 >=± ħ. Furthermore, in Sr2RuO4 there are experimental studies with the observation of the breaking of the inversion symmetry due to the change in velocity of the elastic transverse wave that propagates in the propagates in the [100] direction with [010] polarization at Tc. Henceforth, the possibility for the quantization of the transverse phonon field in terms of creation and annihilation operators might bring a link to the elastic field symmetry-breaking effect in this ternary compound and additionally to other threshold phenomena such that the change in the phonon dispersion law at the gaps value. Additionally, in another order of ideas, a new theory has recently been formulated by Henceforth, this remarkable work shows that the study of the polarization for elastic fields in tetragonal media such as Sr2RuO4 can be of interest. In particular, in the  sheet, ballistic phonon studies, where the electron-phonon interaction is weak and is coupled to the transversal mode. For studies in niobium see The unconventional superconductivity in the multiband superconductor Sr2RuO4 was of great interest for theoreticians and experimentalists during the last century. It is obvious that this century researches will continue to focus on this phenomenon. Therefore, this short discussion has review some aspects of the problem related to several threshold phenomena, that it might be worth exploring in this compound. In particular, the present work was aimed at investigating some literature of those threshold elastic phenomena at Tc where the dispersion laws and the spin nature for the quasiparticle phonons (longitudinal and transverse) and conduction electrons might play a relevant role to help explain different physical properties of this multiband compound. p(U) as a function of the polarization vector U.