We study superconducting properties in multilayer thin films consisting of superconducting La 1.85 Sr 0.15 CuO 4 (LSCO) and Mott insulator Sr 2 IrO 4 (SIO) and report enhanced superconductivity in optimized sample. These multilayer heterostructures show an increase in superconducting transition temperature (T C ) as compared to the single layer LSCO films. The temperature dependence of SIO single layer is also investigated under thermal activation, Arrhenius-type behaviour, and variable-range hopping mechanisms for different temperature regimes. The decrease in T C beyond an optimum thickness of LSCO in these multilayers is analyzed in the framework of a model based on the assumption of induced superconductivity in SIO-LSCO interface due to the doping of La and/or oxygen deficiencies into SIO layers. The studies of transition metal oxide interfaces in the recent decade have led to the discovery of new twodimensional electronic and magnetic phases stabilized by the broken inversion symmetry at the interface, direct and oxygen mediated overlap of transition metal orbits across the interface, charge transfer and even disorder and atomic intermixing. The growth of superconducting LSCO and Mott insulator SIO as well as their multilayer heterostructures was realized on (001) oriented SrLaO 4 (SLAO) substrates by using a multitarget pulsed laser deposition technique (λ= 248 nm) at 800 • C in 230 mTorr of oxygen pressure. After deposition of the samples, the deposition chamber was completely filled with oxygen to atmospheric pressure and then the samples were allowed to cool down to room temperature at a rate of 10 • C per minute with one-hour annealing at 500 • C to realize full oxygenation of the structure. The θ-2θ X-ray diffraction profiles clearly reveal the presence of LSCO layer in the multilayer [LSCO(10 nm)/SIO(2 nm)] ×5 as shown in Fig. Before moving towards the electrical transport investigation of these multilayers, we first present the temperature dependence of in-plane resistivity [ρ(T )] for 10 nm thick SIO single layer grown on SLAO substrate under the same deposition conditions as used for preparing the multilayers. Figure Here, ρ 0 , α, and T 0 are the fitting parameters; k β is the Boltzmann constant and ∆ is the gap energy. For the region-I, the value of ρ 0 and α are 1.09 Ω-cm and 8.81 × 10 -2 K -1 , respectively. The fitted data according to Eq. 1(a) is also plotted in Fig. The T -1/(n+1) dependence of electrical resistivity suggests an n-dimensional conductor. Hence, for our case, fitting shows a three-dimensional VRH conductivity. Cao et al. From Fig. To get into more depth about the variation in T C , we have to look into the possibility of doping into SIO layer. As it is earlier proposed that the doping of electrons or holes in SIO can lead to achieve superconducting phases. where N i , d i , and λ i are the density of states at the Fermi level, the layer thickness and the pairing parameter, respectively, in the two layers. Here, layer 1 is the LSCO-SIO mixed layer and layer 2 is LSCO. In order to get correctly averaged pairing parameter, we assumed the presence of these mixed layers of same thicknesses on both sides of the LSCO layer. Thus T C of the system can be calculated from the formula given by 36 with Θ D is the Debye temperature and μ * is the Coulomb coupling parameter. The fitted value of the parameter N 1 d 1 /N 2 is 6.22 nm, gives d 1 = 2.5 nm, which further indicates the presence of a ≈ 1.25 nm thick mixed layer on either side of the LSCO layer. Although this procedure is of course very approximate, the resulting values of T C for these multilayers systems with different LSCO layer thickness is in good agreement to the model and can be seen in Fig. We have presented a detailed study of LSCO-SIO multilayers as a model system to understand the proximity effect between the layers. The temperature dependence of SIO single layer is also analyzed in the context of thermal activation, Arrhenius-type behaviour, and variable-range hopping mechanisms for different temperature regimes. With the increase in LSCO layer thickness, the LSCO-SIO multilayer system shows an increase in T C as high as ≈ 43K, 10 % higher than the single layer LSCO film. After attaining a maximum, T C decreases with further increasing LSCO layer thickness. For smaller LSCO thickness Cooper pairs spends lesser time due to the dominance of larger pairing interaction in the mixed layers. Although we have tried to give the explanation for the thickness dependence of T C , the poor information about SIO binds us from detailed investigation. A high resolution interface study is required for the better understanding. Our results definitely will give a direction to achieve proposed superconductivity in Sr 2 IrO 4 and also excite the intriguing field of layer superconductors.