The discovery of van der Waals (vdW) magnets opened up a new paradigm for condensed matter physics and spintronic technologies. However, the operations of active spintronic devices with vdW magnets are so far limited to cryogenic temperatures, inhibiting its broader practical applications. Here, for the first time, we demonstrate room temperature spin-valve devices using vdW itinerant ferromagnet Fe 5 GeTe 2 in heterostructures with graphene. The tunnel spin polarization of the Fe 5 GeTe 2 /graphene vdW interface is detected to be significantly large ~ 45 % and negative at room temperature. Lateral spin-valve device design enables electrical control of spin signal and realization of basic building blocks for device application such as efficient spin injection, transport, precession, and detection functionalities. Furthermore, measurements with different magnetic orientations provide unique insights into the magnetic anisotropy of Fe 5 GeTe 2 and its relation with spin polarization and dynamics in the heterostructure. These findings open opportunities for the applications of vdW magnet-based all-2D spintronic devices and integrated spin circuits at ambient temperatures. The creation of van der Waals (vdW) heterostructures by combining two-dimensional (2D) quantum materials with complementary properties can allow the discovery of basic new physical phenomena and the development of new device concepts Recently, several vdW magnets have emerged with the discovery of insulating Cr 2 Ge 2 Te 6 Here, we demonstrate for the first time robust a room-temperature spin-valve device using metallic vdW itinerant ferromagnet Fe 5 GeTe 2 in heterostructures with graphene. Significantly large spin polarization of ~45 % could be detected at room temperature due to the successful fabrication of a good vdW interface with graphene. Taking advantage of the lateral spin-valve device design, we probe the unique spin-polarized carrier injection, transport, precession, and detection functionalities with Fe 5 GeTe 2 /graphene heterostructure. The spin-valve signal could be controlled by electric bias, and measurements with different magnetic orientations elucidate the evolution of magnetic anisotropy and spin polarization due to soft magnetic properties in Fe 5 GeTe 2 . Such device operation advances the synergy between spintronics and 2D materials, and is expected to boost practical applications of vdW magnets in all-2D spin-based integrated circuits at room temperature. The schematic of the spin-valve device with measurement geometry is shown in Fig. We first measured the spin-valve operation with spin injection from Fe 5 GeTe 2 into the graphene channel at room temperature. A source current was applied between Fe 5 GeTe 2 and the reference Au electrode on graphene, and the nonlocal (NL) voltage was measured between detector Co contact and another reference Au contact (Fig. To investigate the anisotropy in spin injection from Fe 5 GeTe 2 and to probe the out-of-plane spin component (along the z-axis), an angle dependence (Fig. Third, the ±90 o data represents the x-axis Hanle (xHanle) curves for spin precession measurement. Contrary to conventional symmetric xHanle signal with both Co-Co injector-detector devices (see Supplementary Fig. To calculate the spin polarization of Fe 5 GeTe 2 , we consider the magnitude of the spin-valve signal (for Φ=0 o ), ∆R nl =P FGT .P Co .λ gr .R sq .exp(-L ch /λ gr )/w gr , where only the spin polarization of Fe 5 GeTe 2, P FGT, is unknown; and the other parameters (P Co the spin polarization of Co, λ gr spin diffusion length, R sq square resistance, L ch channel length and w gr width of the graphene channel) are extracted from the reference Co 1 -Co 2 spin valve with the standard Hanle formula. From the standard Hanle data fitting, we extract the spin lifetime in the graphene channel τ s = 198 ± 13ps, spin diffsusion constant D s =0.008±0.001m 2 /s and spin diffusion legnth λ gr = 1.26 μm. The spin polarization of Co is P co =10.1%±4.1% (see more details in Supplementary Note 4). From the FGT-Co spin valve signal, we calculate the lower limit of effective in-plane spin polarization of Fe 5 GeTe 2 , |P FGT |=35.8%±1.3%. To be noted, in the spin valve signal, the switching of Co occurs before full saturation of Fe 5 GeTe 2 (for Φ=0 o ), which is much larger than the Co coercive field. Therefore, a much larger spin valve signal can be achieved if the detector Co contact is designed to have a higher coercive field, and effective |P FGT | can be as large as ~44.9% if the fully saturated Fe 5 GeTe 2 is considered. The out-of-plane spin polarization along the z-axis is calculated to be P z =9.5%±0.3% from x-Hanle data in Fig. To examine the sign of spin polarization of Fe 5 GeTe 2 contacts on graphene, we performed detailed bias dependence measurements and compared them with the standard Co contacts. We investigated the bias current dependence of the spin injection and extraction signal from Fe 5 GeTe 2 on the graphene channel (Fig. in Fe 5 GeTe 2 results in an accumulation of opposite spin polarization in graphene and hence an inverted behavior of the measured spin-valve signal (Fig. Next, to investigate Hanle spin precession of in-plane spin polarization, we carried out the measurements with an out-of-plane magnetic field (B z ) sweep First, considering the symmetric signal for the entirely out-of-plane moment of Fe 5 GeTe 2 for |B z |>0.15 T, there is no contribution to the spin precession signal and the magnitude of R nl should be null. Notably, we observe that the symmetric signal shows a comparable magnitude of signals at B z =0T and |B z |>0.15 T. Therefore, the in-plane spin S y at B z ~0 T is also negligible and so is the remanent magnetization M y . At the intermediate stages, where B z is in the range of 0 to ±0.15 T, the M y increases to a peak value and decreases again to zero for the magnetic moment M saturation along the z-axis (Fig. Furthermore, we extracted the magnetic moment rotation angle α M with B z from the z-axis Hanle curves using opposite magnetic configurations +/-M eff in Fig. In addition to spin injection from Fe 5 GeTe 2 into the graphene channel, we also demonstrated spin detection by Fe 5 GeTe 2 using Dev 2 as shown in Supplementary Note 7 and Supplementary Fig. sweeps along the z-axis. The M z on the right axis is the out-of-plane magnetic moment in an arbitrary unit, M z =±1 suggesting a total out-of-plane magnetic moment saturation. The inset shows the AHE measurement geometry. All the measurements were performed on Dev 1 at room temperature. In conclusion, we demonstrated a robust room-temperature operation of van der Waals magnetbased spin-valve devices. Highly efficient spin injection, transport, dynamics, and detection could be observed with a large negative spin polarization of Fe 5 GeTe 2 ~ 45% in the heterostructure with graphene channel. Furthermore, soft ferromagnetic properties and spin polarization anisotropy in Fe 5 GeTe 2 could be probed via angle dependence measurements in the spin-valve devices. These studies provide unique insights into the room-temperature magnetism of Fe 5 GeTe 2 and its relation with spin transport and precession in graphene heterostructure devices. These results establish the integration of vdW magnets with graphene spin valve devices and have a vast potential in developing all-2D spintronics devices and integrated circuits at room temperature. Furthermore, this will also bring a strong synergy between 2D quantum materials and spintronics with the possibility of further control the figure of merits by twist angle between the layers, magnetic proximity effects, and gate tunability for energy-efficient and ultra-fast spintronic devices. These room-temperature developments in van der Waals heterostructure will open opportunities for the use of van der Waal magnets for fundamental studies in condensed matter physics and device applications in spintronic sensors, memory, logic, and neuromorphic computing architectures The Fe 5 GeTe 2 (FGT) crystal (from Hq Graphene) flakes (20~50 nm) were exfoliated and dry transferred onto the exfoliated few-layer graphene (from HOPG) on an n ++ doped Si substrate with 285 nm SiO 2 . For the device fabrication, the nonmagnetic and magnetic contacts were prepared by multiple electron beam lithography (EBL) processes and electron beam evaporation of metals. The nonmagnetic Ti/Au contacts were first prepared on FGT flakes and graphene for reference electrodes. The ferromagnetic contacts (TiO 2 /Co) on graphene were prepared in a two-step deposition and an oxidation process was adopted, 0.4 nm Ti was deposited, followed by a 10 Torr O 2 oxidation for 10 min each, followed by 60 nm of Co deposition. Measurements were performed at room temperature with a magnetic field up to 0.8 Tesla and a sample rotation stage in vacuum conditions. The electronic measurements were carried out using current source Keithley 6221, nanometer 2182A, and dual-channel source meter Keithley 2612B.