Spin-orbit torque (SOT) created by a spin current injected into a ferromagnet by an adjacent heavy metal or topological insulator represents an efficient tool for the excitation and manipulation of spin waves. Here we report the micromagnetic simulations describing the influence of SOT on the propagation of spin waves in the W/CoFeB/MgO nanostructure having voltage-controlled magnetic anisotropy (VCMA). The simulations show that two spin waves travelling in the opposite directions can be generated in the center of the CoFeB waveguide via the modulation of VCMA induced by a microwave voltage locally applied to the MgO nanolayer. The amplitudes of these waves exponentially decrease with the propagation distance with similar decay lengths of about 2.5 μm. In the presence of a direct electric current injected into the W film beneath the waveguide center, the decay lengths of two spin waves change in the opposite way owing to different directions of the electric currents flowing in the underlying halves of the W layer. Remarkably, above a critical current density (about 2 × 10 10 A m -2 at zero absolute temperature and 19 × 10 10 A m -2 at room temperature), SOT provides the amplification of the spin wave propagating in one half of the waveguide and strongly accelerates the attenuation of the wave travelling in the other half. As a result, a long-distance spin-wave propagation takes place in a half of the CoFeB waveguide only. Furthermore, by reversing the polarity of the dc voltage applied to the heavy-metal layer one can change the propagation region and switch the travel direction of the spin wave in the ferromagnetic waveguide. Thus, the W/CoFeB/MgO nanostructure can be employed as an electrically controlled magnonic device converting the electrical input signal into a spin signal, which can be transmitted to one of two outputs of the device. Generation and propagation of spin waves in magnetic nanostructures currently attract great attention because such waves can be employed for the development of energyefficient nanodevices for information transmission and processing The functioning of magnonic devices also requires efficient control and manipulation of propagating spin waves In this work, we propose a spin-wave switch controlled by SOT created by a direct electric current flowing in a heavymetal layer adjacent to a ferromagnetic waveguide. In such a device, two spin waves are excited at the center of the waveguide, which propagate in opposite directions and have similar decay lengths in the absence of SOT. In contrast, when sufficient non-uniform SOT is created by an electric current injected into the heavy-metal layer near the waveguide center, the propagation length of one of these waves strongly increases, whereas the other wave experiences a fast decay. We validate our proposal by micromagnetic simulations performed for the W/CoFeB/MgO heterostructure, where spin waves are generated electrically by an oscillating VCMA associated with the CoFeB|MgO interface (Fig. To determine the dynamics of the magnetization M(r, t) in the ferromagnetic layer modeled by an ensemble of nanoscale computational cells, we numerically solve the modified Landau-Lifshitz-Gilbert equation, which in the presence of SOT takes the form where m = M/M s is the unit vector parallel to the magnetization of the cell, M s is the saturation magnetization regarded as a constant quantity at a given temperature, H eff is the effective field acting on the magnetization, s is the unit vector parallel to the spins flowing from the heavy-metal layer into the ferromagnetic film, γ is the gyromagnetic ratio, μ 0 is the magnetic permeability of free space, α = α 0 + δα is the effective Gilbert damping parameter where H is the external magnetic field, H ex and H dip are the contributions resulting from the exchange and dipolar interactions between spins in CoFeB, H an accounts for the influence of the bulk-like cubic anisotropy of CoFeB, while H PMA and H DMI are the effective fields caused by the perpendicular magnetic anisotropy (PMA) associated with the CoFeB|MgO interface and the interfacial Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction (DMI) at the W|CoFeB contact, respectively. Since we consider ultrathin CoFeB films that can be modeled using only one computational cell in the thickness direction z, the interfacial contributions H PMA and H DMI are taken to be inversely proportional to the CoFeB thickness t F . The field H ex was evaluated via the summation of the exchange interactions of the considered inner cell with its four nearest neighbors in the film plane using the exchange constant A ex introduced in the continuum approximation x m 2 y +m 2 x m 2 z + m 2 y m 2 z ) in the expansion of the energy F an (m) of magnetocrystalline anisotropy because sixth-order terms are negligible in the case of CoFeB , where K 0 s = K s (E z = 0), and k s = ∂K s /∂E z is the electricfield sensitivity of K s (2) where D denotes the strength of interfacial DMI, and e i (i = x, y, z) are the unit vectors parallel to the coordinate axes x, y, and z. For the computational cells adjacent to the waveguide lateral free surface Γ, the fields H ex and H DMI were calculated using the boundary conditions For example, when a cell n lacks a neighboring cell n ± 1 in the direction ±y, the magnetization m n±1 of this imaginary cell was defined as m n±1 = m n ± ∂m ∂y Γ l y , where l y is the cell size along the y axis. Since the magnetization was assumed uniform in the thickness direction z and the effective field H eff contained contributions resulting from PMA and DMI, there was no need in boundary conditions at the W|CoFeB and CoFeB|MgO interfaces. The field-like and damping-like SOTs involved in Eq. ( where w F is the waveguide width, while d is the injector width, which was assumed to be 400 nm. Below we will use the notation The numerical integration of Eq. ( First, we employed the micromagnetic simulations for the determination of the initial magnetization orientation in the CoFeB film. The study of the magnetization relaxation to an equilibrium direction showed that the magnetization is practically orthogonal to the CoFeB surfaces in the absence of external magnetic fields. This is due to the influence of PMA, which is stronger than that of the demagnetizing field H dip at the considered small CoFeB thickness t F = 1.7 nm. Under the external field H y = 750 Oe, the magnetization rotates towards the film plane and becomes inhomogeneous across the waveguide (Fig. Next, we studied the electrically induced magnetic dynamics in the waveguide in the absence of a direct electric current in the W layer. It was assumed that the top electrode with the dimensions 100 × 40 nm 2 deposited on the MgO layer with the thickness t MgO = 2 nm is subjected to a microwave voltage V ac = V max sin (2πf t). The voltageinduced modification K s = K 0 s + k s V ac /t MgO of the PMA parameter associated with the CoFeB|MgO interface beneath the electrode was taken into account for the corresponding computational cells. The calculations showed that the microwave voltage excites a steady-state magnetization precession δm i (t) = m i (t) -m i (t = 0) (i = x, y, z) in the waveguide section under the top electrode. The quantities ∆m i = max[⟨δm i (t)⟩ y ] characterizing the precession amplitude averaged over the waveguide width maximize when the excitation frequency f equals f res ≈ 1.2 GHz (see Fig. At the excitation frequencies below the resonance frequency f res , the electrically induced magnetization precession appears to be confined within the waveguide section under the top electrode. In contrast, the emission of spin waves from the excitation area was revealed at the frequencies f ≥ f res . These waves travel in the opposite directions within two halves of the CoFeB nanolayer. In the case of resonant excitation (f ≈ f res ), packets of spin-wave modes with various wave vectors propagate in the waveguide (see Fig. The most important results were obtained when studying the influence of the direct electric current flowing in the W layer on the propagation of spin waves in the CoFeB waveguide. For each predetermined density J W of this current, we modeled the excitation of spin waves by the microwave voltage V ac (t) locally modulating VCMA in the presence of SOT created by the spin current injected into the CoFeB nanolayer. In the simulations, the VCMA oscillating with the frequency f = 1.7 GHz > f res and time-independent SOT were simultaneously applied at the moment t = 0 to the CoFeB nanolayer with the equilibrium magnetization distribution forming at V ac = 0 and J W = 0. The analysis of the electrically induced magnetization dynamics was limited by the time period t ≃ 5 ns, during which both spin waves reach the ends of the 6-μm-long waveguide. It was found that SOT does not significantly change the wave numbers k + and k -of the generated spin waves. At small current densities J W , the amplitudes of these waves still decrease exponentially with the increasing distance |x-x c | from the waveguide center. However, their decay lengths λ + and λ -change under the action of SOT in the opposite way owing to different directions of the electric currents flowing in the underlying halves of the W layer (Fig. slower when it is negative. The simulation data show that the inverse decay lengths 1/λ + and 1/λ -vary linearly with the current density J W (see Fig. Since SOT simultaneously reduces the positive decay length of another spin wave that travels in the opposite direction, by passing sufficient direct current through the W layer it becomes possible to realize a long-distance spin-wave propagation in one half of the CoFeB waveguide only. Moreover, by reversing the polarity of the dc voltage applied to the W layer one can change the propagation region and switch the travel direction of the spin wave in the CoFeB waveguide. To quantify the described effect, we determined the ratio ∆m - x /∆m + x of the precession amplitudes in the spin waves with the wavenumbers k -and k + at the same distance |x-x c | from the waveguide center. Variations of this ratio with the distance |x -x c | at different densities J W ≥ J - W of the electric current are presented in Fig. x /∆m + x exponentially increases with the distance from the source of spin waves, reaching 100 at |x -x c | = 3 μm when J W = 4 × 10 10 A m -2 . Since at f = 1.7 GHz the propagation of monochromatic spin waves with definite wavenumbers takes place in the waveguide (see Fig. To clarify the optimal conditions for the SOT-induced am- gradual rotation of the equilibrium magnetization direction in the CoFeB layer towards the in-plane orientation [see inset in Fig. Discussing our theoretical results in the light of available experimental data, we note that a strong effect of SOT on the propagation of spin waves was observed in the Yttrium Iron Garnet (YIG) waveguide However, a longer modeling demonstrates the progressive development of magnetization auto-oscillations in the CoFeB layer at the current densities J W ≤ J + W and J W ≥ J - W . The amplitude of these oscillations strongly increases at the time t ≃ 20 ÷ 30 ns after the application of SOT, which leads to the transfer of the spin-wave power to incoherent auto-oscillations with higher frequencies due to the magnonmagnon scattering. As a result, the spin-wave amplitude now decreases with the distance from the excitation area even at the highest current density J W = 5 × 10 10 A m -2 used in our simulations. Thus, the compensation of the pronounced nonlinear damping by SOT appears to be impossible To check whether the temporary amplification of spin waves in the W/CoFeB/MgO nanostructure is also possible in the presence of thermal fluctuations, we carried out additional simulations, in which the effective field H eff involved in Eq. ( The simulations executed for a representative excitation frequency f = 6 GHz and various densities J W ∼ 10 11 A m -2 of the electric current in the W layer demonstrated the generation of both monochromatic spin waves and incoherent magnetization oscillations in the CoFeB layer. Since the CoFeB thickness is very small, the influence of thermal fluctuations on the magnetic dynamics appears to be strong at T = 300 K. Therefore, the quantification of the spinwave amplitude requires some averaging procedure. Since the propagation of spin waves in ferromagnets can be visualized with the aid of the micro-focus Brillouin light scattering (BLS) spectroscopy Representative dependences of the BLS intensity at the frequency f = 6 GHz on the position x SW (t) of the spin-wave front in the waveguide are shown in Fig. In this work, we theoretically studied the electrical excitation and control of spin waves in a ferromagnetic waveguide. The study was carried out for the W/CoFeB/MgO nanostructure having PMA and DMI associated with the CoFeB|MgO and W|CoFeB interfaces, respectively. Using micromagnetic simulations based on the numerical solution of the modified Landau-Lifshitz-Gilbert equation, we showed that the modulation of PMA by a microwave voltage locally applied to the MgO layer renders it possible to generate two spin waves propagating in the opposite directions from the center of the CoFeB waveguide. Although owing to DMI these waves have different wavenumbers If the electric current is locally injected into the heavymetal layer near the waveguide center, the charge flow has opposite directions in the two halves of this layer (Fig. V. ACKNOWLEDGMENT