Lithium-metal batteries employing concentrated glyme-based electrolytes and different cathode chemistries are herein evaluated in view of a safe use of the highly energetic alkali-metal anode. Indeed, diethylene-glycol dimethyl-ether (DEGDME) and triethylene-glycol dimethyl-ether (TREGDME) dissolving lithium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide (LiTFSI) and lithium nitrate (LiNO3) in concentration approaching the solvents saturation limit are used in lithium batteries employing either a conversion sulfur-tin composite (S:Sn 80:20 w/w) or a Li + (de-)insertion LiFePO4 cathode. Cyclic voltammetry (CV) and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) clearly show the suitability of the concentrated electrolytes in terms of process reversibility and low interphase resistance, particularly upon a favorable activation. Galvanostatic measurements performed in the lithium-sulfur (Li/S) batteries reveal promising capacities at room temperature (25 °C) and a value as high as 1300 mAh gS -1 for DEGDME-based electrolyte at 35 °C. On the other hand, the lithium-LiFePO4 (Li/LFP) cells exhibit satisfactory cycling behavior, in particular when employing an additional reduction step at low voltage cutoff (i.e., 1.2 V) during the first discharge to consolidate the solid electrolyte interphase (SEI). This procedure allows a coulombic efficiency near 100 %, a capacity approaching 160 mAh g -1 and relevant retention particularly for the cell using TREGDME-based electrolyte. Therefore, this work suggests the use of concentrated glyme-based electrolytes, the fine tuning of the operative conditions, and the careful selection of active materials chemistry as significant steps to achieve practical and safe lithium-metal batteries. Li-ion battery powers a wide array of electronic devices, from portable systems such as laptops and smartphones, to hybrid (HEVs) and fully electric vehicles (EVs). Lithium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide (LiTFSI, Sigma-Aldrich) and lithium nitrate (LiNO3, Sigma-Aldrich) salts were dissolved in diethylene-glycol dimethyl-ether (DEGDME, CH3O(CH2CH2O)2CH3, Sigma-Aldrich) and triethylene-glycol dimethyl-ether (TREGDME, CH3O(CH2CH2O)3CH3, Sigma-Aldrich) solvents at room temperature overnight under magnetic stirring inside an Ar-filled glovebox (MBraun, O2 and H2O content below 1 ppm). The final concentration of each salt was of 1.5 mol kgsolvent -1 in DEGDME and 2 mol kgsolvent -1 in TREGDME, that is, amounts approaching the saturation limit of the solvents. Prior to using, LiTFSI and LiNO3 were dried at 110 °C for 24 hours under vacuum, while DEGDME and TREGDME solvents were dried under molecular sieves (3 Å, Sigma-Aldrich) until a water content lower than 10 ppm was achieved as measured by 899 Karl Fischer Coulometer, Metrohm. The highly concentrated electrolyte solutions are subsequently indicated as DEGDME_HCE and TREGDME_HCE. The analyses of the chemical and electrochemical properties of the electrolytes are reported in a previous work. The electrochemical tests were carried out in CR2032 coin-type cells assembled in Ar-filled glovebox (MBraun, O2 and H2O content below 1 ppm) by employing a 14 mm diameter lithium disk as anode. The S:Sn 80:20 and LFP electrodes were obtained by solvent casting of the active materials on either a porous carbon-cloth foil (GDL, ELAT 1400, MTI Corp.) or an aluminum current collector, respectively. The cathodes were separated from the lithium anode by a 16 mm Celgard foil soaked with the electrolyte solution (either DEGDME_HCE or TREGDME_HCE, see below related amounts) in the Li/S:Sn 80:20 cells, while by two GF/A glass fiber Whatman 16 mm disks soaked with the electrolyte solution (either DEGDME_HCE or TREGDME_HCE) in the Li/LFP cells. Cyclic voltammetry (CV) was performed at a scan rate of 0.1 mV s -1 in the 1.8 -2.8 V vs Li + /Li potential range for S:Sn 80:20 electrode and in the 2.7 -3.9 V vs Li + /Li potential range for LFP electrode. Electrochemical impedance spectra were collected at the open circuit voltage (OCV) condition of the cell, as well as after 1, 5 and 10 CV cycles, and analyzed through the non-linear least squares (NLLS) fitting method via the Boukamp software (χ 2 values of the order of 10 -4 or lower). The Li/S:Sn 80:20 cells were tested through galvanostatic cycling measurements carried out at the constant current rate of C/5 at 25 °C and 35 °C and of 1C at 35 °C (1C = 1675 mA gS -1 ). The cells cycled at the current of C/5 employed 60 μl of electrolyte solution and a voltage range of 1.9 -2.8 V, while voltage limits of 1.6 and 2.8 V and an optimized electrolyte/sulfur ratio of 20 μl mgS -1 were adopted for the cells tested at 1C. The galvanostatic cycling measurements of the Li/LFP cells were performed at the constant current rate of C/5 (1C = 170 mA g -1 ) at room temperature (25 °C), in a 2.7 -3.9 V voltage range. Additional tests were carried out at C/5 and C/3 by exploiting a voltage range between 1.2 and 3.9 V during the first charge-discharge cycle and between 2.7 and 3.9 V for the subsequent ones. All the galvanostatic cycling measurements were performed by using a MACCOR series 4000 battery test system. The DEGDME_HCE and TREGDME_HCE are initially exploited in lithium cell using the S:Sn 80:20 cathode by means of CV coupled with EIS as reported in Figure and short chain ones (Li2Sx with 6 > x > 2), respectively, are reversed into two charge plateaus above 2.3 V. Advantageously, the increase of temperature leads to higher capacity values and to lower polarization for both DEGDME_HCE (Fig. In particular, the cycling trends reported in Figure A further application of the studied electrolytes is exploited by lithium-metal cells using an olivinestructured, (de-)insertion LiFePO4 (LFP) olivine cathode Therefore, an additional galvanostatic test was performed using DEGDME_HCE and TREGDME_HCE in Li/LFP cells at the constant current rate of C/5 (1C = 170 mA g -1 ) by using a voltage range between 1.2 and 3.9 V for the first cycle and between 2.7 and 3.9 V for the subsequent ones as reported in Figure )insertion processes of LiFePO4 may be associated with an excessive growth of the SEI layer at the electrodes during cycling using the DEGDME_HCE, and possibly with gradual changes in cathode crystallite size distribution and surface free energies of the lithiated and the de-lithiated phases of the olivine cathode which lead to a change of the biphasic potential. In order to extend the cycle life of the cells, additional galvanostatic cycling tests were performed on Li/S and Li/LFP cells by adopting the most suitable operative conditions according to the data reported in this work. Indeed, Figure In summary, the findings of this work suggested the possible use of concentrated solutions based on end-capped glymes in efficient lithium-metal cells by careful tuning of i) the ether chain length, ii) the salt nature and concentration, iii) the chemistry of the cathode material, and iv) the operative conditions, including temperature and voltage limits. In addition, the intrinsically lower flammability of the concentrated glymes reported herein compared to the common electrolytes used in battery is expected to allow the development of a lithium-metal battery with high energy and acceptable safety content.