This document is a review on the quantum magnetic properties of heavy-fermion f -electron metals. It is a 'light' version of the manuscript prepared for my 'Habilitation à diriger des recherches', sent to the Jury on 29 October 2020 and defended on 9 April 2021. Small modifications were made to the manuscript on 20 July 2021. In this document, I present a personal view on the heavy-fermion problem, within a phenomenological approach guided by experiments. This review presents a set of 'historical' works which established the ground bases of the thematic during the last decades. An exhaustive and systematic approach is privileged. After a general presentation in Chapter 2, the properties of heavy-fermion paramagnets, antiferromagnets, and ferromagnets are considered in Chapters 3, 4, and 5, respectively. Chapters 6 and 7 are dedicated to two specific compounds, URu 2 Si 2 for which a 'hidden-order' phase constitutes a more-than-thirty-years-old unsolved mystery, and UTe 2 , where multiple superconducting phases have been discovered in the last two years. Experiments performed using a panel of techniques ranging from microscopic (neutron scattering, NMR, etc.) to thermodynamic (specific heat, magnetization, etc.) and transport (electrical resistivity, etc.) probes, under extreme conditions of low temperatures, intense magnetic fields and high pressures, are reviewed. They show that magnetism plays a central role in the quantum critical properties of heavy-fermion systems. An emphasis is given to the intersite magnetic fluctuations, presented as the driving force for a heavy Fermi liquid, precursor of quantum magnetic criticality ending in magnetically-ordered phases. They are also suspected to drive an unconventional mechanism for superconductivity, which develops in the vicinity of quantum magnetic phase transitions induced under pressure or magnetic field. The appearance of magnetic fluctuations and ultimately magnetic order in heavy-fermion compounds occurs in a nearly-integer-valence regime, in which f electrons have a dual itinerant-localized character. Fermi-surface and valence studies, which give complementary information about this duality, are also considered. From valence instabilities to heavy-fermion quantum magnetism A review of the magnetic phases and their associated quantum instabilities in heavy-fermion f -electrons metals constitutes the main matter of this work. This first chapter progressively introduces the basic electronic properties of these systems, in which the magnetic properties are driven by f electrons. It emphasizes that critical magnetic properties of heavy-fermion materials occur at the border of a valence instability, at which the electrons acquire a subtle dual itinerant-localized character. The Chapter is organized as follows. The interplay between magnetism and superconductivity in strongly-correlated-electron systems is presented in Section 2.1. Focus is made in Section 2.2 on the valence states in f -electron lanthanides and actinides, and in Section 2.3 on f -electron intermediate-valent and heavy-fermion systems. The relation between the electronic localization and the stabilization of magnetic exchange interactions is emphasized. Quantum magnetic criticality, which encompasses critical phenomena associated with the onset of long-range magnetic order, is presented in Section 2.4. The stabilization of unconventional superconductivity at the verge of magnetism is emphasized in Section 2.5. Quantum magnetism of electrons is a central issue in condensed matter physics. It includes magnetically-ordered systems as ferromagnets, antiferromagnets, spin-density wave magnets, but also paramagnetic systems The right part of the diagram presents metals. Interestingly, quantum magnetism, but also unconventional superconductivity, is observed in metals in which electrons are close to a localized limit [Armitage 10, Johnston 10, Flouquet 05, von Löhneysen 07, Aoki 13, The schematic generic phase diagrams, shown in Figure Basic properties of the electronic shells in lanthanide and actinide families of materials, which include most of heavy-fermion compounds, are presented here (see also In the lanthanides and actinides, the valence results from a subtle equilibrium between the electronic populations of quasi-localized f orbitals and delocalized s and d orbitals. Table Outer-shell electrons which can participate to chemical bonding and electrical conduction processes are called valence electrons, and the valence v of an atom is the number of its valence electrons. The 4f subshell in lanthanides and the 5f subshell in actinides lie close to the nucleus and do not contribute to valence bonding. The localized character of open 4f and 5f subshells in Ce and U atoms, respectively, is visible in the plot of the electron densities as function of distance to the atom nucleus, shown in Figure When metallic elements form a crystal, the valence electrons contribute to chemical bonding and to the conduction band, and modifications of the valence, in comparison with that of free atoms, are observed. In most of pure crystals, a compact arrangement of the atoms leads to a reduction of the atomic radius. In lanthanides and actinides crystals, this change of radius (in comparison with the free-ion state) can be accompanied by an increase of valence, part of the electrons from the inner subshells 4f and 5f moving to the outer subshells 5d and 6d, respectively. These changes can be evidenced by comparing the evolution of the Wigner-Seitz radius r W S , i.e., the mean radius of an atom in a metallic crystal, in single-element crystals made of 5d transition metals, 4f lanthanides and 5f actinides shown in Figure • 4f lanthanides: Most of the elements are in valence v = 3 with a configuration 4f n 5d 1 6s 2 . The localized 4f subshell efficiently screens the nucleus charge, and the progressive filling of the localized 4f subshell when Z is increased weakly affects r W S , which saturates at 2 Å. A higher r W S 2.2 -2.3 Å in Yb and Eu indicates a smaller valence and a lesser attraction of the valence electrons by the nucleus. The configuration 4f n 6s 2 corresponding to valence v = 2 is favored by a half-filled (n = 7) 4f subshell in Eu and by a fully-filled (n = 14) 4f subshell in Yb. • 5d transition metals: The 5d valence subshell is open. The number of 5d electrons and, thus, the valence increase with Z, and r W S shows a parabolic variation with Z [ For the first elements of the 5d block, the decrease of r W S with increasing Z, from r W S 2.1 Å for La to r W S 1.5 Å for Os, is due to a partial screening of the nucleus charge by the outer-electron charges, leading to their stronger attraction by the nucleus and to the contraction of their orbitals. In the last elements of the line, the 5d subshell is more than half-filled and the screening is more efficient, leading to an increase of the radius with Z. • 5f actinides: For small Z, a decrease of r W S with Z, from r W S 2.0 Å for Th to r W S 1.65 Å for Np, is similar to that observed for 5d elements. The number of itinerant electrons from the 6d subshell and thus, the valence, increase with Z. The lighter actinides in their single-element metallic form are in an itinerant limit similar to that of 5d transition metals. A step-like increase of r W S observed for larger Z elements (Pu-Am) indicates a sudden reduction of valence due to the filling of the localized 5f band. From Am to Cf, an almost constant radius r W S 1.9 Å close to that found in most lanthanides is the indication of a valence reaching, or almost reaching, the value v = 3. By analogy with the lanthanides, the heavier actinides in their single-element metallic form can be considered in a localized, or nearly-localized, limit. In their single-element crystalline state, the situation of 5f actinides is intermediate between that of the 4f lanthanides and 5d transition metals. 5d transition metals correspond to a limit with itinerant electrons, their physics being controlled by the outer and delocalized 5d electrons. Oppositely, most of the lanthanides have the same number of valence electrons (valence v = 3), and their electronic properties mainly depend on their numbers of localized 4f electrons. Most of 4f lanthanides, but also 5f actinides, can be considered in their 'localized' limit when they are in valence v = 3. Deviations towards higher valences, due to the additional filling of itinerant 5d or 6d subshells, are commonly identified as signatures of electronic itinerancy. In some systems, as Yb, Sm and Eu, where the valences v = 2 and 3 are in competition, valence v = 2 is generally considered as the localized limit, while valence v = 3 is considered as an itinerant configuration. In both their free-ion (Table Other f -block elements in their pure crystalline state, as Ce, U, and Np, are close to a valence instability. Transitions between allotropic states are reported in these systems when the temperature is lowered, a smaller metallic radii indicating higher valences at low temperature In lanthanide and actinide compounds and alloys, which include a large number of intermetallic materials, the last f and d orbitals are modified by the environment of other atoms (metals or ligands), and deviations of the valence states, in comparison with the pure-elements metals, are observed. Experimentally, several valence configurations have been identified or proposed for a large series of compounds. Table • In dense U-based materials, small interatomic U-U distances and, thus, small U-atom radius, favor an itinerant limit ending in the stabilization of a paramagnetic ground state, and sometimes of superconductivity. A larger valence due to the delocalization of 5f electrons into the conduction band is expected in these materials. • In materials with a higher number of non-U atoms, large interatomic U-U distances generally coincide with the stabilization of long-range magnetic ordering. These compounds are close to the localized limit, for which a smaller valence related to a higher number of localized 5f electrons is expected. Ultimately, when the interatomic distance becomes bigger ( 5 Å), magnetic exchange interactions collapse and a paramagnetic ground state is established. However, the definition of the localized and itinerant limits is not trivial. In The Hill plot contains all elements of heavy-fermion quantum criticality, which will be addressed in the next Sections and Chapters. The delocalization of the f electrons is generally described as resulting from a hybridization between f localized orbitals and s -d valence orbitals contributing to the conduction band (see the Anderson The observation of superconductivity arising in itinerant systems close to their localized regime, i.e., superconductivity preferentially developing in bad metals rather than in good metals, could naively sound as a contradiction. However, the proximity of magnetic order, favored in the more-localized side of the phase diagrams, is accompanied by the development of precursors magnetic fluctuations Finally, beyond the Hill plot, more subtle approaches are needed to describe real threedimensional compounds. In many f -electron compounds the physical properties are anisotropic and a single parameter, as the smaller distance between f atoms, is not enough for a complete description, as shown by the large scattering of data points in the Hill plot (see Figure This Section introduces how the progressive localization of f electrons can induce a crossover from intermediate-valence into heavy-fermion physics. Experimental signatures of the stronglyrenormalized Fermi-liquid regime reported in these systems are presented. Hybridization and Kondo-effect models developed for the description of these systems are introduced. This Section ends with electronic structure and Fermi surface measurements and their comparison with band calculations. Intermediate valences have been observed in many f electrons systems (see Section 2.2.3 and in The phase diagram in Figure Figure Alternatively to pressure, chemical doping permits to tune the valence instability of Ce. Figures 2.9(d,e) present the variations with temperature of the volume and magnetic susceptibility, respectively, of doped Ce 0.9-x La x Th 0.1 alloys While the physics of intermediate-valent systems is driven by an increase of electrons itineracy, heavy-fermion behavior develops at the onset of an almost temperature-independent va- lence, presumably close to an integer value corresponding to a localized-electrons, or nearlylocalized-electrons, limit. Intermediate-valent compounds are associated with larger energy scales than heavy-fermion compounds. Typically, valence transitions (as in Ce A Fermi liquid corresponds to a renormalized state of matter, where the electrons acquire an enhanced effective mass m * . The mass enhancement, in comparison with the free-electron mass, is driven by the electronic interactions. Basic properties of a Fermi liquid are: • a linear temperature-variation of the specific heat C p , corresponding to a constant Sommerfeld coefficient γ = C p /T ∝ m * , where T is the temperature, • a saturating magnetic susceptibility χ ∝ m * , • a quadratic temperature-variation of the electrical resistivity ρ = ρ 0 + AT 2 , where ρ 0 is the residual resistivity and A ∝ m * 2 is the quadratic coefficient. In 1975, a heavy-fermion behavior was identified for the first time in a material, the paramagnet CeAl 3 , by Andres et al Following the discovery of a heavy-fermion behavior in CeAl 3 , a large number of heavyfermion materials have been identified. Extensive reviews can be found in • Figure • Figure A and γ are, thus, controlled by a single parameter within first approximation. • Figure In a Fermi liquid and within first approximation, we have the relation γ ∝ χ ∝ √ A ∝ S/T ∝ m * between several physical quantities. Other quantities, not considered here, are also the signature of a Fermi liquid and scale together, being controlled by the same parameter m * as well. In Section 2.4.3 and Chapter 3, the relation between the effective mass m * with i) the energy scale of a microscopic phenomenon, the intersite magnetic correlations developing in the correlated paramagnetic regime, and ii) the temperature boundary T max χ and the field boundary H m of this regime, will be emphasized. A hybridization between the f electrons and the conduction electrons is a ground basis for modeling f -electron intermediate-valent and heavy-fermion systems. It describes the interaction between f electrons and the electrons from the conduction band, which partly originates from the s and d valence shells of f atoms, and the deviations from integer valences induced in these systems. Detailed reviews about hybridization models and theories can be found in where J K > 0 is an antiferromagnetic coupling between a localized magnetic spin S and the spin s of an itinerant electron. The Kondo effect leads to the formation of a singlet ground state, corresponding to a localized magnetic moment screened by the spin of the conduction electrons where D is the energy width of the conduction band, ρ(E F ) the density of states of conduction electrons at the Fermi surface, J K is the Kondo exchange interaction, and N is the multiplicity of the localized-electron ground state. Samples with a Fermi-liquid regime driven by a large effective mass m * are those labeled as heavy-fermion systems. A small temperature T max χ ≤ 50 K marks the onset of the heavyfermion correlated regime and can be identified as the Fermi-liquid temperature. Intermediatevalent systems are the place of a stronger hybridization, associated with higher energy scales and, thus, with higher temperature scales than those of heavy-fermion systems. In CeSn 3 , a broad maximum in the magnetic susceptibility is observed at a high-temperature T max χ 150 K [Lawrence 79, Béal-Monod 80], indicating a progressive crossover to an intermediate valentregime similar to the heavy-fermion regime, and suggesting the achievement of a moderatelyenhanced effective mass. However, other intermediate-valent systems, as Ce Figure However, due to the complexity of the heavy-fermion many-body problem, a quantitative description of the electronic properties and of their microscopic origin is often lacking. Difficulty results from the presence of multiple magnetic interactions paths, single-ion magnetic anisotropy and anisotropic magnetic exchanges, which add to the dual localized-itinerant character of the electrons. A challenge for theories is to describe quantitatively the magnetic fluctuations, which play a central role in the critical properties of heavy-fermion systems. Alternatively to Kondo and Anderson models of hybridization effects, magnetic-fluctuations theories assumed the presence of magnetic interactions (see Section 2.4.3.2). Magnetic-fluctuations models allow a qualitative description of the quantum critical magnetic properties when these interactions can be tuned f -electrons heavy-fermion systems are metallic and are composed of multiple electronic bands, to which f electrons generally contribute. Photoemission spectroscopy and quantum oscillation techniques permit to investigate their electronic structure and Fermi surface, i.e., the surface in the reciprocal space corresponding to conduction electrons at the Fermi energy. Here, an introduction to the electronic structure and Fermi surface of heavy-fermion systems is given. Complementary information about photoemission spectroscopy and band-structure calculations can be found in • Angle-resolved photo-emission spectroscopy (ARPES) enables extracting wavevector kdependent photo-emission spectra. Figure While ARPES measurements can be only performed at ambient pressure and zero magnetic field, Fermi surfaces can be studied under pressure and magnetic field by quantumoscillation techniques, via the measurement of Shubnikov-de-Haas (SdH) and de-Haas-van-Alphen (dHvA) effects. Figure Quantum oscillations measurements permit to access different information about the electronic properties: • Delocalization of f electrons. The comparison with isostructural compounds whose last f subshell is empty (or full) can indicate the pertinence of a localized-or itinerant description of f -electrons in lanthanide or actinide compounds (see Table ). For instance, the Fermi surface of Ce compounds in a localized limit [Xe]4f 1 5d 1 6s 2 is generally similar to that from their La-based parents of electronic configuration [Xe]5d 1 6s 2 . In the localized antiferromagnet CeIn 3 • Cyclotron masses. By analyzing the temperature-dependence of quantum-oscillations measurements, one can extract the cyclotron mass m * c,i of an orbit from a Fermi-surface band i. In a Fermi-liquid regime driven by itinerant electrons, the effective mass m * is proportional to the density of states at the Fermi level, and it can be related to the cyclotron where m * b,i is the mass of the band i, and where a i is a constant depending on the topology of the band. Electronic correlations lead to an enhancement of the effective mass by (1 + λ), where λ is the enhancement factor. One can write m * = (1 + λ)m t , where m t is the effective mass of a system without correlations. Equivalently, one can write , where m * c,i,t is the cyclotron mass of an orbital i in a system without correlations and λ i is the enhancement factor specific to the orbital i. In a situation with enhanced electronic correlations on hot spots or hot lines from the Fermi surface, λ i can be different from λ. Otherwise, one can assume λ i = λ. Determining fully a Fermi surface and, thus, extracting the full effective mass from the sum rule in Equation (2.4), is a difficult experimental task. A high number of Fermi-surface sheets is often present, and high band-cyclotron masses, in relation with a strong heavy-fermion character, request very-low-temperature measurements, sometimes beneath standard experimental accessible temperatures. • Nesting. Assuming that itinerant electrons drive the magnetic properties, a nesting of the Fermi surface, i.e., the presence of two parallel parts of the Fermi surface connected with a vector k, can be the signature of magnetic ordering with wavevector k. A nesting effect was identified by In heavy-fermion systems, the magnetic properties are driven by nearly-localized f -electrons, which also contribute to the Fermi surface. Magnetic fluctuations are at the heart of the heavy Fermi-liquid properties induced in the proximity of quantum magnetic phase transitions, at which long-range magnetic order develops (see Section 2.4). However, band calculations generally describe itinerant f electron systems but ignore their magnetic properties. For instance, the identification or proposition of nesting effects remains rare. A challenge for a quantitative modeling of heavy-fermion quantum critical magnets would be to describe the interplay between the magnetic and the band properties. For that purpose, new generations of band calculations, in which the effects of intersite magnetic correlations between nearly-localized f -electrons would be considered, are needed. We have seen that the localization of f -electrons drives a progressive change from intermediatevalence to heavy-fermion physics, and ultimately to long-range magnetic order. Here, basic magnetic properties of localized or nearly-localized f electronic states are presented. Within a competition with the Kondo effect, magnetic anisotropy and magnetic exchange interactions induce long-range magnetically-ordered phases in these systems. Quantum magnetic phase transitions are induced and are accompanied by quantum critical properties. Models based on magnetic fluctuations and describing quantum magnetic phase transitions are introduced. In complement, reviews about the quantum critical properties of heavy-fermion magnetic systems can be found in In f -electron compounds, spin-orbit coupling leads to a ground state of quantum number J = L ± S, where L is the total orbital momentum and S the total spin of electrons from Magnetic exchange Ce 3+ [Xe] 4f 1 It ends in a splitting of the spin-orbit multiplet into crystal-field levels, which consist in linear combinations of the |M J states. In relation with the lattice local environment, a crystal-field ground state presents anisotropic magnetic properties. Ultimately, magnetic exchange between f -electron magnetic moments (see Section 2.4) can lead to magnetic ordering, i.e., the stabilization of a ground state with magnetic moments with a wavevector k, equivalent to a splitting of the crystal-field ground state. Figure In compounds with a small Kondo temperature T K < ∆ CF , i.e., close to a localized limit, the Kondo effect leads to a broadening of the f electron levels by an energy bandwidth ∆ ∼ Assuming localized f electrons, one can calculate the magnetic susceptibility using a Van Vleck-type formula: where N A is the Avogadro number, Z is the partition function, β = 1/k B T , i is the magnetic field direction, n and m are the indices of two crystal-field levels, and n and m are their respective energies [van Vleck 32, (2.7) In Kondo-lattice compounds, Rudermann-Kittel-Kasuya-Yosida (RKKY) magnetic exchange interactions [Rudermann 54, Kasuya 56, Yosida 57], i.e., an indirect exchange between f -electron localized magnetic moments mediated by the conduction electrons, generally develop at low temperatures. They lead to magnetic fluctuations and/or long-range magnetic order, implying deviations from Van-Vleck paramagnetic susceptibility. The RKKY Hamiltonian can be written in the form: where J RKKY (r ij ) is the RKKY interaction between magnetic moments μ i and μ j carried on two neighboring atoms i and j, respectively, distant by r ij . The RKKY exchange can be expressed as: where J K is the single-site Kondo exchange defined earlier (see Equation 2.8) and ρ(E F ) is the density of states at the Fermi energy E F . The sign of the factor C(r ij ), and thus of the RKKY interaction, results from Friedel oscillations of the Coulomb potential created by a charged impurity (see Figure We have seen in Sections 2.2.3 and 2.3 that heavy-fermion states and long-range magnetic order phases develop in the limit of localized f electrons in lanthanides and actinides compounds. A reduced strength of the Kondo hybridization in materials within localized limit allows magnetic exchange interactions to operate, leading in many compounds to the onset of long-range magnetic order. Most of heavy-fermion systems are in the vicinity of a quantum magnetic phase transition, at which their magnetic exchange interactions and magnetic anisotropy are strong enough to induce long-range magnetic ordering. Doniach showed that, for a one-dimensional lattice [ CeIn 3-x Sn x constitutes a textbook example of a progressive change from intermediatevalence to Kondo physics, and ultimately to long-range magnetic order, in agreement with the picture from Doniach Alternatively to chemical doping, pressure allows tuning quantum magnetic phase transitions in heavy-fermion compounds. Contrary to doping, pressure does not affect the sample quality and opens the route to phenomena only observable in high-quality samples, as unconventional superconductivity or de Haas -van Alphen and Shunikov-de Haas quantum oscillations. Complementarily, a magnetic field permits to continuously tune the magnetic ground state of these systems, ending in a polarized paramagnetic regime at high magnetic fields, where the electronic correlations have been (partly or totally) quenched. Figure Beyond the case of Ising antiferromagnets, a large variety of magnetically-ordered phases is observed in heavy-fermion materials, from ferromagnetism to antiferromagnetism, including collinear and non-collinear structures, with Ising (easy-axis) or XY (easy-plane) magnetic anisotropies, spin-density waves with incommensurate wavevectors k, single or multi-k structures etc. Competing magnetic interactions can also lead to magnetic frustration in these systems. The proximity to a quantum magnetic phase transition is indicated by reduced long-range ordered magnetic moments, associated with the presence of a non-Fermi liquid critical regime, which will be introduced in Section 2.4.2.2, and strong magnetic fluctuations, which will be introduced in Section 2.4.3. Deviations from a Fermi-liquid behavior, i.e., critical power or logarithmic laws in different physical quantities, are observed in the vicinity of a quantum magnetic phase transition in heavy-fermion compounds. In such low-temperature non-Fermi liquid regime, the electrical resistivity varies as ρ(T ) = ρ 0 + AT n , with 1 < n < 1.5, the magnetic susceptibility can vary paramagnetic and magnetically-ordered phases. Figure Figures 2. The dynamical magnetic susceptibility χ αβ (q, E), where q is the wavevector and E = hω is the energy, is a complex tensor permitting to describe the magnetic fluctuations. It can be defined as: where α, β = x, y, z and M(q, E) is the magnetization induced by a magnetic field H(q, E). Alternatively, it can be expressed as [Kuramoto 00]: where μ α (q, t) = r μ α (r, t)e -iqr is the Fourier transform of the α component of the magnetic moment μ(r, t) at the position r and time t. For simplicity the indexes α and β are abandoned in the following, and formulas will be expressed for the isotropic case. The dynamical magnetic susceptibility can be decomposed into a real and an imaginary components defined by χ(q, E) = χ (q, E) + iχ (q, E). It can be probed by different experimental methods, as: • measurement of the static susceptibility χ, which is related to the dynamical susceptibility by: where M is the magnetization and H is the magnetic field, • inelastic neutron scattering, which probes the wavevector and energy dependence of the magnetic susceptibility. Neutron scattered intensity can be expressed as: (2.13) In the following, we will use the following convention for neutron-scattering experiments, where the magnetic signal emerges at a neutron momentum transfer Q, related with the wavevector q of the sample reciprocal lattice by: where τ corresponds to the position of a non-magnetic nuclear Bragg peak. The wavevectors characteristic of intersite magnetic correlations, i.e., at which larger neutron scattered intensity emerges from a q-independent background, will be noted k i . • nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR), which allows accessing several magnetic quantities where χ p is the Pauli susceptibility of conduction electrons, which can coincide with that of itinerant f -electrons, as in heavy-fermion systems, and the spin-lattice relaxation rate 1/T 1 , which is linked to the magnetic susceptibility by: where A(q) is a q-dependent hyperfine coupling. NMR experiments are performed in a magnetic field, and the NMR spin-lattice relaxation rate 1/T 1 probes the magnetic fluctuations components perpendicular to the magnetic field. The longitudinal component of the magnetic fluctuations, i.e., the component parallel to the magnetic field, can be accessed by studying the NMR spin-spin relaxation rate 1/T 2 . In paramagnets close to a quantum magnetic phase transition, magnetic fluctuations generally correspond to damped quasi-elastic excitations. They can be described using random-phase approximation theories, in which the dynamical magnetic susceptibility is given by: where χ (q) is the real part of the static susceptibility and Γ(q) is the relaxation rate at wavevector q. χ (q) probes the intensity of the magnetic fluctuations and can be expressed as the integral: (2.18) Equation 2.17 implies: • for inelastic neutron scattering: • for nuclear magnetic resonance: With the aim to describe the magnetic exchange interactions, the susceptibility can be expressed as: where χ 0 (E) is a local q-independent magnetic susceptibility and J(q) = r J(r)e -iqr is the magnetic exchange expressed in the reciprocal space, i.e., the Fourier transform of intersite magnetic exchanges J(r) in the crystal, r being the distance between two magnetic atoms. In a material with intersite magnetic fluctuations of wavevector k, χ(q, E) is q-dependant and |J(q)| is maximum for q = k. Equivalently, χ (q) and Γ(q) are maximum and minimum, respectively, at the wavevector k. The relaxation time is inversely proportional to the relaxation rate and is given by τ (k) = h/Γ(k). As well, the correlation length is inversely proportional to the width κ(k) in q-space of the fluctuations spectrum, and is given by ξ(k) = 1/κ(k). The effects of the onset of ferromagnetic fluctuations, with the magnetic wavevector k F M = 0, and antiferromagnetic fluctuations, with a wavevector k AF = 0, on the wavevector-and temperature-variations of χ (q) and Γ(q) are summarized in Figure A well-documented case presenting low-energy quantum magnetic fluctuations is the heavy- neutron scattering intensity versus energy transfer at the momentum transfer Q = (0, 0, 0.9) and T = 100 mK [Regnault 87], (c) neutron scattering intensity versus Q h and Q l around the momentum transfer Q = (0, 0, 0.9), at the energy transfer E = hω = 0.3 meV and T = 100 mK [Rossat-Mignod 88], (d) specific heat divided by temperature versus temperature [von A series of theoretical works focused on the relation between intersite magnetic fluctuations and the formation of a Fermi liquid in paramagnets close to a quantum magnetic phase transition. The driving role played by magnetic fluctuations in the development of a Fermiliquid regime in the magnetic susceptibility has been emphasized in the early works of Doniach and Engelsberg is followed in the Fermi-liquid regime of dilute Kondo-alloys where C = μ 2 ef f is the Curie constant and μ ef f the effective moment of the f -electrons which describes the Korringa law for a heavy Fermi liquid. By considering the entropy gained by the establishment of short-range order, Edwards and Lonzarich expressed the Sommerfeld coefficient of the heat capacity as function of the relaxation rate of magnetic fluctuations (2.25) Finally, one obtain that magnetic fluctuations with wavevector k can drive to a Fermi-liquid regime of effective mass: developing at temperatures smaller than the temperature T * Γ(k) characteristic of intersite magnetic fluctuations. Magnetic-fluctuations theories were adapted by Hertz, Millis, and Moriya to describe quantum magnetic phase transitions, i.e., a magnetic phase transition occurring in the limit of T → 0 when a non-thermal tuning parameter δ is adjusted Figure The Section presents a focus on unconventional superconductivity, which develops near quantum magnetic phase transitions in heavy-fermion magnets. The role played by the magnetic fluctuations, the observation of a magnetic resonance in the superconducting state, and the challenge to determine the superconducting order parameter are emphasized. Further reviews about the interplay between magnetism and superconductivity in heavy-fermion compounds can be found in [ Ōnuki 04, Pfleiderer 09, Knebel 11a, Aoki 13, Griveau 14, White 15, Aoki 19a]. The first report of bulk superconductivity in a heavy-fermion material, CeCu 2 Si 2 , was made in 1979 by Steglich et al [ In addition to the superconducting phase observed near the critical pressure p c at the magnetic phase transition, a second superconducting phase is stabilized at a pressure p v > p c . While the role of antiferromagnetic fluctuations was emphasized for the stabilization of the first superconducting phase near p c Over the last decades, the number of known heavy-fermion superconductors increased substantially [ A peculiar property of the U-based ferromagnetic superconductors is the possibility to induce, or reinforce, superconductivity near a metamagnetic transition driven by a magnetic field [Sheikin 01, Lévy 05, Aoki 09a]. This is perhaps the most striking manifestation of magneticallymediated superconducting pairing. Figure Recently, the route to magnetic-field-induced superconductivity in non-ferromagnetic compounds was opened by the discovery of superconductivity a paramagnetic compound, UTe 2 . Two superconducting phases develop in the vicinity of a metamagnetic transition induced by a magnetic field applied either along the hard magnetic axis b or along a peculiar hard direction tilted by 25 • from b in the (b, c) plane From the original Hill plots, suggestion was made that magnetism and superconductivity may be antagonist in f -electron systems Figure In 1991, Rossat-Mignod et al discovered a magnetic resonance mode in the superconducting phase of the high-temperature-superconductivity cuprate system YBa 2 Cu 3 O 6+x by inelastic neutron scattering [Rossat-Mignod 91]. Similar observation of magnetic resonances resulting from a sudden gapping of the magnetic fluctuations spectra were observed in the supercon- ducting state of other heavy-fermion, iron-based and cuprate compounds [ Figure The modification of the magnetic excitation spectrum in the superconducting state is also visible in the temperature variation of the NMR relaxation rate 1/T 1 . Figure A challenge is to describe the unconventional superconducting state of heavy-fermion materials. As discussed in Section 2.5.2, superconductivity and, thus, the superconducting order parameter and the associated gapped-excitation spectrum, result from a pairing mechanism, which is presumably driven by magnetic fluctuations. While a conventional phonon-mechanism of superconductivity drives to a s-wave order parameter associated with an isotropic superconducting gap, unconventional magnetic-fluctuation-mechanism of superconductivity can drive to p-, dor f -wave order parameters associated with an anisotropic superconducting gap, which cancels along line-and/or point-nodes of the Fermi surface (see Figure In single-band superconductors in zero-magnetic field or in the limit of zero-magnetic field, the following variations of the heat-capacity and NMR relaxation rate are expected • C p ∝ T and 1/T 1 ∝ T for a gapless quasielastic excitation (Fermi liquid), • C p ∝ T 2 and 1/T 1 ∝ T 3 for a line-node gapped excitation, • C p ∝ T 3 and 1/T 1 ∝ T 5 for a point-node gapped excitation. A T 3 variation of the NMR relaxation rate is observed in many heavy-fermion superconductors and is generally interpreted as the signature of a gapped excitation with line nodes [Sigrist 91, Kuramoto 00]. However, a full superconducting gap without line node has been proposed from heat capacity, thermal conductivity, and penetration depth measurements on CeCu 2 Si 2 by Yamashita et al [ Since magnetic fluctuations are suspected to be the glue for unconventional superconductivity in heavy-fermion materials, it is important to determine how the magnetic properties evolve when tuning parameters are adjusted. Extracting the electronic phase diagrams of these systems under a various set of tuning parameters (mainly chemical doping, pressure, magnetic field) and modeling magnetic fluctuations and long-range orders are prerequisites to describe the superconducting order parameter and the related gapped excitations. This Chapter focuses on the properties of heavy-fermion paramagnets. The correlated paramagnetic ground state of these materials is presented in Section 3.1. Signatures of the electronic correlations in the Fermi-liquid regime and the role played by intersite magnetic fluctuations is highlighted. The effects of a magnetic field applied on these correlated paramagnets is presented in Section 3.2. The physical properties at a metamagnetic transition, or pseudo-metamagnetic crossover, to a high-field polarized paramagnetic regime are detailed. The enhancement of the effective mass, the role played by the magnetic fluctuations, and Fermi-surface reconstructions at the metamagnetic transition are emphasized. Signatures of the electronic correlations developing at low-temperature in various physical properties of heavy-fermion paramagnets are presented in Section 3.1.1. In Section 3.1.2, intersite magnetic fluctuations are identified as the basic phenomenon driving the correlated paramagnetic (CPM) regime of these materials. Section 3.1.1 constitutes an extension of Section 2.3.2 and Section 3.1.2 is an extension to Section 2.4.3.1. A comparison of these two graphs indicates that, in the low-temperature Fermi-liquid regime, χ and C p /T are not strictly proportional. This deviation from the Wilson law can be qualitatively explained assuming that antiferromagnetic correlations drive the Fermi-liquid regime. Knowing that the presence of magnetic fluctuations peaked at an antiferromagnetic wavevector k AF = 0 implies χ = χ (q = 0) χ (k AF ) (see Equation Complementarily to Figure The role of magnetic fluctuations has been highlighted in Section 2.4.3.1, where their characteristic energy scale Γ(k) ∼ 1/χ (k) extracted from quasielastic neutron scattering spectra was shown to drive a Fermi-liquid regime. In Figure In the following, a focus is made on CeRu 2 Si 2 and its parent compounds, whose magneticfluctuations spectra have been intensively studied over several decades. Figure Figures 3.5(a-b) present inelastic-neutron-scattering spectra measured at different temperatures on Ce 0.925 La 0.075 Ru 2 Si 2 , which lies at a quantum magnetic phase transition induced by La-doping with α 1 = 1 ± 0.05 and β 1 = 0.8 ± 0.05. As well, for T > T 0 , power laws are observed in the T -dependence of χ (q 0 , T ) and Γ(q 0 , T ): with α 0 = 1 ± 0.1 and β 0 = 0.6 ± 0.2. Similar √ T -variations of the relaxation rate were observed for other heavy-fermion compounds (see for instance [Lopes 83, T at temperatures higher than the Fermi-liquid temperature. Figure Following Equations 2.13, 2.19 and 3.2, one can rewrite, for T > T 1 , the dynamical susceptibility at wavevector k 1 as: shows a scaling plot of T χ (k 1 , E, T ) versus E/T 0.8 from energy spectra measured by inelastic neutron scattering at the wavevector k 1 and temperatures T > T 1 . In this graph, the collapse of all data on a single curve governed by Equation 3.3 is a consequence from the observed T -power-law variations of χ (k 1 , T ) and Γ(k 1 , T ). Scaling plots of the dynamical susceptibility T α χ (E, T ) versus E/T β were made for other heavy-fermion paramagnets, as UCu 5-x Pd x [Aronson 95], CeCu 5.9 Au 0.1 so that, at energies E Γ(k 1 , T → 0) corresponding to the collected data, one obtain: ending in the trivial form: Equation 3.6 drives the artificial scaling plotted in Figures 3.6(b-c). Other kinds of artificial scaling plots can be obtained from a temperature-independent Fermi-liquid regime and will depend on the fluctuations spectrum and on the energy range of the measured data. To avoid dealing with artificial E/T β scaling graphs and, thus, ending with non-relevant physical information, a preliminary analysis of the temperature-dependence of the energy spectra is mandatory. Metamagnetic transitions induced in heavy-fermion paramagnets under a magnetic field are presented. After an introduction to their signatures in thermodynamic and transport properties in Section 3.2.1, focus will be given to the magnetic fluctuations in Section 3.2.2 and to the Fermi surface in Section 3.2.3. Metamagnetism labels first-order magnetic transitions induced in strongly-anisotropic magnets by a magnetic field [ In anisotropic paramagnets close to a magnetic phase transition, i.e., nearly-ferromagnets or nearly-antiferromagnets, metamagnetism can also occur. Metamagnetism, sometimes called pseudo-metamagnetism (when a crossover rather than a first-order transition occurs), is also observed in heavy-fermion anisotropic paramagnets. Figure This confirms, thus, the Fermi-liquid nature of the CPM regime in CeRu 2 Si 2 under pressure. The enhancement of the effective mass at the metamagnetic transition of heavy-fermion paramagnets indicates that critical magnetic fluctuations may operate. . For H > H m , the low-temperature ground state is a polarized paramagnetic regime established below a temperature scale T P P M , which can be identified here at a maximum of 1/T 1 T , and which increases with H. Figures 3. As well as the quench of antiferromagnetic long-range order into a polarized paramagnetic regime drives the metamagnetic transition in antiferromagnets [ Fermi-surface reconstructions generally accompany metamagnetism in heavy-fermion compounds. Figure Figure A synthesis of the magnetic properties of the correlated paramagnetic regime of heavyfermion systems is made here. Table [Inoue 01, Fukuhara 96, Sugiyama 02, Ōnuki 04, Takeuchi 10, Hirose 11], and is restricted here to paramagnets which indicates that, at first approximation, both quantities are controlled by a single energy scale. UCoAl constitutes an exception to this rule: in a magnetic field applied along its easy Table The magnetic fluctuations have been investigated by neutron scattering in the zero-field ground state of several heavy-fermion paramagnets. In Section 3.2.2, the CPM regime delimited by T max χ and H m in CeRu 2 Si 2 was shown to be associated with antiferromagnetic correlations, which suddenly collapse at the metamagnetic boundary H m . When crossing T max χ or H m , no drastic change of local (q-independent) Kondo magnetic fluctuations has been observed [Raymond 99a, Raymond 07a, Knafo 09a], which indicates no sudden modification of the single-site Kondo effect and, thus, no Kondo breakdown at T max χ or H m . The empirical laws from Equations 3.9 and 3.10 followed by a large number of materials permit to suggest that, by analogy with the textbook CeRu 2 Si 2 case, the CPM regime delimited by T max χ and H m in heavy-fermion paramagnets may be controlled by short-range antiferromagnetic correlations, which progressively vanish at temperatures T > T max χ under zero magnetic field, and suddenly vanish under magnetic fields H > H m at low temperatures. This picture is compatible with models presented in Section 2.4.3.2, in which a Fermi-liquid is controlled by quantum magnetic fluctuations. One can further extend Equation 2.26 to the more general formula: confirming the pertinence of a Fermi-liquid picture based on intersite magnetic fluctuations to describe the CPM regime of heavy-fermion paramagnets. Alternatively to the phenomenological description proposed here, where intersite magnetic fluctuations drive the CPM regime and, thus, control its boundaries T max χ and H m in heavyfermion paramagnets, a picture where T max χ may be related with the onset of a Kondo hybridization between f -and conduction electrons has been proposed (see for instance [Inoue 01, Sugiyama 02, Ōnuki 04, Takeuchi 10, Hirose 11]). In this picture, the maximum of the magnetic susceptibility corresponds to a crossover from a high-temperature regime where the felectrons are localized to a low-temperature regime where they are itinerant. This hypothesis is compatible with the assumption proposed in Ref. This Chapter focuses on antiferromagnets and nearly-antiferromagnets. After an introduction to the basic properties of heavy-fermion antiferromagnets (Section 4.1), the characteristics of quantum antiferromagnetic phase transitions (Section 4.2) and the effects of a magnetic field on heavy-fermion antiferromagnets (Section 4.3) are presented. Complementarily, a general introduction to antiferromagnetism can be found in Basic properties of heavy-fermion antiferromagnets are presented here. Bulk thermodynamic properties (Section 4.1.1) and the microscopic signatures of long-range magnetic order and intersite magnetic fluctuations developing in the antiferromagnetic ground state of these systems (Section 4.1.2) are displayed for a selection of compounds. Magnetic anisotropy plays an important role in heavy-fermion antiferromagnets (see Section 2.4.1.1). Neutron diffraction, i.e., elastic neutron scattering, permits to probe long-range magnetic ordering at a given wavevector k. which antiferromagnetic order is established with the moments aligned either c or ⊥ c, and with commensurate or incommensurate wavevectors. Magnetic structures associated with an incommensurate wavevector generally correspond to a spin-density-wave, while magnetic structures with a commensurate wavevector k = 0 (and sometimes k = 0, in the case of a lattice unit cell containing two magnetic ions) correspond to an antiferromagnetic order. In the following we will label by antiferromagnetism both kinds of staggered magnetic order, and their characteristic magnetic fluctuations, i.e., those corresponding to short-range magnetic order with the same wavevector and ordering direction, will be called antiferromagnetic fluctuations. • Figure • The left part of Figure • Figures 4. • Figure For T > T N , it results from the increase of the antiferromagnetic correlation length, i.e., the typical size of the short-range order, when the temperature is decreased. At T = T N , the divergence of the correlation length leads to the appearance of long-range and static magnetic order (see Figures 2.28(b-d) in Section 2.4.3.1). For T < T N , the magnetic fluc-tuations also grow when the temperature increases and approaches T N , in relation with the progressive reduction of the ordered magnetic moment. • Figure In strongly anisotropic antiferromagnets, as Ce 0.8 La 0.2 Ru 2 Si 2 (see Figure • Figures 4.5(a-b) show the inelastic neutron scattering spectra obtained on CeRhIn 5 at two wavevectors q (-0.6, -0.5, 0.297) and k AF (-0.45, -0.5, 0.297), and the corresponding wavevector-energy-dispersion, plotted simultaneously in a color plot where the intensity of the magnetic fluctuations is mapped out • While CeRhIn 5 has a tetragonal structure and is an Ising-high-temperature paramagnet becoming a weak-XY-antiferromagnet at low-temperature, CeIn 3 has a weak anisotropy simply resulting from its cubic structure. Complementarily to T N = 10 K, a similar ordered magnetic moment μ AF = 0.5 -0.6 μ B / Ce, a superconducting phase induced at a similar critical pressure p c 25 -30 kbar, but a Sommerfeld coefficient, a superconducting temperature, and a crystal-field gap twice bigger in CePd 2 Si 2 than in CeIn 3 . This suggests a possible relation between the strength of planar magnetic anisotropy, the development of enhanced magnetic fluctuations, and that of superconductivity in quantum-critical heavy-fermion systems. Quantum phase transitions, i.e., transitions in the limit of T → 0, between an antiferromagnetic and a paramagnetic phase can be induced by pressure or chemical doping in most of heavy-fermion systems. After an introduction to their basic thermodynamic and electricaltransport properties, Section 4.2.1 presents the electronic phase diagrams of these quantum critical systems, where the destabilization of long-range magnetic order often coincides with the appearance of a superconducting phase. In Section 4.2.2, the quantum-critical role of intersite magnetic fluctuations, which are enhanced at the quantum antiferromagnetic phase transition, is emphasized. Section 4.2.3 shows that Fermi-surface reconstructions coincide with the destabilization of antiferromagnetism in these systems. Finally, Section 4.2.4 shows that smooth valence variations can be observed at the quantum antiferromagnetic phase transition of heavyfermion systems. Heavy-fermion systems undergo quantum antiferromagnetic phase transitions which can be tuned by chemical doping or under pressure. Their magnetic phase diagrams show multiple magnetic phases, and sometimes superconductivity developing in the vicinity of the magnetic phase transition. In this Section, the bulk properties and the typical electronic phase diagrams of a selection of heavy-fermion systems crossing a quantum antiferromagnetic phase transition are presented. Complementarily to Figures 2.19 second-order-like step anomaly in C p at the Néel temperature T N is replaced by another large and second-order anomaly, at the onset of superconductivity at the temperature T sc . At the critical pressure p c 2 -2.5 GPa, T sc is maximal and C p /T saturates to a high value indicative of a heavy-fermion regime with strong magnetic fluctuations. • at the onset of the correlated paramagnetic regime, showing that, for this system, the CPM regime precedes the establishment of antiferromagnetic order for p < p c and it becomes the low-temperature ground state for p > p c [Muramatsu99, Superconductivity is induced in a narrow pocket in the vicinity of the quantum magnetic phase transition of the four antiferromagnets considered in Figures As well as intersite magnetic fluctuations were emphasized in Sections 3.1.2 and 3.2.2 as a driving force for the Fermi-liquid regime established in heavy-fermion correlated paramagnets, we show here that they play a critical role at the quantum magnetic phase transition of heavyfermion antiferromagnets. In this Section, studies of magnetic fluctuations by macroscopic and microscopic experiments performed on a selection of textbook systems are presented. A first focus is given on the signatures of critical magnetic fluctuations induced in the strongly-anisotropic Ising system CeRh 2 Si 2 and in the isotropic cubic system CeIn 3 . Figures 4.9(a-b) present the pressure variation of the quadratic coefficient A of the electrical resistivity Inelastic neutron scattering permits to extract the wavevector-dependence of the magnetic fluctuations and is perfectly adapted to identify the microscopic nature of critical magnetic fluctuations at a heavy-fermion quantum phase transition. Figure The monotonous variation of T 0 indicates that the local magnetic fluctuations do not drive the quantum magnetic phase transition. Oppositely, the minimum value of T 1 at the critical concentration x c indicates that the intersite magnetic fluctuations with wavevector k 1 are critical. These fluctuations are identified as the driving force of the Fermi-liquid regime established at temperatures T < T 1 , in the paramagnetic phase for x ≤ x c , and T 1 = T * 1/m * is identified as the characteristic temperature of the Fermi-liquid regime (see Equation 2.26 in Section 2.4.3.2). ceptibility χ (q, T ) and the relaxation rate Γ(q, T ) have been extracted for the two wavevectors k 1 characteristic of the magnetic-order-parameter fluctuations and q 0 characteristic of the local single-site magnetic fluctuations, for a large range of temperatures and chemical doping covering the phase diagram presented in Figure The extensive study of the wavevector-, temperature-and doping-dependence of the mag- ]. The 'local' scenario is based on the hypothesis that quantum criticality is driven by a single-site local magnetic effect, implying that the magnetic fluctuations at all wavevectors of the reciprocal space are critical. To verify this hypothesis, a demonstration that the magnetic fluctuations at all wavevectors of the reciprocal space are maximum at the quantum magnetic phase transition (critical doping or pressure), in the limit of zero-temperature, is needed. Oppositely, the observation of a monotonous variation of the magnetic fluctuations at a wavevector characteristic of the single-site magnetic fluctuations, as at q 0 for Ce 1-x La x Ru 2 Si 2 , is sufficient to invalidate a local scenario of quantum magnetic criticality. In parallel to the study of intersite magnetic fluctuations, which play a critical role at the metamagnetic transition of heavy-fermion paramagnets (see Section 3.2.2) and at the quantum antiferromagnetic phase transition of heavy-fermion antiferromagnets (see Section 4.2.2), a large experimental and theoretical effort has been devoted to the investigation of the Fermi surfaces. In Section 3.2.3, it has been shown that the metamagnetic transition of heavy-fermion Ce-based paramagnets is accompanied by a Fermi-surface reconstruction. A Fermi surface with itinerant 4f electrons was identified in the correlated paramagnetic regime stabilized for H < H m and a Fermi surface with localized 4f electrons was proposed for the polarized paramagnetic regime reached for H > H m . In this Section, focus is given to the Fermi-surface investigation by dHvA technique of heavy-fermion antiferromagnets at their pressure-induced quantum magnetic phase transition. Fermi-surface studies of two textbook systems, CeRh 2 Si 2 and CeRhIn 5 , are presented here. They show that Fermi-surface reconstructions accompany the quantum magnetic phase transition and indicate a tendency towards electronic localization in the antiferromagnetic phase. Figure , where m 0 is the free-electron mass), before suddenly increasing on approaching p c (m i c > 25m 0 at p p c ) and then smoothly decreasing for p > p c . A heavy-fermion behavior can, thus, be identified as driven by itinerant electrons in the CPM regime of CeRh 2 Si 2 . Figure To summarize, as well as metamagnetism in the paramagnet CeRu 2 Si 2 was suggested to be driven by an itinerant-to-localized change of the nature of 4f electrons (see Section 3.2.3) [Takashita 96, Aoki 14], the antiferromagnetic-to-paramagnetic quantum phase transitions in CeRh 2 Si 2 [Araki 01, Araki 02a] and CeRhIn 5 In Ce compounds, the main integer valence states v = 3 and 4 correspond to n 4f = 1 and 0, respectively, 4f electron per Ce atom (see Table Heavy-fermion compounds are magnetically-ordered, or nearly-ordered, systems, implying that their valence must be compatible with a magnetic ground state. The Hill plot shown in Figure Complementarily to the study of magnetic fluctuations and Fermi surfaces, the study of the valence configuration can, thus, offer valuable information about the electronic states involved in quantum critical phenomena. In this Section, investigations of valence by x-ray absorption spectroscopy on two heavy-fermion compounds at their quantum magnetic phase transition, CeCu 2 Ge 2 and YbNi 3 Ga 9 under pressure, are presented. They permit to confirm that a magnetic heavy-fermion state develop in systems of nearly-integer valence, and that the onset of magnetism is related with a smoothed variation of valence. • Figure • Figure The smooth variations of valence in CeCu 2 Ge 2 and YbNi 3 Ga 9 under pressure indicate a progressive modification of the Kondo hybridization at the critical pressures p c or p * , ending in a magnetically-ordered phase corresponding to a nearly-integer-valence limit. This contrasts with Kondo-breakdown-type scenarios, where a sudden change from localized to itinerant felectron is expected to occur at the quantum magnetic phase transition [Si 01, 13. This confirms that a nearly-integer-valence state constitutes a favorable condition for the development of magnetic correlations, and ultimately of long-range magnetism. As well as chemical doping and pressure, a magnetic field can induce a quantum phase transition between an antiferromagnetic and a paramagnetic ground states. Once high enough, a magnetic field ultimately leads to a polarized paramagnetic regime, where most of the electronic correlations have been squeezed out and all magnetic moments have been polarized. In relation with their magnetic anisotropy, different polarization processes are observed in anisotropic heavy-fermion antiferromagnets. After a presentation to the magnetic-field-temperature phase diagrams of heavy-fermion antiferromagnets and to their basic thermodynamic and electrical transport properties in Section 4.3.1, the effects of a magnetic field to their microscopic electronic properties, i.e., the antiferromagnetic order, the magnetic fluctuations, the Fermi surface, and the valence, are detailed in Section 4.3.2. In complement to this Section, an introduction to magnetic models can be found in [de The signatures in basic thermodynamic and electrical-transport properties of the magneticfield polarization of heavy-fermion antiferromagnets are presented here. First, a general introduction to the effects of a magnetic field on 'model' antiferromagnets is given in Section 4.3.1.1. Focus is then made on the high-magnetic-field properties of different anisotropy classes of heavy-fermion antiferromagnets. While most of them have a strong magnetic anisotropy, some of them also have a weak magnetic anisotropy. Section 4.3.1.2 presents the properties of strongly-Ising uniaxial antiferromagnets and Section 4.3.1.3 presents the properties of strongly-XY planar antiferromagnets. Finally, Section 4.3.1.4 presents the properties of weakly-Ising uniaxial antiferromagnets and Section 4.3.1.4 presents the properties of weakly-XY planar antiferromagnets. Figure • Figures 4.16(d-f) show the magnetic susceptibility, magnetization and magnetic-fieldtemperature phase diagram, respectively, of antiferromagnets with a weak Ising magnetic anisotropy. The high-temperature magnetic susceptibility is almost isotropic, with χ ∼ χ ⊥ , and long-range magnetic order leads to a sharp second-order peak in χ at T N , with a strong reduction of χ at low-temperatures. The transverse susceptibility saturates to a value χ ⊥ > χ at temperatures T < T N . In a magnetic field H μ AF , a spinflop transition is induced at H SF . A first-order step-like anomaly in the magnetization is observed at H SF . For H SF < H < H c , canted moments are composed of an antiferromagnetic component perpendicular to the field-direction and of a polarized component parallel to the field-direction, and M increases almost linearly with H. A second-order kink in M (H) occurs at the antiferromagnetic phase boundary H c . • Figures 4.16(g-i) show the magnetic susceptibility, magnetization and magnetic-fieldtemperature phase diagram, respectively, of antiferromagnets in which a small Ising magnetic anisotropy leads to the formation of magnetic domains. Such XY-type antiferromagnetism can be observed in tetragonal or hexagonal structures with, respectively, two or three equivalent easy magnetic axes ⊥ c. Due to an averaging over the domains, the magnetic susceptibility is nearly isotropic in the easy plane, reaching a value larger than the intrinsic magnetic susceptibility χ of an isolated domain. For H r < H < H c a canted antiferromagnetic state with an antiferromagnetic component perpendicular to the magnetic-field direction, and for which M increases linearly with H, is stabilized. The reorientation field H r corresponds to a crossover governed by the progressive reorientation from a multi-domain low-field regime to a single-domain high-field state. A second-order kink in M (H) occurs at the antiferromagnetic phase boundary delimited by the critical field H c . In weakly-anisotropic antiferromagnets, a magnetic field induces an effective transverse magnetic anisotropy, ending in the stabilization of a canted state whose antiferromagnetic components are perpendicular to the field direction. In systems subject to strong magnetic fluctuations, magnetic-field-induced anisotropy can lead to an increase of the Néel temperature T N [Knafo 07, The prototypical cases presented in Figure • multiple exchange interactions, along different directions, possibly associated with different magnetic anisotropies. Such interactions are generally in competition, due to different wavevectors, geometrical frustration, etc., • a competition between the magnetic anisotropy imposed by the crystal field and that from the magnetic-exchange interaction. Long-range magnetic order can also develop at low temperature, with the magnetic moments aligned along a hard magnetic direction of the high-temperature magnetic susceptibility, controlled by crystal-field effects, • a competition between magnetic exchange interactions and the Kondo effect, ending in a reduction of the magnetic ordering temperature and of the ordered magnetic moments, and in an increase of the magnetic fluctuations. In the vicinity of a quantum magnetic phase transition, such magnetic fluctuations induce a broad maximum in the magnetic susceptibility at a temperature T max χ > T N and metamagnetism at a magnetic field H m > H c . Their progressive quench in a field is associated with a large initial slope of M (H). The quench of remaining magnetic fluctuations can also induce a large slope of M (H) for H > H c . • although most heavy-fermion system are the place of three-dimensional magnetic exchange interactions, low-dimensional (one-dimensional, two-dimensional, magnetic ladders etc.) magnetic exchange can lead to magnetic fluctuations, which can also result in a broad maximum in the magnetic susceptibility, • a magnetic field can also lead to a modification of the magnetic wavevector of antiferromagnetic order, either progressively, or suddenly. In some compounds a magnetic field transforms a spin-density-wave of incommensurate wavevector k into antiferromagnetism with a commensurate wavevector k (close to k). It can also transform a multi-k to a single-k (single-domain) magnetic structure, or a single-k structure made of domains to a single domain. Finally, a magnetic field can induce magnetic phases with modified wavevectors. Here, a focus is made on heavy-fermion antiferromagnets with a strong Ising magnetic anisotropy. The properties of heavy-fermion antiferromagnets with a weak Ising anisotropy will be considered in Section 4.3.1.4. Figure In combination with a magnetic field, the application of pressure permits to continuously tune the phase diagram of a heavy-fermion antiferromagnet in three dimensions. Figure Ising antiferromagnet A similar low-temperature decoupling of H c and H m was observed in Ce(Ru 0.92 Rh 0.08 ) 2 Si 2 , which is also a strongly Ising anisotropic antiferromagnet near a quantum magnetic phase transition, in a magnetic field H c Similarly to the paramagnetic case, where the low-temperature magnetic susceptibility saturates in a Fermi-liquid regime controlled by intersite magnetic fluctuations, the proximity of antiferromagnets to their quantum magnetic phase transition is accompanied by low-temperature quantum magnetic fluctuations, which drive the magnetic susceptibility to large low-temperature values. The related linear increase of M (H) for H < H c can, thus, been interpreted as the signature of the progressive field-induced quench of these intersite magnetic fluctuations into a polarized magnetic moment. The step-like variation ∆M of the magnetization at H c is driven by the sudden alignment of the antiferromagnetic moments. In Ce(Ru 0.92 Rh 0.08 ) 2 Si 2 and Ce 0.87 La 0.13 Ru 2 Si 2 , the large slope in M (H) indicates intense quantum magnetic fluctuations for H < H c , while the small jump ∆M at H c indicates a small ordered antiferromagnetic moment in the AF phase, i.e., the characteristics of a close vicinity of a quantum magnetic phase transition. Oppositely, in CeRh 2 Si 2 , the small slope in M (H) indicates weak quantum magnetic fluctuations for H < H c , while the large jump ∆M at H c indicates a large ordered antiferromagnetic moment in the AF phase, also compatible with the large ordering temperature T N of this system. g-i)). At low-temperatures, first-order transitions are often observed. When the temperature is increased, the first-order transition at H m transforms, via a critical endpoint, into a crossover delimiting the CPM regime and that the first-order transition at H c transforms, via a tricritical point, into a second-order phase transition delimiting the AF phase [ The effects of a magnetic field on heavy-fermion antiferromagnets with a XY planar magnetic anisotropy are presented here. In these materials, long-range antiferromagnetic order is associated with the formation of antiferromagnetic domains, in which the magnetic moments are aligned along one of the ≥ 2 equivalent easy magnetic directions in the easy plane. A focus is made on the well-documented U(Pd 1-x Ni x ) 2 Al 3 alloys, in which the XY magnetic anisotropy is strong. The properties of heavy-fermion antiferromagnets with a weak XY-anisotropy will be considered in Section 4.3.1.5. The temperature-magnetic-field phase diagram of UPd 2 Al 3 in magnetic fields H ⊥ c is presented in Figure A few heavy-fermion magnets are characterized by a weak Ising magnetic anisotropy. Figure As well as the weakly-Ising heavy-fermion antiferromagnets, there are a few weakly-XY heavy-fermion antiferromagnets. Here, the high-magnetic-field properties of one of them, the antiferromagnet CeRhIn 5 are considered. This system belongs to the family of '115' heavyfermion superconductors, for which amongst the highest superconducting temperatures T sc up to 2.3 K in Ce-based system have been reported Figures 4.25 (f-g) present the temperature-magnetic-field phase diagrams at different pressures, and the three-dimensional pressure-magnetic-field-temperature phase diagram of CeRhIn 5 in a magnetic field H ⊥ c [Knebel 11a, Knebel 11b]. They emphasize that a superconducting phase develops in the vicinity of the quantum magnetic phase transition induced in this system under pressure. Interestingly, a magnetic-field-induced reentrance of the antiferromagnetic phase is observed at pressures p p c for H ⊥ c [Knebel 06, Knebel 11a, Park 06] and for H tilted by 20 • towards the direction c [ Experiments on other weak XY antiferromagnets and modelings of their magnetic properties are needed to determine whether the behavior reported for CeRhIn 5 is representative, or not, of this class of materials. We have seen that, within a first approximation, the magnetic-field-temperature phase diagrams of heavy-fermion antiferromagnets can be explained by simple magnetic-polarization processes in relation with the magnetic anisotropy. However, more subtle effects generally need to be also considered. In Section 4.3.2.1, we show that intermediate antiferromagnetic phases, associated with a change of the magnetic structure, can be be induced in fields smaller than the antiferromagnetic phase boundary H c , i.e., before reaching a PPM regime. In Section 4.3.2.2, the enhancement of the effective masses are shown to indicate the presence of critical magnetic fluctuations at H c . Section 4.3.2.3 presents dHvA measurements, which demonstrate that Fermi-surface reconstructions accompany the AF-to-PPM transition induced by a mag-netic field. Finally, Section 4.3.2.4 shows that the valence of a heavy-fermion antiferromagnet is weakly unaffected at H c . In heavy-fermion antiferromagnets, a magnetic field can induce an intermediate antiferromagnetic phase prior to the high-field polarized paramagnetic regime. In some of these systems, neutron diffraction showed that a change of the magnetic structure characterizes the intermediate magnetic phase. The case of CeRhIn 5 in a magnetic field H [110] was already presented in Section 4.3.1.5. Other examples are considered in this Section. While antiferromagnetic phases I and II in low fields are ordered with the magnetic wavevector k 1 = (0.31, 0, 0), the antiferromagnetic phase IV, which develops in high fields at temperatures T T N , is ordered within a superposition of sine modulations of moments with the wavevectors k 1 = (0.31, 0, 0), k 2 = (0.31, 0.31, 0), and of a ferromagnetic component of wavevector k = 0 corresponding to the polarization of the moments. The low-temperature and high-field phase III is ordered with the wavevector k c 2 = (1/3, 1/3, 0), which corresponds to a 'commensurate modification' of wavevector k 2 . A similar phase diagram was found for CeRu 2 (Si 0.9 Ge 0.1 ) 2 , which is also an antiferromagnet derived from CeRu 2 Si 2 [Mignot 91b]. antiferromagnetic phase for H * < H < H c . The electrical resistivity and magnetization variations in these two compounds look similar than those reported for the weakly-Isinganisotropic antiferromagnet YbNiSi 3 , in a magnetic field applied along its easy axis b (see Figure ature and the temperature-magnetic-field phase diagram, respectively, of the Ising antiferromagnet UPd 2 Si 2 in a magnetic field H c Heavy-fermion compounds are the place of magnetic interactions which induces magnetic fluctuations and long-range-ordered magnetic phases. In the parent paramagnetic compound CeRu 2 Si 2 , intersite magnetic fluctuations with the three main wavevectors k 1 , k 2 , and k 3 (see Figure A and the heat-capacity Sommerfeld coefficient γ = T →0 C p /T and (e) magnetic-field variation of A at different pressures of Ce(Ru 0.92 Rh 0.08 ) 2 Si 2 in a magnetic field H c (from [Aoki 12a]). The Inset of (e) presents the pressure-variations of the critical field H c and of the metamagnetic field H m . (f) Magnetic-fieldvariation of the coefficients A and β extracted from fits to the electrical resistivity of YbNiSi 3 , in a magnetic field H b, by ρ = ρ 0 + AT β (from [Bud'ko 07]). We have seen in Sections 3.2.2 and 4.2.2 that the metamagnetic transition of heavy-fermion paramagnets, and the antiferromagnetic phase transition of heavy-fermion antiferromagnets can be the place of critical magnetic fluctuations, of ferromagnetic and antiferromagnetic nature, respectively. Here, a focus is made on the magnetic-field-induced phase transition of heavyfermion antiferromagnets, for which an enhancement of the effective mass also indicate the presence of quantum critical magnetic fluctuations at H c . It was emphasized that a non-Fermiliquid behavior is induced at the critical field of the antiferromagnet YbRh 2 Si 2 (see Figure • Figure • Figure For the systems considered here, the variations of the electrical-resistivity quadratic coefficient A and of the heat-capacity Sommerfeld coefficient γ indicate an enhancement of the magnetic fluctuations at the antiferromagnetic boundary H c and at the boundary H m of the CPM regime (see Section 3.2.2). While critical ferromagnetic fluctuations have been evidenced at the metamagnetic field H m of the heavy-fermion paramagnet CeRu 2 Si 2 , the nature of the critical fluctuations at the boundary H c of a heavy-fermion antiferromagnetic have not been identified so far. Further effort is now needed to determine their nature and their relation with the enhancement of the effective mass, as determined from an analysis of heat-capacity and electrical-resistivity Fermi-liquid behaviors. For this purpose, inelastic neutron scattering experiments could be performed on an antiferromagnet under a magnetic field. The system Ce(Ru 0.92 Rh 0.08 ) 2 Si 2 , where H c and H m are decoupled at ambient pressure, could be an appropriate target. The characterization of the magnetic fluctuations at H c and H m may help understanding the different values of A observed at these two characteristic field (A(H m ) A(H c ) in CeRh 2 Si 2 , A(H m ) < A(H c ) in Ce(Ru 0.92 Rh 0.08 ) 2 Si 2 ). Here, the evolution of the Fermi-surface of antiferromagnets in a magnetic field is considered [Matsumoto 08, Matsumoto 10]. Figure • The first one, whose results are shown in Figure • The second set of dHvA experiments, presented in Figure As shown here and in Sections 3.2.3 and 4.2.3, dHvA experiments demonstrate that the Fermi surface of heavy-fermion compounds strongly varies at their quantum magnetic phase transitions induced under pressure and magnetic field. They indicate that 4f electrons are more localized in the antiferromagnetic phase than in the correlated paramagnetic regime, and that a magnetic field leads to an increase of their localized character. However, extracting the degree of localization or itineracy of the 4f electrons from dHvA experiments is not trivial. In the next Section, measurements of valence, which is an alternative indication of the degree of localization of the 4f electrons, will be considered. As shown in Section 4.2.4, XAS measurements indicate that heavy-fermion systems, and in particular those in an antiferromagnetic state, are very close to an integer-valence limit, corresponding to nearly-localized 4f electrons in Ce compounds (see for instance The apparent contradiction between the conclusions from dHvA (see Sections 3.2.3, 4.2.3, and 4.3.2.3) and XAS experiments is a consequence of the dual itinerant-localized electronic character of heavy-fermion systems. While XAS experiments indicate that heavy-fermion systems, and more particularly the compounds in their AF and PPM phases, have nearly-localized f -electrons, dHvA experiments highlight the itinerant character of the f electrons in the CPM regime, which is sufficient to induce significant deviations in comparison with a non-4f Fermi surface. In addition, due to the magnetic-form factor, the magnetic properties of the f electrons, i.e., long-range magnetic order and intersite magnetic fluctuations, observed by neutron scattering at non-zero momentum transfers are generally considered as resulting from localized f electrons. We have seen that magnetic fluctuations of nearly-localized f -electrons drive the Table Similarly to Section 3.3, where focus was given to heavy-fermion correlated paramagnets, a synthesis of the magnetic properties of a large number of heavy-fermion antiferromagnets is made here. Table This strongly contrasts with the conclusions about heavy-fermion correlated paramagnets, made by in Section 3.3 (Figure Heavy-fermion ferromagnets and nearly-ferromagnets are presented in this Chapter. Basic properties at a ferromagnetic phase transition are introduced in Section 5.1. The phenomena, including superconductivity, induced at a quantum ferromagnetic phase transition are presented in Section 5.2, and the effects of a magnetic field are considered in Section 5.3. In complement to this Chapter, a general introduction to ferromagnetism can be found in The electronic properties of heavy-fermion ferromagnets are considered here. Section 5.1.1 presents signatures of ferromagnetic ordering in bulk thermodynamic and electrical-transport measurements. Section 5.1.2 presents experimental evidences of long-range magnetic order and magnetic fluctuations in these systems. A ferromagnetic state is characterized by a large magnetization in a magnetic field H > H c , where the critical field H c is generally of a few hundreds of Oersted, and applied along an easy magnetic axis. Figure In heavy-fermion antiferromagnets and nearly-antiferromagnets, a large high-temperature electrical resistivity indicates the presence of electronic correlations, presumably driven by magnetic fluctuations (see Figure H c are often used to probe a ferromagnetic order parameter. However, the ferromagnetic phase transition at T C can be only observed for H < H c . For H > H c , a broad temperature crossover indicates a different groundstate, which corresponds to a polarized paramagnetic regime rather than a ferromagnetic phase (see Sections 5.3.1.1 and 5.3.1.2). Neutron diffraction permits to directly probe the order parameter of magnetically-ordered phases in zero-magnetic field. In a ferromagnet, magnetic Bragg peaks occur at momentum transfers Q = τ , where τ is a nuclear Bragg position, corresponding to the wavevector k = 0. Neutron scattered intensity at a ferromagnetic peak can be expressed as I(k = 0) = I 0 + aμ(k = 0) 2 , where the moment μ(k = 0) = μ F M is the ferromagnetic order parameter, I 0 is the intensity of the nuclear Bragg peak, and a is a constant. The bulk magnetic susceptibility χ, or the magnetization M = χH, are natural probes to capture the critical ferromagnetic properties near a ferromagnetic phase transition. As shown by Equations 2.12 and 2.18 in Section 2.4.3.1, χ is related to an integration in energy of the ferromagnetic fluctuations spectra corresponding to wavevector k = 0. Critical exponents related to ferromagnetic ordering can be extracted from magnetization and magnetic susceptibility measurements, but also from magnetostriction measurements. In this Section, the cases of two ferromagnets, UIr and URhGe, are considered in detail. Figure (5.1) with δ = 4.04 ± 0.05. The high-temperature magnetization, measured at T = 60 K, shows an upwards curvature tending asymptotically to the critical power-law in high-fields. The critical behavior in the magnetization at temperatures near T C can be analyzed using the Arrott equation of state with the constants c 1 , c 2 > 0. (5.3) Figure where A = c -γ/δ 1 c 2 γ/δ is a positive constant and: Using the values of β and γ determined from the Arrott method, the value δ = 2.2 ± 0.4 is obtained using Equation The study of UIr [Knafo 09b] was followed by the characterization of the critical magnetization of other U-based heavy-fermion ferromagnets. Figure (5.7) where b is a positive constant, so that: (5.8) While Figure A quantum ferromagnetic phase transition, corresponding to the boundary of a ferromagnetic phase in the limit of zero-temperature, can be tuned by pressure or chemical doping in most of heavy-fermion ferromagnets. The quantum critical properties of heavy-fermion ferromagnets are considered here. Magnetic phase diagrams of critical ferromagnets are presented in Section 5.2.1. Signatures of enhanced magnetic fluctuations in the physical properties are presented in Section 5.2.2. Finally, the variation of valence at a ferromagnetic phase transition is considered in Section 5.2.3. Different examples of ferromagnetic phase diagrams are presented. Quantum ferromagneticto-paramagnetic phase transitions are first introduced (Section 5.2.1.1). Then, the case of ferromagnetic superconductors is considered (Section 5.2.1.2). Finally, the phase diagrams of ferromagnets near an antiferromagnetic phase transition are presented, permitting to emphasize the competition between magnetic exchange interactions (Section 5.2.1.3). The ferromagnetic-to-paramagnetic quantum phase transition of a selection of heavy-fermion ferromagnets is presented in Figure • Figures 5.7 (c,d) show the magnetic susceptibility data (measured via the NMR Knight shift κ) and the magnetic phase diagram of CeRu 1-x Fe x PO. Ferromagnetism is stabilized at dopings x < x c 0.85 • Figures 5.7 (e,f) present electrical-resistivity data and the magnetic phase diagram of U 3 P 4 under pressure Superconductivity develops near a quantum ferromagnetic phase transition in the ferromagnets UGe 2 , UIr, URhGe, and UCoGe. Their phase diagrams under pressure are displayed in Figure A spin-triplet superconducting order parameter, with equal-spin pairing and robust against a large exchange field, has been proposed for these ferromagnetic superconductors Heavy-fermion magnets are the place of a subtle competition between magnetic interactions, either antiferromagnetic, with commensurate or incommensurate wavevectors k = 0, or ferromagnetic, with the wavevector k = 0. Figure • Figure • Figure • Figure In this compound, ferromagnetism is replaced under pressure by an antiferromagnetic phase, evidenced from NMR measurements. The ferromagnetic Curie temperature T C decreases under pressure and is replaced at p * = 1 GPa by a Néel temperature T N , which also decreases with pressure. A quantum antiferromagnetic phase transition is reached at p c = 2.8 GPa, beyond which a paramagnetic ground state is established. The competition between the AF and FM interactions in CeRuPO may be related with the observation of a CPM regime, possibly driven by antiferromagnetic correlations, in the parent paramagnetic compound CeFePO (see Section 3.1.2). The investigation of heavy-fermion ferromagnets at their doping-or pressure-induced quantum phase transition permits to show signatures of critical magnetic fluctuations. Figure • Figure • The case of a ferromagnet near a quantum antiferromagnetic phase transition is considered in Figure • NMR measurements of the relaxation rate constitute a microscopic probe to magnetic fluctuations in the limit of low energies E → 0 and averaged over the reciprocal space (see Equation 2.20 in Section 2.4.3.1). However, they do not allow determining their wavevector-dependence nor their energy spectra. Figures 5. A study of valence in the heavy-fermion paramagnet YbCu 2 Si 2 in the vicinity of its pressureinduced quantum ferromagnetic phase transition is summarized here [Fernandez-Pañella 12]. Figure The studies of valence made on a few heavy-fermion compounds confirm that heavy-fermion physics, and the related quantum magnetic phase transitions, develop in systems in which the f electrons are nearly-localized, i.e., where the valence is nearly-integer, in agreement with general considerations made in Section 2.2.3. The effects of a magnetic field applied on heavy-fermion ferromagnets are considered here. Section 5.3.1 presents the magnetic-moment reorientations observed in these systems under a magnetic field. Section 5.3.2 shows that superconductivity can be induced, or reinforced, by a magnetic field near the quantum metamagnetic transition of U-based ferromagnets. Sections 5.3.3 and 5.3.4 focus on the experimental signatures of the critical magnetic fluctuations and of possible Fermi-surface reconstructions, respectively, at these magnetic-field-induced transitions. The magnetic-moment reorientation processes occurring in heavy-fermion ferromagnets in a magnetic field are presented here. An introduction to basic effects of a magnetic field to ferromagnets is made in Section 5.3.1.1. The case of a magnetic field applied along an easy magnetic direction is considered in Section 5.3.1.2, while that of a magnetic field applied along a hard magnetic direction is considered in Section 5.3.1.2. Zero-field-cooled ferromagnets are composed of magnetic domains, in which the magnetic moments μ F M are aligned along the same direction, 'up' in some domains, 'down' in the other domains. Figure .12: Schematic behavior expected for ferromagnets in a magnetic field. (a) Lowtemperature magnetization versus magnetic field, in a magnetic field applied along easy and hard magnetic axes, (b) Magnetization versus temperature for different fields values, in a magnetic field applied along an easy magnetic axis and (c) magnetic-field-temperature phase diagram in a magnetic field applied along an easy magnetic axis. the magnetization occurs at a critical field H c . Due to the hysteresis, a remanent magnetization M r is observed in 'hard' ferromagnets once the magnetic field is reduced from H > H c down to H = 0. In most of anisotropic materials, a magnetic field applied perpendicularly to the ferromagnetic moments, i.e., H ⊥ μ F M , leads to a linear increase of the magnetization, which saturates at higher field values, generally without hysteresis. In some of them, metamagnetism can also be induced by a transverse magnetic field (see Section 5.3.1.2). Figure In a magnetic field H μ F M applied along the easy-magnetic axis of a ferromagnet, the polarization of the magnetic moments generally occurs at a small critical field μ 0 H c 1 T. These low-field effects are presented in Section 5.3.1.2.1. Close to a discontinuous critical point, where the Curie temperature suddenly collapses, wing-like phase diagrams can be observed. They are presented in Section 5.3.1.2.2. [Paulsen 12], and μ 0 H c 100 mT for CeRuPO in H a (Figure Experimental realizations of wing-like ferromagnetic phase diagrams are presented in Figure • Figure In The ferromagnet UGe 2 , of Curie temperature T C = 53 K, is considered in Figure Ferromagnets with a discontinuous quantum phase transition to a paramagnetic regime present the following properties, synthesized in the phase diagram shown in Figure • The high-field regime for H > H c is characterized by a broad temperature crossover marking the progressive onset of a polarized paramagnetic regime, similar to that observed at high fields in heavy-fermion antiferromagnets and nearly-antiferromagnets (see Sections 3.2 and 4.3). • The high-pressure regime for p > p c is delimited by a broad maximum in the magnetic susceptibility at the temperature T max χ (observed in UCoAl and UGe 2 ) and by a metamagnetic transition at the magnetic field H m . It can, thus, be identified as a correlated paramagnetic regime. Antiferromagnetic fluctuations can lead to a maximum of the magnetic susceptibility and were observed in the CPM regime of several heavy-fermion nearly- antiferromagnets (see Section 3.2). Inelastic neutron scattering experiments are needed to test if antiferromagnetic correlations may develop in the CPM regime of discontinuous quantum ferromagnets for p > p c as well. • For most of heavy-fermion nearly-antiferromagnets, the ratio R CP M = T max χ /H m is nearly constant, varying in the range [0.5-2] (see Section 3.3). A deviation from this universal behavior is observed in the heavy-fermion nearly-ferromagnets UCoAl and UGe 2 under pressure, for which H m → 0 while T max χ ∼ 25 K at the critical pressure p c . This deviation may be a consequence of the easiness to polarize a nearly-ferromagnet in a magnetic field H μ F M . In addition to paramagnet regimes with intersite magnetic fluctuations, antiferromagnetic phases can also exist near a quantum ferromagnetic phase transition. Figure In a few ferromagnets, metamagnetism can be induced in higher magnetic field H ⊥ μ F M applied along a hard magnetic axis. Figure The magnetic-field-temperature phase diagrams of the three compounds in a magnetic field H b are summarized in Figure Superconductivity induced, or reinforced, by a magnetic field at a metamagnetic transition constitutes one of the most spectacular properties of heavy-fermion compounds. It was observed in the three ferromagnetic superconductors UGe 2 , URhGe, and UCoGe, whose temperaturemagnetic-field phase diagrams are shown in Figure • In UGe 2 at a pressure p = 1.35 GPa > p x in a magnetic field applied along the easy magnetic axis a, an anomalous S-shape of μ 0 H c,2 indicates a reinforcement of superconductivity (see Figure • In URhGe at ambient pressure in a magnetic field applied along the hard magnetic axis b, the low-field superconducting phase disappears at μ 0 H c,2 = 2 T, and a high-field superconducting phase is induced in the vicinity of μ 0 H m = 12 T [Lévy 05, Aoki 19a] (see Figures 5.23(a-middle panel,b)). The maximum superconducting temperature of the high-field phase is twice higher than that of the zero-field superconducting phase. The metamagnetic transition field H m = H c and the Curie temperature T C both delimitate the ferromagnetic phase (see also Figure • In UCoGe at ambient pressure and in a magnetic field applied along the hard magnetic axis b, an anomalous S-shape of H c,2 indicates that superconductivity is reinforced around μ 0 H 15 T [Aoki 09a, Aoki 19a] (see Figures 5.23(a-right panel,c)). A fall of T C was reported from electrical resistivity versus temperature data, corresponding to a critical field μ 0 H c 15 T coinciding with the field-reinforced superconductivity domain. However, no signature of metamagnetism was observed from field-dependent magnetization and electrical-resistivity measurements in this field range The relationship between field-induced superconductivity and metamagnetism can be characterized by tuning the metamagnetic properties. Figures 5.24(a-c) summarize a set of experiments performed on URhGe, where pressure, uniaxial pressure, and a tilt of the magnetic field direction were adjusted. For comparison, Figure • Figure • Figure • Figure High values of the superconducting critical fields are observed in U-based ferromagnetic superconductors, in particular for magnetic-field directions leading to a reinforcement or a reentrance of superconductivity. They are often considered as an indication for a spin-triplet mechanism of superconductivity, where no Pauli high-field limitation is expected Signatures of critical magnetic fluctuations induced at a metamagnetic transition, in a magnetic field applied along the easy-magnetic axis of nearly-ferromagnets (see Section 5.3.3.1) or along a hard magnetic axis of ferromagnets (see Section 5.3.3.2), are presented here. In the case of field-induced superconductivity, these critical magnetic fluctuations are suspected to drive an unconventional mechanism of superconductivity. Figure On one hand, from a NMR study of spin-spin relaxation rate 1/T 2 of URh 0.9 Co 0.1 Ge, magnetic fluctuations parallel to the hard magnetic axis b were emphasized at the metamagnetic transition While the Fermi surface of heavy-fermion antiferromagnets and nearly-antiferromagnets was investigated intensively (see Sections 3.2.3, 4.2.3, and 4.3.2.3), the Fermi surfaces of a few heavy-fermion ferromagnets were studied. Figure Magnetism and 'hidden-order' in URu 2 Si 2 The paramagnet URu 2 Si 2 occupies a special place in the family of heavy-fermion compounds. The nature of the 'hidden-order' (HO) phase developing in this material at temperatures below T 0 = 17.5 K constitutes a more than thirty-years-old unsolved mystery. Efforts were devoted to elucidate the order parameter of this phase, but none was successful to determine it unambiguously so far. Theories proposed to describe the HO within different approaches: localized, itinerant, or dual (localized/itinerant) 5f -electrons, multipolar order, nematicity, spin liquid, 'hastatic' order, etc. [Fujimoto 11, Haule 10, Ikeda 12, Thomas 13, URu 2 Si 2 becomes superconducting below the temperature T sc = 1.5 K, and rich magnetic properties can be revealed by tuning the system under pressure, chemical doping, and magnetic field. In this Chapter, the magnetic properties of URu 2 Si 2 and their relations with the hiddenorder phase are presented. The basic electronic properties of URu 2 Si 2 are introduced in Section 6.1. Its quantum magnetic phase transitions induced under pressure or by chemical doping are presented in Section 6.2, and its high-magnetic-field properties are presented in Section 6.3. Complementary information about the hidden-order quest in URu 2 Si 2 can be found in the reviews We review here the properties of URu 2 Si 2 at ambient pressure. The signatures in bulk properties of the correlated paramagnetic regime, the hidden-order phase, and superconductivity, which are successively stabilized when the temperature is decreased, are presented in Section 6.1.1. The evolution of the magnetic-fluctuations spectra is considered in Section 6.1.2, and the Fermi-surface properties are presented in Section 6.1.3. Finally, focus is made on the superconducting phase stabilized in URu 2 Si 2 at low temperature in Section 6.1.4. The transition at the temperature T 0 = 17.5 K to the hidden-order phase in URu 2 Si 2 is associated with strong physical responses in various thermodynamic quantities. Figure Figure • Magnetic susceptibility χ versus temperature curves measured in magnetic fields H a, c are shown in Figures 6.2 measured with I a is twice larger than ρ zz measured with I c. A broad electronic contribution leads to a maximum in ρ xx at T max ρ 75 K and to a plateau in ρ zz in the temperature range 80-300 K. When the temperature is decreased, a step-like increase of the electrical resistivity, followed by a decrease at lower temperatures, is observed for the two current-directions at the transition temperature T 0 to the hidden-order phase. Zeroresistivity indicates the onset of superconductivity at temperatures below T sc = 1.5 K. • Figure Beyond these reports of 'standard' thermodynamic and electrical-transport measurements, magnetic-torque measurements A peculiarity of URu 2 Si 2 is the presence of dispersive gapped excitations spectra in its hidden-order phase. Figure The transition at T 0 is associated with strong modifications in the magnetic fluctuations spectra. Figures 6.4 and 6.5 show that the magnetic fluctuations at the wavevectors k 1 and k 0 , respectively, are sharp and gapped in the hidden-order phase. • Figures 6.4 inelastic lineshape to the spectra • Figure Intersite magnetic fluctuations with wavevector k 1 develop at temperatures higher than T 0 . In the hidden-order phase, they become sharply-gapped but their integrated intensity remains almost unaffected. On the contrary, intersite magnetic fluctuations with wavevector k 0 are almost absent at high temperatures, they develop at temperatures near T 0 and their intensity, probed by χ 0 (= χ (k 0 ), also noted = χ(Q 0 , E = 0) in Figure Alternatively to inelastic neutron scattering, nuclear magnetic resonance allows studying microscopically the magnetic excitations. Figures 6.6(a-b) show the temperature-dependence of the NMR relaxation rate 1/T 1 of URu 2 Si 2 and of its non-5f -electron reference ThRu 2 Si 2 in magnetic fields H c and H ⊥ c [Emi 15, The Fermi surface of URu 2 Si 2 in its zero-or low-field ground-state has been investigated by a large set of experiments, from • From a H 2 'orbital' variation of the low-temperature electrical resistivity in a magnetic field μ 0 H c up to 10 T (see Figure • Figure The negative sign of S indicates that it is controlled by conduction electrons. A step-like decrease of S is observed at T 0 and its comparison with heat-capacity data was understood as a signature of a lower electron density, and of an increased entropy per conduction electron, in the hidden-order phase URu 2 Si 2 is currently considered as a realization of d-wave superconductivity. Figure The application of pressure leads to the destabilization of the hidden-order phase and to the appearance of an antiferromagnetic phase in URu 2 Si 2 . The magnetic-field-temperature phase diagram of URu 2 Si 2 , constructed from electrical resistivity data from • The doping-temperature phase diagram of Fe-doped URu 2-x Fe x Si 2 alloys, presented in Figure • Figure • The phase diagram of Re-doped URu 2-x Re x Si 2 alloys, shown in Figure The possibility to tune the paramagnet URu 2 Si 2 towards antiferromagnetic and ferromagnetic phases indicates that, as well as many heavy-fermion compounds (see Figure • Figure • Figure • Figure In Section 6.1.3, the Fermi surface of URu 2 Si 2 was shown to be modified at onset of the hidden-order phase at the temperature T 0 = 17.5 K. Figure The application of a magnetic field along the easy magnetic axis c of URu 2 Si 2 permits to reveal rich electronic properties: the destabilization of the hidden-order phase, the appearance of a spin-density wave, a cascade of Fermi-surface reconstructions, etc. A review of these high-fields effects is given here. Section 6.3.1 presents bulk properties and the electronic phase diagram of URu 2 Si 2 in a magnetic field H c. Field-induced spin-density-wave long-range order and modifications of the magnetic fluctuations are presented in Section 6.3.2. Field-induced cascades of Fermi-surface reconstructions are considered in Section 6.3.3. Finally, the properties of URu 2 Si 2 in three-dimensional i) magnetic-field-pressure-temperature and ii) magneticfield-chemical-doping-temperature phase diagrams are presented in Sections 6.3.4 and 6.3.5, respectively. The first observation, by magnetization and electrical-resistivity measurements, of fieldinduced phase transitions in URu 2 Si 2 under a magnetic field H c [deBoer 86, de Visser 87b] has been followed by a plethora of experiments using a wide spectrum of techniques. In this Section, a selection of experiments describing the magnetic-field-temperature phase diagram of the system are presented. Figure • SDW phase. At low-temperature, first-order transitions are observed at μ 0 H 1 = 35 K, μ 0 H 2 = 37.5 T for increasing field and 36.3 T for decreasing field, and μ 0 H 3 = 39 T, leading to step-like anomalies in M (Figure • HO phase. At low-temperature, the hidden-order phase is destabilized at a magnetic field μ 0 H 0 34.5 K μ 0 H 1 , which can be defined at a sharp maximum in ∂ρ/∂H (Figure • CPM regime. Figure x,x adds to the purely electronic term ρ e-e x,x , Figure x,x (T, 0T) =ρ x,x (T, 0T)-ρ x,x (T, 50T) and compares it with the low-field magnetic susceptibility χ (from [Sugiyama 90]) x,x and χ indicates that the high-temperature maxima in ρ and χ are driven by the onset of the CPM regime. The boundaries T max χ and H m of the CPM regime follow the universal law R CP M = T max χ /μ 0 H m 1 K/T observed for most of heavy-fermion paramagnets (see Figure • PPM regime: For H > H 3 , the low-temperature magnetization nearly saturates to a value M > 1.5 μ B /U indicating the stabilization of a polarized paramagnetic regime (Figure Signatures in other bulk quantities of the phase transitions induced in URu 2 Si 2 by a magnetic field H c are presented in Figure The magnetic-field-temperature phase diagram of URu 2 Si 2 in H c is presented in Figure Figure The microscopic nature of the SDW phase induced by a magnetic field H c in URu 2 Si 2 was revealed by neutron diffraction As in other heavy-fermion systems, a microscopic understanding of the mechanisms driving to magnetic exchange, which result in magnetic fluctuations or order with particular wavevectors, is lacking for URu 2 Si 2 . Fermi-surface-driven changes of RKKY magnetic-exchange interactions J ex (k) may lead to the appearance of long-range magnetic order, either antiferromagnetism with wavevector k 0 or spin-density wave with wavevector k 1 , under pressure and magnetic field, respectively. Within this picture, pressure-enhanced exchange J ex (k 0 ) would result in antiferromagnetic order with wavevector k 0 , while magnetic-field-enhanced exchange J ex (k 1 ) would lead to a spin-density wave with wavevector k 1 . Understanding how these exchange parameters and the related magnetic excitations evolve under pressure and magnetic field could constitute a decisive step in the description of the electronic properties, including the HO phase, of URu 2 Si 2 . A cascade of Fermi-surface reconstructions is induced in URu 2 Si 2 by a magnetic field H c. Figure • Frequencies of 2000 T and 3000 T are extracted in the SDW phase, for H 1 < H < H 2 and H 2 < H < H 3 , respectively • A large spectrum of frequencies, varying from 500 to 3500 T, is observed in the PPM regime The modifications of the Fermi surface of URu 2 Si 2 in a magnetic field H c support that conduction electrons contribute to the magnetic properties and play a role in the hidden-order phase. The Fermi-surface reconstructions inside the HO phase are related with a reduction of the carrier mobility and are a precursor of the field-destabilization of the HO. SdH frequencies tend to increase with increasing magnetic fields, which leads to the formation of larger Fermisurfaces. From the observation of smaller effective masses and larger Fermi velocities in the PPM regime than in the HO phase, Harrison et al proposed that the 5f electron become localized in the PPM regime We have seen in Sections 6.2 and 6.3 that pressure and a magnetic field H c both lead to the destabilization of the hidden-order phase in URu 2 Si 2 . However, they induce different magnetic phenomena. The application of pressure leads to an increase of T max χ , indicative of the stabilization of the CPM regime, to the stabilization of an antiferromagnetic phase with wavevector k 0 = (0, 0, 1), but to no noticeable change of the Fermi surface. On the contrary, the application of a magnetic field H c leads to a decrease of T max χ , indicating the destabilization of the CPM regime, to the stabilization of a SDW phase corresponding to magnetic order with k 1 = (0.6, 0, 0) in a narrow field window, to a high-field polarized regime, and to a succession of Fermi-surface reconstructions. By presenting the effects of their combined application, this Section clarifies the respective roles of pressure and magnetic field on URu 2 Si 2 . An investigation by Aoki et al by thermal expansion and neutron scattering of URu 2 Si 2 under pressure combined with magnetic fields μ 0 H c up to 15 T is summarized in Figure • SDW phase. This low-temperature phase, observed between μ 0 H 1 = 35 T and μ 0 H 3 = 39 T at ambient pressure, moves towards higher fields and progressively shrinks under pressure • HO phase. This phase is observed at zero field for p < p c = 0.5 GPa and for H > H c , where H c is the AF boundary, under pressures p c < p < p * * = 3.25 GPa. At low temperature and ambient pressure, its upper critical field μ 0 H 0 = 34.5 T delimits the onset of the SDW phase and can be defined as a sharp maximum in ∂ρ/∂H • AF phase. This phase is observed at zero field for p > p c = 0.5 GPa. Its upperfield boundary H c at the onset of field-reentrant HO was observed under pressures up to 2 GPa by thermal expansion [Aoki 09b], but could not be observed by electrical resistivity, where it was presumably masked by the large orbital signal • CPM regime. It is observed at temperatures T 0,N < T < T max χ and under magnetic fields H 0,c < H < H m . For p > p * * , the CPM regime can be identified at low temperature in a narrow field window H c < H < H m . • PPM regime. It is ultimately established in high fields and corresponds to a weaklycorrelated regime. • SC phase. It is restricted to the low pressures p < p c and low fields μ 0 H < 3 T. Beyond this apparent complexity, simple general trends are observed: the fall of the main energy scales under magnetic field and their increase under pressure In Section 6.2.1, chemical doping was presented as an alternative to pressure for driving URu 2 Si 2 to a quantum antiferromagnetic phase transition. We consider here high-magneticfield investigations performed on two families of doped URu 2 Si 2 alloys: • URu 2-x Fe x Si 2 alloys. The doping-temperature phase diagram has striking similarities with the pressure-temperature phase diagram of URu 2 Si 2 (see Figure • U(Ru 1-x Rh x ) 2 Si 2 alloys. The doping-temperature phase diagram also shows an antiferromagnetic phase with long-range ordering with wavevector k 0 , induced for doping x > x c 0.015. However, T 0 and T N both decrease with doping, ending in a paramagnetic ground-state for x > x c,2 0.04. The effects of a magnetic field H c applied on two Rh-doped alloys, of contents x = 0.04 and 0.08, are considered in Figure Since it leads to almost-equivalent effects than pressure, Fe-doping constitutes a precious alternative to pressure for the study of the electronic properties of URu 2 Si 2 . Fe-doped alloys may be considered for experiments using techniques which are not available, or difficult, under pressure (neutron diffraction in pulsed magnetic fields, inelastic neutron scattering, ARPES experiments, etc.). On the contrary, Rh-doping leads to different effects than pressure. However, the similarity between the magnetic wavevector k 2 = (2/3, 0, 0) of the AF phase stabilized by a magnetic field in the Rh-doped compounds, and the magnetic wavevector k 1 = (0.6, 0, 0) of the SDW phase stabilized by a magnetic field in pure URu 2 Si 2 , suggests a possible common origin. To reveal it, series of new experiments may be needed: i) high-field diffraction experiments in compounds with lower Rh-content, for which the ground-state is either the HO or the AF phase, ii) inelastic neutron scattering to determine the dispersive features in the magnetic excitation of these Rh-doped compounds, and their possible relationship with the field-induced magnetic phase. Indeed, the wavevector k 1 = (0.6, 0, 0) of the SDW phase induced by a magnetic field in URu 2 Si 2 Magnetism and superconductivity in UTe 2 Superconductivity was discovered in 2019 in the paramagnet UTe 2 An introduction to the anisotropic magnetic properties of UTe 2 , probed by bulk measurements, is made in Section 7.1.1. Magnetic-fluctuations studies are presented in Section 7.1.2. ARPES measurements of the Fermi surface are presented in Section 7.1.3. Finally, the properties of the low-field and ambient-pressure superconducting phase of UTe 2 are detailed in Section 7.1.4. UTe 2 is a paramagnet characterized by a strong Ising uniaxial magnetic anisotropy. Its magnetic susceptibility χ, presented in Figure Complementarily to neutron and muon experiments, signatures of magnetic fluctuations were observed by NMR The electronic structure and the Fermi surface of UTe 2 have been investigated by angleresolved-photoemission spectroscopy Superconductivity was observed in UTe 2 at temperatures below a critical temperature T sc varying from 1.5 to 1.8 K, depending on the sample quality Pressure permits to tune the electronic properties of UTe 2 : it enhances the temperature at the onset of superconductivity, which reaches a maximum at a critical pressure p c 1.75 GPa. p c corresponds to a quantum magnetic phase transition, beyond which magnetic order is established and superconductivity disappears. The properties of UTe 2 under pressure are summarized in Figure • The combination of heat-capacity (Figure Multiple phenomena, from first-order metamagnetism to superconductivity, are induced in UTe 2 under a magnetic field. A review of these phenomena is given here. Section 7.3.1 presents bulk signatures of field-induced moment polarization processes. Section 7.3.2 focuses on the superconducting phases induced by a magnetic field in the vicinity of a metamagnetic transition. Section 7.3.3 presents the first experimental evidences for field-induced quantum critical magnetic fluctuations. Section 7.3.2 presents indications for Fermi-surface reconstructions induced in high magnetic fields. Finally, combined effects of magnetic fields and pressures are considered in Section 7.3.5. • For H applied along the easy magnetic axis a, M (H) increases with a large slope, which is progressively reduced for μ 0 H > 20 T where the saturation at a value M 1.1 μ B /U is approached. A small variation of ρ is reported in fields up to 70 T. A kink in ρ at μ 0 H * 10 T indicates a possible phase transition or crossover • No transition nor crossover are observed in a magnetic field H c. The electrical resistivity, measured with a current I ⊥ H, follows a H 2 increase characteristic of an orbital contribution, which is driven by the field-induced cyclotron motion of the conduction electrons Figure The low-field superconducting phase of UTe 2 is labeled SC1. Its critical temperature T sc decreases with increasing field, and it extrapolates to a critical field μ 0 H c,2 15 T, masked by the appearance of the field-induced superconducting phase, labeled SC2. Electrical-resistivity measurements, as those presented here, cannot probe a transition between two superconducting phases and the presence of a phase transition between SC1 and SC2 at ambient pressure has not been experimentally directly proved so far. However, by continuity, the phase boundaries determined by heat-capacity under pressure combined with magnetic field (see Figure As well as its magnetic properties (see Sections 7.1.1 and 7.3.1), the superconducting properties of UTe 2 are anisotropic. Figure A Fermi-liquid description of UTe 2 permits to characterize its effective mass and, thus, the strength of its low-temperature magnetic fluctuations. The evolution of its Fermi-liquid properties in a magnetic field and their relation with field-induced superconductivity are considered here. • • Figure These measurements are not definitive proofs and permit only to suspect the presence of Fermisurface reconstructions in UTe 2 under magnetic fields. Direct measurements, by dHvA or SdH techniques, of the Fermi-surface are needed to confirm that the anomalies observed in electricaland thermal-transport properties are induced by Fermi-surface reconstructions. Combined pressure and magnetic field applied on UTe 2 permit accessing a rich electronic phase diagram composed of multiple superconducting and magnetic phases. In this Section, we review series of experiments performed under magnetic fields applied either along the easy magnetic axis a, or along the hard magnetic axis b. field-induced superconducting phase SC2 down to lower magnetic fields under pressure, ending in the loss of the S shape of the critical field [ In parallel to the works summarized above, field-induced superconductivity was also observed beyond the magnetically-ordered phase in a study where the direction of magnetic field was not precisely identified (direction tilted by 30 • from a towards the (b, c) plane) [ Pressure-induced modifications of the magnetic-fluctuations spectra may be related with the enhancement of T sc observed for the phase SC2 near the critical pressure p c . Further investigations, by direct and indirect manners, of the magnetic fluctuations are needed to understand the nature of the superconducting phases induced in UTe 2 . An experimental challenge will be to map out completely the electronic properties of UTe 2 for different directions of the magnetic field (up to more than 60 T) combined with pressure (up to at least 3 GPa), and by different sets of complementarily techniques (electrical resistivity, heat-capacity, magnetization, NMR etc.). Figure 2.19(b) shows the heat capacity versus temperature of the paramagnet CeRu 2 CF 20 meV [Besnus 85]. Figures 2.19 a [Knafo 09b], b [Tateiwa 14a], c [Tateiwa 18], d [