Chitosan effectively adsorbed Ni from a real Ni/Ca/SO4 2-bearing leachate • Sulfate had a positive effect on Ni adsorption while Ca did not have any effect • Formation of NiSO4 0 species contributed to the enhanced Ni adsorption onto chitosan • Chitosan has a Ni qmax of 1.49 mmol/g even with 500 mM SO4 2-and 10 mM Ca present • Chitosan was selective for Ni over Ca as validated in a column setup ABSTRACT Nickel (Ni) is an economically important metal characterized by its mechanical strength and anticorrosion properties. With the increasing industrial demand for Ni and the depleting accessible Ni primary ores, sustainable technologies are required for the recovery of this metal from alternative resources. In this study, adsorption using chitosan was investigated as a sustainable technique to recover Ni from sulfate (SO4 2-) and calcium (Ca) rich secondary resources. The effects of pH, contact time, and the presence of SO4 2-and Ca on Ni adsorption were investigated in batch experiments. Chemical speciation modeling was performed to analyze how the predominant Ni species present under different conditions may affect the efficiency of the adsorption process. The comparison of chitosan's maximum Ni adsorption capacities in the absence (1.00 mmol/g) and presence (1.49 mmol/g) of 500 mM SO4 2-and 10 mM Ca indicated the positive effect of these ions on Ni adsorption. The predominance of the neutrally charged NiSO4 0 species in Ni/SO4 2-system has contributed to the enhanced Ni adsorption on chitosan as verified by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) analysis. However, kinetic studies confirmed that the Ni adsorption rate decreased by 4.5 times when SO4 2-was present. The subsequent continuous Ni adsorption from a real SO4 2--rich leachate in a column setup revealed that chitosan is selective for Ni over Ca and Cr with selectivity quotients of 9.6 (KNi/Ca) and 3.0 (KNi/Cr). Overall, this study indicated that Ni complexation with SO4 2-enhances the Ni adsorption capacity of chitosan, but slows down the adsorption process. Nickel (Ni) is one of the most versatile metals characterized by its workability and mechanical strength at high temperatures and in corrosive environments Considering that primary Ni resources continue to deplete and that new mining operations take at least a decade to plan and build, there is a need to recycle Ni from secondary resources, such as mine tailings and Ni-rich waste streams. Ni recycling does not only reduce the energy requirements and CO2 emissions associated with primary Ni production, but also reduces the exposure to the unstable primary Ni market Ni is present in many industrial effluents, including those of silver refineries, electroplating, zinc base casting, and storage battery industries For instance, the majority of Ni plating industries utilizes sulfuric acid solutions to perform acid pickling for surface activation Liquid streams associated with both Ni plating and industrial sludge leaching typically contain high amounts of SO4 2-and Ca that can reach up to 560 mM and 11 mM, respectively Among the available technologies for Ni removal from wastewater, adsorption has shown great potential because of the following reasons: (1) easy handling, (2) cost efficiency due to possible adsorbent regeneration, (3) sustainability especially if the adsorbents used are abundant and low-cost by-products of other processes, and (4) potential selectivity for the target metal The ability of chitosan to bind metal ions is mainly due to its keto and both primary and secondary amine groups, which can serve as coordination sites for many metal ions Furthermore, the extent of metal adsorption depends on the source of chitosan, the degree of deacetylation, the nature of the metal ion, and the solution conditions such as pH The main goal of this study was to test the hypothesis that the adsorption capacity of chitosan for Ni is largely affected by the presence of SO4 , and Ca. The effects of these ions on the Ni adsorption kinetics and maximum adsorption capacities of chitosan were studied in detail. Furthermore, the feasibility of using chitosan for selective Ni removal from a real leachate was assessed in a continuous flow system. Chitosan with medium molecular weight and 75-85% degree of deacetylation was purchased from Merck, Darmstadt, Germany. Ni(II), Ca(II), SO4 2-, and NO3 -stock solutions were prepared from Ni(NO3)2•6H2O (UCB, Brussels, Belgium), Ca(NO3)2•4H2O (Chem-Lab, Zedelgem, Belgium), Na2SO4 (Merck., Darmstadt, Germany), and NaNO3 (Sigma-Aldrich, Missouri, USA) respectively. The working solutions used in the adsorption experiments were obtained by diluting the respective stock solutions. Deionized water (resistivity > 18.2 MΩ•cm) was used to prepare all aqueous solutions. If needed, the solution pH was adjusted using HNO3. The particle size distribution of chitosan was determined by laser light scattering using a Malvern Mastersizer 2000 capable of measuring particle sizes ranging from 20 nm up to 2 mm. Chitosan was placed into the liquid dispersion unit until the signal was within the acceptable range of 15-25%. The test was run thrice and the average volume frequency (%) was plotted versus the particle size. The Brunauer-Emmett-Teller (BET) specific surface area (SSA) and the total pore volume (PV) of chitosan were determined through nitrogen adsorption-desorption measurements carried out at 77 K using a Micromeritics TriStar II 3020. The sample was degassed at 60°C under vacuum for 48 h prior to measurement. The IEP of chitosan was determined using SurPASS 3 electrokinetic analyzer equipped with a titration unit for automatic determination of the zeta potential as a function of pH. Approximately 50 mg of chitosan was placed in the powder cell of the equipment. The background electrolyte solution used was 0.01 M KCl, while 0.05 M HCl and 0.05 M KOH were used to adjust its pH. The surface functional groups of chitosan before and after Ni(II) adsorption were examined using Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR; Thermo Scientific Nicolet 6700 FT-IR Spectrometer). About 15 mg of chitosan was placed on top of potassium bromide (KBr) powder pressed in a micro-cup. The FTIR spectrum was collected within the wavenumber range of 700 background measurements, which were automatically subtracted from the sample spectrum. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) analyses of raw and Ni-adsorbed chitosan in the absence and presence of SO4 2-were performed on a Kratos AXIS Supra X-ray photoelectron spectrometer using a monochromatic Al K(alpha) source (15mA, 15kV). The instrument work function was calibrated to give a binding energy (BE) of 83.96 eV for the Au 4f7/2 line for metallic gold and the spectrometer dispersion was adjusted to give a BE of 932.62 eV for the Cu 2p3/2 line of metallic copper. The Kratos charge neutralizer system was used on all samples. Survey scan analyses were carried out with an analysis area of 300 × 700 micrometers and a pass energy of 160 eV. High resolution analyses were carried out with an analysis area of 300 × 700 micrometers and a pass energy of 20 eV. Spectra have been charge corrected to the main line of the carbon 1s spectrum (C-C, C-H) set to 284.8 eV. Spectra were analyzed using CasaXPS software (version 2.3.14). Ni(II) speciation in aqueous systems with and without SO4 2-was modeled using Visual MINTEQ 3.0 Batch experiments were used to investigate Ni(II) adsorption on chitosan under varying conditions. For the pH effect, 10 mM Ni(II) solutions with initial pH ranging from 4 to 8 were prepared. To achieve a liquid-to-solid (L/S) ratio of 100 mL/g, 10 mL of each solution was added to 100 mg of chitosan weighed in a polypropylene centrifuge tube. The initial pH of the suspensions was measured using a Thermo Scientific Orion Star A211 pH meter. Samples were transferred to an orbital shaker set at 115 rpm for 24 hours. Afterwards, the final pH of each sample was measured, followed by solid-liquid separation through filtration using membrane filters (0.45 μm pore size). The Ni(II) concentration in the filtrates was determined using inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectroscopy (Varian Vista-MPX CCD Simultaneous ICP-OES). All samples were prepared in quadruplicates and the data presented are mean values with standard deviation. Control samples without chitosan were also prepared and analyzed for Ni(II) concentration to monitor Ni(II) precipitation at different pH values. Additionally, two sets of solutions containing-(1) 10 mM Ni(II) and 500 mM SO4 2-, and (2) 10 mM Ni(II), 500 mM SO4 2-, and 10 mM Ca(II)-were prepared to investigate the effects of SO4 2-and Ca(II) on Ni(II) adsorption at pH 7-8. All solutions also contained NO3 -and Na since Ni(II) and Ca(II) were added as nitrate salts, while SO4 2-was added as Na2SO4. The results of this experiment served as the basis of the following investigation examining the effect of increasing SO4 2-concentration on Ni(II) adsorption onto chitosan. For this adsorption experiment, five solutions containing 10 mM Ni(II) and varying SO4 2-concentrations (0.05 to 500 mM) were prepared at pH 7. The samples were prepared as previously described. The removal efficiency and adsorption capacity of chitosan for Ni(II) were calculated using Eq.1 and 2, respectively. Where R is the Ni(II) removal efficiency (%), q is the amount of Ni(II) adsorbed per unit mass of chitosan (mmol/g), C0 and Ce are the initial and equilibrium Ni(II) concentrations (mM), respectively, V is the volume of the Ni(II) solution (L), and m is the mass of chitosan (g). Two batches of Ni(II) adsorption kinetic studies-with and without 500 mM SO4 2--were performed at pH 7 with an initial Ni(II) concentration of 10 mM. The samples were shaken for different time intervals ranging from 15 minutes to 24 hours. The pseudo-second order Where qe and qt (mmol/g) are the Ni(II) adsorption capacities at equilibrium and time t, respectively, and k2 (g/mmol•min) is the pseudo-second order rate constant of adsorption. Ni(II) adsorption on chitosan was also assessed at different initial Ni(II) concentrations in systems with and without 500 mM SO4 2-and 10 mM Ca(II). The adsorption data were used to determine the maximum adsorption capacities (qmax) of chitosan for Ni(II) in both systems. The initial pH used was ca. 7.5, while the initial Ni(II) concentration was varied from 1 to 100 mM. The Langmuir adsorption isotherm model (Eq. 4) was fitted to the obtained experimental data. Where qe is the Ni(II) adsorption capacity at equilibrium (mmol/g), qmax is the maximum adsorption capacity (mmol/g), b is the Langmuir adsorption equilibrium constant (L/mmol), and Ce is the equilibrium Ni(II) concentration (mM). The adsorption isotherms and the corresponding parameters were determined using SigmaPlot version 13.0. The fixed bed adsorption experiment was carried out in a glass column with an inner diameter of 1 cm. The column was packed with 8.1 g chitosan of 10 cm bed height, and then fixed with glass beads on top. Prior to passing the test solution, the column was conditioned with deionized water for 30 minutes. The test solution was a real leachate Table The selectivity quotients (KNi/(Ca or Cr)), given by Eq. 5 Where Kd Ni and Kd Ca or Cr are the distribution coefficients for Ni and Ca or Cr calculated using Eq. 6. Where X is the concentration of Ni, Ca, or Cr in the treated leachate expressed as a percentage of the initial concentration, V is the volume of the sampled leachate (mL), and m is the mass of chitosan (g). The physical and electrochemical characteristics of chitosan are summarized in Table The volume median diameter d50 of the chitosan used in this study is 0.54 mm, while 10% and 90% of the volume distribution (d10 and d90) have particle size diameters less than 0.17 and 1.15 mm, respectively. N2 adsorption-desorption measurements confirmed the previous reports in the literature The band at around 1013 cm -1 could be assigned to the vibrational stretching of the C-O bonds of carboxylic acid groups These results imply the involvement of amide, alcohol, ether, and alkane functional groups of chitosan in the adsorption of Ni(II). The solution pH is a key parameter in metal adsorption processes as it affects both metal speciation and the adsorbent's surface characteristics Further addition of 10 mM Ca(II) to the system with 500 mM SO4 2-and 10 mM Ni(II) did not present an apparent effect on Ni(II) removal, although it is possible that there was Ni(OH)2 precipitation at around pH 8. As it was evident that SO4 2-increases Ni(II) adsorption onto chitosan, the extent of this enhancement was further investigated. Figure solution pH increased with increasing SO4 2-concentration (Figure XPS analysis of chitosan tried to reveal the differences in the chemical states of elements In addition to C, O, and N, Ni was also observed in the XPS spectra of chitosan after Ni(II) adsorption (Figure The effect of SO4 2-on the Ni(II) adsorption rate of chitosan was investigated at different time intervals. Figure Equilibrium was reached after 4 and 16 h in the absence and presence of 500 mM SO4 2-, respectively. The rapid Ni(II) removal during the first hour of adsorption (Figure The Langmuir isotherm model was fitted to the equilibrium data of Ni(II) adsorption onto chitosan in the absence and presence of both SO4 2-and Ca(II) (Figure to the other adsorbents used in Ni(II) adsorption without SO4 2-in the system, such as Saccharomyces cerevisiae and chitosan(chitin)/cellulose composites, which both achieved a qmax of 0.2 mmol/g Since chitosan has shown better Ni(II) adsorption in the presence of SO4 2-and Ca(II), a column test was carried out to verify its performance in a semi-continuous system (Figure Chitosan was also found to be selective for Ni(II) over Ca(II) and Cr(III). This selective Ni(II) adsorption was also reflected by the calculated selectivity quotients KNi/Ca (9.6) and KNi/Cr (3.0) for the last time point, which were even higher in the initial phase of the column experiment. However, due to much higher Ca(II) concentration in the influent compared to Ni(II) concentration, Ca(II) was still adsorbed by the chitosan in the column. This needs further investigation if the goal is to obtain pure Ni(II) after the adsorption process. however, this needs to be carefully performed because of the limiting low pH conditions that can be used to avoid solubility of chitosan This study has investigated the potential of chitosan in removing Ni(II) from SO4 (A) (B) † 