A contribution to Frank Wilczek's 70th birthday's festschrift, this brief note considers how much power can be extracted from dark matter. Frank Wilczek achieved great things as a theoretical physicist: asymptotic freedom of quantum chromodynamics, the axion as a consequence of the Peccei-Quinn solution to the Strong CP Problem, the proposal that the axion is the constituent particle of dark matter, anyonic quasi-particles in 2-dimensional condensed matter systems, and more yet. Underlying these successes, I believe, is a view of physics as one large topic without the common place, but largely artificial, divisions into particle physics, cosmology and astrophysics, condensed matter physics, theory and experiment. This view encourages one to explore outside one's own box. Frank emboldened us when he said: "If you are not making mistakes, you are working on things that are too easy." So, his 70th birthday festschrift may be a good place to consider whether a significant amount of power can be extracted from dark matter. To start off on a hopeful note, consider that the amount of energy stored in dark matter is truly enormous. Our cosmic neighborhood, defined as a (kpc) 3 volume surrounding the Sun, contains on the order of 10 35 TeraWatt•year in rest mass energy. Whether it can be tapped as an energy source on Earth may be a laudable question. It is certainly quixotic for two unrelated reasons: • The density of dark matter on Earth is very small • The dark matter is very weakly coupled to ordinary matter. I'll argue below that if the dark matter is axions, or axion-like particles, the first difficulty largely disappears. Unfortunately, the second difficulty remains for the time being. The density of dark matter on Earth is commonly stated to be 0.5 × 10 -24 gr/cc. It should be kept in mind however that this number, derived from observation, signifies the average dark matter density on a length scale of order kpc (≃ 3×10 21 cm). Any dark matter detector on Earth is much smaller than that, by approximately 19 orders of magnitude. The dark matter density on Earth may be very different from its kpc scale average, for example if the dark matter is clumpy. In fact there is a straightforward reason why the dark matter density on Earth may be much larger than the above average value: dark matter particles form sharp caustics because they are collisionless and have very small primordial velocity dispersion. At the caustics the dark matter density is much larger than average. For the purpose of making estimates below, we will assume 1) that dark matter has been detected on Earth and 2) that its density has been found to be the standard average value. Let us keep in mind however that the density could be much larger. The dark matter particles move with speeds of order 300 km/s since they form an extended halo around the Milky Way. The rest mass energy flux density implied by the average density and typical velocity is 13 W/m 2 . For comparison the solar energy flux density averaged over the sunlit half of the Earth is 680 W/m 2 . The most popular candidate for dark matter has been the WIMP, an acronym for Weakly Interacting Massive Particle. WIMP detectors on Earth are instrumented to detect collisions of WIMPs with nuclei in the bulk of the detector. In each collision, the amount of energy deposited is at most of order the kinetic energy of the WIMP, which is 10 -6 times its rest mass energy. The largest average amount of kinetic energy is obtained when the nuclear target mass is of order the WIMP mass. If all WIMPs going through a detector were to collide with nuclei in it, the amount of energy obtained would be of order 1.3 × 10 -5 W/m 2 times the surface area of the detector. But of course only a tiny fraction of WIMPs collide with nuclei. Present upper limits on their scattering cross-section, of order 10 -45 cm 2 , imply that the scattering length of WIMPs through material bodies is of order kpc. The notion of extracting significant power from WIMPs after they have been discovered to be the dark matter is truly a non-starter. The situation is different and more tantalizing with the axion, the other leading dark matter candidate, whose popularity has been rising lately . The axion fluid surrounding us is therefore, in first approximation, a classical field oscillating at the frequency with frequency dispersion δν a ∼ 10 -6 ν a due to the spread in kinetic energy. The axion field has a coherence time of order The coherence time of individual caustic forming cold flows is much longer. Once axion dark matter has been detected, the frequency of the axion field oscillations is known. We also know the phase of the axion field at all times provided we keep measuring it on time scales short compared to t coh . This should be achievable since the existing ADMX detector When tuned to the axion mass, the cavity detector of dark matter axions behaves as a driven harmonic oscillator: The quality factor of the oscillator is Q = ω γ . The steady state solution in case the cavity is driven only by the axion field is X(t) = f γω sin(ωt). The power deposited into the cavity is then where g is the coupling of the axion to two photons, ρ a is the axion dark matter density at the detector, V is the volume of the cavity, B the strength of the magnetic field permeating the cavity, and C a number of order one describing how strongly the relevant cavity mode couples to the axion field. The power is of order 10 -22 Watt for the ADMX cavity detector which has a volume of order 125 liters, a magnetic field of order 7.5 Tesla, and a quality factor of order 10 5 . Higher quality factors, of order 10 10 , have been achieved with superconducting cavities. Unfortunately, the need for a magnetic field inside the cavity makes the use of superconducting cavities problematic. If the cavity is driven with power P 0 , with phase 90 • behind that of the driving force due to the axion field, the power transfered to the cavity from axion dark matter is √ P 0 P . Thus, if one drives the cavity with 10 MW of power on resonance, the axion field contributes an additional 0.3 × 10 -7 W. Of course, no one would want to go through so much trouble to generate such a small amount of power! The difficulty with extracting power from axion dark matter is that the coupling g and the other factors on the right hand side of Eq. ( The detector is located at x = 0. h is a coupling with dimension (time) -1 2 , which we are imagining to be large for the sake of argument. In zeroth order in an expansion in powers of h, the axion field is taken to be a monochromatic wave coming by the detector: where There is no prejudice in assuming the wave to be monochromatic if the phase of the actual wave is known at all times. Let us assume that the oscillator, tuned to the same frequency ω, is oscillating with amplitude X 0 and phase δ relative to the local axion field: The power transferred from the axion field to the oscillator is then P X is largest when the oscillator lags 90 • behind the local axion field. The oscillator is a source of axion waves: where r = | x|. For r >> λ, the axion field Poynting vector is where k and r are unit vectors in the directions of k and x respectively. The first term in Eq. ( The second term in Eq. ( The interference term P (1) accounts for the power P X extracted by the oscillator from the axion field. Eq. ( In the axion case, if we were able to increase the coupling h, we would be able to collect up to the energy flowing within a radius 2 k = λ π of the detector/power plant, but no more than that. There is no physics principle that limits the size of h. Unfortunately we do not know at present how to increase h much in practice. Let us also consider dark matter constituted of axion-like particles (ALPs). These are light spin zero bosons like axions Happy Birthday Frank, and many happy returns!