Phase transitions governed by spontaneous time reversal symmetry breaking (TRSB) have long been sought in many quantum systems, including materials with anomalous Hall effect (AHE) 1,2 , cuprate high temperature superconductors 3-8,50 , Iridates 9,10 and so on. However, experimentally identifying such a phase transition is extremely challenging because the transition is hidden from many experimental probes. Here, using zero-field muon spin relaxation (ZF-μSR) technique, we observe strong TRSB signals below 70 K in the newly discovered kagome superconductor CsV 3 Sb 5 11-14 . The TRSB state emerges from the 2 x 2 charge density wave (CDW) phase present below ~ 95 K. By carrying out optical second-harmonic generation (SHG) experiments, we also find that inversion symmetry is maintained in the temperature range of interest. Combining all the experimental results and symmetry constraints, we conclude that the interlayer coupled chiral flux phase (CFP) 15 is the most promising candidate for the TRSB state among all theoretical proposals of orbital current orders 15,33, 40, 42-44 . Thus, this prototypical kagome metal CsV 3 Sb 5 can be a platform to establish a TRSB current-ordered state and explore its relationship with CDW, giant AHE, and superconductivity. The two-dimensional kagome lattice has attracted much interest in the condensed matter community because it can host a variety of exotic electronic physics, such as quantum spin liquids, flat-bands, various topological states and so on The materials display very intriguing physical properties. A charge-density-wave (CDW) with a 2 × 2 order appears at an onset temperature T CDW ranging from 80 K to 110 K The μSR technique is a uniquely sensitive probe of TRSB because it can detect the strength and spatial distribution of the intrinsic local magnetic field at the muon stopping sites inside a bulk material. A previous μSR experiment has shown a weak and static magnetism developing in polycrystalline KV 3 Sb 5 sample Especially, it is intriguing to ask whether the signal reflects a particular orbital current state. Here, we perform more detailed μSR investigations on single crystals of CsV 3 Sb 5 . As summarized in Fig. The TRSB observed in CsV 3 Sb 5 is quite prominent. As there is no measurable short-or long-range magnetic order in CsV 3 Sb 5 , the TRSB cannot originate from any conventional magnetism. Therefore, it is natural to ask whether our μSR results are consistent with the proposed loop current states The above result provides a strong symmetry constraint to possible loop-current states. CsV 3 Sb 5 crystalizes in D 1 6h (P6/mmm) space group We find that the presence of the hidden CFP state can be further elaborated from our experimental data. We notice that there is an aforementioned significant anisotropy in the muon depolarization rates along both p μ //ab and p μ //c directions. This anisotropy can be produced by constructing the microscopic configuration based on the symmetry analysis of the local fields at the muon stopping sites To understand such anisotropy, we simulate the field distribution sensed by muons in the CFP state We find that the CFP model simulation of the BKC-A and BKC-B configurations are highly consistent with the local field distribution at T = 30 ~ 70 K and T < 30 K, respectively. For BKC-A, the simulation reveals an anisotropic local field structure in the Cs-plane with a vanishing B⊥ component and a finite B// component. This is compatible with the in-plane local field revealed by anisotropic muon depolarization rates in both p μ //c and p μ //ab geometries as shown in Fig. Our μSR results clearly reveal the two transitions at T ' = 70 K and T '' = 30 K that are "hidden" from most experimental means. To the best of our knowledge, only the previous transient pump-probe spectroscopy measurements have suggested these two temperature scales: the collective excitation modes at 3.1 THz appearing below 70 K and 30 K, while the CDW transition is hallmarked by a coherent phonon mode at 1.3 THz appearing below ~ 95 K In summary, by using zero-field μSR, combined with optical second harmonic generation, we have experimentally identified a hidden orbital current order in the kagome metal CsV 3 Sb 5 . Our experimental results suggest that the interlayer magnetically coupled CFP states in kagome layers seem to be the most promising TRSB state. The hidden TRSB phase appears well below the CDW transition, suggesting a distinct origin from the CDW order. An extra magnetic transition below 30 K in the TRSB state has been observed. Furthermore, our simulated local field distributions based on the Bilayer-Kagome configurations of the CFP model are highly consistent with our μSR results. This clear identification of the spontaneous hidden TRSB state in the normal state expands our views on the rich physics in this new quasi-2D kagome metal system. It reveals the kagome metal CsV 3 Sb 5 to be a fascinating class of material to explore the novel physics related to the orbital current states, though the issue of how the hidden flux phase, is connected with the CDW order, and superconductivity warrants further investigations. High quality single crystals of CsV 3 Sb 5 were synthesized using the self-flux method The uSR experiments on a mosaic of single crystals with c-axis coaligned were performed on the GPS spectrometer at the Swiss Muon Source at the Paul Scherrer Institute. The measured μSR spectra were analyzed with the musrfit package Here, N 0,j is the measured muon decay events at delay time t=0. The exponential term accounts for the radioactive decay of muon ensemble. A 0,j is the instrumental asymmetry of detector pairs. P j is the projection of muon polarization on the respected detector pairs. N bkg,j accounts for the background events of each detector. A phenomenological Gaussian Kubo-Toyabe depolarization function is used for describing a static and anisotropic field distribution, as given by: ) , where f s describes the fraction of the sample signal, is the muon spin depolarization rate, and is the relaxation rate of the background contribution. The SHG experiments were performed in reflection geometry using a custom-built setup. The incident laser beam was delivered by a Ti:sapphire regenerative amplifier (pulse width incidence angle of 45 deg.) and polarization configuration is illustrated in Fig. authors declare that the data supporting the findings of this study are available within the article and its Supplementary Information. All raw data are available from the corresponding author upon request. While preparing this manuscript, μSR work report on the study of single crystal 