We present an analytical calculation of the response of a driven Duffing oscillator to low-frequency fluctuations in the resonance frequency and damping. We find that fluctuations in these parameters manifest themselves distinctively, allowing them to be distinguished. In the strongly nonlinear regime, amplitude and phase noise due to resonance frequency fluctuations and amplitude noise due to damping fluctuations are strongly attenuated, while the transduction of damping fluctuations into phase noise remains of order 1. We show that this can be seen by comparing the relative strengths of the amplitude fluctuations to the fluctuations in the quadrature components, and suggest that this provides a means to determine the source of low-frequency noise in a driven Duffing oscillator. Phase noise (also frequency noise) is ubiquitous in the field of oscillators. Understanding the fundamental processes that cause this noise is of interest to both physicists and engineers In this paper we are concerned with the question of how phase noise can be transduced in an open-loop driven Duffing oscillator, and whether it is possible to determine the method of transduction from measurements of the noise. This question initially arose from recent experiments involving microelectromechanical (MEMS) oscillators interacting with quantum turbulence in superfluid 4 He For mechanical oscillators, sources of noise can be extrinsic -from the coupling of the oscillator to the driving and measurement circuitry -or intrinsic -from unavoidable coupling of the oscillator to environment. An example of extrinsic noise is thermal Johnson noise from resistive elements in the measurement circuit The canonical additive noise for a mechanical oscillator is thermomechanical fluctuations. These fluctuations arise from the device being in thermal equilibrium with its surroundings, and result in a random force with a white spectrum acting on the device. This force results in random motion of the device. When this motion is superimposed on the driven motion of the device, it appears as a noise in the amplitude and phase of the oscillator. This type of noise is always associated with energy loss and can be directly related to the damping of the oscillator, Γ, or the inverse of the quality factor, 1/Q, through the fluctuation dissipation theorem. Multiplicative, or parametric noise, differs from the additive noise in that the parameters of the oscillator are changing with time. Changes in the oscillator parameters then lead to changes in the phase or amplitude of oscillation. For small parametric fluctuations, the power spectrum of the observed noise is related to the power spectrum of the fluctuating parameter where and α and β are indices representing the fluctuating parameters, e.g. α = φ (phase) and β = m (mass). In the literature, it is commonly considered that parametric phase noise is mediated through fluctuations of the resonance frequency, ω 0 = √ k/m, which is true for most operating environments While it may be uncommon, it is also possible to have fluctuations in the damping rate, Γ. These fluctuations often negligibly affect the oscillator response, and are ignored. For example, take the case of a fluctuating mass. Fluctuations in the mass will also cause fluctuations in Γ, because Γ = γ/2m, where γ is the constant of proportionality for some linear damping force, i.e. F = γv. However, these fluctuations are suppressed by a factor of 1/Q compared to fluctuations in ω 0 . The typical method of operating the resonator exactly on resonance in the linear regime also renders the damping fluctuations unimportant. In this regime of operation, dφ/dΓ = 0, and fluctuations in the damping are not transduced into fluctuations of the phase. However, for certain applications, when large amplitudes of motion are needed, the nonlinear behavior may become important. When operating in the nonlinear regime, we must revisit the response of the oscillator to parametric fluctuations and determine whether damping fluctuations become important. If they are important, can their effect on the phase noise be distinguished from fluctuations in ω 0 ? To answer these questions, we consider the first order response of a driven Duffing oscillator to small low-frequency fluctuations in ω 0 and Γ, and compare the responses of the oscillator. The fluctuation frequency is considered low if the time scale of the fluctuations, τ, is larger than the response time of the oscillator, 1/Γ, i.e. τ > 1/Γ. In this limit, ω 0 and Γ are stationary over the response time of the oscillator, and any transient response from the changing parameters is damped and negligible. To determine the response of the oscillator to fluctuations of this type, it is sufficient to determine the steady state response for constant values of ω 0 and Γ, and introduce the time dependence of these parameters directly into the steady state solution. We consider an oscillator driven in an open-loop configuration by a noiseless ideal-source, i.e., constant driving frequency, ω, and constant driving force amplitude, f 0 . This system is described by the following differential equation: where α 3 characterizes the conservative nonlinear restoring force and g 0 = f 0 /m. A general solution to Eq. 3 will have the form x(t) = a(t) cos(ωt + φ(t)), where a(t) and φ(t) vary slowly over one period of motion. The steady state solution is determined by setting ȧ = a φ = 0. The solution to Eq. 3, with static parameters and small α 3 , can be found in most textbooks on nonlinear oscillators, e.g. Refs. Here, Π = 3 8 α 3 ω 0 characterizes the amplitude dependent resonance frequency shift. These equations can be rearranged to yield the common description of the Duffing oscillator From the experimental point of view, it is common to work with the quadrature components: Typically, X and Y are referred to as the in-and out-of-phase components, respectively. Determining the spectrum of fluctuations of the dynamical variables (a and φ or X and Y) from the spectrum of the oscillator parameters (ω 0 and Γ) is equivalent to computing the first derivatives of the dynamical variables with respect to the oscillator parameters, as indicated by Eq. 1. Here, we present the analytical solutions and their plots for varying amplitudes and phases of oscillations. We then provide a discussion of the difference in responses and identify how to discriminate phase noise driven by resonance frequency fluctuations from phase noise driven by damping fluctuations. Damping Fluctuations. The amplitude and phase responses are found by implicitly differentiating Eqs. 4 and 5, then solving the system of equations. When computing the response to changes in damping, we take g 0 , Π, ω 0 , and ω to be constant. This yields the following response functions: Here a 0 = g 0 /2Γω 0 is the amplitude of motion on resonance (i.e. φ = π/2), and (a * ) 2 = a 2 0 Π/Γ is dimensionless parameter which measures the degree of nonlinearity. In the linear regime (a * ) 2 = 0. The quadrature response is determined by differentiating Eqs. 8 and 9, which yields It is notable that the quadrature response is directly related to the phase response, dφ/dΓ. By comparing the quadrature fluctuations to the amplitude fluctuations, we have a measure of the relative strength of the phase and amplitude fluctuations. The solutions to Eqs. 10-13 for 0 ≤ a * ≤ 8 and 0 ≤ φ ≤ π are shown in Fig. Frequency Fluctuations. The response to resonance frequency fluctuations is calculated in the same way as before, except that g 0 , Π, Γ, and ω are held constant. The following response functions are found: Similarly, the quadrature response is directly related to only the phase response, dφ/dω 0 . The solutions to Eqs. 14-17 for 0 ≤ a * ≤ 8 and 0 ≤ φ ≤ π are shown in Fig. Discussion. From Fig. To better understand how the damping and resonance frequency changes result in changes of the amplitude and phase, it is helpful to consider the frequency response of the oscillator. Several frequency responses of the Duffing oscillator are shown in Fig. With the goal of determining the importance of Γ fluctuations on the nonlinear Duffing oscillator, we calculated the response of the oscillator to low-frequency fluctuations in Γ and ω 0 . We demonstrated that on resonance, the response of the oscillator to fluctuations in ω 0 is unaltered in the nonlinear regime. In contrast, the response to fluctuations in Γ becomes important, and are amplified by driving further into the nonlinear regime. We also demonstrated that in the strongly nonlinear regime, (a * ) 2 1, the source of noise can be determined by comparing the relative strength of the amplitude and quadrature fluctuations off resonance.