The magnetic response of a K2Cr3As3 sample has been studied by means of dc magnetization measurements as a function of magnetic field (H) at different temperatures ranging from 5 K up to 300 K. Looking at the magnetic hysteresis loops m(H), a diamagnetic behavior of the sample has been inferred at temperatures higher than 60 K, whereas at lower temperatures the sample shows a hysteresis loop compatible with the presence of ferrimagnetism. Moreover, several spike-like magnetization jumps, both positive and negative, have been observed at certain fields in the range -1000 Oe < H < 1000 Oe, regardless of the temperature considered. The field position of the magnetization jumps has been studied at different temperatures, and their distribution can be described by a Lorentzian curve. In the last few years, the quasi-one-dimensional chromium-based superconductor K2Cr3As3 Here, we study a Cr-based quasi-one-dimensional sample containing K2Cr3As3 by means of dc magnetization measurements as a function of magnetic field H at different temperatures, ranging from 5 K up to 300 K. Looking at the magnetic hysteresis, we find that at low temperatures the sample shows a ferrimagnetic behavior while at temperatures higher than 60 K a diamagnetic behavior appears. Several spike-like magnetization jumps have been found in a range -1000 Oe < H < 1000 Oe and this can be explained as due to the magnetic instabilities. The paper is organized as follows: in the next section the experimental results are presented, section 3 is devoted to the results and discussion whereas the last one contains the conclusions. A needle-shaped K2Cr3As3 single crystal having length and thickness equal to 2.5 mm and 0.1 mm, respectively, has been analyzed. The fabrication details are reported elsewhere In order to study the magnetic response of the sample, the magnetic moment m has been measured as a function of the magnetic field H in the temperature range from 5 K up to 300 K. In the main panel of Figure To study the magnetic response of a K2Cr3As3 sample, dc magnetization measurements have been performed as a function of the magnetic field at different temperatures ranging from 5 K up to 300 K. Analyzing the magnetic hysteresis loops m(H), we have found a magnetic transition at T ≈ 60 K from a diamagnetic state (T ≥ 60 K) to a paramagnetic response (T < 60 K) compatible with an overall ferrimagnetic behavior of the sample. We underline that ours are bulk measurements so the results obtained are not due to surface effects. Moreover, focusing on the magnetic response of the sample in the field range -1000 Oe < H < +1000 Oe, we have found several spike-like magnetization jumps in the entire temperature range. The field positions of the magnetization jumps have been extracted at the different temperatures, reported in a histogram, and then fitted by a Lorentzian distribution curve. We have found that more than 85% of values are included in the field range 700 Oe ≤ H ≤ 900 Oe suggesting that the lattice needs a specific magnetic energy for allowing the magnetization to jump from a magnetic state to another one.