Coupled nanomechanical resonators made of two-dimensional materials are promising for processing information with mechanical modes. However, the challenge for these types of systems is to control the coupling. Here, we demonstrate strong coupling of motion between two suspended membranes of the magnetic 2D material FePS 3 . We describe a tunable electromechanical mechanism for control over both the resonance frequency and the coupling strength using a gate voltage electrode under each membrane. We show that the coupling can be utilized for transferring data from one drum 1 Nano-electromechanical systems (NEMS) are attracting attention of the scientific community for their potential to study novel quantum and electromagnetic effects at the nanoscale. Various studies have reported mechanical coupling between different resonance modes of the same 2D membrane by mechanical, optical and electronic means. Here, we demonstrate an electrical transduction mechanism for coupling mechanical resonances of two spatially separated membranes made of van der Waals material, allowing control over both the resonance frequency and the coupling strength via gate electrodes. We use the mechanism to strongly couple the fundamental mechanical modes of two suspended circular antiferromagnetic FePS 3 membranes that are separated by an edge-to-edge distance of 2 microns. We show that the coupling mechanism can be utilized for transferring data from one drum to the other, a feature that is useful in data processing and storage systems. Coupling of magnetic materials like FePS 3 is of interest, since their mechanical resonances can be sensitive to both the magnetic phase Laser Interferometry of FePS 3 Resonators. We fabricate two circular suspended FePS 3 resonators on top of a Si/SiO 2 substrate on which we define an array of Au bottom gate electrodes. A layer of spin-on glass (SOG) When operating the laser interferomery technique with both lasers focused at the same position on the same membrane, we independently characterize the resonance spectra of the fundamental membrane modes of drums 1 and 2 at a temperature of 4 K as shown in Fig. We fit these spectra to a harmonic oscillator model and extract the resonance frequencies ω 1,2 as a function of V g , which are displayed with filled blue and orange dots in Fig. The resonances ω 1,2 (V g ) of both drums closely follow the continuum mechanics model, where x 1,2 are the membrane displacements and f d is the force at a drive frequency ω d . The coupling parameter j = J √ m 1 m 2 , where m 1,2 is the effective mass, is responsible for the transfer of energy between the two resonators and thus coupling of the mechanical motion. Several coupling mechanisms can contribute to J (see SI 3). In this work, we present evidence for an electromechanical coupling mechanism for adjusting the coupling strength between two 2D material resonators. Figure is the resistance to ground). As is outlined in SI 4, the optothermal drive of the first drum at non-zero V g,1 then results in a non-zero flake voltage V m,AC that causes an electrostatic force on the second drum, F 2,AC = -J el x 10 sin (ω d t), where x 10 is the amplitude of periodic displacement and the electrical coupling parameter J el is given by: where ε 0 is the dielectric permitivity of vacuum, x g (V g ) the static deflection at the centre of membrane (see SI 1) and x c the separation between the membrane and the bottom electrode. By combining equations 1 and 2, it is seen that J el results in a transfer of mechanical energy via electromechanical coupling between the spatially separated FePS 3 drums. It is notable that the driving force on the second drum F 2,AC is proportional to the product of the individual gate voltages applied to each of the drums. This means that at V g = 0 V on either drum, the electrical coupling parameter J el = 0 even if ω 1 = ω 2 and f d > 0. This property distinguishes the expected behavior of this mechanism from phonon-or tension-mediated coupling, We use this characteristic to provide evidence for the proposed mechanism, by first matching the resonance frequencies of the drums by tuning ω 1,2 such that ω 1 = ω 2 using electrostatic pulling, as shown in Fig. However, the evidence above suggests that the contribution of these mechanisms, that can couple the motion of two spatially separated FePS 3 resonators under our experimental conditions, is negligible in comparison to the dominant mechanism that we propose in Fig. Strong Coupling Between Spatially Separated Nanodrums. Using the setup described above, we focus red and blue laser either on separate drums to excite one membrane and measure the motion of the other, or on the same drum to excite and measure a single one (see Fig. By solving eq 1, we find amplitudes for the two configurations of lasers as: 35 where A 1 is the oscillation amplitude with lasers on the same drum, A 2 the amplitude with lasers on different drums, strength coefficient, and γ 1,2 ω d the detuning. In Figure We now investigate the gate voltage dependence of strong coupling between the separated FePS 3 membrane resonators. In Fig. Coupling Near the Antiferromagnetic Néel Temperature. FePS 3 is an antiferromagnetic semiconductor at low temperature In Fig. dT in Fig. Instead, this switch from strong to weak coupling regime is related to a continuous decrease of the cooperativity due to an increasing γ 1,2 as it approaches the transition temperature, as shown in Fig. In conclusion, we have demonstrated a mechanism that mediates strong coupling between spatially separated membranes made of antiferromagnetic materials FePS 3 and MnPS 3 . This coupling mechanism can be switched on and tuned by an electrostatic gate. In addition, the electromechanical transfer of energy can be amplitude modulated and is shown to be capable of performing bit-by-bit communication. This provides control advantages that can find the use in the development of new device concepts, such as nanomechanical logic gates We also anticipate that in the future antiferromagnetic NEMS of this type can be useful to study more intricate magnetic phenomena, like a magnetostriction in ultrathin layers, This also exposed the circular bottom Au electrode of 5 μm in diameter on the bottom of the cavity. The chip fabrication is described in detail in the previous work. It was checked for all membranes that resonance frequency changes due to laser heating were insignificant during the data acquisition. The Supporting Information is available free of charge at https://pubs.acs.org/doi/xxxxxx. Red laser: λ red = 632 nm. Blue laser: λ blue = 405 nm. (e) Detected resonance peaks for the two suspended drums. Filled dots -measured data, Solid lines -linear harmonic oscillator fits. (f) Resonance frequencies ω(V g ) of drums 1 and 2, extracted from fits similar to (e). Filled dots -measured data, Solid lines -continuum mechanics model 