Recent experiment reported the evidence of dispersing one-dimensional Majorana mode trapped by the crystalline domain walls in FeSe0.45Te0.55. Here, we perform the first-principles calculations to show that iron atoms in the domain wall spontaneously form the ferromagnetic order in line with orientation of the wall. The ferromagnetism can impose a π phase difference between the domainwall-separated surface superconducting regimes under the appropriate width and magnetization of the wall. Accordingly, the topological surface superconducting state of FeSe0.45Te0.55 can give rise to one-dimensional Majorana modes trapped by the wall. More interestingly, we further propose a surface junction in the form of FeSe0.45Te0.55/ferromagnet/FeSe0.45 Te0.55, which can be adopted to create and fuse the Majorana zero modes through controlling the width or magnetization of the interior ferromagnetic barrier. The braiding and readout of Majorana zero modes can be realized by the designed device. Such surface junction has the potential application in the superconducting topological quantum computation. Majorana zero modes (MZMs) have attracted intense attention in condensed matter physics for the potential application in topological quantum computation Recently, the electronic bands with nontrivial topology have been theoretically predicted and experimentally verified in some iron-based superconductors In this work, we perform the first-principles calculations to investigate the properties of the DWs in FeSe 0.45 Te 0.55 . The numerical results can capture both the bulge structure and the specific orientation of the DWs. Interestingly, we find that the iron atoms in the DWs spontaneously form the ferromagnetic order with the magnetization direction along the DWs. Accordingly, we show that the ferromagnetism can manipulate the surface superconducting phase difference between the two sides of the DWs, which is analogous to the physical picture of Fulde-Ferrell-Larkin-Ovchinnikov (FFLO) superconducting state As the STM experiment shows, the DWs are a line of dislocation-like defects, which separate the lattices into left and right parts with a relative half-unit-cell shift Below superconducting transition temperature T c , the superconductivity arises through suppressing the collinear AFM order or spin fluctuation in normal state, while the FM order in the DWs is preserved due to the absence of superconductivity. Then, the system can be simplified as a S/F/S junction which only involving the topological surface states, as shown in Fig. To verify the argument, we consider the generic surface S/F/S junction with arbitrary width L and effective Zeeman field h y of DWs, and solve the Dirac-Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) equation, with Here, , and Θ is the Heaviside step function, φ is the random phase difference between two surface S regimes. The details of the analytic calculation of Eq. ( Here, k y → 0 for μ → 0, and k y = μ/v F sin θ with θ the incident angle approaching 0. In equilibrium state with φ = 0, a couple of gapless bound states can be obtained when with n the integer number. Namely, 1D dispersive Majorana modes with constant density of states (DOS) are realized for the FM DWs with appropriate width L and magnetization h y . For finite μ, the effective low-energy Hamiltonian H ef f describing a couple of bound states can be obtained by projecting H BdG into the subspace spanned by two eigen-states ξ ± corresponding to ε(k y ) = 0 with k y = 0, φ = 0, hyL vF = π 2 Here ) with τ y and τ z the Pauli matrices spanned by particlehole space. When ∆φ = π, H ef f in Eq. ( The implication for the experimental observations (5) Here, k B is Boltzmann constant. N = k F W/π denoting the number of the transport channels in the system with W the length of the domain wall. As shown in Fig. According to Eq. ( To realize and detect the braiding of the MZMs , which means the fermion occupied number changes two. Note that the braiding result is unchanged by exchanging γ 1 and γ 3 and pinning γ 2 and γ 4 . Third, the braiding results can be readout by electron teleportation effect of MZMs At last, we discuss the experimental feasibility and advantage of the designed device. First, the decay length of MZM is ξ 0 ∼ ṽF /∆ 0 ∼ 7 Å for μ = 5∆ 0 , v F ∼ 216 meV Å and ∆ 0 ∼ 1.8 meV In conclusion, we propose a surface S/F/S junction to reveal the underlying physics of experimentally observed dispersive 1D Majorana mode in FeSe 0.45 Te 0.55 . Our calculations predict the spontaneously ferromagnetic order in the domain wall, and we prove the crucial role of ferromagnetism to modulate the superconducting phase of the surface electrons to form Majorana modes. More meaningfully, we design a feasible artificial device involving FeSe 0.45 Te 0.55 /ferromagnet/FeSe 0.45 Te 0.55 junctions, which can create, fuse, braid and readout the Majorana zero modes.