3 P 2 superfluids realized in neutron stars are the largest topological quantum matters in our Universe. We establish the existence and stability of non-Abelian half-quantum vortices (HQVs) in 3 P 2 superfluids with strong magnetic fields. Using a self-consistent microscopic approach, we find that a singly quantized vortex is energetically destabilized into a pair of two non-Abelian HQVs owing to the strongly spin-orbit-coupled pairing. We find a topologically protected Majorana fermion on each HQV, thereby providing two-fold non-Abelian anyons characterized by both Majorana fermions and a non-Abelian first homotopy group. FIG. 1. Schematic of a pair of non-Abelian HQVs (κ, n) = (1/2, +1/4) at x = d v /2 and (1/2, -1/4) at x = -d v /2 in a D 4 -BN state. Its spin-momentum structure is shown by objects with color arrows representing d vectors. Introduction.-Quantum physics tells us that all particles are either fermions or bosons under certain assumptions; a wave function of multi-particle states is symmetric (asymmetric) under the exchange of two bosons (fermions). However, an exception, anyons, exists. The exchange of two anyons causes the wave function to acquire a phase factor There are two apparentlydifferent origins of non-Abelian anyons, one fermionic and the other bosonic. The fermionic origin is based on Majorana fermions realized in topological superconductors The aim of this Letter is to present vortices simultaneously accompanied by the two different non-Abelian natures, that is, fermionic and bosonic origins of non-Abelian anyons. A system that realizes such vortices is a neutron superfluid expected to occur in neutron star cores. This is called the 3 P 2 superfluid (spin-triplet p-wave pairing) of neutrons In this study, we microscopically establish the existence and stability of non-Abelian HQVs, along each of which, we find a topologically protected gapless Majorana fermion. In the presence of a strong magnetic field relevant for magnetars, i.e., neutron stars accompanied by extraordinary large magnetic fields, the ground state is in a dihedral-four biaxial nematic (D 4 -BN) phase Non-Abelian HQVs.-Here, we focus on non-Abelian HQVs in the D 4 -BN phase of a 3 P 2 superfluid. Let us consider systems invariant under a U(1) gauge transformation and SO(3) spin-momentum rotation. A 3 P 2 superfluid is the condensation of spin-triplet Cooper pairs with a total angular momentum of J = 2, the OP of which is given by a 3 × 3 traceless symmetric tensor, A μν ( μ,ν=x,y,z) , with spin index μ and momentum index ν. The continuous symmetries act as A → e i φ gAg tr , e i φ ∈ U(1) and g ∈ SO(3). The homogeneous OP of the D 4 -BN state has a diagonal form which is invariant under a C 4 rotation around the z axis in a point node direction, combined with the π phase rotation. Its spin-momentum structure is schematically shown by d vectors, d μ (k) = ν A μν k ν , using arrows in the top-left object in Fig. where θ ≡ tan -1 (y/x) is the azimuthal angle and R n (θ) ∈ SO( The integer vortices are characterized by κ ∈ Z and n = 0. In the D 4 -BN state, the π phase jump arising from κ ∈ Z + 1/2 is compensated by the C 4 rotation with n ∈ Z ± 1/4. Thus, HQVs are topologically allowed, and a singly quantized vortex is predicted to be split into a pair of HQVs, as illustrated in Fig. where the symbol • denotes a 4×4 matrix in the spin and Nambu space, v F is the Fermi velocity, and ω m = πT (2m + 1) is the fermionic Matsubara frequency (m ∈ Z). The Zeeman field V Z along the z axis is introduced through ǔ = V Z diag( σz , σtr z ). The Pauli matrices in the Nambu space and the spin space are also introduced as τμ and σμ , respectively, where • denotes a 2 × 2 matrix in the spin space. The self-energy matrix σΔ is composed of the 3 P 2 OP A μν . Assuming uniformity along the z-direction, we determine the spatial profile of A μν (R = (x, y)) by self-consistently solving Eq. ( [99] for the detail). Below, we show the numerical results at T = 0.4T c and V Z = 0.5T c with the critical temperature T c . For this parameter set, the D 4 -BN state is the most stable uniform state. In Fig. , where Γ M is a 3 × 3 basis tensor of the z component of the total angular momentum J z such that J z Γ M = MΓ M and γ M (R) is the complex OP projected onto the sector J z = M. The D 4 -BN state is represented by |γ M =2 | = |γ M =-2 | and γ M =-1,0,1 = 0. For an isolated HQV, the asymptotic form of Eq. ( The isolated HQV for n = +1/4 (-1/4) consists of three components, that is, a singular vortex component for M = -2 (+2), an almost uniform unwinding component for M = +2 (-2), and the induced component for M = 0. It can be regarded as a chiral p-wave superconducting vortex with the spin parallel to the chirality, and the phase windings of the induced components are -1 for (κ, n) = (1/2, 1/4) and 3 for (1/2, -1/4) [100, 101]. In the former (latter) case, the vorticity is antiparallel (parallel) to the chirality. However, the amplitude of the induced component |γ M =0 (R)| breaks the axial symmetry to a 3-fold symmetry for n = 1/4 and 5-fold symmetry for n = -1/4 (see Ref. The two types of internal structures in the M = 0 component induced for HQVs with n = ±1/4 are modulated by the connection of these two HQVs. We find that this modulation causes an interaction between the two HQVs and binds them together. To unveil the interaction between HQVs, we compute the Luttinger-Ward energy functional J sn from the self-consistently determined ǧ . We will now remark on the boundary effects. The long-tailed flows of the mass and spin currents are cut off owing to a finite-sized simulation box, so that the translational symmetry for a single HQV is broken. Similar effects are also included in the two-HQV solution and The free energy is scaled as Jsn = J sn /(ν n T 2 c ξ 2 0 Ω z ), where Ω z is the length of the system in the z-direction, and ν n is the density of states at the Fermi energy in the normal state. its energy. In our strategy, the boundary contributions in J sn cancel out those in J ± sn and only the interaction energy of the two HQVs becomes available. In Fig. Molecules of HQVs are also discussed in superfluid 3 He Majorana zero modes in non-Abelian HQVs.-Finally, we clarify the existence of topologically protected zeroenergy states in HQVs, which behave as non-Abelian (Ising) anyons. Using the OP determined self-consistently for a separation of d v 10.7ξ 0 and spatial uniformity along the z-direction, we solve the Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) equation, ȞBdG,k z (R) ì u α,k z (R) = ε α,k z ì u α,k z (R), where ȞBdG,k z is a 4 × 4 matrix in the spin and Nambu space with the OP A μν (R); ì is the α-th eigenvector of the axial momentum k z , and ε α,k z is its eigenenergy. We set k F ξ 0 = 5. For the spectroscopy of the vortex-bound states, we show the fermionic local density of states for k z = 0 in Fig. In the energy region below the bulk gap ω g /T c ∼ 2.0, the spectral weights are localized around the HQV cores and the edge (not shown). The energy levels of the vortex bound states are discretized with level spacing on the order of ω 2 g /ε F ∼ 0.255T c . It is worth noting that each vortex hosts a single zero-energy state with numerical accuracy. Let us now clarify the symmetry protection and non-Abelian nature of the zero modes. For this purpose, we employ the semiclassical approximation as ȞBdG,k z (x, y) ↦ → Ȟ (k, θ), which varies slowly in real-space coordinates. The spatial modulation due to a vortex line is considered as an adiabatic change in the Hamiltonian as a function of the azimuthal angle θ around the vortex line. For the topological protection of zero-energy states in a vortex, the mirror reflection M x y with respect to the xy-plane is essential. As demonstrated in Refs. x y ] = 0, because A xz = A yz = 0, i.e., γ M =±1 = 0 in non-Abelian HQVs. Hence, the Hamiltonian with k z = 0 is block-diagonalized in terms of the eigenvalues of the mirror operator λ = ±i, as Ȟ (k M , θ) = λ Hλ (k M , θ), where the 2 × 2 submatrix Hλ is still subject to the particlehole symmetry. In terms of the Altland-Zirnbauer symmetry classes, each subsector belongs to class D, similar to spinless chiral superconductors In this section, we derive a quasiclassical framework and the Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) equation from an interacting neutron system via a zero-range attractive 3 P 2 force. The derivation can also be referred to our previous paper where We have introduced a spin-momentum coupling in the pair force via the 2 × 2 matrix in spin space tαβ defined by tαβ Following Ref. where • is a 4 × 4 matrix in the spin and Nambu space, τz = diag(1, 1, -1, -1) is the third component of the Pauli matrices in the Nambu space, ǔ = V Z diag( σz , σtr z ) denotes the Zeeman field. The quasiclassical propagator ǧ is defined by In the first line, the integral with respect to the energy ξ = k 2 /2m -μ is performed along the contour C qc , which consists of the counterclockwise contour in the upper half ξ plane and the clockwise contour in the lower half ξ plane. Here, R = (r 1 + r 2 )/2 is a coordinate to describe the spatial inhomogeneity of the superfluid order parameter, T τ is an imaginary time ordered arXiv:2107.02448v2 [cond-mat.supr-con] 18 Sep 2021 operator, and the Nambu spinor ì Ψ has been introduced as ì Ψ(r, τ) = (ψ ↑ (r, τ), ψ ↓ (r, τ), ψ † ↑ (r, τ), ψ † ↓ (r, τ)) with ψ ( †) σ (r, τ) = e H τ ψ ( †) σ (r)e -H τ . The order parameter matrix is defined by where A αβ is a 3 × 3 order parameter tensor of a spin-triplet p-wave superfluid, and kF ≡ k F /k F is a normalized Fermi momentum parametrized as (cos α sin χ, sin α sin χ, cos χ). The order parameter tensor A is connected to the anomalous quasiclassical propagator f by the gap equation where g is the strength of the coupling constant and ν n is the density of state for the normal state at the Fermi energy, and An order parameter profile with a vortex is determined by self-consistently solving the Eilenberger equation and the gap equations with the boundary condition explained below. In order to study the interaction energy of the HQVs, we utilize the Luttinger-Ward energy functional: where Sp[ where 1 is the 2 × 2 identity matrix, and the gap matrix is given, using the anticommutator {a, b} + = ab + ba, by In this section, we explain in detail the boundary conditions for isolated HQVs and a pair of HQVs. For this purpose, it is convenient to expand the order parameter tensor A αβ with respect to the z-component of the total angular momentum as , where Γ M is the 3 × 3 basis tensor with the angular momentum M such that J z Γ M = MΓ M , and γ M (R) is a complex scalar function and denotes the projected order parameter onto the sector M. The operation J z on a tensor A is given by [J z A] αβ = A αγ iε zγβ -iε z αγ A γβ with antisymmetric tensor ε αβγ . A representation of Γ M is given by The D 4 -BN state with point nodes along the z axis is represented for this basis set as |γ 2 | = |γ -2 | and γ 0,±1 = 0. In the following, we consider asymptotic forms of vortices, which give boundary conditions for the above equation set. An integer vortex for such a D 4 -BN state has an asymptotic form given by e iκ θ γ M Γ M , αβ (κ = ±1). (S16) This boundary condition breaks axial symmetry which is described by the form A = M e i (κ-M ) θ γ M Γ M , αβ . In addition to such a non-axisymmetric integer vortex, an HQV is topologically allowed in the D 4 -BN state. Its asymptotic form is given by which indicates that there are two kinds of HQVs in terms of the relative sign between κ and n. Without loss of generality, we set κ = 1/2 in the main text and in the following. It is proposed that an integer vortex with κ = 1 can split into two HQVs with (κ, n) = (1/2, 1/4) and (κ, n) = (1/2, -1/4) where the phase behaves as 2κθ for |R| → ∞(θ 1,2 → θ). In this section, we present self-consistent solutions of isolated HQVs. As mentioned in the previous section and in the main text, there are two kinds of HQVs characterized by n = ±1/4 implying two possible rotational directions of the triad relative to the vorticity. In Fig. . Panels (c), (e), and (g) show |γ -2 |, |γ 0 |, and |γ 2 |, respectively, while panels (d), (f), and (h) show the corresponding phase arg(γ M ). As expected from the boundary condition, the sector M = -2 has single winding, while the sector M = 2 has no winding, which results in an almost uniform amplitude profile. It is remarkable that the amplitude of the induced component M = 0 seems three-fold. It has single phase winding around the core, but opposite to the winding in M = -2. Although the phase change along the loop around the core is non linear, the opposite single winding be understood as an analogy to a vortex in a spinless chiral p-wave superconductor. The gap matrices contributed from the sectors M = -2 and M = 0 are given, respectively, by where we set kz = 0 for simplicity. In the case of an axisymmetric vortex in a spinless chiral p-wave superconductor, the induced component has the opposite chirality relative to the component which has a non-zero order parameter far from the vortex core where κ b + χ b is the sum of the vorticity and chirality, characterizing two inequivalent vortices in chiral p-wave superconductors. By applying this argument to the present HQV case, the winding of the induced component is obtained as follows: From Eqs. (S19) and (S17), κ b = 1 and χ b = -1 for M = -2, and thus we obtain κ i = -1. This is consistent with the opposite single winding indicated by panel (f). Again we remark that the phase change is non linear and the amplitude does not retain the axial symmetry in the present case. In terms of the spin sectors, the winding in the bulk component appears only in the spin down sector as seen from Eq. (S19). Next, we present a self-consistent solution of the other isolated HQV. In order to describe the HQV in the left hand side of a pair of the HQVs, we shift the phase of γ -2 by π in Eq. (S17), as seen from Eq. (S18) by setting θ 1 = π for R 2 = (0, 0) and R 1 = (∞, 0). The numerical solution of this HQV is shown in Fig. It can be seen that only the spin-up sector in the bulk component has the winding in this case, in contrast to Eq. (S19) for the spin-down sector in the previous case. The winding of the induced component can be understood by applying the above argument. In the present case, it follows from Eqs. (S17) and (S20) that κ b = 1 and χ b = 1 for M = 2, while χ i = -1 for the spin-up sector of M = 0 as seen from Eq. (S19). Therefore, we obtain κ i = 3, which is consistent with the winding indicated by Fig. In this section, we show the spatial profiles of the mass current density j m and the spin current density with spin along the z axis j z s for a pair of HQVs. Within the quasiclassical theory, these currents are calculated by where Šμ=x,y,z = diag( σμ , σtr μ )/2. The summations over the Matsubara frequency are cut-off by ω c which is used for the above gap equation, and it is (at least) qualitatively correct. In Fig. Here we discuss the symmetry and topology of zero-energy states bound at a molecule of non-Abelian HQVs in the D 4 -BN state. For comparison, we also show the axisymmetric o-vortex in the D 4 -BN state, which is the most symmetric vortex with normal core, hosting multiple Majorana zero modes. In Ref. Yes Yes modes, while the axisymmetric v vortex has a finite excitation gap in the low-lying quasiparticle spectrum. In this work, we investigate the stability and microscopic structure of non-Abelian HQVs without assuming axial symmetry. As mentioned in the main text, the low-lying quasiparticle structure in the HQV is distinct from those of the o vortex and v vortex, since a single zero energy state appears at each core of HQVs. Below, we uncover the robustness and non-Abelian anyonic nature of the zero-energy states bound at a molecule of non-Abelian HQVs on the basis of symmetry and topology. To unveil the symmetry and topology of vortices, following Refs. [S5-S7], we start with the semiclassical approximation where the Hamiltonian varies slowly in the real-space coordinate system. The Bogoliubov quasiparticle structure is governed by the BdG Hamiltonian in Eq. (S13). The 3 P 2 order parameter in the BdG Hamiltonian has the spatial modulation due to a vortex line. In the semiclassical approximation, the spatial modulation is considered as adiabatic changes as a function of the real-space coordinate surrounding the defect with an angle θ, where we introduce the cylindrical coordinate R = (ρ, θ, z). Then, the BdG Hamiltonian in the base space, (k, θ) is obtained from Eq. (S13), as where Û is the Zeeman energy due to a magnetic field H, and the 2 × 2 spin matrix of the 3 P 2 pair potential is given by Here we consider the D 4 -BN phase of 3 P 2 superfluids. The asymptotic form of the order parameter with an isolated vortex satisfies the boundary condition We assume the spatial uniformity of the order parameter along the vortex line, i.e., the z axis. The parameters κ and n in Eq. (S25) represents the U(1) phase winding and the n-fold texture of the D 4 -BN order along the azimuthal angle θ, respectively (see Fig. corresponding to γ M (ρ, θ) → (-1) M γ * M (ρ, -θ). In the D 4 -BN state, an axisymmetric vortex represented by Eq. (S29) with γ M (ρ, θ) = γ M e i (κ-M ) θ maintains the P 3 symmetry when Reγ ±1 (ρ) = 0. The P 1 symmetry requires the order parameters to satisfy the relations, γ M (ρ, θ) = -γ M (ρ, θ + π). For axisymmetric vortices, this implies that nonvanishing γ ±1 or an even κ M breaks the P 1 symmetry. In the same manner, the P 2 symmetry leads to the relations γ M (ρ, θ) → -(-1) M γ * M (ρ, -θ + π). For axisymmetric vortices with an odd κ, the P 2 symmetry is preserved if Imγ M (ρ) = 0. The vortex state preserving only the P 2 (P 3 ) symmetry is referred to as the v-vortex (w-vortex) state. As discussed in Sec. S3 and Figs. The mirror reflection with respect to the xy-plane is defined as the following transformation of the real-space, the momentum, and the spin variables: (x, y, z) → (x, y, -z), (k x , k y , k z ) → (k x , k y , -k z ), and (σ x , σ y , σ z ) → (-σ x , -σ y , σ z ). For systems with spatial uniformity along the z axis, only the momentum and spin variables transform under the mirror reflection since the BdG Hamiltonian does not depend on z. The mirror reflection operator in the spin space, M x y , is simply given by Mxy = i σz . When the 3 P 2 superfluid order parameter is invariant under the mirror reflection symmetry, the operator acts as As the parity under the mirror reflection, η = ±, is compensated by the discrete U( The mirror reflection operator thus acts on the symmetric traceless tensor A μi as Therefore, the BdG Hamiltonian is invariant under the mirror reflection if A xz = A yz = 0, i.e., γ M =±1 = 0. This condition can be satisfied by the o vortex and the non-Abelian HQVs. In Table One of the topological invariants appropriate for line defects in the Altland-Zirnbauer symmetry class D is the second Chern number where F = dA + A ∧ A is the non-Abelian field strength in the four-dimensional base space. Let |u n (k, θ) be the nth occupied eigenstate of Ȟ (k, θ). The non-Abelian Berry's connection, A α nm , is defined with the eigenstates as Here we introduce (∂ , and thus the o vortex has Ch 2 = 0. We also find that the Chern number in the other vortices is trivial, Ch 2 = 0. When the BdG Hamiltonian (S23) satisfies Eq. (S37) and keeps the mirror reflection symmetry, one can introduce a topological number called the mirror Z 2 number: Since the mirror invariant BdG Hamiltonian commutes with the mirror operator, it can be block diagonal by using the eigenvalues of the mirror operator. Here we should emphasize that the zero-energy vortex-bound state can be the Majorana zero mode only for M η=-x y while the mirror Z 2 number can be defined for both of the two possible mirror symmetries M η=± x y . This is because the particle-hole symmetry is still supported within each subsector for M-x y but not for M+ x y . In terms of the Altland-Zirnbauer symmetry classes, each subsector for M-x y belongs to the class D as well as spinless chiral superconductors. In contrast, for M+ x y , each mirror subsector does not maintain the particle-hole symmetry, and its Hamiltonian belongs to the class A, as well as a quantum Hall state. Thus, the zero-energy states behave as Majorana fermions only for M-x y and only Dirac fermions can be obtained for M+ x y . For M-x y , if the Z 2 invariant is odd, the vortex can host a single Majorana zero mode which behaves as a non-Abelian (Ising) anyon As mentioned in Eq. (S38), the BdG Hamiltonian for the o vortex and the non-Abelian HQVs is invariant under M-x y if A xz = A yz = 0, i.e., γ M =±1 = 0. On the mirror reflection invariant plane at k M ≡ (k x , k y , k z = 0), the BdG Hamiltonian is commutable with M-x y , [ Ȟ (k M , θ), M-x y ] = 0. Hence, the BdG Hamiltonian is block-diagonal for the 2 × 2 submatrices, Hλ (k M , θ), in terms of the eigenvalues of the mirror operator λ = ±i as where Hλ (k M , θ) is still subject to the particle-hole symmetry with C = τx K ( τμ=x,y,z are the 2 × 2 Pauli matrix in a reduced subspace) and belongs to the class D in each mirror subsector. Then, the BdG Hamiltonian, Hλ , is obtained on the base space (k M , θ) ∈ S 2 × S 1 , which is composed of the two-dimensional mirror-invariant momentum space and a loop enclosing the line defect on the mirror invariant plane in the real space. The topological invariant for the Altland-Zirnbauer symmetry class D is the Z 2 number [S10, S14]. The Z 2 number is obtained by the dimensional reduction of the second Chern number in the suspension of the base space, Σ(S 2 × S 1 ), which is given by the integral of the Berry curvature F ∧ F over the suspension. The Z 2 number in each mirror subsector is where Q 3 = tr[ Ãd Ã + 2 3 Ã3 ] is the Chern-Simons form and the Berry connection Ã is obtained from the eigenstates on the mirror reflection invariant plane. For the vortex preserving the mirror symmetry, the Z 2 invariant in the λ subsector is where κ λ is the vorticity of the order parameter in the λ subsector, and l is the first Chern number characterizing the bulk topology of the mirror invariant plane and l = ±1 for λ = ±i. On the basis of the total angular momentum Γ M , the vorticity κ λ is equivalent to the vorticity κ M of J z = M Cooper pairs. Hence, the mirror-protected Z 2 invariants for an isolated HQV with (κ, n) = (1/2, 1/4) and (1/2, -1/4) are (ν λ=+i , ν λ=-i ) = (0, 1) and (1, 0), respectively. Hence, the zero energy state bound at each HQV is protected by the Z 2 invariant regardeless of the intervortex distance d V . In Ref. arXiv:2107.02448v2 [cond-mat.supr-con] 18 Sep 2021