4.3.3 Spin solitons in the presence of KLS string walls -Boundary conditions on wall . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4.3.4 Equilibrium spin textures and free energies of pseudo-random lattices consisting of inseparable and separable 2/4 spin solitons 4.4 The mirror symmetry of 1D nexus objects and its breaking . . . . . . . 5 Spin Dynamical Response and NMR 5.1 Spin dynamic response equations . . . . . . . . . . . The liquid Helium-3 is the unique member in the many bodies systems and condensed matter systems. This is not only because it never freezes to solid even in zero temperature by the existence of strong enough quantum fluctuation, but also because it has complicated enough symmetry breaking patterns to different superfluid phases. The related discussions started from 1960s till now, and lots of intriguing physics have been proposed or been observed, such as novel topological defects and chiral anomaly of quisaiparticle induced by the textures of order parameters. In last decade years, the impurity with nanometer length scales, i.e., aerogel was introduced into the liquid Helium-3 to modify the scattering properties of Helium-3 quasiparticles. One of them, the nafen, which is collection of thin Al 2 O 3 strands is used in the ROTA's experiment, and generates a series of axially polarized new phases, in which the half quantum vortices have been observed. The half quantum vortices are firstly stabilized in polar phase, which is also the first observed nafen distorted superfluid phase of Helium-3. This novel string defects are analogy of the cosmological strings which probably appear in the early universe. The existence of half quantum vortices provides the clue about the existence of other cosmological objects in the nafen distorted superfluid. To solve this question, we analyzed the possible symmetry breaking patterns in detail by using the algebraic topology and group theory. It turns out that the fibrations of the degenerate parameter spaces of symmetry breaking patterns dominate the existence of composite cosmological defects in the successive symmetry breaking of nafen distorted Helium-3. In this review, the fibrations of degenerate parameter spaces in the successive symmetry breaking phase transition of nafen distorted superfluid Helium-3 are reveled by using the homotopy theory and group theory. The results of this deep mathematics i.e., the composite string monople (Numbu monopole) and the string wall (Kibble-Lazarides-Shafi domain wall) are described topologically by using the exact sequences of homotopy groups. To compare our model with ROTA's experiment of string wall, we demonstrate how the topological defects with coherent length scales extend to mesoscopic spin solitons in equilibrium states. After this, the equilibrium free energies, which determines the extended equilibrium configurations, are evaluated by non-linear numerical optimization algorithm. Based on these equilibrium configurations, we calculated the spectrum of spin dynamical response of system under weak magnetic driving. The results exactly coincide with the experimental observations. In addition, the implements of the numerical algorithms, which were used to evaluated the equilibrium configurations of spin solitions and the spin dynamical response, also generate a useful programs library. The massive applications of the functional analysis and theory of integral operators in the algorithms and their implements provide a instance, through which the physical expressions can be mapped to data objects of computer and evolve as physical expressions require. v The North American Nonahertz Observatory for Gravitational Wave (NANOGrav) team reported its finding from the accumulated data in 12.5 years at the end of 2020 The cosmological strings typically appear in many different Grand Unify Theory (GUT) models and String-Theories The idea, that introducing aerogel to modify the microscopic scattering properties of 3 He quasiparticles, was discussed and intensively practiced around late 1990s to 2000s by using isotropic SiO 2 aerogel . Because the characteristic length of aerogel is less than coherent length of Cooper paring of superfluid 3 He, this impurity may dramatically modify the stable phase and the equilibrium phase diagram of superfluid 3 He In spite of the controversy about the route of the string walls decay, the story looks running well until we take the Nambu monopole (string monopole) into account In this review, we demonstrate in details what this guarantee is by using the algebraic topology and group theory. The significant tools are the relative homotopy groups and the exact sequences consisting of homotopy groups and relative homotopy groups of the degenerate parameter spaces of PdB order parameters. We will see how the composite topological defects are classified by relative homotopy groups and characterized by boundary homormophism of the corresponding exact sequences. Originally the classification in terms of the relative homotopy groups has been used if there is the hierarchy of the energy scale or length scales in physical system where n ∈ Z + and n ≥ 1. This means the topological defects in polar phase convert to composite cosmological defects when the second time symmetry breaking occurs! Facing to this amazing fact, all physicists must ask why? Our work reveal that there is fibration between PdB phase vacuum manifold and polar phase vacuum manifold, and this fibration determines that π n (R 1 , R 2 ) must equal to π n (R P ). The rest parts of review are organized as follows. In Chapter. 2 we consider the conventional scheme of the symmetry breaking and the vacuum manifolds of different superfluid phases appeared in the two-step successive transitions in the polar distorted 3 He. The topological defects in these phases are described in terms of the conventional homotopy groups. In Chapter. 3 we discuss the composite topological objects in the vicinity of the second transition. We use the relative homotopy groups and corresponding exact sequence of homomorphisms to classify the composite objects, which are topologically stable in the vicinity of the transition. We demonstrate how fibration of the degenerate parameter spaces happens and what it results in. In order to test our theory with experiment about the KLS string wall of ROTA group, we further discuss the equilibrium extended structures of the KLS string wall with length scale around the dipole length in Chapter. 4. In Chapter. 5, we calculate NMR frequency shift -the experimental observable of the extended structures of KLS string wall by using the linear response theory. The results of numerical simulations exactly coincide with the experimental observations. We summarize the researches and discuss the future work which deserve to be focused on in Chapter. 6. In the appendices, we provide some essential background discussions about technical details. The continuous phase transition is understood as spontaneous symmetry breaking by order parameters about a primary symmetry group G. In most case, order parameters are elements of (complex) vector spaces in which the primary symmetry group G is represented. For example, the magnetization vector of ferromagnetic materials is element of 3-dimensional Euclidean space, where the SO(3) spin rotation is represented. And the order parameter of s-wave superconductor is element of complex number set, which provides S = 0 and L = 0 representation of SO S (3) × SO L (3) × U(1) group, where S and L are quantum numbers of spin and orbital angular momentums. In 3 He liquid at low temperature, the basis vectors of vector spaces are eigenfunctions of S = 1 and L = 1, thus the order parameters space consists of two 3-dimensional vector spaces and the phase space. This gives rise to the bilinear complex-valued order parameter i.e., dyadic tensor A αi In our case, the symmetry group G of normal liquid 3 He in the "nematically ordered" aerogel with the uniaxial anisotropy is different from that in the bulk 3 He where η ij is tensor describing the coupling between aerogel and orbital degree of freedom (DoF) for Cooper paring. In the case of spatially isotropic aerogel, η ij is an Chapter 2. Symmetry Breaking Phase Transitions and Topological Defects in Polar Distorted Superfluid 3 He isotropic tensor and can be written as where η 0 is the eigenvalue of η isotrpic ij . When the aerogel turns to be axially polarized like nafen aerogel, the anisotropic traceless part appears and then η ij can be written as where κ = (η 0η ⊥ ) and η ⊥ is the eigenvalue of η ij along the directions perpendicular to the axially polarized axis i.e., direction of nafen strands In the case with κ < 0, the l z = 0 angular momentum state has biggest gap and highest superfluid transition temperature where SO S (3) is the group of spin rotations; U(1) is the global gauge group of phase degree of freedom, which is broken in superfluid states; T is time reversal symmetry; where C L 2x is π rotation in orbital space about the traverse axis. Microscopic theories have predicted that the polar phase is the stable phase in this nafen distorted system In what follows, we ignore the time reversal symmetry, since it is not broken 2.2. Conventional Symmetry Breaking Scheme of Nafen Distorted 3 He and Vacuum (2.5) Starting from this normal phase vacuum, we discuss three different of phase transition: (a) from the normal phase to the polar phase; (b) from the polar phase to the PdB phase; and (c) Direct transition from the normal phase to the PdB phase. In Sec. 2.3 we consider the topological objects related to these symmetry breaking scenarios, using the conventional approaches of homotopy groups. As we mentioned, the order parameter in the p-wave spin-triplet superfluids is the dyadic tensor A αi , which transforms as a vector under spin rotation (the greek index) and as a vector under orbital rotations (the latin index). In the polar phase it has the form: where Φ is the phase, dα (≡ d) and ẑi (≡ u) are unit vectors of spin and orbital uniaxial anisotropy respectively, and ∆ P is the gap amplitude. The residual symmetry group of the polar phase, the stabilizer of the order parameter in Eq. (2.6), is Here Z S-Φ 2 = {1, C S 2x e iπ }, where C S 2x is π-rotation of the vector d about perpendicular axis and e iπ is the phase rotation by π, i.e. Φ → Φ + π. Then the vacuum manifold of the polar phase is given as (2.8) The coherence length ξ = v F /∆ P in the polar phase is the smallest length scale in our question, which determines the size of singular (hard core) topological defects in the polar phase. Let us now consider the second symmetry breaking phase transition: from the polar phase vacuum with fixed d and Φ to the PdB phase. In the vicinity of this transition the order parameter in Eq. (2.6) acquires the symmetry breaking term with amplitude q 1: (2.9) Chapter 2. Symmetry Breaking Phase Transitions and Topological Defects in Polar Distorted Superfluid 3 He Here ê1 , ê2 and d are three orthogonal vectors in spin space. The corresponding coherence length of the second transition ξ/q is large in the vicinity of this transition. This provides the hierarchy of the length scales, ξ and ξ/q ξ. The residual symmetry subgroup of the PdB phase in the symmetry breaking from the polar phase is where SO S-L (2) represents the common rotations of spin and orbital spaces. The manifold of the vacuum states, which characterizes the second symmetry breaking is: (2.11) Here PdB phase breaks one of SO(2) symmetries of H P respecting to relative rotations of spin and orbital spaces. Here we consider the two-step symmetry breaking form normal phase to PdB phase with a general view point, which the parameter q is not necessarily small. In this general case there is only a single length scale which is relevant i.e., the coherent length ξ PdB of Cooper paring in PdB phase, and thus this situation becomes similar to that of the direct transition from the normal state to the PdB phase, G → H PdB . The order parameter Eq. (2.9) of the PdB phase could be written as where ∆ ⊥ ≤ ∆ . The corresponding residual symmetry group is still Eq. (2.10), and the vacuum manifold of PdB phase in this scenario of symmetry breaking is: In this Section we consider the topologically stable defects, which emerge at each of three symmetry breaking transitions discussed in Sec. 2.2. The polar phase vacuum manifold Eq. (2.8) has the homotopy groups Half-quantum vortex (HQV) described by the Z 2 subgroup of π 1 (R P ) with core size ∼ ξ. This object also got the name "Alice string", because the d monopole transforms to the anti-monopole after going around the HQV, in the same manner as it happens for the charge going around Alice string to move around linear defect in polar phase, one is moving back to the starting point state, while the other one is continuously moving to the π-rotation state (analog to Charge conjugation state) as shown in Fig. The group π 2 (R P ) = Z describes the hedgehogs (monopoles) in the d-field, as shown in Fig. The HQVs have been identified in NMR experiments of polar phase Different with the polar phase, which has QHVs and monopoles, the topologically protected defects of PdB phase are integer-quantized phase vortices of Z and spin vortices with Z 2 in the general case as we mentioned in Sec. 2.2.3. The hard core (sized by ξ) defects (HQVs and hedgehogs) of polar phase are not supported by topology any more. Moreover, the new topological object -the Z 2 spin vortices are similar to that which have been observed in the bulk B-phase The vacuum manifold R 2 of the PdB phase generating at the symmetry breaking transition from the polar phase vacuum in Eq. (2.11) has homotopy groups: (2.16) These homotopy groups are responsible for the topological defects formed in the symmetry breaking transition from the fixed degenerate vacuum of the polar phase (with d = const and Φ = const) to the PdB phase. These topological defects are such important because they connect to defects with higher spatial dimension and then form the composite topological defects in the vicinity of the second time symmetry breaking transition. We will discuss this soon in Chapter. 3. Before that, Let us consider them in details separately. The homotopy group π 1 (R 2 ) = Z describes the spin vortices with 2πn rotation of vectors ê1 and ê2 about the fixed d vector of the polar phase. The winding number is: This relation is analogy with the winding number of integer-quantized vortices of superfluid A-phase, in which the differential 1-form is formed by the two perpendicular unit vectors in orbital degree of freedom Since in the PdB phase π 2 (R 1 ) = π 2 (R 2 ) = 0, there is no way to protect hedgehog (monopole) of polar phase topologically when the second time symmetry breaking to PdB phase occurs. In fact, the d-vector hedgehog converts to the termination point of the spin vortices of π 1 (R 2 ) with two quanta, as we will discuss in detail in the Chapter. 3. As a result the spin-vortices-dressed d-hedgehog in PdB phase, which is generated by two-step successive symmetry breaking transition, becomes the analog of Nambu monopole, which terminates the electroweak cosmic string Similar situation takes place with the HQVs of polar phase, which are not topologically stable in the PdB phase. They become the termination lines of the domain walls of π 0 (R 2 ). We will discuss this mechanism in Chapter. 3, and we will see this process actually is analogy of the mechanism, though which the Kibble-Lazarides-Shafi (KLS) domain wall appears In general the KLS wall is not topologically stable, and can be stabilized only due to symmetry reasons In this Chapter, we discuss how to practice the method of relative homotopy group within the case of two-step successive symmetry breaking transition in polar distorted superfluid 3 He. We also discuss how fibration between different vacuum manifolds emerges and significantly influence physics of topological defects. The nexus object consisting of vortex skyrmion and string monopole in the presence of orientation energy -the magnetic energy, is discussed in Sec. 3.3. As mentioned before, in the vicinity of the second transition, the system has two well separated length scales (gap energy scales), ξ and ξ/q ξ. This leads to the new classes of objects, which combine the topology of both vacuum spaces, R 1 and R 2 . That is because the order parameter fields are mapped into different degenerate vacuum manifolds of PdB phase at different spatial regions when ξ and ξ/q are well separated, thus the homotopy classes of these unusual n-loops of order parameters constitute π n (R 1 , R 2 ) This combined topology can be illustrated by the following example of the KLS string wall. At small distances ξ r ξ/q from the core of HQV, the HQV is described by the homotopy group π 1 (R P ). However, at larger distances r ξ/q, the HQV becomes the termination line of the wall, which is described by the π 0 (R 2 ) topology and has size of ξ/q. As shown in Fig. The similar physics takes place for string monopoles In order to calculate π n (R 1 , R 2 ) and properly understand the composite objects described by them, we need the help of exact sequence of homormophisms of relative homotopy groups. All calculation details about these are put into Appendix. A. Even though π n (R 1 , R 2 ) could be directly calculated, it is always good that we can get understanding of them from different viewpoint. For our case of two-step symmetry breaking phase transition, this part of story is the most excited. Recalling the Eq. (2.7) and Eq. (2.10) in last chapter, we have H PdB ⊂ H P and H P ⊂ G, then we get by the meaning of the third isomorphism theorem through which the cosets kR 2 are mapped to elements of R P isomorphically, where k ∈ R 1 . Then (i) p is surjection from R 1 to R P . Moreover, because p maps cosets of R 1 to elements of R P , (ii) the image of inverse mapping p -1 (U) with U ⊂ R P are disjoint union of cosets in R 1 because all cosets are disjoint between vacuum manifolds R 1 and R P , where R 2 is mapped into R 1 by inclusion. Fibration Eq. (3.3) immediately suggests by applying an theorem in Appendix. A.3 where e, f ∈ R P correspond to polar phase vacua with different d. More details see Appendix. A.3. Equation. The mapping diagram of the long exact sequence (LES) Eq. (A.6) in Fig. The relative homotopy group describes monopoles (hedgehogs) of d field. They survive in the vicinity of the second transition as the topological objects which terminate the spin vortices. To demonstrate this, we need the short exact sequence (SES) The boundary homormophism ∂ * describes the possible string defects connecting on the d-monopoles. As shown both in Fig. Here S 2 is the surface encircling monopole and the group Z is the group of integers n 2 -the topological charges of the hedgehog. While n 1 is the winding number of spin vortices in Eq. (2.17). The equation n 1 = 2n 2 in Eq. Those vortices, which connect with monopoles (n 2 > 0) or antimonopoles (n 2 < 0) allow the existences of complex monopole-antimonopole networks The relative homotopy group fo KLS string wall is (3.9) Even though Eq. (3.9) shows that the topological charges of string wall in the second (PdB) phase are the same as those in the first (polar) phase and they form the group of integer and half-odd integers in both phases, the physical realizations of these and the quotient space of π n (R 1 ) over the image of the mapping π n (R 2 ) → π n (R 1 ). The black arrows represent the image of homomorphisms, while the blue arrows represent the kernal of every homomorphsim. This mapping diagram prescribes the relation between the elements of the composite topological defects. In particular, it shows that the relative homotopy group It demonstrates that the nontrivial monopoles are termination points of spin vortices with the total winding number being even. As we will see in next section, this mapping relations is identical with that describing vortex skyrmions. On the other hand, the relative homotopy group ). As a result, there are two different kinds of phase vortices, that terminate and do not terminate the KLS wall. Those two classes of vortices consist of the two cosets of quotient Z/Z ∼ = Z 2 . Correspondingly, These are the vortices with half-odd integer circulation numbers and the vortices with integer circulation quanta. In these cross sections, ê1 and ê2 vectors rotate around d vector by 2π for every spin vortex. The core size of every spin vortex is ξ/q. The blue line, which surround two cores of spin vortices, is the field line of ê vectors rotation, while the cyan lines, which surround core of every spin vortices, illustrate the winding of ê vectors around the core of spin vortice. HQV( ) This diagram shows that the skyrmions soften the core of Z spin vortices with size ξ/q to size ξ H in the presence of magnetic field. In regions larger than ξ H , vortex skyrmions can be connected with spin vortices via string monopole, if their total topological charge is even according to Eq. ). There are also phase vortices described by Z, but here we ignore them because they do not influence the connection between the spin vortices and skyrmions. (composite) objects are different in the two phases. Similar with the case of string monopole, we recall the SES In the presence of magnetic field H, a new length scale appears in the PdB phase -the magnetic length ξ H ∝ |H| -1 . The magnetic length ξ H is the longest length scale if we neglect the spin-orbit coupling. As a result, we have the order parameter vacuum manifold R 1 at short distances where the magnetic energy can be neglected, and a submanifold R H 1 ⊂ R 1 at large distances (> ξ H ), where the space of the order parameter is restricted by magnetic interaction in the regions larger than ξ H . The first S 1 is the manifold of in plane d vector, while the second S 1 is the manifold of rotations of ê1 and ê2 about the d-axis. However, for q 1, the gradient energy of the d-textures is much larger than that of the textures in ê1 and ê2 fields and intensively increase the free energy of system The results for the relative homotopy group have been confirmed by calculations using the exact sequence, see details in appendices Sec. A.2.2. The mapping diagram of LES of π 2 (R 1 , S 1 × U(1)) i.e., Eq. (A.9) is shown in Fig. Following the convention in Sec. 3.2, we introduce the SES (for details see Appendix. A.2.2) 3.3. Skyrmions and Nexus in the presence of magnetic field ), this kind of object has spin vortices with even winding number on its boundary. As a result, the object described by π is the vortex skyrmion in the presence of magnetic field, which has the soft core of size ξ H represented as skyrmion, see Fig. where ), D 2 is the cross-section of skyrmion and n 1 is the winding number of spin vortices in Eq. (2.17). The Eq. (3.13) is the analog of the Mermin-Ho relation in 3 He-A As a result, their topological invariants are same. Due to this relation the vortex skyrmion can be connected to Z spin vortices with core size ξ/q via the string monopole. Such composite objects, where the monopole connects several linear objects with different characteristic length scales is called nexus. It demonstrates the interplay between π 1 and π 2 topologies. In spite of its novel and complicated structure, nexus actually connect topological objects with different characteristic energies in a topological protected binding in Eq. Originally vortex skyrmions formed by orbital and phase degenerate parameters have been suggested in 3 He-A by Anderson and Toulouse As we have seen in last section of Chapter. 3, the orientation energies with different characteristic lengths reduce the vacuum manifolds and generate nexus, which connects topological objects with different characteristic energies. In this chapter, we discuss how this mechanism runs for one dimensional nexus when we take into account the dipole energy -the smallest orientation energy in superfluid 3 He. We will see the KLS string wall with length scale ξ and ξ/q connect to spin solitons with dipole length ξ D ξ/q via HQV. The possible mesoscopic equilibrium state configurations are analyzed and numerically calculated. The resulted data will be directly used for spin dynamic response calculations in Chapter. 5 and compare with the experimental observations. The PdB phase achieved by two step successive symmetry breaking phase transition, which starts from uniaxial anisotropy normal phase vacuum, has two well separated length scales ξ and ξ/q in the vicinity of transition from polar phase to PdB phase Φ by magnetic energy. To minimize the magnetic energy, spin vector d is perpendicular to static magnetic field H (0) , while the R 2 is unchanged. When the SOC energy is taken into account, R H 1 further reduces to RSOC As a results, there are linear topological objects described by π ), in which the relative 1-loop (black solid curve) is mapped to R H 1 while its end points 0-loop is mapped to RSOC 1 . In nafen-distorted 3 He system, these length scales are magnetic length ξ H and dipole length ξ D where is the order parameter of PdB phase. d ≡ dα and ê1(2) ≡ ê1(2) α are the spin degenerate parameters and they form the triad in spin space. Φ and xi ≡ x, ŷi ≡ ŷ, ẑi ≡ ẑ are phase and orbital degenerate parameters respectively. Here |∆ ⊥1 | = |∆ ⊥2 | = |q|∆ P with |q| ≤ 1, and here the χ αβ is uniaxial tensor of magnetic susceptibility of PdB phase, H α are magnetic field strengths with α = 1, 2, 3, S a are spin densities with a = 1, 2, 3 and γ is gyromagnetic ratio where χ ⊥ and χ are transverse and longitude spin magnetic susceptibilities of PdB phase. In the experiment, a static magnetic field H (0) with fixed direction is turned on from R 1 in the region where length scale of spatial variation is larger than ξ H , as we discussed in Sec. 3.3. Because the magnetic energy locks the d vector into the plane perpendicular to H (0) , R 2 keeps the same form as it is inside the region with length scale ξ H . Then we still have in the region where condition |δ d| 1 is satisfied. In Fig. Following the same idea, the dipole length ξ D is determined by gradient energy density f grad and SOC energy density Chapter 4. Equilibrium Configurations of the Extended Structures of KLS String Wall where g D is strength of spin orbital coupling. Then we have When the Spin-Orbit coupling (SOC) is taken into account, vacuum manifolds of order parameters are further reduced from R H 1 and R 2 . In general consideration, the requirement of minimizing SOC energy in region with length scale larger than ξ D fixes the relative directions between spin vectors and orbital vectors. The resulted vacuum manifold always could be represented by spin degree of freedom because the broken symmetry is relative symmetry in the region with length scale larger than ξ D , where R SOC S is the reduced vacuum manifold of spin degree of freedom. In general case, R SOC S is a complicated space. However R SOC S may be simplified by using parametrization of d and ê1(2) vectors of A PdB αi . To facilitate comparison between experimental observations and our theoretical analysis, the paramentrizations would be used in this work, where θ is the angle between d and local orbital-coordinate frame where θ 0 = arcsin[q/(1 -|q|)]. There is a discrete symmetry for free energy of system and this discrete symmetry turns out to be the mirror symmetry between parametrization in Eq. (4.9) and the alternative in the presence of KLS domain wall. We discuss the details of this discrete symmetry and its violation in Sec. 4.4. Before that, we mainly use the parametrization in Eq. (4.9). In the region where condition |δ d| 1 is satisfied, SOC energy fixes the relative rotation of SO(2) S-L , thus R 2 reduces to R2 = Z S-Φ 2 From illustrtion of R H 1 , RSOC 1 and R2 in Fig. In the region with length scale ξ H ≤ r ≤ ξ D , we have the long exact sequence (LES) of homomorphism of π 1 (R H 1 , R 2 ) (for the details of LES, see Appendix. A.1) where i * projects spin vortices of π 1 (R 2 ) to the spin vortices of π 1 (R H 1 ) the end-points of relative 1-loop may take values from connected or disconnected subsets of R 2 . This LES can be split to the short exact sequence (SES) where ι and π are inclusion and surjection respectively. Eq. (4.13) suggests which is isomorphic to π 1 (R 1 , R 2 ) in the region smaller than ξ H ) The cosets [1/2] and [0] correspond to the presence or absence of the KLS string wall in the region ξ H < r ≤ ξ D respectively. Coset [0] ∼ = 2Z contains all free spin vortices. While Coset [1/2] ∼ = {n + 1/2|n ∈ Z} contains all spin vortices with half-odd winding number i.e., it is set of half spin vortices. When taking into account SOC, R H 1 reduces to RSOC ). ) are spin solitons. This is because the mapping between π 1 ( RSOC 1 , topological invariant of all phase vortices. As a result, the trivial linear objects of ) are all phase vortices because of im i * ∼ = ker j * . We found there are one kind of spin vortices and three kinds of spin solitons because ker k * ∼ = im ∂ * = Z 4 and j * is projection. Moreover, we found form this illustration that the subgroup ) is extension of Z S by π 0 ( RSOC 2 ) = Z 2 and then isomorphic to M. In the orange dash line panel, we shows the corresponding SES of G. As a result, HQV is 1D nexus between spin soliton of coset Then we find such that Because Eq. (4.17) is merely determined by ). ) are spin solitons and spin vortices ) are ). They correspond to free spin vortices and three kinds of spin solitons respectively. Figure. ) in rest of this review, while use phrases "solitons", "bigsolitons", "KLS-solitons" and "π-solitons" to denote particular spin textures with different |∆θ|. S , R2 ) and 1D nexus The SES of G is given as by Eq. (4.17). The mapping diagram of Eq. (4.22) is shown in the dash panel of Fig. This LES suggests here Ẑ ≡ {n S /2|n S ∈ Z}. Eq. (4.24) is one of main results in this chapter. This relation means spin solitons, which are classified by coset Because This means there are two kinds of spin soliton configurations connecting with KLS domain wall via HQV for a given element of π 1 (S 1 S , R2 ). When the topological invariant is literally 2/4, the spin soliton is spatially inseparable π-soliton in Fig. When the topological invariant is 1/4 + 1/4, the spin soliton is combination of two spatially separable spin solitons with topological invariant 1/4. In order to identify these two spatially separable spin solitons, we take in account the requirement We will see these two dramatically different spin textures of 1D nexus objects have different equilibrium free energies, different spin dynamic response properties and different NMR frequency shifts in Sec. 4.3 and Sec. 5.2. These properties help us to identify the objects which be observed in experiment. For the PdB phase generated from symmetry breaking of nonuniform polar phase, we can use the Ginzburg-Landau model to describe the system when |q| is small enough. The Ginzburg-Landau (GL) free energy consists of gradient energy and orientation energies Because ξ D ξ and the strongly uniaxial anisotropy in the presence of nafen strands, we actually did this procedure under London limit where Σ is the volume of the PdB phase sample. Plunging A PdB αi into Eq. (4.25) and substituting d, ê1 and ê2 with their parametrizations in Eq. (4.9), we get the gradient energy density and SOC energy density in term of θ and Φ where i = 1, 2, 3 are the summation indexes of spatial coordinates. In London limit, the term (g D /5)(∆ 2 ) is constant over the sample, thus we drop it in the rest. Because spin degree of freedom does not couple with phase degree of freedom, f grad (Φ, θ) is simply the summation of f grad (Φ) and f grad (θ), where f grad (Φ) and f grad (θ) are the gradient energy densities of phase and spin vectors respectively. Then f grad (Φ) achieves equilibrium independently and can be safely dropped. Moreover, because the HQVs are pinned by nafen strands, the system is translation invariant along the direction of nafen strands, thus all ∂ z θ terms vanish. Finally the free energy, which determines the equilibrium textures in London limit is where f grad (θ) and f soc (θ) are given as In this section, we utilize the nonlinear optimization BFGS algorithm to minimize the free energy functional Eq. (4.27) is the characteristic unit of London limit free energy in this review. Before talking about those numeric results and analyzing the corresponding physics, we discuss the random lattice of HQVs and 2/4 spin solitons formed by the random pinning effect of nafen strands In the experiment of PdB phase, the HQVs are pinned by nafen strands when they appear during cooling down. Hence the HQVs and KLS string walls randomly distribute in the PdB sample and form network. The statistic distribution of HQVs is uniform because there is no reason provides preferable location for HQV. This means the number of HQVs in unit area is constant for rotating PdB superfluid with angular velocity Ω. Then the average area occupied by one HQV is constant as well. We denote the average area occupied by HQV as A = D(Ω) 2 , where D(Ω) is the average distance between two HQVs. D(Ω) depends on the angular velocity as where κ 0 = h/2m is the circulation of HQV and m is mass of 3 He atom In Fig. the spin dynamic response properties of pseudo-random lattice of 2/4 spin solitons are equivalent to the spin dynamic properties of regular lattice of 2/4 spin solitons. There are two types of regular lattices as shown in Fig. However, the pseudo-random lattice model doesn't work any more when the angular velocity of PdB system increase up to critical value Ω c . Recalling that the average distance D(Ω) between two HQVs is proportional to 1/ √ Ω as shown in Eq. (4.33) For PdB system with κ 0 = 6.62 × 10 -8 m 2 /s and ξ D ∼ 10 -6 m to ∼ 10 -5 m, Eq. (4.33) suggests Ω c ∼ 10 1 rad/s to ∼ 10 3 rad/s. These values is larger enough than the angular velocity of PdB system in the experiment of Ref. In order to understand the 1D nexus object consisting of 2/4 spin soliton and KLS string wall, we start from the simpler situation in which there is absence of KLS string wall. In this case ∆ ⊥2 is single valued over the sample of superfluid, then only solitons (|∆θ| = π -2θ 0 ) with topological invariant 1/4 (θ 0 ) , 3/4 (π-θ 0 ) and bigsolitons (|∆θ| = π + 2θ 0 ) with topological invariant 1/4 (π+θ 0 ) , 3/4 (-θ 0 ) are possible in the system. These two different cases correspond to spin solitons in uniform domain with ∆ ⊥2 = +|q|∆ P or ∆ ⊥2 = -|q|∆ P respectively. Moreover, the spin textures have translation symmetry along transverse direction of spin solitons, then the question reduces to one dimensional question. As mentioned before, we use the BFGS non-linear optimization algorithm on Eq. (4.29) to get the equilibrium configuration of spin solitons In Fig. As we have discussed in Sec. 4.2.3 and Sec. 4.2.4, the HQV is 1D nexus connecting KLS domain wall and 2/4 spin solitons. In London limit, the free energy of network of 1D nexus objects is free energy of pseudo-random lattices consisting of 2/4 spin solitons. The equilibrium configuration of pseudo-random lattices is the saddle point of Eq. (4.29). The only complexity here is the topological invariant 2/4 has two different representations i.e., literal 2/4 or 1/4 + 1/4. Based on the topological analysis, we have known these two cases correspond to inseparable π-soliton configuration and separable configurations of KLS-soliton (|∆θ| = 2θ 0 ) and soliton (|∆θ| = π -2θ 0 ). In order to quantitatively get the equilibrium spin textures for both configurations, we minimize the London limit free energy Eq. (4.29) in the presence of KLS string wall. For parametriztion Eq. (4.9), KLS string wall separates two domains with oppsite ∆ ⊥2 in an unit cell of pseudo-random lattice of spin solitons. However, different from the situation with uniform domain for soliton and bigsoliton in Sec. 4.3.2, the existence of KLS domain wall induces a singularity of the London limit free energy F(θ). That is because the order parameter A PdB αi in the London limit is ill-defined on the KLS domain wall. As a result, the free energy Eq. (4.29) and corresponding Lagrangian equation of θ are also ill-defined on the KLS domain wall. On the other hand, we know θ is a continuous function everywhere for 2/4 spin soliton because the relative 1-loop of π 1 (S 1 S , R2 ) is continuous mapping. Then θ keeps single-valued and continuous. These facts require us to set a proper boundary condition of θ on the KLS domain wall. The London limit free energy Eq. (4.29) can be minimized with this boundary condition. Because the free energy and Lagrangian equation of θ is ill-defined on the KLS domain wall in London limit, θ of different domains in the vicinity of the KLS domain wall does not relate to each other by Lagrangian equation. Then θ in two different domains, which are separated by KLS domain wall, are determined independently in two uniform domains with opposite ∆ ⊥2 . In this situation, to keep the continuity of θ on the KLS domain wall, the boundary condition of θ must be a common value of spin solitons in both two domains with opposite ∆ ⊥2 . For the inseparable spin soliton with literally topological invariant 2/4, the natural choice is the stationary point of big-soliton and soliton i.e., θ KLS = π/2. This boundary condition indicates the π-soliton may be understood as a hybrid of big-soliton and soliton in London limit. As for the separable spin soliton with topological invariant 1/4 + 1/4, because all KLS-solitons have common values θ = 0 or θ = π on the KLS domain wall, there are two options of boundary condition In Fig. where Σ is the region which spin solitons occupy. Its area in x-y plane is around Dξ D . Then the integral of fsoc in Eq. (4.34) can be evaluated as The first integral in Eq. ( As a result, the reduced London limit free energy is evaluated as Eq. (4.37) immediately suggests SOC energy is dominating energy of London limit free energy when the average distance D is big and the F(θ) London < 0 because Other information which Eq. (4.37) indicates is the London limit free energy of unit cell of pseudo-random lattice is decreasing function for |q| as long as SOC energy is dominating energy. This is because fsoc | y>0 + fsoc | y<0 is decreasing function of |q|. However, this is not true any more when D is small. Because SOC energy is not dominating energy in this case, the positive-definite gradient energy is competitive with SOC energy. As a result, we can find from Fig. n = D -2 to the Eq. (4.37), Then we find the London limit free energy density of pseudo-random lattices trends to be a constant determined by q when SOC energy is dominating with large D. We can clearly see this form Fig. . This coincides with the numerical results in Fig. In all cases, we find the equilibrium free energies of one-half unit cell of separable spin solitons (KLS soliotns and solitons) are slightly higher than those of inseparable spin solitons (π-solitons). As a result, the equilibrium free energy densities of pseudo-random lattices consisting of separable spin solitons (KLS-soliotns and solitons) are also slightly higher than those of inseparable spin solitons (π-solitons). This significant fact suggests that the equilibrium states which was observed in experiment of rotating PdB system is the pseudo-random lattice of inseparable 2/4 spin solitons (π-solitons) of 1D nexus objects. We will see this is true in next chapter by calculating the spin dynamic response under weak magnetic drive. As we mentioned in Sec. 4.1, The London limit free energy F(θ) London has a mirror symmetry when the coordinates are permuted to each other i.e., F[θ(x , y )] = F[θ(x, y)] with x = y and y = x. This mirror symmetry does not vanish even in the presence of 1D nexus object. As a result, the spin textures of 2/4 spin solitons have this mirror symmetry as well. This discrete symmetry originates from the reduction of degenerate space of order parameter by requirement of continuity of order parameter in the presence of KLS domain wall. In order to understand this, we start from the degenerate manifold of PdB which generates from symmetry breaking transition of polar phase vacuum. In this case, R PdB ∼ = SO(2) S-L × Z S-Φ 2 , in which the nontrivial element of Z S-Φ 2 corresponds to the presence of KLS domain wall the parametrization of vacuum state (ii) is and the corresponding dimensionless London limit free energy is where Comparing Eq. (4.40) and Eq. ( However, this discrete symmetry may be destroyed if the direction of domain wall is fixed in both vacuum states (i) and (ii). In this case, the term containing γ 3 in Eq. (4.40) is invariant for both parametrizations, and thus violates this mirror symmetry. As a result, the equilibrium sates of Eq. (4.40) and Eq. (4.29) are not identical any more. Then we need to check the equilibrium London limit free energy of these two different equilibrium states. We did the same numeric minimizations of London limit free energy with parameteization Eq. (4.39) and calculated the surface densities of equilibrium free energies of pseudo-random lattices in vacuum state (ii). The latter can be evaluated as Then we can expect the surface densities of equilibrium London limit free energy of vacuum state (ii) are slightly higher than those of vacuum state (i) when |q| ≤ 0.2. In Fig. Chapter 5 In this chapter, we discuss how the network of mesoscopic extended structure of KLS string wall -pseudo random lattice of We have talked the topological origin of network of 1D nexus objects with topological invariant 2/4 as well as their equilibrium free energies in previous chapters. Because there are two kinds of spin solitons connecting with KLS string wall, the pseudo-random lattices consisting of them have different equilibrium free energy densities. To compare with the experiments and check the theories, we must calculate the spin dynamic response. Under weak enough magnetic drive, the nuclear spin magnetization of PdB superfluid responds a NMR signal when the frequency of magnetic drive matches the transverse spin dynamic mode. Because the spin dynamics of symmetry breaking states of 3 He is strongly influenced by SOC energy which is determined by the relative orientations between spin and orbital degenerate parameters, the NMR of continuous wave drive is a perfect tool, which can be used to detect the pseudo-random lattice of 1D nexus objects network via dynamics of spin solitons When the PdB superfluid is equilibrium, the spin density has equilibrium value S (0) over the system. If the weak homogeneous magnetic drive is turned on, the spin density gets a tiny variation δS(r, t), where r and t are spatial and time coordinates respectively. In this perturbed system, the transverse spin density δS + may be expanded as where δH a ≡ δH is the homogeneous weak magnetic drive and a = 1, 2, 3 are spatial coordinate indexes. Thus the PdB superfluid under magnetic drive is a linear response system if |δH| |H (0) | Spin-orbit coupling plays an important role in the NMR measurements of significant properties of different superfluid phases in 3 He system. This is because the coherence of superfluid states, which breaks relative symmetry between spin and orbital degree of freedom , strengthens the SOC energy In this section, we utilize the spin dynamic equations dominated by SOC energy to get δS + /δH a and corresponding eigenequations of poles In the limit of hydrodynamics, the system of dynamic equations of spin densities S α and spin vectors are system of Liouville equations where α = 1, 2, 3 are the indexes of spatial coordinates. And V a α denote the three spin vectors of order parameter i.e., The hydrodynamic free energy of PdB superfluid dominated by SOC energy is ( Thus Eq. (5.2) can be further written as and where β = 1, 2, 3 are indexes of spatial components of hydrodynamic variables. The Chapter 5. Spin Dynamical Response and NMR Poisson brackets between S α and V a α can be gotten by the commutators-based methods in Ref. where r 1 and r 2 are the spatial coordinates and αβγ is the Levi-Civita symbol. After plugging Eq. (5.6) into Eq. (5.4) and Eq. (5.5), the coupled first order dynamic equations of spin densities S α and V a α are given as ) where δ = (χ ⊥χ )/χ in which χ ⊥ and χ are the transverse magnetic susceptibility and the longitude magnetic susceptibility of PdB phase respectively. with The details of calculation from Eq. (5.4) to Eq. (5.8) are shown in Appendix. C.1. Starting from the first order equations of spin densities and degenerate parameters in Eq. (5.7) and Eq. (5.8), we can further derive the second order spin dynamic response equations of δS α under weak magnetic drive δH α . This was done by plugging and into Eq. (5.7) and Eq. (5.8). Here the S α and V a(0) α are the equilibrium spin densities and equilibrium degenerate parameters respectively. While the δS α (r, t) and δV a α (r, t) are the dynamic parts of the perturbed spin densities and degenerate parameters. The H (0) α is the static magnetic field and δH α (t) = |δH| xe -iωt is the homogeneous RF continuous-wave drive. We put the details of calculations in Appendix. C.2 and the derived spin dynamic response equations within frequency form is and where The first two terms of Eq. (5.13) correspond to the NMR response of Larmor precession of δS α with frequency ω L = γH (0) . While the last two terms of Eq. (5.13) induce the NMR frequency shift, and they conventionally are called torque terms. From Eq. (5.14) and Eq. (5.15), we found that torque terms are fully determined by the equilibrium textures of spin vectors. In our case with pseudo-random lattices of 2/4 spin solitons, this means the NMR frequency shifts are totally induced by equilibrium textures of spin solitons in 1D nexus objects. That's why the transverse NMR spectrum is perfect tool to observe the network of 1D nexus objects and network of KLS string wall. Taking into account the static magnetic field H (0) = |H (0) | ŷ and the parametrization Eq. (4.9), we can derive the dynamic response equations of transverse spin density under weak magnetic drive δH(t), see the detail of calculation in Appendix. C.3. This calculation gives (5.17) The poles of spin dynamic response function δS + /δH 1 , which are determined by eigenequation correspond to the eigen-modes of transverse NMR frequency shift related to Larmor frequency induced by pseudo-random lattices of 1D nexus objects. We numerically solve this eigen-equation in next section with different D and |q|. For facilitating the numeric calculation, we firstly transform the spin dynamic eigenequation Eq. gives where ρ 1 = ∆ ⊥1 /∆ P and ρ 2 = ∆ ⊥2 /∆ P . Here the dimensionless eigenvalue is the transverse NMR frequency shift under weak magnetic drive and (5.23) We use the Galerkin strategy under finite-element partition to solve Eq. (5.20) Because δH α is low energy drive, we merely consider the spin dynamic response mode with the lowest λ of Eq. (5.20). In addition, the ratio intensity of NMR signal is another observable besides the frequency shift λ. the scaling rule between ratio intensity and angular velocity Ω is a significant feature of the system. The surface density of ratio intensity, which is generated by unit area of pseudo-random lattices of 1D nexuses, is given as where n = D -2 is the density of 1D nexuses and σ is area of one-half of unit cell of pseudo-random lattice. We demonstrate the moduli of the lowest transverse spin dynamic response modes |δS + (ω)| located in the unit cells of pseudo-random lattices of 1D nexus objects with inseparable and separable 2/4 spin solitons in Fig. The transverse NMR frequency shifts λ of pseudo-random lattices of inseparable spin solitons (π-solitons) exactly coincide with the observed values in the experiment of Ref. In Sec. 4.3.4, based on the topological analysis and free energy calculations, we suggested the possible equilibrium state which was observed in experiment is the pseudo-random lattices of 2/4 inseparable spin solitons of 1D nexus objects network. Here we see the results of numeric simulations of transverse NMR spin dynamic response of this kind of pseudo-random lattices indeed coincide with the experimental observations. In contrast with pseudo-random lattices consisting of inseparable 2/4 spin solitons, the transverse NMR frequency shifts of pseudo-random lattices consisting of separable spin solitons strongly deviate from the results of experimental observations, see Fig. Chapter 6 In this review, we discussed a series of significant results originated from fibration between vacuum manifolds of nafen-distorted superfluid 3 He. This fibration occurs in the vicinity of the second time symmetry breaking of two-step successive symmetry breaking phase transition from normal phase vacuum to PdB phase via polar phase. In this symmetry breaking pattern, any topological objects of the polar phase, which are described by π n (R P ), covert to the composite topological defects described by π n (R 1 , R 2 ) in PdB phase because of the fibration. For the superfluid 3 He system, the possible composite topological defects are string monopole (Nambu monopole) and cosmological KLS string wall. The ROTA group has experimentally observed the KLS string wall in nafendisorted superfluid 3 He In the first time symmetry breaking from normal phase to polar phase, the vacuum manifold is R P . After the second time symmetry breaking, the vacuum manifold of system turn to be R 1 . Because the fibration between R 1 and R P , the topological objects of polar phase convert to the composite cosmological objects in PdB phase. While the submanifold R 2 of R 1 becomes to the fiber, which describes the vacuum manifold of PdB generated from a given element of R P . In physics, this is equivalent to symmetry breaking of polar phase with fixed value of the order parameter vacuum to PdB phase. Thus the observed KLS domain wall terminated by the HQV is determined by the nontrivial element of π 1 (R 1 , R 2 ), which isomorphic to π 1 (R P ). The other composite object, which is still waiting for observation, is the string monopole (hedgehog), which terminates the string (the spin vortex). Its topology is determined by the nontrivial element of π 2 (R 1 , R 2 ) ∼ = π 2 (R P ). The core of the monopole is of coherence length size ξ, while the spin vortices have the soft core of size ξ/q ξ. In the work from 1970s and later, the relative homotopy groups have been applied for classification of topological defects on the surface of the ordered system i.e., the boojum Following the idea of group theory application, We also considered the more complicated object -the nexus, which combines the monopole, the string terminated by monopole, and skyrmion (topological soliton) terminated by the same monopole. Such object in the PdB phase arises in the presence of orientation energies i.e., magnetic energy, which provides magnetic length ξ H . In other condensed system, such as superconductor-ferromagnet heterostructures, the objects combining vortices and skyrmions were recently considered. These objects were suggested contain Majorana bound states As discussions in Chapter. 4 show, the nexus is powerful and useful tool, which allows the composite cosmological objects with high energies can be directly detected through low energy spin dynamics. We discussed in details that the topological origin of the novel 1D nexus objects in PdB phase of nafen-distorted 3 He superfluid. In contrast to the topological objects named 2D nexus objects which are similar but live in higher spatial dimension in PdB superfluid The observation is supported not only by topological analysis but also by the calculations of equilibrium free energies and the spin dynamic response. For the superfluid 3 He distorted by nafen-strands, the locations of the HQVs are fixed once they appear during cooling down with a given angular velocity. In the limit of low angular velocity i.e., Ω Ω c , the average distance between pinned HQVs is around hundred microns. As a result, the KLS domain walls attached on the HQVs have very large geometric sizes when the symmetry breaking transition from polar phase to PdB phase occurs. In the spatial regions with length scales ξ D , the SOC energy reduces the vacuum manifolds to discrete sets. The reduced vacuum manifolds have spin solitons, which are described by relative homotopy group π ). Similar process also happens in bulk Helium-3 superfluid and spinor Bose condensate In Chapter. 4 and Chapter. 5, we proved the 2/4 spin solitons smoothly connected on every KLS string wall and form pseudo-random lattices in small angular velocity. The equilibrium configurations and the surface densities of equilibrium free energies of two different pseudo-random lattices with topological invariant 2/4 are numerically evaluated with self-developed non-linear optimization library. These two types of pseudo-random lattices correspond to two representations of group G = π 1 (S 1 S , R2 ), the relative homotopy group of 2/4 spin solitons of 1D nexus objects. Our analysis shows the pseudo-random lattices of inseparable spin solitons are energy favorable. And we further calculated the transverse spin dynamic response under NMR continuous wave drive to compare with the experimental observations. The results of pseudo-random lattices consisting of inseparable spin solitons exactly coincide with the experimental measurements. In the limit of low angular velocity, the pseudo-random lattices models work very well because the randomness of the network of 1D nexus objects doesn't influence the spin textures of spin solitons. This means the randomness and disorder introduced by nafen-aerogel are lost in the low angular velocity. However, when the angular velocity approaches the critic value Ω c , the coupling between spin solitons may dramatically modify the equilibrium spin textures of random lattices of 1D nexus objects. In this case, the random distributions of KLS string wall lead to spin solitons glasses In summary, we demonstrated and reveled the significant influences of fibration between vacuum manifolds for a given symmetry breaking system. Similar phenomena may also occurs in other systems, in which the similar fibration of vacuum manifolds happens. For example, the ferroelectric nematic liquid crystal, which was observed recently Typically the state of the system with topological defects represents the excited state of the system. However, the topological defects can form the ground state. Earlier it was suggested that the suppression of the B-phase on the boundary of superfluid 3 He may lead to formation of stripe phase in 3 He-B under nanoscale confinement in a slab geometry In the presence of magnetic field the corresponding exact sequence is From SES in Eq. (A.10) it follows that π That means that only those objects, which have an even total winding number of spin rotation, are topologically protected. These objects are the d-vector skyrmions. Since π 2 (R 1 , S 1 × U(1)) ∼ = π 2 (R 2 , R 1 ), these d-skyrmions can terminate on the d-monopole, which in turn is the end point of spin vortices with the even number of spin rotation and is the linear analogs of the original point-like skyrmion Fibration is a significant concepts of Homotopy theory and B has a homotopy If such f really exists, then we say p has homotopy lifting property One classic example of fibration is the Hopf fibrarion between S 3 and S 2 . Here the fibration p : S 3 → S 2 is Hopf mapping. Another example is Serre fibration between SO(3) and S 2 . For this example, SO(3) is universal covering space of S 2 . For where φ i (x) ∈ S N , c i ∈ C and x is space coordinates. Pluging Eq. (B.1) into the dimensionless London limit free energy Eq. (4.29), we get the finite-dimensional approximation of the continuous London limit free energy. Eq. (B.2) actually transfers the continuous solution θ over Σ to a discrete set of coefficients c 1 , c 2 , c 3 ...c i ... c N . We can get θ from Eq. (B.1) as long as we get c i . Moreover, there is additional benefit of Eq. (B.2), that is Eq. (B.2) converts the free energy functional to a high dimensional function, which can be numerically minimized by non-linear optimization. In order to get c i by using computer, we still need a properly chosen set of φ i ∈ S N . And we hope φ i could be as simple as possible. This special set of φ i is set of interpolation functions on triangular elements of finite elements (FE) partition where c represents the triangular element (cell) of the partition. The benefit of converting free energy functional into the form og Eq. (B.3) is we only need to deal the explicit form of φ i on a small cell, other than on the whole solving domain. In this situation, we can expect any element (e.g., θ for our problem) of S N is a linear function on every c as long as they connect continuously with each other and c keeps be small. In most case, this element linear function is given as where with ) Plugging Eq. (B.4) into Eq. (B.3), and keep in mind that the coefficients c α of cell should be reorganized as c i of whole domain, we get (- where a ij is a sparse matrix and contains different summations of the quadratic integration in Eq. (B.3). After the conversion of the continuous free energy functional to high-dimensional function in Eq. (B.7), we must consider how to minimize this function, which usually has 4000 to 6000 c i . What we chosen is the popular BFGS algorithm Require: Given vector c 0 i , epsilon > 0 and unit matrix H 0 = I, and calculate the zeroth gradient Ca lcu l a t e A M a t r i x ( ) : lengthRowElement ( 0 ) , lengthColElement ( 0 ) , elementArrayPtr (NULL) , lengthRowNode ( 0 ) , lengthColNode ( 0 ) , nodeArrayPtr (NULL) { } ; / / d e f a u l t c o n s t r u c t o r t o i n i t i l a z e d a t a member / / p a s s i n t h e e l e m e n t s a r r a y and n o d e a r r a y void g e t A l l A r r a y ( i n t * * a r r a y 1 p t r , double * * a r r a y 2 p t r , Plugging Eq. (C.4), Eq. (C.5), Eq. (C.6) and Eq. (C.7) into Eq. (5.4) and Eq. (5.5), we get Eq. (5.7) and Eq. (5.8). Firstly we take time-derivative to Eq. ( f