Among various perovskite proton conducting oxides, Y-doped BaZrO3 perovskite is a promising material for electrochemical hydrogen devices due to the good chemical stability and higher proton conductivity at higher operating temperatures like 500-800 °C. For the practical application of the functional BaZrO3 proton conductor in the electrochemical hydrogen devices, its necessary to understand the isotopic effect of proton conductivity. To understand the isotopic effect of proton conductivity in the barium zirconates, in this study, the proton conductivity in the Ar, (Ar + 4% H2), (Ar + 4% D2), (Ar + H2O), (Ar + D2O), and O2 atmospheres were measured for two different compositions: BaZr0.9Y0.1O2.95 (BZY), and BaZr0.955Y0.03Co0.015O2.97 (BZYC) in the temperature range from 500 °C to 1000 °C. By comparing the obtained results, a significant difference in sinterability, conductivity, and the isotopic effect was observed due to the co-doping of the Co element in the BaZr1-xYxO3-α proton conductor. Power production using hydrogen is one of the sustainable and safe energy generation methods Oxide ceramic materials have excellent chemical and physical features such as hardness, incombustibility, and rustproofness when compared with metals and plastic materials In our previous studies, we reported the hydrogen solubilities and diffusivities behavior along with the distribution of hydrogen in the outer and inner portion of the BZY and BZYC proton conducting oxide materials using the tritium imaging plate (TIP) technique (Fig. BaZrO3 itself does not show high proton conductivity but has high proton conductivity by substituting the zirconium ion (Zr 4+ ) at the B site with a trivalent cation, i.e., In 3+ , Yb 3+ , Y 3+ , Gd 3+ , etc. Among them, it has been reported that when doped with yttrium ion (Y 3+ ), it exhibits the highest proton conductivity In other words, Y-doped BaZrO3 has a perovskite structure with oxygen vacancies as shown in Fig. Perovskite proton conductive oxides generally take protons not only from the hydrogen atmosphere but also from the water vapor atmosphere and exhibit proton conductivity. In the case of acceptor-doped perovskitestructured oxides, the uptake of protons from hydrogen (Eq. ( Here, O o × is an oxygen ion with a neutral charge, OH o • is a hydroxide ion with a single positive charge sitting on an oxygen site, e ′ is an electron, and V o •• is an oxygen ion vacancy with two positive charges. Eq. ( The Vehicle mechanism Since the lattice in the crystal oscillates with a specific frequency and the same applies to the oxygen ions in the perovskite-type oxide, the distance between the oxygen ions in the structure is constantly changing. Protons in perovskite-type oxides are present in the vicinity of oxygen ions in the structure, so they can be treated as OHo. The distance between this OHo and the oxygen ion at the adjacent site is shortened by the lattice vibration, and the proton can jump to the oxygen ion at the adjacent site. The mechanism by which protons move in this manner is called the Grotthuss mechanism. This mechanism can generally be considered in two steps. One is an operation in which protons transfer to an oxygen ion at an adjacent site, and the other is an operation in which protons rotate around an oxygen ion (reorientation). In the Grotthuss mechanism, by repeating these two steps, protons are conducted through the structure (Fig. The raw material powders BaZr0.9Y0.1O3-α (BZY) and BaZr0.955Y0.03Co0.015O3-α (BZYC) (prepared by TYK Corporation Ltd., Japan) were used in this study to prepare the pellets by the solid-state reaction method Table 1 also provides the results of density measurement by the Archimedes method for BZY and BZYC samples. The relative density of BZY and BZYC was 98 %, and 99.7%, respectively. As a result of the density measurement, it was confirmed that all samples show very high relative density, and the density of BZYC was improved than BZY. The SEM images for both powder and sintered samples of BZY, and BZYC are shown in Fig. Both sides of the BZY and BZYC sintered pellets were wet-polished with a diamond polishing pad and SiC waterresistant abrasive papers (# 400, # 600, # 800, # 1200, BUEHLER) to achieve a thickness of 0.86 mm. After that, platinum (Pt) paste was applied to both sides of the sample and baked at 1000 °C for 1 h in an air atmosphere. After baking, the side surface of the sample was lightly polished, and it was confirmed that there was no electrical continuity on any sides of the samples Fig. The measurement atmospheres were argon (Ar), Ar containing 4% hydrogen isotope (hereinafter, (Ar + 4% H2), and (Ar + 4% D2)), wet Ar containing hydrogen isotope (hereinafter, (Ar + H2O), and (Ar + D2O)), and oxygen (O2) with a flow rate of 100 mL/min. Wet Ar was measured by bubbling H2O or D2O with Ar gas. The H2O and D2O pressures were considered to be saturated water vapor pressures. The formula for calculating the conductivity is shown below (Eq. 8) Here, σ is the conductivity, I is the steady-state value of the current, t is the thickness of the measured sample, S is the cross-sectional area of the sample, and V is the value of the applied voltage. In addition, BZYC sample was measured three times in each atmosphere to confirm the reproducibility. In this paper, the conductivity of BZY in Ar, (Ar + 4% H2), (Ar + 4% D2), (Ar + H2O), (Ar + D2O), and O2 atmospheres are denoted as σ BZY_Ar , σ BZY_H 2 , σ BZY_D 2 , σ BZY_H 2 O , σ BZY_D 2 O , and σ BZY_O 2 , respectively. Similarly, the conductivity of BZYC in Ar, (Ar + 4% H2), (Ar + 4% D2), (Ar + H2O), (Ar + D2O), and O2 atmospheres are denoted as σ BZYC_Ar , σ BZYC_H 2 , σ BZYC_D 2 , σ BZYC_H 2 O , σ BZYC_D 2 O , and σ BZYC_O 2 , respectively. All conductivities data in dry ((Ar + 4% H2) or (Ar + 4% D2)) or wet hydrogen-containing atmospheres ((Ar + H2O) or (Ar + D2O)) for BZY are given in Table All conductivities data in dry ((Ar + 4% H2) or (Ar + 4% D2)) or wet hydrogen-containing atmospheres ((Ar + H2O) or (Ar + D2O)) for BZYC are given in Table The closed blue square data points of Fig. The open blue square data points of Fig. Table For both BZY and BZYC, the conductivity is higher in the dry and wet hydrogen-containing atmospheres than in the Ar atmosphere. In addition, since isotope dependence was confirmed in both dry and wet hydrogencontaining atmospheres, it is considered that BZY and BZYC have proton conductivity, and their proton transport is due to the Grotthuss mechanism In BZYC, the conductivity at 900 °C and 1000 °C is similar to that of BZY in both dry and wet hydrogencontaining atmospheres, but it is confirmed that the conductivity tended to be higher than that of BZY as the temperature became lower. This is thought to be due to hydrogen solubility. From our previous HT study, we observed that the hydrogen solubility of BZY decreases as the temperature decreases, while that of BZYC increases (Fig. When the isotope dependence of conductivity is treated based on the classical theory with OH bond and OD bond as harmonic oscillators, the difference in the frequency of the bond affects the pre-exponential factor of the diffusion, presented in Eq. ( Regarding the isotope dependence in the perovskite-type proton conductive oxide, the difference in zeropoint vibration energy between the O-H bond and O-D bond oscillators is also considered. Hibino et al. As a result of this study, both BZY and BZYC tended to become more isotope dependent as the temperature became lower in the dry hydrogen-containing atmosphere, which is consistent with the literature The conductivity of BZY obtained in this study is higher at 800-1000 °C than the literature values measured by Schober et al. in hydrogen atmosphere (sintering conditions: 1715 °C, 30 h, measurement atmosphere: Ar + 4% H2) (Fig. In this study, the conductivity of BaZr0.9Y0.1O3-α and BaZr0.955Y0.03Co0.015O3-α was investigated using a 2-terminal DC method to understand the isotopic effect of proton conductivity along with the co-doped sintering aid Co content effect. The BZY and BZYC samples showed higher conductivity both in the dry hydrogen and wet hydrogen atmospheres than in the Ar atmosphere. The conductivity increased even in the O2 atmosphere, and the conductivity difference increased as the temperature decreased. Therefore, it is confirmed that BZY and BZYC are mixed conductors because of the consideration of conductivity by oxide ions and holes along with proton conduction. From the obtained results and discussion, it is clear that sintering aid Co not only improves the sinterability but also improves the conductivity at 500-800 °C. Since isotopic dependence was confirmed both in the dry and wet hydrogen atmospheres, it could be assumed that BZY and BZYC are the potential protonconducting functional oxide materials for the electrochemical hydrogen devices. 