We study the quench dynamics of a topological p-wave superfluid with two competing order parameters, ∆±(t). When the system is prepared in the p + ip ground state and the interaction strength is quenched, only ∆+(t) is nonzero. However, we show that fluctuations in the initial conditions result in the growth of ∆-(t) and chaotic oscillations of both order parameters. We term this behavior phase III'. In addition, there are two other types of late time dynamics -phase I where both order parameters decay to zero and phase II where ∆+(t) asymptotes to a nonzero constant while ∆-(t) oscillates near zero. Although the model is nonintegrable, we are able to map out the exact phase boundaries in parameter space. Interestingly, we find phase III' is unstable with respect to breaking the time reversal symmetry of the interaction. When one of the order parameters is favored in the Hamiltonian, the other one rapidly vanishes and the previously chaotic phase III' is replaced by the Floquet topological phase III that is seen in the integrable chiral p-wave model. One of the most significant problems challenging our modern understanding of physics is the characterization of many body systems that are far from equilibrium. The extent to which conventional tools and frameworks such as the Landau-Ginzburg-Wilson theory, topological order, and universality remain valid descriptions of systems out of equilibrium is not readily understood. Fortunately, in recent years, there has been great progress in the development of both experimental and theoretical tools that allow us to begin answering such questions. Advances in ultra cold atomic systems In this work, we characterize the late time quantum quench dynamics of a topological 2D p-wave superfluid with two competing order parameters Unfortunately, attempts to experimentally realize such a gas have proven difficult due to the short lifetimes before losses induced by three-body processes destabilize the gas Though this seems promising, a deeper understanding of the nonequilibrium p-wave superfluid is necessary before conclusions can be drawn. The degree of fine tuning required to realize this behavior has not been understood and, naturally, the question arises as to whether these dynamics are stable against small fluctuations around the p + ip ground state due to, e.g., additional interactions, finite temperature, or coupling to the environment. In other words, do deviations from the p + ip ground state affect the existence of this phase? Instabilities in oscillatory dynamical phases have been shown to occur in similar models of superfluids Through the use of analytical techniques and numerical simulations we are able to map out the entire interaction quench phase diagram of the p-wave superfluid, see Fig. phase diagram for quenches from a slightly perturbed p -ip ground state is obtained via a simple interchange of ∆ + and ∆ -. Unfortunately, we find that small fluctuations completely destroy the Floquet topological superfluid. The quench phase diagram of the p-wave superfluid consists of three nonequilibrium phases classified according to the late time dynamics of the two order parameter pairing amplitudes ∆ + (t) and ∆ -(t). In phase I, both amplitudes decay to zero due to dephasing. In phase II, ∆ + (t) has damped oscillations and decays to a nonzero constant while ∆ -(t) stays small and shows persistent nonperiodic oscillations. In phase III', the two order parameter amplitudes grow and exhibit chaotic oscillations. Surprisingly, even though the p-wave Hamiltonian is nonintegrable, we find an analytic description of the phase boundaries that is consistent with our numerical simulations. The resulting quantum quench phase diagram is shown in Fig. To gain insight into the properties of phase III', we FIG. consider the limit ∆ i → 0, which corresponds to the horizontal axis of the quench phase diagram in Fig. For small interaction strengths, γ = ∆ f √ 2ǫ F , where ǫ F is the Fermi energy. As we increase ∆ f moving towards the phase III'-II transition point along the ∆ i = 0 line, γ decreases until it vanishes at the transition becoming purely imaginary afterwards. We find that the transition point is at ∆ f = ∆ QCP . Thus, three transitions occur at the same value of the ground state pairing amplitude ∆ f = ∆ QCP : (i) the equilibrium BCS-BEC quantum phase transition, (ii) the transition between nonequilibrium phases III' and II for ∆ i = 0 and (iii) change in the stability of the normal state with respect to superfluid interactions. A rather remarkable byproduct of this analysis is that the equilibrium BCS-BEC quantum phase transition can be defined solely in terms of the stability of the normal state -the BCS phase is when the normal state is dynamically unstable and the BEC phase is when it is stable. Finally, we study the effects of time reversal symmetry breaking on the late time dynamics of the quenched pwave superfluid. The p-wave interactions can be divided into p + ip and p -ip interaction channels. Time reversal invariance requires that interaction strengths of the two channels be equal to each other, G + = G -= G. This is the model we consider throughout this paper (except Sec. V) and whose quench phase diagram appears in Fig. The simplest realistic 2-D p-wave BCS Hamiltonian is given by where the operator ĉ † k (ĉ k ) creates (annihilates) a spinless fermion with momentum k and G > 0 is the dimensionless BCS coupling. We will focus only on the interaction terms with p = 0, i.e. the reduced BCS model, and neglect the pair breaking terms, p = 0. This approximation is valid away from equilibrium as long as the characteristic timescale of the dynamics is less than the time for pair breaking processes to occur. We expect this to be the case away from the quantum critical point (and its nonequilibrium extension) where the chemical potential, μ (μ ∞ ), vanishes It is convenient to express Eq. ( With this replacement, the reduced (p = 0) Hamiltonian becomes where, without loss of generality, we have set m = 1. The primed sums indicate that the momenta are restricted to the upper half plane so that k = {k x ∈ R, k y ≥ 0} and double counting is avoided. It is easily verified that the pseudospins satisfy the usual commutation relations ŝa k , ŝb q = iδ k,q ǫ abc ŝc k . In a mean-field treatment, the Hamiltonian in Eq. ( where is the pairing amplitude associated with the p ± ip superfluid order parameter, φ k is the polar angle in the k x , k y plane, and the expectation values are taken with respect to the many-body wavefunction of the system. The Heisenberg equations of motion for the operators are with H k an effective magnetic field given by This mean-field treatment is generally exact for pairing models such as our Hamiltonian, Eq. ( Upon taking the expectation value of both sides of Eq. ( In equilibrium, the two order parameter amplitudes have a time dependent phase that winds with frequency 2μ, where the amplitude ∆ 0,± is time independent and μ is the chemical potential to be determined self-consistently. This phase arises due to the requirement that the expectation values in Eq. ( Minimizing with respect to ∆ 0,± one finds that the absolute minimum corresponds to one of the two order parameter amplitudes being zero: {∆ 0,+ = 0, ∆ 0,-= 0} for the p + ip ground state or {∆ 0,+ = 0, ∆ 0,-= 0} for the p -ip ground state and by relating the total particle number It is often more convenient to work with the continuum limit of Eq. ( and where we have performed the integral over the polar angle, φ k , and defined ǫ = k 2 , g = GL 2 /4, and n = N/L 2 . We evaluate these integrals in Appendix B. An important feature of the p-wave superfluid ground state is that it can be tuned across a topological phase transition by varying the chemical potential. In the weak pairing BCS phase (μ > 0), the system is topologically nontrivial and can support chiral Majorana edge modes while in the strong pairing BEC phase (μ < 0), the system is topologically trivial where W -1 is the k = -1 branch of the Lambert W-function. To see how this transition comes about, we can look at the topological invariant characterizing the two phases. There are two possible formulations of the invariant based on the winding of the two vector fields underlying the problem. One definition of the invariant can be given in terms of the winding of the static magnetic field, h k , which acts on the pseudospins. The field winding number is defined as with ĥk = h k |h k | . In both the BCS and BEC ground states h k is given by where, without loss of generality, we have taken ∆ 0,+ to be real. Computing the integral yields For μ > 0, the field winding number gives W = 1 while for μ < 0 it gives W = 0. At the critical point, the field winding number is not a well defined quantity. An alternative definition of the topological invariant can be given in terms of the winding of the pseudospins, s k . The pseudospin winding number is defined as Substituting the ground state configuration from Eq. ( The equivalence between these two definitions of the topological invariant only holds in equilibrium. The pseudospin winding number, Q, depends only on the initial state of the system and is conserved throughout the dynamics so it is of little interest to us In this work, we are interested in studying the dynamics of the two superfluid order parameters after a sudden quench of the interaction strength. We consider a system that is initially prepared in a state arbitrarily close to the p + ip ground state of the mean-field p-wave Hamiltonian Eq. ( We begin by considering the dynamics of the two order parameters following a quench from the exact p + ip ground state -Eq. ( Substituting Eq. ( where in the second line we have taken the continuum limit and performed the integral over φ. The above equation shows that for any p + ip initial state ∆ -remains zero throughout the entire evolution. A similar substitution into the equations of motion Eq. ( Eq. ( discarding the second term, keeping only p = 0 terms in the interaction as before, and rewriting the fermionic operators in terms of the Anderson pseudospins we arrive at The mean field Hamiltonian simplifies to (25) The equations of motion generated by this Hamiltonian after applying Eq. ( This simplification is crucial in understanding the p + ip dynamics of the p-wave superfluid as the mean field p + ip model was shown to be classically integrable using a Lax vector construction In phase I, the order parameter amplitude decays to zero due to dephasing, |∆ + (t)| → 0. At late times, the spins precess with frequencies k 2 around the z-axis and the system is in a gapless superconducting state. This is different from the normal state which would have all spins aligned along the z-axis. In phase II, |∆ + (t)| exhibits damped oscillations and decays to a nonzero constant, |∆ + (t)| → ∆ ∞ > 0. The order parameter amplitude has a time dependent phase that winds with frequency 2μ ∞ , i.e., similar to its ground state behavior in Eq. ( FIG. The expression for the field is of the same form as in the ground state, see Eq. ( This is similar to the ground state result, Eq. ( In phase III, the order parameter amplitude undergoes persistent oscillations that can be described in terms of elliptic functions. Additionally, it was shown in Ref. It is somewhat surprising that the quench dynamics of the full p-wave Hamiltonian can be solved exactly for quenches from a pure p + ip ground state given that this Hamiltonian is nonintegrable. To what extent the dynamics and topological structure survive infinitesimally small perturbations from this fine tuned initial state is studied in the following sections. Naturally, the system cannot be prepared in a p + ip ground state, where ∆ 0,-= 0, with absolute purity. Inevitably, there are fluctuations around this state that can come from a variety of sources. We will see below that pure p + ip oscillatory dynamics are unstable towards exponential growth of the competing p-ip order associated with ∆ 0,-. Therefore, the precise mechanism of the fluctuations is unimportant as long as they seed a nonzero initial ∆ 0,-. To understand the effect of such fluctuations we study quenches from an initial state described by Eq. ( For quenches whose coordinates lie within phases I or II of the p + ip phase diagram, the dynamics of the full p-wave Hamiltonian closely mirror that of the truncated p + ip model, as shown in Fig. From numerical simulations we find the persistent oscillations observed in phase III are not stable to the ∆ - perturbation. Unlike in phases I and II, the p -ip order parameter amplitude exhibits unstable growth, and FIG. after some delay time, τ , the persistent oscillations are destroyed and the system enters a regime of chaotic dynamics which we label as phase III'. Since quenches from g i = 0 to not too large g f belong to phase III', we can understand the behavior in this phase by linearizing the equations of motion about the unpaired (free Fermi gas) ground state, which has ∆ i = 0 and μ i = 2πn. In the continuum limit, the growth exponent γ is defined through the self-consistency equation of the linearized where ζ = ω + iγ. We can rewrite g f in terms of ∆ f through Eq. ( To simplify the analysis we may consider a quench to weak final pairing ∆ f ≪ ∆ QCP . In this case we can take μ i ∼ μ f ≫ ∆ 2 f and look for solutions of the form ζ = 2μ i + iγ for which we find γ = ∆ f √ 2μ i . From numerical simulations we find the initial growth of ∆ -(t) to be suppressed by nonlinear effects and occurring at later times than predicted by the linear analysis. We can also use Eq. ( In order to have real solutions for ω, we must require that μ f ≤ 0. This first happens when ∆ f = ∆ QCP where μ f = 0 and, therefore, the quantum critical point defines the separation point, see Fig. Interestingly, this stability analysis also has important implications for the equilibrium physics of the p-wave superfluid. Indeed, we investigated here the stability of the unpaired ground state (normal state) with respect to the p-wave Hamiltonian Eq. ( The late time dynamics in phase III' appear to be chaotic in contrast to phase III of the p + ip model. We believe this is because the full p-wave model, Eq. (3), is nonintegrable unlike its truncated p + ip counterpart, Eq. At late times, the irregular oscillations of the two order parameters are out of phase with one another. The system dynamics are no longer periodic and the Floquet topological superfluid phase seen in Ref. Although the full p-wave Hamiltonian is nonintegrable, it is possible to determine the phase boundaries analytically. We have seen that the dynamics of ∆ + (t) in phases I and II are nearly identical to those of the p + ip model. We can therefore expect this phase boundary to remain unchanged. In phase III', we have seen that there is an instability of ∆ -(t) that leads to chaotic dynamics of both the orders at late times. However, this instability is confined to the phase III region of the p + ip model and again there is no choice but for the phase boundary to remain unchanged between phases II and III'. The exact phase boundaries for the full p-wave model can then be by performing the same analysis of the Lax roots outlined in Ref. There are differences between shapes of the various lines in our phase diagram as compared to that of Ref. due to the cutoff prescription of Ref. 36, which incorporates the chemical potential, i.e., replaces our Λ with Λ + μ with μ being the equilibrium chemical potential. Because μ depends on the coupling constant, this cutoff changes as a result of a quench. The cutoff represents an energy scale governed by physics at higher energies, such as, e.g., the Debye energy in phonon mediated superconductors. It is more natural to keep this energy scale fixed and unaffected by the quench. We therefore use a fixed cutoff throughout the quench phase diagram, which also results in simpler and more intuitive line shapes. In particular, our phase III' boundary terminates at ∆ QCP along the ∆ f axis and our μ ∞ = 0 line is a straight vertical line defined by the equation ∆ f = ∆ QCP . In the previous section, we have seen that the phase III dynamics are unstable to a perturbation of the pure p + ip initial state. To understand the nature of this instability we study a variation of the Hamiltonian in Eq. ( and define new order parameter amplitudes For G + = G -this Hamiltonian turns into the full p-wave Hamiltonian Eq. (3) we studied above, see Eq. ( We consider quenches from a perturbed p + ip initial state for the two cases where one channel dominates over the other employing the same approach to dynamics as before. For G + > G -, the dominant channel corresponds to the p+ip channel. Using numerical simulations we find that for any quench, the p -ip order parameter, ∆ -(t), quickly vanishes, as shown in Fig. For G + < G -, the dominant channel corresponds to the p -ip channel and it is not immediately clear which channel the dynamics should favor. On one hand, the initial state favors the p + ip channel while the p -ip channel only acts as a perturbation, on the other hand, the equations of motion suppress the p + ip channel and favor the p -ip channel. We find that, in this case, the p + ip order parameter is the one to rapidly decay to zero while the p -ip order parameter survives to exhibit the late time dynamics (in phase I both order parameters decay to zero). This behavior is shown in Fig. We see that the stronger channel always wins at late times regardless of the initial state. This means that the time reversal invariant p-wave Hamiltonian is an unstable FIG. In this work we have studied the quench dynamics of a p-wave BCS superfluid with two competing order parameters, ∆ ± (t). We have shown that when the system is prepared near its p + ip ground state and the interaction strength is quenched, the late time dynamics can be characterized into three distinct phases: in phase I both order parameters decay to zero, in phase II ∆ + (t) decays to a nonzero constant and ∆ -(t) oscillates near zero, and in phase III' the two order parameters are nonzero and undergo chaotic dynamics, see Fig. Although our analysis has only been performed for the p-wave BCS superfluid, we expect a similar chaotic phase to emerge in far from equilibrium dynamics of other models where there are competing order parameters related by a symmetry, for example, in a Fermi gas with more than two species of fermions with pairwise attraction between them 