Solution-processable interlayers are an important building block for the commer- Doping is a key technology to tune the electronic properties of semiconductor devices. In inorganic semiconductors, doping is usually achieved by substituting impurity atoms into the crystal lattice. In organic materials, doping was first carried out using halogens and alkali metals as p-and n-dopants, respectively, leading, for example, to the discovery of conductive polymers in the late 1970s. In this paper, we study the potential of cross-linking to provide stable and versatile doped organic interlayers for fully solution-processed organic electronic devices. Small molecule cross-linkers have been widely used in literature to "lock" the morphology of the active layer in OSCs by establishing covalent bindings. Materials and Cross-Linking Procedure Figure To clarify the effect of cross-linking and rinsing on the electrical properties, we carried out four-point probe conductivity measurements on thin films on glass. As a reference, we studied a 2 wt% doped P3HT film, resulting in a conductivity of 3 × 10 -4 S cm -1 . Upon adding the cross-linker and UV-treating the film, the conductivity decreased by roughly a factor of three to 9 × 10 -5 S cm -1 . A small decrease in conductivity can be expected upon adding the cross-linker, since it may induce changes in film morphology and possibly also affect the doping efficiency. After rinsing of the cross-linked and doped P3HT film with 1,2dichlorbenzene, which is the solvent used for subsequent preparation of the active layer in the OSC devices described below, the conductivity dropped further by more than an order of magnitude to 4 × 10 -6 S cm -1 . The significant decrease upon rinsing the film suggests that the dopants are not fully insolublized or spatially stable in the cross-linked polymer network. However, the insoluble cross-linked film still enables the fabrication of multilayer structures from solution and, even after rinsing, the film exhibits an adequate conductivity for use as an extraction layer (vide infra). The results from the conductivity measurements are summarized in Table To test the functionality of the cross-linked doped P3HT films, we implemented them as HTL in OSCs with a standard device architecture (see Figure Figure However, a different behavior to the PEDOT:PSS reference arises when the devices are operated closer to the open-circuit voltage (V OC ). The doped P3HT device displays lower forward currents and also a slight S-shape around V OC , which leads to a reduced fill factor compared to the reference device. This is further illustrated in Figure To test whether the resistive properties of the cross-linked P3HT can be improved, we performed a doping concentration study. In principle, increasing the doping is expected to lead to a higher density of mobile holes in the HTL and thereby a higher conductivity. Figure In order to clarify whether diffusion of dopants into the active layer is taking place, we measured the doping concentration in the active layer of complete OSC devices using the charge extraction by linearly increasing voltage technique in the doping-induced capacitive regime (doping-CELIV). where ε is the relative dielectric constant, ε 0 the vacuum permittivity, A the voltage rise speed and L the active-layer thickness. In the case of sufficiently high doping, an additional time-dependent extraction current ∆j(t) caused by the extraction of doping-induced charge carriers is added to the transient current response, j(t) = j 0 + ∆j(t). Figure For devices with a doped P3HT layer at the anode, the current transients have a different shape due to an additional time-dependent current ∆j(t) originating from doping-induced free charge carriers in the active layer. In Figure In order to understand the effect of the apparent bulk doping on the device performance, we performed numerical device simulations using a one-dimensional drift-diffusion model. However, the qualitative statement that the degradation of the device performance can be explained by undesired doping in the bulk alone remains unaffected. Figure Since holes move much more slowly than electrons, a space charge region (SCR) is formed near the anode, while the electric field is screened in the vicinity of the cathode. However, due to the greatly reduced recombination rate and the resulting long diffusion length, electrons and holes are also effectively collected from the quasi-neutral region in which f c is only slightly smaller than in the SCR (where f c → 1). Thus, we cannot make the common simplification of assuming of a step-like collection probability with 100% collection in the SCR and 0% collection in the field-free region. where V 0 is the built-in voltage. in Figure This provides a reasonable explanation of why the photocurrent (corrected for parasitic absorption) in the optimized device with a 4 wt% doped HTL is even slightly higher than in the PEDOT:PSS reference device (see Figure We can thus conclude from this section that while the cross-linked P3HT host withstands the following deposition steps, at least some of the dopant Mo(tfd-CO 2 Me) 3 is released from the HTL and diffuses into the active layer. The higher the weight fraction of the dopant in the HTL, the more will diffuse into the active layer and cause bulk doping. A certain bulk doping level will not degrade the device performance and, in the case of the P3HT:PCBM blend investigated herein, can even compensate for the space charge effects due to imbalanced charge transport. However, if the bulk doping concentration is too high, the device photocurrent will drop, since a significant fraction of the charge carriers is generated in a field-free region with low collection probability. In summary, we have investigated the potential of cross-linked doped organic semiconductors as hole transport layer in organic solar cells. As a model system, we studied interlayers of P3HT doped with Mo(tfd-CO 2 Me) 3 that were cross-linked with a photo-reactive tris-azide cross-linker. We have shown that the extraction properties of the cross-linked doped P3HT are comparable to the reference material PEDOT:PSS. The fill factor, however, is found to be lower than in the reference devices, which is due to resistive losses close to the open-circuit voltage. This could not be avoided by increasing the doping in the hole transport layer, since a proportion of the dopants is found to diffuse into the active layer. We were able to detect the undesired bulk doping by CELIV measurements and to understand its effect using numerical simulations. At high doping concentrations, thick-film devices suffer significant losses in photocurrent since a large part of the charge carriers is generated in a field-free region where recombination losses occur. To avoid this, it is crucial to develop cross-linkers that not only stabilize the host material, but also the dopant in the doped interlayer. Materials The cross-linker benzene-1,3,5-triyl tris(4-azido-2,3,5,6-tetrafluorobenzoate) was synthesized as described in the Supporting Information. The dopant Mo(tfd-CO 2 Me) 3 was synthesized as reported elsewhere. Preparation of Cross-Linked HTLs P3HT was mixed with the cross-linker in chlorobenzene at a molar ratio of 100:1 P3HT monomers:cross-linker molecules. The dopant was added at different weight percentages ranging from 2 to 10 wt%. The concentration of P3HT in the solution was kept at 5 mg mL -1 for all dopant ratios. The solution was filtered through a 0.2 μm PTFE filter. The P3HT films were spin-coated and annealed at 120 • C for 5 min directly after the deposition. The annealed films were exposed to UV light at a wavelength of 254 nm for 1 min in order to activate and complete the cross-linking mechanism. An UV lamp with two 8 W light tubes was used and samples were kept at a distance of roughly 10 cm from the light source during exposure. The films were afterwards rinsed with chlorobenzene to remove any residual soluble material. Device Fabrication Organic solar cells were prepared with the device structure glass/ indium tin oxide (ITO)/HTL/P3HT:PCBM/LiF/Al. The ITO substrates (Präzisions Glas & Optik GmbH) were structured by etching with HCl (37-38%). After ultrasonication in de-ionized water, acetone and isopropanol, the etched substrates were treated in a plasma cleaner. Subsequently, the HTL was deposited via spin-coating. Cross-linked HTLs were spin-coated inside a nitrogen-filled glovebox. For the reference devices, the PEDOT:PSS solution was filtered through a 0.45 μm PVDF filter and deposited in ambient air. The devices were then transferred into the glovebox and dried on a hotplate for 10 min at 120 • C. For the active layer, P3HT and PCBM were mixed at 1:1 weight ratio and dissolved in 1,2-dichlorobenzene with a total concentration of 45 mg mL -1 . The active layer was deposited by static spin-coating at 1000 min -1 for 2:45 min. After deposition, the films were annealed at 150 • C for 10 min inside a glass petri dish. The top contact, consisting of 0.8 nm LiF and 60 nm Al, was thermally evaporated through a shadow mask. The device area of about 4 mm 2 was given by the overlap between the bottom and front electrode. Measurements Conductivity measurements were performed under nitrogen atmosphere using a four-point probe setup in a linear configuration. Films were prepared on 2.5×2.5 cm 2 square shaped insulating glass slides for the measurements. Spring-loaded gold probes were used in the setup with a spacing of 1.79 mm. Measurements were performed using a source meter (Keithley 2400) applying a current on the outer probes, while the voltage drop over the inner probes was measured. The measured voltage as a function of current showed a linear behavior in the measured regime. Conductivities were calculated using finite-size corrections. as reported previously. The crosslinker has previously been obtained from the reaction of 4-azido-2,3,5,6-tetrafluorobenzoyl chloride and benzene-1,3,5-triol. S-12 