We present a new mechanical probe to study the properties of superfluid 3 He at microkelvin temperatures down to 100μK. The setup consists of a set of coils for levitating a superconducting sphere and controlling its motion in a wide variety of regimes. In particular, the realisation of motion of a levitating body at a uniform velocity presents both an experimental challenge and a promising direction into the study of the edge states in topological superfluid 3 He-B. We include the theoretical study of the device stability and simulations to illustrate the capabilities of the control system. Starting from Andronikashvili's experiment with the torsional pendulum Despite being the simplest form of motion, uniform motion is notoriously difficult to implement in a low-temperature experiment, mainly due to the limitations on heat release and available space Recently, the uniform motion technique was used to discover anomalously long lifetimes of quasiparticles bound to the surfaces of superfluid In this work we present the design of an experimental setup consisting of a levitation and control system for moving a body in a wide range of motion regimes, from oscillatory to uniform, inside superfluid The setup Our experimental technique is based on the setup shown in Fig. The inner bottom coil has a radius of R 1 = 6 mm while the outer has the radius of R 2 = 15 mm. We can create magnetic fields in opposite directions controlling the direction of the currents I 1 and I 2 so we can obtain the right levitation conditions as we will discuss in the next section. A superconducting body exhibits diamagnetic behaviour. Diamagnetic objects are repelled by magnetic fields and can be levitated. However, in order to achieve stable levitation, the total energy must posses a minimum at the critical point, where gravitational and magnetic forces balance out. The stability conditions, as will be shown below, impose certain constraints on our design. On the other hand, we have limitations for the maximum currents in the coils, dictated by the critical current, and for the maximum field, dictated by the critical field of the superconducting material of the levitating object, which is 28 mT in indium. The differential amount of work done by the magnetic field on the body is -dM • B, while the induced magnetic moment reads 12 Note that the factor α appears as a geometric factor and V is the volume of the body. In the case of a superconducting spherical body where m is the mass of the body and g is the gravitational acceleration. The points where levitation occurs are called critical points, as we have ∇U = 0. For the equilibrium to be stable, the energy must be at a minimum, i.e. the energy will increase in all the directions from the critical points. In mathematical form, the conditions are 14 We can perform an exact analysis of the stability. Up to small corrections, the field created by a coil can be approximated by the one created by a ring of radius a with n turns carrying a current I as 12 with k = 4ar/[(r + a) 2 + z 2 ] as the argument for the elliptic integrals of the first and second type and B r , B z the radial and vertical components of the field. Using this expression we can compute analytically the magnetic field created by the bottom coils. The stability conditions (3) depend only on the magnetic field configuration as we can see from (2). Thus, in order to achieve a stable levitation, we need to fulfill the condition ∇U = 0, in the region where ∂ 2 x B 2 > 0, ∂ 2 y B 2 > 0, ∂ 2 z B 2 > 0, here B is the modulus of the magnetic field. An important consequence of the critical condition of the force being null is that it involves only the density ρ of the levitated body as it reads In order to control the density, the spherical body can be made by coating a plastic material with indium as represented in the inset of Fig. When the sphere is displaced out of the equilibrium position, it starts to oscillate. As the viscosity is very low, we need to suppress these oscillations by introducing a control system. The control system also will allow us to move the sphere with a constant velocity, which is crucial for the studies of surface excitations in The motion around the equilibrium position in the horizontal direction are nonlinear harmonic oscillations whose frequency depends on the amplitude of the motion, but also on the intensity of the magnetic field produced by the bottom coils. In order to prevent the oscillations and to move the sphere at a (quasi-)constant velocity, we can apply a pre-calculated force As an example, in order to move the sphere from x 1 = 0 mm to x 2 = +2 mm, with a uniform velocity of v 0 = 0.02 m/s we need to use a time-dependent current in the lateral coils of the form: Here the current I L (t) is in amps and t is in seconds. The motion comprises three stages: acceleration, uniform motion and deceleration corresponding to the three time intervals in Eq. 7. The first stage, from t = 0 s to t 1 = 0.01 s, represents the acceleration period of time for reducing the oscillations. The second stage, from t 1 to t 2 , is the time interval in which uniform motion is induced, where t 2 = 0.12 s. The third stage, from t = t 2 to t = 0.13 s, represents the time interval where the decelerating pulse is applied to stop the motion of the sphere. The lateral coils are fed with currents producing the field in the same direction, i.e. considering the coils in the y-axis, looking in the positive direction, both coils would carry clockwise currents to move the sphere in the positive y direction. The result can be seen in Fig. We can also use a similar control to suppress the vertical oscillations. These oscillations are produced due to the inhomogeneity of the magnetic field in addition to the distortion of the stability region produced by the side coils. The vertical control is implemented by adding a small synchronised time-dependent current to the bottom coils. The current in the inner coil is shown in Eq. 8 and the current applied to the outer coil is shown in Eq. 9. We can see in Fig. The vertical control process consists of three different stages. In the first stage, from t = 0 s to t 1 = 0.12 s, the current is increased in the inner bottom coil (C 1 ) to compensate the lack of lift produced by the introduction of the horizontal control. Meanwhile, the magnitude of the current in the outer coil (C 2 ) is reduced to increase the upward magnetic field component. Without this stage, the vertical position would fall 200 μm, producing large oscillations in the process. In the second stage, at t = t 1 a downward harmonic pulse (0.13 A in amplitude, 0.006 s long) is applied in the inner coil (C 1 ) to reduce the oscillations produced by the horizontal control at t = t 2 . These oscillations would produce increments in the horizontal velocity up to 2 cm s -1 without the control pulse. Finally, at t = t 3 = 0.17 s, another downward pulse (0.01 A in amplitude, 0.006 s long) is introduced in the inner coil (C 1 ) to completely remove the oscillations. We also need to implement the position detection system to monitor the motion of the sphere and to confirm the validity of our design. For this purpose we will utilise further two coils with axes along x and y. These detection coils will be run at an AC current with a frequency by far exceeding all characteristic mechanical frequencies. The change in the position of the diamagnetic sphere will affect the inductance of the coils which will be registered as a change in their impedance. As a proof of concept, we have developed a levitation and control system to explore properties of superfluid The design consists of a pair of nested coils at the bottom of the cell, which provide the levitation force. The same coils play a role in the control of the sphere's motion. Two pairs of opposing lateral coils in a perpendicular arrangement complete the control system. As shown in this work, the control system allows the uniform motion of the sphere in the horizontal plane. The work presented includes a detailed study of the stability of the set-up and the motion of the sphere in the horizontal plane at uniform velocity. We include the time dependence of the current in the coils needed to control the spurious oscillations of the sphere. We believe that this levitronic device will open up a new trend in the low temperature research and the exploration of the mechanical properties of quantum fluids as well as topological defects within superfluids.