We demonstrate a blind zone-suppressed and flash-emitting solid-state Lidar based on lens-assisted beam steering (LABS) technology. As a proof-of-concept demonstration, with a design of subwavelength-gap one-dimensional (1D) long-emitter array and multi-wavelength flash beam emitting, the device was measured to have 5%-blind zone suppression, 0.06°/point-deflection step and 4.2 μs-scanning speed. In time-of-flight (TOF) ranging experiments, Lidar systems have field of view of 11.3°×8.1° (normal device) or 0.9°×8.1° (blind-zone suppressed device), far-field number of resolved points of 192 and a detection distance of 10 m. This work demonstrates the possibility that a new integrated beam-steering technology can be implemented in a Lidar without sacrificing other performance. Light detection and ranging (Lidar) technologies have been widely applied in autonomous driving, sensing, wind detection, etc. In recent years, all solid-state Lidar systems have attracted wide attention for their high potential to achieve a revolutionary performance. The key point is to replace the bulky mechanical beam-steering components with the solid-state non-mechanical beam-steering components. Various non-mechanical beam-steering technologies have been proposed including lens-assisted beam steering (LABS) Various LABS devices have been explored with different features including ring switches The existence of blind zone in the field of view (FOV) results from the principle of discrete beam steering in LABS devices. As the far-field FOV is exactly the image of the beam pattern on the emitter plane, any gap between two emitters will lead to a blind zone in the FOV. Therefore, blind zone can be suppressed by increasing the fill factor of the emitter array, i.e., the emitters should be placed as dense as possible. For 2D emitter array, the emitter fill factor is limited by switch size, waveguidebending radius and/or emitter size. In a few reported architectures with either 2D ring emitter array The steering speed of LABS device is another issue as it determines the target detection speed in Lidar applications. The widely used thermo-optic switches In this work, we demonstrate a hybrid LABS-based Lidar system that overcomes the fundamental limits in LABS. Firstly, an off-chip cylindrical lens is setting on switchable 1D long-emitter array to obtain high beam quality. Then with a novel Lidar structure that implements a parallel flash beam emitting and subwavelength-gap 1D long-emitter array, the blind zone, one fundamental limit of LABS, is significantly reduced to 5%, corresponding to a deflection angle resolution of 0.06°/point. Moreover, the detection speed, another fundamental limit, can be multiplied by the number of parallel channels. In the proof-ofconcept experiment, the Lidar works under time-of-light ranging mode with 16×12-point beam steering, 11.3°×8.1° field of view and 25-dB background suppression. A blind-zone suppressed LABS Lidar with a FOV of 0.9°×8.1° is also implemented for ranging experiment. This work demonstrates that the fundamental limits of LABS can be overcome with proper Lidar design without sacrificing other performance, which would be a solid step towards a truly practical all solid-state Lidar for various applications including autonomous driving and 3D imaging, etc. To overcome the fundamental limits of blind zone and limited beamsteering speed, a wavelength-assisted LABS design is employed, as shown in Fig. The beam-steering principle in two dimensions is further illustrated in Fig. ( ) where w is the near-field beam diameter, l is the size of the emitter array and f is the focal length of two lenses. The beam steering step θ'xoz can be expressed as: ( where p is the distance between two adjacent emitters, N is the number of emitters. As each emitter corresponds to a beam direction in the far field, N emitters correspond to N different beam directions and thus the number of resolved points in the far field is N. In yoz plane, as depicted in Fig. where Φ is the diffraction angle, λ is the wavelength, β is the propagation constant of light mode in the grating, k0 is the wave number in vacuum, Λ is the grating period. The FOV angle φyoz can be derived by differentiating Eq. ( where ng =-(λ 2 /2π)•(dβ/dλ) is the group index, nr=(β/k0-λ/Λ) is the modal equivalent index of the radiated light, and Δλ is the wavelength range of input light. The beam divergence Δφyoz is expressed as follows based on Fraunhofer diffraction theory where L is the effective grating length when light power decreases to 1/e. The divergence and emitting angles remain unchanged in yoz plane when light beams propagate through cylindrical lens. Similarly, the farfield beam pattern in yoz plane is then obtained by the FT lens. According to Eqs. ( To briefly summarize, beam steering in the xoz plane is determined by the beam pattern on the emitter plane. The blind zone in the far field is generated by the gap between two adjacent grating emitters. Beam steering in the yoz plane is determined by the wavelength tuning, which is gapless in the far field and does not create blind zone. Moreover, simultaneously emitting multiple wavelength (flash beam emitting) can multiply the detection speed by the number of wavelength channels. Although similar hybrid architectures are also proposed in some LABS ( ) devices, the reported works all have limited performance in some key specifications. A detailed performances comparison among our work and other hybrid architectures has been listed in Table The chip was fabricated on a 6×16-mm 2 silicon-nitride on isolator wafer with a silicon photonic CMOS process. A minimum feature size of 200 nm in grating structure is achieved by electron beam lithography (EBL) process. Generally, the emission efficiency of the Si3N4 Bragg grating is limited because of the low refractive index contrast compared with silicon. Methods including distributed Bragg reflector 2D non-mechanical beam steering in our device is achieved by guiding the light to emit from a certain emitter in the array and tuning the input wavelength. In the experiment, a wavelength-tunable continuous wave laser is coupled into the chip through a lensed fiber for wavelengthassisted beam steering demonstration. The light is routed into one of the16 emitters by the cascaded 1×2 MZI switches on the chip. Above the chip, a cylindrical lens is utilized to collimate and steer the up-emitting light in xoz plane, as described in section 2. We first characterize the grating emission properties by removing the cylindrical lens and placing a Fourier transform lens (FT lens, a circular plano-convex lens with 10-mm focal length), as shown in Fig. To further confirm the measurement accuracy of the steering angles, we also measured the far-field beam patterns by directly placing the infrared camera 1 m away from the device, as shown in Fig. As explained in Section 2, 1D long-emitter array in our design allows densely placed grating emitters and the gap between adjacent gratings can be significantly reduced, corresponding to a highly suppressed blind zone in the far field. Our previous work shows a blind zone suppression with defocusing method but the cost is the increase of beam divergence. Further demonstration of blind-zone suppressed beam steering is carried on our device with 0.6-μm-gap waveguide grating emitter array. We have obtained a far-field FOV of 0.91° based on LABS and an FOV of 8.1°based on wavelength tuning in our device, as depicted in Fig. The Lidar that overcomes the fundamental limits of LABS is then demonstrated, as shown in Fig. The advantage of such a Lidar design is that it fully exploits the low control complexity and clean beam emission of LABS while overcoming its fundamental limits of blind zone and relatively low speed. The blind zone is eliminated in y direction by wavelength tuning and suppressed in x direction by reducing the gap between emitters. The speed is improved by flash beam emitting. That is, all the light pulses with different wavelengths emits simultaneously. Such a parallel detection multiplies the detection speed per pixel by the number of wavelength channels. The experimentally measured spectra and time-domain waveforms of the pre-processed light source are shown in Figs. where Pt is the power of emitted light from the transmitter, Ar is the receiver aperture, rt is the reflectivity of target, ta is the air transmission The loss related to the beam propagation and target diffuse reflection is estimated to be ~50 dB according to Eq. To evaluate the ranging accuracy, three groups of ranging experiments by LABS (measurement 1, 2) and wavelength tuning (measurement 3) are performed. Targets are placed with a separation of 15 cm within a range of 3 m in the horizontal direction (LABS direction) and a separation of 20 cm within a range of 1.5 m in the vertical direction (wavelength direction), respectively. The corresponding waveforms of the returning signals are provided in Fig. where τr is the pulse rise time, SNR is the signal-to-noise ratio of the returning signal and c is the speed of light in vacuum. For our system, the pulse rise time is 0.825 ns limited by the bandwidth of amplified APD (200 MHz), the SNR of the returning signal is ~46.7. Therefore, the ranging error is calculated to be ~2.65 mm. Additionally, a proof-of-concept demonstration of blind-zone suppression in Lidar system has been performed. A comparison experiment of ranging between devices with 121-μm-spacing grating array and 0.6-μm-spacing grating array. The ranging results along emitter direction are shown in Fig. To further improve the performance of the LABS chip and Lidar system, a few factors can be considered. The first is the grating emitter. Current 2-time etching for the staircase grating increases the fabrication error, complexity and cost. A substitute method of slated grating can be introduced to obtain a high emission efficiency as well as low fabrication complexity In conclusion, a solid-state TOF Lidar based on hybrid LABS technology is demonstrated on the silicon nitride platform. The implementation of 1D long-emitter array and flash beam emitting overcomes the fundamental limits of blind zone and relatively low speed in LABS technology while still maintaining its advantages of very low control complexity of O(log2N) and excellent background suppression. This work could be a very promising solution for the all solid-state integrated Lidar applications. As a proof-of-concept experiment, we have achieved 16×12-point beam steering and detection in a time-of-light ranging mode. The emission beam has 0.1°×0.5° divergence in two orthogonal directions, 11.3°×8.1° (normal device) or 0.9°×8.1° (blind-zone suppressed device) field of view and 25-dB background suppression. a