A path to lowering the economic barrier associated with the high cost of metal additively manufactured components is to reduce the waste via powder reuse (powder cycled back into the process) and recycling (powder chemically, physically, or thermally processed to recover the original properties) strategies. In electron beam powder bed fusion, there is a possibility of reusing 95 -98% of the powder that is not melted. However, there is a lack of systematic studies focusing on quantifying the variation of powder properties induced by number of reuse cycles. This work compares the influence of multiple reuse cycles, as well as powder blends created from reused powder, on various powder characteristics such as the morphology, size distribution, flow properties, packing properties and chemical composition (oxygen and nitrogen content). It was found that there is an increase in measured response in powder size distribution, tapped density, Hausner ratio, Carr index, basic flow energy and specific energy, dynamic angle of repose, oxygen, and nitrogen content, while the bulk density remained largely unchanged. The performance of a powder-based additively manufactured part highly relies on the quality of the powder feedstock properties. Vock et al. When looking at powder feedstock for powder bed fusion (PBF) processes, Popov et al. Particle Size Distribution (PSD) is a significant parameter in determining the minimum layer thickness, the minimum achievable feature size in final parts; and affects the powder-energy source interaction. The EB-PBF process uses a nominal PSD between 45 μm to 105 μm. Simchi The flowability of the powder is also very important, to ensure uniform layers when dispensed, distributed, and/or spread onto the build area. It is generally understood that in order to obtain powder layers with homogeneous density, it is important to ensure that the powders are free-flowing and exhibit good flow properties. Powder flowability behavior can be correlated to the size, shape, moisture content, and packing efficiency of the powder particles Inert gas fusion analysis (i.e., LECO) provides quantitative data on the absolute oxygen and nitrogen content in the powders. This analysis is essential to understand whether the evolution of the oxygen and nitrogen content in the reused Ti-6Al-4V powder, is within the allowable concentration limits defined by ASTM 2924-14 There has been an increasing interest in fabricating parts using EB-PBF. The EB-PBF process offers distinct advantages when compared to other metal PBF processes. In EB-PBF, components are manufactured under a controlled vacuum and at an elevated temperature To continually improve the process, it is important to identify, address, and overcome some of the process limitations. Debroy et al. Some studies also reported flowability results for virgin and reused powders. Tang et al. Studies on the effect of reusing powder on chemical composition showed that reusing Ti-6Al-4V can lead to an increase in oxygen content. Sun et al. Based on these studies, a powder suitability criteria can be created for reused powders (see Table The Ti-6Al-4V powder used was supplied by Advanced Powders & Coatings, Canada. The Grade 5 plasma-atomized powder (Batch number: P1321) was obtained in its pre-alloyed form with a size range of 45-105 μm. The chemical composition of the powder conforms to ASTM F2924 for a Grade 5 Ti-6Al-4V powder (according to batch information provided by powder supplier). A total of seven powder types were assessed for this study. The powder obtained from the supplier is referred to as the virgin powder (henceforth known as Genesis 0 or G0 In order to assess the powder particle morphology, field emission microscopy (SEM, Zeiss Ultra & Tescan VEGA3) observations were performed. A Camsizer X2 (Retsch GmbH, Germany) was used to measure the PSD of the various powder types. The system uses the principle of digital image processing Powder rheology was investigated using a powder rheometer (FT4, Freeman Technology, UK), rotating drum (Granudrum; Granutools, Belgium) and an automated tap density instrument (GranuPack; Granutools, Belgium). Performance metrics were collected, such as the basic flow energy (BFE), specific energy (SE), bulk density (ρ0), tap density after 500 taps (ρ500), Hausner ratio (H r ) and Carr index (C). To characterize the resistance to flow, eleven test cycles were run with a condition cycle run between each test. During the tests, the precision blade was rotated downwards and upwards through the fixed volume of powder to establish a flow pattern, where the resistance of the powder to the blade yielded the bulk flow properties. The BFE is defined as the energy required to displace a powder when the blade is moving downward, and the powder is constrained. As described by Freeman and Fu Chemical analysis for the various powders were performed using inert gas fusion using a LECO TCH 600 (Leco Corporation, USA) instrument to analyze the oxygen and nitrogen content in the powders. All powder characterisation experiments were performed in triplicate and the average values are reported in this manuscript. As the number of reuse cycles increases, properties such as chemical composition, surface features (e.g., surface roughness and overall particle roundness), and physical and thermal properties are expected to change. Therefore, understanding the powder behavior with reuse is important for both cost and quality control. The powder is predominantly spherical in its as-received (or virgin) condition. Figure The deformed, broken, clip-clap and shattered particle defects are attributed to the recovery via the blasting procedure. The homogenization of powder via tumbling on a jar-mill, may result in numberless collisions between particles, and in friction and wear in presence of air and therefore the tumbling procedure may be another reason for these defects. The particles with molten specks and elongated particles are attributed to the temperature conditions that lead to overheating and smelting of the particles and satellites The ρ500 values are presented in Figure The Carr index (C) is the measure of the extent to which a powder can be compressed (without deforming the particles). The compressibility of the powder is expected to affect the continuity and uniformity of the powder layer, with lower C values in favor of the formation of denser layers. As mentioned earlier, H r is an index that helps assess the flowability of the powder. According to Goyal et al. This degradation of flow properties of the powder blends, as well as the reused individual genesis powders is attributed to the deviation in the powder morphology as observed in the SEM micrographs (Figure Figure The AOR values at the lowest and highest drum rotation speed (i.e., 2 rpm and 60 rpm, respectively) were correlated with the particle size D10, D50 and D90 values. As can be seen from Figure Figure The GranuDrum data interpretation guide mentions that the flowability of a powder is measured as a function of the shearing rates, and therefore rheological properties like shear thinning or shear thickening could be evaluated with this instrument. If the powder AOR and CI increase with an increase in drum speed, the powder is said to show a shear-thickening behavior. All powders in this study show a shear-thickening behavior (Figure The effect of powder reused on interparticle cohesion is contrary to the measurements done with FT4 instrument (higher BFE and SE with reuse). It is not clear at the moment whether the increase of the PSD with reuse is only associated with the agglomeration, the sieving, or a combination of both. Difference in flow regime and the sensitivity of the flowability to multiple powder modifications may explain the discrepancy in these results. As mentioned by Brika et al. Figure Some other studies have also looked at the increase in oxygen and nitrogen content with increase in number of reuse cycles. Ghods et al. There are numerous factors which contribute to oxygen pick-up in Ti-6Al-4V powders processed through EB-PBF. One of the possible reasons for the increase of oxygen pickup is the fact that the powder is exposed to the ambient atmosphere and moisture when transferred from the machine to the PRS for part recovery, and then transferred from the PRS to the sieve. A study performed by Vluttert It is quite challenging to deploy a unified metric to capture the absolute suitability of powders for PBF AM processes. The powder metrics measured are very different in nature and may impact the PBF process and final part properties in different ways. For instance, powder metrics variations may have opposite effects, i.e., some characteristics may lead to an improved behavior in the AM process, others may lead to a deterioration of the AM process behaviour, while some powder metrics may have limited effect. In literature, this is poorly understood at the moment. Variability is still relatively high for some of the powder measurement techniques, and are influenced by the testing equipment type, the testing conditions, the powder storage and handling conditions, the operator skill, the calibration of instruments, and many other factors. Care must be exercised in interpreting each powder metric result individually. Although it is challenging to capture the absolute suitability of powders for PBF AM processes via a consolidated index, there is a potential to describe the relative change in powder properties with respect to a reference state, if such reference should exist. A reference state, for instance, is often considered to be the virgin powder. Two examples of calculations of relative changes from a reference state are presented below. To understand the sensitivity of response to change of the various powder characteristics, from a reference powder (G0 in this work), the various properties measured were normalized to a range of 0 to 1 and a radar diagram of the normalized indices for the G0, G1, G2, and G3 powders was plotted in Figure where x i (0) (k) is the measurement of the quality characteristic, max x i (0) (k) is the largest value of x i (0) (k), and min x i (0) (k) is the smallest value of x i (0) (k). In accordance with the powder suitability criteria created in Table ESF = (D10 + D50 + D90 + O2 + N2+ SE + BFE + H r + C + CI @ 2 rpm + CI @ 60 rpm+ AOR @ 2 rpm + AOR @ 60 rpm ) 13 The ESF values for G0, G1, G2, and G3 powders are 0.176, 0.504, 0.609, and 0.659, respectively. It is assumed that the lower deviation from the ESF value with respect to G0, the more the properties of the powder will depart from the reference state. This is another example of efforts towards expressing the relative change in powder characteristics. As a conclusion, this study looked into comparing the influence of multiple reuse cycles, as well as powder blends created from reused powder, through various performance metrics such as morphology, size distribution, basic flow energy, specific energy, bulk density and tap density after 500 taps, Hausner ratio and Carr index, cohesive index, angle of repose, oxygen content, and nitrogen content. In accordance with the authors' hypotheses established in Shanbhag and Vlasea Investigation into the effect of Plasma atomized Grade 5 Ti-6Al-4V powder reuse on the powder properties as well as properties of powder blends led to the following conclusions: (1) The SEM micrographs of the various powder types show extensive physical modification to the surface of the particles, with increasing degree of powder reuse. The micrographs depict features such as elongated particles, broken particles, deformed particles, particle with molten specks and agglomerates. The broke, shattered, clip-clap and deformed particles are attributed to the powder recovery process (i.e., blasting, sieving) and tumbling process; and the particles with molten specks, elongated particles and agglomerated particles are attributed to the high temperature conditions leading to overheating and smelting of particles and satellites. (2) The D10, D50 and D90 values increase with increasing degree of powder reuse. This observation is attributed to the agglomeration of powder particles. (3) The ρ0 remained unchanged for all powders; however, the ρ500 increases with increasing degree of powder reuse. The H r and C values show an increase with an increase in number of reuse cycles. This trend indicates modification of reused powders from their virgin state. These observations have been attributed to the deviations from spherical morphology, for the reused powder, as observed in the SEM micrographs. Due to these deviations, uneven raking and nonhomogenous layers may be obtained. (4) The BFE and SE measured using powder rheology increase with increasing degree of powder reuse. This suggests that the reused powder is more cohesive than the virgin powder. This behavior is attributed to the mechanical interlocking and friction between particles (caused by the non-spherical morphology). ( It should be noted that G0 powder did not undergo any processing in the EB-PBF machine, blasting in the powder recovery system and sieving to remove the fine powder particles. Therefore, this powder type may be considered an anomaly for the various powder characterization. Nevertheless, the results for G0 are presented in order to compare the results for all other powder types and use G0 as the baseline.