Atomic layers deposited on semiconductor substrates introduce a platform for the realization of the extended electronic Hubbard model, where the consideration of electronic repulsion beyond the onsite term is paramount. Recently, the onset of superconductivity at 4.7K has been reported in the hole-doped triangular lattice of tin atoms on a silicon substrate. Through renormalization group methods designed for weak and intermediate coupling, we investigate the nature of the superconducting instability in hole-doped Sn/Si(111). We find that the extended Hubbard nature of interactions is crucial to yield triplet pairing, which is f-wave (p-wave) for moderate (higher) hole doping. In light of persisting challenges to tailor triplet pairing in an electronic material, our finding promises to pave unprecedented ways for engineering unconventional triplet superconductivity. Introduction.-Unconventional superconductivity is one of the most active and exciting fields of physics research. The discovery of high-temperature superconductivity in doped cuprate materials in 1986 Two-dimensional atom lattices on semiconductor substrates are a material platform with a rather simple electronic structure. The adsorption of only 1/3 monolayer of group-IV elements such as Pb and Sn forms a ( √ 3)R30 ○ structure, realizing a triangular lattice. Three out of four of the adatoms' valence orbitals are engaged in covalent back bonds with the substrate, leaving the fourth orbital as a half-filled dangling bond. As a consequence for the electronic structure, a single metallic surface band is present within the substrate's band gap. Such a half-filled surface band is subject to significant electron-electron interactions. For some of these materials, the presence of non-negligble non-local Coulomb interactions was suggested as the driving mechanism for their charge-ordered ground states (e.g. in Pb/Ge(111), Sn/Ge(111) or Pb/Si(111) In this Letter, we investigate the competing pairing channels of correlated electrons in Sn/Si(111). By applying the weak-coupling renormalization group (WCRG) method, we are able to find the leading superconducting instabilities in an analytically controlled way in the limit of weak interactions. While correlated electrons on a hexagonal lattice have a generic propensity towards chiral d-wave pairing Model and Method.-We assume that boron-doped Sn/Si(111) is well-described by an extended Hubbard model on the triangular lattice. The electronic band-structure is derived from Local Density Approximation (LDA) first-principle calculations with t 1 = -52.7 meV and t 2 t 1 = -0.389, t 3 t 1 = 0.144, t 4 t 1 = -0.027 The extended Hubbard Hamiltonian is given by with n iσ ≡ c † iσ c iσ , n i ≡ n i↑ + n i↓ , and the local (nearest neighbour) Hubbard interaction strength U 0 (U 1 ). Longer-ranged interactions are generically present, but are often screened and hence mostly assumed subdominant by comparison to U 0 . Notably, the situation is different for several group-IV adsorbates on semiconductor substrates many of which possess charge-ordered ground states, which likewise tend to be favoured by longrange Coulomb repulsion We investigate the superconducting instabilities and form factors of the model Hamiltonian (2) for the holedoped case by virtue of the WCRG method Results.-For the particular bandstructure of Sn/Si(111), at U 1 = 0, we find a leading chiral d-wave instability only in a comparably small range of dopings 0.9 ≤ n ≤ 0.95 [see Fig. Motivated by previous work Discussion Single layers of ordered metal atoms such as Pb and In on Si(111) offer themselves as interesting platforms for conventional electron-phonon mediated superconductivity up to 3K In this work we have neglected the role of spin-orbit coupling (SOC). LDA calculations including SOC show that its effect is rather small. In addition, small to modest contributions of SOC only give rise to some mild mixing of the different pairing channels Our work emphasizes the role of non-local Coulomb interactions in order to stabilize spin-triplet pairing. The same had been previously observed for one-band Hubbard models on the square, triangular, and honeycomb lattice Another group-IV adsorbate, which features essentially the same bandstructure as Sn/Si(111) and is also believed to have significant non-local Coulomb interactions, is Pb/Si(111) Conclusion.-We have shown theoretically that the recently discovered superconductivity in Sn/Si(111) could realize the elusive case of spin-triplet pairing. In contrast to most scenarios on hexagonal lattices where chiral d-wave dominates, we show that the bandstructure of Sn/Si(111) leads to a competition between d-wave and spin-triplet pairings. We further argue that non-local Coulomb interactions are non-negligible in Sn/Si(111); including them suppresses the chiral d-wave state. For moderate hole-dopings we find f -wave pairing; most interestingly, hole dopings larger than 8.5%, as achieved in recent experiments, stabilize the archetypal topologically non-trivial p + ip-wave state. Our weak-coupling analysis is backed up by intermediate-coupling FRG simulations which further substantiate our results. Given the simple chemical and electronic structure of Sn/Si(111) and other adatom lattices on semiconductor substrates, they might provide the cleanest platform for studying (topological) superconductivity emerging from a doped Mott insulator in the future. Here, only a short overview of the weak coupling renormalization group (WCRG) method will be given, a detailed description can be found in various works For the WCRG, we consider all terms in the perturbative expansion of the effective two-particle-vertex up to second order in the onsite interaction, U 0 . The renormalization group (RG) flow equation is given by where g denotes the effective two-particle-vertex, and k 1 (k 2 ) the momenta of the pair electrons with zero total momentum before (after) the scattering process via the interaction H -H 0 . The integral on right hand side runs over the Fermi surface (FS). ε 0 denotes the initial infrared cutoff and ε a lowered cutoff. Note that the final result is still be independent on the initial (arbitrary) cutoff parameter ε 0 In the weak coupling limit we can bypass the procedure of the RG flow, i.e., lowering the cutoff ε in consecutive steps, and obtain the final g directly. All terms which contribute in this manner for the given system are the diagrams shown in Fig. FIG. where W denotes the bandwidth, the diagrams 1, 2a, 2b, and 2c are explicitly given by ) the nearest-neighbor kinetic energy ε 1 (k) = ∂ε(k) ∂t 1 , and the integrand of the particle-hole susceptibility χ ph , f (E) is the the Fermi distribution function. Note that the first order in U 0 just suppresses the s-wave solution. The leading superconducting instability is given by the most negative eigenvalue, λ min , of g. Then, the effective interaction reads V eff = λ min ρ, where ρ is the total density of states at the Fermi level, and the relation to the critical temperature is given by The corresponding eigenfunction, ψ min , yields the form factor of the order parameter, which can be classified by the irreducible representations of the symmetry group of the crystal lattice. In Fig. Since the three spin orientations of the triplet states are degenerate, it is enough to only calculate g (2b) (yielding the results for spin-singlets and spin-triplets with total spin S = 0), since the contribution of g (2c) (yielding the results for spin-triplets with total spin S = ±1) is already captured. The strength of the second neighbor interaction, U 1 , is adjusted by the parameter α, such that In the main paper, it is shown that finite U 1 leads to a suppression of the chiral d-wave singlet pairing state. Instead, triplet pairing (either chiral p-wave or f -wave) becomes the leading instability. In Fig. . Effective coupling for U1 U0 = 1 2 (as relevant for SnSi(111)): chiral d-wave pairing is suppressed, leading to chiral p-wave (below van Hove) and f -wave superconductivity (above van Hove). The color code is the same as in Fig. Similar to section I. we will only review the basic concepts of the functional renormalization group (FRG) method here, since all technical details have been described in various places in the literature, for example Note that the three topologically distinct contributions can be further expanded into five diagrams by using the SU (2) symmetry of the problem, i.e., explicitly performing the sum over different spin contributions of the bare (G Λ ι0,ι2 = G Λ q0=q2,ω0=ω2 δ σ0,σ2 ) and single-scale propagator S Λ ι1,ι3 = S Λ q1,ω1 δ σ1,σ3 . The result can be represented by the diagrams shown in Fig. We implement the flow parameter Λ in the temperatureflow scheme. This allows for an unbiased treatment of particle-particle and particle-hole instabilities as well as providing an intuitive picture of understanding the flow as cooling down the system. We solve the resulting integro-differential equation using the Euler method. The initial condition to the problem is given by enforcing the bare action to equal the renormalized one at an initial cutoff Λ init = 10 t 1 > U 0 . A nice way to analyse the physical implications of the changing two-particle vertex during the flow is to analyse its mean-field components at each point during the flow and plot the effective interaction strength of the leading instabilities as a function of Λ. Due to the perturbative nature of the approximations made by the truncation of the flow equation, the couplings in the bare vertex will in general grow upon lowering of the cutoff, i.e., integrating out high energy modes. This eventually results in a breakdown of the truncation conditions and the flow has to be terminated. Here this termination condition is fixed to be max Γ Λ κ2,κ3;κ0,κ1 > U c = 100t 1 . Usually the analysis of the mean-field order parameter decomposition of the final vertex identifies a clear instability channel, in the present calculations always in the superconducting channel, and diagonalization analogous to the Cooper vertex analysis for the WCRG method allows us to identify the symmetry of the principal superconducting instability. This procedure is performed completely analogous to the one described in Ref. We have used the tight-binding parameters involving hoppings up to fourth nearest neighbors from Ref. 11. We note that in Ref. 12 independent hoppings are given, which match ours very closely. They contain, however, some small fifth-neighbor hopping t 5 t 1 = 0.0318 We take these small deviations as a motivation to test the stability of our findings when varying the bandstructure parameters t 2 , t 3 or t 4 , respectively. Given that the parameter space is three-dimensional, we only vary one parameter at a time. We use the WCRG method to compute the superconducting phase diagram and check the influence of variations of ±10% of the hopping parameters. Specifically, we first vary t 2 while keeping t 1 , t 3 , t 4 constant and at their original values. Then we repeat this procedure for t 3 and t 4 , respectively. Such variations in the hopping parameters mostly affect the van Hove singularity and shift it to slightly higher or lower fillings. The superconducting phase diagram changes accordingly. We still find directly at van Hove filling a narrow region with chiral d wave (which further shrinks upon increasing U 1 ), and f wave above and chiral p wave below van Hove filling. With other words, the phase diagram remains invariant with respect to the van Hove singularity. We can further assume, that also combined variations of several hopping parameters would not lead to a qualitatively different outcome (as long as they are small). We have summarized our analysis in Fig. Interestingly, changes in t 3 have the most drastic effect (while variations in t 2 and t 4 are negligible). If we assume for a moment that the tight binding parameters of Ref. Sn/Si(111) Here we address the issue of the electron-phonon (EP) coupling in Sn/Si(111). Due to the size of the system, a fully first-principles study is unfeasible. However, if one assumes that the wave vector dependence of the EP coupling is not strong, there is a simple approach using deformation potentials D = ∆E k ∆Q due to frozen phonon modes with mode amplitude Q. The main idea behind this approach is that a phonon that strongly couples to states nearby the FS produces a large shift ∆E k in the Since this mode requires an enlargement of the unit-cell, the bandstructure is unfolded onto the primitive Brillouin zone in order to compare with the pristine electronic dispersion (red line). The size of the blue dots is a measure of the unfolding weight. The ab-initio and phonon calculations have been performed with the VASP electronic dispersion at or near the Fermi level. The ab-initio phonon dispersion is shown in Fig. 3-unit-cell) disperse inside a gap into the Si(111) phonon dispersion. Within the deformation potential ap-proximation, the EP coupling of a specific phonon mode is calculated as where N (E F ) is the density-of-states per spin and unitcell, M Sn is the mass of the Sn atom, and D is the aforementioned deformation potential. Inspecting Eq. S9 one also notices that the lowest frequency modes contribute most at the EP coupling. For this reason, we focus our attention to the lowest branch at the K valley with phonon frequency ∼ 5 meV, since it is further characterized by a strong out-of-plane displacement of the Sn atom. This is quite relevant in light of the p z character of the FS, which is indeed expected to react to vertical displacements. We create a supercell with a total of 360 atoms, and the four surface Sn atoms displaced according to the first phonon eigenmode at K. The amplitude Q of the displacement is set for convenience to 20 times the eigenmode (in the linear approximation, the deformation potential is independent of the amplitude), resulting in Q ∼ 0.13 Å. To infer the shift of the electronic states at the Fermi level, we show in Fig. 