Carbon Nanotubes (CNTs) of sufficiently large diameter and a few layers self-collapse into flat ribbons at atmospheric pressure, forming bundles of stacked CNTs that maximize packing and thus CNT interaction. Their improved stress transfer by shear makes collapsed CNTs ideal building blocks in macroscopic fibers of CNTs with high-performance longitudinal properties, particularly high tensile properties as reinforcing fibres. This work introduces cross-sectional transmission electron microscopy of FIB-milled samples as a way to univocally identify collapsed 2 CNTs and to determine the full population of different CNTs in macroscopic fibers produced by spinning from floating catalyst chemical vapour deposition. We show that close proximity in bundles is a major driver for collapse and that CNT "stoutness" (number of layers/diameter), which dominates the collapse onset, is controlled by the growth promotor. Despite differences in decomposition route, different C precursors lead to similar distributions of the ratio layers/diameter. The synthesis conditions in this study give a maximum fraction of collapsed CNTs of 70% when using selenium as promotor, corresponding to an average of 0.25 layer/nm. Like a macroscopic tube, carbon nanotubes (CNTs) of large diameter and small thickness (i.e. few layers) can have sufficiently low flexural rigidity to collapse radially inwards into flat, ribbon-like structures, and remain stable due to van der Waals interactions between opposite sides of the inner CNT layer in the collapsed state 1. The collapse of CNTs has been widely studied by molecular-dynamic simulations and experiments, including studies on changes in their theoretical electronic properties A promising strategy could be TEM analysis of the thinnest lamellas (slices) cut normal to the fibre's axis that resolves the transversal cross-sections of CNTs and their bundles at the highest resolution. Transversal TEM technique has been mainly used for the visual representation of high-densified cross-sections with reduced inter-bundle distances in CNT fibres subjected to stretching post-treatments. In this work, we use the transversal TEM method to observe cross-sections of CNTs in bundles of macroscopic fibers, enabling not only univocal identification of collapsed CNTs in bundles, but also accurate quantitative determination of the distribution of CNT diameters and number of layers. Equipped with this tool, we demonstrate the importance of bundling and low CNT "stoutness" (number of layers/diameter) to induce self-collapse at atmospheric pressure. Finally, the paper shows that CNT populations can be shifted through changes in the FCCVD synthesis conditions, with the fraction of collapsed CNTs increasing through the choice of promotor but being less sensitive to carbon source. CNT aerogel filaments were synthesized in the gas phase by floating catalyst Chemical Vapor Deposition (FCCVD) The samples for transversal TEM analysis were prepared by slicing a densified CNT fibre using a Focused Ion Beam (FIB) microscope (Thermo Fisher Scientific, SCIOS Dual-beam system). The fibre cross-section milling was done after Pt deposition on the CNT fibre material (approximately 2 μm) to protect the specific area of interest from ion beam damage. A cross-section slice (lamella) of CNT fibre (around 10 μm width) was prepared by means of progressive focused ion beam milling and transferred to an Omniprobe Liftout Copper grid. Ion beam milling was first performed with an accelerating voltage of 30kV and beam current range 5nA to 1nA. After lifting out the specific area of interest and attaching to the TEM grid, ion beam milling at 30kV with 0.3nA was done to reduce sample thickness to less than 200nm. Finally, further sample cleaning was done at 5kV with 48pA until reaching 100nm sample thickness. Examples of electron micrographs during the preparation process are included in Figure To discard sample damage or modification due to FIB cross -sectioning, a subset of CNT fibers were embedded in a polymer matrix before ion beam milling. They showed the same structural features as those without polymer. Figure Note that the relatively high degree of alignment of the CNTs (see SAXS azimuthal profile in Figure The materials in this study consist of continuous, macroscopic fibers of CNTs produced as aerogels in a vertical FCCVD reactor. Collecting the material in the aerogel form and depositing it directly onto TEM grids preserves the open network structure of CNTs in the material, enabling direct observation of low-density areas of the sample by conventional TEM. An alternative method to analyze CNTs in macroscopic fibers is to exploit the mechanical robustness of the network structure to produce transversal sections of CNT aerogels by FIB milling. Because the CNTs are predominantly aligned along the fiber axis (according to SAXS, Figure We characterize these morphological features through the nanotube eccentricity: where 2a and 2b are the large and short axis respectively. Note that e = 0 for circular sections and e = 1 for fully collapsed tubes. Figure Next, we determined the full distribution of the inner and outer diameters of the CNTs, now accurately determined for elliptical and collapsed tubes from their directly-observed perimeters. Both distributions (Figures Marked in the diameter distribution are also CNTs that are collapsed. As expected, they correspond to those with a large outer diameter and a small number of layers -therefore having a larger inner diameter-. For collapsed CNTs, average outer diameter of 7.6 nm and inner diameter of 6.6 nm were obtained. To rationalize the different CNT morphologies observed and identify descriptors of the combined effect of diameter and number of layers on CNT eccentricity, it is instructive to consider the mechanics of CNT collapse. From continuum mechanics, the effective bending stiffness (or flexural rigidity) of a single walled tube, i.e. the resistance to changes in the curvature of a single shell where Y is the effective Young ́s modulus, ν is Poisson ́s ratio and t is the shell thickness. This expression can be applied to single-walled nanotubes with appropriate selection of the shell thickness. Instead of the interlayer spacing of 0.34nm, the effective wall thickness of the SWNT is related to the atomic-scale wall resistance to in-plane bond stretching and inplane angle bending, with a value between 0.066 and 0.089 nm. With the view of describing CNT packing efficiency in bundles, a more adequate descriptor than D0 can be extracted from analysis of the mechanics of collapse. From continuum elasticity, the collapse buckling pressure for an isolated CNT collapse is given by This equation predicts the pressure necessary for the collapse of CNTs based on the rigidity of the graphitic shell (D0) and the shape of the CNT in terms of N and its outer diameter (d). It contains the ratio of N/d as the key descriptor for the collapse of the CNTs, capturing the notion that tubes with larger diameter and more layers collapse more easily. In Figure where 1 ≤ α ≤ 3, and α = 3 for perfect bonding between walls, and α = 1 for independent walls. For an intermediate coupling between walls, the reported value of N/d ~ 0.4 nm -1 (threshold diameter for double-wall CNTs ~ 5.4 nm) is remarkably close to the value of 0.5 nm -1 obtained here (Figure A point of interest stemming from the direct observation of CNT cross sections by TEM is the width of the distributions of diameter and number of layers, i.e., the morphological polydispersity of the 1D constituents. The shape of the diameter distribution is comparable to that other inorganic 1D nanostructures produced by FCCVD, This work introduces a method for analysis of molecular composition of fibers of CNTs and other macro-ensembles of 1D nanostructures, based on TEM imaging of FIBmilled cross sections of bundles. This mode of observation of CNT fiber aerogels provides quantitative information on their molecular structure in terms of CNT eccentricity, fraction of collapsed CNTs, packing efficiency, and in general provides the first means for accurate determination of the distribution of CNT diameters and number of layers in these systems. The results show a wide distribution of diameters and number of layers, leading to the coexistence of collapsed, predominantly round or elliptical CNTs in the same bundles. These morphologies are governed by the CNT stoutness, that is, the ratio of number of layers/diameter. Comparison of materials produced under different synthesis conditions shows that the distribution of N/D is mainly controlled by the choice of the growth promotor and its effect on the distribution of active catalyst particles. Materials produced with equal ratios of promotor/carbon but from different precursors have similar N/D distributions. From analysis of the maximum N/D values for collapse, the results also show that CNT collapse largely occurs through bundling. This suggest that methods to control aerogel formation and assembly into fibers could affect the final state of the CNTs, and could now be analysed with the method introduced here.