We demonstrate an external cavity laser formed by combining a silicon nitride photonic integrated circuit with a reflective semiconductor optical amplifier. The laser uses an alignment tolerant edge coupler formed by a multi-mode waveguide splitter right at the edge of the silicon nitride chip that relaxes the required alignment to the III-V gain chip and equally splits the power among its two output waveguides. Both the ground and first order mode are excited in the coupler and reach the quadrature condition at the waveguide junction, ensuring equal power to be coupled to both. Two high-quality-factor ring resonators arranged in Vernier configuration close a Sagnac loop between the two waveguides. In addition to wideband frequency tuning, they result in a longer effective cavity length. The alignment tolerant coupler increases the alignment tolerance in the two directions parallel to the chip surface by a factor 3 relative to conventional edge couplers, making it ideal for gain chip integration via pick-and-place technology. Lasing is maintained in a misalignment range of ±6 μm in the direction along the edge of the chip. A Lorentzian laser linewidth of 42 kHz is achieved. XTERNAL cavity lasers (ECL) have been incorporated in systems servicing diverse applications such as coherent communications There have been a number of successful demonstrations of hybrid-integrated ECLs, with past work focusing on reduction of the linewidth, increase of the tuning range, or both Here, in order to make such assemblies better manufacturable and thus better suited for mass-production, we focus on the problem of efficiently coupling light between the two elements, while relaxing alignment tolerances and showing that the other essential laser qualities, such as tuning range and linewidth, can be maintained. To address this, we make use of alignment tolerant couplers that we first demonstrated in silicon and optimized for edge Here, we use an edge coupler configuration compatible with flip-chip integration technology and a pair of ring resonators in Vernier configuration for providing a wide, single mode tuning range. The PIC is implemented in a high-confinement silicon nitride (SiN) integrated waveguide platform Here, we focus on relaxing the required placement accuracy of the RSOA in a SiN based ECL. Compared to a conventional edge coupler, the required accuracy with which the III-V gain chip has to be placed in the two directions parallel to the surface of the PIC is relaxed by a factor 3, uniquely enabling assembly with pick-and-place flip-chip technology. The rest of this paper is organized into three sections. In section two, we describe the silicon nitride PIC. In section three, we report the ECL characteristics, and finally, in section four, we conclude the paper and give an outlook on future work. Figure The PIC was fabricated by LIGENTEC in their standard multi-project wafer (MPW) process with photonic structures fully etched in an 800 nm SiN film fabricated by high-quality low pressure chemical vapor deposition (LPCVD) and fully clad by SiO2. In the following, the ATEC and the Vernier structure are described in more details. Figure The tips are then progressively tapered up from 200 nm to 400 nm, over a length of 30 μm, pulling the field into the SiN core, before being merged into a single slab. A second taper adiabatically reduces the slab width back to 1.4 μm, over a conservatively chosen length of 100 μm. The following interference section supports two TE-polarized modes, the ground and first order mode. The length of the multimode interface section is chosen such that the two lowest supermodes at the input interface are mapped to its two modes with a 90 o relative phase shift at the output waveguide junction. Finally, the light is split and routed to two 550 nm wide single-mode output waveguides that are further tapered up to 600 nm. This leads to the two modes always reaching the waveguide junction in quadrature, irrespectively of the lateral (x-direction) displacement of the RSOA or lensed fiber at the input interface, suppressing interference and ensuring that equal power is coupled into both waveguides. This does not violate the reciprocity principle, as light is coupled to the two output waveguides with a RSOA-position-dependent relative phase. However, since the light is routed to a Sagnac loop thereafter, whose functionality does not suffer from this phase offset, it is irrelevant to the overall functionality of the chip. If the amplitude of the fields coupled into the two output waveguides of the ATEC are a and b, the power coupled back by the Sagnac loop to the lensed fiber or RSOA is 4|ab| ! irrespectively of the relative phase of these two coefficients and is maximized for balanced output powers. This assumes that the loop itself is lossless. In practice, the insertion losses (ILs) of the Vernier structure have to be added to the overall loss budget. Prior to conduction experiments with the RSOA, as reported in Section III, the PIC is characterized using a lensed fiber also at its input interface. Corresponding simulation and measurement results are shown in Fig. In the vertical y-direction, the ATEC does not improve the alignment tolerance, since in both cases it results from overlap integrals between field profiles with closed to matched MFD. The -3 dB alignment tolerance is actually slightly worse for the ATEC (±0.7 μm vs. ±1 μm for the SEC), as a consequence of it being referenced to the IL optimum at x=±1.7 μm but being taken at x=0 μm. This is however acceptable for the application pursued here, as the ATEC is meant to facilitate flip-chip integration for which the accuracy in x and z is determined by the placement accuracy, but the vertical alignment is defined by mechanical contacts, for example between the III-V chip and pedestals formed in a common substrate In the z-direction, the other direction in the plane of the chips, there is also a significant improvement in alignment tolerance, as seen in Fig The use of a single or of multiple ring resonators is a common practice in integrated ECL design for providing wavelength selectivity. Ring resonators can be interposed in the optical path between the chip interface and a reflective element For the ECL at hand, a Vernier structure consisting of two rings is implemented, that are each individually tunable with thermal tuners over an entire free spectral range (FSR) with an 80 mA current range and below 200 mW of dissipated power (per ring). Due to the low loss of the SiN waveguide platform, it is possible to design ring resonators with very high quality (Q-)factors. On the other hand, the bending radii (and accordingly, the radius of the ring resonators) must remain larger, in comparison to Si, due to the reduced index contrast between SiN and SiO2. This, in turn, leads to a small FSR, which can impair the functionality of the ECL by causing mode Fig. hopping since a large number of resonances then fall within the gain bandwidth of the RSOA if a single ring is used. Two ECL designs were implemented on-chip with different ring Q-factors, as determined by the coupling strengths to the bus waveguides. For each ECL design, two rings with the same loaded Q-factor and slightly different radii of 115 μm and 117 μm are used. The high Q-factor effectively creates a long cavity length and therefore removes the need to use long delay lines to reduce the phase noise and the linewidth. The effective length of a ring at resonance, L "## , can be estimated as where Q $ is the loaded quality factor, c % the speed of light in vacuum, ω the angular resonance frequency, and n & the group index. However, as the targeted Q-factor is increased and the coupling strengths consequently reduced, the ILs resulting from waveguide losses and excess junction losses inside the rings also go up. The two designs are summarized in Table 2 Amplitude coupling coefficients. The effective FSR of the Vernier structure can be roughly estimated as with FSR ( and FSR ! the FSRs of the two rings equal to 1.6 nm and 1.62 nm, resulting in an effective FSR of 130 nm larger than the gain bandwidth of the utilized RSOAs (see Section III). To test the Vernier structure of Design 2, the heaters of the two rings are set to obtain overlapping resonances at 1525 nm. Light is coupled from the lensed fiber to the ATEC and the backreflection recorded by means of a circulator. The resulting reflection spectrum is shown in Fig. After characterizing the PIC, the lensed fiber was replaced by an RSOA and a series of experiments were performed to characterize the ECL. We use commercial RSOAs operating in the C-and L-bands. The main specifications of the RSOAs are summarized in Table The alignment tolerance between RSOA and PIC was tested by moving the RSOA along the x-direction parallel to the chip facet, with the Vernier structure on the PIC tuned to a given wavelength. The system's output power for Design 2 operated with the C-band SOA, as above, a 275 mA injection current and the Vernier structure tuned to 1530 nm is shown in Fig. Moreover, the ECL described here does not have a separate phase shifter to align the Fabry-Perot resonances resulting from the overall cavity formed by the RSOA and the PIC with the resonances of the rings. Given the 1 mm RSOA length and the equivalent delay lengths of the rings, we estimate the FSR of the Fabry-Perot resonances to be 1.4 GHz for Design 1 and 0.52 GHz for Design 2. The full width at half maximum (FWHM) of the rings, on the other hand, are 0.9 GHz and 0.32 GHz, and are below the corresponding Fabry-Perot FSR. Given that moving to the edge of the FWHM results in a 3-dB drop in input to drop port coupling efficiency per ring (i.e., 6 dB total), it can be seen that there can be a significant spread in internal laser cavity losses between experiments, as well as outcoupling coefficients, potentially leading to some spread in the recorded data. However, we did not experimentally observe any evidence of this being a significant problem, as stable lasing was obtained once the ring resonances were tuned to coincide, irrespectively of e.g. small variations in the RSOA to PIC distance influencing the spectral positions of Fabry-Perot resonances. Given the relatively high Q-factor of the utilized rings, frequency pulling might have played a role in facilitating alignment of the laser wavelength with the ring resonances The next set of experiments aimed at characterizing the tunability of the ECL and were carried out with a Design 1 device and the C-band RSOA. By tuning the resonances of the two ring resonators on the PIC, a large tuning range measured to span over 83 nm was achieved. Measurements were limited by the range of our high-resolution spectrum analyzer at the lower wavelength boundary (1520 nm) and lasing was limited by the tapering off of the C-band RSOA gain in the higher wavelength range (lasing stopped a few nm above 1600 nm). Figure The range of achievable lasing wavelengths is expected to be limited primarily by the gain spectrum of the RSOA, with the bandwidth of the ATEC playing a secondary role. Simulations show that an ATEC with an interference section length optimized to obtain the targeted quadrature condition and thus balanced waveguide output power levels at 1550 nm reaches an output imbalance of 3 dB at 1500 nm and 1600 nm. For this level of imbalancing, the reflection of the Sagnac loop into the RSOA mode, 4|ab| ! as discussed above, drops by only 0.5 dB. Moreover, the bandwidth of the ATEC can be improved by reducing its length Finally, the linewidth of the Design 2 laser with L-band SOA, at an injection current of 200 mA and the Vernier structure tuned to 1584 nm, was estimated using the delayed selfheterodyne (DSH) measurement technique using a 6.5 km fiber delay. Figure In this work, we demonstrated an ECL with an alignment tolerant interface between the gain chip and the PIC. It allows for easier coupling and promises higher yield in high volume manufacturing. The alignment tolerance of the alignment tolerant edge coupler is three times better than that of a standard edge coupler in the x-direction, parallel to the edge of the chip, and improved by over a factor 2X in the axial z-direction, away from the edge of the chip. High confinement silicon nitride waveguides, with low loss and medium mode confinement, allow for maintaining a compact ECL size. At the same time, it is possible to achieve very good results in terms of tunability, output power, and linewidth. Lasing was maintained for x-axis displacements in a range of ±6 μm. Operated with a single C-band RSOA, the laser can be tuned in a range exceeding 1520 nm to 1603 nm, limited on the lower wavelength side by spectral range of our test equipment. A Lorentzian linewidth of 42 kHz was measured. Ongoing work aims at further reducing this linewidth by using even higher quality factors as well as antireflection coatings to reduce parasitic effects. The main challenges seen while using the alignment tolerant couplers in a laboratory environment were proper angular alignment between the two chips and meeting the required quadrature condition inside the alignment tolerant edge coupler that ensures maximum alignment tolerance. These challenges should be overcome with controlled, automated assembly in a manufacturing environment.