We numerically demonstrate that a planar slab made of magnetic Weyl semimetal (a class of topological materials) can emit high-purity circularly polarized (CP) thermal radiation over a broad mid-and long-wave infrared wavelength range for a significant portion of its emission solid angle. This effect fundamentally arises from the strong infrared gyrotropy or nonreciprocity of these materials which primarily depends on the momentum separation between Weyl nodes in the band structure. We clarify the dependence of this effect on the underlying physical parameters and highlight that the spectral bandwidth of CP thermal emission increases with increasing momentum separation between the Weyl nodes. We also demonstrate using recently developed thermal discrete dipole approximation (TDDA) computational method that finite-size bodies of magnetic Weyl semimetals can emit spectrally broadband CP thermal light, albeit over smaller portion of the emission solid angle compared to the planar slabs. Our work identifies unique fundamental and technological prospects of magnetic Weyl semimetals for engineering thermal radiation and designing efficient CP light sources. Circularly polarized (CP) light is obtained by utilizing either linear to circular polarization conversion device (quarter wave plate) or electroluminescence, photoluminescence, incandescence (thermal radiation) of chiral geometric or material systems In this work, we reveal that recently discovered magnetic Weyl semimetals, which are strong gyroelectric or magneto-optic materials, can emit strong circularly polarized thermal radiation which is broadband in the mid-and long-wave infrared wavelength range. Although linearly polarized thermal radiation has been demonstrated using patterned or microstructured geometries Weyl semimetals are topological quantum materials whose nontrivial bulk band topology manifests as unique physical effects such as the topologically protected Fermi arcs, the chiral anomaly in the bulk, and large negative magnetoresistance We show that thermal radiation into the half-space above the surface is strongly circularly polarized due to strong gyrotropy which depends on the momentum separation parameter b. The right figures depict the spectra of RCP and LCP light emissivities in the normal direction for a representative example of a Weyl semimetal large optical nonlinearity We also demonstrate the circular polarization of thermal emission from finite subwavelength as well as wavelength-size bodies made of MWS. We use the thermal discrete dipole approximation (TDDA) method suitable for thermal radiation calculations from finite nonreciprocal bodies We note that chiral absorption of Weyl semimetals has been noted recently The manuscript is organized as the following. We provide the main results in section (II) followed by the conclusion (III) and the appendix (IV). In section (II), we provide the description of optical response or permittivity of MWS (II A) followed by the detailed analysis of spin or circular polarization of thermal emission from extended planar slabs (II B) and finite-size objects (II C). There has been a significant body of research in the past decade devoted to the fundamental understanding of Weyl semimetals. They are now theoretically well-understood The band structure of Weyl semimetals contains an even number of nondegenerate band-touching points called as Weyl nodes which are topologically stable. These Weyl nodes appear in pairs of two nodes of opposite chirality separated by a vector 2b in momentum space and by a scalar 2 b 0 in energy space (chiral chemical potential). The iii electromagnetic response of Weyl semimetals is described using the formalism of axion electrodynamics where these parameters appear in the form of axion term in the Lagrangian density. The axion term eventually leads to the following modified constitutive relation for the displacement field in the frequency domain where ε d (ω) is the frequency-dependent permittivity of the corresponding Dirac semimetal, which has b 0 = b = 0. In this work, we consider only materials where Weyl nodes have the same energy such that b 0 = 0. Throughout the work, we choose b = b kz to be along the kz direction of the coordinate system but also mention the implications of other directionalities. Based on these considerations, the permittivity tensor of the MWS is: where The presence of off-diagonal anti-symmetric entries in the permittivity tensor leads to electromagnetic nonreciprocity Here ε b is the constant background permittivity, and σ is the bulk conductivity, whose dispersion is given by is the cutoff energy, beyond which the band dispersion is no longer linear In the following, we first use a representative example with parameters similar to Ref. We consider a semi-infinite half space (thick planar slab) of representative MWS (parameters noted above) at temperature T = 300K emitting thermal radiation into the vacuum half space (environment) at T 0 = 0K. The infinite transverse extent lies in the xy plane with normal to the surface along z direction. We analyze thermal emission in the direction characterized by the angles (θ, φ) where θ is the angle with z axis and φ is the angle made by the in-plane component of the emission-direction vector with x axis. The thermal radiation power emitted per unit surface area dA of the slab in the direction (θ, φ) per unit solid angle dΩ per unit wavelength dλ for a given polarization state ê is given by, 1 e hc/(λk B T ) -1 is the blackbody radiance at temperature T . It is divided by 2 in Eq.6 to account for two orthogonal polarization states separately. Since we are interested in the circular polarization of light, the polarization-dependent emissivity is calculated in the eigenbasis of right circularly polarized (RCP) and left circularly polarized (LCP) photons where η (LCP/RCP) denotes the emissivity of LCP/RCP light. Its dependence on (θ, φ, λ) in the above equation is omitted for brevity. This quantity is similar to the circular dichroism parameter considered in circular dichroism spectroscopy Based on the contour plot and the top figure, broadband high-purity CP thermal emission characterized by |S T | > 0.5 and η T > 0.5, is realized over almost 75% of the emission solid angle of 2π in the wavelength range of 6μm to 14μm for this representative MWS planar slab. In Fig. We now tune the underlying parameters in the model described in section II A and analyze the behavior of thermal photon spin S T to point out favorable parameters for realizing broadband CP infrared radiation. We first vary the Weyl nodes separation b in the above model along kz from 1 nm -1 to 6 nm -1 . Figure Figure In the model of a representative MWS considered above, we used a simplified system containing only 2 Weyl nodes in the electronic band structure. This parameter, denoted as g, influences the diagonal permittivity of the Weyl semimetal through Eq. 5. Figure Figure We also note that S T is quite small for the Voigt geometry in which the gyrotropy axis of MWS is parallel to the surface of the planar slab. This result was noted for InSb slab in Ref. In addition to extended planar slabs, we now show that the finite objects made of a magnetic Weyl semimetal can also emit broadband CP thermal radiation in specific emission directions. Again, there is no local formulation of Kirchhoff's law where W (ω) denotes the spectral energy density and the vector S(ω) denotes the spectral spin angular momentum density In other words, the same quantity from the previous section is analyzed here. The quantities E(r, ω) ⊗ E * (r, ω) and H(r, ω) ⊗ H * (r, ω) are computed using the aformentioned TDDA approach applicable for finite-size nonreciprocal objects. From the perspective of potential experiments, it is also important to calculate the net emission power which has been described in several works before We first consider a cube made of MWS of length 1μm along each side. The temperature of the cube is T = 300K and that of its surrounding environment or vacuum is T 0 = 0K. We use the same representative MWS as used for the planar slab considered in Fig. We numerically demonstrated that planar slabs of magnetic Weyl semimetals (MWS) can emit high-purity CP thermal radiation (S T ∼ 1) over a broad wavelength range in mid-IR and long-wave-IR spectral region, and for a significant portion of the emission solid angle. For a representative MWS with parameters similar to Ref. Specifically, larger separation between Weyl nodes (equivalent to stronger gyrotropy), smaller Fermi energy, and smaller number of Weyl nodes are favorable amongst other parameters for achieving larger bandwidths. We further demonstrated using TDDA computations that finite-size bodies made of MWS also lead to spectrally broadband CP thermal radiation albeit with geometry-dependent direction-specificity or small angular bandwidths compared to extended planar slabs. We note that no such functionality of highly efficient broadband CP radiation at mid-IR and long-wave-IR wavelengths currently exists. It is difficult to realize simultaneously large spectral and angular bandwidths of high purity CP infrared emission reported in this work by employing other existing approaches. In other words, MWS appears to exhibit a unique capability to solve this technological design problem. There has been an extensive work in the past decade on Weyl semimetals with many candidates currently being investigated in experiments. In particular, time-reversal-symmetry broken magnetic Weyl semimetals (focus of this work) include pyrochlore iridates Y 2 IrO 7 , Eu [32, 33] ferromagnetic spinels HgCr 2 Se 4 We acknowledge funding from DARPA Nascent Light-Matter Interactions program. The authors declare no conflicts of interest. We provide the summary of theoretical derivations and computational methods here. The polarization-resolved thermal radiation power from an extended planar slab is given by Eq. 6 in the main text. This can be derived within the radiometry framework using detailed balance of energy and momenta or within the scattering formulation of fluctuational electrodynamics. The derivation for nonreciprocal media is discussed in detail in Ref. In the planar geometry, the emission direction is characterized by the angles θ, φ made by the propagation wavevector k. It is straightforward to obtain the associated transverse electric (s) and transverse magnetic (p) polarization unit vectors for the plane of incidence spanned by k and ẑ (normal to the slab surface). These eigenvectors are given below: The RCP eigenvector is ês + iê p (also denoted as +) and the LCP eigenvector is ês -iê p (also denoted as -). From the perspective of an observer/detector in the far-field, the incoming RCP photons have a clockwise rotation of E-field and the incoming LCP photons have an anti-clockwise rotation of E-field. The spin angular momentum per photon along the propagation direction is for LCP photons and -for RCP photons The emissivities in the eigenbasis of RCP and LCP photons are: where R (ij) (ω, θ, φ) for i, j ∈ {+, -} denotes the polarization interconversion reflectance for light of angular frequency ω incident in the direction characterized by the angles (θ, φ). These reflectances depend on the associated Fresnel reflection coefficients in ês , êp basis and given by the following expressions: where we have omitted (ω, θ, φ)-dependence for brevity since it is the same on both sides. r jk (ω, θ, φ) denotes the amplitude of j-polarized reflected light due to unit-amplitude incident k-polarized light of frequency ω. These reflection coefficients are computed by solving the boundary conditions. A computational tool to obtain these coefficients for generic bianisotropic media is available on GitHub https://github.com/chinmayCK/Fresnel under the MIT license. We employ thermal discrete dipole approximation method recently used for analyzing thermal emission from nonreciprocal finite bodies where P is a column vector of length 3N consisting of dipoles p 1 , . . . , p N , and G EE = ĜEE (r, r 1 ), • • • , ĜEE (r, r N ) is the row vector of ĜEE (r, r ) = where R = rr , R = |r -r |, and ⊗ denotes the outer product. Here the bar notation of P and other following variables indicates that the quantities are located or evaluated inside the object. The discrete dipoles inside the object denoted as p i consist of fluctuating part p These equations in the matrix form are as the following: P = P(fl) + P(ind) , This forms the discrete dipole approximation (DDA) equation which is to be solved to obtain P required to calculate thermal emission quantities. The fluctuating point dipoles p Similarly, the correlations E(r, ω)⊗H * (r, ω) required for calculation of Poynting flux or radiative heat transfer can be obtained within the TDDA formalism, which has been discussed in several works before 