Reconfigurable Intelligent Surfaces (RISs) have attracted major attention in the last few years, thanks to their useful characteristics. An RIS is a nearly passive thin surface that can dynamically change the reradiated field, and can therefore realize anomalous reflection, refraction, focalization, or other wave transformations for engineering the radio propagation environment or realizing novel surface-type antennas. Evaluating the performance and optimizing the deployment of RISs in wireless networks need physically consistent frameworks that account for the electromagnetic characteristics of dynamic metasurfaces. In this paper, we introduce a general macroscopic model for evaluating the scattering from an RIS. The proposed method decomposes the wave reradiated from an RIS into multiple scattering contributions and is aimed at being embedded into ray-based models. Since state-of-the-art ray-based models can already efficiently simulate specular wave reflection, diffraction, and diffuse scattering, but not anomalous reradiation, we enhance them with an approach based on Huygens' principle and propose two possible implementations for it. Multiple reradiation modes can be modeled through the proposed approach, using the power conservation principle. We validate the accuracy of the proposed model by benchmarking it against several case studies available in the literature, which are based on analytical models, full-wave simulations, and measurements. With the current deployment of fifth generation (5G) communication systems, it is now a critical time to identify enabling technologies for the sixth generation (6G). 6G systems are expected to fulfill more stringent requirements than 5G networks in terms of transmission capacity, reliability, latency, coverage, energy consumption, and connection density. Existing 5G technologies, such as millimeter-wave communications, massive multiple-input multiple-output schemes, and ultra-dense heterogeneous networks, are mainly focused on system designs at the transmitter and receiver sides, as well as on the deployment of additional network infrastructure elements with power amplification, digital signal processing capabilities, and backhaul availability. The purpose of currently available 5G technologies is mainly to capitalize on or to cope with often unfavorable wireless propagation environments. In fact, the propagation environment is conventionally modeled as an exogenous entity that cannot be controlled but can only be adapted to. According to this design paradigm, communication engineers usually design the transmitters, receivers, and transmission protocols based on the specific properties of the wireless channels and for achieving the desired performance. Recently, the technology referred to as reconfigurable intelligent surface (RIS) has emerged as a promising option for its capability of customizing the wireless propagation environment through nearly passive signal transformations. An RIS is a thin surface that is engineered to possess properties that enable it to dynamically control the electromagnetic waves through, e.g., signal reflections, refractions, focusing, and their combinations. In wireless communications, RISs are intended to realize so-called programmable and reconfigurable wireless propagation environments, i.e., large-scale or small-scale propagation environments that are not viewed and treated as random uncontrollable entities but become part of the network design parameters that are subject to optimization for fulfilling the stringent requirements of 6G networks An RIS operates, on the other hand, in the electromagnetic domain directly on the electromagnetic waves that impinge upon it. The performance evaluation and optimization deployment of RISs in wireless networks require physically consistent and realistic models that account for their electromagnetic characteristics and physical implementations, which include the wave transformations that they realize, the size, losses, parasitic effects, and transmission distances Motivated by these considerations, a few research works have recently investigated macroscopic methods for modeling the scattering from finite-size RISs, which are based on different analytical approaches and assumptions. A summary of the available contributions and a brief description of their main features and limitations are available in Table I A more extensive state-of-the art review can be found in Main features Limitations In contrast to the current state-of-the-art, in the present paper we introduce an approach for modeling the scattering from a general finite-size and non-ideal RIS. The model is conceived for being integrated into currently available raybased models, such as ray tracing and ray launching methods, which are recognized as the most suitable and efficient deterministic models for realistic radio propagation simulations in man-made environments. Several ray-based models discretize ordinary surfaces into surface elements (also called "tiles") in order to simulate diffuse scattering (by using, e.g., the effective roughness (ER) model • We introduce a general parametric approach for modeling the scattering from a finite-size RIS, which is suitable for integration into ray-based models. • The proposed model is macroscopic, as it is agnostic to the specific microscopic (unit cells) physical implementation of the RIS, and is instead characterized by macroscopic parameters. • The model explicitly takes into account diffuse scattering, in addition to the desired and undesired reradiation modes, it is not limited to flat metasurfaces, and it can be easily generalized for application to refractive metasurfaces (not considered here for brevity). • We consider and compare two versions of the model for computing the anomalous reradiated field. • The method is conceived to be integrated into advanced discrete ray-based models Even disregarding the impact of the finite size of the surface and the near-field illumination, real-world metasurfaces can generate multiple reradiated modes but only one of them is usually the desired mode. For example, let us consider an anomalous reflector that is designed, under a plane wave illumination, to reradiate a single plane wave towards a nonspecular direction. It is known that a non-local design is usually needed for realizing surfaces with a high reradiation efficiency and for avoiding parasitic modes Currently available ray-based simulation tools are conceived for modeling specular reflection, diffraction and diffuse scattering The proposed approach for modeling the scattering from an RIS starts from imposing a power balance constraint, according to the power conservation principle, between the incident and the reradiated waves. The power balance constraint is imposed regardless of the size of the RIS, and is formulated in terms of macroscopic parameters that measure the relative intensity of all possible reradiated and scattered modes, which carry power towards different directions. As far as periodic surfaces are concerned, the directions and the amplitudes of the different reradiated modes can be obtained from Floquet's theory and by applying the mode-matching approach The proposed power balance criterion accounts for specular reflection, diffraction, diffuse scattering, and for all nonspecular reradiated modes. In the proposed model, however, we ignore the field reradiated by evanescent (non-propagating) modes. This implies that the approach is applicable to observation points that are at least a few wavelengths away from the surface of the RIS, where the impact of the evanescent modes can be safely assumed to be negligible. However, the proposed approach can be applied to both the near-field and far-field regions of the RIS structure. After ensuring the power conservation principle, the scattered field is computed by taking into account the finite size of the surface and the characteristics of every possible reradiated mode. Specifically, anomalous reradiation is computed by adopting two methods: (1) Huygens' principle based on a generalization, proposed in this paper, of the method of image currents The proposed approach is inspired to the ER model The ER model is a heuristic approach for modeling diffuse scattering from ordinary surfaces (e.g., building walls) that can be easily integrated into ray-based field prediction algorithms Based on Fig. where P i , P r , P s , are the incident, specularly reflected, and diffuse scattered powers at the generic surface element dS, and P p is the power that penetrates into the wall. More precisely, the model assumes that the wall has some surface irregularities with respect to an ideal uniform flat surface, that divert a fraction of the power from the direction of specular reflection towards other directions. The dissipated power P p is assumed to be independent of these irregularities. Let us introduce the scattering parameter S (0<S<1), which is defined so that S 2 corresponds to the ratio between the diffuse scattering power and the reflected power. Also, let us introduce the specular field-reduction factor R (0<R<1, which is often called Rayleigh factor) to account for the attenuation that the reflected wave undergoes with respect to a smooth flat layer. From (1) we obtain where ρ is the surface reflectance of the wall. If the wall had a perfectly smooth surface, we would have: Combining ( Equation ( If an ordinary surface is replaced by an RIS, the ER model needs to be generalized. In fact, an RIS is designed to intelligently reradiate the incident wave into the desired direction while minimizing the specular reflection and the diffuse scattering. Therefore, the anomalous reradiation needs to be included into the power balance formulation. In practice, anomalous reradiation is realized through an appropriate patterning of the surface of the RIS, e.g., by using strip-based, patch-based, or loop-based unit cells. The patterning imposes a spatial modulation on the incident electromagnetic waves, which in turn results in the creation of reradiated modes. The proposed approach for modeling the reradiation from the RIS is, however, macroscopic, i.e., it is not intended for modeling the specific microscopic patterning of the surface. The proposed model characterizes the phase and amplitude modulation that the RIS applies to the incident electromagnetic waves. Specifically, the generic mode that is reradiated by the RIS is characterized through local surfaceaveraged (on the scale of the wavelength) phase and amplitude modulation coefficients, which are denoted by χ (x , y ) and A (x , y ), respectively, with (x , y ) being a generic point of the RIS. Further details are given in Section III. Similar to the original ER model, the power balance is imposed to each surface element dS. Specifically, the power balance in ( where the power that penetrates into the RIS (P p in (1)) is split into two contributions: P m , which is the total (for all anomalous modes) power that is reradiated by the RIS, and P d , which is the power that is dissipated into the structure of the RIS. As detailed in Section III, each tile of the RIS is viewed as a secondary source of a set of reradiated spherical wavelets, and the superposition of these wavelets results in the reradiated waves based on Huygens' principle. To characterize the power balance at the RIS surface, we introduce the total reradiation intensity coefficient m that determines the fraction of the incident power P i that is reradiated into the anomalously reradiated modes. In simple terms, m plays for anomalous reradiation the same role as the reflectivity ρ plays for specular reflection. In RIS-coated walls, in addition, diffuse scattering may be present, which is caused by the presence of possible imperfections. Under these assumptions and similar to (2), the power balance in (5) can be rewritten as follows: where the same notation as in ( If the RIS is assumed to be perfectly smooth and without imperfections (while still taking the power dissipated in the RIS into account), we obtain: Even though not explicitly shown in Under the assumption of far-field illumination, i.e., the incident wave is a plane wave, the aforementioned parameters do not depend on the position of the tile dS on the surface. This is similar to the original ER model. In this case, the power balance constraint in (9) can be applied to the whole RIS. If the transmitter is in the near-field region of the RIS, on the other hand, the angle of incidence θ i depends on the position of the tile on the RIS. Therefore, the power balance in (9) holds only locally, i.e., for the specific tile under consideration, and the macroscopic parameters (ρ, m, τ) depend on the location of the tile and the angle of incidence θ i . Some RISs may be realized, at the microscopic scale, by exciting evanescent (i.e., non-propagating) waves in the close proximity of the surface in order to obtain wave transformations at high power efficiencies. These designs result in engineered surfaces with power exchanges between different surface areas of the RIS, where local power losses and local power gains are observed. At the macroscopic level, these implementations of RISs can be modeled through the surface-averaged amplitude modulation coefficient A (x , y ) (further detailed are given in Section III). In For generality, we assume that the RIS reradiates N propagating modes. By denoting with m n the reradiated power coefficient of the n th propagating mode, ( where n m n can be interpreted as the (macroscopic) power reradiation coefficient of the RIS and the N-tuple (m 1 , m 2 , . . . , m N ) defines how the reradiated power is distributed among the N modes. The N modes in The focus of this paper is the analysis and modeling of reflective surfaces. The proposed approach can be generalized for application to transmissive surfaces, i.e., RISs that scatter the incident signals towards the forward direction, beyond the wall. In this case, the forward-ER scattering model can be applied The power balance constraint in According to Huygens' principle, as mentioned, each surface element of a finite-size RIS is viewed as a secondary source of a spherical reradiated wavelet, with a given phase and intensity, and the coherent superposition of the wavelets generated by the tiles that comprise the RIS results in the overall reradiated wave. As summarized in Table Algorithm I: Computation of the RIS-scattered total field 1. Electromagnetic characterization of the RIS (via analysis, full-wave simulations, or measurements). For every reradiated mode, the parameters (ρ, m n , S , τ) are defined as a function of the angle of illumination. In this step, the RIS is assumed to be of infinite extent. 2. Computation of the field due to specular reflection: E specular . This is obtained based on geometrical optics Algorithm I. Proposed approach for modeling the total scattered field from a finite-size RIS and its integration into ray-based models and simulators. Before introducing the two methods, we summarize in Algorithm I the proposed approach for computing the complete scattered field from a finite-size RIS, which encompasses the integration of the reradiation model discussed in this section into ray-based models. More specifically: (i) the specular reflected field is obtained by using the geometrical optics methods; (ii) the edge diffracted field related to the specularly reflected field is obtained by applying the uniform theory of diffraction The first proposed method for computing the reradiated field is based on an integral formulation that originates from the induction theorem First, we introduce the macroscopic spatial modulation coefficient as: where P = (x , y ) ∈ S RIS is a generic point of the surface S RIS of the RIS. As introduced in Section II, m is the reradiation intensity coefficient, and R is the Rayleigh factor. Also, A m (x , y ) and χ m (x , y ) are the amplitude and phase of the spatial modulation introduced by the RIS for realizing the desired wave transformation, respectively. To ensure that the power balance constraint in In order to derive the reradiated field, the induction theorem is applied In conventional electromagnetic scattering problems, the induction equivalent problem is usually formulated and solved for surfaces that can be modeled as a perfect electric conductor (PEC) or as a perfect magnetic conductor (PMC). In these cases, the method of image currents is applied, and the total surface current densities are computed. In these cases, either only magnetic or only electric current densities exist. With the current densities at hand, the reradiated field is computed by using the radiation integrals in the absence of the surface. This approach is, however, not directly applicable to engineered surfaces like an RIS. An RIS can be viewed as a layer with a generic surface impedance, as discussed in Based on Appendix A, the field reradiated by an RIS can be found as generated by equivalent surface electric (J) and magnetic (M) currents, which depend on the incident fields and on the macroscopic surface modulation coefficient Γ (P ), as follows: where E i and H i denote the incident electric and magnetic fields that are evaluated on the RIS surface. If the RIS operates as a conventional PEC (i.e., Γ = -1) we obtain J (P ) = 0 in (13), i.e., the induced electric currents are shorted by the PEC surface. Similar considerations apply if the RIS is configured as a conventional PMC, i.e., Γ = 1, which implies M (P ) = 0. Equations ( From ( As a case study, we focus our attention on the field reradiated by an RIS under the assumption that the incident signal is a far-field (with respect to the primary source antenna) spherical wave whose electric and magnetic fields can be formulated as follows: where η is the free-space impedance, P t and G t are the radiated power and the antenna gain of the transmitter, respectively, pi is the normal unit vector that embodies the polarization of the incident wave, ki is the propagation unit vector, k = 2π/λ is the wave number, and χ 0 is a fixed phase shift. Also, r i is the distance from the phase center of the transmitter to the point where the fields are computed. If the fields are observed on the surface of the RIS, then r i = r i (P ). It is worth noting that only the tangential components of the fields E iτ and H iτ , which can be formulated as: contribute to the surface currents in As illustrated in Fig. where r = |r |, r = r / |r |, and the following surface electric and magnetic fields are defined: The fields in It is worth noting that, according to the induction theorem, (16) gives a valid result only if the reradiated field is computed in the space above the surface. Moreover, due to the approximations used in the derivation, [see (A.6) in Appendix A], ( The reradiated magnetic field H m can be obtained, mutatis mutandis, by using Based on ( In the literature, another approach that has been used for estimating the field reradiated by a finite-size RIS is based on antenna theory. In this method, an RIS is viewed as an array of scattering antenna elements The representation of a finite-size RIS as an antennaarray is based on the known relation between the effective aperture A m and the directivity D m of an aperture antenna, i.e., D m = 4π/λ 2 A m To formulate an antenna-array model that is electromagnetically consistent, therefore, we consider antenna elements for which the following physical relations need to hold: where the third inequality ensures the absence of grating lobes. For simplicity of notation, we assume ∆S = (∆l) 2 . From the third equation in By definition, the directivity D m is always greater than one. Thus, from Therefore, δ must satisfy the following constraints: 0.28 = δ min ≤ δ ≤ δ max = 0.5 (20) From the lower bound in Motivated by ) where α ≥ 0 is a tuning parameter. From On the other hand, larger values of α would result in grating lobes. Since, in addition, α ≥ 0, from Another often utilized antenna pattern is the Huygens radiation pattern, which is defined as: The power antenna pattern in By definition of directivity, we obtain D m =3 from Equation ( The analysis of the exponential-Lambertian and Huygens' radiation patterns bring to our attention that modeling an RIS as an antenna-array is possible, but some constraints on the modeling parameters need to be ensured. Specifically, an RIS can be modeled as an antenna-array provided that the feasibility conditions in ( Let us assume that the feasibility conditions in ( Specifically, the RIS is partitioned into N X × N Y elementary surface elements ∆S . The generic surface element is identified by the indices (u, v), where u = 1, 2, . . . , N X and v = 1, 2, . . . , N Y . The corresponding reradiated electric field is denoted by ∆E m (u, v). Then, the total reradiated field evaluated at the observation point P can be formulated as: To compute ∆E m (u, v), we use a two-step approach: (i) first, we ensure that the reradiated power fulfills the power balance constraint in As far as the power balance principle is concerned, the quadruplet of parameters (m, τ, ρ, S) needs to fulfill Under these assumptions, let θ i (u, v) and θ m (u, v) denote the direction of the incident wave and the direction of propagation towards the observation point P, respectively, that correspond to the surface element (u, v). Then, the reradiated electric field can be formulated as follows: To fulfill the power conservation principle, it needs to be ensured that a fraction equal to mR 2 of the power received by the antenna element is reradiated into the upper halfspace, which is a solid angle of 2π steradians. Therefore, the following power balance equation needs to hold: dθ m where the dependence on (u,v) is omitted for ease of reading. Therefore, we obtain: where is the power intensity of the incident electric field according to As a result, the power intensity of the total reradiated field can be formulated as follows: By combining ( Notably, θ m (P |u, v ) in Based on Finally, the complete reradiated electric field is obtained by inserting In this section, we validate the proposed reradiation models for RISs. Specifically, we consider examples of RISs for which the macroscopic spatial modulation coefficient Γ is obtained from analytical models, full-wave simulations, and experimental measurements. Six case studies are analyzed. 1) Ideal Phase-Gradient Reflector: The first case study corresponds to an ideal metasurface that introduces an ideal phase modulation to the reflected fields, with the goal of reradiating a single incident plane wave towards a target direction in the absence of dissipation and undesired reradiated modes. We consider a 7 × 7 m 2 large RIS that lies in the xy plane and that introduces a linear phase modulation such that dχ m (x ) /dx = k (sinθ isinθ r ), where θ i is the angle of incidence and θ r is the desired angle of reflection The RIS operates at 3 GHz and is illuminated normally (θ i = 0) by a plane wave that is linearly polarized in the y-direction and whose intensity is 1 V/m. The desired angle of reradiation is θ r = 60 degrees. The reradiated field is computed with the integral model in Section III-A and is reported in Fig. For comparison, we compute the reradiated electric field by using the antenna-array model introduced in Section III-B, i.e., by using ( 2) Ideal Focusing Lens: The second canonical case study corresponds to an ideal and lossless metasurface that focuses a single spherical wave towards an intended location, i.e., the metasurface operates as a reflecting focusing lens. In this example, the angle of incidence is θ i = 60 degrees, the RIS lies in the xy plane at z 0 = -10 m, and the intended focus is at the Fig. origin. The phase modulation profile to obtain the desired reradiated wave is χ m 1 (x , y ) = k (x ) 2 + (y ) 2 + (z 0 ) 2ksinθ i x , while we assume unitary amplitude parameters as in the previous case study. The results are illustrated in Fig. 3) Lossless Anomalous Reflector (with parasitic modes): To evaluate the capabilities of the proposed model to account for the presence of parasitic reradiated modes, we consider the metasurface analyzed in 4) Diffuse Scattering: The fourth case study is centered on analyzing the impact of diffuse scattering that originates from design trade-offs, construction nonidealities and/or the deposit of dust on the surface of the RIS. To the best of our knowledge, no specific experimental results on modeling diffuse scattering from engineered surfaces exist in the literature. Thus, we con-Fig. The fifth case study is centered on validating the proposed macroscopic model for characterizing a phase-gradient lossy metasurface that has been manufactured and experimentally characterized 6) Analysis of the Spreading Factor: The final case study is centered on evaluating whether the proposed model can correctly reproduce the transition from the near-field to the far-field regions of a finite-size RIS. Based on the considered modeling assumptions, the power intensity of the electric field is expected to be constant as a function of the distance in the near-field region, while it is expected to decay with the square of the distance in the far-field region. To validate this trend, we consider an ideal phase-gradient reflector that is illuminated by a normally incident plane wave (θ i = 0 • ) with a unitary electric field, which is steered towards an anomalous angle of reflection equal to θ r = 30 • . Specifically, we compute local averages of the intensity of the electric field over regions of size 10λ × 10λ, and as a function of the observation distances along the direction of the main lobe of the reradiation pattern. The results are shown in Fig. We have introduced a physically consistent and realistic macroscopic model for evaluating the multi-mode reradiation and diffuse scattering from general engineered reconfigurable surfaces. The model is based on a hybrid approach, according to which well-established ray-based methods for modeling specular reflection, diffraction, and diffuse scattering, are complemented with the Huygens principle for modeling anomalous reradiated modes. Specifically, ray-based and Huygens-based methods are coupled together through a parametric power balance constraint that ensures the energy conservation between the incident and scattered fields. We have compared two different formulations of the Huygens principle. The first approach is based on the induction theorem and the second approach is based on antenna-array theory. Furthermore, the feasibility and accuracy of both methods have been discussed. In addition, we have implemented the complete macroscopic model and have validated its accuracy against analytical models, full-wave electromagnetic simulations, and experimental measurements available in the literature. Possible generalizations of the proposed model include its use for linklevel and system-level performance evaluations in realistic multipath propagation scenarios, as well as the development of a ray-based framework for modeling multi-mode reradiation for different types of reconfigurable surfaces. Appendix A Generalized method of image currents and derivation of The method of current images can be generalized in the presence of an RIS as shown in Fig. Specifically, according to the induction theorem, the induced surface currents are: J i (P ) = H i (P ) × n M i (P ) = n × E i (P ) (A.1) where P = (x , y ) ∈ S RIS is a generic point on the surface of the RIS, n is the unit normal vector that points outwards (i.e., towards the reflection half-space), and E i and H i are the incident electric and magnetic fields, respectively. In addition, the image current densities are (see Fig. where Γ (P ) is the macroscopic spatial modulation coefficient in J (P ) = (1 + Γ (P )) [H i (P ) × n] M (P ) = (1 -Γ (P )) [ n × E i (P )] (A.3) and by assuming that the reradiation occurs in the absence of any physical objects, i.e., in free space. The total surface currents in (A.3) assume that the RIS is of infinite extent and the impact of the edges on the surface currents is ignored. By using the notation in Fig. E m (P) = 1/ ( jωε) S RIS k 2 G (x , y ) J (x , y ) dS +1/ ( jωε) S RIS (J (x , y ) • ∇ ) ∇ G (x , y ) dS -1/ ( jωε) S RIS jωεM (x , y ) × ∇ G (x , y ) dS where ∇ denotes the gradient operator with respect to (x , y ), "×" denotes the vector cross product, " • " denotes the scalar dot product, and G (x , y ) is the free-space Green's function: where the terms that decay faster than 1/r are neglected. By using (A.6), the following expression is obtained: (J (x , y ) • ∇ ) ∇ G (x , y ) ≈ -k 2 G (x , y ) (J (x , y ) • r ) r (A.7) Also, the following triple vector product identity holds: J (x , y ) -(J (x , y ) • r ) r = r × (J (x , y ) × r ) (A.8) By inserting (A.6), (A.7) and (A.8) in (A.4), and recalling that k/ (ω ) = η, the reradiated electric field can be formulated as follows: E m (P) ≈jk S RIS ηG (x , y ) r × (J (x , y ) × r ) dS jk S RIS G (x , y ) (M (x , y ) × r ) dS (A.9) By substituting (A.3) and (A.5) in (A.9), we eventually obtain In a similar way, the expression of the reradiated magnetic field can be obtained by applying the approximations (A.6) to the Kottler's formula for the H field 