We investigate the eigen oscillations of internal degrees of freedom (Higgs mode and Goldstone mode) of two-band superconductors using the extended time-dependent Ginzburg-Landau theory, formulated in a work In a previous work The superconducting (SC) system has two types of collective excitations: with an energy gap (quasi-relativistic spectrum) E 2 = m 2 υ 4 + p 2 υ 2 (where m is the mass of a Higgs boson, so that mυ 2 = 2|∆|) -Higgs mode, and with an acoustic (ultrarelativistic) spectrum E = pυ -Goldstone mode. The light speed υ is determined from the dynamical properties of the system, and it is much less than the vacuum light speed: υ = v F / √ 3 c (v F is Fermi velocity). The Higgs mode is oscillations of modulus of the OP |Ψ(t, r)|, and it can be considered as sound in the gas of above-condensate quasiparticles (at T → T c ). The propagation of a Higgs boson is not accompanied by charge transfer. It should be noted, that the free Higgs mode is unstable due to both strong damping of these oscillations at T → T c , so that the aperiodic relaxation takes place with decay into above-condensate quasiparticles, since E(q) ≥ 2|∆|. The Goldstone mode is oscillations of the phase θ(r, t), and it is absorbed into the gauge field A μ according to the Anderson-Higgs mechanism. The Goldstone oscillations cannot be accompanied by oscillations of the charge density, they generate the transverse field divA = 0 only and they are eddy currents (i.e. divj = 0), as result of the boundary conditions. From the gauge invariance of the Lagrangian it follows, that the superconductor is equivalent to a dielectric (in some effective sense) with the permittivity ε = c 2 υ 2 only for the induced electric field E = -1 c ∂A ∂t (with frequencies 0 < ω < 2|∆|). Thus, the speed υ is the speed of light in SC medium, if there were no skin-effect and Meissner effect. At the same time, inside the superconductor the potential electric field is absent E = -∇φ = 0 as consequence of the boundary conditions. For the electrostatic field E = -∇φ the permittivity is ε(ω = 0, q = 0) = ∞ as in metals. Two-band superconductors are a specific class of superconductors essentially differing in their properties from singleband superconductors. The main feature of these materials is the presence of two OP -"wave functions" Ψ 1 and Ψ 2 corresponding to the condensates of Cooper pairs in each band. In a bulk isotropic s-wave superconductor the GL free energy functional can be written as where m 1,2 denote the effective mass of carriers in the corresponding band, the coefficients a 1,2 are given as a i = γ i (T -T ci ) where γ i are some constants, the coefficients b 1,2 are independent of temperature, the quantities and η describe interband mixing of the two OP (proximity effect) and their gradients (drag effect), respectively. If we switch off the interband interactions = 0 and η = 0, then we will have two independent superconductors with different critical temperatures T c1 and T c2 because the intraband interactions can be different. Thus, a two-band superconductor is understood as two single-band superconductors with the corresponding condensates of Cooper pairs Ψ 1 and Ψ 2 (so that densities of SC electrons are n s1 = 2|Ψ 1 | 2 and n s2 = 2|Ψ 2 | 2 accordingly), but these two condensates are coupled by both the internal proximity effect Ψ + 1 Ψ 2 + Ψ 1 Ψ + 2 and the "drag" effect η ∇Ψ 1 ∇Ψ + 2 + ∇Ψ + 1 ∇Ψ 2 . In presence of a magnetic potential A the replacement ∇ → ∇ -i2e c A must be done in the free energy functional Minimization of the free energy functional with respect to the OP, if ∇Ψ 1,2 = 0, gives where the equilibrium values Ψ 1,2 are assumed to be real (i.e. the phases θ 1,2 are 0 or π) in absence of current and magnetic field in the case of a two-band superconductor (but not for three-band superconductors, where the equilibrium phase differences can be not only 0 or π, but it can be 2π/3 or π/3, 2π/3 depending on the signs of the interband interactions ik Near the critical temperature T c we have Ψ 3 1,2 → 0, hence, we can find the critical temperature equating to zero the determinant of the linearized system (2): Solving this equation, we find T c > T c1 , T c2 , moreover, the solution does not depend on the sign of . The sign determines the equilibrium phase difference of the OP |Ψ 1 |e iθ1 and |Ψ 2 |e iθ2 : that follows from Eq.( The case < 0 corresponds to an attractive interband interaction (for example, in MgB 2 , where s ++ wave symmetry occurs), the case > 0 corresponds to a repulsive interband interaction (for example, in iron-based superconductors, where s +-wave symmetry occurs) The solutions of Eq.( In references In Ref. As has been demonstrated in Ref. Proceeding from the aforesaid, we aim to obtain eigen oscillations of internal degrees of freedom (the Higgs mode and the Goldstone mode) of two-band superconductors using the ETDGL theory formulated in Ref. A. Ginzburg-Landau Lagrangian for two-band superconductors In the general case the OP Ψ 1,2 are both spatially inhomogeneous and they can change over time: Ψ 1,2 = Ψ 1,2 (r, t). The OP are complex scalar fields, which are equivalent to two real fields each: modulus |Ψ(r, t)| and phase θ(r, t) (the modulus-phase representation): ,t) . ( For the stationary case Ψ 1,2 = Ψ 1,2 (r) the steady configuration of the field Ψ 1,2 (r) minimizes the free energy functional (1). However, for the nonstationary case Ψ 1,2 (r, t) the minimization procedure makes no sense. According to the method described in Then the two-component scalar fields Ψ 1,2 (r, t) minimizes some action S (as in the relativistic field theory The Lagrangian L is built by generalizing the density of free energy in Eq.( instead the gradient operators: ∇Ψ → ∂ μ Ψ, ∇Ψ + → ∂ μ Ψ + . Then the required Lagrangian takes the form: where the same speed υ is used for both Ψ 1 and Ψ 2 with the masses m 1 and m 2 accordingly (it should be noted the property Fermi velocities in each band accordingly) plays role of the light speed in SC medium, and it will be found below. In the presence of el.-mag. field c A μ must be done in Lagrangian ( The electromagnetic response has been considered in Ref. where we have used the following properties, as We will see, that modulus and phase variables can be separated in the linear approximation. Thus, the field coordinates |Ψ 1,2 (r, t)| and θ 1,2 (r, t) are the normal coordinates, and their small oscillations are the normal oscillations. Let us consider movement of the phases θ 1,2 . The corresponding Lagrange equations are where we have omitted nonlinear terms, such as The phases can be written in the form of harmonic oscillations: where q μ = ω υ , -q , x μ = (υt, r), equilibrium phases θ 0 1,2 satisfy the relation ( , we obtain the following linear equations: We can see, that oscillations of the phases θ 1,2 are separated from movement of the modules |Ψ 1,2 | in a linear approximation. Substituting the phases Equating to zero the determinant of the system (15), we find a dispersion equation: From where we can see, that one of dispersion relations is wherein A = B, thus this mode is common mode oscillations, as the Goldstone mode in single-band superconductors. There is another oscillation mode with spectrum wherein at that for symmetrical bands If we suppose the drag effect is absent: wherein For symmetrical bands that corresponds to results of Ref. It should be noted, that at T > T c the Goldstone excitations make no sense (as the light speed υ and the permittivity c 2 /υ 2 [1]), so far as the phase θ of the OP makes no sense, since Ψ = 0, although |Ψ| 2 = 0 occurs due to fluctuations In a two band superconductor a current (flow) takes the following form from where we can see, that the Goldstone mode In the previous subsection we could see, that oscillations of the phases θ 1,2 are separated from movement of the modules |Ψ 1,2 | in the linear approximation. Therefore, let us consider only movement of the modules (that is, assuming θ 1 = θ 0 1 and θ 2 = θ 0 2 ), then Lagrangian (9) takes the form: At T < T c we can consider small variations of modules of OP from their equilibrium values: and Lagrangian The last five terms can be omitted as a constant. The terms at φ 1 and φ 2 should be zero: that corresponds to Eq.( That is, the effect of the weak interband coupling on the both OP Ψ 1,2 at T = 0 is not significant, and it can be described as perturbation. Let, for example, T c1 T c2 , then from Eq.( For symmetrical bands, i.e. At T → T c we have Ψ 01,02 → 0, then it is not difficult to obtain from Eq.( Thus, at high temperatures T T c1 , T c2 , the values of Ψ 01,02 are determined by the interband coupling , so that, if = 0, then Ψ 01,02 = 0. Let us introduce the following notes: then, The second formula is correct only if the weak interband coupling 2 a 1 a 2 takes place. The Lagrange equations for the Lagrangian (25) are: The fields φ 1,2 can be written in the form of harmonic oscillations: φ 1 = Ae -iqμx μ , φ 2 = Be -iqμx μ , where q μ x μ = ωt -qr. Substituting them in Eqs. Equating to zero the determinant of the system From where we obtain the following dispersion relations: where Thus, in two-band superconductors the Higgs mode splits into two branches. Let us consider each mode at T = T c , that is a 1 a 2 = 2 (however, we must apply for α 1 α 2 more accurate expressions than Eq.(32) using Eq. where f (T c ) is some finite dimensionless value. Obviously, the coefficient η must be such, that a1 m2 + a2 m1 -2η > 0 and η 2 < 1 m1m2 . We can see, that for the first mode (39) the energy gap (the mass of a Higgs boson) vanishes at the critical temperature, as in single-band superconductors. At the same time, the energy gap of the second mode which coincides with energy of the Leggett mode whose energy gap vanishes at T = T c , as for the mode (or from the uncertainty principle: ω 0 ξ υ ∼ ⇒ ξ ∼ υ ω0 , since the energy of the Higgs mode plays role of the uncertainty of energy in a superconductor). Thus, we obtain the coherence lengths accordingly to the branches We can see, that the first coherence length diverges at T = T c . On the contrary, the second length remains finite and it varies little with temperature. These length scales are not related to the concrete bands involved in the formation of the superconducting ordering in a system with interband interaction. This result corresponds to the results in Ref. Let us consider the ratio of amplitudes for both branches of the spectrum. From Eq.( At T → T c , using Eqs. where in Eq.( From the first equation we can see, that increasing (decreasing) of Ψ 01 results in increasing (decreasing) of Ψ 02 , then from the second equation we can see, that the increased (decreased) Ψ 02 causes increasing (decreasing) of Ψ 01 . This increasing (decreasing) of Ψ 01 causes the increasing (decreasing) of Ψ 02 again, and so on. Thus, Eqs.(26) describe a system with the positive feedback. Therefore, excitation of the common mode oscillations requires less energy, than if the condensates from different bands were independent. On the contrary, to excite the anti-phase oscillations (Ψ 01 increases, but Ψ 02 decreases and vice versa) we must do the work against the positive feedback, hence minimal energy of these oscillations is larger. Thus, Higgs modes are oscillations of SC densities n si = 2|Ψ i | 2 , at the same time, the normal density must oscillate in anti-phase so, that n = n s + n n = const and n s v s + n n v n = 0. To change SC density and, hence, the normal density, as least one Cooper pair must be broken, that is the energy of order of 2|∆| must be spent. So, in Ref. Thus, we must suppose then from Eq.( Then the multiplier before Ψ 01 Ψ 02 depends on temperature very weakly, and this energy is symmetrical with respect to the bands. Using relationship between the "wave function" of Cooper pairs Ψ and the energy gap ∆ where 3π 2 are electron densities for each band. Then, we can see, that ( ω 0 ) 2 ∝ |∆ 1 ||∆ 2 |, and we can suppose: where χ = const (dimensionless) is such, that in superconductor with symmetrical , since in single-band superconductors we have υ = υ F √ 3 and we can determine the "dielectric permittivity" as Substituting Eqs. If we consider symmetrical bands, i.e. υ F 1 = υ F 2 and T c1 = T c2 , then we obtain υ 2 = χ 6 υ 2 F ⇒ χ = 1. It is not difficult to notice, that the dependence of υ on T in Eq.( Strictly speaking, the relation Ψ ∝ ∆ is not valid at low temperatures T T c both in pure superconductors (where n s (0) = n) and in dirty superconductors (where n s (0) ∝ |∆|) , where λ ij is dimensionless interband and intraband coupling constants, we must suppose (λ 12 +λ 21 )/(λ 11 λ 22 -λ 12 λ 21 ) = 1/4 for different materials with different T c , hence with various λ ij , that is very unlikely. In Ref. where n and m are integer numbers. For MgB 2 the value of the energy is observed as ω 0 4meV and n/m = 3/2, 1/1, 1/2, 1/3. This phenomenon has been observed as the dips in the dI/dV characteristics at the voltages V res . In general, peculiarities of the same type could also appear due to interaction of the AC Josephson current with phonons Thus, the resonant enhancement of the DC current takes place if an additional coherence is introduced into the JJ with AC Josephson current (resonance with phonons, el.-mag. waves, the Leggett mode etc.). In Sect.II we could see, that, as in single-band superconductors, in two-band superconductors one Goldstone mode (unobservable due to absorbtion into el.-mag. field) and only one Higgs mode exists, at the same time, the Leggett mode is prohibited. Let us consider a S-I-S junction, where the right and left banks are the same isotropic s-wave twoband superconductors with the energy gaps ∆ 1,2 . We assume the capacity C of the JJ is small, so that a McCumber parameter is β = (2e/ )I m CR 2 1, that is displacement current is negligible m . Calculation of the Josephson current between two-band superconductors with the strong impurity intraband scattering rates (the dirty limit described with Usadel equations) and the weak interband scattering in Ref. Here, R N 1 and R N 2 are the contributions of the normal resistance for each band, is the phase difference between the banks R and L. The interband scattering is neglected in the present approximation, so that the anharmonicity in Eq.( Since sin θ 2 ≤ 1 (for maximal current we can suppose θ ≈ π/2) we can expand Arctanh sin θ 2 in the series as: Then, where at that I m3 ∼ 0.1I m2 ∼ 0.01I m1 . Let us consider the problem with the given voltage V . Then, in order to ensure the gauge invariance, the phase θ must be changed as: θ → θ -2e V t ≡ θ -ωt, where ω ≡ 2e V . Then, As in Sect.II, we consider the small variations of modulus of the OP from its equilibrium value: where |φ 1,2 | Ψ 01,02 . Thus, Ψ 02 φ 2 sin (ωt -θ) The AC current with frequencies ω, 2ω, 3ω, . . . stipulates oscillations of SC density n s in each band, and besides, according to the result of Sect.II, the oscillations in each band occur in phase (in the linear approximation): m1 sin (ωt -θ) + I (1) m3 sin (3ωt -3θ) + . . . m1 sin (ωt -θ) + I (2) m3 sin (3ωt -3θ) + . . . Then we can write the equations: m1 ω 4eΨ 01 cos (ωt -θ) + I m3 ω 4eΨ 02 cos (3ωt -3θ) + . . . Thus, if there were no eigen oscillations (Higgs oscillations with the frequency ω 0 -Eqs. m1 ω 4eΨ 01 cos (ωt -θ) + I m2 ω 2eΨ 01 cos (2ωt -2θ) -3I m3 ω 4eΨ 01 cos (3ωt -3θ) + . . . (68) m1 ω 4eΨ 02 cos (ωt -θ) + I (2) m3 ω 4eΨ 02 cos (3ωt -3θ) + . . . (69) The particular solutions of nonhomogeneous differential equations are (the general solutions are attenuating, therefore they can be omitted): where We can see, that resonance occurs at frequencies ω = nω 0 , nω 0 /2, nω 0 /3, . . . (if γ ω 0 ). In the resonant frequencies we have φ 1,2,3 = π/2. Then the solution (70) in the resonant frequencies is 8eΨ 01,02 γ sin (nω 0 t -2θ) (72) 8eΨ 01,02 γ sin (nω 0 t -3θ) . Out of the resonances the amplitudes of φ 1,2 are negligible. Substituting the solutions (72) in the current (63) we obtain the currents at the corresponding resonant frequencies: Out of the resonances the current has the form: We can see, that at the frequencies ω = nω 0 , nω 0 /2, nω 0 /3, . . . the DC current occurs, however, unlike DC Josephson current (57,60), it is not function of the phase difference θ. Thus, at the voltage where m, n = 1, 2, 3 . . ., DC current through the JJ appears. Amplitudes of the resonant peaks is proportional to the square of the critical Josephson currents I 2 m1 , I 2 m2 , I 2 m3 , . . .. As we have seen above: I m3 ∼ 0.1I m2 ∼ 0.01I m1 , hence, DC resonant currents are such, that I 1 3 ω 0 ∼ 10 -2 I 1 2 ω 0 ∼ 10 -4 I(ω 0 ), as we can see from Eq.(73). Thus, the main resonance at the voltage V res = ω0 2e (that is, when ω = ω 0 ) is the most pronounced. In I-V characteristic of MgB 2 break junction (S-I-S type) a "step" has been observed in Ref. Thus, the resonant enhancement of the DC current through the JJ is result of the coupling between AC Josephson current and Higgs oscillations. It should be noted, that we obtain the result (73) neglecting of the interband scattering, hence, the effect would have been observed also in single-band superconductors. However, in the single-band superconductors the minimal energy of the Higgs mode is ω 0 = 2|∆| |), then the Higgs mode is stable, therefore, the corresponding resonances in AC Josephson effect can be observable. The subharmonics at higher frequencies ω = n m ω 0 > ω 0 can be )/e the Josephson current I(V ) quickly goes to zero, and the total current is the tunneling of quasiparticles through the contact In this work we investigate the eigen oscillations of internal degrees of freedom of two-band superconductors using the action (6) with the corresponding Lorentz-invariant Lagrangian 1) Due to the internal proximity effect, the Goldstone mode splits into two branches: common mode oscillations with an acoustic spectrum -Eq.( 3) The energy gap of the Higgs mode in two-band superconductors -Eq.( 4) It is demonstrated, that the resonant enhancement of the DC current through a JJ at the resonant bias voltage V res , when the Josephson frequency or its harmonics match the frequency of some internal oscillation mode or its harmonics in two-band superconductors (banks) -Eq.(56), which was observed in the experiments 