The combination of two-dimensional Dirac surface states with s-wave superconductivity is expected to generate localized topological Majorana zero modes in vortex cores. Putative experimental signatures of these modes have been reported for heterostructures of proximitized topological insulators, iron-based superconductors or certain transition metal dichalcogenides. Despite these efforts, the Majorana nature of the observed excitation is still under debate. We propose to identify the presence of Majorana vortex modes using a non-local transport measurement protocol originally employed for one-dimensional settings. In the case of an isolated subgap state, the protocol provides a spatial map of the ratio of local charge-and probability-density which offers a clear distinction between Majorana and ordinary fermionic modes. We show that these distinctive features survive in the experimentally relevant case of hybridizing vortex core modes. In condensed matter physics, Majorana zero energy modes are highly sought after subgap states localized in topological superconductors and certain fractional quantum Hall states. 1,2 Whereas initial efforts were mainly directed towards one-dimensional systems based on semiconductor quantum wires in proximity with conventional superconductors ("Majorana"-wire), Recently, progress in this direction was made in a variety of novel "Fu-Kane" materials that combine bulk superconductivity with two-dimensional surface Dirac states of topological origin and feature E 1 on the order of a few hundred μeV . Prominent example materials with claims for MVM based on LDOS measurements are the iron-based superconductors FeTe 0.55 Se 0.45 , A second important difference pertains to the complexity of the electronic system: While an ideal onedimensional topological superconductor harbors two Majorana zero modes at its ends, the two-dimensional situation is characterized by the fact that vortices (and their putative MVMs) are located in a disordered lattice with local but essentially random hybridizations The rest of the paper is organized as follows: In Sec. II we present the low-energy two-dimensional Fu-Kane model and its tight-binding approximation. We then review the description of non-local superconducting quantum transport in Sec. III. The case of a single vortex pair is treated in Sec. IV which is suitable to present our protocol proposed for experiments. The applicability of our main ideas to a realistic disordered vortex lattice is demonstrated in Sec. V and a conclusion is contained in Sec. VI. We consider a single two-dimensional Dirac surface Hamiltonian H 0 = -i v [σ x ∂ x + σ y ∂ y ] -μ with velocity v, chemical potential μ and the σ-Pauli matrices acting in spin-space. where ∆ is the pairing field and the spinor of electronic annihilation operators is given by ψ r = (ψ ↑,r , ψ ↓,r ) T . The ansatz ψ r,σ ≡ n u σ,n (r) γ n +v * σ,n (r) γ † n leads to the following Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) equations for eigenmodes γ n and -energies E n , and Pauli matrices τ μ acting in particle-hole space. The particle-hole symmetry is P = σ y τ y K with P 2 = +1 and K complex conjugation. In the homogeneous case, the energies for momentum k are given by E k = ±(∆ 2 + (±vk -μ) 2 ) 1/2 . A magnetic field B z applied orthogonal to the surface creates vortices in the pairing field, 41 with R j = x j e x + y j e y the vortex positions and the function f (r) = tanh(r/ξ) modeling the decay of the pairing amplitude from its bulk value ∆ 0 towards the vortex core within lengthscale ξ. For a single vortex at the origin, Eq. ( For numerical simulations, we regularize the continuum model on a two-dimensional square lattice. We set the lattice constant a = 1, along with the choice v = 1, = 1. The straightforward regularization H 0 → H 0,L = k σ x sin k x +σ y sin k y +σ z (-2 + cos k x + cos k y )-μ can be improved upon replacing sin(k) → 4 3 sin(k)-1 6 sin(2k) and cos(k) → x and k 4 y at the cost of involving hoppings along bonds 2ae x,y . This will ultimately allow us to choose a large chemical potential (μ = 0.6) for the simulations in the lattice model while still approximating the dispersion of the continuum model at the Fermi level to a satisfactory degree. This in turn yields a small length scale for the Fermi wavelength k -1 F (μ = vk F ) allowing for tractable overall system sizes. In real space, the lattice Hamiltonian reads and the BdG Hamiltonian becomes The inclusion of magnetic field and vortices in the lattice model is achieved via a discretized version of Eq. ( In the limit λ a, the argument of the exponent can be approximated by i j θj (r12) 2 [1-rj (r12) λ K 1 (r j (r 12 )/λ)] where r j (r 12 ) ≡ |R j -(r 1 +r 2 )/2| is the distance between the vortex j and the midpoint of the bond from r 1 to r 2 and θ j (r 1,2 ) is the angle between the connection lines r 1,2 -R j measured at the vortex position. where J l (x) is the Bessel function of the first kind and the decay in radial direction is governed by the Majorana coherence length is ζ = v/∆ 0 . Here, the effect of the vector potential A(r) has been neglected as justified for a single vortex if λ ζ. Table We choose the lattice model parameters as μ = 0.6, ∆ 0 = 0.2, ξ = 2, λ = 30, the unit of energy is given by v/a = 1 and the unit of length is a = 1. As summarized in Tab. I, this choice of parameters is motivated by comparison to the experimentally extracted values for FeTe x Se 1-x , which are of similar relative size. Only the London penetration length λ of the lattice model, while still being by far the largest length scale, is chosen smaller than what would be appropriate in FeTe x Se 1-x to keep the required lattice sizes tractable. The one-dimensional gapless Majorana mode localized at the open boundaries of the system does not affect the results below due to sufficient distance between vortices and boundary, so that the hybridization between vortex bound states and the edge modes is negligible compared to inter-vortex hybridizations. The LDOS ρ(ω) (see Eq. ( We now consider a transport setup and attach an STM tip "T" as well as a ground contact, see Fig. With the exception of the strong-tunneling experiment by Zhu et al., where we choose Γ 0 = 0.02∆ 0 = 0.004 in Fig. We now describe the three-terminal transport setup analyzed in the remainder of this work. We add a second lead ("contact C") at the sample surface in the vicinity of the tip "T", see Fig. (10) Here, Γ ≡ Γ C + Γ T is the sum over the two lead-induced level broadenings Γ α ≡ γ 2 α n α /t where n α ≡ u α +v α is the total wavefunction intensity at the contact position, with It is assumed that Γ E 0 for Eq. ( The crucial observation in Eq. ( This relation allows for the extraction of q T /n T , the ratio of BCS-charge and intensity of an eigenstate at energy E 0 at the tip position. The prerequisite is that a pair of peaks at ω ±E 0 can be identified in the g CT data. The significance of the quantity q T /n T for detecting Majorana zero modes lies in the fact that an isolated Majorana zero mode fulfills q T (r) = 0 at every position r due to the particle-hole symmetric nature of the state. On the other hand, for an isolated Majorana zero mode at E 0 = 0, the condition Γ E 0 cannot be achieved. Consequently, one has to rely on the hybridization between zero modes to push the energy E 0 to finite values so that q T /n T can be detected by non-local transport, thereby compromising q T = 0 to a certain degree. In the following, we apply these general ideas to the case of MVMs and show that MVMs set themselves apart from the CdGM-states at finite energy by a peculiar spatial signature of the q T /n T map. Based on the above discussion and Eq. ( We now turn to the leading effect of temperature on the quasiparticle structure, assuming that the temperature remains low enough that the superconducting properties and vortex locations are unmodified. First, the sample temperature T s needs to be small enough so that the temperature dependent intrinsic quasiparticle decay Γ 0 can be neglected against Γ T,C for our coherent nonlocal transport theory to apply. We next consider the effective electron temperature T eff,α in lead α which usually exceeds the sample temperature (Ref. 50 determined 85mK for the former and about 40mK for the latter in the case of an STM tip). Theoretically, T eff,α is taken into account by a convolution of g αβ (ω) with the derivative of the Fermi function - 2T eff,β . Since the V β -dependence of I α is assumed to only enter via the distribution functions of the leads, 6 the broadening procedure of g CT in Eq. ( At zero temperature, the peaks of Eq. ( In the following we theoretically implement the above protocol. We assume that Γ 0 is sufficiently small so that the scattering matrix approach is justified. However, we take into account a finite temperature in the leads. While the case with two vortices studied in the subsequent Sec. IV is still analytically tractable, our numerical approach is particularly useful for the realistic case of a distorted vortex lattice. Here the above assumption of a single spectrally isolated subgap state at energy E 0 drastically fails as every pair of MVMs contributes one fermionic state that cluster in a MVM-or CdGM-band. However, our exact numerics still shows that the peculiar signatures found for the vortex-pair still survive in the vortex-lattice g sym CT /g asym CT map. We now investigate the case of a single pair of vortices where for the hybridized MVMs, we can find [q/n](r) analytically from the single MVM wavefunction, Eq. ( Note that n s (r) is proportional to sum of the two individual MVM's intensities, qualitatively similar to the LDOS ρ(ω, r), see Fig. We expand the Bessel functions at a sufficient distance from the vortices r 1,2 k F 1. We further restrict to a point r c on the connecting line between the vortices, which is peaked at the mid-point rc = (R 1 + R 2 )/2. The peak value is q s /n s (r c ) = -s sin(k F R) which oscillates like the MVM hybridization 37 E 0 ∼ cos k F R + 1 2 tan -1 (ζk F ) with a relative phase shift depending on the value of ζk F and valid for R ξ, 1/k F . Note that for the theoretically interesting case of μ = 0, which is unrealistic in current materials, chiral symmetry prevents hybridization (E 0 = 0) for vortices of the same vorticity. In summary, based on the elementary case of a vortex pair, we propose to identify hybridized states of MVMs by their non-local spatial distribution of q/n which attains values close to zero at the vortex positions and magnitudes attaining their maxima in between. In contrast, ordinary CdGM-states show peaks of |q/n| at the vortex positions. The positions of the vortices can be experimentally obtained from the LDOS ρ(ω, r) map as usual, While this relation could be shown analytically for the case of a single energetically well-separated subgap state (i.e. the vortex-pair case), it remains valid qualitatively for the case of a band of subgap states as in the case of a distorted vortex lattice as we show below. In the remainder of this paper, we will demonstrate the above assertion using a numerical implementation of the non-local transport measurement on a faithful lattice model with finite-temperature leads attached. We start with the vortex pair, see Fig. We now turn to the experimentally realistic case of a distorted vortex lattice. Owing to the presence of a finite density of states both in the MVM-and CdGM-band, the analytical treatment from Sec. III building on the presence of a single spectrally isolated eigenstate a priori does not apply any longer and we resort to numerical simulations. We use a large sample L x ×L y = 160×162 with an average vortex distance R ∼ 13 similar to the separation of the vortex pair studied above. To avoid edge effects, we focus on the central region of the sample. In Fig. The signatures of g sym CT /g asym CT (ω = E 1 ) at the CdGMstate energy shown in panel (f) are radially symmetric local maxima at all vortex positions with an oscillating behavior in between vortices. For an experimental realization, the question about the maximally feasible distance between the tip "T" and contact "C" is highly relevant. At this point, the local nature of the intrinsic broadening Γ 0 neglected beyond Eq. ( Another aspect is possible (single-particle) Anderson localization We proposed to apply a non-local quantum transport measurement to identify the presence (or absence) of hybridized Majorana zero modes in the vortex cores in Fu-Figure Kane materials, like the surface of iron-based superconductors. In contrast to recent applications of this method to one-dimensional "Majorana"-wires, We emphasize that the presented features in the ratio q/n are generic. The only requirement is a sufficiently large hybridization E 0 , a value that oscillates with separation R in the two-vortex case. If E 0 approaches zero as a matter of fine-tuning, the non-local conductance peaks move towards zero-bias and will not be observable such that the experimental protocol cannot be implemented for that particular state. This suggests that there is no danger in a false-positive identification of MVM. Further evidence for this also comes from the vortex-lattice case in Fig. We expect our results to be relevant for all existing platforms of candidate Fu-Kane materials showing signatures of putative MVMs, see Sec. I. Moreover, our proposal should be applicable to recently suggested alternative realizations of MVMs, like giant topological vortices trapped in an ordinary superconductors with a dislocation line. where u α = u(r α ) is the electron part of the BdG-wavefunction at the position of lead α and similar for the hole-part v α . For the spinless case and in the presence of two leads α = {L, R}, Ref. We set t ≡ 1 in the following and use the definitions and relations in Table II some of which already appeared in the main text. We find and insert this in Eq. (A2) where α, β = {L, R}. We now extract the sub-matrices required for computing the local-and non-local conductance, g LL and g LR . g LL = N L -tr s † ee,LL s ee,LL + tr s † he,LL s he,LL (A8) g LR = -tr s † ee,LR s ee,LR + tr s † he,LR s he,LR (A9) After straightforward but lengthy algebra, we obtain In the main text, we are only interested in g LR (ω). We obtain Eq. (10) for |ω| E 0 assuming that E 0 is much larger than all other scales appearing in Eq. (A11). R Jason Alicea, "New directions in the pursuit of Majorana fermions in solid state systems," Reports Prog. Phys. 75, 076501 (2012).