One of the major barriers in adapting the existing EB-PBF process parameters to a new powder material system is controlling the preheating conditions such that every layer of powder results in enough partial sintering to create a coherent powder cake. To be able to understand the powder sintering process and adapt it to other materials, we must look at the degree of sintering and the effective thermal conductivity of the powder bed. An in-depth understanding of these characteristics will help tailor the preheating conditions and furthermore, make it easier to remove/de-powder intricate parts after build completion without compromising the advantages of the preheating phenomenon. This study evaluates the impact of preheating temperature on the insitu powder cake properties. Three different preheat temperatures, 650 °C, 690 °C and 730 °C, are employed to a Ti-6Al-4V powder cake and in each standalone build, unique powder-capture artefacts are fabricated to be able to analyze the in-situ powder cake properties using X-ray computed tomography. An empirically-derived model for thermal conductivity of the powder cake as a result of changing the preheating temperatures, was obtained. The results demonstrated that the effective thermal conductivity of the powder cake at a given preheating temperature strongly depends on the packing density, contact size ratio and coordination number. An increase in preheating temperature, lead to a linear increase in the packing density (from 58.42 ± 1.10 % to 61.87 ± 0.96 %), contact size ratio (from 0.45 ± 0.004 to 0.48 ± 0.003), coordination number (from 3.36 ± 0.05 to 3.58 ± 0.05) and the effective thermal conductivity (from 1.75 ± 0.07 W/m/K to 2.11 ± 0.07 W/m/K) of the powder cake. The findings in this work will be deployed to assess and to correlate the effects of different powder conductivity and Preheat Themes on the surface topography and geometric fidelity of components with simple and complex geometries. The energy source in electron beam powder bed fusion (EB-PBF) processes, is used for both partial sintering (during preheating) and fusing (during melting) powder particles together Figure The reason for using a higher energy electron beam is to create a more uniform heat environment by lowering the difference in thermal conductivity between parts and powder. PH2 ensures that the electron beam is melt safe and can move on to the Melt Theme. The Preheat Theme can be controlled by varying the beam current (mA), beam speed (mm/s), number of repetitions, focus offset (mA) and scan order. The beam current controls the energy input during the heating process, the beam speed controls the exposure time of the beam, the focus offset controls the beam sharpness or beam diameter during preheating. An additional solution to the smoking issue is introducing a small partial pressure of helium into the vacuum environment. This inert gas creates He + ions above the powder bed that pick-up electrons from the powder bed and reduce the risk of smoke. However, the introduction of helium only takes place during the melting stage. In addition, He gas increases the cost of the process, thus increasing its use is generally prohibitive. Studies have shown that preheating can increase the mechanical strength, electrical and thermal conductivity of the sintered powder, as well as improve the beam-powder interaction efficiency Drescher et al. where Eline is the line energy expressed as (Equation and L 0 is the line offset and N is the number of scan repetitions. They observed that the thermal conductivity increases with an increase in Ea. Another observation was that the micro-hardness of the components reduces with increasing Ea due to microstructural coarsening of Ti-6Al-4V caused by annealing. They identified that an Ea value of 411 kJ m -2 was optimum as it produced parts with a high hardness and low dimensional deviations from the computer-aided design (CAD) model. There is a need for identifying a suitable preheating strategy in order to address the disadvantages presented by Sigl et al. One of the major barriers in adapting the existing EB-PBF process parameters to a new powder material system and particle size distribution is controlling the preheating conditions such that every layer of powder obtains enough partial sintering to create a coherent powder cake, while simultaneously ensuring that the powder cake can be reconditioned into free-flowing powder with appropriate qualities for powder reuse. To be able to understand the powder sintering process and adapt it to other materials, the degree of sintering, or more explicitly the size of the sinter necks and density of each preheated layer, must be determined to predict the thermal conductivity of the powder bed. This will help tailor the preheat theme temperature and other parameters that would make it easier to remove/de-powder parts after build completion without compromising the advantages of the preheating phenomenon. Parts manufactured by powder-bed fusion (PBF) additive manufacturing (AM) processes, that are employed in critical sectors such as aerospace, biomedical, defense, marine and automobile require rigorous qualification steps. As such, a strong understanding of the properties of the metal powder feedstock, as well as its behaviour in the process is necessary. Specifically, researchers across the globe are modelling the heat transfer process Some studies A few mathematical models relating the thermal conductivity of powder beds to the porosity and the gas type around the powder particles, were proposed. As such, Sih et al. Only a handful of studies demonstrated work on empirical measurements conducted explicitly to verify and improve thermal property information used in finite element (FE) models to simulate the heat transfer mechanism in AM processes. Rombouts et al. Table Temperature (in °C) 20 100 200 300 400 500 600 700 750 The above-mentioned literature indicates that the thermal conductivity for a powder bed is substantially different when compared to the same material obtained in its cast or wrought form. This can be attributed to the limited contact between powder particles and is furthermore influenced by complex packing conditions. Heat transfer through conduction in a solid part is faster than in powder as the vacuum gaps between powder particles work as insulators and slow down the heat transfer It is important to recognize that the effective thermal conductivity of a powder bed in EB-PBF depends on the neck size between the partially sintered powder particles. The diameter of this neck controls the rate of heat transfer. Tolochko et al. Manufacturing a powder encapsulation container during the EB-PBF process would assist in obtaining a sample of the immobilized metal powder cake during in situ building conditions. A few studies in literature tried to capture such an immobilized powder cake. Liu et al This work introduces a method to assess and investigate the behaviour of powder and powder layers during the EB-PBF process. A special powder capture artefact with an internal cavity, referred to as a capsule, was used to capture the immobilized powder cake during the EB-PBF process. This powder capture artefact design assists in protecting the powder cake in a way that is unaffected from the environment during the powder recovery stage. These artefacts are also manufactured in different locations on the build plate to measure the consistency of the powder bed condition. Furthermore, the assessment of the powder cake will assist in constructing an empirically-derived model for thermal conductivity of the powder cake in the EB-PBF process as a result of changing the Preheat Theme. The findings in this work will be deployed to assess and to correlate the effects of different powder conductivity and Preheat Themes on the surface topography and geometric fidelity of components with simple and complex geometries. SolidWorks (Dassault Systèmes, France) was used for designing and obtaining the specimen STL files. File preparation for manufacturing was then performed using Materialise Magics (Materialise, Belgium). The software was used for rescaling, positioning on a start plate, and support structure creation, where required. Slicing the files was then executed by Build Assembler (Arcam plug-in for Materialise Magics), which converts the information into an Arcam build file (.abf) that is imported to the machine. The two stacked powder-capture artefacts are connected by a small 1 mm cylindrical connector. In the event that the two artefacts need to be separated, the connector can be easily cut or broken off. Note that, the artefact placed on top, appears upside down. This does not affect any analysis since the shape and orientation of the Region of Interest (ROI) remains the same with respect to the manufacturing coordinate system and the internal capsule design remains unchanged. Alongside every powder-capture artefact, there was a 15x15x30 mm part-quality artefact which will be used, in a future study, to assess the surface topography. The position of the samples on the start plate of the machine and the naming strategy are shown in Figure The XCT-scanner (Xradia 520 Versa, Zeiss, Pleasanton, CA) was set to operate at 100 kV, 90 μA, and resolution of 6 μm. The acquisition files were obtained at 1001 projections (per 360 deg of rotation). Each artefact was first scanned, capturing the powder capsule at a 6 μm voxel size. The scans focused on a 6 mm diameter by 6 mm tall sub-region (or ROI as shown in Figure Noise was reduced by down-sampling the gray-scale images to 8-bit in MATLAB. A gray-scale threshold value to isolate the solid portion of the specimen was chosen such that the thresholded images had a qualitative visual match to the gray-scale data pore structure. After down-sampling and thresholding, a black and white or B&W image (white = solid, black = pore) stack was obtained from MATLAB (Figure The thermal conductivity can be calculated based on the methodology described by Gusarov et al. where λ is the thermal conductivity of the corresponding bulk material (for Ti6Al4V the value is 6.7 W/m/K as per According to Gusarov et al. Figure Firstly, it can be observed that with an increase in preheating temperature, the layer-wise density values increase. Secondly, the densities were predominantly uniform across the various locations sampled on the build platform, for a given preheating temperature. Thirdly, there is a clear indication that the layer-wise density for any specific capsule, across the 70 layers, had a global variation of approximately ± 1.5% with a clear density increase in the central region of the capsules. The reason for the density increase in the central region of the capsules is unclear at the moment but may be affected by the heat transfer phenomena at the bottom and top of the capsule. The cause of such outcomes will be examined in a follow up study. In the EB-PBF process, a defocused electron beam is used as a planar heat source to preheat the build plate to a desired sintering temperature and control the heat input and sintering mechanism. A few studies in literature have looked at influencing the sintering mechanism of the powder bed by changing the PH1 line energy The average layer-wise density values for the Experiment 1, Experiment 2, and Experiment 3 samples are 99.98%, 99.97% and 99.98% respectively. Hence it can be concluded that the change in preheating temperatures does not lead to a change in the density of the solid parts built in the powder cake. It is important to assess the impact of lower preheating temperatures since high preheating temperatures can cause excessive partial melting which may reduce the reusability of the powder The particle size has a significant influence on the layer-wise powder bed density It is observed that the average equivalent diameter values lie between 54.03 ± 0.68 μm to 57.05 ± 0.52 μm for all Experiment 1 powder capsules, 54.95 ± 0.62 μm to 56.77 ± 0.58 μm for all Experiment 2 powder capsules and 56.04 ± 0.51 μm to 56.84 ± 0.53 μm for all Experiment 3 powder capsules (as shown in Table The contact size ratio, x, is the ratio of the contact spot diameter (or sinter neck diameter) to the sphere diameter (or powder particle diameter). Obtaining this ratio is critical to identify the effective thermal conductivity according to the equation presented by Gusarov et al. The contact size ratio shows how strongly the powder particles are sintered together. A higher contact size ratio value translates to better sintering. Consequently, a higher degree of sintering leads to a lower chance of repulsion by virtue of electrostatic charging In Figure Thermal conductivity is a measure of the rate of heat transfer through material It is observed that the average effective thermal conductivity values lie between 1.75 ± 0.07 W/m/K to 1.87 ± 0.10 W/m/K for Experiment 1 capsules, 1.88 ± 0.09 W/m/K to 1.99 ± 0.15 W/m/K for all experiment 2 capsules and 1.99 ± 0.07 W/m/K to 2.11 ± 0.07 W/m/K for all Experiment 3 capsules (as shown in Table Stemming from the observations in Sections 3.1 -3.4, some correlations were noticed between the preheating temperature and the various metrics such as layer-wise density, contact size ratio, coordination number and effective thermal conductivity. Therefore, to quantify this interdependency, the packing density, contact size ratio, coordination number, and effective thermal conductivity values, as shown in Table Maly et al. The effect of varying preheating temperatures on the effective thermal conductivity of the Ti -6Al-4V powder cake, in EB-PBF, were observed. Some of the main findings were: i. The calculated average packing density, contact size ratio, coordination number, and effective thermal conductivity, of the powder-capsules, ranged from 58.42 ± 1.10 % to 61.87 ± 0.96 %, 0.45 ± 0.004 to 0.48 ± 0.003, 3.36 ± 0.05 to 3.58 ± 0.05, and 1.75 ± 0.07 W/m/K to 2.11 ± 0.07 W/m/K, respectively when the preheating temperature was varied between 650 °C and 730 °C. ii. The effective thermal conductivity of the powder cake at a given preheating temperature strongly depends on the packing density, contact size ratio and coordination number. iii. The current study shows that it is possible to use a reduced preheating temperature since a mere change of 3% in the layer-wise density and 12% in the effective thermal conductivity, was observed, with an 80 °C decrease in the preheating temperature. iv. A decrease in the preheating temperature led to a linear decrease in the packing density, contact size ratio, coordination number, and consequently the effective thermal conductivity. Logarithmic regression equations were established from the empirically -derived thermal conductivity data. These equations can be used to predict the thermal conductivity of the powder cake, in EB-PBF, when using preheating temperatures between 650 °C and 730 °C.