Superconductivity in layered cuprates is induced by doping holes into a parent antiferromagnetic insulator. It is now recognized that another common emergent order involves charge stripes, and our understanding of the relationship between charge stripes and superconductivity has been evolving. Here we review studies of 214 cuprate families obtained by doping La 2 CuO 4 . Charge-stripe order tends to compete with bulk superconductivity; nevertheless, there is plentiful evidence that it coexists with two-dimensional superconductivity. This has been interpreted in terms of pair-densitywave superconductivity, and the perspective has shifted from competing to intertwined orders. In fact, a new picture of superconductivity based on pairing within charge stripes has been proposed, as we discuss. The story of charge-stripe order in cuprate superconductors has evolved in important ways over the last quarter century. The original discovery of charge stripe order in La 1.6-x Nd 0.4 Sr x CuO 4 * jtran@bnl.gov is presented in Fig. The first clue came with the measurement of the superconducting transition temperature, T c , as a function of doping in La 2-x Ba x CuO 4 , where a strong dip was found Next, it was discovered that partial substitution of a rareearth ion, such as Nd A series of single-crystal neutron diffraction studies The ND data for x = 0.115, 0.125, and 0.135 were collected with the triple-axis spectrometer SPINS located at the NIST Center for Neutron Research using beam collimations of 55 -80 -S-80 -open (S = sample) with fixed final energy E f = 5 meV. The x = 0.095 crystal was studied at triple-axis spectrometer HB-1 at the High Flux Isotope Reactor, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, using beam collimations of 48 -48 -S-40 -136 with E f = 14.7 meV. The cylindrical crystals, with a typical weight between 5 and 10 g, were mounted with their (h,k,0) zone parallel to the scattering plane. Doping 104506-2 We have already noted that the anisotropy that pins the stripes within the CuO 2 planes rotates 90 • from one layer to the next. This respects the crystal symmetry, such that the intensity of (00L) reflections is finite only for even L. In RSXS experiments, however, the x-ray polarization can break the symmetry, Figure H. Miao et al. is directly sensitive to magnetic correlations; Spin-stripe fluctuations are readily measured by inelastic neutron scattering with an energy resolution of ∼ 1 meV, and have been characterized in a number of 214 cuprates, as reviewed elsewhere. It is clear that energy resolution may impact the apparent with a 1⁄2H; 0; L scattering plane. All data were collected with horizontal (σ)-polarized incident x rays. Figure The relative strength of the speckles can be quantified by calculating the intensity variation where I max s and I min s are the maximum and minimum speckle-modulated intensities. There is a substantial incoherent background from sample fluorescence that we choose to subtract before evaluating V. After averaging over several cuts close to the dotted horizontal line in the 15 K data shown in Fig. Next we address the time evolution of the observed speckles to test for CDW dynamics, which we examine in the "waterfall" plots or kymographs shown in Fig. Numerous previous studies indicate that the CDW correlation length decreases, in concert with a reduction in peak intensity, as temperature increases and that the CDW peak eventually disappears around 54 K, close to the low temperature tetragonal (LTT) structural phase transition [38,40-42,44] [see Fig. Figure XPCS studies can also provide information on factors that control the pinning of charge stripes. For example, suppose one measures the diffraction speckle pattern at low temperature, then heats the sample to T cycle , and finally cools to the original temperature and repeats the speckle measurement. By evaluating the cross correlation of the speckle patterns, one can test the reproducibility of the stripe domain pattern. Fig- P speckle denotes summing over the peak in the cross-correlation matrix, corresponding to just over one speckle (~4 × 16 pixels) in size. The value is normalized by dividing by the auto-correlations of A m,n and B m,n , such that two identical images have ξ = 1. In Fig. These data establish that the CDW domains are strikingly reproducible upon temperature cycling well above the LTT and CDW transitions. The CDW is pinned at low temperatures, which is the usual behavior for a system with a long CDW correlation length as this can be accomplished by even a weak pinning force. This is, however, not a priori certain and the CDW in chromium has been reported to be dynamic down to low temperatures An analysis of hard X-ray Bragg diffraction data suggests that the typical LTO domain width is ~700 nm (Supplementary Note 3); we expect the LTT domain width to be comparable. In these experiments we illuminate a ~10 × 10 μm 2 area of the sample with coherent X-rays, which will contain of order 200 LTT domains. All the CDW signal from this area contributes to the interference that determines the speckles. Within a given CuO 2 layer, only half of the twin domains will contribute to a given CDW diffraction peak because of the unidirectional ordering within the LTT structure; the other half of the twin domains will contribute to a CDW peak rotated by 90°, i.e. at (0, 0.23, 1.5) rather than (0.23, 0, 1.5). Hence, in order for the speckle pattern to reproduce after cycling through the LTO-LTT transition, the domain pattern must reproduce precisely. Now, the speckle pattern reproduces with cycling, but only if we use T cycle < 240(3) K. This temperature matches the LTO-HTT transition. So if we cycle into the HTT phase, the resulting CDW speckle pattern in the LTT phase changes. This indicates that LTO domain boundaries play a crucial role in propagating the CDW domain memory. How does the CDW domain memory created at LTO-HTT transition translate through LTT? Based on strain considerations, LTO domain boundaries are expected to occur along the 〈100〉 HTT lattice directions, as confirmed by TEM imaging Early structural studies of LBCO demonstrated that the LTT and LTO tilt patterns can be conceptualized as superpositions of oneanother Another significant observation is that, within the CDW phase, the speckle locations do not change with temperature (see Fig. Almost all cuprates show some form of orthorhombic structural symmetry breaking, so the CDW memory effects discovered here may well be shared by many different cuprate species. Testing whether other cuprates, including those without a LTT phase, show similar behavior, and whether lattice pinning and the stability of CDW ordering are related will be important in future work. We further emphasize that the experimental configuration presented here, in which sample drift problems are avoided by attaching a mask directly to the sample, is also applicable to applied current or laser excitation, as well as to the magnetic fielddependent behavior studied previously in magnetic alloys The phase diagrams in Figs. To explain the observation of 2D superconductivity, it has been proposed that the charge stripes are superconducting, but coupled in an antiphase fashion, corresponding to a pairdensity-wave (PDW) state. with E g = 0.5 meV at 30 K and 0.7 meV at 5 K. For more detailed characterization of the temperature dependence of the gap, we compare Љ at 0.5 and 1.5 meV vs temperature in Fig. The resistivity data shown in Fig. The c-axis resistivity just starts to turn down at T 1 ‫ءء‬ Ϸ 34 K and drops more quickly below T 2 ‫ءء‬ Ϸ 29 K; there is a corresponding small step in ab at T 2 ‫ءء‬ . Comparing with the susceptibility, we see that Ќ becomes irreversible at T 1 ‫ءء‬ ͑FC and ZFC results diverge͒ and there is a small drop in the FC response at T 2 ‫ءء‬ . There is also an onset of a diamagnetic response in ʈ . The combination of responses at T 2 ‫ءء‬ suggests that it represents the onset of superconductivity in small 3D grains. Clearly, these grains do not form a percolating path, as both ab and c remain finite after the grains become superconducting. ͑Note that even at 10 K, the ʈ ZFC response is still much less than 0.1% of full shielding, consistent with a tiny 3D superconducting volume fraction.͒ The FC Ќ response saturates below T 2 ‫ءء‬ , suggesting that the 3D superconducting grains pin magnetic vortices. At the apparent Berezinskii-Kosterlitz-Thouless ͑BKT͒ transition, T BKT Ϸ 16 K, discussed in Ref. Complementary support for the PDW picture is provided by optical conductivity studies. For example, measurements of the loss of the c-axis superconducting response in La 1.85-y Nd y Sr 0.15 CuO 4 as the structure was tuned from LTO to LTT by increasing the Nd concentration Complementary information on the Hall coefficient, R H , is present in Fig. The stripe correlations can still be relevant to pairing in the case of spatially-uniform superconductivity. To obtain inphase superconductivity between neighboring stripes, it is necessary to gap the spin excitations within the spin stripes. This implies that the superconducting gap associated with long-range coherent superconducting order is limited by the spin gap, a correlation that has been experimentally demonstrated. 113) There is also empirical evidence that the spin gap on the charge stripes provides an upper limit for the pairing scale. While T c shows a maximum of 32 K in LBCO at x = 0.095, applying a c-axis magnetic field can easily destroy the 3D order, resulting in 2D superconductivity, 120) as shown in Fig. Returning to the results in H ⊥ , which are the main focus of this paper, voltage versus current measurements indicate linear resistivity at the onset of ρ ⊥ with nonlinear behavior at higher currents. These observations are consistent with a model A complication in our sample is that there is a structural transition that overlaps with the superconducting transition. In LBCO, there is a transition from the low-temperature orthorhombic (LTO) phase, also found in LSCO, to the An interesting feature of th that they are able to pin charge Here, we are interested in the po order The apparent decoupling o gether with the presence of st the quasi-two-dimensional (2D LBCO with x = 1/8. The rest of the paper is orga mental methods, including com are discussed in the next sect voltage versus current measurem while the diffraction results a results are summarized and thei Sec. V. The crystals for this study solvent, floating-zone techniq crystals are reported in paper I resistivity measurements were the standard four-probe techn Measurement System (Quantu cut from the same parent, w measurements, and the ρ resu crystal. For ρ ⊥ , the crystal 1.7 × 2.7 × 1.1 mm 3 with volta a-b faces; for ρ , the dimensio with 2.9 mm between voltage Ag paste, were annealed at configurations are illustrated in resistance was measured at roo to be less than 2 before and a 134513-2 by the orthorhombic strain, which here is also a finer scale splitting, a small monoclinic distortion. . Overview ive view of the resistivity data, we ith linear scales in Fig. With unusual behavior, it is important to consider possible extrinsic explanations. While the coincidence of the structural and superconducting transitions complicates the situation, it does not provide an explanation for the regime of apparent uniaxial resistivity. Could there be some sort of inhomogeneity in the samples that causes the ρ and ρ ⊥ measurements to be determined by distinct phases? Before addressing this question, we point out that the phase boundary for superconducting order determined by our ρ ⊥ data is quantitatively consistent with results in the literature Another possibility to consider is inhomogeneous current flow below T c in the mixed phase. As discussed in Sec. II A, studies of Bi 2 Sr 2 CaCu 2 O 8+δ have shown that in the regime where vortices are not uniformly pinned, the in-plane current tends to flow along the edges of the crystal. We have suggested that the differences for ρ between our results and previous work might be due to different contact configurations. As this can be a contentious issue, it is highly desirable to confirm our results with independent measurements. We present two such checks below. One confirmation is provided by field-dependent measurements of the in-plane thermopower S shown in Fig. (STM) studies of Bi 2 Sr 2 CaCu 2 O 8+δ . Charge density modulations were originally observed in the "halo" regions around magnetic vortices. 122) More recent work has provided evidence that these modulations also correspond to PDW order. 123) To appreciate why PDW order might be favored near vortex cores, consider the comparison shown in Fig. Let us first consider the superconducting transition. Figure We summ diagram in L020502-2 This case leads to another possible connection. STM studies To test this possibility, a crystal of LBCO x = 0.095 with 1% Zn substituted for Cu was studied. Earlier work had demonstrated that the Zn enhances the spin stripe order, while reducing T c for 3D order. 134) Measurements 131) of anisotropic resistivity and magnetic susceptibility are shown in Fig. As mentioned at the end of Sec. 4, uniform d-wave superconductivity requires a spin gap below T c , as is observed for LSCO with x > 0.13. We already noted that STM has detected PDW correlations in the halo regions around magnetic vortex cores, As we have seen, the formation of charge stripes in 214 cuprates is an emergent response to doping holes into an AF insulator. While stripe order competes with 3D superconductivity, it coexists with 2D superconductivity. In fact, it appears that charge stripes, in the form of 2-leg ladders, can be the source of pairing correlations in cuprates. There are theoretical analyses that are supportive of this perspective, 152) but we will have to wait for studies with advanced numerical approaches to reach a firm conclusion. This work was supported by the U. S. Department of Energy (DOE), Office of Basic Energy Sciences, Division of Materials Sciences and Engineering, under Contract No. DE-SC0012704.