Magnonics is seen nowadays as a candidate technology for energy-efficient data processing in classical and quantum systems. Pronounced nonlinearity, anisotropy of dispersion relations and phase degree of freedom of spin waves require advanced methodology for probing spin waves at room as well as at mK temperatures. Yet, the use of the established optical techniques like Brillouin light scattering (BLS) or magneto optical Kerr effect (MOKE) at ultra-low temperatures is forbiddingly complicated. By contrast, microwave spectroscopy can be used at all temperatures but is usually lacking spatial and wavenumber resolution. Here, we develop a variable-gap propagating spin-wave spectroscopy (VG-PSWS) method for the deduction of the dispersion relation of spin waves in wide frequency and wavenumber range. The method is based on the phase-resolved analysis of the spinwave transmission between two antennas with variable spacing, in conjunction with theoretical data treatment. We validate the method for the in-plane magnetized CoFeB and YIG thin films in k ⊥ B and k B geometries by deducing the full set of material and spin-wave parameters, including spin-wave dispersion, hybridization of the fundamental mode with the higher-order perpendicular standing spin-wave modes and surface spin pinning. The compatibility of microwaves with low temperatures makes this approach attractive for cryogenic magnonics at the nanoscale. Properties of magnetic materials are of high interest due to several application concepts regarding, e.g., memories, sensors, microwave devices, or logic devices The spin-wave dispersion measurement is also possible using the propagating spin-wave spectroscopy (PSWS). The PSWS is a technique which uses a vector network analyzer (VNA) connected to a pair of microwave antennas (e.g., striplines or coplanar waveguides) by microwave probes In previous reports, the spin-wave dispersion was ex-arXiv:2107.09363v1 [cond-mat.mes-hall] 20 Jul 2021 tracted from PSWS spectra measured on yttrium iron garnet (YIG) using the CPW excitation. As the CPWs excitation spectrum exhibits distinct peaks in k-space, it allows extracting one point in spin-wave dispersion for each peak. The central k-vector of each peak is then assigned to a frequency from either the envelope of the S 21 sweep Here, we show that the spin-wave dispersion measurement using VNA is possible with a high level of details determined by the VNA frequency step. Our setup uses Rohde & Schwarz ZVA50 VNA and GGB industries microwave probes to establish a connection to the two antennas lithographically fabricated on top of CoFeB and YIG thin films. The lithography process consisted of e-beam patterning using PMMA resist, e-beam evaporation of Ti 5 nm/Cu 85 nm/Au 10 nm multilayer, and lift-off. The CoFeB films (nominal thicknesses 30 nm and 100 nm) were magnetronsputtered from Co 40 Fe 40 B 20 (at. %) target on (100) GaAs substrate with 5 nm Ta buffer layer. The (111) YIG films were grown by liquid phase epitaxy on top of a 500 μm, thick (111) gadolinium gallium garnet substrate The VNA controls and analyses the electric signals of transmitting and receiving antennas both in the domain of amplitude and phase, therefore, it can measure the phase acquired by the spectral components of spin wave while it propagates between antennas. Our analysis is based on the S 21 transmission parameter. The transmitted spin-wave signal is modified by a nonmagnetic background S background 21 that is always present in the experiment due to direct electromagnetic crosstalk between the antennas. This background is constant for different values of static magnetic field, and therefore it is possible to evaluate it as the median over all measured magnetic fields. The subtracted signal ∆S 21 is then calculated as: ∆S 21 = S 21 -S background 21 . Fig. In the next step, we repeat the measurement on multiple instances of identical antenna structures (with varying gap width) prepared on the same 30 nm CoFeB thin film sample. The phases measured over 11 gap widths are shown in Fig. Fig. In addition to the 30 nm CoFeB thin film, we also measured 100 nm thick CoFeB [Fig. In the dispersion measured on 100 nm thick CoFeB film, we further identified visible hybridizations at the crossings' positions between the n = 0 fundamental spinwave mode and n = 1, 2, 3 higher-order perpendicularly To investigate numerically the hybridization between the fundamental mode and perpendicularly standing modes, we solve Landau-Lifshitz equation (LLE) using the finite-element method (FEM) in the frequency domain. The LLE was linearized and implemented in FEM solver (COMSOL Multiphysics) as a set of differential equations for in-plane and the out-of-plane components of magnetization m and m ⊥ : together with the equation for the scalar magnetostatic potential φ derived from Maxwell equations in magnetostatic approximation where x and x ⊥ denote the directions of the corresponding dynamic components of magnetization. In contrast to the analytical model of Kalinikos and Slavin, our numerical calculations truly reproduce the spin dispersion relation in the crossover dipolar-exchange regime The numerical model (as well as the analytical model by Kalinikos and Slavin) is characterized by a few material parameters. We fixed the value of exchange stiffness to A ex = 14 pJ/m 2 and layer's thickness to nominal value d = 100 nm. The values of saturation magnetization M s = 1275 kA/m and gyromagnetic ratio |γ|/2π = 30.8 GHz/T were selected to fit the ferromagnetic resonance frequency (i.e., the frequency of fundamental mode at k = 0) and the slope of the dispersion for fundamental mode. The surface anisotropy K s determines the spin-wave pinning and therefore is important both for the quantization (and the frequencies) of the perpendicularly standing modes and the strength of the hybridization between and perpendicularly standing modes. To obtain the proper values of the frequencies of perpendicularly standing modes, we did not need to reduce the thickness below the nominal value 100 nm but we had to introduce the non-zero K s instead, which seems to be a more realistic approach. The experimental data show that the hybridizations of fundamental mode with the perpendicularly standing mode are observed both for the perpendicularly standing modes quantized with even (n = 2) and odd number of nodes (n = 1, 3) across the layer. The effect for n = 1, 3 is hardly visible in dispersion relation [Fig. From the measured dispersion relations, it is possible to extract also other parameters important for spinwave propagation. The group velocity v g can be calculated as the numerical derivative of the dispersion v g = 2πdf /dk and the lifetime τ can be obtained as the numerical derivative of field-dependent dispersion , where ω B = γB and α is a damping constant. The decay length δ can be then calculated by multiplying the group velocity and the lifetime δ = v g τ . In Fig. We also analyzed how the number of measured propa-gation distances (gaps) affected the reliability of the obtained dispersion. We took the data measured for 11 gap widths in total and then used different combinations of a reduced number of gap widths (starting from 2 up to 10) to evaluate the dispersion. The dispersion obtained from the reduced number of gap widths was then compared to the analytical fit Kalinikos-Slavin model As can be seen from the presented data, the variablegap approach allows the reconstruction of the spin-wave dispersion relation, including detailed features that might be used for analysis of the spin-wave system. In order to obtain the highest possible data quality, we need to fabricate multiple pairs of antennas where the gap width and the step in the gap width (an increase of the gap between two pairs of antennas) must be optimized for each experiment. Note that this approach does not require precise knowledge of the excitation spot location (phase origin) because it does not affect the fit's slope. It is only essential to know the relative differences between the propagation distances, i.e., the gap-width step, which can be easily measured (and precisely fabricated using e-beam lithography). The antenna design is sample-specific and needs to be tailored to fulfil experimental requirements. The antenna's type and geometry must be able to excite the expected k-vector range with sufficient efficiency. The gap widths need to be in the optimum range considering the caustics formation and the spin-wave decay length for the given material and geometry. For example, for CoFeB 30 nm in k B geometry at k = 5 rad/μm, we calculated decay lengths of 0.03 μm and 0.45 μm for magnetic fields of 20 and 200 mT, respectively. Here, the quality of the measured data, even for the smallest fabricated gap distance of 1 μm, was not sufficient to evaluate dispersion; thus, this geometry is not presented in Fig. Before fitting the data as plotted in Fig. In Table Big advantage of the VG-PSWS technique is that it does not require direct optical access to the sample, making the method very suitable for, e.g., experiments at ultra-low temperatures. In addition, compared to other techniques for spin-wave dispersion relation measurement VG-PSWS can achieve high resolution in frequency and k-vector at the same time. This combination allows capturing smooth dispersion curves over the span of all accessible k-vectors and fast acquisition times allow repeating the experiment in multiple magnetic field strengths and orientations. The full set of field-dependent dispersion curves measured for both k ⊥ B and in k B geometries present a robust 4-dimensional (f , k, B, angle) dataset that can be further evaluated, and all essential material and spin-wave parameters can be extracted from it. A disadvantage of this method is the need for a set of antennas with multiple gap widths on top of the sample. The other techniques can obtain the dispersion either without any antenna (conventional BLS), with one excitation antenna (MOKE, Phase-resolved BLS, STXM) or with a pair of excitation and detection antennas (PSWS). However, the need for multiple antennas may be overcome in the future by using freestanding positionable antennas In conclusion, we presented a new method of extraction of high-quality spin-wave dispersion relation from propagating spin-wave spectroscopy (PSWS) measurements performed over several propagation distances. We demonstrated this technique on CoFeB and YIG thin films measured in k ⊥ B and k B geometries. The results on CoFeB thin film were verified by phase-resolved BLS measurement showing good agreement. When compared with the phase-resolved BLS, the VNA-based method provides more frequency measurement points in a shorter acquisition time. Fine detail measurement capability was demonstrated on the measurement and analysis of hybridized modes acquired on 100 nm thick CoFeB thin film, revealing asymmetric surface pinning and the values of pinning parameters on both interfaces of the magnetic layer. The all electric nature of this method makes it very suitable for characterization of cryogenic and quantum magnonics systems and materials. *** Excitation limited.