It is shown that a model of a superconductor as a classical ideal charged fluid at constant uniform temperature in a uniform compensating positively charged background exhibits the Meissner state with the correct value of the penetration depth. The differences between this model and the textbook classical model that fails to predict the Meissner state are discussed, as are the similarities of this model to the coupled Schrödinger-Maxwell model, which does predict flux exclusion. In particular, this model does not neglect the pressure term and terms that are bilinear in the velocity in the fluid equations; these terms are essential to the results. It is a widely held belief that the Meissner state, the exclusion of magnetic flux by a (type I) superconductor, cannot be derived from a classical treatment of collissionless charge carriers, but instead requires a separate ansatz, such as that made by F. and H. London In what follows, in Sec. II we develop the model, in Sec. III we discuss its gauge transformation properties, in Secs. IV and V we contrast the model with the classical textbook model and the Schrödinger-Maxwell model, and in Sec. VI we offer a brief conclusion and discussion. The fluid equations for this model are (cgs units) where (n, v) are the fluid (number density, velocity) fields, (q, m) are the (charge, mass) of the fluid particles, p is the fluid pressure, and (E E E, B) B) B) are the self-consistent (electric, magnetic) fields that satisfy the Maxwell equations (Gaussian units) Here, n 0 is the space-time average of the number density n(r r r, t). Note that in (2.1a), the usual phenomenological collision term, (-mνv v v), is omitted from the right-hand side, in accord with this fluid model in which the collision frequency ν = 0. We write the electromagnetic fields in terms of their potentials in the usual way, and also define the "canonical momentum field " P P P by Substituting these in (2.1a), we get exactly We recall that, for uniform constant temperature, we may write where μ(n) is the chemical potential; i.e., n - and from (2.5) and (2.6) We expect that |n -n 0 | n 0 for most situations 1 , because charge separations in a charged fluid are very difficult to manintain, and also because (2.2a) and (2.8) show that |n -n 0 | ∝ v 2 , which should be small. Therefore, for such situations, it should be a very good approximation to replace n by n 0 in (2.2b), whereby, combining (2.2) and (2.7), we get immediately where is the penetration length. The static limit of (2.9) is the same as the result of the London theory. Since P P P is a gradient, we may write (2.4) as where J has the dimension of angular momentum. This result suggests that we make a gauge transformation in an attempt to eliminate J if it should happen to be non-zero: We let and for convenience require the Lorentz gauge for the primed potentials, which yields The Maxwell equations (2.2) and (2.1b), (2.3), (2.4), Note that not only does J disappear from (3.4g), but also from the fluid motion equation (2.8), which converts to (3.4c). So we may choose this gauge in simply connected regions. Note also that, in the static limit, these equations imply that n = n 0 and φ = constant, but that A A A , v v v and B B B still go to zero inside the fluid, within a short distance from the surface, unless n 0 → 0. However, in general by Stokes' theorem we must have where Φ is the total magnetic flux enclosed by the arbitrary closed path C. Consider a non-simply connected region of the fluid. In particular, imagine a cylindrical annulus of ideal fluid whose thickness is much greater than λ p , and let there be a magnetic field directed along the axis inside the inner cylinder (vacuum), so that Φ = 0 for a closed path in this fluid. For example, this is the situation for an infinitely long currentcarrying circular solenoid in vacuum, surrounded by a superconductor. If we solve the static limit of (3.4a) to (3.4g) for such a case, we find that both v v v and A A A go to zero deep within the fluid. Therefore this A A A is inadequate: Although it yields the correct B B B inside the fluid, it cannot satisfy (3.5). We must add to it a term cq -1 ∇J, as in (3.2), where J = (qΦ/2πc)θ, and θ is the azimuthal angle in cylindrical coordinates. This will satisfy (3.5) without influencing the results of (3.4). Thus, we see that, even classically, J cannot be transformed away in such situations. The model developed above is fundamentally different from the classical models discussed in many texts Perhaps the simplest quantum mechanical model is that given by Feymann and assumes that the particles being described are Cooper pairs that behave as bosons. Thus, all of them may be in the same (ground) state, whereby the (charge, current) densities (ρ, j j j) are given by He then shows that the coupled Schrödinger-Maxwell equations are equivalent to the ideal charged fluid equations which are strikingly similar to (2.1a) and (2.2a). In fact, if in our motion equation (2.8) we replace the chemical potential μ(n) by , then our equations are equivalent to the hydrodynamical form of the Schödinger-Maxwell equations, from which the Meissner effect does result. We have shown that a completely classical treatment of an ideal charged fluid does predict exclusion of static magnetic fields. The crucial element of the proof lies in showing that the canonical momentum field P P P defined in (2.4) is a gradient, even in a classical treatment. If a conventional collision term (-mνv v v) with collision frequency ν > 0 is included on the right-hand side of Eq. (2.1a), then P P P cannot be a gradient or be identically zero (see Appendix A), and then v v v = 0 rather than P P P = 0 is the classical static limit result in simply connected regions. Note that our approximate expression (2.9) and the exact epression (3.4a) imply that, for frequencies greater than the plasma frequency ω p ≡ λ p /c, electromagnetic waves can propagate in the fluid, just as in collisionless plasma. However; our model has several limitations. For example, it does not account for the full Meissner effect: the exclusion of the magnetic flux during the superconducting phase transition. During such a dynamical process the system is not at a uniform constant temperature, whereby (2.6) would not be applicable. In this case, the canonical momentum field P P P could not be chosen as a gradient field. Nonetheless, this classical model suitably describes the Meissner state wherein a superconductor has no internal magnetic field. Finally, we note that neither this nor any other classical treatment can offer an explanation of the absence of electron-lattice interaction in the superconducting state; for that, one needs the insight and power of quantum mechanics and the BCS theory concept of Cooper pairs This might not be true if n 0 → 0, as should happen near a superconducting-normal transition. In quantum mechanics, we know that J is proportional to the phase of the superconducting wavefunction, or J = l θ, where l is an integer and θ is the azimuthal angle in cylindrical coordinates. This leads to quantization of the enclosed flux, Φ = (hc/q)l. Also we know that this behaviour is the origin of the Aharonov-Bohm effect. For a fuller discussion, see Complete equivalence of the solutions of our classical equations with those of Schrödinger-Maxwell equations would require more, namely, that the function ψ ≡ n 1 2 exp(iJ/ ) be single-valued and satisfy the usual boundary conditions. In the Schrödinger-Maxwell treatment, the canonical momentum field is a priori a gradient.