We show theoretically that the characteristic modes of dielectric resonator antennas (DRAs) must be capacitive in the low frequency limit, and show that as a consequence of this constraint and the Poincaré Separation Theorem, the modes of any DRA consisting of partial elements of an encompassing super-structure cannot resonate at a frequency that is lower than that of the encompassing structure. Thus, design techniques relying on complex sub-structures to miniaturize the antenna, including topology optimization and meandered windings, cannot apply to DRAs. Due to the capacitive nature of the DRA modes, it is also shown that the Q factor of any DRA substructure will be bounded from below by that of the superstructure at frequencies below the first self-resonance of the super-structure. We demonstrate these bounding relations with numerical examples. D IELECTRIC resonator antennas (DRAs) have drawn significant attention from researchers and engineers since their initial investigation by Long Though many DRA designs have been reported in literature covering various applications, such as broadband designs The objective of this work is to understand whether DRAs are limited in a fundamentally different way from metallic antennas using both theory and numerical simulation. Recent observational studies have reported that shape optimization approaches applied to DRAs within a bounded volume appear to only increase the electrical size of the antenna The electric field integral equation (EFIE) in a dielectric object using the volume equivalence principle is: where the polarization current J(r) is related to the total electrical field as J(r) = jω 0 ( r (r) -1)E(r); A(J) and ∇Φ(J) are the magnetic vector potential and the electric scalar arXiv:2108.04691v2 [physics.app-ph] 27 Aug 2021 potential, E i (r) is the incident field, and r (r) is the relative permittivity distribution of the dielectric object. With proper basis expansion, the above equation can be converted into a matrix equation using the method of moments (MoM) where X and R are the imaginary and real parts of the antenna's MoM impedance matrix Z, I is the basis coefficient vector, and V i is the excitation vector. The characteristic modal analysis (CMA) uses these matrices to formulate the generalized eigenvalue equation in which the characteristic currents I n produce far field orthogonal patterns and the characteristic eigenvalues λ n are related to the net stored magnetic and electric energy of the antenna However, the characteristic modes of DRAs differ in a fundamental way from the metallic antennas. It has recently been observed that a DRA displays only capacitive characteristic modes The stored electric energy (W vac e ), the stored magnetic energy (W vac e ) and the radiated power of an antenna in free space can be written in terms of its current and charge density (J(r), ∇ • J(r)) respectively as (J 1 (r 1 ) where Ω is the DRA domain, k = ω/c is the phase constant, with ω being the angular frequency and c being the speed of light in free space; r 21 = |r 2 -r 1 | is the distance between sources, and X vac e and X vac m are the matrix operators for the stored electric and magnetic energy in free space. In a volume equivalent problem featuring only dielectric bodies, the antenna sources in (4)-( The power, energy and the MoM matrix of a DRA antenna system are related as To prove that the eigenvalues of a DRA must be negative in the low frequency limit, we examine the limiting behavior of the energy terms in (4)- Due to the non-negative nature of these energy terms, C 1 , C 2 , and C 3 are non-negative constants related to the antenna geometry and source distribution ), it follows that Because the above relation is valid for all possible current distributions on the antenna, the relation in When metallic structures supporting frequency independent, loop-type currents (J (0) = 0) are involved, the magnetic energy term (W vac m ) due to J (0) will be proportional to k 0 , no longer guaranteeing the negative definiteness of the X matrix and allowing the possibility of inductive modes. Fig. The capacitive nature of DRAs' characteristic modes have some unique implication on the physical parameters (resonance frequency, Q factor, etc.) of DRAs as revealed through the analysis of DRA substructures. Substructure antennas are antenna structures that are obtained by combining parts of an encompassing super-structure as illustrated in Fig. The definition of substructure antennas for DRAs is similar to their metallic counterparts in We here consider a finite dimension problem, where dim{W i } = K, and dim{ Wi } = K. Useful mathematical relations can be derived between the impedance matrices, energy matrices, and eigenvalues of the super-structure and substructure DRAs As shown in Appendix A, the characteristic eigenvalues of the super-structure (λ) and its arbitrary substructure ( λ) are related as: for all frequencies, where K is the rank of the super-structure Z matrix, and K is the rank of the substructure matrices. The key interpretation of the bounding relation in The resonant frequency of each characteristic mode is defined as the frequency at which its eigenvalue reaches zero. Since we have shown in Section II that small DRAs have only capacitive modes, the implication of the bounding relation in where f k and fk are the resonant frequencies of the kth characteristic mode for the complete and the substructure DRAs respectively. In other words, if arranging the characteristic modes based on the algebraic value of the eigenvalues, the characteristic modal resonance frequencies of all the substructure antennas are bounded below by those of the super-structure. Consequently, DRAs cannot be made resonant at a frequency lower than the original resonant frequency of the super-structure by optimizing the substructure antenna geometry. This result provides valuable guidance for future DRA design, optimization and synthesis. In metallic antennas supporting both inductive and capacitive modes at low frequencies, it is possible to combine the inductive and capacitive modes to further lower the antenna Q factor where X vac e and X mat e are the energy operators defined in ( We can rewrite this equation in a form similar to (26) by invoking the basis transformation between the substructure and super-structure DRAs. Arranging the eigenvalues (in this case, Q n ) in ascending order, and invoking Poincaré Separation Theorem for f ≤ f 1 . Namely, before the first modal resonant frequency of the super-structure, the Q factor of all substructure DRAs are bounded below by that of the complete DRA structure not only for the fundamental mode but also for the higher order modes. In this section, we illustrate the theoretical bound established in Section III through several numerical examples. We select a rectangular DRA as our example problem to demonstrate the eigenvalue and Q factor bounds. The DRA has a dimension of 40 × 25 × 16 mm 3 and is placed in free space. Considering the variety of materials in DRA designs, two different materials are investigated here: alumina with permittivity of 9.8 and zirconia with permittivity of 23 The polarization current distributions of the first four characteristic modes of the rectangular DRA are given in Figure The first resonance of the super-structure is 2.94 GHz for the alumina DRA and 1.96 GHz for the zirconia DRA. The theoretical bounds in An optimization is conducted at 2.5 GHz for the alumina DRA, and at 1.2 GHz for the zirconia DRA. These frequencies are below the fundamental resonances, and the characteristic eigenvalues are all negative. The optimization uses a binary genetic algorithm (GA) in which each binary gene in this case represents the presence or absence of a dielectric tetrahedron. In the GA procedure, the optimization initializes with a set of randomly generated structures (50% chance of each tetrahedra being present or absent) that then evolves through tournament, crossover, and mutation steps. The structures' fitness is evaluated with a cost function and the candidates with the lowest costs in each generation are combined and mutated to generate the next generation of structures. These new structures are fed back into the search cycle until the optimization procedure converges. In this study, 80 generations are used and each generation consists of 40 population. The mutation rate in this case is 12%. Interested readers can refer to The cost function defined for this optimization is, where λk is the k-th characteristic eigenvalue of the DRA structure under evolutionary search. Due to the capacitive nature of the DRAs, this cost function is equivalent to maximizing the individual characteristic eigenvalues of the substructure DRAs, and thus, moving them nearer to resonance at the optimization frequency. Optimization is conducted independently for the first four characteristic modes of the studied rectangular DRAs in an attempt to move any of them above the super-structure's baseline value. Figure To validate the Q factor bound established in where Qk is the k-th lowest modal Q factor of the DRA structure under evolutionary search. The calculation of the modal Q factors of the DRA is conducted based on the energy operators discussed in Section II and the validation of the method against results in literature can be found in Based on the result in The minimization of the first four modal Q factors are conducted independently using the same genetic algorithm. The optimized result of the alumina DRA is shown Figure Note that here we used the characteristic modal currents for the Q factor evaluation. Even though generally the eigenvectors in To better illustrate the bounding phenomena and why conventional small metallic antenna design techniques fail to work in DRA design, we provide two specific design examples. In Sample A, we use a meandering technique common in small antenna design in an attempt to lower the resonant frequency of a DRA substructure. The meandered DRA is created within a thin, rectangular DRA block (the super-structure), as shown in Figure As suggested in As a demonstration of the Q factor bound in Researchers familiar with small conductive antenna design may initially expect the meandering and helical structures in the previous section to increase the electrical length of the structure and reduce the resonant frequencies. However, this is clearly not the case as shown in Table Multi-mode DRAs can be used for MIMO and diversity applications. The finding in In this paper, we prove that all characteristic modes of DRAs must be capacitive in the low frequency limit. As a consequence of this constraint and the eigenvalue interlacing principle, we show that DRA modes cannot be made to resonate at a lower frequency than the resonant frequency of that mode in the encompassing super-structure. This implies that optimization of the DRA geometry within a super-structure cannot make the antenna electrically smaller at resonance, which provides useful insight for DRA design and synthesis efforts. Moreover, we show that because no inductive modes are available for modal combining to lower the antenna Q factor, the modal Q factors of all substructure DRAs are bounded by the Q factors of the DRA super-structure at frequencies below the first modal resonance frequency of the super-structure. Though these fomulations can produce negative energy for certain electrically large antennas