Inspired by the observation of a distributed time delay in the nonlinear response of an optical resonator, we investigate the effects of a similar delay on a noise-driven mechanical oscillator. For a delay time that is commensurate with the inverse dissipation rate, we find stable limit cycles. For longer delays, we discover a regime of chaotic dynamics associated with a double scroll attractor. We also analyze the effects of time delay on the spectrum and oscillation amplitude of the oscillator. Our results point to new opportunities for nonlinear energy harvesting, provided that a nonlinearity with distributed time delay can be implemented in mechanical systems. Despite what Newton's laws suggest, physical systems do not respond instantaneously. Real systems generally have a non-instantaneous response, which can be mathematically described by a time-delayed term in the equation of motion representing them Thermo-optical nonlinear cavities offer a convenient platform for probing an interesting type of nonlinear distributed time delay Let us first demonstrate, experimentally, the existence of a distributed time delay in the thermo-optical nonlinear response of an oil-filled optical microcavity. Figure In a frame rotating at the frequency of the driving laser ω, the light field α in our cavity satisfies: ∆ = ω -ω 0 is the laser-cavity detuning, with ω 0 the cavity resonance frequency. Γ = γ + κ L + κ R is the total dissipation rate, with γ the intrinsic loss rate, and κ L (κ R ) the input-output coupling rate through the left (right) mirror. U quantifies the strength of the cubic nonlinearity, corresponding to effective photon-photon interactions in optical systems. The memory kernel K(t) = exp (-t/τ ) /τ accounts for the non-instantaneous nonlinear response of our cavity, i.e., the distributed time delay. This time-delayed response arises because the temperature of the oil takes a finite time to relax to a steady state when the laser amplitude F changes. The term Dξ(t) = D[ξ 1 (t) + iξ 2 (t)]/ √ 2 represents Gaussian white noise with variance D 2 in the laser amplitude and phase. ξ i (t) each have zero mean [i.e., ξ i (t) = 0], and are delta-correlated with unit variance [i.e., ξ i (t)ξ i (t + t ) = δ(t )]. Moreover, ξ 1 (t) and ξ 2 (t) are mutually uncorrelated. We numerically solve Eq. 1 (and equations ahead) using the xSPDE toolbox For strong driving (large F ), the cavity supports optical bistability: two stable steady states with different intracavity intensity |α| 2 at a single driving condition. To evidence bistability, we measure the transmitted intensity while scanning the cavity length (and hence ∆) forward and backward. The black curve in Fig. Figures The results in Fig. m is the mass of the oscillator and γ its dissipation. a and b define the potential V (x) = -ax 2 /2 + bx 4 /4 in the limit τ → 0. We set a > 0 and b > 0, such that V (x) is a double-well potential. To simulate Eq. 2 it is convenient to define the variables w = b write Eq. 2 as a set of 3 ordinary differential equations which we solve numerically using a fourth-order Runge-Kutta algorithm with time increments ∆t = γ -1 /100. The dynamics of our nonlinear oscillator strongly depend on the memory time τ . In Fig. Figure Figure To summarize, we have demonstrated how a distributed time delay in a Duffing-type nonlinearity can lead to a rich phenomenology, including the emergence of stable limit cycles and chaos. Remarkably, the amplitude of the limit cycle oscillations can be very large when the delay time is commensurate with the dissipation time. If such a distributed time delay can be realized in nonlinear energy harvesters 