A novel photonics-based RF reception approach is proposed as a competitive solution to meet the current challenges of photonic-based approaches and to realize high performances at the same time. The proposed approach adopts the superheterodyne configuration by a combination manner of electronic techniques and photonic techniques, including the ultrawideband generation of optical LO, the two-stage photonic superheterodyne frequency conversion and the real-time IF compensation. An engineering prototype has been developed and its performance has been evaluated in the laboratory environment. The experiment results preliminarily verify the feasibility of the proposed approach and its engineering potential. The typical performances are as follows: 0.1 GHz~ 45GHz operation spectrum range (>40 GHz), 900 MHz instantaneous bandwidth, 101 dB• Hz 2/3 SFDR and 130 dB• Hz LDR, image rejections of ~80 dB for 1st frequency conversion and >90 dB for 2nd frequency conversion. RF receiver as the front-end in modern electronic system play essential roles in wide range of applications from spectrum sensing, electronic warfare (EW), Radar, to wireless communications. Continuous development is promoting RF receiver to satisfy the increasing requirement on several key performances at the same time, such as wider operation spectrum range (>40 GHz), larger instantaneous bandwidth (>500 MHz), higher interference/spurious suppression capability. Conventional receiver architectures based on the electronic techniques and components have significant technical bottlenecks hardly satisfying these requirements Typically, the superheterodyne configuration is the most common receiver architecture adopted by diverse applications requiring high reception performance, including Radar receiver, EW receiver, test receiver and spectrum/signal analyzer Photonic techniques have attracted great attention in breaking through the bottlenecks of conventional electronic receiver architectures due to its advantages such as ultra-wide operating spectrum range, large instantaneous bandwidth, low nonlinear distortion, low loss, light weight, high-efficiency tunable LO, and high interference/spurious suppression. In recent years, a variety of photonics-based RF reception approaches based on different architectures have been proposed and experimental demonstrated for various application purposes In this paper, we propose and demonstrate a novel photonics-based RF reception approach, which is competitive to meet the current challenges and to realize high performances. The proposed approach adopts the superheterodyne configuration by a combination manner of electronic techniques and photonic techniques, including the ultra-wideband generation of optical LO, the superheterodyne photonic frequency conversion and the real-time IF processing. The photonic-based superheterodyne configuration has two stages of photonic-based frequency down-conversion, where two lasers are respectively used as the optical carrier and the optical LO. The other techniques including digital feed-back locking, analog feed-forward compensation, and RF processing in the frond-end and back-end are employed to optimize the system performance, such as frequency/phase noise compensation, interference/spurs suppression. An engineering prototype has been developed and tested in detail. The proposed approach has two distinguishing features. 1) The optical LO is generated based on a wide-band tuning laser with two major steps, the coarse locking and tuning of the LO frequency by a digital locking unit, and the real-time compensation of the residue frequency-error and the phase-noise by the 2 nd frequency conversion unit and the reference extraction unit. The proposed optical LO serve has the advantages of ultrawide tuning range (>45 GHz), excellent harmonic spurious suppression, and its implementation is relatively simple and reliability. 2) The photonic frequency conversion is based on the superheterodyne configuration. This photonic-based superheterodyne configuration has two stages of frequency conversion. In the first stage, RF signals is converted to a fixed high-intermediate frequency (high-IF). In the second stage, the high-IF signal is down-converted to a low-IF. Combining with the RF processing in the front-end before EOM and the IF processing after the photoelectric detection, the proposed photonic frequency conversion shows several advantages of ultra-wide frequency conversion range (≥45 GHz), larger instantaneous bandwidth (>900 MHz), higher interference/spurious suppression capability. The schematic of the proposed photonics-based RF reception approach is shown in Fig. where φ n LO is the phase noise of optical LO and f err is the frequency error of optical LO relative to optical carrier. The output signals of the 3 dB hybrid are fed into a balance PD for the optical-electronic down-conversion of the f C + f RF ' signal through the coherent beat process. The output current of the balance PD is expressed as For the superheterodyne configuration These lead to complicating the frequency planning and the system configuration for suppressing the input interferences and the spurious generated in the frequency conversion. Thanks again to the advantages of the ultra-wideband generation of optical LO and the superheterodyne photonic frequency conversion, the high-IF frequency can be chosen at a big value (typ. 18.5 GHz in our approach) so that the optical LO always locates at the upper side of the signal frequency even up to 45 GHz as shown in fig 1D . As a consequence, the 1 st frequency conversion with a large instantaneous bandwidth, a high suppression of image frequency can achieve successfully with a considerably simple frequency planning and the system configuration. It should be noted that the optical frequency conversion has an advantage of intrinsic resistance to the spurious in the frequency conversion as compared to the RF mixer In expression (4), the high-IF signal E sig (t) contains two disturbances, the residue frequency error f err and the residue phase noise ∆φ n_C,LO . Although the optical LO laser is coarse frequency-locked (not phase-locked) to the optical carrier laser in a digital feed-back locking manner (details described in the following part), the 1 st photonic frequency conversion in our approach will introduces obvious frequency instability and phase noise to the high-IF signal f sig due to the frequency instability and the noncoherence between the two lasers. In order to address these issues, the analog feed-forward compensation method is introduced. The compensation signal is generated in the reference extraction unit, the schematic of which is shown in fig 1 (see the pink block). In this unit, one copy of the optical carrier is modulated with a phase modulator (PM) driven by an electrical expansion source with a fixed-frequency at ∆f. The output signal after the phase modulation is E C_∆f (t) = e j(2πf C t+φ n C +α sin(2π∆ft+φ n E )) = ∑ J l (α)e j(2π(f C +l∆f)t+φ n C +lφ n E +l π ) (11) According to GHz in this work) and ultra-low phase noise and high frequency stability is easy to achieve and has a relatively low-cost and a small footprint, furthermore the mode number l is so small that has at most 6 dB influence on E sig ′ (t). As for φ n ref , it is originated from the tunable reference source with frequency at f ref and has indistinct influence on E sig ′ (t). Due to f ref only depending on the value of f beat as descripted in ( An engineering prototype based on the proposed approach has been developed as shown in fig. The system performances are also characterized in terms of dynamic range and linearity as shown in fig. In conclusion, a novel photonics-based RF reception approach is proposed as a competitive solution to meet the current challenges of photonic-based approaches and to realize high performances at the same time. The proposed approach adopts the superheterodyne configuration by a combination manner of electronic techniques and photonic techniques, including the ultrawideband generation of optical LO, the superheterodyne photonic frequency conversion and the real-time IF compensation. The principle and the functional parts of the proposed approach are described in detail. An engineering prototype of the photonicsbased RF reception approach has been developed and its performance has been evaluated in the laboratory environment. The experiment results preliminarily verify the feasibility of the proposed approach and its engineering potential. The typical performances are as follows: 0.1 GHz~ 45GHz operation spectrum range (>40 GHz), 900 MHz instantaneous bandwidth, 101 dB•Hz 2/3 SFDR and 130 dB•Hz LDR, image rejections of ~80 dB for 1 st frequency conversion and >90 dB for 2 nd frequency conversion. The proposed approach has two distinguishing features. 1) The optical LO is generated based on a wide-band tuning laser with two major steps, the coarse locking and tuning of the LO frequency by a digital locking unit, and the real-time compensation of the residue frequency-error and the phase-noise by the 2 nd frequency conversion unit and the reference extraction unit. The proposed optical LO serve has the advantages of ultra-wide tuning range (>45 GHz), excellent harmonic spurious suppression, and its implementation is relatively simple and reliability. 2) The photonic frequency conversion is based on the superheterodyne configuration. This photonic-based superheterodyne configuration has two stages of frequency conversion. In the first stage, RF signals is converted to a fixed high-intermediate frequency. In the second stage, the high-IF signal is down-converted to a low-IF. Combining with the RF processing in the front-end before EOM and the IF processing after the photoelectric detection, the proposed photonic frequency conversion shows several advantages of ultra-wide frequency conversion range (≥45 GHz), larger instantaneous bandwidth (>900 MHz), higher interference/spurious suppression capability.