Diffractive optical networks unify wave optics and deep learning to all-optically compute a given machine learning or computational imaging task as the light propagates from the input to the output plane. Here, we report the design of diffractive optical networks for the classification and reconstruction of spatially overlapping, phase-encoded objects. When two different phase-only objects spatially overlap, the individual object functions are perturbed since their phase patterns are summed up. The retrieval of the underlying phase images from solely the overlapping phase distribution presents a challenging problem, the solution of which is generally not unique. We show that through a task-specific training process, passive diffractive networks composed of successive transmissive layers can all-optically and simultaneously classify two different randomly-selected, spatially overlapping phase images at the input. After trained with ~550 million unique combinations of phase-encoded handwritten digits from the MNIST dataset, our blind testing results reveal that the diffractive network achieves an accuracy of >85.8% for alloptical classification of two overlapping phase images of new handwritten digits. In addition to all-optical classification of overlapping phase objects, we also demonstrate the reconstruction of these phase images based on a shallow electronic neural network that uses the highly compressed output of the diffractive network as its input (with e.g., ~20-65 times less number of pixels) to rapidly reconstruct both of the phase images, despite their spatial overlap and related phase ambiguity. The presented phase image classification and reconstruction framework might find applications in e.g., computational imaging, microscopy and quantitative phase imaging fields. Diffractive Deep Neural Networks (D 2 NN) A diffractive network can be considered as a coherent optical processor, where the input information can be encoded in the phase and/or amplitude channels of the sample/object field-ofview. Some of the previous demonstrations of diffractive networks utilized 3D printed diffracted layers operating at terahertz (THz) wavelengths to reveal that they can generalize to unseen data achieving >98% and >90% blind testing accuracies for amplitude-encoded handwritten digits (MNIST) and phase-encoded fashion products (Fashion-MNIST), respectively, using passive diffractive layers that collectively compute the all-optical inference at the output plane of the diffractive network In general, coherent optical processing and the statistical inference capabilities of diffractive optical networks can be exploited to solve various inverse imaging and object classification problems through low-latency, low-power systems composed of passive diffractive layers. One such inverse problem arises when different phase objects reside on top of each other within the sample field-of-view of a coherent imaging platform: the spatial overlap between phase-only thin samples inevitably causes loss of spatial information due to the summation of the overlapping phase distributions describing the individual objects, hence, creating spatial phase ambiguity at the input field-of-view. Here, we present phase image classification diffractive networks that can solve this phase ambiguity problem and simultaneously classify two spatially overlapping images through the same trained diffractive network (see Fig. In addition to all-optical classification of overlapping phase images using a diffractive network, we also combined our diffractive network models with separately trained, electronic image reconstruction networks to recover the individual phase images of the spatially overlapping input objects solely based on the optical class signals collected at the output of the corresponding diffractive network. We quantified the success of these digitally reconstructed phase images using the structural similarity index measure (SSIM) and the peak-signal-to-noise-ratio (PSNR) to reveal that a shallow electronic neural network with 2 hidden layers can simultaneously reconstruct both of the phase objects that are spatially overlapping at the input plane despite the fact that the number of detectors/pixels at the output plane of the diffractive network is e.g., ~20-65 times smaller compared to an ideal diffraction-limited imaging system. This means the diffractive network encoded the spatial features of the overlapping phase objects into a much smaller number of pixels at its output plane, which was successfully decoded by the shallow electronic network to simultaneously perform two tasks: (1) image reconstruction of overlapping spatial features at the input field-of-view, and (2) image decompression. We believe that the presented diffractive network training and design techniques for computational imaging of phase objects will enable memory-efficient, low-power and high frame-rate alternatives to existing phase imaging platforms that often rely on high-pixel count sensor arrays, and therefore might find applications in e.g. microscopy and quantitative phase imaging fields. Spatial overlap between phase objects within the input field-of-view of an optical imaging system obscures the information of samples due to the superposition of the individual phase channels, leading to loss of structural information. For thin phase-only objects (such as e.g., cultured cells or thin tissue sections), when two samples e jθ 1 (x,y) and e jθ 2 (x,y) overlap with each other in space, the resulting object function can be expressed as e j(θ 1 (x,y)+θ 2 (x,y)) , and therefore a coherent optical imaging system does not have direct access to θ 1 (x, y) or θ 2 (x, y), except their summation (see Fig. The optical classification of overlapping phase images using diffractive networks presents a challenging problem due to the spatial overlap of the input images and the associated loss of phase information at the input plane. Interestingly, different combinations of handwritten digits at the input present different amounts of spatial overlap, which is a function of the class of the selected input digits as well as the style of the handwriting of the person. To shed more light on this, we quantified the all-optical blind inference accuracies of the presented diffractive optical networks as a function of the spatial overlap percentage, ξ, at the input field-of-view; see Fig. diffractive feature size, we set the layer-to-layer axial distance to be 40λ to ensure connectivity between all the neurons on two successive layers. We selected the diffractive layer thickness, h, as a trainable physical parameter dictating the transmittance of each neuron together with the refractive index of the material. To limit the material thickness range during the deep learning-based training, h is defined as a function of an auxiliary, learnable variable, h a , and a constant base thickness, h b , where the function, Q * (. ) represents the *-bit quantization operator and h m is the maximum allowed material thickness. If the material thickness over the i th diffractive neuron located at (x i , y i , z i ) is denoted by h(x i , y i , z i ), then the resulting transmittance coefficient of that neuron, t(x i , y i , z i ), is given by, where n(λ) and κ(λ) are the real and imaginary parts of complex-valued refractive index of the diffractive material at wavelength, λ. Following the earlier experimental demonstrations of diffractive optical networks, in this work we set the n(λ) and κ(λ) values to be 1.7227 and 0.031, respectively In this study we also assumed that the transmittance function inside the input field-of-view, T in (x, y), covers an area of 53λ×53λ and without loss of generality, it is illuminated with a uniform plane wave. At the output plane, the width of each single-pixel detector was set to be 6.36λ on both x and y directions for all four output detector configurations shown in Figs. optical networks trained based on the output detector layout D-2 do not require multiple ground truth vector labels. Simply the ground truth label vector of a given input field-of-view is defined In the case of D 2 NN-D2d, the vector I ̅ contains 3 main parts, I M+ , I M-and I Q where I M+ and I M- are length M vectors containing the normalized optical signals collected by the detectors representing the positive and negative parts of the final differential class scores ΔI M = I M+ -I M-. Accordingly, in the associated forward training model, the intensity vector I M in Eq. ( During the blind testing of the presented diffractive optical networks on the test set T1, the class estimation solely uses the argmax operation, searching for the highest class-score synthesized by the diffractive networks, based on the associated output plane detector layouts shown in Fig. The purpose of this performance quantification using T1 is to reveal whether the diffractive optical networks trained based on overlapping input phase objects can learn and automatically recognize the characteristic spatial features of the individual handwritten digits (without any spatial overlap). For this goal, in the case of D 2 NN-D1 and D 2 NN-D1d, the class estimation rule in Eq. 1 was replaced with, mod(argmax(I), M) and mod(argmax(ΔI), M), respectively. Since the input images in the test set T1 contain single, phase-encoded handwritten digits without the second overlapping phase object, the optical signals collected by the detectors, {D Q + , D Q -}, at the output plane of the diffractive networks D 2 NN-D2 and D 2 NN-D2d become irrelevant for the classification of the images in T1. Therefore, the decision rule in Eq. 9 is simplified to argmax(I M ) and argmax(ΔI M ) for the all-optical classification of the input test images in T1 based on the diffractive networks D 2 NN-D2 and D 2 NN-D2d, respectively. The phase image reconstruction electronic neural networks (back-end) following each of the presented diffractive optical networks (front-end) include 4 neural layers. The number of neurons on their first layer is equal to the number of detectors at the output plane of the preceding diffractive network (D-1, D-1d, D-2 or D-2d, see Figs. where ρ l+1 and ρ l denote the output and input values of the l th layer of the electronic network, respectively. The operator LReLU stands for the leaky rectified linear unit: The batch normalization, BN, normalizes the activations at the output of LReLU to zero mean and a standard deviation of 1, and then shifts the mean to a new center, β (l) , and re-scales it with a multiplicative factor, γ (l) , where β (l) and γ (l) are learnable parameters, i.e., The hyperparameter ε is a small constant that avoids division by 0 and it was taken as 10 -3 . The of the phase image reconstruction networks was driven by the reversed Huber (or "BerHu") loss, which computes the error between two images, a(x, y) and b(x, y), as follows: The hyperparameter φ in Eq. 15 is a threshold for the transition between mean-absolute-error and mean-squared-error, and it was set to be 20% of the standard deviation of the ground truth image. If we let φ p (x, y) and φ q (x, y) denote the first and second output of each image reconstruction electronic network (i.e., 28x28 pixels per phase object), the image reconstruction loss, L r , was defined as the minimum of two error terms, L r ′ and L r ′′ , i.e., where φ 1 (x, y) and φ 2 (x, y) denote the ground truth phase images of the first and second objects, respectively, which overlap at the input plane of the diffractive network. As there is no hierarchy or priority difference between the input objects φ 1 (x, y) and φ 2 (x, y), Eq. 16 lets the image reconstruction network to choose their order regarding its output activations. With the 0.53λ lateral sampling rate in our forward optical model, the transmittance function inside The overlap percentage, ξ, between any given pair of samples, θ 1 (x, y) and θ 2 (x, y) (see Fig. In Equations 18a-b, ξ 1 and ξ 2 quantify the percentage of the input pixels that contain the spatial overlap with respect to θ 1 (x, y) and θ 2 (x, y), respectively, and the final ξ is taken as the max of these two values. For the digital implementation of the diffractive optical network training outlined above, we developed a custom-written code in Python (v3.6.5) and TensorFlow (v1.15.0, Google Inc.). The backpropagation updates were calculated using the Adam table of detectorclass assignments (as shown Fig. 1b), where the strongest two detector signals indicate the inferred 2, ... , M} . A negative signal difference between {D Q + , D Q -}, on the other hand, indicates that the two overlapping phase objects are from different data classes/digits, and the final class assignments in this -, correctly predicting that the two overlapping phase images are of the same class; the maximum output signal of the remaining output detectors {D m , m = 1,2, ... , M} also correctly reveals that the handwritten phase images belong to digit '3' with a maximum signal at D 3 . This D 2 NN-D2 design provides 82.61% inference accuracy on the test set T2 with 10K test images, closely matching the inference performance of D 2 NN-D1 (82.70%) reported in