We show experimentally that the fundamental ingredient of wave-based signal differentiation, namely zeros of the scattering matrix that lie exactly on the real axis, can be imposed at will and in situ by purposefully perturbing an overmoded random scattering system. The resulting unprecedented flexibility overcomes current limitations of wave-based differentiators, both regarding their extreme vulnerability due to fabrication inaccuracies or environmental perturbations as well as their lack of in situ adaptability. Moreover, in addition to current miniaturization efforts, we suggest that integrability of wave processors can also be achieved by endowing existing bulky everyday-life systems that naturally scatter waves with a second signal-processing functionality. We demonstrate our technique by placing a programmable metasurface inside a 3D disordered metallic box: the hundreds of available degrees of freedom allow us to impose at will reflection zeros on a connected port, such that the reflected signal envelope is the temporal derivative of the incident one. We demonstrate our ability to toggle between differentiation of envelopes modulated onto distinct carriers. We also parallelize multiple differentiation operations on the same device and implement higherorder differentiators. Our "over-the-air" temporal differentiator for microwave carriers may find civilian and military applications in processing wireless communication or radar signals, for data segmentation and compression, as well as machine vision and hearing. Our generic concept is also applicable to optical, acoustic, and elastic scattering. Differentiation is a pivotal mathematical operation with signal processing applications including edge-based segmentation for data compression or image sharpening, FM-to-AM demodulation for communication or Doppler-radar processing, as well as machine vision and hearing. Analog implementations of differentiation on wave processors promise much higher speeds and minimal power consumption in contrast to their digital electronic counterparts A longstanding question in wave physics and material science is how to excite a structure such that no wave energy is reflected back. CC is the simplest case of zero reflection and usually refers to coupling a single (guided) incident channel to an isolated mode of the structure corresponding wavefront in the system diverges To overcome the excessive sensitivity of wave processors, a recent trend has been to explore ideas from topological photonics In parallel, the switching between different functionalities (differentiation, equation solving, etc.) has been studied In contrast, our approach offers at least two orders of magnitude more degrees of freedom. This massive increase in programmability, together with the high density of zeros inherent to overmoded random scattering systems, makes it easy for us to perturb the system such that one of its zeros is placed, at a desired frequency, on the real frequency axis with extremely high precision (notch depth < -70 dB). Moreover, we can also switch to different functionalities and simultaneously create multiple zeros at arbitrary frequencies which is of importance for parallel wave processing at distinct frequencies, exploiting the wave equation's linearity The technique underlying the present work to purposefully perturb a complex scattering system to impose real-valued scattering zeros "on demand" is, on the one hand, conceptually a topic of significant contemporary interest in mesoscopic physics. The concept was proposed and experimentally demonstrated in Ref. However, they also find increasingly use inside rich scattering environments In this paper, we establish the unprecedented flexibility offered for wave-based differentiators based on judiciously tuned overmoded random scattering systems, through a series of microwave experiments in a prototypical metallic disordered box equipped with 1-bit programmable metasurfaces. Our work is realized in the WLAN 5-GHz band and hence of potentially direct technological relevance. First, we demonstrate our ability to impose in situ a scattering zero at any desired frequency in this band, and to toggle at will between them. We directly inject various complicated waveforms in time-domain experiments to provide direct experimental evidence of our ability to compute the temporal derivative of an envelope of an arbitrary carrier (within the 5-GHz band). Second, we generalize this concept to toggling between multiple simultaneous zeros of the scattering matrix-that lie on the real axis-of various spectral separations in order to demonstrate parallel wave processing on the same device. Finally, we cascade two tunable chaotic cavities to compute second order derivatives, thereby engineering a transfer function usually associated with CPA exceptional points Operation principle. To start, our goal is to compute the temporal derivative of a function e(t) that modulates an arbitrary carrier ω 0 by letting it bounce off the interface between a port and an irregularly shaped electrically large metallic box -see Figure For the differentiation operation to happen, the system's transfer function H(ω) (i.e., the port's reflection spectrum) should approximate i(ω -ω 0 ) in the vicinity of ω 0 , as sketched in the inset. A zero of the scattering matrix that lies on the real axis at ω 0 , which we define as a real-valued zero, yields this functional form of the reflection spectrum upon excitation To accomplish this goal, we mount two programmable metasurfaces Direct observation of meta-programmable differentiation. We begin by identifying eight metasurface configurations that yield a real-valued scattering matrix zero at eight distinct, evenly spaced frequencies between 5.05 GHz and 5.4 GHz. The resulting transfer functions are shown in Figure A direct experimental observation of meta-programmable differentiation requires the injection of various waveforms modulated onto various carriers and the observation of their reflections. We modulate each of the considered carriers in turn with one of three envelope functions shown in Figure In Figure Our goal is now to simultaneously impose a real-valued scattering zero at the same frequency in two similar but distinct chaotic cavities, and to toggle between different examples thereof that differ in terms of the chosen frequency, in order to then directly illustrate our ability to perform meta-programmable second-order differentiation. Given that our experimentally available number of programmable meta-atoms is limited, we now split them equally between the two cavities. The optimization problem is now much harder since we have only half of the previously available degrees of freedom in each cavity. This is of course not a general limitation of our concept but related to our experimental constraints, and we cater to it by allowing some flexibility regarding the chosen frequency in our optimization protocol. In the left columns of Figures Compared to first-order differentiation, the output signals are much weaker and hence noisier, such that we average the output measurements over 20 acquisitions. The averaged output envelopes for the four considered carriers in Figure Beyond the wave computing functionality discussed so far, the setup from Figure Besides speed and the ease of processing signals in their native domain, a compelling argument for wave-based computing is its energy efficiency. Indeed, a passive material can offer a desired transfer function without any energy consumption. However, a passive material cannot serve as the basis of a fair comparison with our technique since a passive material lacks all the features and advantages of reconfigurability that motivate our present work. Our device is "quasi-passive": the programmable metasurface does not provide any energy to the wave and only requires minimal power, as low as a few μW per meta-atom To summarize, we demonstrated experimentally the essential steps to implement a meta-programmable "over-the-air" wave-based differentiator. The unprecedented flexibility of our approach is enabled by not fabricating a carefully designed device with a single resonance and a few degrees of freedom but leveraging in situ the massive amount of degrees of freedom offered by a programmable metasurface inside a complex scattering system in order to tune scattering zeros onto the real axis at will. The resulting in situ adaptability overcomes the extreme sensitivity of analog differentiators to any sort of detuning which originates from the fact that they operate at a scattering anomaly associated with a diverging dwell time. We demonstrated with direct temporal measurements of the output signal that our technique can (i) toggle between operation at different carrier frequencies, (ii) parallelize the computational operation based on the wave equation's linearity, and (iii) implement higher-order differentiation. Our approach can be extended to process spatially encoded information, to using overmoded random scattering systems based on guided waves, and to optical or acoustic scattering, as detailed in Supplementary Note 9. Besides the implementation of analog differentiation, the unprecedented flexibility and precision of the implemented filters is relevant to applications in wideband defense systems such as cognitive radio. Looking forward, we envision that a frequency sensing module is integrated with the entire system such that the latter can autonomously adapt itself to the incident signal; such an "intelligent" control of the metasurface configuration based on sensor measurements is easily implemented with current technology Another avenue that can prove fruitful is to explore potential benefits of continuously programmable meta-atoms Experimental setup. A photographic image of the experimental setup from Figure Note that our concept is generic and could be implemented with any other programmable metasurface design, too. Determination of metasurface configurations. Identifying a metasurface configuration that yields a desired scattering response, e.g., a real-valued scattering zero at a desired frequency, is an inverse problem. For our proof-of-principle experiments, we solved this inverse problem via an iterative experimental trial-and-error algorithm detailed in Supplementary Note 4 which involved roughly 800 measurements with a vector network analyzer (Agilent Technologies PNA-L Network Analyzer N5230C, 0 dBm emitted power, 10 kHz intermediate-frequency bandwidth). In the future, the inverse design of metasurface configurations can be performed much faster and in software, once an artificial neural network has been trained to approximate the function that maps the configuration to the scattering response. Ref. For a given test scenario involving a specific function e(t) to be derived and a specific carrier ω 0 , we generated the waveform e(t)e iω 0 t with a signal generator (Aeroflex IFR 3416, 2 dBm emitted power, 33 MHz sampling rate) and toggled the metasurface to the configuration suitable for the chosen carrier. The input signal was injected via Port 1 of a circulator (PE83CR006; see Supplementary Figure The programmable metasurface is an ultrathin array of meta-atoms whose electromagnetic scattering properties can be reconfigured electronically. The concept can be traced back to pioneering works in the early 2000s The prototype used in our experiments (purchased from Greenerwave) is based on the design introduced in Ref. The above "conventional" characterization is a useful first indication of the metasurface's properties but of course it contains no information about the dependence of these properties on the angle of incidence or on the coupling between different meta-atoms. Especially in a rich scattering setting such as the one we consider, in which certainly waves from all possible angles are incident on the metasurface, it is more meaningful to characterize the metasurface in situ For the experiment underlying Figure The divergence of the dwell time can also be understood from considering the phase delay time which is defined as the frequency derivative of the scattering phase: τ = d(arg(S 11 ))/dω. Given the discontinuity of the phase of the transfer function i(ω -ω 0 ) at ω = ω 0 , namely its phase jump of π, its derivative at ω = ω 0 diverges. Tunable microwave notch filters are developed for applications other than analog differentiation where different metrics matter, resulting in filter shapes that are typically not only insufficiently deep but also oftentimes deformed with respect to the shape needed for analog differentiation.