The elementary CuO2 plane sustaining cuprate high temperature superconductivity occurs typically at the base of a periodic array of edge-sharing CuO5 pyramids. Virtual transitions of electrons between adjacent planar Cu and O atoms, occurring at a rate t/ħ and across the charge-transfer energy gap E, generate 'superexchange' spin-spin interactions of energy J ≈ 4t 4 E 3 ⁄ in an antiferromagnetic correlated-insulator state. However, hole doping this CuO2 plane converts this into a very high temperature superconducting state whose electron-pairing is exceptional. A leading proposal for the mechanism of this intense electron-pairing is that, while hole doping destroys magnetic order it preserves pair-forming superexchange interactions governed by the chargetransfer energy scale E. To explore this hypothesis directly at atomic-scale, we combine single-electron and electron-pair (Josephson) scanning tunneling microscopy to visualize the interplay of E and the electron-pair density nP in Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8+x. The responses of both E and nP to alterations in the distance δ between planar Cu and apical O atoms are then determined. These data reveal the empirical crux of strongly correlated superconductivity in CuO2, the response of the electron-pair condensate to varying the charge transfer energy. Concurrence of predictions from strong-correlation theory for hole-doped charge-transfer insulators with these observations, indicates that charge-transfer superexchange is the electron-pairing mechanism of superconductive Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8+x. The prospect that hole-doped CuO2 retains charge-transfer superexchange interactions between adjacent Cu spins has long motivated an hypothesis that spinsinglet electron-pair formation mediated by superexchange, is the mechanism of high temperature superconductivity. In transition-metal oxide insulators, superexchange (1) generates intense magnetic interactions between electrons that are localized at adjacent transition-metal atoms, typically generating robust antiferromagnetism. The superexchange interaction J occurs when the degeneracy of transition-metal 3d orbitals is lifted by the Coulomb energy U required for their double occupancy, so that intervening oxygen 2p energy levels are separated from the relevant transition-metal 3d level by the charge-transfer energy E. Within the framework of the three-band model, the interactions of two adjacent 3d electrons of spin S i are well approximated by a Heisenberg Hamiltonian H = JS i • S j , with J the superexchange interaction produced by a multi-stage process of electronic exchange between spins on adjacent 3d orbitals via the non-magnetic oxygen 2p orbitals. In the strong-coupling limit U/t ≫ 1, J ≈ 4t 4 /E 3 where the transition rate of electrons between 3d and 2p orbitals is given by t ħ ⁄ . Specifically for CuO2-based materials, the planar Cu 2+ ions are in the 3d 9 configuration with a singly occupied d x 2 -y 2 orbital, while the planar O 2-ions have closed 2p 6 shells whose in-plane p σ orbitals dominate. To doubly occupy any d x 2 -y 2 orbital requires an energy U so great that the d-electrons become fully Mott-localized in a charge-transfer insulator state, with the p σ energy level separated from the pertinent d x 2 -y 2 level by the CuO2 charge-transfer energy E (Fig. Hamiltonian based on a single Cu d x 2 -y 2 plus two O p σ orbitals per unit cell (3, 4): Here i,j enumerate planar CuO2 unit cells, label any of the three orbitals, t ij αβ are transition rates for electrons between orbitals at sites i, j, ε α are the orbital energies, and n i↑ d , n i↓ d are the d x 2 -y 2 orbital occupancies by spin state. Heuristically, such models describe a two-dimensional correlated metallic state with intense antiferromagnetic spin-spin interactions. If superconductivity occurs (Fig. Empirical study of charge-transfer superexchange as the mechanism of this superconductivity requires knowledge of the dependence of Ψ on the charge-transfer energy E, but this has not been experimentally accessible. Certainly, E and J have long been studied using optical reflectivity, Raman spectroscopy, tunneling spectroscopy, angle resolved photoemission, and resonant inelastic X-ray scattering (Ref. 10, Section I). Typically, to access different E for these studies required changing between crystal families in the antiferromagnetic-insulator state. But this renders impossible the required comparison between E and Ψ measured simultaneously in the same superconductive state. Instead, the maximum superconducting critical temperature TC subsequent to hole-doping is often proposed as a proxy for Ψ and then compared with the E derived from the parent insulator, for a range of different compounds. But varying the crystal family alters a wide variety of other material parameters besides E, and TC is anyway controlled by other influences including dimensionality and superfluid phasestiffness (11). More fundamentally, advanced theoretical analysis has recently revealed that no one-to-one correspondence exists between the TC and Ψ in the CuO2 Hubbard model In this context, dynamical mean-field theory (DMFT) analysis of the CuO2 Hubbard model has recently yielded quantitative predictions of how Ψ is controlled by E. Moreover, theory also indicates that this interplay may be adjusted by altering the distance δ between each Cu atom and the apical O atom of its CuO5 pyramid To explore this prospect, one must measure Ψ and E as a function of separation above each planar Cu atom. But Ψ is, in general, a complex-valued field and thus not a physical observable, meaning that experimentalists must study |Ψ| 2 ≡ n P , the electronpair density. Moreover, the pseudogap masks the true electron-pairing energy gap so that single-particle tunneling spectroscopy cannot be used to image the superconductive order parameter in lightly hole-doped cuprates. Our strategy therefore combines novel techniques in atomic resolution imaging with a fortuitous property of the canonical cuprate Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8+x. First, a mismatch between preferred bond lengths of the rocksalt and perovskite layers in Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8+x generates a ~26Å periodic modulation of unit-cell dimensions (Fig. In practice, single crystals of Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8+x with hole-density p ≈ 0.17 are cleaved in cryogenic ultrahigh vacuum in a dilution refrigerator based spectroscopic imaging scanning tunnelling microscope (SISTM), to reveal the BiO termination layer (Fig. In search of associated modulations in E(r), Fig. Such enormous junction resistances (or large tip-sample distances) preclude effects on g(V) of the tip-sample electric field. Hence, by visualizing g(r, V) in the -1.6 V ≤ V ≤ 2 V range at these junction-resistances, one can determine empirically if E(r) modulations exist. For example, Fig. and E(Φ = π) ≈ 0.95eV (red arrows), as indicated. Correspondingly, to search for modulations in n P (r), Fig. where equivalently dn ̅ P /dE ≈ -α eV -1 , with a range 0.3 ≲ α ≲ 1.0 depending on the materialspecific parameters For decades the electron-pairing mechanism of cuprate high-temperature superconductivity has been hypothesized (30-37) as due to electron-electron interactions mediated by superexchange, but with the electron-pair condensate Ψ subject to the strong no-double-occupancy constraints on the Cu d x 2 -y 2 orbitals (38, 39), (Fig. Effects of the supermodulation can be observed in topographic images T(r) measured at the BiO crystal termination layer of Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8+x. Its signal as a component of the topographic image can be expressed as T′(r) = A S (r) cos Φ(r), (S1) Φ(r) = Q S ⋅ r + θ(r), (S2) where Q S is the supermodulation vector and θ(r) is a spatially dependent phase disorder. To measure Φ(r) we process T(r) retaining only the wavevector components near q = ±Q s . In practice, this is achieved by first Fourier filtering T(r) as follows: where T(q) is the Fourier transform of T(r). We use σ ≈ ) . (S6) Adding back the pure modulating Q S ⋅ r term and defining the result modulo 2π , generates a map of the total supermodulation phase Φ(r) = [Q S ⋅ r + θ(r)] mod 2π. The relationship between the apical Cu-O displacement δ and phase Φ can then be obtained using X-ray refinement techniques (53) that report apical displacement varies between δ ∼ 2.25 Å at Φ = 0 and δ ∼ 2.54 Å at Φ = π (Fig. To extract the spatially resolved charge transfer energy E(r) , high voltage Here, we visualize g(r, V) in the range -1.6 V ≤ V ≤ 2 V, and at the extremely high junction resistance R N ≈ 85 GΩ (V S = 600 mV: I S = 7pA) necessary to suppress all tipinduced electric field effects. One must consider the possibility of a "setup effect" on these data. Most simply, the electron tunneling current from the STM tip to the sample is where T(r) is the 'topograph', V the tip-sample bias voltage, N (r, E) the sample's localdensity-of-electronic-states, NTIP(E) the tip density-of-electronic-states f(E,T) is the Fermi function. Here Ce -T(r) T0 contains all the effects of tip elevation, tip-sample work-functions and tunneling matrix element. Thus, at very low temperatures and with NTIP(E) and C(r) both constants where VS and IS are the (constant but arbitrary) 'set-up' bias voltage and current respectively. In practice, these two parameters fix the tip elevation T(r) for each tipsample junction. Equivalently, standard constant-current topographic imaging adjusts T(r) as the tip scans over the sample surface to maintain a set point current, IS, at a constant applied tip-sample bias VS. In this case, the topographic image T(r, V S ) is up to a constant. The energy derivative of Eq. S8 at zero temperature yields the tip-sample differential conductance dI/dV(r, E = eV) ≡ g(r, E) which, upon substitution of Ce -T(r) from Eq. S9 yields This is the infamous "setup effect" in which g(r, V) is not proportional to N(r, E). Any setup effect of the Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8+x crystal supermodulation would then be to modulate ∫ N(r, E)dE eV s 0 periodically at wavevector Q S . One can simulate the effects which this would produce by multiplying a typical g(r, V) by a periodic function ACos(Q S . r) and this we have done to generate simulated data in Fig. Hence, variations in the energy separation E between the bands can be estimated by measuring the energy range between these edges at a constant differential conductance G as shown, for example, in Fig. Finally, Fig. The macroscopic wavefunctions of the tip and sample forming a Josephson junction can be written as ψ T = 〈c ↑ c ↓ 〉 T e -iφ T = √ n T e -iφ T (S12) ψ S = 〈c ↑ c ↓ 〉 P e -iφ S = √ n P e -iφ S (S13) where n T (n P ) and φ T (φ S ) are the electron-pair densities and the phases of the tip (sample), respectively. Here, Z is the impedance relevant to re-trapping of the diffusing phase. The first derivative of I P (V J ) at zero bias is In scanned Josephson tunneling microscopy (SJTM) using superconductive STM tips (eg. Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8+x nanoflake tip as used in this study), the sample electron-pair density can therefore be visualized (7,8,9) by measuring either I m (r) or g 0 (r) and also separately measuring R N 2 (r) in the identical field of view yielding the electron-pair density as: For these studies, we use a Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8+x nanoflake tip (7,60). A single crystal sample of Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8+x at the hole density p = 0.17 ± 0.01 and superconducting transition temperature Tc = 91 K is cleaved in cryogenic ultra-high vacuum. The nanoflake tip is then created by picking up a nanometer scale Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8+x flake from the sample surface. A typical resulting topography is shown in Fig. To extract the phase-diffusive Josephson differential conductance at zero bias g 0 from g(V J , r) we fit this Josephson junction differential conductance spectrum to the 1 st derivative of Eq. S15 with free fitting parameters being 1 2 I J 2 Z , V c and an additional constant C added to take account of any small conductance offsets that may occur systematically, and from which fits the g 0 (r) and I m (r) are derived. Fig. The Josephson tunnel junction resistance R N (r) is difficult to determine in a single g(r, V) map because I P (V J ) is measured in the 50 μV range (Fig. Thus, g 1 (r, V) and g 2 (r, V) are obtained in different measurements but nominally the same field of view (FOV). These images, along with their associated topographs T(r), are then registered to the exact same FOV by a series of transformations. Each experimental image T(r) can be registered to the expected periodic lattice using the Lawlor-Fujita (LF) procedure ( The g 1 (r, V J ) is then fit with a parabolic curve g 1 = a . (S19) A typical example of such data R N (r) which is used to establish n P (r) ∝ g 0 R N 2 (r) as in For Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8+x a similar procedure has been used to plot the energy gap (colloquially in cuprate studies the "pseudogap") for single-particle excitations Δ(Φ) as a function of phase (25). The results are that Δ is also modulated at QS and that its value is minimized at Φ ≈ π. Therefore, the data in Fig. Theoretical calculations of Ψ and E have been carried out by numerical solution of the Emery three-band model within the framework of cluster dynamical mean field theory (CDMFT). One can extract predicted values of α = dn P /dE for comparison with the experimental results in Fig. To do so, we first normalize measured g 0 R N 2 to its mean value in the experimental 