Radio-frequency (RF) systems deliver the power to change the energy of a charged particle beam, and they are integral parts of linear and circular accelerators. A longitudinal electrical field in the direction of the beam is generated in a resonant structure, the RF cavity. As it directly interacts with the bunches of charged particles, the cavity can be considered as a coupler to transport energy from an RF power power amplifier to the beam. The power amplifier itself is driven by a low-level RF system assuring that frequency and phase are suitable for acceleration, and feedback loops improve the longitudinal beam stability. The spectrum of RF systems in particle accelerators in terms of frequency range and RF voltage is wide. Special emphasis is given to the constraints and requirements defined by the beam, which guides the appropriate choices for the RF systems. RF systems provide the longitudinal electric fields for the energy increase or decrease of charged particles and transform a string of magnets into an accelerator. These high electric fields are conveniently achieved by resonantly exciting an oscillating system, and the accelerating voltage becomes where V 0 is the peak voltage amplitude, f the frequency and φ the RF phase. At the same time the voltage generated by the RF system keeps the particles longitudinally focused in bunches, and it allows to manipulate the longitudinal beam parameters. The main ingredients of a typical RF system are sketched in Fig. The first part of this overview concentrates on the choice of the basic RF system parameters, driven by the constraints and requirements defined by the beam. Thereafter, the RF cavity as a key component is treated from conceptual and engineering points of view. The main technologies for power amplifiers are described, together with guidelines to select the most appropriate type for a given application. The basic feedback systems and beam control loops are introduced to generate RF signals at the correct amplitude and phase for the acceleration in a synchrotron. 2 Choice of parameters RF systems in particle accelerator exist in a wide frequency and voltage range. While the frequency can be as low as few hundred kilohertz for proton synchrotrons in the low-energy range (up to a few GeV for protons), the original RF frequency for the Compact Linear Collider (CLIC) used to be as high as 30 GHz, which had later been changed to its present value of 12 GHz. Also the amplitude of signals in RF systems spans many orders of magnitude. RF signals from beam pick-ups may be as low few microvolts. At the upper end of the range, the total RF voltage available in the Large Electron Positron (LEP) collider at CERN was about 3.6 GV just before the final shut-down of the accelerator in the year 2000. Planned high-energy linear accelerators will require pulsed RF voltages in the teravolt range. The main requirements for the RF system majorly depend on the accelerator type as well as on the particle type, lepton or hadron, to be accelerated. Without being exhaustive, Fig. Most circular accelerators profit from the advantage that the particles pass through the accelerating stations multiple times, which allows to reach high energies with a moderate energy gain per turn. For the particular case of a synchrotron the orbit length is kept constant by increasing bending field and RF frequency synchronously. However, the periodicity introduces the additional constraint that the RF frequency, f RF must be an integer harmonic of the revolution frequency, f rev For ultra-relativistic particles this can be conveniently achieved by an RF system at fixed frequency. In low-and medium-energy synchrotrons, in which the revolution frequency changes during acceleration, the RF system must also sweep its frequency during acceleration. This introduces important technical challenges. It is worth noting that rare exceptions exist to Eq. The RF frequency is an important design parameter parameter of any accelerator which must be chosen carefully. As shown above it mainly depends on particle and accelerator type. However, the choice is not only guided by beam dynamics arguments, but also technical constraints which give preference to a specific RF frequency The advantages and disadvantages of a low RF frequency are summarized in Table Not only the cavity size and volume shrink with increasing frequency, but the breakdown field limiting the maximum surface electric field in vacuum becomes more comfortable at higher frequencies as well (Fig. describing the quality of an RF cavity in terms of breakdown voltage. Since its publication, much higher surface electric fields have been demonstrated, mainly due to better surface treatment. This improvement is commonly expressed as the factor with respect to the curve described by Kilpatrick. From Fig. In most cases the beam physics and engineering constraints only define a certain favorable frequency range for the RF system of an accelerator. This leaves some leeway for the exact frequency choice. In the past decades a set of common RF frequencies has emerged. Adhering to one of these frequencies assures that off-the shelf RF components are available from industry. Additionally, it allows the exchange of RF development and equipment amongst research laboratories using the same frequency. Table Next to the frequency the voltage is the second main design parameter for an RF system in a particle accelerator. At minimum the RF system must provide the required energy gain qV = ∆E , where q is the particle charge and V the accelerating voltage. During this so-called on-crest acceleration the particles are at the phase of the RF voltage maximum (Fig. More RF voltage needs to be provided to place the bunch of particles off-crest, at a so-called synchronous phase, φ S , such that qV > ∆E → qV sin φ S = ∆E . This scheme ensures the phase focusing and keeps the particles together in bunches. For a particle with positive energy offset arriving before a particle with the reference energy, the RF voltage is lower than for the synchronous particle (Fig. In a synchrotron or storage ring the RF system must firstly provide the energy gain per turn due to the changing field in the bending magnets. To keep the radius of the orbit constant, the centripetal force, F Z , must be equal to the Lorentz force, F L , of the dipole magnets: where p and q are momentum and charge of the particle; ρ is the bending radius. A time dependent bending field, dB/dt = Ḃ will hence require a momentum change of ṗ = qρ Ḃ . Discretizing the momentum change according to results in the synchronous energy gain per turn of for a given ramp rate of the bending field. The total RF voltage installed in a synchrotron therefore scales with the size of the accelerator at fixed ramp rate, Ḃ. Assuming that the ramp rate of the bending magnets is, in first order, independent of the circumference, the energy gain according to Eq. ( Secondly, the RF system must also compensate any energy loss of the particles, most prominently due to synchrotron radiation in lepton accelerators. The average energy loss per turn due to this effect becomes which can be expressed for electrons in the simplified equations between quantities The particle rest mass is given by m 0 , and q is its charge; 0 8.85 • 10 -12 As/(Vm) is the electric permittivity of free space. As synchrotron radiation losses are proportional to 1/m 4 0 , they are about thirteen orders of magnitude weaker for hadrons and only relevant in very high-energy synchrotrons with energies in the order of few TeV. The RF cavity is the most visible part of an RF installation. It is a oscillating system to achieve the high electric field gradients for the acceleration and manipulation charged particles in an accelerator by resonant excitation. It can be understood as coupler or adapter between the RF power from an amplifier and the beam. A wide range of technical implementations for RF cavities, from a simple pill-box cavity Each resonant mode of an RF cavity can be described as a circuit of lumped elements. The impedance of this parallel circuit of resistance, R, inductance, L and capacitance, C is written as which resonates at the frequency where the impedance of inductance and capacitance compensate, The quality factor, Q of a resonant oscillator is proportional to the ratio of stored energy and the energy lost during an oscillation cycle The energy stored in the resonant mode is distributed between both reactive elements. In the limiting case the energy is either be stored in capacity or inductance alone, where V is the maximum voltage and I the maximum current, respectively. In terms of the lumped elements, the quality factor can hence be expressed in the form Replacing the reactive elements in Eq. ( where the approximation applies at frequencies close to the resonance, ∆ω ω 0 . Comparing Eq. ( While the lumped element representation for a resonant mode of a cavity is convenient for circuit simulations, it is not adapted to the design of RF cavities. In a particle accelerator the resonance frequency, ω 0 of a cavity is normally given by the beam parameters, for example a specific harmonic of the revolution frequency in a synchrotron or storage ring. Neglecting energy transfer into the beam, the shunt impedance R relates the achievable gap voltage with the available RF power. The third parameter most relevant to the cavity designer is the ratio of shunt impedance and quality factor, the so-called "R-upon-Q", R/Q. This parameter is only defined by the cavity geometry and is thus a main criterion to optimize a cavity design. When a charge, q travels through a cavity at the speed of light (Fig. The beam induced voltage at the cavity gap is V ind . This very simplified model assumes also that the charge is not slowed down due to the energy loss. Using Eq. ( Equation Depending on the required frequency RF cavities for acceleration may have very different geometries. However, as will be shown by the following examples, most of them can be reduced to the same basic resonator types. As the cavity size scales with the RF wavelength λ ∝ 1/f and their volume even with 1/f 3 , the size cavities in the low frequency range quickly becomes unmanageable. Below 10 MHz the RF wavelength is in excess of 30 m. This would ask for huge cavities, too large for the space available in the straight sections in low and medium energy synchrotrons. A very common resonator type to overcome this problem is the so-called line resonator (Fig. An example of an inductively shortened cavity is the ferrite-loaded cavity while lowering the propagation velocity to This shortens the cavity such that a quarter wavelength of more than 25 m can fit into a compact cavity of physical length below 1.5 m. Even smaller cavities with larger voltage capability or larger bandwidth can be achieved with high-permeability magnetic alloy material like, for example, Finemet Adding magnetic material like ferrite or magnetic alloy nonetheless introduces losses which lower the shunt impedance and increase the RF power requirements. An alternative technique to reduce the resonator frequency is capacitive loading. The capacity must be located in a region of large electric field and is hence in the region of the accelerating gap. Figure Fig. The main losses in conventional coaxial line resonators are caused by the RF current flow on the surface of the inner conductor. When moving to higher frequencies such a conductor is not needed. As illustrated in Fig. To calculate the resonance frequency, the cavity can be considered as a section of circular wave guide. The transverse magnetic (TM) cut-off frequency of a cylindrical wave guide is given by the condition that the longitudinal electric field, E z must vanish on the surface of the conducting cylinder. Transverse magnetic means that there is no longitudinal magnetic field, but only longitudinal electric field. This is equivalent to the condition where J 0 (χ) is the Bessel function of first kind, D the diameter of the wave guide and λ c its fundamental cut-off wavelength. With the zero crossing of the Bessel function being at χ 01 2.40483, the wavelength at cut-off is hence given by Closing the circular wave guide with end plates perpendicular to the wave guide axis creates a cavity of length, l. This extra boundary condition allows additional resonant modes. In combination with Eq. ( As the Bessel functions have multiple zero crossings, χ pq the number of cavity resonances due to the cavity diameter D is infinite. The resonance frequency of the lowest order transverse magnetic (TM) mode, ω 010 is independent of the cavity length, l. Only for a short pillbox cavity (l < 1.01538 D) this mode is the fundamental one. For a longer cavity the resonance frequency of the fundamental mode becomes a TE mode, which has a resonance frequency below ω 010 . In this case the frequency of the fundamental mode decreases with increasing cavity length. Only the TM mode is suitable for acceleration as its longitudinal electric field is largest on axis, where the beam passes through the cavity. The presence of further resonant modes at higher frequencies, the so-called higher-order modes (HOM), are an important issue in cavities installed in particle accelerators. In rings the longitudinal beam spectrum mainly consists of lines at integer multiples of the revolution frequency. Whenever one of these lines overlaps with a frequency of an HOM, beam power is unintentionally coupled back into the cavity. This does not only cause energy loss and heating in the cavity, but also may drive a high-intensity beam unstable. More evolved cavity shapes have therefore been designed to optimize for the specific application in high-intensity accelerators. In the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) at CERN the average energy gain per turn is with only about 0.5 MV/turn very moderate and the total RF voltage of up to 16 MV per turn is only required to keep the bunches short in collision. However, as the average beam current of more than 0.5 A is very large (nominal bunch intensity of 1.3 • 10 13 p/b at 25 ns spacing) and, due to the low revolution frequency, the longitudinal beam spectrum contains spectral lines every 11 kHz, beam loading and beam power coupling to HOMs are major issues. A bell-shaped cavity design has been adopted (Fig. To generate the electric field for acceleration in a cavity resonator, RF power from a source, an RF amplifier must be coupled into the cavity. There are several possibilities to excite the resonator which becomes also clear from the lumped element model of the resonance (Fig. The inductive or magnetic coupling is most common for cavities in the frequency range of up to a few 100 MHz. A loop is placed in a region of large magnetic field in a cavity. For the example of the line resonator (Sec. 3.2.1) this is near the short circuit side. Figure Less common is capacitive or electric coupling directly to the cavity, which connects to the resonator in the same way as the beam (Fig. As an example for electric coupling through an antenna, the power coupler of the main accelerating cavities of the LHC at 400.8 MHz is illustrated in Fig. about 300 kW into each cavity. To cope with the different conditions during injection, acceleration and collision in the LHC, it features a mechanically changing coupling ratio. During the injection process, where beam loading should be minimized, the antenna is plunged deeper into the cavity structure, linking it more tightly to the power amplifiers. In collision, when the maximum RF voltage is required, the antenna is partly removed from the cavity to reduce the coupling and increase the effective shunt impedance. The RF amplifier, sometimes also called power plant, is connected to the cavity resonator and supplies the energy for the acceleration of the beam. Two major different technologies co-exist to amplify an RF signal. Firstly, vacuum tube amplifiers play an important role in accelerators. As the physical size of vacuum electronics grows with the output power, gridded tubes like triodes and tetrodes may not be considered small with respect to the RF wavelength anymore. The fact that a device has a size comparable to or is even larger than the wavelength is actually employed in travelling wave tubes, klystrons and many other types of tubes. In-between, the inductive output tube (IOT) unites the moderate power input circuitry of a triode with the high-power output system of a klystron. Secondly, solid state amplifiers have become a mature competitor, even at highest power levels. While transistors themselves as amplifying elements are much smaller than tubes, the auxiliary circuitry requires significant space. The achievable power per transistor remains still significantly below the power from a single tube device. Hence the outputs of many transistors, typically hundreds to thousands, are combined to achieve the desired power levels. The gain per amplification stage moreover defines how many stages must be chained to obtain the required overall gain. Travelling wave tubes may achieve significantly higher gains than gridded tubes or transistors. This may simplify an installation. Ideally, the available output power of the amplifier, P amplifier would be entirely transferred to the beam. The power balance in a real RF system as illustrated in Fig. where n is the number of RF stations, must be compensated just to produce the total accelerating voltage, V . This equation suggests that distributing the RF voltage over several cavities is beneficial for the total RF power which only grows proportionally to their number. Large particle accelerators are therefore equipped with an ensemble of RF stations. Finally, the energy does not only flow from the amplifier through the cavity to the beam, but the beam also delivers energy back to the RF system, as introduced in Sec. 3.1. Ideally compensating the beam induced voltage would require a power of Fully removing the beam induced voltage contribution in high current accelerators would require excessive RF power and partial compensation schemes to mitigate beam loading effect are put in place Conceptually a power amplifier ideally just multiplies the input signal by a constant factor which does not pay tribute the complexity of a real device. For an ideal amplifier, however, the power amplification factor g would be the only parameter. Such an ideal amplifier would have a large bandwidth to amplify all frequencies equally well, no saturation and infinite RF power with zero delay. It would furthermore not add any noise to the amplified input signal, be unconditionally stable under all load conditions and resist reverse power which may be delivered back from the cavity to the amplifier. Radiation hardness may be another requirement in the particle accelerator environment. The principle of operation of valves like diodes, triodes or tetrodes is based on an electric current generated by a flow of electrons in vacuum. The electrons are released by thermionic emission. The so-called cathode electrode is heated by a filament and produces an electron cloud. Coated metals, carbides or borides are often used as materials due to their low energy required to liberate these electrons. Applying a positive voltage to a second electrode, the anode, generates an electric field which attracts the electrons and causes a current flow (Fig. Introducing a grid, g 1 between cathode and anode as illustrated in Fig. which describes the gain of this triode in an RF power amplifier. For this type of tube the gain is limited by the parasitic capacity between the anode and the control grid. The amplified signal at the anode couples back to the grid which causes the amplifier to excite itself to uncontrolled oscillations. Damping of these oscillations is achieved by reducing the capacitive coupling between anode and control grid (Fig. Tetrodes are the main work horse of high-power RF amplifiers. They combine large gain, thanks to the additional pre-acceleration of the electrons, with good stability. Their performance is mainly limited by secondary electrons which are released at the anode due to the impacting primary, higher-energy electrons from the cathode and pre-accelerated by the positive voltage at the screen grid. The secondary electrons may cause a current flow through the screen grid, which can ultimately damage its fine mesh structure. The secondary emission from the anode can be reduced by special surface treatment. An example for a large scale power plant are the tetrode amplifiers driving the main 200 MHz travelling wave acceleration structures of the Super Proton Synchrotron (SPS) at CERN. The water-cooled tube alone (Fig. The main accelerating cavities in the CERN Proton Synchrotron (PS) are driven by tetrode amplifiers as well (Fig. The mechanical dimensions of amplifier tubes scale with the power dissipation, the higher the output power the larger the device must be dimensioned to assure appropriate cooling. With increasing frequency the mechanical size of the tube therefore cannot be considered small compared to the RF wavelength any longer, and travelling wave effects must be taken into account. Beam tubes make use of these effects to achieve high gain and power output levels. The most prominent example of a linear beam tube is the klystron. The simplified concept of the klystron, which can also be considered as a small electron accelerator in itself, is sketched in Fig. Real klystrons are usually significantly more evolved than the simple example shown above. Additional cavities may be inserted in the drift space between in-and output resonators to assure optimum bunching. Solenoid magnets are moreover required around the drift region to keep the electron beam focused. About 50 units of the large klystrons shown in Fig. Compared to tubes, the output power per transistor device of a solid state amplifier is significantly lower. The active semiconductor die must be small, with the size limiting the maximum dissipated power. Internally connecting multiple dies in parallel within an RF transistor The conceptual schematics of an RF amplifier illustrating the basic building blocks is sketched in Fig. The continuous wave power ranges of commercially available RF power sources are summarized in Fig. The choice of the amplifier technology for an RF system in a particle accelerator depends very much on the specific application. A non-exhaustive list of criteria and arguments is presented in Table . 4. The table only includes technical arguments relevant from the beam point of view, but intentionally excludes those related to maintainability, reliability, lifetime or cost. The cost to provide and operate the technical infrastructure in terms of electrical power supply, cooling, etc. can become very important for high-power amplifiers and should nonetheless be taken into for the choice. For example the high-voltage installations for tube-based power plants require special care and intensive maintenance, while solid state amplifiers work with moderate supply voltages which are easier to handle. Additionally, the overall efficiency of an RF power plant can contribute significantly to the cost of operation. For a fair comparison it must therefore include the total power lost in the entire infrastructure needed to run an installation. For many applications, for example the power amplifier in conventional synchrotron light sources, both amplifier technologies can be considered as viable options. In other case, like the installation of an RF amplifier in a radioactive environment, the tube technology is better suited. The amplifier powering an accelerating cavity is itself driven, at a low power level, by the low-level RF system As mentioned above, most high-energy particle accelerators are equipped with multiple RF stations to manipulate the beam. A distinction is therefore made between local and global feedback loops. The local loops act on each individual RF station separately, without any knowledge of signals from other RF stations. Global feedback loops are those which treat all RF stations just as one single large RF system, and they hence act globally on all RF stations simultaneously. The energy transfer between an RF cavity and the beam occurs in both directions. Both, the RF amplifier as well as the beam can induce voltage in the cavity. Of course, this beam induced voltage, causing energy transfer from the cavity back to the beam, is unintended and must be reduced. A simplified lumped element circuit is sketched in Fig. A more more elegant way to decrease the apparent impedance for the beam can be realized by using the power amplifier to counteract the beam-induced voltage. The simplified lumped element circuit model is shown in Fig. where Z(ω) represent the impedance of the bare resonator according to Eq. ( Measured transfer functions are plotted in Fig. As the de-phasing ∆φ = ∆ωτ is proportional to the frequency offset with respect to the resonance frequency, intentionally reducing the feedback bandwidth is an option to achieve larger feedback gain. One example is introduced in the next section. The longitudinal beam spectrum in a synchrotron is concentrated around multiples of the revolution frequency, nf rev . Any longitudinal impedance is hence only excited at these frequencies, which can be exploited for the 1-turn delay feedback concept. This feedback system implements a periodic comb filter with high gain only in very narrow frequency bands around the revolution frequency harmonics. Thanks to this significantly smaller bandwidth of each pass-band compared to the overall cavity transfer function (Fig. The overall set-up of a cavity with direct and 1-turn delay feedback is sketched in Fig. to the total loop delay of the revolution period, T rev , the hardware can be located far away from the cavity, outside the accelerator tunnel. The resulting modification of the transfer function is illustrated in Fig. Global feedback systems act on all RF stations simultaneously and hence drives the entire set of them just like a single RF station. The global loops are also referred to as the longitudinal beam control of flight of the beam from RF station to RF station, a de-phasing is applied. It assures that all stations are in phase at the moment of the beam passage. The frequency of the RF source is sweeping with the increasing beam velocity, but the relative phases are static as the geometrical azimuth between the RF stations is constant. Global feedback loops apply small corrections in frequency and phase to the RF signal generated by the common master RF source. Distinction is made between three main global feedback loops for synchrotrons. Firstly, the beam phase loop locks the phase of the RF system to the centre the phase of the circulating bunches. It damps any common-mode dipole oscillations. However, the phase loop introduces a slow drift in average RF frequency which leads to a radial displacement if uncorrected. This is avoided by either a radial loop or a synchronization loop. The radial loop measures the radial displacement of the beam and corrects it by changing the RF frequency, f RF = hβc/(2πR). The synchronisation loop locks the RF frequency to an external reference frequency. Additionally, at the beam transfer from one synchrotron to the next, it is necessary to lock the RF frequencies of the two rings. This scenario is also handled by a synchronization loop. The beam phase loop locks the phase of the accelerating wave with respect to the circulating bunches such that the relative phase between a longitudinal beam signal and the RF voltage in the cavities is set to the synchronous phase. In this case the beam cannot escape the accelerating wave and any bunch phase oscillations, with all bunches oscillating in phase, are efficiently suppressed. The beam phase loop is a particular variant of the electronic phase-locked loop (PLL), which should be briefly introduced here. In telecommunication technology, the PLL is mainly employed for frequency regeneration and multiplication, as well as for frequency synthesis. Figure In this configuration the PLL acts as a frequency multiplier with a well-defined fixed phase relationship between in-and output signals. Replacing the input signal by a signal from the circulating beam, and fixing the division ratio to unity, transforms the electronic PLL into a beam phase loop (Fig. To improve the performance of the loop and to cope with the sweeping revolution frequency acceleration, the VCO is implemented in the form of a precision RF source. An estimate of the expected revolution and RF frequency is numerically calculated from the bending field or momentum. This open loop frequency value is corrected by a small amount with the output from the loop filter (Fig. In modern beam control systems the entire loop may be implemented digitally, with analog-todigital converters acquiring beam and cavity return signals. Conceptually identical to the set-up in Fig. The beam phase loop tracks the beam in terms of phase. However, it may induce unwanted drifts of the average frequency during acceleration. Again the beam itself can be taken as a reference to control the average RF frequency by monitoring its radial displacement with respect to the central orbit. The radial loop becomes essential around the transition energy. This is illustrated using the differential relation between frequency and radial offset where γ tr is the energy factor, γ = E/E 0 . For a magnetic cycle with a slowly increasing bending field. the second term can be neglected. At transition energy, γ = γ tr , the effect of a longer or shorter path due to a higher or lower particle energy on the revolution frequency is compensated by the higher or lower velocity of the particle, and the revolution frequency is independent of the particle energy. On the contrary, the sensitivity of a relative radial displacement, ∆R/R, with respect to a normalized frequency error, ∆f /f according to shows that near transition energy even a tiny frequency error can cause a large radial displacement, sufficient to drive the beam horizontally into the vacuum chamber, see Fig. Although essential to accelerate a beam through the transition energy, the radial loop has the major drawback of any other beam-based regulation loop. The measurement of the beam signal induces unwanted noise into the RF frequency within the loop and generates additional phase jitter of the RF signal at the cavity gap. Such a phase jitter degrades the longitudinal beam quality as it results in uncontrolled blow-up of the longitudinal emittance. When the transition energy is not located between injection and extraction energy, and is therefore not crossed during the acceleration, the radial loop is better replaced by a synchronization loop to control the average revolution and RF frequencies. The combined block diagram of beam phase and synchronization loops is summarized in Fig. The same loop can also be used to synchronize two synchrotrons with respect to each other. For a bunch-to-bucket transfer between two synchrotrons, the RF frequencies should be ideally identical in both or, more generally, integer harmonics of each other. In this case the internal reference synthesizer is replaced by an external RF frequency provided by the receiving synchrotron (Fig. 1. In the receiving synchrotron the circulating bunches are locked to the RF voltage by its beam phase loop. 2. The RF signals, together with a divided revolution frequency marker are transmitted as reference to the sending synchrotron. 3. The average frequency and the phase in the sending synchrotron are locked to this external reference prior to the transfer. 4. The beam phase loop of the sending synchrotron assures the phase lock between beam and RF voltage. In summary, thanks to the synchronization loop and the beam phase loops, the circulating bunches in both sending and receiving accelerator are locked in phase and frequency with respect to each other. In case of an integer circumference and revolution frequency ratio, n of two accelerators, the beam in the smaller one will just make n turns during one turn of the larger one. The overall system nonetheless has a fundamental periodicity with the revolution frequency of the larger accelerator. More evolved schemes are required to transfer beams between two synchrotrons with a rational circumference ratio, but in most cases the synchronization loop plays a key role for the bunch-to-bucket transfer. RF systems are integral parts of every linear and circular particle accelerator. Their parameters must be well chosen at the initial design stage, based on the requirements and constraints defined by the beam. This does not only assure the acceleration process, but also allows to manipulate the longitudinal beam parameters like, for example, bunch length, peak current or number of bunches. RF system are composed of the cavity which directly interact with the particle beam, and a set of low-level, as well as high-power electronics to provide sufficient RF voltage at the correct frequency and phase to the beam. As a major difference compared to most other components installed in accelerators, the interaction between beam and RF system is bidirectional and the beam, through induced voltage, influences the behaviour of the RF as well as vice versa. For the beam control loops, the beam actually becomes an integral part of the RF system and defines itself the optimum parameters for its acceleration. synchrotrons in the low-and medium-energy range (up to typically few tens of GeV), RF frequencies below approximately 100 MHz cannot be avoided as there is presently no technology to build wideband or wide-range tunable RF cavities in the frequency range beyond. Generally, RF frequencies below about 200 MHz are preferred for most hadron linear accelerators, cyclotrons, as well as low-and medium energy hadron synchrotrons. The opposite Table Available online at https://cas.web.cern.ch/previous-schools Strictly speaking the RF voltage must only be repetitive with the revolution period.