Three-dimensional van der Waals ferromagnet Fe3GeTe2 (FGT) is regarded as a candidate for the magnetic topological nodal line semimetal. We investigate lateral electron transport between two 3 μm spaced superconducting In leads beneath a thick three-dimensional FGT exfoliated flake. At low 30 mK temperature, we observe Josephson supercurrent that exhibits unusual critical current Ic suppression by the magnetic field B. The overall Ic(B) pattern is asymmetric in respect to the B sign. We demonstrate, that the asymmetry is defined by the magnetic field sweep direction, so the Ic(B) pattern is strictly reversed (as B to -B inversion) for the opposite sweeps. We also observe an interplay between maximum and minimum in Ic(B) in normal magnetic fields, while there are fast aperiodic Ic(B) fluctuations for the in-plane ones. These effects can not be expected for homogeneous superconductor-ferromagnet-superconductor junctions, while they are known for Josephson spin valves. The mostly possible scenario for Josephson spin valve realization in FGT is the misalignment of spin polarizations of the Fermi arc surface states and ferromagnetic FGT bulk, but we also discuss possible influence of spin-dependent transport between magnetic domains. Recently, Fe 3 GeTe 2 (FGT) has attracted significant attention as a promising platform for novel physical phenomena, which are connected with magnetic and electronic non-trivial topology. FGT is an itinerant van der Waals ferromagnet characterized by an out-of-plane magnetocrystalline anisotropy both for three-dimensional single crystals and down to two-dimensional limit, which was confirmed by theoretical and experimental investigations Different realizations of spin valves are known for magnetic materials. Usually, spin valves are realized as ferromagnetic multilayers In proximity with a superconductor, topological surface (or edge) states are able to carry supercurrents over extremely large distances In JSVs supercurrent is defined mainly by the relative orientation of the layers' magnetizations, while in conventional Josephson junctions it is modulated by magnetic flux. The strength of the singlet-triplet conversion substantially depends on the particular configuration of the magnetization misalignment in the Josephson spin valve. For the supercurrent flowing perpendicular to the layers, such a dependence on relative orientations of the layers' magnetizations was studied in detail and has been recently used for experimental identification of relative weights of singlet and triplet amplitudes constituting a net supercurrent Symmetry analysis and first principles calculations have shown, that the inversion symmetry breaking can occur at the FGT interface Here, we investigate lateral electron transport between two 3 μm spaced superconducting In leads beneath a thick three-dimensional FGT exfoliated flake. At low 30 mK temperature, we observe Josephson supercurrent that exhibits unusual critical current I c suppression by the magnetic field B. The overall I c (B) pattern is asymmetric in respect to the B sign. We demonstrate, that the asymmetry is defined by the magnetic field sweep direction, so the I c (B) pattern is strictly reversed (as B to -B inversion) for the opposite sweeps. We also observe an interplay between maximum and minimum in I c (B) in normal magnetic fields, while there are fast aperiodic I c (B) fluctuations for the in-plane ones. These effects can not be expected for homogeneous superconductorferromagnet-superconductor junctions, while they are known for Josephson spin valves. The mostly possible scenario for Josephson spin valve realization in FGT is the misalignment of spin polarizations of the Fermi arc surface states and ferromagnetic FGT bulk, but we also discuss possible influence of spin-dependent transport between magnetic domains. Fe 3 GeTe 2 was synthesized from elements in evacuated silica ampule in a two-step process. At the first step, the load was heated up to 470 • C at 10 deg/h rate and the ampule was held at this temperature for 50 h. At the second step, the temperature was increased up to 970 • C with the same rate. After 140 h exposure, the ampule was cooled down to the room temperature at 5 deg/h rate. X-ray diffraction data indicates, that the iron tellurides FeTe and FeTe2 were also found in the obtained material, in addition to the expected Fe 3 GeTe 2 compound. To obtain Fe 3 GeTe 2 single crystals, the synthesized mixture was sealed in evacuated silica ampule with some admixture of iodine. The transport reaction was carried out for 240 h with temperatures 530 • C and 410 • C in hot and cold zones, respectively. Afterward, the ampule was quenched in a liquid nitrogen. Water-solvable iron and tellurium iodides were removed in hot distilled water from the obtained Fe 3 GeTe 2 single crystals, so the X-ray diffraction analysis confirmed strict Fe 3 GeTe 2 composition. Non-trivial surface properties are known for threedimensional topological semimetal single crystals Fig. To confirm FGT quality, magnetoresistance measurements are performed also in standard Hall bar geometry for reference samples with normal (Au) leads. In Fig. Fig. As expected, the zero-resistance state appears below some critical temperature, which is about 0.88 K and 0.34 K for the devices in Fig. The high temperature curves are typical for Andreev reflection in Fig. Since FGT is an uniaxial ferromagnet, which is confirmed by the Hall curves in Fig. Fig. As a most important, the observed dV /dI(B) asymmetry depends on the magnetic field sweep direction. Moreover, all the dV /dI features are mirrored for the opposite (blue and rad colors) field sweeps, so dV /dI(B) curves are strictly reversed for the two sweep directions in Figs. unwanted shortings of the In leads, since a simple In-In junction can not demonstrate the observed dV /dI(B) reversal. dV /dI(B) reversal can also be demonstrated by colormaps in Figs. For Josephson effect, an important information can be obtained from the maximum supercurrent I c suppression. In principle, zero-resistance black region in the colormaps reflects the critical current I c (B) suppression pattern, as it is emphasized by the white envelope curves in Figs. There are also some features in Fig. For the in-plane magnetic fields, I c (B) shows fast aperiodic fluctuations in Fig. In In FGT FIG. ∆B = 0.01 mT. We check, that our procedure gives I c values, which are perfectly stable at fixed magnetic field, as demonstrated in Fig. Temperature dependence of the critical current I c (T ) is shown in Fig. As a result, we observe I c (B) pattern asymmetry and its' reversal in dependence on the magnetic field sweep direction. This effect can be observed for both magnetic field orientations, while in normal magnetic fields there is also a prominent change of the I c (B) shape during remagnetization. This behavior can not be expected for usual SFS junctions with the homogeneous magnetization of the central ferromagnetic layer, where remagnetization can only shift the I c (B) pattern position in magnetic field A conventional spin valve, in its simplest form, is a layered structure consisting of a thick (fixed) and a thin (free) ferromagnetic layers In the case of FGT, the presence of spin-polarized topological Fermi arcs has been demonstrated by ARPES 8 , while spin momentum locking 56 was inferred to be responsible for anti-symmetric magnetoresistance in FGT/graphite/FGT heterostructures If a spin valve is sandwiched between two superconducting electrodes The observed interplay between the I c (B) maximum and minimum after remagnetization in Fig. Regarding the effects of the domain structure, one should note that the presence of several ferromagnetic domains between the superconducting leads could generally give rise to essentially the same physics as in a JSV Thus, our experimental results can be regarded as demonstration of the JSV, which is realized in the magnetic nodal-line topological semimetal FGT. Moreover, surface transport was ubiquitously attributed to carry Josephson current at long distances in JJs based on topological materials As a conclusion, we investigate lateral electron transport between two 3 μm spaced superconducting In leads beneath a thick three-dimensional FGT exfoliated flake. At low 30 mK temperature, we observe Josephson supercurrent that exhibits unusual critical current I c suppression by the magnetic field B. The overall I c (B) pattern is asymmetric in respect to the B sign. We demonstrate, that the asymmetry is defined by the magnetic field sweep direction, so the I c (B) pattern is strictly reversed (as B to -B inversion) for the opposite sweeps. We also observe an interplay between maximum and minimum in I c (B) in normal magnetic fields, while there are fast aperiodic I c (B) fluctuations for the in-plane ones. These effects can not be expected for homogeneous superconductor-ferromagnet-superconductor junctions, while they are known for Josephson spin valves. The mostly possible scenario for Josephson spin valve realization in FGT is the misalignment of spin polarizations of the Fermi arc surface states and ferromagnetic FGT bulk, but we also discuss possible influence of spindependent transport between magnetic domains.