We study how nonhelical spin textures affect the proximity-induced superconductivity of topological insulator (TI)-superconductor (SC) interface states. In particular we calculate the conductance of lateral heterojunctions which comprise a TI surface that is only partially covered by a superconducting material. Interface potentials at the TI-SC interface may lead to a Fermi velocity and spin texture mismatch between the two regions of the lateral heterojunction. By enforcing the hermiticity of the total Hamiltonian, we derive the boundary conditions and calculate the conductance of the structure in both the normal and superconducting state. The total Andreev conductance is calculated for both s-wave and spin-triplet parent SCs, and for several examples of nonhelical spin textures which lead to different Fermi surface mismatches between the two planar regions of the heterojunction. We find that for spin-triplet SCs, nonzero conductance signatures only appear for certain combinations of nonhelical spin textures and parent superconducting material. Topological Insulators (TIs) are a class of materials which admit linearly dispersing surface states and preserve time reversal (TR) symmetry. parent SC. Existing conclusions about the interface superconductivity, including the prediction that some parent spin-triplet SCs do not induce superconductivity at the interface at all, have been reached assuming helical TI surface states. In Ref. 4, it was demonstrated that nonhelical spin textures are required in order to observe proximity-induced superconductivity for several classes of parent SCs. To study the consequences of junctions on the TI interface state, in this work we analyze the conductance signatures of lateral heterojunctions of TI-vacuum and arXiv:2108.07332v1 [cond-mat.supr-con] 16 Aug 2021 TI-SC interfaces. As shown schematically in Fig. In Sec. IV we analyze these results for several different experimental setups. We compare how the scattering across the heterojunction described by our formalism compares to the effects of a mismatch in the chemical potential between regions I and II, and we analyze the Andreev conductance arising from several different nonhelical spin textures within region II. In Sec. V we modify our model from Sec. III by introducing spin-triplet SCs within region II, and we analyze the Andreev conductance for parent spin-triplet SCs from the D 4h point group. Critically, we find that for certain types of spin-triplet SCs, nonzero conductance signatures exist only if nonhelical spin textures are present in region II. In Sec. VI we summarize our main results and discuss the key experimental consequences of nonhelical spin textures. We begin with a description of the lateral heterojunction in the normal state. As shown in Fig. Here σ = (σ x , σ y , σ z ) T is a vector of Pauli matrices in spin-space, v F is the Fermi velocity, μ L and μ R are the chemical potentials in regions I and II respectively, and c is a three-component vector defined by c i = -i j=x,y c ij ∂ j . We notice that in the case c D = -i v F (∂ y , -∂ x , 0) T , the Hamiltonians of regions I and II equal each other and we recover a single TI surface over all space. The presence of nonhelical spin textures in the TI-SC interface of region II are can then be encoded in the choice of c ij coefficients. In this section we calculate the normal state conductance of the lateral heterojunction described by Eq. (1). To do this, we must solve the scattering problem in which incoming electrons in region I of Fig. The effective long-wavelength description cannot account for the rapid variations of the wave functions in the vicinity of the potential edge at x = 0. Therefore, due to the fact that we only have a linear description, in this approach the envelope wave function is not continuous. for some matrix M and wave functions ψ I (r) and ψ II (r) in regions I and II respectively. In order for this to be a valid boundary value relation for our system, and hence valid for all wave functions of the Hilbert space, M must respect the hermiticity of the Hamiltonian H expressed in Eq. (1). This ensures particle conservation and therefore continuity of the current normal to the boundary. That is, if both ψ 1 (r) and ψ 2 (r) are wave functions for all x that belong to H, we must have the inner product relations ψ 1 |Hψ 2 = Hψ 1 |ψ 2 . Inserting Eq. ( To explicitly solve for each element in M, it is helpful to restrict the form of M by requiring that it must also respect the discrete symmetries of the system. We let ψ(r) be a wave function over all space such that and write T = iσ y K as the TR symmetry operator where K is complex conjugation. Because the system preserves TR symmetry, we know that T ψ(r) is also a wave function of our system. Eq. ( where all the γ i are purely real. With this restriction, Eq. ( Here , and β is a free parameter such that β ∈ [0, 2π). Now that we can match the wave functions at the x = 0 boundary between regions I and II, the next step is to solve the scattering problem to obtain the normal state conductance of the lateral heterojunction. We consider an incoming electron in region I of Fig. In region II the wave function is Here θ c(k 1 ) , φ c(k 1 ) are the polar and azimuthal angles of the vector c(k 1 ) respectively, where c(k) is defined by c i (k) = j=x,y c ij k j , and r and t are the coefficients for the reflected and transmitted parts of the wave function respectively. Matching the wave functions at the x = 0 boundary by using Eq. ( FIG. To demonstrate the consequences of the free parameter β on the normal state conductance, we analyze σ N in the case when both regions I and II are described by helical Hamiltonians and set c = c D in Eq. ( Having discussed the normal state of the lateral heterojunction, we now analyze the superconducting state. To calculate the conductance of the device shown in Fig. Focusing on region II, we can obtain the form of the proximity-induced order parameter of the TI-SC interface by projecting the Cooper pair structure of the parent SC onto the eigenstates of the interface Hamiltonian. Writing (b k↑ , b k↓ ) as the electron annihilation operators and introducing the Nambu-spinor Ψ = (b k↑ , b k↓ , b † -k↑ , b † -k↓ ) T , the Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) Hamiltonian of the interface may be written as Here H(k) = c(k) • σ -μ R is the interface Hamiltonian in the normal state, and the proximity-induced order parameter is given by ∆ = [ψ(k) + d(k) • σ](iσ y ). The spinsinglet and spin-triplet components of the proximityinduced order are described by ψ(k) and d(k) respectively. In this section, we shall focus on the case that the parent material of the heterostructure is an s-wave SC by setting ψ(k) = ∆ 0 and d(k) = 0. We then take the weak coupling limit to obtain the BdG wave functions. Here Φ = (a k , a † -k ) T and ∆(k) = -e -iφ c(k) ∆ 0 , with φ c(k) being the azimuthal angle of the vector c(k). The normal state energy is given as ξ(k) = |c(k)| -μ R . In the basis of Eq. ( We may then invoke the Andreev approximation to model the boundary between regions I and II. For a spatially inhomogeneous order parameter, the BdG equations are given by Here v F (k F ) = (∂ξ/∂k)| kF , and ∆(r . By solving these equations we can obtain the wave functions for our system. To solve the Andreev scattering problem, we assume a helical surface Hamiltonian in region I and consider an incoming incident electron with momentum k 1 and in-plane angle θ. At the boundary, the electron may be retroreflected as a hole with momentum k 1 or specularly reflected as an electron with momentum k 2 , corresponding to scattering events A and B in Fig. Note that we choose to use the spin basis of Eq. ( Here In region II the incident electron can either be transmitted as an electron-like quasiparticle with momentum k 1 and in-plane angle θ or a hole-like quasiparticle with momentum k 2 = (-k x , k y ) T , corresponding to scattering events C and D in Fig. Here )/(-e -iφ c(k) ∆ 0 ). Once again θ c(k) and φ c(k) are the polar and azimuthal angles of the vector c(k) respectively. We have that k As in the previous section the outgoing angle θ may be solved for in terms of the incoming angle θ due to the conservation of the k y momentum and the conservation of the normal state energy, noting that ξ To solve the scattering problem we then must match the wave functions at the x = 0 boundary. Once again we can generally write In the mean field BdG description the Hamiltonian H is written in a redundant formalism where the hole degrees of freedom are constructed from the electron Hamiltonian H(k) by writing -H T (-k). Following the methods of Sec. II we find that the boundary value matrix for the hole Hamiltonian -H T (-k) is given by M * (β). Because -H T (-k) is not independent of H(k), we see that if M(β) has a particular value for its free parameter β, then M * (β) must also have this same value for its free parameter. The boundary value matrix for the BdG wave functions is then The block diagonal nature of the matrix M S (β) means that there is no additional particle hole mixing due to the boundary conditions, which is a natural assumption. Matching the wave functions by writing ψ I (0, y) = M S (β)ψ II (0, y) and solving for the coefficients A and B, we then define the transmission coefficient of the superconducting lateral heterojunction where σ N (θ, β) is the normal state conductance given in Eq. ( In this section we analyze the consequences of nonhelical spin textures, as encoded in the choice of c ij coefficients, on the conductance of superconducting lateral heterostructures with parent s-wave SCs. We first analyze the normalized conductance σ R in the case that c(k) = c D (k) in region II, where c D (k) = v F (k y , -k x , 0) T so that both sides of the heterojunction admit helical surface states. We find that when β = 0 FIG. there is no scattering at the junction and all incoming angles experience perfect Andreev reflection for energies below the gap edge. When β = π/2 the probability of specular reflection due to scattering increases, resulting in a suppressed conductance for energies below the gap edge as shown in Fig. In Fig. Nonhelical spin textures in region II that result from rotational symmetry breaking interface potentials within TI-SC heterostructures can introduce elliptical energy contours and out-of-plane spin textures within the TI interface states. where 0 < λ < 1. In this work we analyzed how nonhelical spin textures present in TI-SC interface states affect the conductance of lateral heterojunctions, which can be created by placing a parent SC in contact with only half of a TI surface as shown schematically in Fig. Our results in general demonstrate that nonhelical spin textures have important and observable consequences for TI-based devices. TI-SC heterostructures placed alongside ferromagnetic materials have earlier been proposed to host Majorana zero modes as a consequence of the spin-momentum locking intrinsic to topological interface states. In this article we show that the spin-momentum locking within heterojunctions is more complex than has been commonly assumed, and leads to a more diverse set of phenomena even for non-magnetic heterostructures. Our work therefore constitutes a crucial step towards understanding the role of non-helical spin states in such heterostructures. 