Plasmas have long been used for the synthesis (1) and manipulation (2-4) of materials because of their unique ability to deliver both energy and chemicallyactive species to the surface of materials -an attribute that separates them from other approaches to materials processing. This energy flux serves to drive the surfaces out of thermal equilibrium with the bulk material, thus enabling local physicochemical processes that can be harnessed to remove (etch) substrate material, deposit different material, or chemically modify the surface. However, to-date, there have been no reports on the direct measurement of the localized, transient response of a material surface subjected to a plasma energy 1 flux. In other words, a direct in-situ measure of the transient thermal response of a material subjected to a plasma flux is lacking. Here we show that, despite this massive incident flux of energetic species, plasmas can induce transient cooling of a material surface. Using time-resolved optical thermometry insitu with this plasma excitation, we reveal the novel underlying physics that drive this 'plasma cooling' that is driven by the diverse chemical and energetic species that comprise this fourth state of matter. We show that the photons and massive particles in the plasma impart energy to different chemical species on a surface, leading to local and temporally changing temperatures that lead to both increases and decreases in temperature on the surface of the sample, even though energy is being imparted to the material. This balance comes from the interplay between chemical reactions, momentum transfer, and energy exchange which occur on different time scales over the course of picoseconds to milliseconds. Thus, we show that through energetically exciting a material with a plasma, we can induce cooling, which can lead to revolutionary advances in refrigeration and thermal mitigation with this new process that is not inhibited by the same limitations in the current state-of-the-art systems. Introduction. Plasmas have long been used for the synthesis (1) and manipulation where the power delivered to (P in ) and released from (P out ) the surface is determined by the flux of energetic particles and radiation arriving at and leaving the surface, along with endothermic and exothermic reactions occurring at the plasma-surface interface. The difference between P in and P out is absorbed by the material (P heat ), with a temperature determined by the thermophysical properties of the material. Of course, this power balance does not dictate that the energy delivered to the surface must exceed that released from the surface. The complex array of incident plasma species and chemical reactions at the surface could, in theory, enable local temperatures to both increase or decrease during plasma irradiation. This potential for plasma-induced cooling, or the decrease in the temperature of a surface during plasma irradiation, could provide novel avenues for structure and device cooling, refrigeration, and temperature-controlled material processing. Our current understanding of energy delivery from a plasma to a material surface and its response is guided using a variety of ancillary plasma diagnostics In this work, we experimentally demonstrate the ability of an incident plasma to cool the surface of a material. While seemingly counterintuitive that an incident flux of energy would lead to a decrease in surface temperature, this plasma cooling is enabled by exposing a surface to a pulsed plasma, which allows the broad range of different energetic processes associated with plasma exposure to be parsed in time. This cooling is then measured through time-resolved, relative temperature changes in the plasma-exposed material with nanosecond resolution. Specifically, we expose an 80 nm gold (Au) film supported by a sapphire substrate to a pulsed, atmospheric plasma jet (Fig. The use of a thin Au film supported by an insulting substrate satisfies two criteria that are critical to understanding energy transfer at the plasma-surface interface. First, as Au is a noble metal and chemically inert, there are minimal surface reactions (e.g., surface oxidation) that would significantly alter the surface and distort the interpretation of energy deposition mechanisms. Second, because charge transfer and hot-electron effects occur on much faster time scales than investigated in this work, the insulating substrate ensures that charged species and electronically-driven energy transfer from the plasma to the metal surface remain localized to the surface of the Au film. This critical aspect ensures that the measured surface temperature is indicative of only the plasma-Au energy transfer and subsequent thermal diffusion rather than ballistic mechanisms that traverse deep into the substrate Results. In considering plasma interactions, there is an incident flux of various species including charged particles, photons, as well as excited and reactive neutrals (Fig. A few salient features can be noted in Fig. these features are present even when the laser is turned off and the photodetector is blocked. Second, there is a simultaneous, rapid increase of both the measured thermoreflectance and surface current about 2 μs after the rise in voltage. This heating event is followed by a transient decay associated with heat conduction into the substrate, which is governed by the thermal properties of the film and substrate. Interestingly, a peak in reflectivity is observed about 1 μs after the rise in voltage, and prior to the rapid heating event. As the thermoreflectance coefficient of Au at this laser wavelength (637 nm) is negative, this increase suggests a reduction in surface temperature. As discussed above, the flux of various charged species incident upon the metal film results in a net current, which leads one to invoke Joule's first law where the power dissipated is proportional to the product of the current and resistance (e.g., P ∝ I 2 R). As with other current sources, this relationship explicitly leads to an increase in temperature, even without consideration of particle interactions (e.g., momentum transfer due to the kinetic energy of incoming ions or the charge transfer associated with neutralization of ions). As the measured thermoreflectance is indicative of a change in the gold's temperature, one should expect that the temporal derivative of this reflectivity trends with the current, since temperature is directly related to particle number density/charge, which is the temporal integrand of current (e.g., Indeed, as shown in Fig. This leads to the obvious question: What is the mechanism for this plasma-induced cooling? Discussion. Although the notion of cooling resulting from an incident energy flux is seemingly counter-intuitive, there are a number of physical processes arising at the plasma-surface interface that could potentially reduce the temperature of a surface. Thermionic emission, for example, has been theoretically devised as a refrigeration method, with potential efficiencies on par with Carnot cycles However, there are two additional effects that could also lead to the observed cooling phenomenon. The first, which has been recently shown to lead to a temperature decrease in highrepetition laser ablation Alternatively, adsorbate desorption could be the underlying mechanism for observed cooling. Despite the inert nature of Au, water will adsorb on Au surfaces even under ultra-high vacuum conditions This process is effectively plasma-induced evaporative cooling of the surface. The second potential mechanism is similar to the Nottingham effect, whereby cooling results from the loss of electrons via field emission To elucidate which of these potential mechanisms is responsible for plasma-induced surface cooling, it is important to consider the magnitude of temperature reduction upon cooling. To gain insight to this, we note that during the observed cooling, the peak differential reflectivity Based on an array of previous works indicating the observed cooling is on the order of approximately 1 K. If we consider the possibility that this temperature reduction is due to the sublimation of the Au film, then only a monolayer-equivalent number of Au atoms would need to be ejected from the film within the plasma-irradiated region to achieve the observed degree of cooling (see Supporting Information for calculations and further discussion on this topic). Similarly, if we consider that the observed cooling is induced by the removal of adsorbed water, which has a significantly greater heat capacity than that of Au, a similar temperature decrease requires submonolayer, or non-uniform distributions, of water to be removed from the surface within the probed volume. This is certainly plausible given our measurements are conducted at standard temperature and pressure (STP) We can repeat a similar analysis for the number of electrons that would need to be emitted for a 1 K temperature reduction within the probed volume of the Au; at the time-scales measured here, the electron and phonon temperatures can be considered in equilibrium, and thus the energy requirement for a temperature decrease remains dominated by the phononic heat capacity of Au, as used above. Nonetheless, one must consider the energy lost per electron; the average energy of an electron in a metallic system is approximately 3/5 of the Fermi energy (≈5.5 eV for Au). Thus, for a 1 K temperature decrease at room temperature, approximately 7 × 10 8 electrons would need to be emitted from the Au surface. To gain further insight into which of these mechanisms, or combination of mechanisms, is driving the observed cooling process, we perform two-temperature model (TTM) calculations We must now consider the temporal flux of various species incident upon the Au surface (Fig. Likewise, photon-driven desorption of adsorbates This observation of a photon-driven cooling mechanism is further supported by spatiallyresolved thermoreflectance measurement results shown in Fig. While a photon-driven process is certain, both the liberation of surface adsorbates and electronic emission can be supported by our experimental measurements, two-temperature analysis, and prior TDTR measurements. Discerning the potential contribution of the two processes requires additional considerations. The results of Fig. To further reinforce this plasma-induced evaporative cooling of a metal surface, we consider the relative heating and cooling contributions with varying plasma-jet parameters. For example, as the applied voltage of the electrodes is increased, we observe a corresponding increase in the measured surface current and the associated peak temperature of our thermoreflectance measurements (see Supporting Information and Fig. Yet, like the flux of charged particles, the flux of photons responsible for either desorption or electronic emission will be increasing with voltage as well. In other words, the cooling effect has become saturated and the additional flux does not play a role. As noted previously, neither gold atoms nor electrons are in limited supply, and so atom-or electron mediated cooling mechanisms should not plateau. This further reinforces our posit that neither Au atom nor electron ejection is responsible for the observed plasma-induced cooling. A similar observation is observed with varying voltage pulse widths, whereby the net cooling magnitude is relatively constant above some critical width (≈ 2μs in this work), while the peak temperature varies significantly with changes in charged particle flux. Interestingly, below this critical pulse width, this cooling can occur without any significant plasma-induced heating of the Au surface. Here, a sufficient number of high-energy photons are produced at plasma ignition to drive desorption, but the voltage is extinguished before the streamer and associated flux of charged particles can reach the surface with sufficient intensity. Just above this threshold, a spike in both the heating and cooling profile is observed due to an abundance of both charged particles and photons. These observations not only reinforce the notion of photo-driven, desorption-induced cooling of the Au surface, but also indicate potential regimes for which the relative heating and cooling profiles of the target surface can be manipulated through various plasma parameters. In fact, our previous work Summary. In summary, we have provided the first nanosecond-resolved measurement of energy transduction during plasma-surface interactions with a transient thermoreflectance method. Simple ohmic heating of the metal Au surface through a flux of charge species is the predominant mechanism of energy transfer, which dissipates primarily through conduction into the material; this process is in excellent agreement with our two-temperature model calculations. Furthermore, we find that the plasma jet induces transient cooling of the Au surface prior to Joule heating. Over the course of approximately 800 nanoseconds, the plasma jet liberates surface species from the Au film, thus temporarily cooling the metal surface. This unique process, typically overwhelmed by the resistive heating of material surfaces during steady-state operation and thus undetectable, opens the door to a new means of surface cooling and provides critical insight to the plasma-material interactions that drive material modification and processing. 