Based on the many-particle-number-state treatment for transport through a pair of Majorana zero modes (MZMs) which are coupled to the leads via two quantum dots, we identify that the reason for zero cross correlation of currents at uncoupling limit between the MZMs is from a degeneracy of the teleportation and the Andreev process channels. We then propose a scheme to eliminate the degeneracy by introducing finite charging energy on the Majorana island which allows for coexistence of the two channels. We find nonzero cross correlation established even in the Majorana uncoupling limit (and also in the small charging energy limit), which demonstrates well the teleportation or nonlocal nature of the MZMs. More specifically, the characteristic structure of coherent peaks in the power spectrum of the cross correlation is analyzed to identify the nonlocal and coherent coupling mechanism between the MZMs and the quantum dots. We also display the behaviors of peak shift with variation of the Majorana coupling energy, which can be realized by modulating parameters such as the magnetic field. Majorana zero modes (MZMs) have been widely believed as promising building blocks for topological quantum computation We notice that either the zero-bias-peak or the quantized conductance is based on the setup of single-lead local measurement, whereas the local measurement is insufficient to fully confirm the existence of the MZMs. Despite that the most convincing signals should be the non-Abelian statistics, the earlier further step can be the measurements based on nonlocal transport of two-lead devices, such as the measurement of nonlocal conductance matrix In a two-lead transport setup, the nonlocal nature of the MZMs implies both the so-called "teleportation" and crossed Andreev reflection (CAR) processes. The former process mediates direct transfer of the same type of particles (electron or hole) between the two leads, while the latter converts an incoming electron into an outgoing hole in a different lead. The both channels are expected to establish cross correlation of currents, through the MZMs over a distance much longer than the superconducting coherence length (i.e., the size of Cooper pairs). Nevertheless, it has been shown that, in the setup of the MZMs coupled to the leads directly, nonlocal cross correlation of currents does not exist at the limit of the Majorana * Electronic address: xinqi.li@tju.edu.cn coupling energy ǫ M → 0 On the issue of Majorana nonlocality, the most interesting problem is yet how to establish nonzero cross correlation at the long distance limit with ǫ M → 0. In Refs. generacy" of the Andreev process and the teleportation channels. Inspired by this observation, we propose a scheme to eliminate the 'degeneracy' by introducing finite charging energy E C on the Majorana island, which allows subsequently a restoration of nonzero cross correlation even at the limit ǫ M → 0. This consideration is a generalization of Ref. Before carrying out a full calculation in Sec. III for the cross correlation of currents in the two-lead (three-terminal) transport setup as schematically show in Fig. Dot-MZMs-Dot system For the isolated QD-MZMs-QD system, we split the lowenergy effective Hamiltonian into two parts, H S = H 0 + H ′ , with the individual parts given by In H 0 , ǫ M is the coupling energy of the two Majorana modes γ 1 and γ 2 , and ǫ j is the energy level of the j th QD. In the tunnel coupling Hamiltonian H ′ , λ 1 and λ 2 are the coupling amplitudes of the MZMs to the QDs. In order to carry out a study for the charge transfer dynamics in the occupationnumber-state representation, we convert the Majorana modes into regular fermion, through the transformation From the tunnel-coupling Hamiltonian in this form, it is clear that there exist two processes. One is the normal tunneling process described by d † j f , and its Hermitian conjugate. The charge transfer path through the f particle, owing to its highly nonlocal nature, is usually termed as "teleportation" channel. Another process in H ′ , described by d † j f † and its Hermitian conjugate, is the famous Andreev process associated with splitting and formation of Cooper pairs. In terms of the occupation-number-state representation |n 1 n f n 2 , totally we have eight basis states, i.e., with the electron numbers of the left dot, central MZMs, and the right dot (n 1 , n f and n 2 ) being "0" or "1", respectively. To highlight the most challenging issue of nonlocality, let us consider the case of ǫ M = 0. Starting with the state |100 , the quantum evolution will be restricted within the odd-parity subspace expanded by {|100 , |010 , |001 , |111 }. It is straightforward to obtain the occupation probabilities of the left and right dots, respectively, as From the results of Eqs. ( In Refs. The BdG matrix of Hamiltonian of the central QD-MZMs-QD segment in Ref. In terms of the BdG single-particle-state picture, the underlying state basis reads as {|Φ In this representation, a cancellation owing to quantum destructive interference between the positive and negative energy states will also result in the conclusion that no coupling between the quantum dots can be established when ǫ M → 0. In Ref. Using this order of basis, in Ref. Unfortunately, we notice here an essential sign error in the matrix elements H o 24 and H o 42 , owing to ignoring the Fermi-Dirac quantum statistics. That is, a correct treatment should lead us to the following result Importantly, the minus sign in the second identity is necessary owing to the Fermi-Dirac statistics, caused by the cross order of action when acting d † 2 f † on |n f n 2 . Notice that there is no this type of sign problem when acting d † 1 f † on |n 1 n f . Therefore, the correct form of the odd-parity sector of the Hamiltonian matrix should be the following one In the even-parity sector of the Hamiltonian matrix, similar sign errors exist as well in Ref. After correcting the sign errors, the master equation approach can give the same result of zero cross correlation at the limit ǫ M → 0. Thus the "result-showing discrepancy" between Refs. The "degeneracy" observation allows a couple of ways to reveal the cross correlation at the limit ǫ M → 0. In Ref. Here we may briefly mention that in the latter scheme, in order to realize the gate-modulated charging energy through the well known Coulomb-blockade model In this section, based on the insight gained above, we consider to introduce a modestly finite charging energy to eliminate the degeneracy and show the nonzero cross correlation of currents at the limit ǫ M → 0. We first outline in Sec. III A the master equation approach and the technique of noise spectrum calculation, then specify in Sec. III B the many-particle states involving in the charge transport dynamics, under proper assumptions of bias voltage window and charging energy scales. Finally, in Sec. III C, we present the numerical results, physical interpretations and discussions. The basic idea of master equation approach to quantum transport is regarding the central device, in terms of the language of quantum dissipation, as the system-of-interest, while regarding the transport leads as environment where c j,k are the annihilation operators of the j th lead electrons which are coupled to the quantum dots with amplitudes t j . In the weak coupling regime, under the Born-Markov approximation, the master equation for the reduced density ma-trix ρ of the central system reads as In the second part of dissipative terms, we introduced The correlation functions of the lead-electrons read as C (+) , where the statistical average is referred to the local-thermal-equilibrium of leads and the time dependence is from the interaction picture with respect to the leads Hamiltonian. Under wide-band approximation for the leads, the matrix elements of D (±) j can be straightforwardly carried out using the eigenstate basis of the central system Hamiltonian H S , as Here ω mn is the energy difference of the eigenstates, say, ω mn = E m -E n , while f ± j are the Fermi occupied and unoccupied functions of the j th lead. The tunnel-coupling rates are introduced through Γ j = 2πν j |t j | 2 , with ν j the densityof-states of the j th lead. In the master equation approach, the transient current in the j th lead can be conveniently expressed as I j (t) = Tr[ Îj ρ(t)] ≡ Îj , while the current operator is given by Moreover, the master equation approach allows a very convenient way to calculate the current correlation functions, by taking the spirit of quantum regression theorem and a generalized quantum-jump technique. Specifically, for the cross correlation of our interest in this work, we introduce S RL (t) = δ Î2 (t)δ Î1 (0) , where δ Îj (t) = Îj (t)-Îj . The key quantity we need to calculate is Here ρ is the steady state of the central device and we introduced the notation Then, the cross correlation of current fluctuations is given by S RL (t) = S RL (t)-Ī2 Ī1 , where Ī2 and Ī1 are the steady-state currents in the two leads. The power spectrum S RL (ω) of the cross correlation of currents is simply the Fourier transformation of S RL (t). In practice, S RL (ω) can be obtained more directly by Laplacetransforming the master equation for ρ(t), which is the evolving state governed by ρ(t) = e Lt ρ(0), while the "initial" state after the first current measurement is given by ρ(0) = Î1 ⊲ ρ. To eliminate the degeneracy of the teleportation and local AR channels, we introduce charging energy E C on the Majorana island which, however, does not suppress the AR process, being thus a generalization of the work by Fu being added to the Dot-MZMs-Dot system Hamiltonian H S given by Eq. ( for the respective charging energies. In order to carry out the solution of the master equation and the spectrum of the cross correlation function of currents, we specify the state basis for the central system as |n 1 n f n 2 , 2n c , with n 1 and n 2 the electron numbers of the left and the right dots, and n f and n c the numbers of the f quasiparticle and the created or destroyed Cooper pairs. The total electron number of the central Dot-MZMs-Dot device is N = n 1 + n f + n 2 + 2n c , which is restricted in our calculation as N = -1, 0, 1 and 2 by setting the gate charge n g = 1/2 and the charging energy E C ≤ 9 4 E C . Here we have assumed that the next possible charging energy E C = 25 4 E C is excluded by the choice of bias voltage window. Under these considerations, all the many-particle states which are involved in the transport dynamics and in our numerical calculation are listed in Table Let us consider first the special case suggested by Fu in Ref. States basic physics that results in the three characteristic frequencies we observe in Fig. In the presence of charging energy, in contrast to the case of E C = 0, the most important result is that the cross correlation of currents is nonzero. The physical interpretation is not obvious at all, since in both cases the teleportation channel and the Andreev process commonly participate in the transient quantum dynamics. As analyzed in Sec. II, the cross correlation cannot be established in the ideal Majorana limit (ǫ M = 0), in the absence of charging energy. The appearance of nonzero cross correlation in the presence of finite E C differs also from the case of Andreev bound states (ABSs), FIG. which may be formed near the ends of the quantum wire (the central island under present study). For the case of ABSs, the individual local AR processes can just maintain independent local currents, but cannot establish cross correlation owing to lacking either the crossed AR or the teleportation channel. =0.252 =1.125 FIG. In the presence of E C , more complicated states partici-pate in the transient dynamics and result in more complicated spectral structures in the full spectrum. In Fig. Note that the quantum supposition of the component states reflects, from an alternative perspective, the quantum dynamics governed by the Andreev process of Cooper pair's formation and splitting. The next peak at ω 2 = 1.125 shown in Fig. Similarly, the quantum superposition of the various component states, e.g., in |Ψ 4 , indicates coherent transitions between the component states, i.e., the transition |100, 0 ↔ |010, 0 ↔ |001, 0 mediated by the Majorana teleportation channel, and the transition (|100, 0 , |001, 0 ) ↔ |111, -2 owing to the local Andreev process. Alternatively, in time domain, let us consider a superposition of |Ψ 3 and |Ψ 4 for the isolated central system, e.g., with |Ψ(0) = (|Ψ 3 + |Ψ 4 )/ √ 2 as an initial state. In Fig. So far, the most important prediction of this work is that the cross correlation of currents is nonzero even at the limit ǫ M → 0, as shown in Fig. In Fig. In the previous section, we considered (relatively large) finite charging energy E C which generalizes Ref. For the convenience of description, let us denote the state of the Majorana island as |n f [n c ] , with n c explicitly accounting for the net numbers of the Cooper pairs in the island. Accordingly, we reexpress the states |n 1 n f n 2 , 2n c (introduced in Sec. III) as |n 1 , n f [n c ], n 2 . In the main study of this work, we restrict n c = 0 and ±1, owing to the relatively large charging energy E C with respect to the bias voltage. After including the states of the two quantum dots, totally we have 24 states of |n 1 , n f [n c ], n 2 . However, as shown in Table In the limit of small charging energy E C , an obvious difficulty in numerical simulation is that one should include a large number of island states with n c = 0, ±1, ±2, • • • . In the case of E C = 0, this difficulty was avoided by taking into account only the parity states, i.e., the odd parity state |n f = 1 and the even state |n f = 0 . This means that we have identified all the states |n f [n c ] with different n c as a single state |n f . In the presence of charge transfer between the Majorana island and the quantum dots, the island associated with n c = 0 and ±1 will suffer state transition among 6 states. For instance, we have In each line of the transitions, the former is the teleportation channel (normal tunneling process), while the latter is the Andreev process. In the limit E C → 0, the two channels are energetically degenerate. However, if E C = 0, the degeneracy is removed and cross correlation is expected to establish, as shown in previous studies of this work. Further, let us look at the following transitions If we restrict n c = 0 and ±1, the two states |1[-2] and |0 In order to overcome this difficulty, let us apply a 'boundary condition' by setting |0 . This treatment allows us to hold complete pairs of the degenerate channels of teleportation and Andreev process, within the total 24 states associated with n c = 0 and ±1. We can thus recover the correct result of E C = 0. Based on this treatment, after introducing small nonzero E C , we can simulate the effect of nonzero cross correlation established by removing the channels degeneracy, in a continuous manner. In Fig. Based on the many-particle-number-state treatment for transport through a "Dot-MZMs-Dot" system, we clarified that the absence of cross correlation at the Majorana uncoupling limit (ǫ M → 0) is owing to a degeneracy of the Andreev process and the teleportation channels. We further proposed a scheme to eliminate the degeneracy by introducing charging energy E C on the Majorana island, which allows a restoration of nonzero cross correlation even at the limit ǫ M → 0. This result demonstrates well the nonlocal nature of the MZMs. Specifically, we analyzed the characteristic structure of coherent peaks in the power spectrum of the cross correlation, which reflect the nonlocal and coherent coupling mechanism between the MZMs and the quantum dots. We also displayed the behavior of peak shift with variation of the Majorana coupling energy, in a hope for possible demonstration by experiments. Experimental challenges for studying the cross correlation analyzed in the present work should be similar as for previous works We noticed that, in the single-particle BdG treatment in terms of scattering matrix approach, the vanished cross correlation at the limit ǫ M → 0 is caused by a cancellation owing to quantum destructive interference between the positive and negative energy states, or, equivalently, from uncoupling between the Majorana modes at the limit ǫ M → 0. This picture looks quite different from the mechanism of degeneracy of the two channels revealed by the BdG-free numberstate treatment, where each of the channels supports a nonvanishing charge transfer process. Searching for a unified understanding of the two pictures is remained as an open and interesting problem for future investigation. In the presence of the Coulomb charging energy, it is well known that the single-particle S matrix scattering approach does not work M → 0, since the connection between the two quantum dots cannot be established, owing to decoupling of the Majorana modes |Φ 1 and |Φ 2 when ǫ M → 0. Alternatively, one can also use the eigenstates |E 0 and |-E 0 for the pair of Majorana modes (with