Experiments on the distributions of switching currents in Josephson junctions are sensitive probes of the mechanism by which a junction changes abruptly to a finite voltage state. At low temperatures data exhibit smooth and gradual deviations from the expectations of the classical theory of thermal activation over the barrier in the tilted washboard potential. In this paper it is shown that if a very small proportion of the noise energy entering the apparatus at room temperature survives filtering and reaches the sample, it can enhance the escape rate sufficiently to replicate experimental observations of the temperature dependence of the switching bias. This conjecture is successfully tested against published experimental data. When the bias current applied to a Josephson junction is gradually increased, the junction will eventually switch to a non-zero voltage state. For repeated trials carried out at the same temperature, each commencing at zero bias current, this switching occurs at slightly different values of bias current. Accumulated escape data form a switching current distribution (SCD) whose peak defines the most probable value for the escape bias. For temperatures above about 100mK, these characteristics are well described by the classical theory of thermally activated escape out of the washboard potential, as discussed in the next section. When dilution refrigerators became available, experiments were possible down to base temperatures as small as a few millikelvin. Leggett But as has already been pointed out At such low temperatures, the SCD peak behavior was instead observed to deviate smoothly from the classical prediction, and this fact requires an explanation. A modified classical thermal escape rate is proposed here and is successfully tested against data from three independent experiments. Thermal activation from a potential well at a given temperature is governed, in the low damping regime, by the well known escape rate due to Kramers where ∆U is the barrier height and, for a Josephson junction, f J is the plasma frequency f J = f J0 1 -η 2 1/4 , with η = I/I C denoting the normalized bias current. The barrier height in the Josephson washboard potential is given by and E J = I C /2e is the Josephson energy. Fig. experimental data from the expectation based on the standard escape rate represents a deviation from classical thermal activation at the lowest temperatures. Such smooth peeling away is also observed in the experiments of Voss and Webb The escape rate Γ is a static function that can be evaluated directly from Eqs.(1 and 2). In Fig. However, in Fig. For high temperatures, simulation results closely match experimental data. But as indicated in the previous section, discrepancies exist at the lowest temperatures. This is illustrated in Fig. The following ansatz is proposed: where the parameter ε will be 1.0 for standard thermal activation and ε < 1 when there is an increase in the escape rate. So thermal activation would be enhanced for 0 < ε < 1. To bring simulation into agreement with observation, the following sequence was followed: select a temperature; begin with ε = 1 and run a simulation to find the SCD preak position η P ; iteratively decrease the value of the parameter ε in small steps, performing simulated bias sweeps and stop when the simulated peak closely matches the experimental value for that temperature; repeat for each temperature in the experimental dataset. This iterative process was carried out for the experiments of Voss and Webb The values of ε determined in Fig. As can be seen, the simulation precisely matches the experimental data, even below 50mK. No experimental system consisting of a sample chamber in a dilution refrigerator and shielded from the room temperature world by means of isolation stages 1. "Moreover, the available concepts often provide inadequate filtering to operate at temperatures below 10mK" from FIG. A residual noise temperature T N , which can be minimized but never fully eliminated in this kind of experiments, can also lead to some ambiguities at low temperatures" from Therefore consider a fixed residual noise energy E N which combines with the thermal energy E T = k B T B , where T B is the bath temperature, to activate escapes from the Josephson potential well. Then from Eq.( note that the noise factor E N /k B has dimensions of temperature. This expression quantifies the inherent temperature dependence of ε in terms of both bath temperature and E N /k B . Clearly ε → 1 as E N → 0. Fig. 1. From Eq.(4) ε will equal 1/2 when the bath temperature is equal to the noise factor; hence Considering the experimental data for Oelsner et al. At the lowest temperatures, experiments exhibit a smooth transition away from the predictions of the standard Kramers' escape rate, Eq.(1). Figure The enhancement factor ε has been shown to result from the combination of two sources of energy that drive escapes from the Josephson potential well: the sample at temperature T and residual external noise at an equivalent tenperature E N /k B . For the test case of Oelsner et al. Deviations of observed SCD peaks from predictions based on standard escape rates, at low temperatures, have until now been interpreted as a sign of a crossover from a classical to a macroscopic quantum state of the Josephson junction. However as shown in Fig. 