Spin superconductor (SSC) is an exciton condensate state where the spin-triplet exciton superfluidity is charge neutral while spin 2(h/2). In analogy to the Majorana zero mode (MZM) in topological superconductors, the interplay between SSC and band topology will also give rise to a specific kind of topological boundary state obeying non-Abelian braiding statistics. Remarkably, the non-Abelian geometric phase here originates from the Aharonov-Casher effect of the "half-charge" other than the Aharonov-Bohm effect. Such topological boundary state of SSC is bound with the vortex of electric flux gradient and can be experimentally more distinct than the MZM for being electrically charged. This theoretical proposal provides a new avenue investigating the non-Abelian braiding physics without the assistance of MZM and charge superconductor. Introduction. Stable excitons (electron-hole pairs) Since the Coulomb interaction between electron and hole is naturally attractive, the mean field Hamiltonian of exciton condensate (EC) Both the EDS and the SSC share plenty of similarities with the conventional electric charge superconductor. For illustration, the charge neutral and spin 2(h/2) "Cooper pair" in SSC is also a zero-momentum pair flowing dissipationlessly An important reason for TSC being appealing in the past decades is that its topological edge state, the Majorana zero mode (MZM), is regarded to obey the intriguing non-Abelian statistics and therefore as a promising candidate for topological quantum computation In this Letter, we propose that such "half-charge" of the topological boundary state and its consequent non-Abelian braiding are also exhibited if a SSC is topologically non-trivial. The difference lies in that the "charge" in SSC refers spin other than the electric charge. Accordingly, the non-Abelian geometric phase here is an Aharonov-Casher (AC) phase Spin-based non-Abelian braiding utilizing the Aharonov-Casher effect. From the relativistic theory of electrodynamics, the Lagrangian of a particle moving in the speed of v in an electromagnetic potential (V, A) is in the general form ], where q, p 0 , and s is the electric charge, the electric dipole, and the spin of this particle, respectively, E = -∇V , and B = ∇ × A are the electromagnetic field. From this Lagrangian, a canonical momentum can be defined and the corresponding Peierls substitution has the form of where α 0 ≡ α/c 2 is the spin-orbit coupling (SOC) coefficient. The -qA term corresponds to the celebrated AB phase Although being omitted in the usual discussions, the AC term -α 0 s × E plays an important role in the SSC. The Hamiltonian describing a two-dimensional SSC reads where c † ke↑ creates an electron in the spin-up electron-like band, while c † kh↑ creates a hole (annihilates an electron) in the spin-down hole-like band Therefore, if both the dispersion of the electron-like band k+ and the hole-like band k-in Eq. ( For a topological SSC with a vortex in which the superconducting order parameter is suppressed, the periodic condition of the bulk state's wavefunction around the vortex requests that the "Cooper pair" state must acquire a 2π phase when it encircles this vortex. The "Cooper pair" here is a spin-polarized exciton c † ke↑ c † kh↑ possessing spin 2 (h/2) ẑ so that such a 2π phase actually comes from the AC effect dr • (-α 0 s × E) However, such "half-charge"-related π phase cannot be reached through the HMW effect in EDS, although its "Cooper pair" bulk state c † ke,t c † kh,b (the subscript t and b denotes the top and the bottom layer in the bilayer system, respectively) with non-zero electric dipole p 0 will also pick up a 2π phase as dr • (p 0 × B) when it encircles a vortex in the EDS. This is because the topological boundary state (c ke,t ± c † kh,b ) k=0 here is a superposition of two single particle states, in which an individual single particle state cannot carry an electric dipole. Hence, in contrast to the charge superconductor and SSC, both the two components of the topological boundary state in EDS will gain a HMW phase of 0 other than ±π. Now we have discussed the possibility to construct a non-Abelian geometric phase of π utilizing all three terms in the Peierls substitution Eq. ( Vortex of electric flux gradient. As a consequence of the London-type equations of SSC where the spin is assumed to be polarized along the ẑdirection as s = sẑ. It follows that the electric flux gradient ∂Φ E /∂z in the SSC plays the role of the magnetic flux Φ B in the TSC that dr • (-qA) = -qΦ B . Equation ( ) where λ ± indicates the inverse of the localization length of this bounded zero mode, and C is the normalization constant. Such an analytical solution confirms that the topological boundary state in the SSC is a zero mode carrying charge |e| and spin 0. As in the case of charge superconductor, the vortices of the electric flux gradient in a SSC can also form periodic spatial units and thus constitute an Abrikosov flux lattice (5) where l y is the wave length along the ŷ-direction and n y is an integer. Here we have introduced the cyclotron frequency ω 0 = α0hE0 m * L where m * is the effective mass of the exciton. As Abrikosov once assumed Discussions and possible material. Such spin-based non-Abelian braiding originates from the "half-charge" property of the boundary state protected by the topology of the SSC, hence it is quite general and does not rely on the detailed parameters of the material. Here we propose the ferromagnetic graphene with staggered potential applied as a possible candidate for p-wave topological SSC in which the single-particle bands k± are quadratic and the superconducting pairing potential ∆ k is p-wave [see Eq. ( where k is the wave vector near the Dirac points K, K . Here, the s-wave pairing term is the on-site Coulomb attraction U aa 00 , while the pwave term coming from the NN Coulomb attraction U ab 0δ is protected by the lattice symmetry of the graphene . Hence, although the on-site Coulomb attraction term is typically larger than the NN Coulomb attraction as U aa 00 > U ab 0δ , the staggered ferromagnetic graphene can still be a p-wave topological SSC if the flat band condition M/B 1 is satisfied. Remarkably, the zero energy of the topological boundary state will not shift up to the lowest order even when such a mixed pairing potential is presented [37]. I, the topological boundary state in the SSC is electrically charged and spin 0, this is in stark contrast to the exciton bulk state in the SSC which is electrically neutral while possesses spin 2 (h/2). Taking the advantage of such a character, the subgap topological boundary state in SSC can hopefully be detected by the state-of-the-art spin-resolved probing technology However, the electric charge carried by the topological boundary state could also do harm to its non-Abelian braiding properties. Although the pure spin current Finally, it is worth noting that the topological boundary state in the SSC [cf. ψ 0 in Eq. ( Summary. We have proposed a theoretical framework of spin-based non-Abelian braiding in SSC utilizing the AC effect. The desired non-Abelian geometric phase of π in the Fock space spanned by the topological boundary state only requires the periodicity of the exciton wavefunction around the vortex as well as the "halfcharge" property of the subgap topological boundary state. Therefore, such proposal is quite universal since the periodicity is naturally satisfied, the "half-charge" h/2 is a robust physics constant, and the subgap property is protected by the band topology. The possible experimental investigation requires a SSC material in which the p-wave pairing amplitude dominates and meanwhile, the possible disturbance from the AB effect could also be managed to rule out.