Background Surface topography strongly modifies adhesion of hard-material contacts, yet roughness of real surfaces typically exists over many length scales, and it is not clear which of these scales has the strongest effect. Objective: This investigation aims to determine which scales of topography have the strongest effect on macroscopic adhesion. Methods Adhesion measurements were performed on technology-relevant diamond coatings of varying roughness using spherical ruby probes that are large enough (0.5-mm-diameter) to sample all length scales of topography. For each material, more than 2000 measurements of pull-off force were performed in order to investigate the magnitude and statistical distribution of adhesion. Using sphere-contact models, the roughness-dependent effective values of work of adhesion were measured, ranging from 0.08 to 7.15 mJ/m 2 across the four surfaces. The data was more accurately fit using numerical analysis, where an interaction potential was integrated over the AFM-measured topography of all contacting surfaces. Results These calculations revealed that consideration of nanometer-scale plasticity in the materials was crucial for a good quantitative fit of the measurements, and the presence of such plasticity was confirmed with AFM measurements of the probe after testing. This analysis enabled the extraction of geometry-independent material parameters; the intrinsic work of adhesion between ruby and diamond was determined to be 46.3 mJ/m 2 . The range of adhesion was 5.6 nm, which is longer than is typically assumed for atomic interactions, but is in agreement with other recent investigations. Finally, the numerical analysis was repeated for the same surfaces but this time with different length-scales of roughness included or filtered out. Conclusions The results demonstrate a critical band of length-scales-between 43 nm and 1.8 μm in lateral size-that has the strongest effect on the total adhesive force for these hard, rough contacts. All real surfaces exhibit roughness, which has profound effects on surface properties. This includes the mechanics of interfaces: adhesion A simpler approach is sufficient for hard contacts, in which the elastic energy required for creating a conforming contact is much larger than the interfacial adhesive energy gain: An interaction potential is integrated over the undeformed contacting geometry. This approach can be applied to simple analytical geometries, such as spheres Three critical questions remain for describing the roughness-dependent adhesion of surfaces with multiscale topography. First, can the classic analytical models such as those proposed by Fuller and Tabor, Rumpf, and Maugis, be applied to describe their behavior? Second, is the importance of long-range adhesive interactions limited to ultra-flat surfaces (as found in The purpose of the present work is to investigate these questions using adhesion tests of some of the hardest materials: a ruby sphere on polycrystalline diamond substrates. Diamond coatings are technologically relevant in a number of applications Many adhesion studies have used atomic force microscopy (AFM) or colloidal AFM to characterize surface topography and then perform tip-based adhesion tests on the measured surface Adhesion tests were carried out between ruby spheres and polycrystalline diamond coatings using a MEMS-based force sensing probe (FT-MA02, FemtoTools, Buchs, Switzerland). The 0.5-mm-diameter spheres (B0.50R, Swiss Jewel, Philadelphia, PA) were pre-polished to an ultrasmooth (RMS height < 1 nm) finish using a slurry of ruby particles (0.05 μm). The spheres were glued to the tips of the force-probes to create a sphere-on-flat geometry for the test. The substrates comprised four different polycrystalline diamond coatings, which were grown by hot-filament chemical vapor deposition (HF-CVD) and are boron-doped for electrical conductivity. The substrates have varying grain size, and are denoted microcrystalline diamond (MCD), nanocrystalline diamond (NCD), ultrananocrystalline diamond (UNCD), and a polished form of UNCD. The deposition and surface topography of the diamond coatings are characterized in Ref. For this work, the topography of the spheres and substrates were measured using atomic force microscopy (AFM) (Dimension V, Bruker, Billerica, MA). Measurements were made using diamond-like carbon (DLC)-coated probes (Tap DLC300, Mikromasch, Watsonville, CA) in tapping mode. Scans with lateral size of 2.5 μm (512 × 512 pixels) were performed on each of the four substrates and on the ruby spheres. Representative images for the surface topography of the substrates, and of the polished spheres are shown in Fig. The MCD and NCD have the largest roughness magnitude of the four substrates, as is shown by the vertical scale bar of the AFM images in Fig. The adhesion testing was performed using a custom micromechanical tester in a controlled-environment vacuum chamber on a vibration-isolation table. Dry air was flowed into the chamber prior to testing until the relative humidity was less than 1% (below the minimum reading of the humidity sensor). Dry air was flowed in for the duration of the test at low flow rates to ensure consistently low humidity levels. A three-axis slip-stick piezoelectric stage provides closed-loop motion control and real-time x-y-z position data. For each individual adhesion measurement, the sphere was brought into contact with the substrate, loaded to a 10-μN preload (corresponding to a nominal Hertz stress of 135 MPa), and then withdrawn at a rate of 30 nm/s. The 10-μN preload occurs before the test and represents the minimum force required for the probe to find the point of contact. After finding contact the tip is lowered slowly onto the substrate up to a preload of 5μN. Then, the force required to pull the sphere off of the surface is recorded as F pull-off , with a force resolution of 30 nN. A single "test" comprised an array of individual adhesion measurements (typically 1-by-1 mm), for a total of 400 individual measurements per test. Tests were performed in immediate sequence on all four samples in randomized order, without opening the chamber or modifying test conditions. Six such sequences were performed with different spheres and different substrate samples, to ensure repeatability and reproducibility of results. A schematic of a typical test setup is shown in Fig. The experimental data was fitted using a cohesive zone model, using an exponential interaction potential with energy U given by with a hard-wall repulsion at r = 0. Here, W adh,int is the intrinsic work of adhesion, r is the distance between interacting bodies, and ρ is the "range of adhesion" Here, A pix is the area for a single surface pixel and the sum runs over all pixels in x and y. Note that g x,y in Eq. ( Due to random topography variation, there were sometimes significant contributions to adhesion from near the edges of the AFM scans. Therefore, for all substrate-tip combinations, the scans were stitched together so that there were no longer edge contributions to the adhesive interaction between the rough surface and a sphere of 0.5-mm diameter (< 0.5% change from additional stitching). The stitching was done by mirroring the surface scans horizontally and vertically to ensure that all edges matched up. This was needed because real topography measurements are not periodic. Similar to the experiments, the tip was brought into contact with the substrate in many locations over a square array. The above rigid analysis was supplemented by an elastic and a plastic analysis. For the elastic analysis, we computed surface deformation using a Fast-Fourier-transform-accelerated boundary element technique For the plastic analysis, we use a simple bearing-area approach. This assumes that the harder surface plastically deforms the softer surface on all points that penetrate, and that the pressure in the contact area is equal to the hardness H. The penetration of the tip is then such that the number of contacting (and hence plastically deformed) surface pixels is sufficient to support the preload, N contact = F∕HA pix . A preload of 10 μN, chosen to match the experimental preload, was used to determine the amount of plastic deformation of the softer surface. No plastic deformation then occurs during pull-off; the pull-off force is simply a result of the plastically deformed geometry. Note that we did not employ a combination of elastic and plastic contact, but similar plasticity models were used in elasto-plastic contexts in Refs. The topography can be used to compute roughness metrics such as root-mean-square (RMS) height, slope, and curvature, which are commonly used as inputs for rough-contact models. Table Figure All four of the distributions can be fit using a log-normal distribution. This is more difficult to see in the linear plots, given the skew of a large number of events with small pull-off force. Plotted on a log-log scale (Fig. A standard method of analyzing adhesion in rough spheres is to use classical sphere-contact models (such as JKR or DMT It is clear from these measured values of effective work of adhesion, along with the values of RMS parameters shown in Table Instead of a single-asperity model extracting the effective work of adhesion for each substrate, a numerical analysis can be performed using the combined roughness of the sphere and substrate (see Methods). Like the experiments, the calculations were repeated for an array of 20 × 20 contacts on each substrate. Each numerical calculation yields a computed pull-off force F calc for a specific choice of input values for W adh,int and ρ and a specific contact location on the rough surface (Fig. For numerical tractability, the analysis was only performed over a square of size of 12.5 μm rather than the 1-mm size scale of the experiments. Initially, the calculations were performed assuming rigid and/or elastic deformation only. Elastic calculations were virtually indistinguishable from the rigid calculations and we concluded that elasticity does not play a significant role in these contacts. Additionally, the micronewton-scale adhesive forces measured experimentally could not be explained with adhesion models based on rigid or elastically deforming surfaces, thus indicating that plastic deformation is likely occurring in these contacts. We incorporated plastic deformation of the ruby tip with hardness of H = 25 GPa The numerical analysis can be fit to the mean values of the experimental data from all four substrates in order to extract best-fit values for intrinsic work of adhesion and the range of adhesion. We note that while W adh,int simply rescales the computed pull-off force, the dependence of F calc on ρ is nonlinear and depends on the specific topography. The range of adhesion ρ is extracted by analyzing the ratios of pull-off forces between materials, since this cancels the (unknown) intrinsic work of adhesion W adh,int in our model equations. Figure It is clear from Fig. There is only one combination of parameters that enables the best fit for all samples. The fit was evaluated by computing and minimizing the mean relative error (MRE) between Fig. The measured range of adhesion is much longer than is expected for typical atomic interactions such as covalent bonds or van der Waals forces, which are typically considered to have a range of adhesion around 0.3 to 0.6 nm The origin of these large values for range of adhesion is still in dispute. Previously proposed explanations involve electrostatic interactions due to contact charging A second common explanation for longer-than expected values for range of adhesion is capillarity. Water bridges across a contact can increase the area of interaction of a rough contact and are known to significantly increase the adhesive force. The relative humidity determines the presence and size of these capillary bridges, which in turn affect the adhesive force. The present testing was carried out in a dry atmosphere (< 1% RH). This is insufficient to eliminate all water from the contact, but will limit its contribution. He et al. A third common explanation for large values for range of adhesion is retarded dispersion, or Casimir, interactions. These forces arise due to the finite speed of electromagnetic interactions and typically act over ranges larger than a few nanometers, even up to tens of nm To specifically verify that plastic deformation can occur in these contacts, an additional investigation was performed with AFM imaging performed on the ruby sphere (softer material) in the exact location of contact before and after an array test was performed. The standard adhesion test setup does not permit this precise knowledge of test location; therefore, an alternate custom micromechanical test setup was used, with a cantilever based force sensor, but otherwise similar setup. A ruby sphere was polished, preimaged in the AFM (Fig. The numerical modelling (recalculated at a preload of 20 μN) predicted deformations with a depth of approximately 2 nm and edge lengths of approximately 50 nm (Fig. The numerical analysis in this investigation has demonstrated that adhesive interactions act over a length scale of greater than 5 nm, and that plasticity serves to increase contact area above the predictions of rigid or elastic calculations. These two factors may limit the impact of certain length-scales of topography on the total macroscopic adhesion. To check the influence of different roughness scales, we repeated the pull-off force calculations on a variety of virtual surfaces, with different scales of roughness filtered out or included. This was accomplished by taking advantage of the all-scale measurements performed on the same substrates in Ref. To add small-scale roughness, we first stitched the 512 × 512 pixel AFM scan using mirror images, leading to a 1024 × 1024 periodic topography. This stitched surface was first Fourier interpolated on an 8192 × 8192 grid (0.625 nm pixel size) and parts of the spectrum with wavelength smaller than T = 20 nm were cut out. A randomly rough surface that follows the substrate PSD for wavelengths λ < λ T and has a constant roll-off above T was added to this interpolated topography. Features below the varying cutoff wavelengths S are then filtered out to check their effect on the calculated pull-off force. To add large-scale roughness, the AFM scan was again stitched to create a periodic topography, and this was stitched multiple times to yield an 8192 × 8192 (20 μm linear size) grid. Fourier components at wavelengths bigger than T = 1 μm were cut out. A randomly rough surface with spectrum following the substrate PSD for wavelengths λ > λ T and zero below T was added to this topography. Features with wavelength above the varying cutoff wavelengths L are then filtered out to check how they affected the calculated pull-off force. Figure The explanation for this critical band of scales of topography may be different for the large and small scales. The unimportance of large-scale topography is likely linked to the area that is interacting with the sphere. Given a range of adhesion ρ, a sphere of diameter D will interact with a flat surface within a disk of radius r = √ D . For D = 500 nm and ρ = 5.6 nm we obtain a radius of r = 1.7 μm, almost exactly the wavelength above which large-scale topography no longer matters. This shows that macroscopic pull-off forces are strongly affected by finite-size effects, and that the magnitude of pull-off forces will depend strongly on the sphere radius. This also means that the scales of roughness that matter are determined by the macroscopic contact geometry, as long as sphere radius R is much larger than typical scales of the roughness. For the unimportance of small-scale topography, there are two effects that enhance each other: the large range of adhesion, and the effect of plasticity. The large range of adhesion (5.6 nm), which was determined from the numerical analysis, indicates that topography variations below this scale have a reduced contribution to adhesion. For example, for rigid surfaces with a sinusoidal gap of amplitude 2 nm, a range of adhesion of 0.5 nm would mean that only the contacting peaks contribute to adhesion and the rest of the surface is irrelevant; while a range of adhesion of 5 nm would mean that all portions of the surface are adhering, with only small differences in relative contributions from different locations. An additional explanation is the effect of plasticity. The small-scale roughness has the highest local slope, and thus the highest surface stress. This means that the small-scale roughness will cause deformation, which smooths out these scales earlier than other scales, and reduces their contribution to macroscale adhesion. The results demonstrated that, for the macroscale adhesion of extremely stiff materials, the very smallest scales of roughness do not determine adhesion. This is in stark contrast to the adhesion of nanoscale contacts of hard materials In these measurements, the larger scales of roughness were also less significant. This implies that measurements based on stylus profilometry, which is resolution-limited by the micron-scale radius of the tip, are not sufficient to predict and describe adhesion of these materials. It also implies that a simple scalar parameter such as RMS height is insufficient to determine macroscale adhesion. We look forward to investigating this point further, with the goal to understand the generalizability of this result beyond the current experimental setup. Another key result of the calculations for hard materials is that adhesion is dominated by the asperities at the very high end of the height distribution. This leads to highly variable extremes in adhesion that can far exceed common predictions based on the average asperity height. The adhesion distributions appear to be log-normal, with a long tail, which strongly impacts the mean adhesion value and leads to rare but significant ultra-high-adhesion events. This has strong implications for real-world applications, such as MEMS devices, which must overcome such surface forces and the threat of stiction. The shape of the measured distributions would suggest that any moving parts should be significantly overdesigned to ensure they can overcome the long-tail events. Another important finding is that the experimental results were unable to be fit without the inclusion of plasticity. The assumption is that at some length scale, the contact pressure will overcome the hardness of one of the materials. Ruby, in our experiments, is the softer material. Whether this results in plastic flow or fracture, the contact area should evolve to support the preload applied and will be significantly larger than predictions from elastic models. In recent work in both SEM The effective work of adhesion (that includes the effect of topography) of these surfaces varies by almost two orders of magnitude, from 0.08 to 7.15 mJ/m 2 . These values for W adh,eff are calculated from the overall sphere geometry using spherical contact-mechanics models. Given the wide variability of the adhesion force between interfaces of identical large-scale geometry, it is not surprising that the effective work of adhesion varies so much. These variations, however, are not explained by simple analytical models, such as those based on a Gaussian distribution of asperity heights, nor those based on a balance between elastic and adhesive energy. Common (elasto-)adhesion theories balance the elastic energy required for deformation with the interfacial energy (intrinsic work of adhesion) gained during contact By combining detailed measurements of topography, thousands of mm-scale adhesion measurements, and numerical integration of an interaction potential, we computed both the intrinsic material parameters governing adhesion as well as the contributions to adhesion from multi-scale topography. The intrinsic work of adhesion between ruby and polycrystalline diamond was found to be 46.3 mJ/ m 2 while the range of adhesion was 5.6 nm. This large value for range of adhesion, along with the requirement for plasticity in the calculations, leads to a diminished role of small-scale topography on the macroscale adhesion of these hard contacts. While prior work on soft-material adhesion on the same substrates provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article's Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article's Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http:// creat iveco mmons. org/ licen ses/ by/4. 0/.