We study mean-field states resulting from the pairing of electrons in time-reversal broken fractal Hofstadter bands, which arise in two-dimensional lattices where the unit cell traps magnetic flux Φ = (p/q)Φ0 comparable to the flux quantum Φ0 = h/e. It is established that the dimension and degeneracy of the irreducible representations of the magnetic translation group (MTG) furnished by the charge 2e pairing fields have different properties from those furnished by single particle Bloch states, and in particular are shown to depend on the parity of the denominator q. We explore this symmetry analysis to formulate a Ginzburg-Landau theory describing the thermodynamic properties of Hofstadter superconductors at arbitrary rational flux Φ = (p/q)Φ0 in terms of a multicomponent order parameter that describes the finite momentum pairing of electrons across different Fermi surface patches. This phenomenological theory leads to a rich phase diagram characterized by different symmetry breaking patterns of the MTG, which can be interpreted as distinct classes of vortex lattices. A class of Zq-symmetric Hofstadter SCs is identified, in which the MTG breaks down to a Zq subgroup. We study the topological properties of such Zq-symmetric Hofstadter SCs and show that the parity of the Chern numbers is fixed by the parity of q. We identify the conditions for the realization of Bogoliubov Fermi surfaces in the presence of parity and MTG symmetries, establishing a novel topological invariant capturing the existence of such charge-neutral gapless excitations. Our findings, which could bear relevance to the description of re-entrant superconductivity in moiré systems in the Hofstadter regime, establish Hofstadter SC as a fertile setting to explore symmetry broken and topological orders. The goal of this paper is to provide a framework for describing charge 2e condensates formed by pairing of electrons in Hofstadter bands, which arise from the interplay of an external magnetic field and a two-dimensional (2D) lattice periodic potential Superconductivity in high magnetic fields, specifically above the upper critical field H c2 , known as re-entrant superconductivity Hofstadter lattices possess rich single particle properties. In contrast to Landau levels obtained when Φ/Φ 0 1, Hofstadter bands have finite bandwidths and are characterized by a wider range of Chern numbers, which gives way to unconventional quantum critical phenomena controlled by lattice effects In this work we focus on describing the symmetry properties of the pairing order parameter ∆ab ∝ ψ a ψ b under U(1) and magnetic translation symmetries for a general Hofstadter lattice with magnetic flux Φ = (p/q)Φ 0 per unit cell, with p and q coprime integers. The magnetic translation group (MTG) is generated by non-commuting lattice translation operators in the presence of a magnetic field From the study of group representations stems a comprehensive Ginzburg-Landau phenomenological theory of Hofstadter superconductors for generic magnetic flux. The analysis shows that Hofstadter condensates are characterized by multi-component order parameters, uncovering an ideal scenario to explore a number of unconventional superconducting orders Moreover, the analysis of irreps of the MTG shows that the Hofstadter superconducting phase behaves as a vortex lattice, in the sense that the phase of the components of the order parameter winds as a parallel transport takes place around the unit cell. Therefore, these findings provide a general framework that justifies the numerical observation of vortex lattices in fermionic The group theory classification of Hofstadter pairing discussed in this work sheds light on earlier studies of pairing in fermionic Hofstadter systems done mostly in the context of synthetic gauge fields in optical lattices of cold atoms This work is organized as follows. In Sec. II we set our notation, review the action of the MTG on single particle electronic states, emphasising -see Fig. Finally, in Sec. V we analyse the spectrum of fermionic excitations of such Z q -symmetric Hofstadter superconductors, deriving some general results about the bulk topology and nature of quantum critical points. First, we show that chiral Hofstadter superconductors provide a natural setting for realizing topological superconductivity with tunable Chern numbers. We demonstrate, under general conditions, that particle-hole and parity symmetries constraint the change of the Chern number across quantum critical points to even values ∆C ∈ 2Z, implying the conservation of Chern number parity and therefore the non-Abelian character of bulk fermionic states. Furthermore, we show that when Hofstadter superconductors with Z q MTG symmetry also possess parity symmetry, their spectrum necessarily supports Bogoliubov Fermi surfaces (BFS). For odd q, there is only one BFS, which is stable even if the Z q symmetry is broken as long as particle-hole and parity symmetries are preserved and protected by the same topological invariant as constructed in We consider a 2D electronic system in a perpendicular magnetic field B on a lattice with basis lattice vectors a 1 and a 2 . We assume a 1 points along the x-direction. As spin will play no role in the analysis of the MTG, we will consider spin polarized fermions for simplicity, but note that the analysis applies to systems with both spins included. The primitive vectors of the reciprocal lattice are then b 1 and b 2 = b 2 ŷ and we work with the vector potential A = xBa 2 /a 2y in the Landau gauge, where a 2y is the y component of a 2 . We further assume that the magnetic flux per unit cell is a rational multiple of the flux quantum: Φ = p q Φ 0 , with Φ 0 = h/e. The unit cell is therefore extended by a factor of q along the x axis, and the Brillouin zone is folded along the b1 direction by the same factor (see Fig. The q-fold splitting of the bands can be understood from a symmetry perspective. The non-trivial vector potential breaks the translation symmetry T 1 of the lattice along the x direction, but the system remains symmetric under magnetic translation T1 that is a composition of T 1 and the gauge transformation A(x) → A(x) -Ba 1 a 2 /(2a 2y ). Importantly, the two magnetic translation symmetries T1 and T2 = T 2 do not commute but satisfy T1 T2 = ω p q T2 T1 where ω p q = e 2πip/q is a q th root of unity. Together T1 and T2 generate the magnetic translation group (MTG), which includes a subgroup of U (1) transformations generated by the commutator T1 T2 T -1 As a result of the noncommutativity of the MTG, its irreducible representations (irreps) formed by the electron states are q dimensional We define d αk to be the second-quantized annihilation operators corresponding to the α sub-band. With our gauge choice, the quasimomentum component k x can be restricted to -π q , π q due to the folding of the Brillouin zone. Under the magnetic translations, where Q = 2πp q b2 . Notice that T1 therefore acts as a translation operator also on the reciprocal lattice, but along a perpendicular direction. As a result, each sub-band is q-fold degenerate within the Brillouin zone, ε α (k) = ε α (k + Q), which reflects the fact that with a different gauge the unit cell could be extended along a 2 instead of a 1 , with the Brillouin zone folded in the b2 direction. Since the dispersion is gauge invariant it must remain the same with both choices, and is therefore periodic in both directions (see (with implicit summation over on the RHS), with T 1 = e -ipx τ and T 2 = e -ip•b2 σ * , where are the q × q shift and clock matrices, respectively. The transformation properties of electron operators described in Eq. (2.2) will play a central role in understanding the properties of the superconducting state; in particular, they will lead to a general understanding of the irreps realized by the superconducting gap function to be discussed in Sec. III that we will see are distinct from the single electron irreps relevant for the Hofstadter bands constructed in Although our symmetry analysis of superconductivity presented below is quite general and can be easily ex-tended to include pairing between multiple bands α relevant in the strong-coupling regime, since the MTG symmetries act trivially on the band index as seen in Eqs. (2.1-2.2), it is sufficient to consider the pairing instability of the Fermi surfaces restricted to a single band α in the weak-coupling regime. We therefore consider a scenario where the chemical potential lies within a single band α and project general momentum-conserving pairing interaction Hamiltonian onto this band (with the α band index henceforth omitted) ) where , n, m = 0, . . . , q -1, with labeling the total momentum of the interacting pair. The sum is over all momenta and indices. Momentum conservation means that the interactions respect the T2 = T 2 symmetry. However, according to Eq. (2.2), T1 places the additional constraint (2.5) on the couplings We describe the state obtained by pairing of spin polarized electrons in a single Hofstadter band using the standard mean-field pairing Hamiltonian , ,p , ,p where ε(p) is the electron dispersion and ∆(p) are gap functions that are q × q matrices. H BdG is the Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) Hamiltonian in the basis of Nambu spinors Ψ p, = (d p, , d † -p, ). The unphysical redundancy of the BdG formalism is encoded in the anti-unitary particle hole symmetry (PHS) of the BdG Hamiltonian, which acts as C = τ x K on the Nambu spinors where τ j are Pauli matrices acting on the particle/hole sectors and K is complex conjugation. Under the PHS, C -1 H BdG (p)C = -H BdG (-p), which implies that ∆(p) = -∆T (-p) consistent with anti-commutation relations. In the ground state, the gap functions further satisfy the self-consistent gap equation obtained by minimizing the free energy. Close below the transition temperature the gap function is small and approximately satisfies the linearized gap equation ) where ν is the density of states per patch at the Fermi level and Λ is the high energy cutoff (see Appendix A for derivation). Notice there are q patches, as shown Fig. The solutions of the linearized gap equation can be classified by the irreducible representations (irreps) of the symmetry groups of the system according to which they transform In order to address these questions, we first review the general symmetry action on the BdG Hamiltonian in Sec. III A. We will then utilize this formalism in Sec. III B to address the role of MTG on the pairing Hamiltonian and construct the corresponding irreps furnished by the gap functions. A. Symmetry Action on the Gap Function and the Linearized Gap Equation We now review how symmetries other than the PHS act on the BdG Hamiltonian and in particular how they act on the gap functions ∆ which implies that the U (1) symmetry is broken down to a Z 2 symmetry in the SC state. More generally, suppose that S(p) is some (possibly momentum dependent) unitary matrix representing a symmetry acting on the normal state Hamiltonian. In the normal state, we then have a family of symmetries S(p, θ 0 ) = U (θ 0 /2)S(p) parametrized by θ 0 . Since the gap function breaks the U (1) symmetry, at most one member of this family may remain unbroken, and so we have to consider each possibility in our analysis. By the same argument as for the U (1) symmetry itself, we find that S(p, θ 0 ) acts on the gap function as Requiring the gap function to be invariant under this symmetry, we note that the phase θ 0 is not arbitrary but instead determined by the possible solutions of Typically there is only a finite set of allowed θ 0 , which determine the irrep to which ∆ belongs. In particular, e iθ0 determine the characters of the irrep [109], and for finite irreps there is only a finite set of characters. For example, if S q (p) = 1, we must have θ 0 = 2π q N with N being some integer. This is the case for the MTG symmetries: T q 1 = T q 2 = 1. Using Eqs. (2.2) and (3.4), we find that under T1 (θ 1 ) = U (θ 1 /2) T1 and T2 (θ 2 ) = U (θ 2 /2) T2 the gap function transforms as ∆ T1(θ1) ----→ e iθ1 τ ∆τ T , (3.6a) where τ and σ are the shift and clock matrices defined in Eq. (2.3). More explicitly, the elements of ∆ transform as ----→ e iθ2 ω p( + ) q ∆ , . As mentioned above, θ 1 and θ 2 in Eqs. (3.7a-3.7b) are restricted to the values: ) where M, L are integers defined modulo q. In particular, note that e iθj (j = 1, 2) are actually elements of the MTG since T2 T1 T -1 T -1 = U (-2πp/q), a U (1) transformation acting as Eq. (3.3) on the gap function. The first important conclusion is that there is no nonzero ∆ that satisfies both (3.7a) and (3.7b) for q > 2 (q = 2 is an exception, as we will discuss below), for any choice of θ 1 and θ 2 . This means that any pairing order necessarily breaks at least some MTG symmetries. A similar result was shown for the superfluid bosonic condensate in a strong magnetic field, essentially the bosonic version of the Hofstadter model, in Ref. Before moving on to the analysis of the irreps realized by the gap function in the next subsection, let us consider the implications of the MTG symmetries for the linearized gap equation Eq. (3.2), which reads: (3.9) The first observation is that only gap function elements ∆ , with the same value of L = + appear on both sides of the equation, and, as a result, the linearized gap equation splits into q independent equations for each value of L, which corresponds to the L th anti-diagonal of the matrix ∆ and labels the total momentum of the Cooper pairs along the b2 direction. This decoupling is a consequence of momentum conservation along that direction due to the T2 = T 2 symmetry. As such, for a particular L, the decoupled solution is a matrix with non-zero elements only along the L th anti-diagonal: We refer to such a matrix as an L th anti-diagonal matrix. From Eq. (3.7b), ∆(L) T2(θ2) ----→ e iθ2 ω pL q ∆(L) We will consider gap functions symmetric under T1 (θ 1 ) symmetries in Sec. IV when we study the effect of nonlinear terms in the gap equation, but for the purposes of the linearized gap equation it is sufficient to look at ∆(L) . The effect of the T1 symmetry on ∆(L) is to shift it to ∆(L-2) . Notice that the matrices ∆(L) defined in Eq.(3.10) have well defined transformation under T2 . However, the phases between ∆(L) and ∆(L ) with L = L are arbitrary. We then fix these phases by defining ∆(L) such that At this stage, it becomes necessary to distinguish between the cases of even and odd q. In the latter case, note that applying T1 to ∆(0) generates all of ∆(L) since 2 mod q; the parity of L, in other words, is not well-defined example, for q = 3 there is a single irrep with three irrep components ∆(L) given by For even q, however, ∆(L) are not all generated by applying T1 to ∆(0) ; rather, ∆(L) split into two groups for even and odd L, that are not mapped to each other by T1 or any other MTG symmetry (in Sec.III B we show that each of these two groups actually splits into two more, resulting in 4 irreps for even q). For even q we therefore define but with defined modulo 2q and restricted to be of the same parity as L, i.e. = 0, 2, . . . , 2(q -1) for even L and = 1, 3, . . . , 2q -1 for odd L. With the indices L± 2 defined modulo q this can be seen to properly index all the elements of ∆(L) . As another concrete example, for q = 2 we have and In terms of the functions ∆ , the linearized gap equation for each value of L becomes (p; p )∆ (p ) . (3.19) Because the interactions satisfy Eq. (2.5) due to the T1 symmetry, for odd q we can take g is also even. For even q and even L we can take g /2, /2 ; for odd L, we instead take g ( -1)/2,( -1)/2 . Recall that for even q, and are both defined modulo 2q and restricted to have the same parity as L. The second important conclusion that follows from these considerations of T1 symmetry is that, for odd q, each of the L equations Eq. with some complex coefficients η L is another solution of the linearized gap equation. As we will see in Sec. IV, this includes gap functions symmetric under T1 (θ 1 ) and indeed any other element of the MTG symmetries. This large degeneracy of solutions of the linearized gap equation is lifted when non-linear terms are included, as we also show in Sec. IV. The higher order terms thus determine which MTG symmetries, if any, remain unbroken in the ground state. The symmetry analysis of the previous section shows that pairing matrix ∆ belongs to a multidimensional irrep, with ∆(L) forming the components of the irrep, as described in Eq. A representation is a group homomorphism Γ : G → GL(V ) between the symmetry group G -the MTG in our case -and the group of linear transformations GL(V ) that act on a particular vector space V . For irreps realized by ∆, ∆(L) form the basis of this vector space. The linear transformations in question, Γ(S) for an element S of the MTG, act on the gap function via Eq. (3.4). The representation is reducible if there is a nontrivial subspace of V that is mapped to itself under the action of any symmetry operation. To clarify the terminology, we say that ∆ belongs to, realizes, or transforms as the irrep, and that ∆(L) are the components of the irreps. The homomorphism is always understood to be the one determined by Eq. In order to explicitly construct an irrep, the general procedure Before discussing the irreps for even q in more detail, let us note that the fact that they are q/2 dimensional irreps is in contrast with the earlier result found by Brown and Zak in Refs. . This is simply the Aharonov-Bohm phase picked up by an electron moving around a loop encircling the original, non-magnetic, unit cell described by the operation L. Applying L on the gap function via Eq. (3.4), however, yields a different result, since from Eq. (3.3) we have consistent also with Eqs. (3.7a-3.7b), and corresponding to an Aharonov-Bohm phase picked up by a particle of charge 2e. This is of course as one would expect for a Cooper pair. Although Refs. We also note that Eq. Although the MTG irreps realized by ∆(L) are distinct from the single particle irreps of the MTG, for odd q they are qualitatively similar as they are of the same dimension. For even q, on the other hand, we saw that the parity of L is well defined, and ∆(L) split into two q/2 dimensional irreps for each parity of L, as in Eq. (3.15). The irreps for even q are thus qualitatively different. As we will now show, there are in fact four such irreps. One can anticipate that there must be four q/2 irreps from a version of Schur's orthogonality relations proven in Refs. The reason there are additional irreps is that there is an additional symmetry that may remain unbroken by the paired state. To see this, note that applying T1 (θ 1 ) q/2 times on ∆ brings an element on the L th anti-diagonal to the same anti-diagonal but not to the same diagonal, as can be seen from Eq. (3.7a): -----→ e iθ1q/2 ∆ -q/2, -q/2 . (3.23) The element on the RHS is on the same anti-diagonal since -q/2 + -q/2 ≡ + mod q, but it is not the same element since q/2 = 0 mod q. Note that from Eq. (3.8a) we have e iθ1q/2 = (-1) pM = (-1) M (using the fact that p cannot be even if q is even), consistent with the fact that T q/2 1 squares to the identity. The parity of M provides the additional character, in addition to the parity of L, that yields the four q/2-dimensional irreps as claimed. We label the irrep components ∆(L,±) , and these satisfy This implies that the functions ∆ in Eq. (3.16) additionally satisfy ∆ +q = ±∆ (recall that in this case is defined modulo 2q). In addition to having only a single anti-diagonal, ∆(L,±) has a q 2 × q 2 block structure: where Â and B are q 2 × q 2 matrices. Notice that ∆(L,+) † ∆(L,-) is odd under T q/2 1 and so such terms are not allowed in the free energy (also their trace vanishes), as expected for products of elements from different irreps. This implies in particular that ∆(L,+) and ∆(L,-) decouple in the linearized gap equation and in general have different critical temperatures. To illustrate the irreps and the additional symmetry, it is helpful to consider again the special case of q = 2. The relation Eq. (3.24) places an additional constraint on the gap functions in Eqs. (3.17-3.18), so the components of the two irreps symmetric under T2 (0) are while the components of the two irreps anti-symmetric under T2 (0) (symmetric under T2 (π)) are The ± corresponds to gaps symmetric or anti-symmetric under T1 (0) respectively. A more generic example is provided by q = 4, for which the irrep components are given by which correspond to states symmetric under T2 (θ 2 ) with θ 2 = πp 2 L and symmetric/anti-symmetric under T 2 1 (0) for ± respectively (p can only be 1 or 3 in this case). Note the block structure that is in agreement with Eq. (3.25) that also holds for the q = 2 case. We stress that the irrep construction presented here for both even and odd q can be applied without change if ∆ carries additional indices (e.g. spin or band indices), as long as the MTG symmetries do not act on these indices. The construction is therefore quite general, and additional lattice symmetries can be included in a straightforward way (see Appendix B). It is however not unique since the irrep is multi-dimensional: instead of irrep components symmetric with respect to T2 , we could have worked with irrep components that are symmetric with respect to T1 , or, in general, any q linearly independent combinations of ∆(L) . We will consider such combinations in Sec. IV when studying the minima of the Ginzburg-Landau free energy. As discussed in Sec. III, the gap functions that solve the linearized gap equation are arbitrary linear combinations of the irrep components The irreps are q dimensional for odd q, with L = 0, . . . , q -1 and ∆(L) satisfying the defining properties given in Eq. (3.12a-3.12b). For even q, we assume that one of the four q/2-dimensional irreps has the highest T c so that the rest can be neglected, and we therefore drop the ± in ∆(L,±) and restrict L to be even or odd. The degeneracy of the linearized gap equation is, however, lifted by even infinitesimal non-linear terms, resulting in spontaneous symmetry breaking of the MTG symmetries. In order to study this symmetry breaking, here we use the irreps to construct a phenomenological effective Ginzburg-Landau free energy, following the same procedure used for unconventional superconductors constitutes the order parameter of the paired state (for even q, we take η to be a q/2 component vector instead but use the same notation below). We emphasize that while we originally obtained the microscopic gap functions ∆(L) in the context of a weak-coupling pairing within a single Hofstadter band, the effective GL theory presented here is insensitive to the details of the microscopic theory and therefore remains valid both in the presence of additional degrees of freedom (including additional Hofstadter bands) and in the strong-coupling limit. Note that the action of T1 and T2 on ∆ (L) as given in Eq. (3.12a-3.12b) is equivalent to an action on the components of η: We can see that T1 and T2 act on it as τ 2 and σ * respectively, while U (1) transformations U (θ) act as e -2iθ . This determines the irrep of the MTG realized by η itself in place of the set of ∆(L) Note that terms of the form η * L η L are ruled out for L = L by T2 symmetry (including gradient terms), while T1 implies that |η L | 2 terms have equal coefficients and that β M N does not depend on L. Dj = ∂ j + 2ie c Ãj (with j = x, y) is the covariant derivative where Ã = A -xBa 2 /a 2y is the gauge field associated with the spatial variations of the overall phase of η. This choice imposes gauge invariance while ensuring that in the ground state η L are spatially uniform. We emphasize that the relation between the spatial variations of the overall phase of η and the vector potential is only valid for very small spacial variations of η L , i.e. on a scale much larger than the magnetic unit cell, as the transformation properties of the gap functions ∆ under gauge transformations, inherited from those of the d p, operators, are highly nontrivial within the magnetic unit cell. A free energy with very similar symmetries was constructed as a dual theory in a different context in Ref. We note that there is some redundancy in the pa-rameters, and in particular we take N M (the last equality to make the free energy real; the rest are not strictly necessary but account for redundancy) and κ jj = κ * j j . For odd q only (q+1)(q+3) 4 of the β M N parameters are thus distinct, a total of (q+1) 2 parameters counting real and imaginary parts separately. For even q, M and N must be both even or both odd with only even or only odd L, depending on the irrep. The number of independent parameters, again counting the real and imaginary parts separately, is (q+2) 2 8 if q/2 = 1 is odd, with the exception of q = 2, for which there is an additional identification between β 00 and β 11 . If q/2 is even we additionally have that β 00 = β q/2,q/2 and β 0,q/2 = β q/2,0 and are therefore real, so the number of independent real parameters is q 2 -q-6 2 . Terms with M and N of different parity are allowed and couple the even and odd irreps, but this can be ignored if the critical temperatures for the two irreps are sufficiently different at second order. In addition, we observe that the free energy Eq. (4.4) has an accidental symmetry at fourth order. Namely, it is symmetric under I : η L → η -L (and combinations of I with MTG symmetries). This accidental symmetry is broken by sixth order terms, however: We will not consider these higher order terms below but note that the accidental symmetry is in general explic-itly broken. I may be an actual symmetry if crystalline symmetries are present, for example a rotation by π as considered in Refs. Minimizing the free energy Eq. (4.4) with respect to η * L (and integrating by parts), we obtain the Ginzburg-Landau equations: (4.6) Below we will only discuss the uniform phases, in which the left hand side vanishes, and leave the non-uniform solutions for a future study. As already noted in Sec. III B, there is no non-zero gap function ∆, and hence no non-zero configuration of the field η, that respects all the MTG symmetry. The non-trivial solutions of the GL equations therefore necessarily break some but not necessarily all of the MTG symmetries, as we will show below. Note that the solutions correspond to local extrema of the free energy, while the ground state is determined by the global minimum. With our choice of irrep elements, the simplest type of symmetric solutions are the ones that respect the T2 (θ 2 ) symmetry with θ 2 = 2πp q L (breaking it for any other choice of θ 2 ), in which case η L = 0 unless L = L, and the only non-zero component is η L = -α 2β00 . There are q or q/2 solutions corresponding to each choice of L (for q odd and even respectively). The value of the free energy at these extrema is (the indexing will be explained below). The T1 (θ 1 ) symmetry is broken for any choice of θ 1 and maps the degenerate extrema to each other. If this solution is a global minimum, we refer to the corresponding ground state as a Z q symmetric Hofstadter SC phase. The order of the symmetry is q for either even or odd q. There is no fundamental difference between the T2 (θ 2 ) and T1 (θ 1 ) symmetries of course, and so we naturally expect solutions of the GL equation that respect T1 (θ 1 ) as well as other symmetries of the MTG while breaking T2 (θ 2 ) for any choice of θ 2 . Indeed, since the irreps are multidimensional, the definition of the irrep components ∆(L) is not unique, and we could always take the basis of the irrep to be any linearly independent orthogonal combinations of ∆(L) , including those that respect other MTG symmetries. In particular, there are solutions that respect the symmetry T (θ 0 ) = T N2 2 (θ 2 ) T N1 1 (θ 1 ) for any choice of θ 0 = N 1 θ 1 + N 2 θ 2 with N 1 , N 2 = 0, . . . , q -1. We index the corresponding solutions as η (M ) N 1 ,N 2 . For N 1 = 0, T2 (θ 2 ) is broken and generates degenerate solutions by shifting the index M = 0, . . . , q -1. The solu-tions found above that do respect T2 (θ 2 ) can be considered as a special case with N 1 = 0, N 2 = 1, and can be labeled η (L)0,1 (we reserve L to label the b2 component of the total momentum of the Cooper pairs). Before explicitly constructing such linear combinations and showing that they do indeed yield additional solutions of the GL equations in Sec. IV B, we illustrate this fact for the cases of q ≤ 4 that can be partially analyzed analytically. Some of these cases have earlier been considered in Refs. A. Solutions of GL Equations for q ≤ 4 We start with the simplest non-trivial case, q = 2 (only p = 1 is allowed), which has four 1D irreps. The free energy of each irrep is trivial and of the form (omitting gradient terms) for the single order parameter η = η 0 or η 1 and a unique solution for |η|, implying that the ground state always has some Z 2 symmetry. The corresponding gap functions ∆(L,±) with L = 0, 1 are simply the irrep components given in Eqs. (3.26-3.27): ∆(0,±) = ∆ 0 0 0 ±∆ 0 (4.9) and with ∆ as defined in Eq. The second-simplest non-trivial case and the only other case that can be completely solved analytically is q = 4 (with p = 1 or 3), in which case there are four 2D irreps corresponding to even or odd L and gaps symmetric or anti-symmetric under T 2 2 (0). The free energy is for even and odd L respectively, where φ 02 = 2(φ 0 -φ 2 ) and φ 13 = 2(φ 1 -φ 3 ), with η L = |η L |e iφ L . Note that β 02 can actually be taken to be real in this case. Terms with β 01 and β 12 are allowed by symmetry but couple different irreps, so we ignore them assuming that α 0 and α 1 are sufficiently far apart. The free energies have the same mathematical form, and are also similar to the free energy for PDW order parameters the two minima for β 02 < 0 are φ L = φ L+2 and φ L = φ L+2 + π, i.e. the order parameters are both real and either equal or opposite. Whether the two order coexist at all, however, depends on the ratio (β 02 -β 11 )/β 00 with a phase transition at β 02 -β 11 = β 00 /2 (note that β 00 and β 11 are also real). The non-coexisting solutions are precisely the T2 (θ 2 ) symmetric solutions, with the corresponding gap functions being the irrep components as given in Eq. (3.28): which correspond to states symmetric under T2 (θ 2 ) with θ 2 = πp 2 L and symmetric/anti-symmetric under T 2 1 (0) for ± respectively. As for q = 2, ∆ are defined in Eq. For the ∆(L,-) irreps, there is however a phase transition into a state with gap functions forming linear combinations (assuming As can be checked directly, ∆(M,±)1,0 are symmetric under T1 (θ 1 ) with θ 1 = πp 2 M with odd M = ±1, consistent with the notation. In addition, as will generalize to all even q, ∆(M,±)1,0 are symmetric/anti-symmetric under T 2 2 respectively, requiring the additional ± index. In a pattern that will also generalize to other even q (and trivially holds also for the previous example of q = 2), the corresponding gap functions are even/odd checkerboard matrices [113] symmetric/anti-symmetric under T 2 2 (0) respectively: These happen to be the phases found in Ref. For the ∆(L,+) irreps, again assuming β 02 > 0, the phase transition is instead into that as the notation indicates are symmetric under T2 (θ 1 ) T1 (θ 2 ) with Explicitly they are given by the even/odd checkerboard matrices symmetric/anti-symmetric under T 2 2 (0) respectively: These are distinct from the phases found in Ref. We get additional phases taking β 02 < 0, which results in ∆(M,±) 1,N 2 solutions with even M = 0, 2 and N 2 = 1 or 0 for ∆(L,±) irreps respectively. We thus find that at least one Z 4 symmetry remains unbroken for q = 4, though this may change if the even and odd L irreps are allowed to mix or higher order terms are included in the free energy. For examples of a numerical analysis of the former possibility (with some additional symmetries), see Ref. The simplest odd q case is q = 3 (with p = 1 or 2). There is only one MTG irrep in this case, and the free energy is where β 01 = |β 01 |e iθ01 is not necessarily real (unlike the q = 4 case) and Unfortunately already in this case we did not find a complete analytical solution. To make some progress, it is convenient to minimize the free energy with respect to φ (L) 01 instead of φ L , noting that there is a constraint L φ (L) 01 = 3θ 01 . This can be enforced using a Lagrange multiplier 01 are equal for all L in the ground state. This is enough to prove that if all of |η L | are in addition equal in the ground state, then the ground state has a Z 3 symmetry. This is as much as we can determine analytically. Numerically, we find that for the explored parameter range at least one of the MTG symmetries is always unbroken in the ground state and either all of |η L | are equal or only one is non-zero; this is another pattern that we will see generalizes to all q. The sole exception are phase transitions, for example in the special case It is clear that the direction of the vector η is arbitrary in the ground state due to the additional SU (3) symmetry, so symmetry breaking linear combinations are allowed in this case. We cannot definitively state that the MTG cannot be fully broken away from such phase transition points. The possible distinct Z 3 symmetries in this case are T2 , T1 , T2 T1 , and T 2 2 T1 (other cases are redundant). Note that we can thus always take N 1 = 1 in η (M ) N 1 ,N 2 . The gap functions symmetric under T2 are again the irrep components already given in Eq. (3.14): where note that ∆ with = 0, 1, 2 as defined in Eq. (3.13) are determined by the gap equation and may be complex. Gap functions symmetric under T1 are (4.23) Gap functions symmetric under T2 T1 are (4.24) Finally, gap functions symmetric under T 2 2 T1 are (4.25) The phases found for the Harper-Hubbard model in Ref. We now determine the general form of solutions ) for some choice of θ 0 = N 1 θ 1 + N 2 θ 2 with N 1 , N 2 = 0, . . . , q -1. For simplicity, we will only consider the case when the order of this symmetry is q. This is not the case if and only if N 1 , N 2 and q all share a common divisor d = 1. The order of T (θ 0 ) in that case is q/d and the degeneracy of the solutions is dq for odd q or dq/2 for even q. Below we consider only d = 1, and treat the odd and even q separately. Let us first consider the T1 (θ 1 )-symmetric order parameters for odd q, with e iθ1 = ω pM q . These can be obtained by taking η 0 = η and sequentially applying T1 (θ 1 ) to η. This way we find the components of η (M )1,0 to be where [L/2] q = L/2 if L is even but [L/2] q = (L + q)/2 if is odd. By construction, applying T2 (0) to η (M )1,0 maps it to η (M +2)1,0 , and again there are q degenerate solutions. The corresponding gap functions can be considered as an alternative set of irrep components, now symmetric with respect to T1 (θ 1 ). Eq. (4.23) provides an example for q = 3. The procedure is essentially the same for all other T (θ 0 ) symmetries, and we obtain the solutions η (M ) N 1 ,N 2 with components = ω -2pN1N2J(J-1)-pM J q η (4.28) with J = 0, . . . , q -1. If the greatest common divisor gcd(N 1 , q) = 1, some components may vanish. Again for simplicity we will not consider that case; in all other cases we can take N 1 = 1 without loss of generality since T (θ 0 ) forms a Z q subgroup. To gain a better understanding of these solutions, we consider the implications for the form of the gap functions The symmetry T (θ 0 ) constrains the elements of these matrices to be of the form where ∆ -as given in Eq. (3.13) are the same for all M, N 1 and N 2 and depend only on -that labels which diagonal they are on. The phases φ on the other hand are different for each M and depend only on L = + , i.e. which anti-diagonal the element is on. From Eq. (4.29) we see that for N 1 = 1 and setting φ (M ) 1,N 2 0 = 0 without loss of generality, (4.31) See Eqs. (4.23-4.25) for concrete illustrations of these equations for q = 3. The case when N 1 = 1 is similar with the phases permuted accordingly. The expressions for even q are essentially the same as for odd q but with some minor modifications to keep track of the fact that there are four different irreps in this case. Note that within a given irrep, only η L with the same parity of L are non-zero, so the symmetric order parameters have an additional index. For example the T1 (θ 1 )-symmetric order parameters are η (M,±)1,0 with components given by the same expression as for odd q, Eq. (4.26): but with the understanding that only even or odd L components are non-zero. In general, the order parameters with symmetries other than T2 (θ 2 ) are given by η (M,±) N 1 ,N 2 . The meaning of the labels depends on the parity of N 1 . If N 1 is odd, ± labels the parity of L of non-zero components while M is determined by which of the four irreps the gap function belongs to, with T q/2 1 (0) acting as (-1) M on the order parameter. If N 1 is even, on the other hand, M must have the same parity as L, while ± corresponds to T q/2 1 (0) acting as ±1 in the irrep. For odd N 1 , Eq. (4.28) gives η (M,+) N 1 ,N 2 with even L components. The odd L component combinations η (M,-) N 1 ,N 2 are given by essentially the same formula: = ω -2pN1N2J(J-1)-pM J q η . (4.33) For even N 1 , the RHSs of Eqs. (4.28) and (4.33) give the components of η (M,±) N 1 ,N 2 for even and odd M respectively. We will consider odd N 1 below for simplicity. The parity of L of the non-zero components can be considered as the eigenvalue of η (M,±) N 1 ,N 2 under T q/2 2 (0). We note that this symmetry places a particular constraint on the corresponding pairing matrices ∆, on which it acts as -----→ σq/2 ∆σ q/2 (4.34) (note that σq/2 , = (-1) ). This implies that the gap functions ∆(M,±) that are even or odd under T q/2 2 (0) are even or odd checkerboard matrices = 0 whenever + is odd or even respectively for + and -respectively. We saw this explicitly for the q = 2 and 4 cases considered in Sec. IV A. Note that the term ∆(M,+) N 1 ,N 2 † ∆(M,-) N 1 ,N 2 is odd under T q/2 2 so such a term is not allowed in the free energy and its trace vanishes because a product of an even and an odd checkerboard matrix is an odd checkerboard matrix with zero diagonal. This confirms once again that the four irreps for even q are not mixed at the leading second order in the free energy. Again to understand the solutions better, we consider the form of the gap functions corresponding to the order parameters η (M,±) N 1 ,N 2 . As for odd q, we can express the elements of ∆(M,±) but with a caveat that -in ∆ -is defined modulo 2q and restricted to be even or odd for ± respectively, as in Eq. (3.16), and additionally satisfying ∆ +q = (-1) M ∆ . In this case only the relative phases between even or odd L anti-diagonals are defined, so for N 1 = 1 we have: As for odd q, the phase relations for N 1 = 1 are similar. See Eqs. (4.10, 4.14,4.16) for concrete illustrations for q = 2 and 4. Zq-symmetric and Non-Symmetric Solutions of the GL Equations So far in this subsection we have simply constructed configurations η (M ) N 1 ,N 2 in Eqs. for odd q; the relations are the same for ∆(M,+) N 1 ,N 2 in Eq. (4.35) for even q, while for ∆(M,-) N 1 ,N 2 the last relation becomes to be consistent with the fact that in this irrep T q/2 2 (0) acts as -1 on ∆(M,-) N 1 ,N 2 . We still need to show that the configurations η (M ) N 1 ,N 2 are actually solutions of the GL equations and are therefore always at least local extrema of the free energy. To see this, note that all the symmetric configurations have the important property that all the components η L have the same magnitude and differ only by a phase, η L = ηe iφ L with real η (more precisely, all non-zero η L have the same magnitude). Plugging this ansatz into Eq. (4.6) we find the equation for η: where M N for all L. Therefore, as claimed above, symmetric solutions are always extrema of the free energy. The free energy at these extrema is (Note that if both N 1 and N 2 divide q, some η L are zero, but all non-zero components have equal magnitudes.) Although we thus conclude that the T (θ 0 )-symmetric order parameters are possible ground states of the system, it is not true that the ground state is necessarily symmetric. Though we did find this to be the case for q ≤ 4 in Sec. IV A (analytically for q = 2 and 4 and numerically for q = 3), already for q = 5 we find numerically that the MTG may be fully broken in the ground state, as shown in Fig. parameters, we observe first-order phase transitions between phases with only one η L being non-zero and all |η L | equal, i.e. phases with different Z q symmetries; a phase transition into a phase with pairs of |η L | being equal except for one that is symmetric under η L → η M -L for some M (as noted above, this is an accidental symmetry in our case); and a phase transition into a phase where none of the |η L | are equal and there are no symmetries. There may also be second-order phase transitions, as we find for q = 7 (see Fig. To summarize this section, we found that the GL equations Eq. (4.6) always have solutions with a Z q symmetry T (θ q M , and N 1 , N 2 = 0, . . . , q -1. N 1 and N 2 are determined in the ground state by which of F N1,N2 , given in Eqs. (4.7) and (4.42) is smallest (assuming the ground state does not completely break the MTG), while each value of M = 0, 2, 4, . . . corresponds to a degenerate solution. For even q, only M of the same parity give degenerate solutions, while all M are degenerate for odd q. The solutions are thus q-fold degenerate for odd q and q/2-fold degenerate for even q, corresponding to the dimensions of the MTG irreps, and there is an additional Z 2 symmetry for even q. Additional degeneracy may occur if other crystalline symmetries are present, e.g. the inversion-like symmetry I : η L → η -L that exists in presence of two-fold rotation symmetry (and is an accidental symmetry at fourth order of the free energy). Since T2 (0) is broken by all phases except η (0)0,1 , in all other cases the unit cell is extended in real space by an additional factor of q along the a 2 direction, resulting in a unit cell q × q larger than the normal state unit cell in the absence of the magnetic field (note that T q j (0) are always unbroken). The symmetric solutions are given by η (M ) N 1 ,N 2 for odd q (η (M,±) N 1 ,N 2 for even q) in Eqs. An important property of the symmetric solutions is that all non-zero components η L have the same magnitude η given by Eq. Though we showed analytically that the GL equations always have symmetric solutions, we emphasize that this only guarantees that such states are local extrema of the free energy, not necessarily global minima that are the true ground states. This implies that extra care must be taken when analyzing such systems numerically, as some methods are susceptible to getting stuck in local minima. Indeed, we find explicit cases for q = 5 for which the MTG is completely broken, see Fig. Interestingly, in the limit of large q the unit cell may exceed the size of a finite sample, resulting in a phase with essentially no translational order, similar to a vortex glass phase and may melt into a vortex liquid-like phase due to thermal fluctuations Having identified the Z q -symmetric Hofstadter SC phases, we now want to consider their excitation spectrum and topological properties. For this purpose we consider the 2q × 2q BdG Hamiltonian Eq. (3.1b) describing pairing of electrons in a single Hofstadter band: with the gap function ∆ symmetric under some order q MTG symmetry with q M and M, N 1 , N 2 = 0, . . . , q -1. For simplicity, we will set N 1 = 1 and N 2 = N in this section. Interestingly, this additional symmetry allows us to completely diagonalize the BdG Hamiltonian in the spin polarized limit for any q, as we show below. In general, symmetry can also affect the topology of the system, potentially giving rise to symmetry protected topological phases (SPTs) It is therefore natural to ask whether the MTG symmetries can also give rise to novel TSC phases realised by Hofstadter superconductors. Remarkably, we demonstrate in Sec. V B that Hofstadter superconductors described by the BdG Hamiltonian Eq. (3.1b) can indeed realize SPT phases protected by MTG symmetries where the parity of the Chern numbers is the same as the parity of q. This result establishes that Hofstadter superconductors with a fully gapped spectrum fall into two topological classes according to the parity of q; i.e., they support non-Abelian (Abelian) excitations for odd (even) q. We illustrate the possible topological phase transitions for a specific form of the gap functions explicitly in Sec. V B for q = 3 and 5. Symmetries, including crystalline symmetries like inversion, can also lead to topologically protected gapless excitations We first review the action of symmetries on the BdG Hamiltonian. If a general symmetry acts as a matrix S(p) on the fermionic annihilation operators d p, , it results in the action on the Nambu spinor For example, a U (1) symmetry U (θ) given by d p, → e iθ d p, ≡ U (θ)d p, is represented in the BdG formalism by Ũ (θ) = e iθ 0 0 e -iθ . (5.4) The symmetries act on the BdG Hamiltonian as S(p)H BdG (p) S-1 (p), which is compatible with the transformation of the gap function in Eq. (5.5) We remark that these commutation relations have been used to classify gapless and fully gapped crystalline topological superconducting phases for Z 2 symmetries with S2 = 1, in which case the two possibilities e iθ0 = ±1 result in different topological invariants Here we will only invoke the classification in Sec. V C for the parity symmetry P that reverses p → -p and acts on the BdG Hamiltonian as P(0)H BdG (p) P † (0) = H BdG (-p) . ( The normal state is symmetric under P consistent with the condition ε(p) = ε(-p) necessary to guarantee the pairing instability in the first place. Note that we refer to P as parity symmetry since while it is similar to inversion symmetry, the full inversion symmetry also acts on the patch indices as → -. The gap function of the paired state may have either even or odd parity, ∆(p) = ± ∆(-p), in which case the BdG Hamiltonian is symmetric under P(0) or P(π) respectively. Alternatively, P(θ 0 ) may be broken for any choice of θ 0 . Note that due to the PHS relation ∆(p) = -∆T (-p), even and odd parity gap functions are skew-symmetric or symmetric matrices, ∆T (p) = ∓ ∆(p) respectively. Finally, the MTG symmetry T (θ 0 ) = T N 2 (θ 2 ) T1 (θ 1 ) with θ 0 = 2πp q M and M, N = 0, . . . , q -1 acts in the Nambu basis via where τ and σ are the shift and clock matrices defined in Eq. (5.8) some of the indices are assumed to be fixed and thus we omit them for clarity. Due to the breaking of the MTG symmetries, there are q or q/2 degenerate ground states for different values of M . The phases φ L determined by the T symmetry are given in Eqs. (4.31) and (4.37). The functions ∆ (p), defined in Eqs. (3.13) and (3.16) for odd and even q respectively, are ultimately determined by the microscopic interactions Eq. (2.4) via the gap equation Eq. (3.2). In our phenomenological approach we treat them as arbitrary functions. Note that in the spin polarized case considered here, PHS additionally requires ∆ (p) = -∆ -(-p); in particular, ∆ 0 , as well as ∆ q for even q (for which is defined modulo 2q), have to be an odd function of p, which in general has to be chiral for the spectrum to be fully gapped. As with any symmetry, we can simultaneously diagonalize the BdG Hamiltonian and T . In particular, since T is two-fold degenerate, we can write the BdG Hamiltonian Eq. (3.1b) in a 2 × 2 block-diagonal form using a basis that simultaneously diagonalizes T (0). This is useful because the eigenstates of T (0) are known: the eigenvalues of the matrix σN τ are λ (n) = ω pN (q+1) 2 q ω pn q , with corresponding eigenstates with a sum over = 0, . . . , q -1 on the right-hand side implied and with n = 0, . . . , q -1 being the index in the new basis. Using this new basis we can define a new Nambu spinor Ψ p,n = (f p,n , f † -p,n ) and the corresponding transformed BdG Hamiltonian. For odd q, the gap function for the M th ground state as given in Eq. (4.29) and (4.31) becomes a L th anti-diagonal matrix ∆ with (5.10) with the only non-zero elements given by while the rest vanish; this formula holds for the even q case as well with defined modulo 2q and restricted to only even or only odd values depending on the irrep. In this basis, the gap functions for different values of M correspond to different anti-diagonals, just as the T2 (θ 2 ) symmetric irrep components ∆(L) defined in Eq. (3.10). For a fixed M , after a reshuffling the transformed BdG Hamiltonian splits into 2 × 2 blocks. For example, for q = 3 and L = 2 we have (5.12) It is easy to read off the 2 × 2 blocks, and for any q they are The BdG Hamiltonian thus splits into q blocks, each being a single-band triplet SC with effective gap function ∆ 2n-L . The eigenvalues of the 2 × 2 blocks are simply and the Nambu eigenspinors of the BdG Hamiltonian are where ên,u and ên,v are unit basis vectors with u and v denoting particle and hole components of the spinors. As in the regular spin polarized SC (5.16) Here we observe that with the chemical potential in the normal state fixed, the parity of the Chern numbers cannot change in a topological phase transition, assuming the normal state Fermi surface does not cross highsymmetry points. This is because the Chern number changes at the phase transition due to the gap closing at Dirac nodes, as happens for example in phase transitions in quantum Hall systems and Chern insulators The assumption of T symmetry can be lifted, but note that the presence of q bands is a direct consequence of the MTG symmetry of the normal state. Phase Diagrams for q = 3 and 5 In this subsection we illustrate the conservation of the parity of the Chern number in the special cases of q = 3 and 5, and obtain generic phase diagrams. Here we will assume that T = T2 (0) T1 (0), corresponding to N 1 = N 2 = 1 and M = 0. For q = 3 the corresponding gap function was given in Eq. (4.24): We consider the functions ∆ (p) to be of the following general form expanded around the Fermi surface: where p F = √ 2mμ and a 0 , a 1 and b 1 are complex even functions of p. The pairing matrix is such that in the limit ∆ 1 = 0 the spectrum remains fully gapped unless a 0 = 0; in that case note that the total Chern number is just q times the winding of ∆ 0 (p). The terms proportional to a 0 (p) and a 1 (p) constitute the odd parity components of the gap function, while the b 1 (p) term is an even parity component. We consider the possibility that parity is broken and thus consider both components coexisting. We first consider the simplest case when a 0 , a 1 and b 1 are constants and compute the Chern number numerically using the algorithm in As mentioned above, the spectrum is gapless along the b 1 axis, with a Fermi surface coinciding with the normal state Fermi surface. This is a simple consequence of the matrix ∆ being anti-symmetric along this axis and therefore having a zero eigenvalue, leading to an ungapped energy band. Below we will show that this Bogoliubov Fermi surface is not accidental and occurs for all odd q. It is moreover topologically protected by the combination of PHS C and parity symmetry P. While Fig. More phases and phase transitions are possible for larger q, but always with Chern numbers of the same parity as q. We illustrate this for q = 5 with ∆ 0 = a As shown in Fig. Here we show that the BFS discussed in the previous section are topologically protected in the presence of the parity symmetry P and are a general feature of the phase diagram of Z q Hofstadter SCs: for odd q a BFS is always present and protected by a topological invariant that has been established in For even q, note that Eq. (5.11) implies that when ∆ is an L th anti-diagonal matrix, n in ∆ n is either an even or odd integer modulo 2q for L even or odd respectively. When L is odd, therefore, we conclude that in general none of the ∆ n vanish, while for even L two of them vanish, namely ∆ 0 and ∆ q . In the latter case the BFS is doubly degenerate and formed by four bands instead of two. As we discuss below, this implies that the BFS is topologically protected for odd q but not in general for even q. We conjecture that the doubly degenerate BFS is topologically protected for even q and even L as long as the Z q MTG symmetry is unbroken. To establish whether the BFS is topologically protected, we need to compute the corresponding topological invariant. As discussed in Sec. V A, due to the PHS relation ∆(p) = -∆T (-p), ∆(p) being anti-symmetric is equivalent to it being even under P: ∆(p) = ∆(-p). It has been shown in Note that while the Pfaffian is generally only defined for anti-symmetric matrices of even dimensions, the Pfaffian Pf[A] of a matrix A can be more generally defined as a polynomial in the elements of A with integer coefficients such that Pf 2 [A] = Det[A]. We therefore first want to find the determinant of H BdG which we can do by direct computation using the eigenvalues of the BdG Hamiltonian in Eq. (5.14): where the product is over all values of n. Notice that this is positive for even q but negative for odd q. We therefore compute the Pfaffian of τ z H BdG instead of H BdG itself, the two being equivalent for even q. τ z is a Pauli matrix acting on the particle and hole sectors (it can be replaced with any 2q × 2q matrix with integer elements and determinant equal to (-1) q ). This still does not guarantee that Det[τ z H BdG ] is a square of a polynomial, and we need to invoke the antisymmetry of ∆. As pointed out above, when ∆ is an anti-symmetric matrix, ∆ -n = -∆ n . Using this fact, we conclude that when ∆ is an L th anti-diagonal matrix, where the product is restricted to only include one of each pair of ∆ ±n (p). As ε 2 (p) + |∆ n (p)| 2 are positive-definite quantities, we conclude that the Pfaffian does not change sign when q is even, but necessarily changes sign at the BFS for odd q because ε(p) does. The Z 2 topological invariant can be defined as Note that while we made use of the MTG Z q symmetry in the proof of the existence of the BFS for odd q, since the stability of the BFS relies only on PHS and parity symmetry (5.24) While for odd q we simply have ν Z2,0 = ν Z2 , we note that interestingly we can also define ν Z2,0 for even q assuming that L is even. In that case we can also analogously define ν Z2,q indicating a sign change of Pf [τ z H BdG,q ] = ε. We then have ν Z2 = ν Z2,0 ν Z2,q is trivial, while the new invariant ν Z2,0 is not, indicating the presence of a doubly degenerate BFS. Importantly, ν Z2,0 exists for even q only when L is even, and can only be defined in the presence of the Z q MTG symmetry in addition to PHS and parity P, unlike ν Z2 . Recall that when the Z q symmetry is T (θ 0 ) = T N 2 T1 with θ 0 = 2πp q M , L = N -M modulo q and note that T (θ 0 ) commutes or anti-commutes with T q/2 1 (0) when L is even or odd. Recall also that gap functions are even or odd under T q/2 1 (0) for even and odd M respectively and belong to different irreps of the MTG, as we showed in Sec. III B. The parity of N , on the other hand, determines whether the Z q symmetry T (θ 0 ) commutes or anti-commute with T q/2 1 (0). We therefore conclude that for even q, ν Z2,0 is a new topological invariant protected by the combination of PHS, parity P, and Z q symmetries when M and N have the same parity. We note the similarity of the definition of ν Z2,0 to that of topological invariants of crystalline SPT phases defined by similarly simultaneously block-diagonalizing the Hamiltonian and the crystalline symmetry In this paper, we have provided a detailed analysis of the properties of electrons undergoing pairing instabilities in time-reversal broken Hofstadter bands, which characterize the spectrum of single particle states in 2D lattices with magnetic flux Φ = (p/q)Φ 0 per unit cell. Our approach focused on exploring the consequences of the magnetic translation symmetries on the paired state. A central result of this work is the classification of the irreducible representations of the magnetic translation group furnished by the pairing matrix ∆, which we established to have different properties from the familiar irreps furnished by single particle Bloch states. Furthermore, the group theory analysis shows that at least one magnetic translation symmetry is necessarily broken in the paired state, and we find numerically that all of them can be broken at least for q ≥ 5. Building on the properties of the irreps of the magnetic translation group, we have formulated an effective Ginzburg-Landau theory to study the thermodynamic properties of Hofstadter superconductors at general fluxes Φ = (p/q)Φ 0 with rational p/q. The theory is constructed in terms of a complex valued vector order parameter η of dimension q (q/2) for odd (even) q. Moreover, we found that the multi-component nature of the order parameter yields a rich phase diagram characterized by different symmetry breaking patterns of the magnetic translation group, which can be interpreted as distinct classes of "vortex lattices." An important class of thermodynamic phases we have identified corresponds to Z q -symmetric Hofstadter superconductors, in which the magnetic translation group breaks down to a Z q subgroup resulting in q/2-or q-fold degenerate ground states for even and odd q, respectively, with the degeneracy equal to the dimension of the irreps. Furthermore, we have shown that chiral Z q -symmetric Hofstadter superconductors provide a natural setting for the realization of topological superconductivity with tunable Chern numbers. In particular, we have established that when pairing only involves electrons in a single Hofstadter band, Hofstadter superconductors can realize SPT phases protected by magnetic translation symmetries where the parity of the Chern numbers is the same as the parity of q. This property establishes that Hofstadter superconductors with a fully gapped spectrum fall into two topological classes according to the parity of q; i.e., they support non-Abelian (Abelian) excitations for odd (even) q. Moreover, we have shown that when the Hofstadter superconductor additionally possesses parity symmetry, its spectrum necessarily supports Bogoliubov Fermi surfaces (BFS) for odd q, even when the Z q symmetry is broken by the order parameter as the associated topological invariant defined in This work raises a number of interesting questions that deserve future attention. First, given that the ground states we find have a large degeneracy of order q, in a real system it is natural to expect domain formation. The study of such domains requires considering gradient terms in the Ginzburg Landau free energy in Eq. (4.4) that we have ignored in this work. Additionally, other spatial defects (of the order parameter and/or of the underlying lattice) such as dislocations and disclinations are possible. It could therefore be fruitful to study the nature of low energy excitations of Hofstadter superconductors in the presence of such defects to seek possible realizations of defect-bound Majorana fermions Furthermore, the presence of a multi-component order parameter characterizing Hofstadter superconductors with phases relations fixed by the magnetic translation group suggests the possibility that this system may support interesting classes of Leggett modes Finally, it would be desirable to find direct connections between the phenomenological Ginzburg-Landau theory established on symmetry grounds and microscopic models describing moiré superlattices subject to a perpendic-ular magnetic field In this work we were motivated mainly by the fact that superlattice and moiré systems allow for both the experimental realization of Hofstadter systems As an example also considered in Ĉ-1 In particular, Ĉ4 takes eigenvectors of T1 with eigenvalues ω pM q to eigenvectors of T2 with the same eigenvalues ω pM q , and similarly eigenvectors of T2 with eigenvalues ω pL q to eigenvectors of T -1 1 = T q-1 1 with eigenvalues ω -pL q . This fixes the action of Ĉ4 , including its action on the gap function ∆(p) = L η L ∆(L) (p) which can be separated into an action on p (which is the same as the action of C 4 ) and an action on the order parameter η. The latter can be deduced from Eqs. (4.26) or (4.32) by requiring η (M )1,0 Ĉ4 --→ η (M )0,1 , η (L)0,1 Ĉ4 --→ η (-L)1,0 . (B2) The condition Ĉ4 4 = 1 in principle allows us to take instead η (M )1,0 Ĉ4 --→ i N η (M )0,1 with N = 0, 1, 2, 3, but this can be obtained by combining Ĉ4 with a U (1) transformation so we can take Eq. (B1) as the canonical definition of Ĉ4 (we can also define Ĉ4 (i N ) in the same way we defined Tj (θ)). Note that Ĉ2 4 = I, the accidental symmetry that we defined in Sec. IV. We can similarly define a three fold magnetic rotation Note that the magnetic field itself breaks the out-of-plane mirror symmetries, while the in-plane mirror symmetry commutes with both T1 and T2 and so acts trivially on the patch indices. The rest of the magnetic point group symmetries do not commute with the MTG symmetries. This means in particular that the Z q phases discussed in the main text generally break the point groups symmetries. On the other hand, we could consider phases that respect the magnetic point group symmetries, but which therefore in general break all of the MTG symmetries. Note also that the relations in Eqs. (B1-B4) imply that the MTG is a normal subgroup of the total symmetry group that includes the point group (i.e. any element of the MTG conjugated by a point group symmetry is again an element of the MTG). This implies by Mackey's irreducibility criterion that the representations of the total symmetry group induced by the irreps of the MTG presented in Sec. III B are themselves irreducible. In other words, in most cases the irreps of the MTG can essentially be considered as irreps of the total symmetry group, though additional irreps (in which the MTG is completely broken) may be possible.