The production of Gd-148 had challenges for available methods in the literature, such as its high cost and low production amount. Therefore, we recommended a new production route of Gd-148 on natural Sm and Eu targets via particle accelerators. For this aim, we calculated and simulated cross-section, activity, the yield of product, and integral yield curves for 21 different nuclear reaction processes under certain conditions. Based on the obtained results, we proposed the radioisotope Gd-148 to use Radioisotope Thermoelectric Generators for deep space and planetary explorations in spacecraft and space-probes as a suitable energy source, instead of Pu-238. Nuclear batteries that depend on ionizing radiation to provide heat and ion production have been developed for applications of deep space researches, planetary explorations, and microelectronic technology e.g. the radioisotope thermoelectric generator (RTG), which converts heat power into electricity via the Seebeck effect. In a few decades, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) has taken important steps to develop RTG which is the most advanced Multi-Mission Radioisotope Thermoelectric Generator (MMRTG) developed by NASA. MMRTG has been basically used by NASA's deep space missions to ensure electrical power to space-crafts and space-probes as shown in Fig. For this aim, in this work, we have assessed the production of Gd-148, which has potential for use in RTGs, on Sm, Eu targets via particle accelerators. The activities and the yields of product for the productions of these isotopes are simulated under some conditions e.g. irradiation time of 24 h, the incident beam current of 1 mA, and the cooling time of 24 h. Moreover, the cross-sections of each reaction process are calculated in the energy region between 1 MeV and 100 MeV. Based on the obtained results, the integral yield curves of appropriate reaction processes for the production of Gd-148 to be able to use as an energy source in RTGs are calculated as dependent on incident particle energy (projectile energy). Based on Sm and Eu targets, Gd-148, which is the suitable half-life and specific power densities to use in RTGs, might be produced by nuclear reaction processes via a particle accelerator. However, to produce this nucleus, the simulations of the reaction processes were carried out under particular circumstances to be determined the activities and the yields of product in energy region Eparticle=1100 MeV for each reaction. The Sm and Gd targets were supposed to the uniform thicknesses and density during the irradiation time of all reaction processes and above 99% purity of targets. The reaction processes include no loss in the activity or yield. That's why the simulation of the reaction processes does not contain any superiority. Based on incident particle energy and particle beam current, it has been noted that the target isotopes in each reaction process involve appropriate target thicknesses. The effective targets of Sm and Eu isotopes and the most important results of reaction processes are clearly presented in Table MeV and irradiation time of 24 h. Besides, the cooling time is 24 h. Under circumstances mentioned above, the yields of product and activities of Gd-148 on Sm and Eu targets were simulated for 21 different reaction processes. To assess the production of Gd-148 on Sm and Eu targets in the nuclear reaction processes, we have calculated the cross-section of reaction processes via Talys 1.9 code, and the cross-section curves of reactions are shown in Fig. where Ek and σ CF represent the emission energy and the composite-nucleus formation cross section. Furthermore, particle (p) and hole (h) number are given p=pп+pν and h=hп+hν by proton (п) and neutron (ν) particles. Regarding the level density model in two-component exciton model, we exploited the Fermi gas model with constant temperature (CTM), and total level density can be given by the following equation: where U and EM are the effective excitation energy and an iterative term, NL and NU are constant parameters obtained from tables and databases. In addition to the cross-section calculations, the simulations of the activities and the yields of product for all reaction processes have been performed by Talys code under certain conditions. The activity (Aj) of the produced nucleus j as a function of irradiation time (t) in terms of the decay rate of j, where N j (t) is represents by Thence, the activity is expressed as follows: where the production rate R T→j can be expressed in terms of the beam current (I beam ), the residual production cross-section (σ j rp ), the projectile charge number (z p ) and the active target volume (V target ): Additionally, the integral yields of nuclear reaction processes have been calculated by the following equation: where ) is the mass-stopping power of target material, NA, σ(E) and M represent the Avagadro number, the reaction cross-section and the mass number of the target material. Furthermore, to calculate the integral yield, the mass-stopping powers of target materials need in Eq. where A and Z represent the mass number and proton number for the target material. Each of the variables can be found out in Artun's previous works in detail Table To produce Gd-148, the cross-section curves of 21 different reaction processes with charged particle-induced reactions on natural Sm and Eu targets are presented in Figure Nonetheless, the projectile energy in the alpha-induced reaction processes do not exceed 100 MeV and the cross-section values are above 900 mb. On the other hand, the maximum crosssection value of 144 Sm(α,γ) reaction is 0.52 mb at 18 MeV. In analyzing the cross-sections for the production of Gd-148, it is clearly observed that using natural Sm isotopes as target is more appropriate compared to Eu targets. However, to analyze the accuracy of the production of Gd-148, the activities and yields of product of all reaction processes should be also estimated and discussed. In order to estimate the formation of Gd-148 in the charged particle-induced reactions on 151,153 Eu and 147,148,149,150,152,154 Sm target materials, we simulated activity and yield of product of the reaction processes as dependent on irradiation time (Figs. The alpha reactions on Sm targets reach up to 100 GBq/mAh. However, the deuteron-induced reactions on Eu targets in Fig. In this work, we analyze the production of Gd-148 because Gd-148 has vital potential as an energy source for use in RTGs. It is obvious that there are ineffective and expensive methods in the literature to produce Gd-148. For this reason, we recommend a new production route of Gd-148 to the literature, which is quite an efficient production method based on the obtained results in this work. The production of Gd-148 is performed by a particle accelerator in the energy region Eparticle=100→1 MeV. The natural Sm and Eu targets are irradiated by the charged particles during 24 hours for a constant beam current of 1 mA. The calculated cross-section and integral yields curves of reaction processes are presented as a function of the projectile energy. Additionally, the activity and the yield curves are simulated for each reaction process as dependent on irradiation time. When considered the calculated and the simulated results, it has been noted that the importance of target material in reaction processes in the production of Gd-148 can be seen in 153 Eu( 3 He,x) reactions for the production of Gd-148 are higher than those of 151 Eu(d,5n) and 153 Eu(d,7n) reactions, the activities (1036.89 MBq and 670.22 MBq, respectively) for 151 Eu(d,5n) and 153 Eu(d,7n) reactions are higher than the activities of 151 Eu( 3 He,x) and 153 Eu( 3 He,x) reaction processes (133.05 MBq and 79.51 MBq).