The parent compound of high-T c cuprate superconductors is a Mott insulator described by the Heisenberg spin-spin interaction on a square lattice. With carrier doping, the charge degree of freedom becomes active and both spin and charge couple to each other, leading to very rich physics including high-T c superconductivity. In this article, we focus on the charge degree of freedom and review theoretical insights into the electronic nematic order, bond-charge orders, and plasmons. The low-energy charge dynamics is controlled by the spin-spin interaction J, which generates various bond-charge ordering tendencies including the electronic nematic order. The nematic order is driven by a d-wave Pomeranchuk instability and is pronounced in the underdoped region as well as around van Hove filling in the hole-doped case; the nematic tendency is weak in the electron-doped region. Nematicity consistent with the d-wave Pomeranchuk instability was reported for hole-doped cuprates in various experiments such as inelastic neutron scattering, angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy, Compton scattering, electronic Raman scattering, and measurements of Nernst coefficients and magnetic torque. Although the t-J and Hubbard models correctly predicted the proximity to the nematic instability in cuprates far before the experimental indications were obtained, full understanding of the charge ordering tendencies in hole-doped cuprates still requires further theoretical studies. In electron-doped cuprates, on the other hand, the d-wave bond-charge excitations around momentum q ≈ (0.5π, 0) explain the resonant x-ray scattering data very well. Plasmon excitations are also present and the agreement between the large-N theory of the t-J model and resonant inelastic x-ray scattering measurements is nearly quantitative in both hole-and electron-doped cuprates. Theoretically the charge dynamics in cuprates is summarized as a dual structure in energy space: the low-energy region scaled by J, where the nematic and various bond-charge orders are relevant, and the high-energy region typically larger than J, where plasmons are predominant. We hope that the present article serves for a sound basis toward further experimental and theoretical studies on the origin of the pseudogap and ultimately the high-T c mechanism. The parent compound of high-temperature cuprate superconductors is a charge-transfer type Mott insulator and exhibits the Neél state. The cuprate physics is nothing less than the physics of a doped Mott insulator on a square lattice, independent of carrier types. Furthermore effectively only one band is relevant to the physics related to the energy scale below ∆ CT . The study of the cuprate physics therefore provides a simple setup to explore the very rich physics of a doped Mott insulator: In this article, we focus on the charge degree of freedom and provide theoretical insights into the electronic nematic order (Sec. 2), bond-charge orders (Sec. 3), and plasmons (Sec. 4). In Sec. 5, we provide a slightly detailed summary. The page limitation did not allow us to cover all interesting works related to the three subjects above. In addition, the spin degrees of freedom and a coupling between spin and charge are beyond our scope. The electronic nematic order breaks the rotational symmetry of the system, leaving the other symmetries unbroken. There are two different routes to obtain the nematic order. One is to assume the so-called stripe ordered phase, which breaks both rotational and translational symmetries, and to envisage that the charge stripes fluctuate due to the lowdimensionality and restore the translational symmetry alone. The other is to invoke a d-wave Pomeranchuk instability (dPI) in the metallic phase as was first obtained in the t-J (Refs. 42,43) and Hubbard The origin of the nematic order lies in the (effective) nearest-neighbor interaction such as J-and V-terms on a square lattice. We can easily see that the spin-spin interaction contains the following interaction: where N s is the total number of lattice sites, S i = 1 Here implying four different channels. Let us focus on the forward scattering processes and put q = 0 in Eq. ( where d k = cos k xcos k y . The nematic order parameter may be defined as When the antiferromagnetic interaction (J > 0) is considered, the nematic channel becomes attractive. The functional form of the right-hand side of Eq. ( If one starts with the Hubbard model, the interaction on the right-hand side of Eqs. ( Pomeranchuk interaction itself is quite general, independent of whether the system is defined in the strong coupling limit as in the t-J model or in a weak coupling model. Obviously the spin-spin and Coulomb interactions contain other ordering tendencies, too and the nematic order is regarded as one of them. But first let us focus on the nematic order and clarify its typical property. Figure and Here f (x) is the Fermi distribution function and ξ k is the renormalized electron dispersion. That is, the nematic order occurs when the a term exceeds unity. This a term describes the d-wave weighted density of states averaged over an energy interval of order of temperature T around the chemical potential and becomes large in two different cases. One case is that the band width becomes narrower. In the slave-boson mean-field theory, the nearest-neighbor hopping integral t is renormalized to be tδ, where δ is doping rate measured from half-filling. The renormalization of t to tδ is a special feature of the strong electron correlations that the double occupancy of electrons is prohibited at any lattice site. This is the major reason why the onset temperature increases with decreasing doping in Fig. The enhancement of the nematic instability there is not visible, implying that the effect of the band narrowing is dominant. Similar results to Fig. In a weak coupling model, the nematic order occurs around van Hove filling with a domeshaped transition line as shown in Fig. In the weak coupling limit, the phase diagram Fig. where γ = 0.577 is the Euler constant, ḡ is the dimensionless coupling constant, and ǫ Λ corresponds to the typical energy scale around the saddle point contributing to the nematic with α = 0.4515. Hence the dimensionless ratios of different quantities become universal: Note that the functional form of Eq. ( While a certain approximation and some simplification are usually needed to compute the phase diagram, we emphasize that the presence of the dPI interaction in the attractive channel itself does not depend on an approximation. Higher order corrections to the approximation may modify quantitative features of the phase diagram, but may not introduce a drastic change as long as the nematic instability survives. In fact, exact diagonalization The electron-electron interaction can also drive other orders such as superconductivity, antiferromagnetism, charge-density-wave, and bond-charge orders. Which order can be the leading one in the t-J and Hubbard models? In the t-J model, d-wave pairing is a stronger instability than the nematic order in the slave-boson mean-field theory The nematic instability is usually weaker than bond-charge orders in a large-N theory, Coulomb repulsion is taken into account. Available theoretical results imply that the nematic tendency is surely present in both t-J and Hubbard models. The point here is that even if the nematic tendency is preempted by a different order, the susceptibility of the nematic order can remain large. In this case, the electronic property becomes very susceptible to a small external anisotropy and exhibits a big anisotropy. The big response to a small anisotropy is a robust and a general property of the nematic physics when the system is close to the nematic instability. This physics was extensively studied in the slave-boson mean-field theory of the t-J model In the theoretical scheme in Ref. 43, the nematic tendency increases with decreasing doping as shown in Figs. The strong coupling Hubbard model with a large on-site Coulomb interaction U (U/t = 6, 8, 10, 12 in Ref. 53, U/t = 6 in Ref. 54, and U/t = 10 in Ref. 55) also shows the large nematicity in a small doping region close to half-filling, consistent with Figs. However, it should be kept in mind that the possible magnetic instability was not considered in those studies. Hereafter we do not distinguish between electron operators ckσ and c kσ because the nematic physics is relevant to both strong and weak coupling models. The nematic correlation function is defined as where q and ω are momentum and energy transfer, respectively, Γ is a positive infinitesimal, χd (q) = 1 2 σ c k+ q 2 σ is a generalized nematic operator [see also Eq. ( The spectrum of the nematic fluctuations was revealed in Ref. 73 in both normal and superconducting phases. In the normal phase, the nematic mode is realized inside the particlehole continuum [inset in Fig. In the normal phase, the nematic fluctuations appear in a low-energy region as shown in Fig. where ν n = 2πnT is a bosonic Matsubara frequency; ξ is the nematic correlation length, ξ 0 and u are non-universal parameters determined by the momentum dependence of the interaction strength and the band structure; g is a coupling strength at q = (0, 0). Quantum nematic fluctuations are described by finite Matsubara frequencies ν n 0 in Eq. ( At finite temperature, a more drastic effect occurs. The self-energy computed perturbatively to first order is shown in Fig. However, when more precise calculations were performed by including the self-consistency in the perturbative analysis and also vertex corrections, Electronic Raman scattering in the B 1g symmetry measures directly the nematic correlation function for q = 0 in Eq. ( B 1g phonons also couple directly to the nematic fluctuations and Raman scattering exhibits a characteristic feature near the nematic instability. When the B 1g phonon's frequency is very small, the predicted double peak structure in the normal phase in Fig. In Bi 2 Sr 2 CaCu 2 O 8+δ (Bi2212) around van Hove filling, where the pseudogap temperature nearly vanishes, the B 1g Raman scattering The nematic correlations are then suppressed inside the pseudogap region. Further exploration by Raman scattering for different cuprate compounds will serve to elucidate how the nematic fluctuations evolve in the cuprate phase diagram. As seen in the original theoretical finding of the dPI, Compton scattering measures directly the momentum distribution function and thus can also detect the FS, complementary to ARPES. Recent measurements for La 2-x Sr x CuO 4 (LSCO) at x = 0.08, 0.15, and 0.30 revealed that the FS strongly deforms to become open for x = 0.08 and 0.15, like a quasi-one-dimensional FS, in each CuO 2 plane and such a deformation alternates along the c-axis, recovering the fourfold symmetry in bulk. YBCO has an intrinsic small anisotropy coming from the orthorhombic crystal structure. Various physical quantities, however, can exhibit a large xy-anisotropy due to a coupling to the underlying nematicity, which is a robust feature of the nematic physics as was discussed in Fig. The first experimental signature was obtained in the xy-anisotropy of the magnetic excitation spectra in YBCO. The nematic order couples directly to an external xy anisotropy such as strain, uniaxial pressure, and an orthorhombic crystal structure. In the presence of xy anisotropy, the nematic order parameter becomes finite and thus no second-order phase transition occurs. However, When weak nematic order-parameter fluctuations are included, the wing splits into two as shown in the main panel in Fig. At zero temperature, YBCO is expected to locate near the point of QCEP 2 in Fig. Referring to a pioneering work by Griffiths about the wing structure associated with a first-order phase transition, namely a concept of tricritical point, in the He 3 -He 4 mixtures, The possible importance of bond-charge orders in cuprates was already recognized in early theoretical studies. Extensive studies of possible charge orders were performed in a large-N theory of the t-J model on a square lattice at leading order. In the leading-order theory of the large-N expansion, the number of spins is extended from D ab (q, ω) are obtained as a 6 × 6 matrix and given by where a and b run from 1 to 6; q and ω are momentum and energy transfer, respectively. The quantity D (0) ab describes bare charge susceptibilities and is renormalized by the boson selfenergies Π ab at the order of 1/N. Explicit forms of D The instability of the paramagnetic phase is signaled by the divergence of the static susceptibilities D ab (q, 0) for a continuous phase transition. Therefore we study eigenvalues and eigenvectors of the matrix [D ab (q, 0)] -1 . When an eigenvalue crosses zero at a given doping rate, temperature, and momentum, the instability occurs toward a phase characterized by the corresponding eigenvector. Among numerous possibilities, essentially only a few bondcharge instabilities are relevant to parameters appropriate to cuprates. i) Flux phase with q ≈ (π, π). In this phase, currents flow in each plaquette; see Fig. The phase diagram obtained in the large-N theory of the t-J model The charge ordering tendency exhibits a strong particle-hole asymmetry. In contrast to the hole-doped case, the charge ordering tendency is limited only close to half-filling in the electron doping region. The dPI becomes the weakest instability and flux phase is leading at high temperature. At low temperature in a moderate doping region, dbond with q ≈ (0.8π, 0.8π) becomes dominant and the ordering tendency of sbond and unibond with q ≈ (π, π) are located close to the dbond. In the large-N theory, the effect of spin fluctuations does not appear at the leading order and thus no magnetic instability is observed in Fig. On the hole-doped side, one may assume the magnetic order close to half-filling, for example, in δ 0.05. Hence the theory predicts the flux instability in a large doping region, which is however not observed in experiemnts. This inconsistency remains to be studied. Since the second leading one is the dPI, we can expect that the systems has a large nematic susceptibility and becomes sensitive to an external xy anisotropy even if the dPI does not occurs. This feature is in fact consistent with the nematic tendency observed in cuprates; On the electron-doped side, the magnetic phase may extend to a wide doping region, which could hide all charge ordering tendencies or make only dbond, sbond, and unibond relevant to the reality. As we shall show below, the dbond ordering tendency is consistent with the RXS The charge excitation spectrum is computed from Eq. (15). To extract the bond-charge component, we need to project D -1 ab onto the corresponding eigenvector. We obtain the dbond, sbond and flux order susceptibilities as follows: The difference between χ dbond and χ sbond lies in the sign in front of D -1 34 and both quantities become identical for q = (π, q y ) and (q x , π). Since Fig. χ sbond shows a low-energy dispersion around q = (π, π), which is related to the proximity to the corresponding instability at δ c = 0.114 (see Fig. χ flux exhibits large spectral weight at q = (π, π) around ω = 0.1t. This energy is reduced to zero with decreasing doping towards δ c = 0.093, where the flux phase instability occurs (see Fig. The important insight obtained here is that the low-energy charge excitations are not dominated by a certain bond-charge order, but by various types of bond-charge orders especially around q = (π, π). RIXS measurements in such a region have not been performed. What was extensively studied is a region along the (0, 0)-(π, 0) direction by RXS. Plasmons are a well established concept in metals in the presence of the long-range Coulomb interactions 125) and were discussed theoretically also in cuprates eV around q = (0.3π, 0) (Refs. 137-139). The origin of this signal is controversial. One scenario proposed intraband particle-hole excitations with strong incoherent character, not plasmons. By taking the layered structure in cuprates and the long-range Coulomb interaction into account, the large-N theory of the layered t-J model on a square lattice turned out to explain the charge excitations observed around q = (0, 0) in terms of acoustic-like plasmons nearly quantitatively. after summing all contributions up to O(1/N). Note that the large-N theory can handle both on-site charge and bond-charge excitations on an equal footing by choosing appropriate com- Figure Below ω ≈ 0.8t, there is a particle-hole continuum coming from individual charge excitations. π,π) (q x ,q y ) 0 0.5 The continuum does not depend much on q z and the result for q z = 0 is presented. We find no strong spectral weight near zero energy, implying that there is no (on-site) charge order tendency, which contrasts with the case of bond-charge orders (see Fig. It should be noted that the plasmon energy has a gap at q = (0, 0) for a finite q z . This gap comes from the presence of the finite interlayer hopping integral t z (Ref. 38, 133, 151, 153, 154), which was missed in many theoretical studies. Figure which is more conventional in research of cuprates? In this case, instead of plasmons, the zero-sound mode is realized and its dispersion [Fig. It was shown 149) that the acoustic-like plasmon dispersion obtained theoretically well reproduces the peak position of the charge excitations observed in electron-doped cuprates Given that high-temperature cuprate superconductors are realized by carrier doping into a Mott insulator, the understanding of the charge dynamics is definitely indispensable to the cuprate physics. In this article, we have focused on the electronic nematic order, bond-charge orders, and plasmons. A crucial insight obtained in theory is that cuprates can be close to the electronic nematic instability. Bond-charge orders range from the so-called flux phase It is d-wave bond-charge order that explains the charge peak observed along the (1, 0) direction for various doping rates. Plasmons originate from the usual on-site charge excitations in the presence of the longrange Coulomb interaction, 125) not from the bond-charge excitations. Moreover the layered structure common to high-T c cuprate superconductors is needed to be considered 