We report on the study of phonon properties and electron-phonon coupling in thin NbTiN films, which are intensively exploited in superconducting devices. Studied NbTiN films with thicknesses less than 10 nm are disordered with respect to electron transport, the Ioffe-Regel parameter of kF le = 2.5 -3.0 (kF is the Fermi wave vector and le is the electron mean free path), and inelastic electron-phonon interaction, the product qT le 1 (qT is the wave vector of a thermal phonon). By means of magnetoconductance and photoresponse techniques, we derived the inelastic electronphonon scattering rate 1/τ e-ph and determined sound velocities and phonon heat capacities. In the temperature range from 12 to 20 K, the scattering rate varies with temperature as 1/τ e-ph ∝ T 3.45±0.05 ; its value extrapolated to 10 K amounts to approximately 16 ps. Making a comparative analysis of our films and other films used in superconducting devices, such as polycrystalline granular NbN and amorphous WSi, we found a systematic reduction of the sound velocity in all these films by about 50% as compared to the corresponding bulk crystalline materials. A corresponding increase in the phonon heat capacities in all these films is, however, less than the Debye model predicts. We attribute these findings to reduced film dimensionality and film morphology. Thin disordered NbTiN films are intensively exploited in various superconducting devices. They have become a prominent material for the fabrication of scientific and commercial superconducting nanowire single-photon detectors (SNSPDs) In this study, we derive various properties of NbTiN films at low temperatures, in particular, the e-ph scattering time, the sound velocity, and the phonon heat capacity, and carry out a comparative analysis with other films, NbN and WSi, intensively used in various superconducting devices. We show that, in all films, the sound velocity is reduced and the phonon heat capacity is increased as compared to the corresponding bulk crystalline materials. We suppose that this effect is exclusively controlled by modification of acoustic phonons due to reduced film dimensionality and film morphology. NbTiN films with thicknesses 6 and 9 nm (samples #L135 and #L134, respectively, in Table Resistance and Hall measurements were carried out by a standard four-probe technique in a Physical Property Measurement System (manufactured by Quantum Design) in magnetic fields applied perpendicular to the film surface. The van der Pauw method was used to determine the square resistance R S and eliminate the effect of the planar geometry for two-dimensional (2d) specimens. Fig. 1 holds, we fitted the R S (T ) data with the theory of fluctuation conductivity of Aslamazov and Larkin . ( Here, h is the reduced Planck constant and e is the elementary charge. An external magnetic field suppresses the superconducting transition as it is shown in Fig. termined the Fermi wavevector as k F = (3π 2 n e ) 1/3 , the elastic electron mean free path as l e = hk F /(n e e 2 R SN d), and, finally, the Ioffe-Regel parameter k F l e . The latter indicates a slightly different level of disorder in our films. All these parameters are listed in Table We determined the e-ph scattering time for our NbTiN films by means of the magnetoconductance technique described in The result is shown in Fig. We fitted the experimental δG(B, T ) data with a sum of Eqs. (A1-A4) using three independent fitting parameters, namely the temperature-dependent electron dephasing time τ φ (T ), the temperature-independent spin-orbit interaction time τ s.o. , and a constant C * allowing the latter to take values between 1.0 to 3.0 according to The experimental dependence τ -1 φ (T ) is described with a sum of rates affiliated with different phase-breaking scattering events in which electrons are involved. In the absence of extrinsic phase-breaking sources, these are electron-electron (e-e) where Here, #L135, respectively). It is worth noting that the expression for the e-ph dephasing rate, Eq. (2b), is valid in a relatively small temperature range, where n is constant, in general, n varies with the temperature. We fitted the experimental τ -1 φ (T ) data shown in Fig. We studied the energy relaxation of nonequilibrium electrons in NbTiN microbridges by means of the photoresponse technique. The microbridges were fabricated from the two NbTiN films, #L135 and #L134, shaped to a width of ∼90 μm and a length of ∼1 μm (along the current flow) with tapered contacts toward the electrodes, which are 21 μm apart, to reduce the current-crowding effect. The microbridges were installed in a continuous flow cryostat, kept in the resistive state at an ambient temperature slightly larger than T C0 , and exposed to light pulses via a quartz window of the cryostat. Light was focused onto the microbridges into a spot with a diameter larger than ∼ 100 μm. The light pulses were generated by a Ti:Sapphire laser at a wavelength of about 800 nm with a repetition rate of 80 MHz and a subpicosecond duration. Biasing the microbridges with a small direct current, we recorded their photoresponse (amplified voltage transients) to light pulses in the time domain with a sampling oscilloscope (Fig. d The e-ph energy relaxation time (proportional to the τ e-ph with a proportionality coeff. computed with Eq. ( is seen in Fig. We fitted the experimental transients using c e /c ph and τ esc as fitting parameters, along with the fixed values of τ EP . The results are shown in Fig. For the studied thin NbTiN films, we found that in the temperature range from 12 to 20 K the e-ph scattering time varies as τ e-ph ∝ T -n with n between 3.4 and 3.5 and that at 10 K the extrapolated value, τ e-ph Let us now discuss the τ e-ph provided by the SM model (Appendix B). Under the condition q T l e 1 and the dominance of vibrating scattering centers (k ∼ 1) fulfilled for our films, τ e-ph(l) τ e-ph(t) and, consequently, the total e-ph scattering rate is controlled by the interaction of electrons with transverse phonons τ e-ph ≡ τ e-ph(t) . Therefore, we limit the discussion to the properties of transverse phonons. Interacting with a phonon, an electron exchanges momentum ∼ q T within an interaction region ∼ 1/q T ∝ u t , so that the smaller the phonon velocity, the smaller the interaction region, and the shorter the interaction time. In fact, τ e-ph(t) ∝ ρu 3 t (Eq. B1b). With ρ * = 7.5 g/cm 3 and u * t = 4.7 nm/ps for bulk crystalline NbTiN computed from first-principles Let us now estimate the phonon escape time using the acoustic mismatch model Further, from the best-fit values of c e /c ph ratios (Table II) and c e = π 2 k 2 B N (0)T /3 predicted by the Drude model, we find the phonon heat capacities c exp ph , which are listed in Table av , where l ] -1/3 ≈ u t , are systematically larger than the heat capacities c * ph computed within the same approximation with the sound velocities of corresponding bulk crystalline materials. There are three effects on the sound velocity and phonon heat capacity to be discussed: (i) depletion of long-wavelength phonon states,(ii) phonon softening, and (iii) film morphology (amorphous or granular structure). At low temperatures, the wavelength of a thermal phonon λ ph ≈ 2πhu/(k B T ) becomes comparable or larger than the film thickness that modifies the 3d Debye phonon spectrum. Phonon spectra in a metallic film with a variable thickness on a semi-infinite substrate were computed and compared with experimental data In a thin mono-crystalline film, phonon softening, i.e. the decrease of the effective Debye temperature with respect to the bulk value, occurs due to weakening of ion bounds at film surfaces As it is seen from the discussion above, the effect of the film morphology on the sound velocity and phonon heat capacity is hard to separate from the effect of the reduced dimensionality. The structure of both NbTiN films Comparing calorimetric experimental values of c exp ph with the c ph values computed with reduced sound velocities u t of the SM model (Table Finally, let us compare the properties of our NbTiN films and NbN films studied in We have studied dephasing and energy relaxation of electrons in thin superconducting NbTiN films on Si/SiO 2 substrates with magnetoconductance and photoresponse techniques, respectively, and compared our results with those reported in the literature for NbN and WSi films. Our main findings are the following: (a) The studied NbTiN films are strongly disordered with respect to electron-phonon scattering, the product q T l e (T C ) 1, and electron transport, the Ioffe-Regel parameter k F l e = 2.5 -3.0. In the temperature range from 12 to 20 K, their inelastic e-ph scattering rate varies as τ (b) In all studied and considered films, we have found a systematic reduction of the sound velocity by ∆u/u = 40 -60 % as compared to the sound velocities computed from the first principles for corresponding bulk crystalline materials. (c) For all films the experimental calorimetric heat capacities of phonons are much larger than the heat capacities computed for corresponding crystalline materials with the 3d Debye model. For amorphous films and relatively thick polycrystalline films, calorimetric heat capacities are almost equal to those computed with the reduced sound velocities, while for granular films they are a few times less. The latter is most plausibly due to the depletion of low energy phonon modes in granules. Authors greatly acknowledge the support of V. Zwiller in the sample preparation and stimulating discussions with K. Illin on the magnetic properties and morphology of superconducting granular films. a At T = T C0 , τ e-ph equals α e-ph . b t a c Obtained in Appendix C.