We demonstrate an RF photonic fractional Hilbert transformer based on an integrated Kerr microcomb source featuring a record low free spectral range of 48.9 GHz, yielding 75 microcomb lines across the C-band. By programming and shaping the comb lines according to calculated tap weights, we demonstrate that the Hilbert transformer can achieve tunable bandwidths ranging from 1.2 to 15.3 GHz, switchable centre frequencies from baseband to 9.5 GHz, and arbitrary fractional orders. We experimentally characterize the RF amplitude and phase response of the tunable bandpass and lowpass Hilbert transformers with 90 and 45-degree phase shift. The experimental results show good agreement with theory, confirming the effectiveness of our approach as a powerful way to implement the standard as well as fractional Hilbert transformers with broad and switchable processing bandwidths and centre frequencies, together with high reconfigurability and greatly reduced size and complexity. 2 band. This represents twice the number of wavelengths, or taps, used in our previous work The spectral transfer function of a general fractional Hilbert transformer is given by where j = √-1, φ = P × π / 2 denotes the phase shift, P is the fractional order (when P = 1, it becomes a standard Hilbert transformer). The corresponding impulse response is given by a continuous hyperbolic function: This hyperbolic function is truncated and sampled in time with discrete taps for digital implementation. The null frequency is given by: where ∆t denotes the sample spacing. The coefficient of the tap at t = 0 can be adjusted to achieve a tunable fractional order where N is the number of comb lines, or taps, and n = 0, 1, 2, ... , N-1 is the comb index. In order to scale the bandwidth of the standard and fractional Hilbert transformer, we multiplied the corresponding impulse response of the spectral transfer function of the Hilbert transformer with a cosine function to vary the operation bandwidth (designed by the Remez algorithm where fBW is the scalable bandwidth. To further switch the centre frequency of the Hilbert transformer, the tap coefficients were multiplied by a sine function to shift the RF transmission spectrum. The corresponding discrete impulse response is given by Here, we use this transversal approach to achieve Hilbert transformers with both variable bandwidths as well as RF centre frequencies. The transfer function of the transversal structure where M is the number of taps, ω is the RF angular frequency, T is the time delay between adjacent taps, and h(n) is the tap coefficient of the n th tap. Figure The MRRs used here were fabricated on a platform based on Hydex glass To generate microcombs with the 48.9 GHz device, the CW pump power was amplified to ~30.5 dBm, and the wavelength swept from blue to red near one of the TE resonances of the MRR at ~1553.2 nm The soliton crystal microcomb was first flattened via an optical spectral shaper (Finisar, WaveShaper 4000S) and then modulated with the RF input signal to multicast the RF waveform onto all wavelength channels simultaneously, yielding 75 replicas, although only 38 or 39 taps were actually used, on a 98 GHz spacing (2 x 48.9 GHz) for the device. These were then passed through ~3.84 km of standard single mode fibre (SMF) to provide the progressive time delays between wavelengths. The fibre was approximately twice as long as that used in The wavelength channels for both positive (solid red line) and negative (solid gray line) taps were separately measured by an optical spectrum analyser (OSA), achieving good performance that agreed well with the theory (blue dot). Finally, the weighted and delayed replicas were combined and converted back into the RF domain via a balanced photodetector (Finisar BPDV2150R). The system RF frequency response was characterized with a calibrated vector network analyser (VNA, Agilent MS4644B) to measure the RF transmission and phase response. Fig. We demonstrate a broadband RF photonic Hilbert transformer with variable bandwidths as well as RF centre frequency, based on a Kerr soliton crystal microcomb. Up to 39 wavelengths, or taps were used, resulting in a tunable bandwidth ranging from 1.2 to 15.3 GHz as well as a switchable centre frequency from baseband to 9.5 GHz. Dynamic tuning of the bandwidth, as well as the centre frequency, was achieved by programming and adjusting the tap weights. This microcomb based approach represents a solid step towards achieving a fully integrated photonic signal processor for future ultra-high-speed RF systems. [1] S. L. Hahn, Transforms and Applications Handbook, A. D. Poularikas, Ed., 3rd ed. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, 2010, ch. 7.