The Nielsen-Ninomiya Theorem has set up a ground rule for the minimal number of the topological points in a Brillouin zone. Notably, in the 2D Brillouin zone, chiral symmetry and space-time inversion symmetry can properly define topological invariants as charges characterizing the stability of the nodal points so that the non-zero charges protect these points. Due to the charge neutralization, the Nielsen-Ninomiya Theorem requires at least two stable topological points in the entire Brillouin zone. However, additional crystalline symmetries might duplicate the points. In this regard, for the wallpaper groups with crystalline symmetries, the minimal number of the nodal points in the Brillouin zone might be more than two. In this work, we determine the minimal numbers of the nodal points for the wallpaper groups in chiral-symmetric and space-time-inversionsymmetric systems separately and provide examples for new topological materials, such as topological nodal time-reversal-symmetric superconductors and Dirac semimetals. This generalized Nielsen-Ninomiya Theorem serves as a guide to search for 2D topological nodal materials and new platforms for twistronics. Furthermore, we show the Nielsen-Ninomiya Theorem can be extended to 2D non-Hermitian systems hosting topologically protected exceptional points and Fermi points for the 17 wallpaper groups and use the violation of the theorem on the surface to classify 3D Hermitian and non-Hermitian topological bulks. The study of various topologically protected points in lattice has deepened our understanding of profound knowledge in condensed matter physics The Fermion doubling theorem in the literature is limited to the absence of additional global symmetries and crystalline symmetries. On the contrary, including these symmetries, the classification of topological phases of matter has rapidly grown since the discovery of the topological insulators In Hermitian systems, the Nielsen-Ninomiya Theorem in 2D is different from the one in 1D and 3D. That is, symmetries are required to protect 2D nodal points; either space-time inversion symmetry or chiral symmetry can protect 2D Dirac nodes with 2-fold degeneracy at any location in the Brillouin zone (BZ). Space-time inversion symmetry quantizes the Z 2 Berry phase in the 1D integral path In chiral-symmetric systems, Dirac points with non-zero integer winding numbers are stable and fixed at zero en-ergy, while in space-time inversion symmetric systems, Dirac points can be moved to any energy level and are the only stable nodal points due to the Z 2 invariant. On the other hand, in 2D non-Hermitian systems, robust Fermi points To investigate the generalized no-go theorem, we consider the three distinct 2D platforms -nodal chiral-symmetric systems, space-time inversion symmetric semimetals, and non-Hermitian nodal systems. Our generalized no-go theorem exhaustively includes any 2D lattice possessing the topological points characterized by Z and Z 2 invariants. For Hermitian lattices, we note that the fragile topology This generalized no-go theorem provides a new approach to understand the topological phases beyond the methodology of the symmetry indicators The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In sec. II, before going through the technicality, we provide an overview of the no-go theorem for the 17 WGs in topological points Hermitian and non-Hermitian lattices. In sec. III, we thoroughly study the generalized no-go theorem for zeroenergy nodal points protected by chiral symmetry. In sec. IV, using a similar approach, we extend the no-go theorem to Dirac nodes protected by space-time inversion symmetry for the 10 WGs possessing inversion symmetry. In sec. V, we show that the non-Hermitian no-go theorem for exceptional points and Fermi points inherits some features from the Hermitian chiral-symmetric one and distinctly have additional re-We begin with the overview of the generalized no-go theorem for 2D Hermitian and non-Hermitian lattices for the 17 wallpaper groups, and the following sections will serve all of the details. The 17 wallpaper groups exhaustively classify 2D lattices with crystalline symmetries and Fig. ( This neutralization equation directly leads to the well-known statement of the Nielsen-Ninomiya theorem In chosen symmetry class, the minimum of this number corresponds to the minimal multiplicity and configuration of the topological points. The standard Nielsen-Ninomiya theorem First, let us introduce the no-go theorem for 2D Hermitian lattices preserving chiral symmetry for the 17 WGs in Table x indicates the mirror symmetry operator commutes/anticommutes with S. (We note that WG#14 without M x , which is an exception, has mirror symmetry M y along ΓK.) The numbers listed in the table represent the minimal absolute number ν abs for each WG symmetry class. Since some symmetries can trivialize the nodal points, '0' indicates the absence of the stable nodal points protected by chiral symmetry. Most of the remaining numbers represent the minimal numbers of the Dirac nodes with ±1 charge, with the exceptions labeled by * ; due to the symmetry constraints, the minimal configurations of the exceptions require the presence of nodal points with high charges, whose absolute values are greater than one C > 1. The minimum multiplicity list for topological points in Hermitian and non-Hermitian lattices. The entire table exhaustively lists minimal ν abs describing the minimal multiplicities of the nodal points at zero energy for each WG and AZ symmetry class preserving chiral symmetry. For each WG, one or two point group generators with signs indicate the algebra between the chiral symmetry operator and the generators. While '0' indicates the absence of nodal points protected by chiral symmetry, non-zero ν abs indicates the minimal number of Dirac points with ±1 charges for most of the WG symmetry classes, with the exceptions labelled by * . That is, in the exceptions the minimal configurations require the presence of at least one high-ordered nodal point, of which the charge is not ±1. On the other hand, label ◇ indicates the minimal numbers of the Dirac nodes for space-time-inversion-symmetric lattices for 10 of the WGs. For non-Hermitian systems, label • marks the minimal numbers of Fermi points and exceptional points for the 17 WGs. For example, in class CI in WG#10 with C + 4 the minimal configuration for ν abs = 4 only includes one nodal point with +2 winding number and the other with -2 winding number. For other Hermitian systems, stable nodal points protected by space-time inversion symmetry ((C 2 T ) 2 = 1) carry only ±1 charge, due to the Z 2 invariant of the Berry phase Lastly, for 2D non-Hermitian lattices, any symmetry is no longer required to protect topological points; robust Fermi points and exceptional points carrying non-zero charges naturally arise Following this additional rule, we note that the non-Hermitian no-go theorem does not always share the same minimal absolute numbers ν abs with the chiral-symmetric lattices in class AIII. In Table Table We start with 2D Hermitian lattices preserving chiral symmetry. Since there are 5 AZ symmetry classes with chiral symmetry, the generalized no-go theorem for chiral symmetry is much more complicated than space-time-inversionsymmetric systems and non-hermitian lattices. After going through the details of all the chiral symmetry classes, we directly extend these results of the no-go theorem to the two other cases. We review the interplay of nodal points, chiral symmetry, and winding numbers by showing that the non-zero winding number quantized by chiral symmetry can protect the nodal point. Furthermore, we build the relation between winding numbers for two nodal points connected by crystalline symmetries or time reversal symmetry. This relation is an important building block for our no-go theorem. Chiral symmetry is our focus symmetry protecting nodal points with non-zero winding numbers in this section. We consider an (effective) non-interacting system and the Bloch Hamiltonian preserving chiral symmetry obeys where unitary matrix S is defined as chiral symmetry operator. One of the ideal platforms to realize chiral symmetry is time-reversal symmetric superconductors where particle-hole symmetry operator C is antiunitary. The time-reversal symmetric Hamiltonian also satisfies where time-reversal symmetry operator T is also antiunitary. Consequently, the combination of particle-hole symmetry and time-reversal symmetry becomes chiral symmetry with chiral symmetry operator S = CT as a unitary one. When an eigenstate Ψ(k)⟩ possesses energy E, the chiral symmetry equation (4) leads to another eigenstate S Ψ(k)⟩ having energy -E; zero energy (E = 0) is a special point. Furthermore, it will be shown later that stable nodal points are locked in zero energy so we choose zero energy as Fermi level. Here we review the definition of the winding number quantized by chiral symmetry. By choosing a proper basis, the chiral symmetry operator is written as S = τ z ⊗ I n×n so the Hamiltonian is in the block off-diagonal form Assuming h(k) is invertible (det(h(k)) ≠ 0), we can define the winding number in a closed loop integral path in the BZ By rewriting det h(k) ≡ f (k)e iα (k) , where f (k) is a singlevalued function and α(k) is a multivalued function, the winding number is given by Since in the loop the start and end points of the integral are identical, ∮ dα(k) = 2πl and then the winding number ν is quantized. We note that the definition of the winding number is equivalent to the one using the flattened Hamiltonian (see Appendix B for the detail). We demonstrate the interplay of nodal point protection, chiral symmetry, and winding number by using a simple 2 × 2 Hamiltonian where n is a positive integer, The nodal point appears at K 0 = (k x0 , k y0 ) in the BZ with E = 0. The energy dispersion E = ±∆k n and q = ∆ke inθ , where ∆k = ∆k 2 x + ∆k 2 y . The meaning of the winding number is the change of U (1) phase of det h(k) along the close loop Γ(K 0 ) encircling K 0 in the counterclockwise direction. The chiral symmetry operator is given by S = τ z and H(k) obeys chiral symmetry equation ( (n = ±1 corresponds to a Dirac point.) This node is equivalent to n Dirac nodes with ν = sign(n). Chiral symmetry quantizes the winding number and forbids the presence of τ z destroying the nodal point. Moreover, the zero energy of the nodal point cannot be lifted, since the identity matrix, which is the only one changing the nodal point energy, is forbidden by chiral symmetry. In this regard, the non-zero winding number n indicates the presence of the stable nodal point. We note that without breaking chiral symmetry, the nodal point with winding number n can be deformed to several nodal points and the summation of the winding numbers for the nodal point is still n. Likewise, the Hamiltonian having another nodal point with -n winding number is written as When we merge these two systems (H n (k) and H -n (k)), the Hamiltonian is given by which still preserves chiral symmetry with the symmetry operator S = σ 0 ⊗ τ z . Since the total winding number for the nodal point vanishes, we simply find a symmetry-preserving mass term mσ y ⊗τ y destroying the nodal point and the gapped energy dispersion is given by E = ± k 2n 0 + m 2 . Namely, the two nodal points at the same locations with the opposite winding numbers are unstable. A symmetry operator g acts on the k-space in the following form Suppose there exists a generic nodal point at K 0 , which is protected by chiral symmetry but not necessarily described by the simple model where Γ (K 0 ) indicates an infinitesimal loop of the integral encircling K 0 counterclockwise. The symmetry results in the presence of a nodal point at gK 0 , while this symmetry operator can be time reversal or crystalline. To count the number of the nodal points in the BZ, it is important to study the relation between the two winding numbers (ν(K 0 ), ν(gK 0 )) of the two nodal points connected by the symmetry g; the winding numbers (ν(K 0 ), ν(gK 0 )) are computed in the integral loops Γ(K 0 ) and Γ(gK 0 ) encircling K 0 and gK 0 points respectively as illustrated in Fig. The algebra of chiral symmetry operator and g symmetry operator determines the connection between the two winding numbers at K 0 and gK 0 . The derivation details of the connections for crystalline symmetry operators and time reversal symmetry operators are given in appendix B. As we first consider crystalline symmetry, the Hamiltonian preserving crystalline symmetry obey (See appendix A for the derivation) where U ± g represents the unitary crystalline symmetry operator in the momentum basis and ± signs indicate (anti)commutation relation between the two symmetry operators (U ± g S ∓ SU ± g = 0). We note that H(k) and U (k) ± , which are single-valued (appendix A), obey where G i is a reciprocal lattice vector. In the following, we always use +(-) to indicate that the chosen symmetry operator (anti)commutes with chiral symmetry operator (S). These two possible forms of U ± g lead to the different connections of the winding numbers between K 0 and gK 0 ν(g There are two types of crystalline symmetries in wallpaper groups -(glide) mirror symmetries and rotation symmetries. The mirror operators satisfy det g = -1, whereas the rotation operators obey det g = 1. For g + , the two nodal points (K 0 and gK 0 ) connected by the mirror symmetry possess the opposite winding numbers, while the nodal points linked by the rotation symmetry have the identical winding numbers. On the contrary, for g -, the two winding numbers linked by the mirror operator are identical and the ones linked by the rotation operator have the different signs. We note that the generic forms of the crystalline symmetry operators in Eq. 15 are momentum-dependent. That is, nonsymmorphic symmetry operations, which are glide mirror ones only in 2D systems, have the same winding number relations at K 0 and gK 0 with mirror symmetry operations. Therefore, in the next subsection when we classify the minimal multiplicities of the nodal points, we treat the WGs # On the other hand, time reversal symmetry operator can commute (T + ) or anticommute (T -) with chiral symmetry operator S. For T ± , the connection between the two winding numbers is given by (see the derivation in appendix B) The winding number relations at K 0 and gK 0 for different symmetry operators are summarized in Table It has been shown in Table The five AZ symmetry classes (AIII, BDI, DIII, CI, and CII), which preserve chiral symmetry, can possess nodal points characterized by winding numbers. By considering the 11 distinct sets of the WGs, we can directly study the no-go theorem for class AIII, since this symmetry class preserves only chiral symmetry. The remaining four symmetry classes have additional time reversal symmetry. Because chiral symmetry is the combination of time-reversal symmetry and particle-hole symmetry (S = T C), we treat particle-hole symmetry as redundancy. The AZ symmetry classes determine the algebra between the chiral operator and the timereversal operator. While class BDI, CII have T + time-reversal operator, class DIII, CI have T -time-reversal operator (see the proof in appendix C). In two of the following subsections, class BDI, CII have the same minimal configurations for each of the 17 WGs. In total, there are 44(= 11 × 4) effective WG symmetry classes for the generalized no-go theorem. Time reversal and C 2 symmetry operators both map nodal points at ±K 0 to ones at ∓K 0 respectively. There are two possibilities of the operator algebra arrangements to determine the existence of the protected nodal points. We assume the winding number at K 0 to be w and time reversal operation T ± leads to the winding number at -K 0 to be ∓w. On the one hand, we use C ∓ 2 operation, which correspond to the first operation T ± respectively, to map the winding number at -K 0 back to the one at K 0 as illustrated in Fig. The trivialization of the nodal points can be extended to nodal points at symmetry-invariant points. According to Table II, any of T + , C - n , and M + operations leads to ν(K 0 ) = -ν(gK 0 ). Hence, when a nodal point is located at the corresponding time-reversal, rotation, or mirror invariant points, its winding number must vanish and the nodal point does not have chiral symmetry protection. The charge of the nodal point is defined by the winding number C(K 0 ) = ν(K 0 ) and the absolute charge number ν abs is defined in Eq. 2. Given WG symmetry class and the algebra of the symmetry operators, the smallest number of the absolute charge number ν abs indicates the minimal configuration of the nodal points. We note that the minimal configuration of nodal points in BZ might not be unique. Since the winding numbers of the nodal points have the weight in this indicator number, the minimal number of the nodal points cannot directly indicate the minimal configuration. The only exception is the all of the nodal points in the BZ are Dirac node with ν = ±1. In this case, the number of the Dirac nodes is equal to ν abs . Since a nodal point at a time-reversal invariant point inherits additional constraints from the the ten-fold classification of the topological nodal superconductors According to the classification of topological semimetals and nodal topological superconductors (a) We check if the symmetries force nodal points to possess zero winding number. For example, when the system preserves T ± time-reversal symmetry and C ± 2 symmetry, there are no nodal points protected by chiral symmetry. Allowing nodal points with non-zero winding number, the symmetries do not restrict the value of the winding number away from any TRI points. To find the minimal configuration of the nodal points, we first place one Dirac point with winding number ν = 1 in the irreducible BZ but not at TRI points. (b) Different placements of the Dirac point lead to different configurations of the Dirac points in the entire BZ. We separately consider the location of the Dirac point at mirror lines, rotation centers, and general points. Commonly, rotation centers are in mirror lines, although K and K ′ points for WG#14 are two of the exceptions. If the Dirac point is located at a symmetry-invariant point, we have to further check if the symmetry corresponding to the invariant point trivializes the Dirac point. For example, according to Table (c) Using the symmetry operation (rotation, mirror, or timereversal), we extend the nodal point from the irreducible BZ to the remaining area of the BZ. Following table II, we determine the winding numbers of the extended nodal points based on the algebra between the chiral symmetry operator and the symmetry operators for the extension. (d) Since the summation over the winding numbers of all the nodal points in the entire BZ must vanish as the key result of the original Nielsen-Ninomiya theorem (1) (see appendix D for the proof) we have to check if the summation is zero after the extension of nodal points. If so, this configuration has the minimal configuration of the nodal points. If not, we add an additional nodal point and repeat step (b,c) until the total winding number vanishes Alternatively, when the first Dirac point with -1 winding number is placed at one point of the mirror lines (ΓK, ΓK ′ , not K, K ′ ), C + 3 rotation symmetry generates 2 additional copies of the Dirac points with the same winding number. Furthermore, from these 3 Dirac points, time-reversal symmetry produces other 3 Dirac points with -1 winding numbers as shown in Fig. Most of the WG symmetry classes follow the aforementioned recipe to search for the minimal configuration of the protected nodal points. However, for class AIII there are some exceptions, which are nodal points located in the special points (Γ, M, X, Y ) and (Γ, M i ) for the two types of the BZs respectively. An additional step of the recipe has to be considered in these special cases. (e) The winding number with the integral path through the entire BZ (the dash lines in Fig. For the WGs (#3 -9, 11, 12) possessing M - x generator, the constraint is reduced to On the other hand, the hexagonal BZ has different special points. For WGs (#14, 17) possessing M - y generator and WGs (#16, 17) possessing C + 2 generator, we have Thus, in this final step we have to check if the configuration of the nodal points satisfies Eqs. 20, 21, or 22 for the corresponding WG symmetry classes. If so, the minimal configuration is found. If not, step (b,c,d) are need to be repeated until the constraint conditions are fulfilled. Let us use WG#2 with C + 2 in class AIII as an example. We place two Dirac points with ±1 winding number at Γ and M separately. Although the entire BZ is neutralized, Eq. 20 is violated. In fact, no matter how the two Dirac points are located at two of the rotation invariant points (Γ, X, Y, M ), Eq. 20 does not hold. The only way is to have four Dirac points placed at the four invariant points separately and Fig. The TRI points are special for nodal points. Since TRI points obey K 0 = -K 0 , in the presence of T + time reversal symmetry the winding number of the nodal point at this invariant point vanishes. The reason is that based on table II T + gives the opposite winding number at the same point. Class BDI/CII with T + never possesses a nodal point with non-zero winding number at any time-reversal invariant points. Hence, we discuss the no-go theorem for only two non-trivial AZ symmetry classes -DIII and CI. The absolute numbers ν abs of the minimal configurations for the WG symmetry class are shown in Table Class AIII and CII may possess protected nodal points, since according to the classification table, nodal points in class AIII and CII can be characterized by Z and Z 2 invariants respectively. However, TRI points are absent in class AIII, which has been exhaustively studied in the previous subsection. In addition, although in class CII the non-zero Z 2 invariant can protect the nodal point, here we focus on only nodal points protected by winding numbers. Hence, class AIII and CII are excluded in the no-go theorem for TRI nodal points. The recipe to find the smallest absolute winding number ν abs for each WG symmetry class is identical to the previous subsection for off-time-reversal-invariant-point. Additional cares are needed for class DIII with T 2 = -1 and for class CI with T 2 = +1. First, due to T 2 = -1, the Kramers' degeneracy leads to double degeneracy for each band at all of the TRI points. In addition, chiral symmetry pairs two energy bands with ±E. Hence, for the odd number of the energy band pairs in the system there must exist an energy band pair at E = 0 at all of the four time-reversal invariant points in the BZ. Since we assume that nodal lines are absent, the nodal points always appear at the four time-reversal invariant points. On the other hand, since in class CI 2Z invariant given by the classification table We demonstrate three examples to show how to find the minimal configurations of the nodal points. We first consider WG#11, 12 with C + 4 and M -in class DIII ((T -) 2 = -1). These two WGs share the same point groups. In the BZ, Γ, X, Y, M are TRI points and three of them (except for Y ) are in the irreducible zone as shown in Fig. Another example is WG#15 in class DIII with T -, C + 3 , M -. The four points (Γ, M 1 , M 2 , M 3 ) are TRI points in the hexagonal zone as shown in Fig. #15 DIII ( , , ) DIII ( , , ) Alternatively, we choose a nodal point with +3 winding number at Γ and three Dirac points with -1 winding number at three M i points as shown in Fig. We consider WG#14 in class CI with T -, C + 3 , M -as the last example. We place the first nodal point at Γ. Since in class CI any nodal point at a TRI point must possess even winding number, the simplest choice for the nodal point at Γ is +2 winding number. With C + 3 rotation symmetry, a nodal point in the most area of the BZ has three copies with the same winding number, except for K ′ , K, Γ. Therefore, a Dirac point with -1 winding number is placed at K. Due to T -timereversal symmetry or M -reflection symmetry, another Dirac point appear at K ′ with -1 winding number. The total winding number vanishes and as shown in Fig. The symmetry constraints control the configurations of the nodal points protected by chiral symmetry. x ) with signs indicate the algebra between the chiral symmetry operator and the generators; ν abs = 0 indicates the absence of nodal points protected by chiral symmetry. In the table there are some cases that nodal points are forced to be placed at K, K ′ , which are not TRI points, due to the charge neutralization. In some cases, high-ordered nodal points with ν > 1 must be present in the minimal configurations; hence, we use * to distinguish the particular cases from the case possessing only Dirac nodes. no-go theorem. Nodal points protected by chiral symmetry away from TRI points can be realized in 2D Dirac materials and time reversal symmetric superconductors. 2D Dirac materials, such as graphene, may preserve accidental chiral (sublattice) symmetry, whereas time reversal symmetric superconductors naturally preserve chiral symmetry stemming from in intrinsic time reversal symmetry and particle-hole symmetry. We first consider a two-dimensional nodal Cu-based superconductor with d-wave pairing where We choose the parameters as t 1 = 0.25, t 2 = -0.05, μ = -0.18 and ∆ 0 = 0.1. First, the system preserves particle-hole symmetry ( where 98, and β = 0.45. Since chiral symmetry is still preserved with S = σ z and the linear dispersions lead to the four Dirac points with ±1 winding numbers, with the low-energy Hamiltonians H r l ± (k) = δk i A ij δk j , sign(det A) corresponds to ±1 winding numbers of the Dirac points. Therefore, ν=+1 for k 0+ , k ′ 0+ and ν=-1 for k 0-, k ′ 0-as shown in Fig. The classification of our no-go theorem depends on point groups, regardless of symmorphic and non-symmorphic symmetries. Glide reflection symmetry is the only type of the non-symmorphic symmetries in the 17 wallpaper groups. We study a toy model of a 2D glide plane symmetric superconductor in class BDI. spinless fermion in the lattice in the basis of , and superconductor gap ∆(k) = ∆ 0 sin(k y ). We choose the parameters as t 1 = 1.2, t 2 = 0.2, t 3 = 0.3, m 0 = 2, μ = 0 and ∆ 0 = 0.3 so that two nodal points appear at (±2π 3,0). The spinless superconductor system naturally preserves particle-hole symmetry , where the symmetry operator M g = e -i ky 2 (cos( ky 2 )τ 0 σ x + sin( ky 2 )τ 0 σ y ). Since this operator M + g commutes with S, M + g also connects the two nodal points with the opposite winding numbers. Away from TRI points, the two nodal points with ±1 winding numbers are consistent with Table It is known that there are two Dirac points in the graphene model, which can be simply described by the p z orbital containing nearest neighbor hoppings and t is hopping parameter. Since the system preserves sublattice chiral symmetry S = σ z , time reversal symmetry T = K, effective particle-hole symmetry C = σ z K, we have class BDI with T + . We note that the graphene is a non-interacting electron system in this case so the effective particle-hole symmetry, which stems from the combination of the sublattice symmetry and time reversal symmetry, is unrelated to superconductivity. On the other hand, the graphene belongs to WG#17 with two generators M - x =σ x and C - 6 =σ x . The crystalline symmetries lead to The nodal points are present at K ∶ (2π √ 3, 2π 3) and 3) with +1 and -1 winding numbers respectively. Table x and C - 6 . It is not surprising that our no-go theorem covers the two Dirac points in the graphene. We add d + id-wave superconductor pairing in the graphene. Its BdG Hamiltonian in the basis of where the d + id-wave pairing by nearest-neighbor antiferromagnetic exchange coupling in a honeycomb lattice Since this spinless SC model stems from the spinful system with spin SU (2) symmetry, we have particle-hole symmetry with C = τ y σ 0 K and C 2 = -1 Therefore, the Hamiltonian H BdG (k) preserves reflection symmetry ( Back to nodal points, when the superconducting gap vanishes, in the BdG Hamiltonian each of K and K ′ possesses two Dirac points with the same winding numbers -one from particle part and the other from the hole part. Let us focus on K possessing the two Dirac points with +1 winding number. As the superconductor gap gradually increases from zero, a Dirac nodal point with -1 winding number stays at K and three Dirac nodal points with +1 winding number move away from K along three ΓK lines separately as illustrated in Fig. x and C - 6 in class CII Table The key difference between nodal points located at and away from TRI points is that time reversal symmetry imposes an additional constraint at TRI points. For class DIII, nodal points exhibit Kramers' degeneracy at TRI points, while for class BDI, the winding numbers of the nodal points are always even. We provide several examples to show these special properties. Particularly, we remove the diagonal term so that the Hamiltonian preserves chiral symmetry (4) with S = σ z . Four Dirac points are located at TRI momenta (0,0), (0,π), (π,0), (π,π) because Kramers' degeneracy and chiral symmetry force twofold degenerate states with zero energy at all of the TRI points. The system preserves time reversal symmetry Since T 2 = -1 and C 2 = +1, the system belongs to class DIII. On the other hand, the system possesses C 2v point group symmetry with generators C 2 = σ z and M x = σ y , which obey x = H(-k x , k y ), and the algebra of the crystalline symmetry operators is given by C + 2 and M - x . According to Table x , C + 2 ) does not trivialize winding numbers at TRI points, where nodal points are located. Table By choosing the integral path encircling one of the nodal points, we obtain ν=+1 for the nodes at (0,0) and (π,π), whereas ν=-1 for the nodes at (0,π) and (π,0). The symmetries in class CI force nodal points at TRI points to have even winding numbers. Since T 2 = 1, Kramers' degeneracy is absent at TRI points; hence, unlike class DIII, it is not necessary that all of the TRI points in the BZ possess nodal points at zero energy when the number of the energy band pairs is odd. To demonstrate these properties, we consider a simple 2D tight-binding Hamiltonian The system preserves chiral symmetry (4) with S = σ z , timereversal symmetry ( , where symmetry operators C + 4 = σ z and M - x = σ x . Since T 2 = 1 and C 2 = -1, the system belongs to SG#11 in class CI. Two nodal points with quadratic energy dispersions are located at TRI momenta Γ:(0,0) and M:(π,π). The Hamiltonian of the low energy expansion near the nodal points Γ and M is in the form of where We provide a 2-band tight binding model possessing six Dirac nodes located at high symmetry points (Γ, K, K ′ , M 1 , M 2 , M 3 ) as shown in Fig. where the rotation operator obeys C 6 (x) = (x + √ 3ŷ) 2 and C 6 (ŷ) = (ŷ -√ 3x) 2. Furthermore, the rotation operation C 6 acting on σ x and σ y exhibits the same basis changing as x and ŷ. We rewrite the Hamiltonian in the momentum space where 2)e 2πi 3 . Since chiral symmetry with S = σ z , time reversal symmetry with T = σ y K, and particle-hole symmetry with C = σ x K are preserved, T 2 = -1 and C 2 = 1 lead to class DIII. Moreover, the system preserves reflection symmetry Based on the algebra between the crystalline symmetry operators and the chiral symmetry operator, the model belongs to WG#17 with M - x and C + 6 . The energy dispersion in Fig. We build a tight binding model hosting a quadratic node at Γ and two Dirac nodes at K, K ′ separately. Consider each site has spin-1/2 degree of freedom in triangular lattice. The 2 × 2 Hamiltonian in the real space is written as where C 3 = C 2 6 . In this regard, the Hamiltonian in the momentum space is given by where 2)e 2πi 3 . The symmetry class corresponds to CI, since one can check that chiral symmetry with S = σ z , time reversal symmetry with T = σ x K, and particlehole symmetry with C = σ y K are preserved. Moreover, the system preserves reflection symmetry As shown in Fig. For 2D lattices, chiral symmetry is not the only symmetry protecting nodal points. Space-time inversion symmetry, which is the combination of time-reversal symmetry and inversion symmetry, is another option and its symmetry operator obeying (C 2 T ) 2 = ±1 represents the two distinct types of the space-time inversion symmetry. Particularly, the spacetime inversion symmetry with (C 2 T ) 2 = 1 can protect nodal points. While chiral symmetry intrinsically appears in timereversal-symmetric superconductors, the space-time inversion symmetry with (C 2 T ) 2 = 1 can naturally arise in most of the inversion-symmetric materials preserving time-reversal symmetry; the symmetry-preserving Hamiltonian in the momentum space obeys where the symmetry operator In this regard, to search for new Dirac materials it is important to study the generalized no-go theorem of the space-time inversion symmetry for different WGs. However, this no-go theorem is distinct from the aforementioned theorem of the chiral symmetry, because there are two main differences between chiral symmetry and space-time inversion symmetry. First, the Z 2 Berry phase quantized by space-time inversion symmetry characterizes the stability of the Dirac nodes, while the Z winding number quantized by chiral symmetry characterizes the stability of the node points. Second, the Dirac nodes protected by space-time inversion symmetry can move freely at any energy level, whereas the node points protected by chiral symmetry are locked at zero energy. To preserve space-time inversion symmetry, we consider inversion symmetry C 2 and time-reversal symmetry T both are preserved. That is, to simplify the problem, we consider type-II magnetic wallpaper groups (G + T G). Since crystalline symmetry operator C 2 and time-reversal symmetry operator T always commute, we have . Furthermore, only 10 of the 17 WGs preserve inversion symmetry and their corresponding point groups are C n and C nv with n = 2, 4, 6. Hence, the generalized no-go theorem of spacetime inversion symmetry in class AI and AII is much simpler than the one of chiral symmetry. To study the generalized no-go theorem of space-time inversion symmetry, in the following we review that the symmetry quantizes the Z 2 Berry phase, and build the relation between the Z 2 Berry phases for two nodal points connected by crystalline symmetries or time reversal symmetry. Then, we discuss the minimal configurations of the Dirac nodes for different WGs by borrowing the idea from the discussion of chiral symmetry. Lastly, we implement the no-go theorem on the study of the two-dimensional Dirac semimetal materials. For the space-time inversion symmetry, the Berry phase characterizing the nodal points is the key to its generalized no-go theorem. The Berry phase for the nodal point K 0 can be in form of where is the periodic function of the Bloch wavefunction, the summation is for all the occupied states below the energy level of K 0 , and Γ (K 0 ) is the closed integral path encircling K 0 . In the literature, the space-time inversion symmetry quantizes this Berry phase with the only two possible values (0, π) as an Z 2 invariant As the Berry phase γ (K 0 ) = π, the integral path cannot smoothly shrink to a single point and then vanish, due to the singularity of the nodal point. This leads to the protection of the nodal point against gap opening without breaking spacetime inversion symmetry. This protected nodal point with the lowest order of energy dispersion is a Dirac node. Although there exists a high-ordered nodal point with γ = π, without breaking the symmetry, the node can be smoothly deformed to a Dirac node Next, in order to include all the nodal points in the BZ, we consider the relation between the two Z 2 Berry phases (γ (K 0 ) , γ (gK 0 )) of two nodal points connected by crystalline symmetry or time-reversal symmetry g and this symmetry operation can be symmorphic or nonsymmorphic. The berry phase at gK 0 point is given by Since the value of the Berry phase is either 0 or π, it is expected that the two Berry phases connected by the symmetry g are identical (see the proof in appendix F). While the relations of the winding numbers connected by a symmetry in Table The Z 2 property of the Berry phase significantly simplifies the process to find the minimal configurations of Dirac nodes as the generalized no-go theorem, when we compare this with the complexity of chiral symmetry with the Z invariant. In sec. III C, the five steps for nodal points protected by chiral symmetry can be simplified for space-time inversion symmetry. Let us first provide the recipe for Dirac nodes not located at TRI points. (a) We start to place a Dirac node with γ = π at any location of the irreducible BZ, except for TRI points, as shown in Fig. (b) This step is similar to the one for chiral symmetry. That is, using all of the symmetry operations, we duplicate the node point inside of the irreducible BZ to the remaining area of the BZ. We note that space-time inversion symmetry is used to quantize the Berry phase, only one of time-reversal symmetry and inversion symmetry can duplicate the Dirac node. We always use inversion for duplication unless mention otherwise. (c) Finally, we have to check if the summation of the Berry phases from all the Dirac nodes in the BZ obeys which is the Nielsen-Ninomiya theorem for the Z 2 charges. The derivation is similar with the one for the Z charges in appendix D. Since inversion symmetry is always preserved, the duplication in step (b) leads to even number of the Dirac nodes. Hence, the summation condition is naturally satisfied. This is the end of searching for the minimal configuration of the Dirac nodes. In the minimal configurations, all the Dirac nodes are connected by symmetries; to mark this symmetry connection, we put ∼ on the corresponding minimal numbers in Table for WG#2, 6 -12 and for WG#16, 17. The reason is that the two quantized Berry phases calculated in the two dashed lines as shown Fig. After considering all possible placement of Dirac nodes, we can build Table V to show the minimal numbers and configurations of the Dirac nodes for the ten WGs with time-reversal symmetry. Furthermore, the minimal configurations in Table When we place a Dirac node at TRI point, say Γ, any symmetry is unable to duplicate the Dirac point, which violates the neutralization Over hundreds of 2D and quasi-2D materials, graphene (b) WG#11 -Square-graphyne: The crystal structure of S-graphyne in Fig. (c) WG#17 -β-graphyne and TiB 2 : Fig. (d) WG#17 -NiPSe 2 : The monolayer NiPSe 3 belongs to the layer group P 31m including point group D 3d and its crystal structure is shown in Fig. Near the Fermi level, the valence and conduction bands are predominantly attributed to the Ni-3d xz yz orbitals. With Ni-3d xz yz orbitals and two bases of the sublattice the effective 4band tight binding model Beyond the Hermitian systems, non-Hermitian physics , where the real part ε n (k) represents the renormalized band dispersion and the imaginary part Γ n (k) represents the inverse of quasi-particle lifetime, which is affected by environment dissipation In a 2D non-Hermitian Hamiltonian H nH (k), Fermi points (FPs) and exceptional points (EPs) can be topologically protected and immune from any perturbations In the following, we first review the topological invariants of EPs and then show that the relation of the EPs connected by crystalline symmetries is identical to the chiral-symmetric lattices. Being different from the Hermitian chiral-symmetric systems, rotation symmetry in the non-Hermitian systems imposes an additional constraint on EPs located at rotation centers. Finally, we generalize the corresponding no-go theorems to the 17 WGs. Likewise, the no-go theorem of FPs follows the same recipe in the next subsection. In 2D BZ, non-Hermitian degeneracy points can be topological stable points and are categorized into exceptional (defective) points and non-defective points. That is, at an EP the corresponding eigenstates coalesce where K j EP is the momentum of the EP in the BZ. Before extending the no-go theorem of the EPs to the 17 wallpaper groups, let us review the definition of the discriminant number ν disc (K EP ). For a generic m-band non-Hermitian Hamiltonian H nH (k), the characteristic equation determines all of the eigenenergies The EP momentum K EP corresponds to the vanishing of the discriminant Disc E [H nH ](k EP ) = 0. We note that although this equation can also identify non-defective degeneracy points, the points are unstable and can be easily deformed to EPs where the integration path Γ(K EP ) is a loop encircling K EP counterclockwise. Due to the single-valued discriminant function, the discriminant number is always an integer. Since the topological numbers from the two distinct origins (chiralsymmetric systems and EPs) share the same mathematical structure, we can derive the doubling theorem for EPs by following the same recipe in chiral-symmetric system (Appendix D). That is, the sum over the discriminant numbers of all the EPs vanishes as previously shown in Eq. 49. To extend the the EP no-go theorem to the 17 wallpaper groups, we study the relation of the discriminant numbers for EPs connected by symmetries. It is known that the two symmetry generators C n and M form the 17 wallpaper groups, with crystalline symmetry operator matrix U g (k). The symmetry-preserved Hamiltonian obeys where U g is a unitary matrix and particularly η = 1 for the conventional crystalline symmetry. The crystalline symmetry generators can be extended to the combination symmetry of crystalline operation and complex-conjugation/transpose In this regard, U g (k)K t , U g (k)K * , and U g (k)K † indicate the combination crystalline operators of the transpose/complex-conjugation/conjugate-transpose respectively. The corresponding Hamiltonians obey the symmetry equation ( In the following discussion, we label g to indicate U g (k) and U g (k)K t representations and ḡ to indicate U g (k)K * † representations. We are interested in WGs formed by one or two generators and the generators can either g or ḡ. The generators are either rotation or mirror. To be specific, the WG with one generator is in form of g or ḡ, while the WG with two generators is in form of (C n , M ), (C n , M ), ( Cn , M ), ( Cn , M ). We study the no-go theorem for the WGs in those forms and build Table VI in the following. Particularly, the EP no-go theorem for the 17 conventional WGs correspond to the cases with the generator g. We use examples to illustrate the distinct combination symmetries above. Consider a Hermitian Hamiltonian H H (k) = H † H (k) which preserves inversion symmetry, i.e. I . When a non-Hermitian term iλ(k)Γ (which is typically a perturbation) is added, where λ(k) = λ(-k) is a real even function and Γ is a Hermitian matrix, the Hamiltonian becomes H nH (k) = H H (k) + iλ(k)Γ. One can easily check that when [Γ, U I ] ± = 0, the corresponding inversion symmetry representation becomes U I /U I K † , respectively. On the other hand, U I (k)K * is equivalent to time reversal symmetry operator. We start with a Hermitian Hamiltonian preserving time reversal symmetry (H Similarly, when a non-Hermitian perturbation is introduced, the Hamiltonian reads Before building the generalized no-go theorem for g and ḡ, where g = C n , M , in Table . For all of the WGs, ν abs can indicate the number of the EPs with ν disc = ±1 in the minimal configuration, except for EPs located at rotation centers. It will be shown later that a charge for an EP located at a C n rotation center must be a multiple of n. For a WG with one/two symmetry generator C n or/and M , symmetries can not connect all nodal points in the minimal configuration. This is an important property leading to anomalous surface BZ violating the no-go theorem. The details are discussed in sec. VI B. For the remaining WGs, all nodal points are connected by symmetries. After this overview of the table, we provide a stepby-step instruction for the non-Hermitian no-go theorem table in the following. (a) We first consider the conventional crystalline symmetries and the transpose symmetries with the generators all indicated by g. Since no global symmetries are required to protect EPs in 2D non-Hermitian systems, unlike Hermitian Hamiltonian preserving chiral symmetry, there is no algebra between crystalline symmetry operators and other global symmetry operators. By using the symmetry equation ( Hence, the discriminants at these two points are identical As symmetry g connects two EPs (gK EP and K EP ), the relation of the discriminant numbers at these two points is given by The explicit relations between the two EPs for the two different types of the crystalline symmetries are given by which are identical to the relation of the generators C + n and M + in Table To understanding an EP located at a rotation center, we consider n-fold rotation symmetry C n . Being different from the Hermitian chiral symmetric systems, the charge of the non-Hermitian EP at a rotation center, say K r EP , is limited by an additional restriction. In order to show the restriction, in the expression where Γ 1 n (K r FP ) denotes the one n-th of the closed integral path Γ (K r FP ) with the two end points k o and Ĉn k o . After decomposing the integral of the winding number to n separate integral paths, we can reorganize the discriminant number equation where j is an integer. The second line stems from that the symmetry relation ( Since the integrands at k o and Ĉn k o are identical, the integral path of Γ 1 n (K r EP ) is effectively closed so that the integral is quantized. Hence, as an EP is located at a n-fold rotation symmetry center, its discriminant number is a multiple of n. This constraint for the value of the discriminant number does not allow the EPs to inherit some of the minimal configurations from the chiral symmetric systems. For example, for WG#10 with C + 4 , one of the chiral symmetric minimal configurations is that four Dirac points with ±1 charges quantized can be separately located at Γ, X, Y, M , which are rotation centers. However, the C 4 rotation symmetry from WG#10 forbids any non-Hermitian EP with ±1 charge to appear at any rotation center. Hence, this configuration is excluded in Table For the transpose symmetries with U g U * g = -1, we have to take a special care of degeneracy points. Back to the tenfold classification of the Hermitian systems, the different values of the symmetry operator squares (T 2 , C 2 = ±1) correspond to distinct AZ symmetry classes. In particular, class AII (T 2 = -1) leads to the Kramers degeneracy at TRI points. On the contrary, the Kramers degeneracy does not hold in the time-reversal symmetric non-Hermitian systems. Instead, only when transpose symmetry with U g U * g = -1 leads to g , where g = C n , M i , these gsymmetry-invariant points must exhibit at least two-fold nondefective degeneracy (b) Consider the conjugation crystalline symmetries and the conjugate-transpose ones; their generators are all indicated by ḡ. By using the symmetry equation ( The conjugation adds an extra minus sign to the relation equation (56) between the two symmetry-connected discriminant numbers Hence, in Table VI the EP no-go theorem for the conjugate 17 WGs ( Cn , M ) corresponds to the Hermitian no-go theorem for C - n and M -in class AIII as listed in Table The last two can be easily extended by the recipe above. Due to the relations between the symmetry-connected EPs To host EPs, the minimal dimension of the non-Hermitian Hamiltonian must be 2 × 2, since at least two states coalesce. First, we calculate the explicit form of the discriminant for a generic 2 × 2 non-Hermitian Hamiltonian The eigenenergies are given by E ± = h 0 ± h 2 x + h 2 y + h 2 z . Using Eq. 51, we have a simple form of the discriminant This form is employed to compute the discriminant for the following examples. (a) We start with a 2 × 2 off-diagonal Hamiltonian The Hamiltonian preserves the following symmetries where C4 = σ 0 and M x = σ 0 . Table To find EPs in this model, we obtain the discriminant ] by using Eq. 63. As the discriminant vanishes, the Hamiltonian becomes a Jordan canonical form and the two eigenstates coalesce as an EP. In this regard, the four EPs are located at (±π 2, ±π 2) and (±π 2, ∓π 2) in the mirror lines. To compute the discriminant number of the EPs, we particularly consider the EP at (π 2, π 2). Near the EP, the leading order of the discriminant is given by where dk x y = k x y -π 2. By the definition (52) of the discriminant number, we have ν disc = +1 for the EP at (π 2, π 2). The C4 rotation symmetry extends to this EP to the remaining three by implementing the discriminant number relation where h(k) = cos k x -cos k y + i sin k x sin k y . We can check that the Hamiltonian obeys where C 4 = σ 0 and Mx = σ 0 . According to Table To study EPs in this model, we use Eq. 63 and then obtain the discriminant First, starting with m = 0, we find two EPs are located at Γ and M . The discriminant near these two points can be written as where dk xπ = k x -π, dk yπ = k y -π. Therefore, by using the definition (52) of the discriminant number, ν disc = +4 for the EP at Γ and ν disc = -4 for the EP at M . This minimal configuration possesses the EPs located at the C 4 rotation centers. The C 4 rotation symmetry (59) forces the discriminant numbers to be a multiple of 4. When we increase m from 0, the EP at Γ is split into four EPs at (0, ± cos -1 (1 -m)) and (± cos -1 (1 -m), 0) in the mirror lines. Since the original EP at Γ possesses +4 discriminant number and the four EPs connected by the C 4 rotation symmetry share the same charge, each EP has +1 discriminant number. Similarly, the EP at M is split into four EPs with -1 discriminant number at (± cos -1 (-1 + m), π) and (π, ± cos -1 (-1 + m)). (c) Being a fundamental 2D example with non-trivial band topology, the Chern insulator has been widely studied in Hermitian topological band theory. One of the simplest Hermitian Hamiltonians describing the Chern insulator [144] is given by In the region 0 < M < 2, the nonzero Chern number leads to the presence of the chiral edge states and the quantized conductance. Then we add on-site dissipations uniformly to The minimal absolute topological number ν abs for non-Hermitian "Exceptional points" and "Fermi Points". In the column of rotation centers, ⨉ indicates the absence of the topological points with non-zero charges in the rotation centers, while the labels of the rotation centers with nZ indicates that topological points can be located at the listed centers and the topological numbers must be multiples of integer n. Label ∼ above some absolute numbers ν abs indicates all topological points connected by symmetries in the minimal configuration. "MLs" is an abbreviation for mirror lines and G indicates topological points at general points. The non-zero ν abs without location specification denotes that all topological points in the minimal configuration are located at general points. Rotation centers C3 and My (Γ, K, K ′ ) ∶ 3Z 6 (MLs, Γ, or M 1 2 3 ) or 12 (G, K, or K ′ ) C3 and My My ⨉ 0 #15 C3 and Mx ⨉ 6 the Chern insulator so that the Hamiltonian becomes non-Hermitian where γ 0 ± γ z are the on-site dissipations for the different orbitals. Due to the dissipative nature, γ 0 ± γ z must be greater than zero, namely γ 0 ± γ z ≥ 0. The reason is that due to the dissipative energies -i(γ 0 ± γ z ), the corresponding time evolution operator on each site exhibits exponential decay trend (e -(γ0±γz)t ) as time evolves. In the presence of the on-site dissipation, this non-Hermitian Chern insulator preserves the following two symmetries , where C 4 = e iπσz 4 and M x = σ z , which belongs to WG#11. That is, the minimal number of EPs with charge ±1 is given by 8 according to Table To demonstrate the evolution of the EPs, we particularly choose γ 0 = 0 and M = 1 2 and start with γ z = √ 7 2. The vanishing discriminant determines eight EPs in the 2D BZ -(±2π 3, ±π 2), (±2π 3, ∓π 2), (±π 2, ±2π 3), (±π 2, ∓2π 3) as shown in Fig. Using the definition (52) of the discriminant number, we have ν disc (k 1 ) = 1. In this regard, the C 4 rotation symmetry duplicates the three EPs at (-2π 3, -π 2), (±π 2, ±2π 3) with ν disc (k 1 ) = 1, while M x transpose reflection symmetry leads to the four remaining EPs with ν disc (k 1 ) = -1. The presence of the eight EPs is the minimal configuration consistent with Table On the other hand, as γ z is decreased to √ 3 2, the two EPs at (±2π 3, π 2) merged into one EP at (π, π 3) and the merge neutralizes the charge. Similarly, by merging the six remaining EP are reduced to three neutralized EPs separately located at (π, -π 3) and (±π 3, π) as shown in Fig. In short, γ z < √ 3 2 is the topological region, while γ z > 15 8 is the trivial region. As √ 3 2 < γ z < 15 8, the 8 EPs with ν disc = ±1 represent the topological phase transition region. Therefore, the EP minimal configurations listed in Table VI can indicate the topological phase transition for the non-Hermitian line-gap phases. We briefly introduce the topological protection for FPs in 2D non-Hermitian models, which was recently studied in the literature The FPs are the direct generalization of Fermi surface from Hermitian to non-Hermitian systems. We first recall the Fermi surface defined for a Hermitian Hamiltonian H H (k). In the 2D BZ the Fermi surface, which is determined by det[H H (k) -μ] = 0, is 1D closed lines. Given a complex chemical potential μ and a non-Hermitian Hamiltonian H nH (k), the non-Hermitian Fermi surface is located at k satisfying E n (k)-μ = 0. That is, the two constraints of the equation in the real and imaginary parts form two separate closed lines in the BZ and the non-Hermitian Fermi surface is the crossing points of the two lines; hence, we call Fermi points (FPs) for non-Hermitian Fermi surface in 2D non-Hermitian systems. This is different from 1D Fermi lines in 2D Hermitian systems, since there exists a well-defined invariant characterizing any non-Hermitian FP in the BZ. To identify all of the FPs K FP in the BZ, we use determinant These FPs K FP can be characterized by winding number as an invariant where Γ(K FP ) is a loop counterclockwise encircling the FP at K FP . Since in a proper basis the Hamiltonian H nH (k) is single-valued in the entire BZ and the integrand is a singularity at the FP, the winding number ν FP of the FP is always quantized as an integer. For any non-zero winding number, the integral loop is not contractable so that the FP K FP inside the loop is a stable singularity point, which cannot be removed. Furthermore, only FPs with non-zero winding numbers are singularities in the entire BZ. Here we point out that the (non-Hermitian) FPs and the (Hermitian) Dirac points share the identical mathematical structure. In order to see this, we map the non-Hermitian Hamiltonian H nH (k) to a Hermitian Hamiltonian with chiral symmetry The zero energy nodes of the Hermitian Hamiltonian H H (k) appear when the determinant of the off-diagonal matrix vanishes det[H nH (k) -μ] = 0. The equation is exactly identical to Eq. 77 determining the non-Hermitian FPs. Furthermore, the definitions of the topological invariants This charge neutralization manifests that in the BZ an FP with non-zero winding number must be accompanied by another FP with the opposite winding number. To study the relations of FPs connected by symmetries, we consider four types of the combination crystalline symmetries -conventional crystalline, transpose crystalline, complexconjugation, and conjugate-transpose symmetries. We use g to indicate the generators of the first two symmetries (U g , U g K t ), while ḡ is used to indicate the generators of the last two symmetries (U * g , U g K † ). Transferring from the EP no-go theorem for the 17 WGs to the FP cases, we simply replace the discriminant in the integrand of the discriminant number It is straightforward that the FP no-go theorem follows the same rules of the EPs as listed in Table and for C n the charges of the FPs at rotation centers (K r FP ) are limited by the same constraint (59) The only difference between the FPs and the EPs is that the chemical potential has to be included in the symmetry equations The chemical potential μ can be any complex number, then the FP relation To satisfy the FP relation We use three examples to demonstrate that our no-go theorem in table VI covers the minimal configurations of the non-Hermitian FPs. (a) We first consider a one-band model with the Hamiltonian where μ is the chemical potential and imposed to be real to preserve M symmetry. By checking the symmetries, the Hamiltonian obeys where C 2 = 1, and where Mx = K * . Hence, the system belongs to WG#6 with C 2 and Mx . When μ = 0, two FPs are located at (0, 0) and (π, π) separately. By expanding the energy near these points, we have where dk xπ = k x -π, dk yπ = k y -π. Hence, by using the winding number equation ( The even numbers of the charges at the C 2 rotation centers is consistent with the rotation constraint (b) For the second example, we change the one-band model to The Hamiltonian with real chemical potential μ obeys where C * 4 = K * and M x = 1. Hence, the system belongs to WG#10 with C4 and M x . We start with the chemical potential μ = 2. The FP satisfying E(K PF ) = μ is located at (0, 0). Because this is the only FP in the entire system, to preserve the charge neutralization where dk x y = k x y -π 2. By using the definition (78) of the winding number, the charge of the FP at (π 2, π 2) is given by +1. The C4 rotation and reflection symmetries extend to this FP to the remaining three with the winding number relation (c) Consider a non-Hermitian Chern insulator and its Hamiltonian H C (k) is written in Eq. 74. It has been shown in EP example (c) that the Chern insulator Hamiltonian preserves C 4 rotation symmetry and M x mirror symmetry with C 4 = e iπσz 4 and M x = σ z . Even in the presence of the complex chemical potential μ, the symmetries are still preserved. According to Table VI, the minimal number of FPs with charge ±1 is given by 8. To show the distribution of the FPs concretely, consider γ 0 = 0, γ z = √ 3 2, M = 1 2, and μ = 1. Therefore, the Fermi momentum K FP is determined by det(H C (K PF ) -1) = 0. One of the FPs is located at K ++ FP = (π 2, 2π 3). Near this point, we expand the determinant to the leading order where dk x = k x -π 2 and dk y = k y -2π 3. The linear terms determine the winding number ν(K ++ FP ) = -1. The C 4 rotation symmetry generates other three FPs with ν = -1 located at (-π 2, -2π 3), (∓2π 3, ±π 2). Furthermore, the transpose reflection symmetry extends 4 additional FPs with ν = +1 located at (±π 2, ∓2π 3) and (±2π 3, ±π 2) as shown in Fig. The generalized no-go theorem can lead to three useful applications in condensed matter physics -layer groups, anomalous topological surface, and twisted bilayer physics. In chiral-symmetric, space-time-inversion symmetric and non-Hermitian systems, the no-go theorem for the 17 wallpaper groups can be directly extended to the 80 layer groups. Compared with wallpaper groups, layer groups have an additional degree of freedom in z direction without translational symmetry. With this additional direction, some layer groups can preserve z-flipping symmetries LG# 1, 4, 5 inversion symmetry (I). Each layer group can be formed by one of the wallpaper groups with/without one z-flipping symmetry generator The z-flipping symmetry operation contains M z operation. Here we assume M z commutes with chiral operator (S) and 2D space-time inversion operator (C 2z T ). For the discussion associated with the no-go theorem of the layer groups, for any related z-flipping symmetry operation, the effect of the z-flipping can be neglected, and the remaining operation in the other directions are kept. That is, M z → no change; C 2x , C 2y → M y , M x ; I → C 2z . In this regard, the layer group can be projected to one of the wallpaper groups. Table VII shows the wallpaper group projections from all the 80 layer groups. The no-go theorem of the layer group follows the corresponding wallpaper group projection; this projection can be used for nodal points protected by chiral symmetry and space-time inversion symmetry as well as non-Hermitian exceptional points and Fermi points. By treating the layer structure as the 2D lattice, we can project any layer group to one of the wallpaper groups. Its no-go theorem inherits the theorem of the corresponding wallpaper group. Let us use 2 layer groups as examples to demonstrate the 2D projection. LG The no-go theorem of the wallpaper groups also serves as clear guidance to search for 3D non-trivial topological phases with anomalous surfaces. This anomalous surface stems from the breaking of the 2D surface no-go theorem. The reason is that the surface BZ (SBZ) can have boundaries and does not cover the entire 2D BZ without boundaries, as shown in Fig. The violation of the charge neutralization can occur in the SBZ and brings anomaly The way to realize the anomalous surface is to have all nodal points in the minimal configuration NOT connected by symmetries. In the tables, the non-zero numbers without ∼ indicate this case. Although the entire 3D system obeys the 2D no-go theorem, some of the topological points can be outside of the SBZ without breaking any symmetries, as illustrated in Fig. Let us investigate the non-trivial bulks by studying the violation of our generalized no-go theorem on the surfaces for Hermitian and non-Hermitian systems. (a) For chiral symmetry, there are five AZ symmetry classes possessing stable nodal points at zero energy. Since the absolute numbers in class BDI and CII are either 0 or number labeled by ∼, the anomalous surface cannot exist in these classes. The trivial 3D topology in these two symmetry classes is consistent with the ten-fold classification Since nodal points off TRI points are connected by symmetries, to realize the minimal unneutralized charges, the nodal point has to be located at a TRI point, as shown in Fig. (b) For space-time inversion symmetry, Dirac nodes off TRI points for the 10 WGs preserving inversion symmetry are always connected by symmetries. Hence, on the SBZ the total charges are neutralized. On the other hand, while for class AI time-reversal symmetry forbids any Dirac node at any TRI points, for class AII Dirac nodes can be present at TRI points; the SBZ can include only one TRI point without breaking symmetries as shown in Fig. (c) For non-Hermitian systems, to realize unneutralized exceptional points and Fermi points on the surface, WG generators must be one or two of C n and Mx , which correspond to the absolute numbers without ∼ in Table where The sum of the Fermi-point charges on the anomalous surface corresponds to the integer value of the 3D topological invariant. On the other hand, different from Fermi points at fixed energy, the exceptional points on the surface in the entire energy spectrum are counted to examine the violation of the no-go theorem as an anomaly. The violation leads to the non-trivial topological bulk. The sum of the exceptional-point charges on the anomalous surface corresponds to another Z bulk topological invariant, which is unknown in the literature. The hint of the nogo theorem leads to a new direction to study this new non-Hermitian topological phase. Two graphene-monolayers with a small twisted angle form Moiré superlattice. At the magic angle, the emergence of the flat bands in the Moiré BZ has become an important playground to explore strongly correlated physics. In the two monolayers, the Dirac nodes located at K, K ′ evolve to complete flat bands in the entire Moiré BZ through the interlayer coupling. The presence of the Dirac nodes is one of the key elements for the band flatness. Our generalized no-go theorem can guide us to find other platforms hosting the similar Dirac nodes sorted by symmetries and can extend to square lattice and non-Hermitian platforms. As discussed previously in sec. III E 3, graphene without spin-orbital coupling can be simplified to an effective spinless system, which preserves time-reversal symmetry with T 2 = 1 and sublattice (chiral) symmetry, and this monolayer system belongs to WG#17 in class BDI with C - 6 and M - x . To realize alternative similar twisted bilayer systems, it is worth investigating if other platforms can host only two Dirac nodes at K, K ′ . Since the symmetry connection of the two nodes (∼) is not a factor affecting the Dirac node locations, we are looking for these two configurations labeled by 2(K, K ′ ) and 2(K, K ′ ). Table Our generalized no-go theorem also shows that in some symmetry classes the Dirac nodes at K, K ′ must be accompanied by other Dirac nodes due to the charge neutralization. Two Dirac nodes with +1 charges located at K, K ′ can be neutralized by two approaches as illustrated in Fig. To extend the twisted physics to square lattices, we consider the low-energy effective continuum Hamiltonian of the twisted bilayer graphene where σ ±θ 2 = e ∓iθσz 4 (σ x , σ y )e ±iθσz 4 , ∇ = (∂ x , ∂ y ), and T n e -iqn⋅r . The two diagonal terms represent the two Dirac cones located at the different layers and the interlayer coupling T 3 (r) is composed of three momentum hoppings differed by angle ψ = 2π 3 where k θ = 8π sin(θ 2) 3a0 and w AA BB indicates the strength of the AA/AB-basis coupling. Fig. The physics describes the coupling between the two Dirac nodes at M separately located in the two layers. The interlayer coupling has momentum hoppings in four directions S 4 (r) = ∑ 4 m=1 S m e -ipm⋅r ; Using the form of T 3 (r) in the graphene, we can write the details of the hoppings as where p θ = π sin(θ 2) b 0 , φ = π 2, and φ 0 = π 4. Graphene hosts Dirac nodes at K and K ′ points with ±1 charges quantized by chiral (sublattice) symmetry. It is natural to seek a similar non-Hermitian platform possessing topological points (EPs and FPs) at the same locations. However, since K and K ′ points are the C 3 rotation center, different from the Hermitian nodal phase, the values of the non-Hermitian charges must be a multiple of 3 The stable topological points in 2D lattices arise in chiral-symmetric, space-time-inversion-symmetric, and non-Hermitian systems. In the presence of crystalline symmetries and time-reversal symmetry, the minimal number of the topological points might be more than two beyond the original no-go theorem (the fermion doubling theorem This generalized no-go theorem is a unified principle and a fundamental rule for forming Dirac semimetals, nodal timereversal-symmetric topological superconductors, and non-Hermitian lattices with exceptional points or Fermi points. We start with chiral-symmetric nodal systems for the 17 wallpaper groups. Space-time-inversion-symmetric nodal semimetals and non-Hermitian nodal systems inherit the principle from the chiral-symmetric system with small modifications. The examples in the manuscript show that the topological materials in the literature must obey this ground rule, such as graphene and d-wave superconductors. In addition, the theorem predicts several new Dirac semimetals, such as six Dirac nodes in a hexagonal lattice The generalization of the no-go theorem also leads to several applications in condensed matter physics. The no-go theorem for the 17 wallpaper groups can be directly extended to the 80 layer groups through the projection. Our classification can determine if the no-go theorem on the surface can be violated; since the violation implies non-trivial bulks, this approach indirectly classifies Hermitian and non-Hermitian 3D topological bulk with Z and Z 2 invariants. Twisted bilayer graphene brings fruitfully interesting physics from the coupling of the Dirac cones. New predicted Dirac semimetals from the generalized no-go theorem can be new platforms of twisted bilayers for strong correlations. where Ψ γ (k)⟩ is the eigenstate of the H(k) with energy E γ . Assuming the absence of zero-energy states, chiral symmetry leads to N + = N -. Since the flattened Hamiltonian inherits chiral symmetry (4) from the original Hamiltonian by choosing a proper basis, chiral symmetry operator can be written as S = τ z ⊗ I n×n and the flattened Hamiltonian has this offdiagonal form Due to Q 2 = I 2n×2n , q(k) is a unitary matrix and invertible due to the absence of the zero-energy state. Using q(k), the winding number is defined in a closed loop integral path in the BZ This definition of the winding number is regularly used in the literature To show that h(k) and q(k) lead to the same winding number, we choose the eigenstates as the basis and then prove that H(k) commutes with Q(k) since The commutation relation can be rewritten in the proper basis . One can obtain The above equation implies that det[h(k)q † (k)] is a real number so that ln det(h(k)) + ln det(q * (k)) = γ(k) is a single-valued function, which leads to ∮ dγ(k) = 0. Using the property of the unitary matrix q(k), we have ln det(q * ) + ln det(q) = 0. Hence, the winding number with the closed integral path Γ(K 0 ) can be directly written in form of h(k) To connect the relation between ν(K 0 ) and ν(ΓK 0 ), we first consider g τ = {g τ } with spatial translation τ as a 2D crystalline symmetry operator. Since the matrix form of the symmetry operator commutes with chiral symmetry operator S = τ z ⊗ 1, the unitary symmetry operator in the single-particle basis (or particle-hole basis for superconductors) is written in a generic form of where U gi (k) is a momentum-dependent unitary matrix, which can describe a nonsymmorphic symmetry operation. The crystalline symmetry equation ( where U T i is momentum-independent since time reversal symmetry operator is non-spatial. In 2D momentum space, time reversal operation is equivalent to the combination of C 2 rotation and complex conjugation. Therefore, Hence, with the commutation relation between T + and S, time reversal operation flips the sign of the winding number for the nodal point at -K 0 . On the other hand, when symmetry operator anticommutes with S, the relation of the winding numbers between K 0 and gK 0 flips the sign. Following the similar derivation, we have crystalline symmetry operator U - g (k), which anticommutes with S, in the form of where V gi is a unitary matrix. This symmetry operator links the Hamiltonian at K 0 and gK 0 For time-reversal symmetry operator T -anticommuting with S, since the complex conjugate operator in T -flips the sign of the winding number, the relation between K 0 and -K 0 with time-reversal symmetry is given by ν(-K 0 ) = ν(K 0 ) (B18) The results of the winding number relations are summarized in Eqs. 17, 18 and Table. II. In all the WG symmetry classes, it is the most difficult task to find a tight-binding model for the minimal configuration of a nodal point with ν = 2 located at Γ and two nodal points with ν = -1 at K, K ′ in class DIII. In a 2-band model, time reversal symmetry (T 2 = -1) limits the winding number of the nodal point at Γ to an odd number. Hence, the 2-band model cannot host a nodal point at Γ carrying an even winding number. To find the minimal tight-binding model hosting this high-ordered nodal point, we start with a 4-band model consisting of two 6-Dirac-point Hamiltonians H 6 (k) (37) in class DIII. Since H 6 (k) possesses 6 Dirac nodes separately located at Γ, M 1,2,3 , K ′ , K, two of the twelve Dirac nodes at Γ carry ν = 2 winding number together, two nodes at M 1,2,3 carry ν = -2, and two nodes at K, K ′ carry ν = 2. However, the nodal points at M 1,2,3 should be removed and the signs of the winding numbers at K, K ′ should be switched. To achieve this, we intensionally add H 4 (k) (40) from class CI with real coefficient α as a coupling between two H 6 (k)'s. The 4 × 4 Hamiltonian is written in the form of (E1) Since time reversal symmetry with T = iτ 0 σ y K and particlehole symmetry C = τ 0 σ x K are preserved, the system belongs to class DIII. Hence, chiral symmetry operator is given by S = τ 0 σ z . Furthermore, this is WG#17 with C 6 rotation and M x generators since the Hamiltonian obeys M x H 4×4 (-k x , k y )M -1 )C -1 6 = H 4×4 (k x , k y ) with C 6 = cos π 6τ z σ 0 -i sin π 6τ z σ z . The algebra between the generators and the chiral symmetry operator is given by M - x and C + 6 . According to Table To realize the minimal configuration, we begin to increase α from 0, two Dirac points at each of M 1,2,3 points move toward K, K ′ along M K, M K ′ separately as shown in Fig. 3, from K or K ′ Dirac nodes separately move along ΓK or ΓK ′ toward Γ as shown in Fig. Appendix F: C2T symmetry Space-time inversion symmetry (C 2 T ) can protect 2D Dirac cones in the presence of disorders, and quantizes the Z 2 Berry phase in the 1D integral path. Here, we provide the detailed deviations; the Berry phase with the closed integral path Γ(K 0 ) at the nodal point K 0 can be written in Eq. 43. Space-time inversion operator C 2 T is the combination of a unitary matrix and complex conjugation C 2 T = V k K; the unitary matrix V k might be k-dependent and does not have any singularity point in the BZ. By assuming the absence of degenerate states, the relation of wavefunctions under C 2 T symmetry is given by The Berry phase with a non-contractible integral path can be written as where β j ∓ represent the phases at the beginning and the end of the integration path respectively; since the integration path is a closed loop, the start point and the end point are identical. Hence, the first summation is 2mπ, where m is an integer. Furthermore, due to the absence of any singularity in V k , the third term vanishes. After using the identity ⟨φ * k,j ∂ k φ * k,j ⟩ = ⟨∂ k φ k,j φ k,j ⟩ = -⟨φ k,j ∂ k φ k,j ⟩, (F3) we have the quantized Berry phase The modulo operation of 2π stems from gauge transform u * n (k)⟩ → e ilθ u * n (k)⟩ by using K 0 as the singularity point for the transformation; Hence, the two Berry phases differed by 2πl are equivalent. The crystalline symmetry {g τ } connects two nodal points K 0 and gK 0 so that the Hamiltonians at the two points obeys where the crystalline symmetry operator U g (k) is a momentum-dependent unitary matrix. Therefore, the wavefunctions at the two points are connected by Here we use that U g (k) does not have any singularity in the BZ. Since the Berry phase is either 0 or π, the relation between K 0 and gK 0 can be simplified to γ(gK 0 ) = γ(K 0 ). (F8) Similarly, for time-reversal symmetry, the Berry phases at K 0 and -K 0 are related by γ(K 0 ) = γ(-K 0 ) (F9) 7. Six Dirac nodes: WG#17 in class DIII ′ ) or 6 MLs or 12 4(M1,2,3, Γ) M3 M M 1 2 M3 (k) Γ Γ Γ Γ Γ Γ Γ M3 Y M X (a) (b) (e) (f) (c) (d) Γ M surface leads to the non-trivial bulk. The 3D bulk topological invariant is given by the sum of the nodal-point charges on the (a) (b) (c) (d)