The interior of a neutron star is expected to be occupied by a neutron 3 2 superfluid, which is the condensate of spin-triplet -wave Cooper pairs of neutrons with total angular momentum = 2. Here we investigate the thermodynamic stability of 3 2 superfluids in a neutron-star interior under a strong magnetic field. Using the theory incorporating the finite size correction of neutron Fermi surface, we show that the spin-polarized phases of 3 2 superfluids, the magnetized biaxial nematic phase and the ferromagnetic phase, appear in high temperatures and high magnetic fields. These phases were missed in the previous studies using the quasiclassical approximation in which dispersions of neutrons are linearized around the Fermi surface. In particular, the ferromagnetic phase, which is the condensation of Cooper-paired neutrons with fully polarized spins, appears between the normal phase and the biaxial nematic phase and enlarge the thermodynamic stability of 3 2 superfluids under strong magnetic fields. Furthermore, we present the augmented Ginzburg-Landau theory that incorporates the thermodynamic stability of spin-polarized 3 2 superfluid phases. A neutron star, which is composed almost entirely of dense neutrons, is a colossal superfluid in the Universe The condensates of paired neutrons exist under extreme conditions prevailing in the interiors of neutron stars such as high density, rapid rotation, and a strong magnetic field Let us consider neutrons interacting via a strong spinorbit force, which are invariant under a gauge transformation [U In this paper, we consider the presence of a uniform magnetic field along the -axis, which explicitly breaks SO(3) down to U previous works have predicted the thermodynamic stability of spin-polarized superfluid states. In this paper, we report the thermodynamic stability of spinpolarized 3 2 superfluid phases, such as the magnetized BN and FM phases, at strong magnetic fields relevant to magnetars. In general, the superfluid phase transition drastically changes a low-energy dispersion of neutrons near the Fermi surface. The Cooper pairs are confined to a low-energy band near the Fermi surface and a shell in momentum space, | -F | ≪ F , where F is the Fermi momentum of normal neutrons. In previous works Here we introduce the theoretical formulation for neutron 3 2 superfluids on the basis of the Luttinger-Ward theormodynamic functional. Let us start to define the Nambu-Gor'kov Green's function in terms of a grand ensemble average of the fermion-field operators in the Nambu (particle-hole) space, ( ) = H -H and ̄ ( ) = H † -H ( =↑, ↓ for spins) are the field operators for fermions with spin =↑, ↓ and momentum in the Matsubara representation. In this paper, we set ħ = B = 1 and set the volume of the system to → 1. We have introduced abbreviation, ≡ ( , ), representing the three dimensional space position and the imaginary time for the neutron ( = 1, 2). tr denotes the transpose of a matrix . The elements of ˆ obey the symmetry relations in the Nambu space, . In this paper, we consider translationally invariant neutron matter and transform the space-time position to the momentum and Matsubara frequency at temperature , . The self-consistent formalism is derived from the Luttinger-Ward thermodynamic functional which is given in terms of the full Nambu-Gor'kov Green's function and the self-energy Σ as where the trace, Tr 4 , (tr 2 ) is taken over the spin and Nambu spaces (spin space). The inverse propagator for free fermions is given by where is the 2 × 2 spin matrix of the single-particle Hamiltonian for neutrons under a magnetic field where and are the mass and the chemical potential. Here n = 1.2×10 -13 MeV/T is the gyromagnetic ratio for a neutron. We use = ( 1 , 2 , 3 ) and = ( 1 , 2 , 3 ) to denote the matrices in the spin and Nambu spaces, respectively. The last term in Eq. ( The Dyson's equation for the full Green's function is obtained from the latter stationary condition as The off-diagonal submatrix of the self-energy, Δ ( ), in Eq. ( where we assume a condensate of neutron pairs with zero center-of-mass energy and momentum. The diagonal selfenergy, describes the Fermi liquid corrections to the quasiparticle excitation energies. The Φ-functional in Eq. ( The interaction in the Cooper channel is decomposed into the spin-singlet (e: even parity) and spin-triplet (o: odd parity) functions: , where we have introduced ˆ ≡ / F . At low density of neutrons, the 1 0 channel is attractive and dominant in Cooper pair channels. At the high density regime 10 14 g/cm 3 ( is the particle density of neutrons), the 1 0 channel remains repulsive due to the strong core repulsion, while the 3 2 interaction stemming from a strong spin-orbit force between two nucleons remains attractive. As the interaction in the 3 0 and 3 1 channels are repulsive at high density The traceless and symmetric tensor, , ( ˆ ), is given by ( ˆ ) = 0 Another interaction potential, ( FL ; ), is expanded in terms of the Legendre polynomials l and parameterized with the Landau's spin-independent and spin-dependent Fermiliquid parameters (s) l and (a) l (l = 0, 1, . . . ) as where F is the neutron density of states at the Fermi energy F . Among the dimensionless parameters, (a) 0 gives rise to the spin-exchange interaction with the magnetization density of neutrons, and significantly affects the equilibrium properties of 3 2 superfluids under a magnetic field. In this work, therefore, we only take account of the lowest order terms (l = 0). The 2 × 2 self-energy matrix in the spin space is then given by and Σ = -Σ . The particle density and the spin density are obtained as respectively. Although the thermodynamic properties are insensitive to (s,a) l ≥1 , the fermionic vacuum polarization steaming from the Fermi liquid corrections with l ≥ 1 may affect the spectrum of bosonic excitations, i.e., collective excitations of 3 2 Cooper pairs where the Bogoliubov-de Gennes Hamiltonian is given by The self-energies associated with the particle density and spin density are renormalized to the chemical potential and the magnetic field as eff = - where is the magnetization density of neutron 3 2 superfluid and 0 N is the Pauli spin susceptibility of a normal neutron gas with effective mass * and the density of state F . We define eff ( ) Let Û ( ) be a 4 × 4 unitary matrix that diagonalizes the Bogoliubov-de Gennes Hamiltonian as where is the energy eigenvalues of the Hamiltonian. The thermodynamic stability of 3 2 superfluids is determined by minimizing the thermodynamic potential Ω( , , ). The potential is equivalent to the Luttinger-Ward functional Ω[ ˆ , Σ] when ˆ and Σ satisfy the stationary conditions in Eqs. ( ( ), the thermodynamic potential is recast into where we utilize the relations, tr ln = ln det and ln[( 2 + 2 )/ 2 ] = / + 2 ln(1 + -/ ) + ( is a -independent constant). The gap equation for the 3 2 order parameter are derived from the stationary condition of the thermodynamic potential. The total particle density and magnetization density = 1 2 n are also obtained from the thermodynamic relations respectively. The gap equations for A are derived from the stationary condition of the thermodynamic potential, The equilibrium state is determined by solving the selfconsistent equations ( In the absence of external fields, the normal neutron system is invariant under a gauge transformation [U(1) ] and the three-dimensional spin-orbit rotation [SO(3) ] The order parameter for 3 2 superfluids is the 3 × 3 traceless symmetric tensor, A , defined in Eq. ( in the 3 × 3 matrix notation. The ordered state spontaneously breaks the symmetry of the Hamiltonian, , to ⊂ . The group describes the remaining symmetry of the ordered state and the tensor is invariant under a transformation by the group element h ∈ , hA = A. The element h is written as h = Φ+ J , where Φ and J are the generators for a gauge transformation and simultaneous spin-orbit rotation, respectively, and is an infinitesimal parameter. There are three continuous subgroups of , FM = U(1) -2 , FM ′ = U(1) -, and UN = U(1) . The elements of these subgroups are given by h = ( -2J ) , h = ( -J ) , and h = J , respectively. In the first two subgroups, the gauge transformation A → A is compensated by the spin-orbit rotation about the axis byor -2 , which manifestly exhibits the equivalence between phase change and spin-orbit rotation. The order parameters of two ferromagnetic (FM and FM ′ ) phases are given by where we omit the U(1) phase degrees of freedom. The former (latter) state corresponds to a condensation of neutrons into Cooper pairs with = ±2 ( = ±1), whose spins are fully (partially) polarized. The ordered state with UN = U(1) is the UN nematic state. In addition to the ordered states preserving continuous symmetry, there exist competitive orders with discrete symmetry. When the ordered state preserves the time-reversal symmetry, A must be a real symmetric traceless tensor. Hence, the order parameter with time-reversal symmetry is given by a diagonal form The eigenvalue ∈ [-1, -1/2] is the order parameter that represents the biaxiality of the nematic order parameter. The most symmetric state is the UN state at = -1/2, which maintains the U(1) symmetry about the ˆ axis in the spin-orbit space. When deviates from the UN point, the ordered state breaks the U(1) symmetry down to the discrete symmetry. The BN state at = -1 remains invariant under dihedral-four 4 symmetry, which has the 4 and 2 axes. The intermediate holds dihedral-two 2 symmetry with the three 2 axes. Below, we focus on the high temperature and high magnetic field regime of 3 2 neutron superfluids. The 3 2 order parameter under a magnetic field is expressed in terms of three real parameters (Δ, , ) as Without loss of generality, we assume that the magnetic field is applied along the -axis. The order parameter in Eq. ( Phase O.P. [see Eq. ( = -1, ∈ (0, 1) Eq. ( -where 3 and 3 represent and /2 rotations around the third ( ) axis, respectively, and 1 3 is the 3 × 3 unit matrix. The mixing of nonzero component in the 4 -BN state lowers the symmetry to the cyclic group 4 . In Table where ( ) ∈ O(2) is the -fold rotation matrix about the -axis, The integer vortex is = 1 and = 0, while the half-quantized vortex is = 1/2 and = ±1/4. They obey Abelian exchange statistics. In the case of the nonmagnetic 4 -BN ( = -1, = 0), each non-Abelian half-quantized vortex hosts a single zero energy mode, which behaves as a non-Abelian anyon At zero magnetic fields, the excitation energy of Bogoliubov quasiparticles is obtained from Eq. (20) as where (0) eff ( ) = 2 /(2 )eff is the energy of the normal neutrons at zero magnetic fields and the -vector is defined as which represents the spin degrees of freedom of 3 2 Cooper pairs. When the time-reversal symmetry is preserved ( = 0), the -vector is real and the eigenstates are doubly degenerate as a Kramers doublet. A state with nonzero breaks time-reversal symmetry, and the energy gap of the fermionic excitations at = F is determined by The ordered state with ( ) × * ( ) ≠ 0 is referred to as a nonunitary state. In such nonunitary state, the 3 2 Cooper pairs at the point have a spin ( The spin polarization of 3 2 Cooper pairs splits the degeneracy of Bogoliubov excitations at , leading to two distinct excitation gaps, | ( )| 2 ± | ( ) × * ( )|. In particular, when ≠ 0, the order parameter in Eq. ( where • • • is the average over the neutron Fermi surface. The net spin of 3 2 Cooper pairs leads to the polarization of neutron spins at zero magnetic fields. The spin polarization of 3 2 Cooper pairs may stabilize the nonunitary states with ≠ 0, such as the magnetized 4 -BN and FM states, under a strong magnetic field. In the previous works To properly discuss the thermodynamic stability of spinpolarized 3 2 superfluids under strong magnetic fields, we compute the momentum integral in self-consistent equations in Sec. II A without employing the quasiclassical approximation. This incorporates the finite-size effect of the Fermi surface and asymmetry of density of states (particle-hole asymmetry), which are regarded as the higher order corrections on c / F and Δ/ F . It is demonstrated below that the corrections split the critical temperatures of the nonmagnetic UN/BN states and the FM states, and thermodynamically stabilize the spin-polarized 3 2 states under a strong magnetic field. To see the role of particle-hole asymmetry on the splitting of the critical temperatures, we start with the order parameter in Eq. ( and Δ ↑↓ ( ) = Δ ↓↑ ( ) = 0. The BdG Hamiltonian is decomposed to the spin sectors where ↑ and ↓ are the single-particle energies of spin-up and down neutrons, respectively. The Bogoliubov quasiparticle excitation energy is obtained as where we have taken = + (-) for spin-up (down). The variational parameters and Δ are determined by solving the gap equation. From the saddle point condition of the thermodynamic potential for A given by Eq. ( where The inverse of the coupling constant is associated with the parameter Δ 0 / F through the gap equation at = = 0, where Δ 0 is the superfluid gap at = 0 and = 0. To quantify the finite-size correction of the neutron Fermi surface and particle-hole asymmetry, we introduce the parameter To determine the critical temperatures, we linearize the gap equations ( where ̄ F ≡ ( F,↑ + F,↓ )/2. In the spin-polarized state with > 0 ( < 0), the spins of Cooper pairs are aligned parallel (anti-parallel) to the applied magnetic field. The finite-size correction of the neutron Fermi surface, , splits the critical temperatures, which is crucial for the thermodynamic stability of the magnetized BN and ferromagnetic states with > 0 at high magnetic fields. As shown in Fig. Let us now clarify the thermodynamically stable 3 2 superfluid phases under a strong magnetic field. In the previous works based on the quasiclassical approximation Here we determine the order parameters Δ( , ), ( , ), and ( , ) in Eq. ( This is related to the dimensionless parameter in Eq. ( The FM state with = 1 and = -1 appears in the narrow region around c . In Fig. IV. GINZBURG-LANDAU THEORY FOR 3 2 Around the transition point from the normal phase to the superfluid phase, the 3 2 superfluids allow bosonic excitations as collective modes is obtained through the fermion loops by integrating out the fermion degrees of freedom. In many cases, the GL expansion may be given up to the fourth order. In the case of 3 2 superfluids, however, the expansion up to the fourth order is not enough to determine uniquely the ground state due to a continuous degeneracy among the UN, 2 -BN, and 4 -BN phases at the fourth order. At this order, in fact, an extended symmetry, SO(5), happens to exist thought it is absent in the original Hamiltonian. Such degeneracy can be resolved at the sixth order in the GL expansion where is a complex 3 × 3 matrix for the 3 2 order parameter. In the GL equation, we use the notation for the order parameter of the 3 2 superfluids, which is different only by a factor from A used in the BdG theory in Sec. II. Each term in Eq. ( In this case, the spontaneous breaking of the extended symmetry eventually generates a quasi-Nambu-Goldstone mode The existence of the critical end-point was first found in the analysis of the BdG equation Notice that the (0) term is the eighth-order term for the global stability which was found in Ref. In the above equations, the coefficients are uniquely determined by the loop calculation for fermion, (2) ≡ 7 (3) (2) ≡ 31 (5) and (1) ≡ - with the state-number density 0 = F /(2 2 ) at the Fermi surface, the magnitude of the magnetic moment | * | = ( /2)/(1+ (a) 0 ), the superfluid transition temperature at zero magnetic fields c0 , and the polarization vector ( = 1, 2, 3) defined by We note that (0) , (0) , (0) , (0) , (0) , (2) and (4) are obtained under the qausiclassical approximation, where the Fermi surface is regarded as the flat surface approximately. On the other hand, the (1) and (1) terms represent the violation of the particle-hole symmetry. Those two terms are beyond the quasiclassical approximation and they are relevant to the curvature of the Fermi surface. In the definition of (1) , the function 1 ( ) is given by where > 0 is the cutoff parameter for the energy measured from the Fermi surface: should be a finite value, because the scaling behavior does not hold at the lowestorder for the violation of the particle-hole symmetry. In fact, the value of 1 ( / c0 ) becomes divergent for the infinite value of . There is no such divergence in the coefficient (1) due to the higher-order loops of fermions. We confirm that the (1) and (1) terms vanish in the quasiclassical approximation with the large F limit. Thus, those terms are relevant at the low density region only. Here, we comment that the (1) term was first given for the 3 He superfluids in the GL formalism Similarly to Eq. ( with real parameters 0 ≥ 0, -1 ≤ ≤ -1/2, and -1 ≤ ≤ 1. We remind us that the amplitude 0 can be different from that in the BdG theory due to the different overall factor as discussed already. The nonzero value of is relevant to the magnetized 4 -BN and FM phases. The values of 0 , , and are determined uniquely by minimizing the GL free energy for given temperature, magnetic field and particle density. Let us show the numerical result of the phase diagram by the GL free energy. As the input parameter, we determine the cutoff parameter in the following way. According to Ref. region between the 4 -BN phase and the normal phase at nonzero magnetic fields. This is consistent with the result in the self-consistent calculation of the thermodynamic potential for fermions (Fig. We have investigated the thermodynamic stability of neutron 3 2 superfluids under a strong magnetic field. A 3 2 superfluid is expected to exist in the interior of neutron stars under extreme conditions. In particular, magnetars have the most intense magnetic field in the Universe. The strong field, = 10 15 -10 18 G, amounts the critical field (∼ B c ) of spinsinglet Cooper pairing, corresponding to ħ / B c ∼ 0.1-100 for c = 10 9 K. The interaction of neutron spins with such strong magnetic field breaks spin-singlet Cooper pairs, and the Because the FM fields exist at nonzero magnetic fields, it is enough to consider only the terms coupling to the magnetic fields, such as the (1) term, as relevant terms in the next-to-leading order. conventional 1 0 superfluids are thermodynamically unstable against the Zeeman splitting of the neutron Fermi surface. Employing the self-consistent calculations properly incorporating the Zeeman effect, we have demonstrated that spin-polarized 3 2 Cooper pairs are tolerant against a strong magnetic field. A Zeeman field induces the successive phase transitions from the UN state ( = -1/2 and = 0) to the 2 -and 4 -BN states ( ∈ (-1, 1/2) and ∈ (0, 1)) and the FM state ( = -1 and = 1). The variational parameters, ∈ [-1, -1/2] and ∈ [0, 1], quantify the biaxility and the spin polarization of 3 2 order parameters, respectively. The FM state becomes thermodynamically stable in the high temperature and strong magnetic field, and the critical temperature rather increases with increasing . Therefore, the spin-polarized 3 2 superfluid is expected to survive in the interior of magnetars with intense magnetic field. Neutron 3 2 superfluids have two key ingredients, Bogoliubov quasiparticles and 3 2 Cooper pairs. The former is the elementary fermionic excitations from the superfluid ground state, while the latter behaves as long-lived bosons with internal degrees of freedom = 0, ±1, ±2. The superfluids share much common interests in condensed-matter physics, including -wave superconductors The Bogoliubov quasiparticles can be main carriers in thermal and spin transport phenomena. In 3 2 superfluids, their gap symmetries and topological properties are sensitive to the biaxility and nonunitarity . In the UN state, the excitation energy in Eq. ( In addition to fermions, the condensation of 3 2 Cooper pairs is accompanied by rich order parameter manifold and thus paves a way for understanding the thermal evolution of neutron stars and a longstanding issue on glitches in pulsars. As discussed in Sec. II B, there are several Nambu-Goldstone bosons associated with nontrivial broken symmetries in 3 2 ordered states. Such bosonic excitations might be relevant for the cooling process by neutrino emission = {(1, 1 3 ), (-1, 3 ), (1, 3 ), (-1, 3 3 )},(29)