In this work we developed an extension to the Transfer Matrix method (TMM) to include a current source term, with the aim of describing both the transmission and emission of THz pulses in spintronics THz emitters. The TMM with source is derived from the Maxwell equations with a volume free current term. This extension to the TMM allows for the study of realistic spintronics THz emitters as multilayers of different materials with different thicknesses. We use this to prove that, in spite of a common misconception, the drop rate of the THz emission amplitude at higher heavy metal layer thicknesses is not related and does not provide information about the spin diffusion length. It is instead the effect of the increase in the parasitic absorption of the generated radiation by the conducting parts of the spintronics THz emitter itself. The terahertz (THz) frequency gap is a frequency range between infrared and microwaves (0.1-10 THz). This frequency range is drawing much attention in a number of fields aimed at the fabrication of new optoelectronic devices. Examples of the applicability of THz technology are security checks For the past few years a new type of emitter, known as spintronics THz emitters, has attracted a great interest in the field by providing low-cost, broad spectrum, flexible and performant emission based on spin-to-charge conversion in ferromagnet(FM)/heavy metal(HM) multilayers The effort in optimising spintronics THz emitter requires the ability to accurately describe these processes. An effective approach to model the propagation of electromagnetic waves in heterostructure devices is the transfer matrix method (TMM) as it efficiently and elegantly accounts for multiple reflections at the different interfaces of a multilayer. The standard TMM however addresses the problem of a wave crossing a multilayer, while in the case of the spintronics THz emitters, the wave is generated within one (or more) of the layers by a pulsed current. Previously, there have been several attempts at modifying the TMM by approximating the current as a 2D current running through the interface between two of the layers In this work we developed an extension to the TMM to include space-and time-resolved charge currents J[t, z]. The approach can be straightforwardly adapted to the case of free charge distributions, yet we do not address this case here. Specifically, we focused on photo induced ultrafast spin currents We first focus on a single layer and write the free current in terms of its Fourier components in space and time where i is the imaginary unit. As the equations we are going to address are linear, we can explicitly compute the emitted radiation for the case of a single Fourier component and then obtain the full solution by summation. Therefore we study the case of a source J[z, t] = J exp[i(kz -ωt)]. The Maxwell's equations within the layer where the free current is running are where we stress that, in general, k = ω √ μ, as k is the reciprocal space variable (momentum) for the spatial Fourier transform of the current profile and not the light wave vector. Notice how k is a purely real number, while ω √ μ is, in general, a complex value. The solution of the inhomogeneous system above can be constructed as the general solution of the associated homogeneous system plus a particular solution of the inhomogeneous system. The general solution is known from textbooks (5) Therefore, the time-(notice not space-) Fourier transform of general solution can be written as with where f > [ω] and and f < [ω] are two amplitude parameters that are to be fixed by boundary conditions and that represent the amplitude of the right propagating wave and of the left propagating one, respectively. For shortness we can rewrite Eq. 6 as which gives the fields amplitude at a given position. The shape of the fields within layers that have no current running through them is simply a special case of Eq. 6 with the free current term set to zero. We now suppose we have a multilayer with M layers, sandwiched by air. We assume that the N -th layer has a free current at a given frequency and momentum. We want to calculate the radiation generated by the free current yet including transmission and multiple reflections through the multilayer. We compute the response at the same frequency as the source. The fields at the interfaces of the N -th layer are given by where we have used the subscript N to refer to quantities that depend on the characteristics of the N -th layer. For compactness, we have dropped the explicit dependence on the frequency in the above expressions. Since both FN [0] and FN [d N ] depend on the amplitude parameters fN , they can be written in terms of each other: where, Eq. 12 provides the amplitude of the fields at the right interface of the N -th layer if the fields on the left interface are known. A similar approach can be used for all the other layers. As we assume here that no current runs in any of the other layers, except the N -th one (the approach can be easily generalised), for a generic layer n we can still use Eq. 12 with the source term set to zero: Using the fact that the fields must be continuous at every interface, we can obtain (by a procedure that very closely resembles the transfer matrix method derivation the relationship between field amplitude parameters of the air on the left of the multilayer ( f0 ) and those of the air on the right ( f∞ ) or for brevity where with n and m representing two layers (the reader should notice the inverse order of the product). We then obtain the emitted radiation by solving the system of equations, where f > ∞ gives the amplitude of the radiation emitted towards the right of the multilayer, while f < 0 the one towards the left. Eq. 18 specifies that there is no radiation incoming towards the multilayer on either side. The system can be solved and, in particular, the righthand side emission is, where the numerical indices represent matrix elements corresponding to a specific column and row. It is useful to generalise the treatment above to include two further effects: the presence of an external (probe) pulse for which we need to calculate the transmission, and the removal of echo pulses eventually produced in a thick substrate from the transmitted and generated radiation spectrum. The first situation is common for THz pump and probe experiments. The pump pulse triggers the formation of the pulsed current (as in the case of spintronics THz emitters) that, in turns, creates a pulsed emitted radiation which is experimentally measured. However it is common to further investigate the system by sending a probe pulse onto the multilayer, and investigating its transmission through or reflection from the sample. The second effect leads to some complications in the presence of echoes and we addressed it in Ref. where the index S refers to the substrate layer, and f > 0 represents the probe pulse sent from the lefthand side of the multilayer. This gives where t [n,m] represents the transmission coefficient, B. Propagation, focusing and detector's response The field amplitudes computed above are the ones immediately outside of the multilayer. However, the usual time-domain terahertz spectroscopic setups do not measure those fields directly. Typically, the terahertz radiation, before reaching the detector propagates in air and is directed through parabolic mirrors to focus on the electro-optic detection crystal. The propagation and focusing process can be approximately included by multiplying the transmission by a response function that is linear with frequency However, the electro-optic detector response results from several effects within the electro-optic detecting crystal itself. Thus, we avoided the details of the THz detection process since it varies with different setups and is beyond the scope of this work. But it is important to note that the response from electro-optical crystal further convolute with the emitted terahertz electric field before its final detection. We use the approach developed above to model a typical optical pump -THz probe setup for spintronics THz emitters. We choose, as an example, a multilayer system commonly used for spintronics THz emitters: a 1mm Al 2 O 3 substrate, a 10nm F e layer, a 2nm Au layer, and a 10nm Al 2 O 3 capping layer. The dielectric response for each layer is fully accounted for as frequency dependent. The frequency-dependent relative permittivities for F e and Au are constructed using the Drude model with plasma frequency and damping frequency taken as 4.08eV and 0.02641eV respectively for F e, and as 9.03eV and 0.027eV for Au We assume, in this example, that the transverse charge current is localised within the Au layer only (but more general configurations can be described as well). We construct the temporal and spatial profile of the charge current as the product of a spatial and a temporal function. We test our approach with two temporal profiles for the charge current. The first used profile is + 1 with a rise time of a = 200fs and a switching-off time of b = 500fs (see temporal profile 1 in Fig. To produce a comparable amplitude to the 1st profile the h in Eq. 24 is taken as 5 × 10 -21 . As spatial profile we assume a simple exponential decay with depth in the Au layer: In principle the superdiffusive spin current is not expected to have such profile, especially in such thin layers. Nonetheless due to the very high spin-orbit coupling of the Au layer, spin to charge conversion is expected to quickly reduce the spin polarisation of the spin current. Therefore, in high spin orbit coupling materials, we expect the charge current induced by inverse spin Hall effect to quickly drop, not because of the drop in amplitude of the superdiffusion of the excited carriers, but due to the quick loss in their spin polarisation. For simplicity, we assume here a decay length (spin diffusion length) λ of 1 nm (see Fig. Using the TMM with source developed above, we are able to compute the temporal profile emitted THz wave using the two types of currents in Eq. 23 and 24 as shown in Fig. Our method is also able to reproduce the transmitted THz probe and the emitted THz signal within the same formalism (see Fig. In the computed case, both the source current and the probe signal are generated around time 10ps. The emitted pulse however reaches the surface on the right very quickly, while the probe signal is still travelling through the substrate (see We are now ready to address the core interesting point. It might be tempting to assume that making the HM layer thicker should increase the THz emission efficiency, if the spin diffusion length is long enough. The rationale is that a thicker HM layer will allow for more charge current to be generated. That concept, although partially correct, fails to include another important effect of the increase in thickness of the HM layer. This layer is (in standard spintronics THz emitters) conducting. THz radiation is heavily absorbed by conducting layers. Therefore, while a thicker HM increases the amount of current, it also increases the absorption of the generated THz. We investigate here the overall balance of these two competing effects. We assume two different scenarios: one with a spin diffusion length of 1nm and one with a spin diffusion length of 3nm. We use a sample similar to the one used above, but with an HM layer with increasing thickness: Al 2 O 3 (1mm, substrate) / F e (10nm)/ Au (Xnm)/ Al 2 O 3 (10nm), where X goes from 0 to 10. As expected, we observe in Fig. Finally we mention that similar results are obtained by changing the thickness of the FM layer (not shown), due to very similar reasons. In conclusion, we have proposed an analytical way to describe the spintronics THz emitter based on an extension of the Transfer Matrix Method to include volume sources (beyond the previously used approximations of 2D currents). The TMM with source is flexible, easy to implement, performant and able to describe a large variety of spintronic THz emitters constructed by different materials. It also provides a detailed prediction of the emitted THz waveform generated by imposing specific spatial and temporal profiles for the source current. It moreover easily allows to simulate both a transmitted THz probe and generated THz pulse at the same time. Using this approach we have been able to address the very important issue of how the thickness of the layers influences the efficiency of the THz emission and its relationship to the spin diffusion length. We have proven that, even if it is tempting to do so, the drop rate of the THz emission at higher thicknesses is not related and does not provide information about the spin diffusion length, but it is the effect of the increase in the parasitic absorption of the generated radiation by the conducting parts of the spintronics THz emitter itself.