Similar to the diode in electronics, a thermal diode is a two-terminal device that allows heat to transfer easier in one direction (forward bias) than in the opposite direction (reverse bias). Unlike conductive and convective thermal diodes, a photonic thermal diode operates in a contactless mode and may afford a large operating temperature range. In this work, a novel near-field photonic thermal diode with hexagonal boron nitride (hBN) and indium antimonide (InSb) is proposed and theoretically demonstrated. The temperature dependence of the interband absorption of InSb is used to couple (or decouple) with the hyperbolic phonon polaritons in hBN. The numerical analysis predicts a rectification ratio greater than 17 for a 10 nm vacuum gap when operating at an average temperature of 300 K and a temperature difference of 200 K. The calculated rectification ratio exceeds 35 with higher average temperatures and larger temperature differences. The mechanism proposed here for achieving photonic thermal rectification provides a new way of controlling radiative heat transfer. Analogous to its electronic counterpart, a thermal diode is a two-terminal device with an asymmetric thermal transfer function that depends on the direction of temperature gradient. numerically demonstrated R ’é╗ 24 at 50 nm vacuum gap with a temperature difference of 10 K above and below the VO 2 transition temperature of 341 K. As shown in Figure The hBN sheet is a uniaxial medium due to its layered structures. In the present study, the optical axis of hBN is parallel to z-direction so that its dielectric tensor may be expressed as 2 00 00 00 where ’üź ’ü× is the ordinary dielectric function (when the electric field is in the x-y plane) and ’üź is the extraordinary dielectric function (when the electric field is parallel to the optical axis or z-axis). Lattice vibrations in either the in-plane or out-of-plane direction result in a mid-infrared Reststrahlen band in the ordinary or extraordinary dielectric function, respectively. Therefore, the dielectric functions of hBN can be modeled as 40,41 where ’üĘ is the angular frequency, m ’ĆĮ or ’ü× , ’üź ’éź is a high-frequency constant, TO and LO represent transverse optical phonon and longitudinal optical phonon modes, respectively, and ’ü¦ is the damping coefficient. These parameters are taken from Kumar et al. There are two hyperbolic bands in which 0 ’üź’üź ’ü× ’éó’éó ’Ć╝ . The type II hyperbolic band with 0 ’üź ’ü× ’éó ’Ć╝ in the region 0.17 eV 0.20 eV ’üĘ ’Ć╝’Ć╝ is shaded because it plays a key role in the proposed thermal diode. As shown in Figure . The real part of the extraordinary dielectric function ) while the imaginary part ( ’üź ’éó’éó ) is negiligible small for 0.15 eV ’üĘ ’ĆŠ . As a widely used narrow bandgap semiconductor, the interband absorption coefficient of InSb is strongly temperature dependent. is the angular frequency corresponding to the bandgap energy g E with being the reduced Planck constant. It is reasonable to use the fitting value of 1 0 7000 cm ’üĪ ’ĆŁ ’é╗ for all temperatures. where T is in [K] and g E in [eV]. This relation has been experimentally validated from about 10 K to 600 K. For 1 100 ╬╝m h ’ĆĮ (InSb), 2 5 nm h ’ĆĮ (hBN), and a vacuum gap of d = 10 nm, the heat flux 12 q is calculated with an average temperature avg 1 2 ( ) / 2 T T T ’ĆĮ’Ć½ as a function of 12 T T T ’üä ’ĆĮ ’ĆŁ and plotted in Figure Therefore, increasing the temperature difference results in an increase of the rectification ratio. The rectification ratio is also shown in Figure The near-field heat flux enhancement between InSb and hBN is not as strong as that between two hBN sheets. ), the heat flux is about 53% that between two blackbodies. The reduction is presumably due to multiple reflections with the InSb and hBN layers. Even with a smaller T ’üä , relatively large R can still be achieved: for example, R = 2.17, 5.13 and 9.67, when T ’üä = 60 K, 92 K and 120 K, respectively. Note that another way to characterize the thermal performance is to use a rectification efficiency defined as The spectral heat flux () q ’üĘ for both forward and reverse scenarios are shown in Figure , the dielectric function of InSb is the same at 200 K and 400 K, and the forward and backward spectra overlap with each other. Because InSb is treated as nonabsorbing in this region, only propagating waves in vacuum can be supported. Furthermore, surface reflection results in a reduction of the heat transfer that is even smaller than that between two blackbodies. The oscillations continue for reverse bias g (200 K) 0.2 eV E ’é╗ . A small peak occurs at 0.17 eV in the reverse scenario due to the spike in ’üź ’ü× ’éó’éó . For reverse bias, there is a quick rise in () q ’üĘ near 0.2 eV ; however, the magnitude is relatively small since it is beyond the hBN hyperbolic band and only propagating waves in vacuum and frustrated modes can be supported. For 0.23 eV ’üĘ ’ĆŠ , the difference between the forward and reverse scenarios is negligibly small. In this region, the absorption by the thin hBN sheet is negligible so that only propagating waves in vacuum are supported. No interference effects are expected at 0.20 eV ’üĘ ’ĆŠ since InSb film is essentially opaque in this region. In this case, the surface reflection between vacuum and InSb is dominated by the refractive index rather than the absorption coefficient. Hence, the forward and backward () q ’üĘ almost overlap with each other. The contour plot of the transmission coefficient is shown in Figure As mentioned previously, these modes give photon tunneling for ’üĘ from 0.15 eV to 0.17 eV, although with a lower transmission coefficient away from 0.17 eV. There exist propagating waves in InSb that can be tunneled through the vacuum gap at 10 nk ’üó ’Ć╝ due to frustrated total internal reflection. 14 The hyperbolic modes support photon tunneling at high ’üó values, resulting in greater enhancement of the near-field heat flux. Parametric sweeps were conducted to help understand the role of thicknesses and vacuum gap on the performance of the proposed photonic thermal diode. The calculation results show that the effect of the InSb thickness is small. When 1 10 ╬╝m h ’ĆŠ , the heat fluxes and rectification ratio are almost constant. Therefore, 1 100 ╬╝m h ’ĆĮ is used in all calculations without further discussion. The effects of d and 2 h on the rectification ratio are shown in Figure , R reaches a maximum at 2 5 nm h ’ĆĮ and decreases slightly as 2 h increases. Even when 2 1000 nm h ’ĆĮ , the rectification ratio is greater than 15.4. For 20 nm d ’ĆĮ , the 4.54 R ’ĆĮ (or rectification efficiency ’ü© = 0.82) at 2 10 nm h ’ĆĮ . It can be seen from Figure In summary, a novel near-field photonic thermal diode is proposed by coupling the interband absorption of an InSb film with the HPhPs in a hBN sheet. The temperature dependence of the band edge absorption of InSb enables the thermal diode behavior. A high rectification ratio of more than 17 is predicted at a 200 K temperature difference with an average temperature of 300 K. When the temperature difference is increased to 350 K for a temperature difference of 500 K, calculations show that the rectification ratio is near 38. This work theoretically demonstrates a new mechanism to achieve photonic thermal rectification and provides a new way of controlling the radiative heat transfer at the nanometer scales. The fluctuational electrodynamics and a transfer matrix method are used to calculate the nearfield radiative heat transfer between two thin films. The net radiative heat flux from 1 to 2 is calculated by Fig. 4, Feng et al.