The shear strength and the corrosion resistance of the fiber/matrix interface after immersion in simulated body fluid was studied in poly-lactic acid/Mg fiber composites. The shear strength of the interface was measured by means of push-out tests in thin slices of the composite perpendicular to the fibers. It was found that the interface strength dropped from 15.2 ± 1.4 MPa to 7.8 ± 3.7 MPa after the composite was immersed in simulated body fluid for 148 hours. The reduction of the interface strength was associated to the fast corrosion of the fibers as water diffused to the interface through the polymer. The expansion of the fibers due to the formation of corrosion products was enough to promote radial cracks in the polymer matrix which facilitate the ingress of water and the development of corrosion pitting in the fibers. Moreover, cell culture testing on the material showed that early degradation of the Mg fibers affected the proliferation of pre-osteoblasts near the Mg fibers due to the local changes in the environment produced by the fiber corrosion. Thus, surface modification of Mg fibers to delay degradation seems to be a critical point for further development of Mg/PLA composites for biomedical applications. Biodegradable materials, including natural and synthetic polymers as well as hydrolizable metals, are currently considered for the fabrication of implants, tissue scaffolds and medical devices Nevertheless, the accumulation of acidic products during degradation does not always favor tissue integration and, moreover, their low mechanical properties limit their use in many orthopedic applications. Natural polymers based of proteins (such as silk, collagen and fibrin) and polysaccharides (starch, alginate, etc.) are less likely to generate foreign body reactions but their mechanical properties are even lower than synthetic polymers. On the contrary, biodegradable metals, such as Mg, Zn and Fe, present much better mechanical properties and the corrosion products can be easily eliminated and/or metabolised or assimilated by cells Mg is particularly interesting for orthopedic applications because its elastic modulus (~45 GPa) is similar to that of human bones (2-30 GPa) Considering the advantages and drawbacks of both types of biodegradable materials, Mg/polymer composites are an appealing solution because metallic fibers can provide the mechanical strength while the polymeric matrix slows down Mg corrosion. Furthermore, the mechanical properties and degradation rate of the composite can be tailored from the volume fraction and spatial distribution of matrix and fibers in the composite and it has been indicated the acidic products generated during the degradation of PLA can be neutralized by the degradation of Mg particles In this investigation, the interface shear strength of PLA/Mg fiber composites as a function of immersion time in phosphate buffer saline (PBS) solution at 37°C is determined by means of push-out tests, that have been extensively used to measure the interface properties in other composites Billets of approximately 51 mm diameter of WE43MEO Mg alloy were produced by casting, machining and heat-treatment processes and then converted into 6 mm diameter rods by indirect extrusion (Meotec GmbH. Aachen). The nominal composition of the alloy was 1.4 -4.2 % Y, 2.5 -3.5 % Nd, <1 % (Al, Fe, Cu, Ni, Mn, Zn, Zr) and balance Mg (in wt%). Afterwards, the rods were cold drawn to fine wires of 0.1 mm diameter (Meotec gmBH, Aachen and Fort Wayne Metals Research Products Corp., Indiana, USA). The fibers had a constant diameter with tolerance of ±0.001 mm which was confirmed with a micrometer. The fibers were cleaned by the manufacturer to a standard appropriate for biomedical applications and were used as received. PLA pellets (3251D) with a molecular weight around 160000 g/mol were supplied by NatureWorks BV (The Netherlands). Composite laminae were prepared by transferring fibers from spool to a Teflon covered plate. The fibers were loaded in tension using a custom-designed winding mechanism. A PLA/chloroform solution was then poured onto the fibers, leading to a unidirectional fiber composite lamina after evaporation and drying of the solvent. In addition, PLA laminae of 300 mm x 300 mm x 0.2 mm were prepared by hot pressing of the pellets. Alternative PLA and fiber composite laminae were placed into a mold of 120 mm x 12 mm x 2 mm and consolidated by hot pressing at 185oC, leading to fully dense PLA/Mg fiber composite plates with an average fiber volume fraction of 20%. Composites samples of 5 mm x 12 mm x 2 mm were cut from the plates for the degradation tests. This cross section (12 mm x 2 mm) is representative for bone plates and other biomedical applications. The cross-sections created during cutting (where the Mg fibers were exposed) were sealed with a waterproof epoxy resin to ensure that degradation occurred through the PLA matrix and not by pipeline diffusion mechanisms along the fiber/matrix interface from the cross-sections where Mg fibers are exposed. The samples were immersed in PBS solution at 37°C in a sealed polypropylene container. The PBS volume to sample mass ratio was above 30 ml /g and the PBS solution was changed daily. The samples were removed after 27 h (~1 day) and 148 h (~6 days), dried and thin slices for the push-out tests were prepared as indicated below. Visual inspection showed that ends of the specimens (in which you could see the cross section of the fibers) were effectively sealed because rapid corrosion at this location would have peeled of epoxy. It is worth noting that the intended period of in vitro study was 14 days, but preparation of thin slices was impossible after this period due to the enhanced degradation of composite. The surfaces of the push-out test samples were observed in the SEM (Zeiss EVO MA15) at an accelerated voltage of 3~5 kV to determine the degradation micromechanisms and corrosion products were identified by energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDAX Octane Plus). Thin slices perpendicular to the fibers were cut from the composite plates using a high precision wire cutting machine for the push-out tests. The slices were embedded in an epoxy resin (SpeciFix resin system, Struers, Denmark) for successive grinding and polishing steps to obtain a sample with thickness of 0.2 mm, twice the diameter of fibers, ensuring that both the faces of the slice were perpendicular to the fiber direction. The thickness of each slices was measured with a Vernier caliper and they were in the range 0.19 to 0.21 mm. Push-out tests of the fibers were carried out in the thin slices that were placed on a metallic support with a central groove of ≈ 200 μm in width (Fig. The average interfacial shear strength between the Mg fiber and the PLA matrix was calculated according to where Pmax, R and l stand for the maximum load recorded during push-out test, the fiber radius and the thickness of composite slice, respectively. A pre-osteoblast cell line from mouse calvarial MC3T3-E1 sub-clone 4 (ATCC CRL-2593) was used to study the interaction of the composite with cells. Cells were cultured in alpha-MEM medium (Invitrogen) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) (Invitrogen), 2 mM glutamine, and 100 U/ml of penicillin and 100μg/ml streptomycin (Pen/Strep, Invitrogen). Cells between passages 11 and 13 were used and maintained at 37°C in a humidified 5% CO2 atmosphere. The medium was renewed every two days, and cells were used after reaching 90% of confluence. Composite samples with dimensions 0.5 cm x 1cm x 0.2 cm were sterilized by immersion in 70% ethanol during 10 min followed by air drying. Cells were directly seeded on the surfaces of the material at a concentration of 100.000 cell/cm 2 in 100 μl of alpha-MEM. After 30 min, 1 mL of complete culture medium was added and cells were incubated at 37°C for 24h. Finally, cells were washed twice with PBS and fixed with 4% formaldehyde solution for 30 min. Afterwards, they were passed through serial solutions of 30%, 50%, 70, 80%, 90%, and 100% ethanol each for 15 min. The samples were air-dried, sputter-coated with gold and observed in the SEM at an acceleration voltage of 7 kV. Representative load-displacement curves of five push-out tests on isolated fibers of Mg/PLA composites are plotted in Fig. The load-displacement curves of the push-out tests in composite plates immersed in PBS during Load (N) immersed for 27 hours showed a more marked concave region at the beginning of the test (as compared with the as-manufactured samples), that could be attributed to uneven surfaces resulting from grinding/polishing because of the deterioration of the composite, indicating that the bending stiffness of the composite plate has decreased significantly. In addition, two samples showed an extended region with constant, negative slope after the peak-load, which was associated with the progressive push-out of the fiber against frictional forces at the broken interface. Nevertheless, interface failure was also brittle in these cases and the fibers protruded from the bottom of the slice at the end of the tests in all samples. The concave region at the beginning of the test and the extended region with negative slope after the peak load were more important in the samples tested after 148 hours in PBS (Fig. The average value (and the corresponding standard deviation) of the interface shear strength according to eq. ( Cells were deposited on the longitudinal and transversal surfaces on the Mg/PLA composites. They were in contact with the PLA in the longitudinal surface and with Mg and PLA in the transversal one. The cells deposited on the longitudinal surface of the composite grew uniformly on the PLA, as it can be seen in SEM micrographs at different magnifications (Figs. The lines on the surface of the longitudinal samples are a result of the cutting process (Fig. Moreover, the cells were attached to the PLA but not to the Mg fibers, which showed evidence of the build-up of corrosion products thwarting adhesion (Fig. The results presented above show that the diffusion of water from the composite surface towards the Mg fibers took place very quickly when the composite samples were immersed in PBS solution and degradation of the interface strength was already noticeable after 1 day. The interface strength was reduced from 15.2 ± 1.4 MPa to 7.8 ± 3.7 MPa (Fig. Cracking enabled the rapid diffusion of the water into the Mg fibers accelerating the corrosion and the degradation of the composite material. Mechanical tests of PLA/Mg composites after immersion in corrosive enviroments reported cracks in the PLA matrix The degradation of the Mg/PLA composites can be understood from the widely accepted corrosion-induced cracking model of steel reinforced concrete . The hydrogen gas (H2) resulting from the reaction diffuses through the PLA matrix. The corrosion layer grows inwards and outwards at same time and severe pitting starts on random locations of the fiber surface by diffusion of chlorine ions which convert Mg(OH)2 into soluble MgCl2 releasing hydroxyl (OH -1 ) ions. The OH -1 ions either diffuse out of composite into the medium or react with available carboxylic end groups produced by hydrolytic degradation of PLA, leading to the formation of water It is known that the corrosion resistance of Mg WE43 alloy is higher than that of Mg and that pitting corrosion happens when the alloy is directly exposed to the corrosive medium Thus, it was surprising that the PLA matrix could not stop pitting corrosion of the Mg fibers, as shown in Figs. where E 7 ( ) and E )*+ , ν 012 , E '( , ν 34 stand for the elastic modulus and Poisson's ratio of PLA and Mg. α '( and α )*+ stand for the respective coefficients of thermal expansion and ΔT = -148 °C is the difference between the test temperature (37oC) and the processing temperature (185 oC). R is the fiber radius (50 μm) and β = 0.262 is the coefficient of linear expansion of corroded region around the fiber due to the transformation of Mg into Mg(OH)2 (2) and the magnitude of β are detailed in the appendix while the thermo-elastic constants of Mg and PLA can be found in Table It should be noted that three difference sources of residual stresses were initially considered in the model to predict the circumferential tensile stress in the PLA matrix at the interface (eq. 2). They were the thermal stresses that arise during the cooling stage after the composite forming process, the swelling of matrix due to the water uptake and the fiber expansion due to the formation of the corrosion layer. Nevertheless, the effect of swelling was not included in the model because it would release the tensile stresses in the matrix and there were not accurate experimental data to the determine the volume expansion due to water uptake. Moreover, the water uptake stops very quickly while cracks evolved with time. Table and, according to eq. ( In order to validate the results of the analytical model, a number of small cracks in the PLA, emanating from the Mg fibers, were selected in the cross-section of the sample immersed in PBS during 27 h. The thickness of the corrosion layer on the fiber was measured at these crack locations, as shown in Fig. Thus, it seems that the rapid degradation of the Mg was negative from the viewpoint of biocompatibility, as it has been shown in other investigations The Appendix. Analytical model for the stresses in the matrix at the interface due to the uniform corrosion of the fibers. A simplified thermo-elastic analysis is presented to determine the stresses in the PLA matrix at the interface with a circular Mg fiber as a result of the thermal expansion mismatch between matrix and fibers and of the expansion of the corrosion products in an annular region of the fiber of thickness e0. The circular fiber of radius R is embedded in an infinite matrix and the thermo-elastic problems of a cylindrical cavity subjected to an uniform internal pressure p (Fig. 