Majorana zero modes are a much sought-after consequence of one-dimensional topological superconductivity. Here we show that, in turn, zero modes accompanying dynamical instanton events strongly enhance -in some cases even enable -superconductivity. We find that the dynamics of a onedimensional topological triplet superconductor is governed by a θ-term in the action. For isotropic triplets, this term enables algebraic charge-2e superconductivity, which is destroyed by fluctuations in non-topological superconductors. For anisotropic triplets, zero modes suppress quantum phase slips and stabilize superconductivity over a large region of the phase diagram. We present predictions of correlation functions and thermodynamics for states of topologically enhanced superconductivity. One-dimensional topological p-wave superconductors are widely proposed as building blocks for quantum information processing In this paper we show that charge-2e topological triplet superconductivity in one-dimensional quantum wires becomes possible while it is not allowed for non-topological systems. The latter can only undergo vestigial charge-4e pairing in a much reduced regime of the phase diagram, see Fig. These findings occur for systems that are isotropic in spin space where we exploit a connection to Haldane's conjecture in spin space, disorder-inducing configurations are suppressed by zero modes that are more akin to what is known for spinless systems Model: We study a time reversal invariant p-wave spin triplet superconductor in one dimension at zero temperature. The Bogoliubov-de Gennes Hamiltonian for given space-and time-dependent order-parameter configuration ∆ (x, τ ) in the Nambu spinor basis Ψ = (ψ ↑ , ψ ↓ , ψ↓ , -ψ↑ ) T is with m the fermion mass and μ the chemical potential. The order parameter takes the form of a real unit vector n, that describes the orientation of the Cooper pair spin, times a global phase θ, i.e. ∆ = |∆|e iθ n, with the pairing strength |∆|. μ < 0 corresponds to a trivial and μ > 0 to a topological superconductor In low-dimensional intrinsic superconductors orderparameter fluctuations are important and are governed by the non-linear σ-model (NLσM): Here K 0 c and K 0 s denote the bare stiffnesses of the charge and spin sector respectively. v c and v s are the respective velocities. We use K c,s for the renormalized stiffnesses. This model is a generalization of previous descriptions for spinless fermions Topological field configurations: The fields θ, n that describe U (1)-phase and spin of a Cooper pair allow for several distinct QPSs, shown in Fig. where Dθ N Dn N . . . denotes the integral over smooth bosonic fluctuations on top of the topological field configuration and Z f N [θ, n] is the fermionic partition sum in a given bosonic background of fixed N . Notice, all fluctuations around the trivial state, including these instantons, must be taken into account as long as their action is finite. Estimating the core size of QPS we obtain, following Ref. 1/2 , and the core action Topologically trivial superconductivity: To analyze the model it is tempting to argue that fermions are gapped and should not change the universal behavior of orderparameter fluctuations. Then, the NLσM of Eq. ( Integrating out fermions: In order to systematically integrate out fermions in a one-dimensional system we employ non-Abelian bosonization We employ this method to effectively eliminate the massive degrees of freedom while retaining the effect of zero modes. The degrees of freedom of the WZNW theory are group valued boson fields defined on the orthogonal group O(4). The matrix components of this field can be related to fermionic currents by g ij = (-i/M )χ i R χ j L , where χ R , χ L are right-and left-moving Majorana fermions that can be constructed from the microscopic fermions, and M is a regularization dependent mass-scale. The degrees of freedom described by the BdG-Hamiltonian (1) deep in the topological phase are exactly four right-moving and four left-moving Majorana fermions, which explains the manifold O(4). Effectively, the field g encodes the fermionic fluctuations and the opening of a gap corresponds to breaking the chiral symmetry, i.e. individual components of g develop a finite expectation value. The action with coupling constant γ reads where the Wess-Zumino term Γ[g] is defined by extending the domain of the group valued field g ∈ O(4) to a hemisphere of the three-dimensional unit sphere with S 2 as boundary FIG. The pairing term is bosonized and introduces a (θ, n) dependent mass term for g. In the adiabatic limit g follows the variation of the background fields (θ, n) and thereby traces the equator of O(4). The details of the subsequent analysis are given in the supplement where θ = π. For a topologically trivial superconductor we obtain instead θ = 0. Eq. ( Before we discuss further implications of this finding, we offer an alternative and physically more transparent derivation of the θ-term. We consider nontrivial skyrmion configurations but in this context it is particularly convenient to introduce a soft easy-plane anisotropy With this complex fugacity, the contribution of 2π spin QPS vanishes upon summation over Q, the internal degree of freedom of the vortex is the associated topological charge In addition to nontrivial spin textures, we can also analyze charge vortices or combinations of charge and spin vortices. We find that one can map this dynamic problem onto an effective Hermitian single-particle Hamiltonian H eff in two dimensions (x, τ ). H eff can then be reduced to the two-dimensional Fu-Kane Hamiltonian of a 3D topological insulator surface state in contact with an s-wave superconductor 2 ), with winding number of a planar spin vortex ν s . More generally we obtain a zero mode for each odd ν c ± ν s . These dynamical zero modes can be understood as protected level crossings under the adiabatic variation of a parameter. Perturbations that do not destroy the level crossing also do not lift the dynamic zero modes. Hence Z f N [θ, n] = 0 for these singledefect configurations and the corresponding vortex fugacities vanish. More importantly, vortex-antivortex pairs do not contribute to a BKT transition as the exponen-tially small overlap between modes gives rise to a linear, confining potential overruling the usual logarithmic interaction. Our mapping to the Fu-Kane model can also be applied to spinless p-wave superconductors where it agrees with past results on QPSs in this system Quantum Phase diagram. If we combine the θ-term and the presence of zero modes due to charge vortices, we can determine the phase diagrams shown in Fig. It is a charge insulator and a spin-nematic state. Hence, the critical stiffness for the destruction of superconductivity is 16 times lower than in the trivial case; see Fig. Correlators: Let us discuss experimentally and numerically measurable consequences of the topological phases in terms of bosonic and fermionic correlators. In topologically trivial superconductors, fermions are gapped and fermion correlators decay exponentially. This is qualitatively different for topological superconductors. The power-law behavior of the single-fermion correlator is again caused by dynamical zero modes. We obtain where r = x 2 + v 2 c τ 2 denotes the Euclidean norm of a point (x, τ ) in space-time. For simplicity we assumed v s = v c . Hence, the topological superconductor possesses gapless charged fermionic excitations. This is in contrast to nodal excitations which can appear in higher dimensions and are charge neutral. However, experiments which measure the phase coherence, such as flux quantization or the a.c. Josephson effect are expected to detect a condensate charge of 2e. Eq. ( Similarly, we expect power-law dependence on temperature of various transport coefficients, such as the thermal conductivity Notice that nonetheless the system cannot be described as a Tomonaga-Luttinger liquid of charge-e fermions, since the behavior of two-particle correlators differs. Zero modes also nontrivially affect two-particle correlators in the topological state The exponent for the singlet pair-correlator differs from the Luttinger liquid result (extracting the Luttinger parameters from the one-particle correlator) for general values of K c , ρ LL sg ∼ E 1+ 1 2Kc . In the 2e-ordered phase the singlet correlations are less singular than in a conventional Luttinger liquid. At low energies the amplitude for tunneling triplet pairs into the system is enhanced compared to the one for singlet pairs. A detailed derivation is given in Easy axis anisotropy: We already discussed an additional easy axis anisotropy S an = λ dτ dxn 2 z when we offered an alternative derivation of the θ-term in Eq. ( We find that superconducting fluctuations in topological and topologically trivial superconductors are qualitatively different, leading to distinct phase boundaries, symmetry breaking, and excitation spectra. The common theme is that superconductiv-ity in topological systems is much more robust against fluctuations. The reason is the crucial role of dynamic zero modes. The most dramatic effect is the emergence of otherwise forbidden charge 2e superconductivity for isotropic triplets caused by a topological term in the action. It yields algebraic superconducting order for a stiffness 16 times lower than charge 4e-superconductivity in the non-topological counterpart. In the following it will be argued that the computation of the Pfaffian of the fermionic kernel K (to be defined below) of a dynamical problem in (1+1)-dimensions can be mapped to a time-independent Hamiltonian problem in two spatial dimensions. Subsequently, the zero modes of this Hamiltonian will be found for the topological background configurations introduced in the main text. The kernel K is not Hermitian. This prohibits in general an expansion in a complete set of eigenmodes. By multiplying K with a matrix such that the resulting operator is Hermitian, this issue can be circumvented. This procedure allows to determine the value of the Pfaffian up to a phase, since Pf(AB) 2 = det(A) det(B), which follows from Pf(A) 2 = det(A) [S47] and multiplicativity of the determinant. Let us first construct the kernel K. Consider the fermions to be deep in the topological superconducting phase μ 2m|∆| 2 . Then the low-energy degrees of freedom are situated near the Fermi points. Define the real and imaginary parts of the components of the gap function as ∆ j ≡ Re|∆|k F e iθ n j and ∆ j ≡ Im|∆|k F e iθ n j . We expand close to the Fermi points ±k F = ± √ 2mμ = ±mv F . The Nambu spinors now have eight components corresponding to spin, Nambu, and right/left moving components, which we describe using the Pauli matrices σ i , τ i , and ρ i , respectively. The reality condition then takes the form Ψ † = Ψ T σ y τ y ρ x ≡ Ψ T C. (The charge-conjugation operator C also exchanges left-and right-movers). Then for Note that C and K have a different matrix structure than in the main text, since the expansion around the Fermi points was not explicitly performed there. The sign of the gap function at the left Fermi point is reversed, due to the antisymmetry of the p-wave pairing in momentum space. The term ∼ ∂ x (ue -iθ n) has been neglected, because typical bosonic momenta are much smaller than k F . In order to map this problem to an Hermitian operator, we multiply by the matrix σ y τ y ρ z and obtain This is an effective Hamiltonian of a (2 + 0)-dimensional system with coordinates (x, τ ). It has a chiral symmetry C = ρ z . The kinetic term has the structure of a Dirac Hamiltonian with α-matrices α x = -τ z ρ x and α τ = -ρ y that satisfy the Clifford algebra {α i , α j } = 2δ ij . It takes the form The components of the gap function act as coordinate dependent mass terms. It is convenient to introduce polar coordinates in the (x, τ )-plane by x = r cos φ, v F τ = r sin φ, and associated Dirac α-matrices α r = cos φα x + sin φα τ , α φ = -sin φα x + cos φα τ . In these coordinates the effective Hamiltonian takes the form Consider now a charge QPS with winding number ν c ∈ Z situated at the origin. This corresponds to a configuration of the gap function where ∆ j = ∆ 0 (r) cos(ν c φ)n j and ∆ j = ∆ 0 (r) sin(ν c φ)n j . The real and positive amplitude of the ∆ 0 (r) has to vanish at the origin for the gap function to be well-defined. Far away from the core the amplitude approaches the equilibrium value |∆|k F . The n-vector can be chosen to point in any constant direction, and we choose the z-direction n = e z . Hence, for this particular configuration the effective Hamiltonian reads This Hamiltonian is identical to a direct sum of two (2+0)-dimensional Fu-Kane Hamiltonians of a 3D topological insulator surface state in contact with an s-wave superconductor [S41]. The decomposition is with respect to the two spin-sectors that are defined by the choice of the constant vector n which defines a quantization axis. It is known that the Fu-Kane Hamiltonian possesses a single localized zero mode in a background field with odd winding number and no zero mode in a background field with even winding number. We can conclude that the Hamiltonian (S5) possesses two localized zero modes in the field of a charge QPS of odd winding number. Moreover, there exists an anti-unitary operator that commutes with (S5) and squares to -1, an effective time-reversal symmetry, given by T = σ x τ y K. This enforces the double-degeneracy of the spectrum, while the particle-hole symmetry P defined by C = PT protects the zero modes. The solutions can also be found explicitly for ν = ±1 by looking for angle-independent solutions to the zero mode equation. For ν c = +1 we find, introducing g c (r) = N exp - For the case of ν c = -1 we find analogously One easily realizes that the conclusions made about the zero modes do not rely on our simplifying assumption that v F = v c . Consider now a combined charge and spin QPS, that is a configuration in which both the phase and the n-vector wind around the origin with winding numbers ν c and ν s respectively. Note that if both ν c and ν s are half-integer the gap function is still well-defined. We choose the n-vector to lie in the xy-plane, thus the components of the gap function take the form ∆ x = ∆ 0 (r) cos(ν c φ) cos(ν s φ), ∆ y = ∆ 0 (r) cos(ν c φ) sin(ν s φ), ∆ x = ∆ 0 (r) sin(ν c φ) cos(ν s φ), and ∆ y = ∆ 0 (r) sin(ν c φ) sin(ν s φ). The remaining components vanish. The resulting effective Hamiltonian reads It can be seen that the Hamiltonian decomposes into two sectors where the Cooper-pair background field is that of a QPS with winding number ν c ± ν s respectively. If ν c and ν s are both half-integer, then the field in one of the sectors has odd winding and the other has even winding. Therefore there is a single zero mode on such a combined QPS. This zero mode is protected by the particle-hole symmetry operator P = τ z ρ x K. At finite easy-plane anisotropy the relevant topological excitations that determine the properties of the spin sector of the model [Eq. ( If the anisotropy is strong, i.e. the core size L an ∼ v s /λ is small, then it is natural to decompose this Hamiltonian into a unperturbed H 0 eff that contains the vortex winding of the meron, and a perturbation V due to the core region The unperturbed Hamiltonian H 0 eff can again be decomposed into a direct sum of Fu-Kane Hamiltonians. Indeed it possesses a time-reversal symmetry that squares to -1, given by T = σ x ρ y K. The perturbation explicitly breaks this symmetry. Therefore, the unperturbed problem possesses two zero-modes for odd winding number, and the splitting effected by the perturbation must be symmetric (due to the still intact particle-hole symmetry). For ν s = +1 the two (unperturbed) zero mode solutions read where g s (r) = N exp -r 0 dr |∆|kF vF sin β(r) is a real function that is exponentially localized near r = 0. In the space of the zero modes the perturbation takes the form In first order perturbation theory the two zero modes are split symmetrically around zero -the perturbative calculation is justified as long as the splitting is small compared to higher Caroli-de Gennes-Matricon states, which results in the condition L an |∆|/v F . In this limit one may neglect the coupling to higher energy states which implies that the kernel is block diagonal with one block consisting of the zero mode subspace and the other of the finite energy states (the restriction of K to this subspace is denoted K ). Then the Pfaffian factorizes The Pfaffian of V zm , a 2×2-matrix, is given by the upper right off-diagonal element. Thus Pf V zm = -iaQ, where a is a real and positive number. It can be seen that Pfaffians of configurations with opposite skyrmion charge Q have opposite sign. Hence the contributions of merons and antimerons to the effective fugacity cancel and can be written in the form Pf (CK) ∼ e -iπQ . (S16) The relative phase produced by the fermions of the complex fugacity of configurations with different skyrmion charge Q is therefore identical to the phase produced by a θ-term with topological angle θ = π. We also verify the existence of zero modes by numerical computation. To this end, the fermionic kernel is discretized on a lattice. Then the determinant (which is the square of the Pfaffian) is computed with the background field configuration of interest inserted. Due to the finite size of the lattice and due to the finite numerical accuracy it is not possible to show that the determinant in a certain background field vanishes exactly. However, we demonstrate two effects that strongly suggest the presence of zero modes: (i) The numerical value of the determinant in an appropriate topologically nontrivial background field is multiple orders of magnitude smaller compared to the determinant in a homogeneous configuration. (ii) In the background of a QPS-anti-QPS pair the determinant scales exponentially with the separation of the defects det(CK) ∼ e -/ξ . This is evidence for the linear confinement of QPS-anti-QPS pairs, in distinction to the usual logarithmic interaction. Concretely, we consider the kernel CK deep in the topological phase, Eq. (S1). It is placed on a space-time lattice of n τ = 100 sites along the imaginary-time direction and n x = 300 sites along the spatial direction. A QPS-anti-QPS pair with winding number n = 1 is used as a background configuration and the separation between the defects is varied. For an exemplary separation of 50 lattice sites the determinant in the non-trivial background is about 10 58 -times smaller compared to the determinant in the homogeneous background. Furthermore, the expected linear scaling of the logarithm of the determinant is observed, until the zero modes begin to hybridize with the edge modes. The same scaling behavior is observed for a pair of spin-QPS and a QPS pair subject to phase bias, Figs S1 (b),(c). As outlined in the main text the presence of Fermi zero modes in an instanton background leads to algebraic decay of fermion correlators. This result can also be understood as analogous to the problem of chiral symmetry breaking in gauge theories: The fermion parity symmetry (which is separately conserved in the two spin sectors) does not allow gapless excitations with charge e naively. But taking into account the instanton sectors renders this symmetry anomalous. In the following sections one-and two-fermion correlators are computed by considering contributions from zero modes in topologically nontrivial background fields. For simplicity we assume that v c = v s in the following sections. Before we proceed we briefly comment on the role of fluctuating electromagnetic fields in charged systems. There are two effects, both of which only affect the charge field θ, but leave the theory in spin-space unchanged: First, the logarithmic interaction of charge QPSs is formally screened beyond a space-time scale L [S48] which is, however, exponentially large in the square of ratio of the London penetration depth and some microscopic scale. [S49, S50] Second, the phase mode hybridizes with the 1D plasmon mode and decays faster than powerlaw because of a logarithmic momentum dependence of the stiffness [S51]. However, any metallic gate, located at a distance d s will screen the long-range interaction. While formally both phenomena would destroy algebraic superconductivity, it persists in the important and experimentally relevant regime d s x L. The fermion correlator is given by a functional integral over all possible configurations of the fermions and the fluctuating order parameter weighted by the action A given configuration of the order parameter can be divided into a singular vortex part and a regular fluctuation Let us focus on half QPS configurations, since they will generate the most relevant contribution to the correlator. We first perform a gauge transformation in order to separate the contribution of the fermions in the QPS background from the fluctuations. Introduce fermion operators χ κ through where U σκ (n) denotes the elements of an SU (2) matrix that satisfies such that it transforms to a frame in which the fermions are subject only to the topologically nontrivial configuration. The matrix U can be given explicitly as However, it cannot be expressed solely through the fluctuating angles, but it depends explicitly on the underlying vortex configuration through θ v s . This has to be taken into account when the averages are performed. We therefore find where the sum goes over n QPS-anti-QPS pairs at the locations X 1 , . . . , X 2n with orientation d i . Hence it can be seen that the correlator factorizes into a sum of fermion correlators in QPS-anti-QPS background fields and fluctuation contributions from θ and n. (Of course even though the 2π combined QPSs are confined they still have to be summed over in the functional integral.) Let us now turn to the computation of the correlator of χ-fermions. As outlined above it involves a sum over singular (QPS) background field configurations. We make the following approximation: we consider only the contribution of a single QPS-anti-QPS pair (of charge-spin combined QPSs) situated at distance r (or more precisely, in a region of size ξ around r) and at 0. Then there is a localized (in space-time) zero mode with spin κ at r and a localized zero mode with spin κ at 0. Taking into account configurations with higher numbers of QPS-anti-QPS pairs, these zero modes will eventually broaden into a band [S52, S53] with the Fermi energy at half-filling, and the near-zero modes will become extended states. Whether the approximation above is justified depends on which order-parameter configurations dominate the path integral, dilute QPS-anti-QPS pair configurations, or dense ones. In any case, since the contributions of the extended zero modes to the correlator will also decay algebraically, they do not change the general conclusion of the presence of gapless fermion excitations. Going back to the single QPS-anti-QPS pair, the expectation value χ κ (r)χ † κ (0) in the background field is a constant independent of r because of the integration over the (approximate, exact in the limit r → ∞) Fermi zero modes. This can be seen by noting that the functional integral is defined as an integration over Grassmann numbers. Expanding the Nambu spinor fields Ψ and its transposed Ψ T in some basis with Grassmann numbers a n where the left and right basis functions can be chosen to be mutually orthonormal η L,n |η R,m = δ n,m , the Majorana-Grassmann integral takes the form where K ls denotes the matrix elements of the kernel in the introduced basis. From the preceding sections it is known that without the additional insertions the Grassmann integral vanishes, since it is equal to the Pfaffian Pf(K). From the point of view of Grassmann integration this means that there are Grassmann numbers that do not appear in the integrand. These are the zero modes. Hence the Grassmann integral becomes non-zero only if there is an insertion for every zero mode. From this it can be concluded that the expectation value above takes a finite value in the limit r → ∞. The longdistance behavior now comes from the instanton action ∼ exp -Ks+Kc 2 log r (this is just the interaction energy of the QPS and the AQPS). Of course combined QPSs with higher winding number ν will also contribute to the correlator, but their contribution will be subleading, because of the higher interaction energy that leads to the exponent The fluctuation contributions of the superconducting phase are given by e i(θ sw (r)-θ sw (r ))/2 ∼ r -1/8Kc . In a state without superconducting order this correlator decays exponentially. Hence the loss of phase coherence renders the fermions massive. Even though the zero modes are still present (locally) they do not influence the long-range properties anymore. The fluctuation contribution of the n-vector is encoded in the correlator U σκ (n(r))U † κ σ (n(0)) . Using Eq. (S21) we can write where . . . v(sw) denotes the average over vortex (fluctuation) configurations. Taking σ =↑, σ =↑ we find that three of the four terms in the sum depend on θ v s . What happens to these terms upon averaging? The relevant contributions of the Grassmann integral come from close to the vortex cores. There the phase texture θ v s varies rapidly. Hence all terms involving θ v s will be suppressed. The remaining contribution is In the anisotropic case this is now easy to evaluate and we find In the isotropic case θ sw s and β sw cannot be regarded as independent fields. Their dynamics must be described by a SU 1 (2) WZNW model. This can be effected by the replacement K s → 1/2. Hence As we have seen above, the summation over combined QPSs (that host a single localized Fermi zero mode) leads to algebraic decay of single-fermion correlators. Analogously, configurations with two zero modes localized at the same point lead to algebraic decay of two-fermion correlators. This is an effect that does not originate from the presence of gapless single fermion excitations, which is why it persists in the vestigial phases. It has to be distinguished from the possible effect of extended single zero modes which appear for dense configurations of QPS-AQPS pairs. Essentially, if the single Fermi zero modes hybridize and form a band of finite width, then two fermion correlators are naturally gapless with a scaling dimension that is inherited from the single-fermion correlator. In the opposite limit of a very dilute QPS-AQPS pair configuration this is not implied. In this case the two-fermion correlator can only become gapless through order-parameter configurations with two zero modes lo-calized at the same point. Consider a 2π charge QPS. It possesses two localized zero modes of opposite spin, because the tunneling event changes the fermion parity in both the spin-up and -down sectors. This pair of zero modes forms a singlet, since it is unchanged by rotations in spin space. (Therefore the corresponding operator represents a type of order differing from the primary triplet order ∆.) The annihilation operator with the same quantum numbers (charge 2e and spin 0) is given by ψ σ (r)ψ -σ (r). Hence in the approximation that only configurations containing a single QPS-AQPS pair contribute, we obtain Using the anticommutativity of the Grassmann numbers it turns out that the angular contributions cancel out. We find therefore Because this correlator is independent of the variables in the spin sector, it remains gapless in the spin disordered vestigial charge-4e phase. We can also consider a 2π spin QPS. It hosts two zero modes of opposite spin, but now the phase is advanced in the opposite direction in both spin sectors, which implies that the fermion parity changes in the opposite direction. The corresponding operator thus has to be neutral and carry spin-1 (the spin QPS like n under spin rotations). Such an operator is given by ψ † σ ψ -σ . Note that the zero modes are only present in the limit of infinite anisotropy, otherwise they are gapped out. In this limit we find It is independent of the charge variables. Hence at infinite anisotropy the charge disordered vestigial spin-2 phase possesses gapless spin-1 excitations. In the following, a detailed derivation of the θ-term using non-Abelian bosonization [S35] is presented. Non-Abelian bosonization is a technique by which a (1 + 1)dimensional system of fermions with a O(N ) × O(N ) (or U (N ) × U (N )) chiral symmetry can be rewritten as a fixed point of a bosonic theory, with the bosonic field being defined on the group manifold O(N ) (U (N )). The advantage of the approach, compared to Abelian bosonization, lies in the manifest preservation of the complete chiral symmetry. The action governing the group-valued field g is the WZNW action of level k = 1 where the Wess-Zumino term is defined extending the domain of g to a hemisphere of the three-dimensional unit sphere with the original domain S 2 as its boundary ∂y μ g -1 ∂g ∂y ν g -1 ∂g ∂y ρ . (S31) By virtue of Stokes' theorem the Wess-Zumino term is independent of the precise choice of the extension. In the case discussed here, the Lagrangian of fermions with spin in the background of a p-wave pairing field deep in the topological phase is expressed as a Lagrangian of Majorana fermions with a O(4) × O(4) chiral symmetry that is manifestly broken by the pairing terms that act as space-time dependent Majorana masses. In this form the free theory can be represented by a WZNW action of level k = 1, and the pairing terms become mass terms for the group valued bosonic field g that effectively pin g to a fixed value. Under adiabatic variation of the gap function g traces out a submanifold (S 1 × S 2 )/Z 2 of O(4). We demonstrate that the Wess-Zumino term (S31) measures the skyrmion charge Q of the pairing field configuration, Γ[g(θ, n)] = iπQ, and is hence responsible for the appearance a θ-term with θ = π in the effective theory describing the superconductor. We begin by representing the free fermion action as a theory of massless Majorana fermions. Define the rightand left-moving fermion fields R and L, and the rightand left-moving spinors as After expansion around the Fermi points the BdG Hamiltonian [Eq. ( with H R = v F (-i∂ x )τ z and H L = -H R . The spinors are connected by the reality conditions , where C = σ y τ y . Hence the Hamiltonian has the same number of degrees of freedom as that of 8 Majorana fermions, but expressed through φ R and φ L it does not yet have the appropriate form. The desired Nambu spinor should satisfy the Majorana condition Φ † = Φ T . This condition is satisfied by the spinor Under this transformation the kinetic part of the Hamiltonian becomes H kin = v F i∂ x ρ z . It remains to express the pairing terms in this representation. Before the transformation they are given by H p,R = ∆ j σ j τ y +∆ j σ j τ x and H p,L = -H p,R . The result after the transformation is It can be seen that this BdG Hamiltonian only contains off-diagonal ρ-matrices. Hence it only couples left-and right-moving fermions. Therefore it effect is to generate a mass term linear in g upon bosonization. Now, the group valued field g is introduced. The correspondences between the currents are given by where M is a quantity with dimensions of mass that depends on the regularization procedure. These formulas can now be used to represent the pairing terms through g. Parametrize the order parameter as above. Consider e.g. the first contribution to Eq. (S35). It holds Proceeding analogously for the remaining terms yields where O U defines an embedding of the order parameter manifold into the target space of g It can be checked that O U is indeed orthogonal. Moreover its determinant is equal to one det(O U ) = 1 which means that the mapping is into the SO(4) component of O(4). For fixed background fields n, θ the pairing term is minimized by the configuration g = O U . This can be seen by virtue of the following argument: The matrix -gO T U is an element of O(4). Its trace is given by the sum of its eigenvalues. Because of the orthogonality the possible eigenvalues lie on the complex unit circle, and, if they are not real, come in pairs of complex conjugates. Hence the minimal value of the trace is -4 which corresponds to 4 eigenvalues of -1. Indeed a matrix with 4 eigenvalues of -1 is equal to the negative of the identity matrix and hence also unique. The mean-field solution can be used as a starting point to find the effective action. As discussed above it parametrizes the Goldstone manifold. Fluctuations around this manifold are massive. Define h = gO T U and use the Wiegmann-Polyakov formula [S54] constitutes the leading order contribution to the effective action. The kinetic part gives which is simply the action of the NLσM corresponding to the order parameter manifold. This constitutes a renormalization of the NLσM due to the contribution of the fermions (the starting point is already a NLσM with stiffnesses K 0 c,s ). Its magnitude can be estimated by using the fixed point value of the O(4)×O(4) symmetric model as a bare value. Then γ 2 = 4π and therefore the renormalization of the stiffness is K f = 1/2. Let us now determine the effect of the Wess-Zumino (WZ) term. In order to substitute the mean-field configuration into the WZ term it is necessary to extend it to the three-sphere S 3 . Following [S19] parametrize S 3 by the coordinates on S 2 , (x 1 , x 2 ) and an additional polar angle ξ ∈ [0, π]. The equator corresponds to ξ = π/2. Hence the extension g has to satisfy g x 1 , x 2 , π 2 = g(x 1 , x 2 ) and the limit g(ξ → 0) has to exist. Since the only field that can obtain a nontrivial θ-term from the WZNW action is the vector n it is sufficient to set the superconducting phase θ to a constant value. For simplicity θ = π/2 is chosen. Then the semi-classical configuration that is to be extended reads where the vector of matrices Σ has been introduced. It satisfies the algebra which is analogous to the algebra of Pauli matrices up to a sign. Now, a concrete example of an extension is given by g This can be seen by noting that g = iτ y (cos ξ + in • Σ sin ξ) = iτ y cos ξ + g sin ξ. (S45) This coincides with g for ξ = π/2 and is an element of O(4) on the whole three-sphere. The expression (S44) can now be inserted into the WZ term. Defining ω i ≡ n × ∂ i n it can be expressed as By repeatedly applying Eq. (S43) and using that the Σ i are traceless this can be brought into the form The third term vanishes and the first two terms combine, n The integral over ξ evaluates to π/4 and therefore the result is But this can be identified as the θ-term of a NLσM defined on S 2 [S19] Comparison with the result from the WZNW model shows that the θ-angle takes the value π. In the following we demonstrate starting from a purely fermionic model with BCS interactions in the p-wave channel, that a state characterized by a superconducting order parameter of the form ∆ ∼ e iθ n is favored. We show that the family of mean-field states parametrized by Eq. (S39) arises as the ground-state manifold of the interacting model. Consider the local interaction operator For positive interaction constant V > 0 this interaction is attractive and drives a BCS instability in the p-wave channel. A mean-field decoupling yields the BdG Hamiltonian [Eq. ( Define τ ± ≡ τ 0 ± τ y . Transforming to the Majorana representation (S34) yields In this form the interaction can be bosonized using Eqs (S36). We define the effective interaction strength η = V k 2 F M 2 > 0 and find x tr gσ y σσ y τ + tr gστ -. (S54) In order to show that the family of solutions parametrized by Eq. (S39) indeed minimizes Eq. (S54), we expand the action in fluctuations around this solution. Therefor we introduce the imaginary, antisymmetric, and traceless matrices L ab = -i(e ab -e ba ) for a < b, a, b ∈ {1, 2, 3, 4}, where e ab has entry 1 at the position (ab) and zero everywhere else. These matrices form a basis of the Lie algebra so(4). This allows to write g = O U exp i The mass matrix C (ab)(cd) possesses three zero eigenvalues and three positive eigenvalues for all (θ, n). The three zero-eigenvalue modes correspond to translations along the manifold, while the three positive eigenvalues describe gapped fluctuations with mass √ 8η. Hence the solutions g = O U (θ, n) indeed constitute the groundstate manifold of the interaction (S51), and it therefore favors an order parameter of the form ∆ ∼ e iθ n. The fermion-fermion interaction operator Eq. (S51) provides one specific starting point to obtain the twofluid model Eq. The linear couplings between the HS field and the fermion bilinears generates the pairing terms of the BdG description. The NLσM formulation is recovered upon fixing the amplitude of the HS field to a non-zero value. The bare stiffnesses of this model are equal to zero. The coupling to the fermions dynamically generates a finite renormalized stiffness. Performing a gradient expansion one finds K ren c,s = 2F μ 2m|∆| 2 with F (x) → 1 for x → ∞, F (x < 0) = 0, and F (x) ∼ x 1/4 log 1/2 (1/x) for x → 0 + . Hence K c,s = 2 deep in the topological phase for this concrete model. On the mean-field level a self-consistent solution with a finite amplitude exists if the ground-state energy is lowered compared to the normal state. Consider the change in ground-state energy density This quantity has to be negative for a nontrivial selfconsistent solution to exist. Deep in the weak-paired phase this is certainly the case: expanding around the Fermi points and assuming a constant density of states yields the familiar BCS criterion.