We study the spin susceptibility of the orbital-singlet pairings, including the spin-triplet/orbitalsinglet/s-wave Eg representation proposed by Suh et al., [H. G. Suh et al., Phys. Rev. Research 2, 032023 (2020)], for a three-orbital model of superconducting Sr2RuO4 in three dimensions. For the pseudospin-singlet states represented in the band basis, the spin susceptibility decreases when reducing the temperature, irrespective of the direction of the applied magnetic fields, even if they are spin-triplet/orbital-singlet pairings in the spin-orbital space. However, because the pseudospintriplet d-vector in the band basis is not completely aligned in the xy-plane (along z-axis) owing to the strong atomic spin-orbit coupling, the spin susceptibility for spin-singlet/orbital-singlet/odd-parity pairings is reduced around 5-10 percent with the decrease of the temperature along the z (x) axis. We can determine the symmetry of the pseudospin structure of the Cooper pair by the temperature dependence of the spin susceptibility measured by nuclear magnetic resonance experiments. Our obtained results serve as a guide to determine the pairing symmetry of Sr2RuO4. Pairing symmetry in the Sr 2 RuO 4 (SRO) superconductor (SC) Experimental signatures of a two-component superconducting order parameter in SRO were observed in ultrasound and thermodynamics experiments To determine the spin structure of the Cooper pair, the temperature dependence of the spin susceptibility in the NMR experiments gives us the important information In this paper, we calculate the temperature dependence of the spin susceptibility below the critical temperature T c for orbital-singlet pairings in the three-dimensional SRO model by choosing the possible irreducible representations. We focus on the spintriplet/orbital-singlet/s-wave and spin-singlet/orbitalsinglet/odd-parity pairings stemming from the multiorbital and strong atomic spin-orbit coupling. In the first case, the pseudospin-singlet pairing is realized in the band basis, then the resulting spin susceptibility is reduced with the decrease of temperature irrespective of the direction of the magnetic field for all possible irreducible representations. In the second case, the spin susceptibility changes around 5% (10%) by the temperature along the x (z) axis, because the pseudospin-triplet dvector in the band basis is not perfectly aligned in the xy-plane (z-axis) away from the xy-symmetric plane owing to the strong atomic spin-orbit coupling. We conclude that the recently observed spin susceptibility of NMR ex-periments in SRO In this section, we show the model Hamiltonian and the formulation to calculate the spin susceptibility in SRO. SRO has the I4/mmm tetragonal space group with the point group D 4h where ] is the creation operator of electrons in t 2g -orbitals. For Ĥ in Eq. ( where Λl=0∼8 are the Gell-Mann matrices as shown in Appendix A, and σj=0,x,y,z are the Pauli ones in the spin space. [The explicit form of h lj (k) is given in Appendix A.] In the superconducting state, the Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) Hamiltonian is given by with the pair potential (energy gap function) ∆(k). Here, we consider the pair potential by the symmetry of the Cooper pair. The present model Hamiltonian has the parity dependence in k and spin-orbital degrees of freedom. Then the pair potential can classify the four types of Cooper pair that satisfy the Fermi-Dirac statistics: spin-singlet/orbital-triplet/even-parity (STE), spin-triplet/orbital-triplet/odd-parity (TTO), spin-triplet/orbital-singlet/even-parity (TSE), and spinsinglet/orbital-singlet/odd-parity (SSO). In our study, we focus on the orbital-singlet pair potentials, i.e., TSE and SSO. Note that we do not consider the odd-frequency pairing in the pair potential because we do not adopt the retardation effect in the attractive channel with i, j = x, y, z and the t 2g -orbital anglar momentum operators projected onto respectively. Here, we define the indices of Li and σj in Eq. ( with the critical temperature T c . We choose α c so that the maximal quasiparticle energy gap amplitude becomes ∆ 0 , and its value is given in Appendix C (Table with the lattice constants [a, a, c] and the definition of the indices Li and k j=x,y,z as [i, j]. Spin susceptibility χ i (T ) along the i = x, y, z axis at temperature T is given by the Kubo formula where ŝi=x,y,z are the spin angular momentum operators expanded in particle-hole space, iε n = i(2n + 1)πT is the fermionic Matsubara frequency, E α(β) (k) is the Bogoliubov energy band, and |α(β) is the eigenstate corresponding to the Bogoliubov energy band E α(β) (k) with the band indices α, β. Here, ĝ(k, iε n ) stands for the matrix of the Green's function in the spin-orbital basis and G α (k, iε n ) denotes the Green's function defined by Here, we adopt the formulation, to sum up the Matsubara frequency from -∞ to ∞ analytically. Although the Fermi surface along the z-axis is almost cylindrical We show the temperature dependence of the calculated spin susceptibility below the critical temperature T c for the orbital-singlet pairings in the three-dimensional SRO model. Figure ] representations decreases for the magnetic field in the z-direction, as well as ∼ 10% along the x-axis at low temperature. These results contradict naive understanding for the single-band results where spin susceptibility decreases for any direction of the field in a spin-singlet pairing or along the direction parallel to the d-vector of the pair potential. To resolve this, we focus on the pseudospin state in the band basis and parity dependence for each orbital-singlet pair potential. In principle, when the spin-singlet/evenparity pairing is realized in the single orbital model, spin susceptibility goes to zero at T = 0 irrespective of the direction of the magnetic field. In the spin-triplet/oddparity pairing, the spin susceptibility is reduced below T c if the d-vector is parallel to the magnetic field. However, when the d-vector is perpendicular to the magnetic field, spin susceptibility does not change with the temperature. It implies that we can determine the spin structure by the temperature dependence of the spin susceptibility in the single-orbital model. In the present study, spin susceptibility for TSE (SSO) pairings is reduced independently of the direction of the applied mag-netic fields (has the anisotropic behavior for the directions). For TSE pairings, the temperature dependence shown in Fig. Here, we point out the relation between spin susceptibility and pseudospin/parity state. The behavior with the temperature in TSE (SSO) pairings is similar to that in spin-singlet/even-parity (spin-triplet/odd-parity). We can mention that the symmetry of the parity coincides with the temperature dependence of the spin susceptibility for the orbital-singlet pair potential. Therefore, in multiorbital SCs with strong atomic spin-orbit coupling, the temperature dependence of the spin susceptibility for the orbital-singlet Cooper pair is determined by the pseudospin/parity state in the band basis. For this perspective, we can mention that spin susceptibility for orbital-singlet pairings with different momentum dependence, e.g., TSE d and SSO f -wave, behaves qualitatively the same as that for s and p-wave cases in the present study, respectively. We note that these kinds of temperature dependence for orbital-singlet pairings in the present study are the same as a theoretical research of the spin susceptibility in the superconducting topological insulator Cu x Bi 2 Se 3 We studied the temperature dependence of the spin susceptibility below T c for the orbital-singlet Cooper pair in SRO. The pseudospin state in the band basis is de-termined by the parity of the pair potential. In other words, the pseudospin-singlet (triplet) state is realized in the case of even (odd) parity pairing. If we consider orbital-singlet pairing, pseudospin-singlet (triplet) state means spin-triplet (singlet) pairing. Thus, the spin susceptibility for the spin-triplet/orbital-singlet/swave pairings decreases with the temperature, independently of the direction of the applied magnetic fields. In the spin-singlet/orbital-singlet/odd-parity pairings, the spin susceptibility decreases around 5% (10%) along the z (x) axis for A 1u [y, y] + [x, x], A 2u , B 1u , B 2u , and , and E u {[z, x], [z, y]}) representations at low temperature. It is caused by the pseudospin d-vector that is not completely aligned in the xy-plane (along the z-direction) away from the xysymmetric plane due to the strong atomic spin-orbit coupling. This behavior is relevant to the effect of the atomic spin-orbit coupling, not the orbital nature in the superconducting state. Here, the quantitative of the spin susceptibility strongly depends on the length of the atomic spin-orbit coupling, as the importance of the strong spin-orbit coupling in SRO was pointed out Appendix A: Model Hamiltonian of three-dimensional Sr2RuO4 in the normal state In Appendix A, we describe the three-dimensional Hamiltonian of Sr 2 RuO 4 (SRO) in the normal state in Refs. in the [d yz , d zx , d xy ] basis. We note that the Gell-Mann matrices Λl=4,5,6 correspond to the t 2g -orbital angular momentum operators, Lx = -Λ6 , Ly = Λ5 , Lz = -Λ4 , respectively. The matrix elements h lj (k) are given by with intraorbital hopping terms, with interorbital hopping, with isotropic atomic spin-orbit coupling λ z = λ xy = λ SO , and with k-dependent spin-orbit coupling, respectively. Here, ξ yz,zx,xy (k) and g(k) are described by xy cos k x a cos k y a + 2t (z,z) xx cos 2k x a + 2t (z,z) yy cos 2k y a + 4t (z,z) xxy cos 2k x a cos k y a + 4t (z,z) xyy cos 2k y a cos k x a + 2t (z,z) zz (cos k z c -1), (A17) We set the parameters as shown in Next, we confirm the orbital characters in the normal state at the Fermi level in the three-orbital SRO model in Refs. Appendix F: Spin susceptibility for intraorbital chiral p-wave pairing Finally, we calculate the spin susceptibility for the intrarorbital chiral p-wave pairing, on behalf of all spintriplet/odd-parity states. The chiral p-wave state in the present study is given by with the unit matrix in t 2g -orbital space L0 . Figure The spin susceptibility at nonzero atomic spin-orbit coupling λ SO decreases around 5% along the x-direction at low temperature as shown in Fig. To unveil the role of the atomic spin-orbit coupling λ SO , we also study the spin susceptibility at λ SO /t = 0. At λ SO /t = 0, the spin susceptibility does not decrease along the x-direction in Fig. In conclusion, at the nonzero atomic spin-orbit cou-pling λ SO , when we can define the pseudospin d-vector, the spin susceptibility is reduced around 5-10% along the axis where there is no reduction in the single-orbital model. It occurs by the pseudospin d-vector that is not completely aligned in the xy-plane or z-direction away from the xy-symmetric plane in the presence of the strong atomic spin-orbit coupling λ SO .