Mixing in an active micromixer was achieved using Lorentz force-assisted actuation of an enameled copper wire. A single-step template-assisted soft lithography technique was used to construct the mixing chamber. The chamber had a volume of 1.86μl. Application of a Square wave alternating current in tandem with tension in the wire provided the necessary conditions for the resonant oscillation frequency of the wire. The repeatability of the ratio of higher harmonics to the fundamental frequencies of the oscillating wire conforms to standardization of the device fabrication, assembly, and functionality. Simulations and experiments were performed to validate uniform temperature distribution in the mixing chamber. Real-time optical detection of the sample assisted in sensing the completion of chemical reactions in the chamber. Mixing of various aqueous based chemical reactions was performed. It was found that mixing efficiency was greater than 95 percent. Multiple devices were fabricated to show the usability and reproducibility of the system. Microfluidics is an approach to control fluid dynamics and its interaction at a scale of 10 -6 liters and below. At this scale, the surface and viscous forces dominate over the inertial forces in the fluid. This uniqueness of the microfluidic systems has been intensively studied and ubiquitously used in various disciplines of sciences Ref. 1,2. Advances are being made to reduce the large-scale volume of a laboratory reaction into a microfluidic system. This would equally help to perform complex reactions Ref. 3-5.  There are many chemical reactions which demand small volumes as the reagents may be valuable, or their reaction product yield is less. Hence the microfluidic system is a suitable system to study such reactions A number of reports demonstrate active microfluidic devices having a magnetic stirrer in the microfluidic chamber Ref. 9-11. In another study Ref. 12 ferrous nanoparticles were introduced in the sample of interest. The stirrers and particles moved in response to the change in direction of an external magnetic field. Their motion could efficiently enable mixing in the system. Additionally, microfluidic systems using ferrofluids have also been demonstrated, which are actuated under changing electromagnetic fields Ref. 13. Similarly, Lorentz force was exploited to perform the trapping of cells and mixing in the microfluidic system Ref. In microfluidic devices, it is always observed that precise control over the physical parameters eases the device operation as well as good control over the results. Additionally, the device fabrication should be cost-effective, simple, and made from readily available materials. Taking all these factors into consideration, a current carrying wire in a magnetic field is the simplest system to observe Lorentz Force. This could be utilized as an active mixing method in a microfluidic device made from template-assisted soft lithography technique. "Lorentz Force" is mathematically represented by Eq. (1) Ref. (1) Based on this, a novel method was conceptualized to fabricate a cost-effective active micromixer using only template-assisted microchannel fabrication. The mixing could be done using Lorentz force acting on a current-carrying conductor placed inside the microchannel under a known tension. To the best of our knowledge till date, such a device does not exist. In this study, a micromixer was constructed using template-assisted soft lithography Ref. 19 and was characterized. An enameled copper wire passing through the chamber exposed to an external magnetic field, executed oscillatory motion upon excitation by a square wave AC signal. Its motion caused mixing in the microchamber. The simple assembly process of the device makes it easily reusable. As depicted in Fig. The device was fabricated by template-assisted soft lithography Ref. 19 using PDMS polymer. The casting mold was made from off the shelf materials. The fabricated device had a cylindrical cavity of diameter 450μm and length 11.7mm at the center. This is the MC in which the mixing was achieved. The MC was continuous with the main channel which was passing through the device as shown in Fig. A platform was designed and fabricated on which the device was mounted firmly to carry out the study. Fig. For the real-time monitoring of the tension, a load cell connected to HX711 ADC module was used along with Arduino UNO to read the tension values and was calibrated. A cylindrical pocket was made at the bottom of the device to place a rare earth magnet 4mm below the MC. The measured magnetic field was 1960 Gauss at this distance (Digital Gaussmeter DGM-102, Scientific equipment Roorkee). A square wave AC electrical signal from Agilent 33220A 20MHz function generator was used to actuate the wire. The signal was buffered through H-bridge IC L293D as shown in the circuit diagram in Fig. For regulating the temperature inside the MC, Ohmic heating was implemented. This was done by winding four turns of the steel wire (diameter 150μm) around the aluminium chassis. The chassis had inner and outer diameters of 3mm and 6.33mm respectively and a length of 9mm. Single side adhesive tape coated over aluminium chassis provided the required electrical insulation between the steel wire and the aluminium chassis. Electrical power was applied to the steel wire (heating element). The temperature was monitored by two CRZ2005R-100 Resistance Temperature Detectors (PT-100), Hayashi Denko Co. Ltd. attached at the two axial ends of the chassis. Optical sensing in the device was done using an Ocean Optic CCD HR4000 spectrophotometer and Light-emitting diode (LED) (Peak wavelength 538nm) as the source. The light was coupled through the MC using optical fiber keeping 450μm path length. For details of fabrication and assembly of the micromixing device refer to supplementary section 1. Three case studies were done for validating the application of the device. In all the studies amplitude of the wire oscillation was set to maximum. Two solutions in a 1:1 volumetric ratio were pumped manually inside the MC using a Hamilton syringe through the inlets of the device. In this work, we fabricated a novel and simple active microfluidic mixer device by utilizing a singlestep soft lithography technique. An oscillating copper wire (D80) performed mixing in the MC as it experienced maximum Lorentz force due to the unique architecture of the micromixer. The oscillations in the wire were generated by the changing direction of the Lorentz force with the frequency of the square wave alternating current riding on the wire. The oscillations therefore obtained were parallel to the plane of the platform on which the device was mounted. A current carrying wire (D80) is expected to cause Ohmic heating, therefore heating the MC. As the temperature measurement of the straight wire was not directly possible, a simulation was performed in COMSOL (supplementary section 2). The simulation included the complete device with MC having length of 11.7mm and the D80 passing through it. The results show that the temperature of the D80 increased to 28.2°C and that of MC increased by an average of 1°C from the room temperature (Fig. To achieve efficient mixing, it is required that the wire oscillations should be at resonance. Hence, experiments were performed to optimize the amplitude, frequency, and tension of the oscillating wire to ensure that the system operates at its resonant frequency. The expression governing the dynamics of the oscillating wire under tension in a dissipative environment could be given by Eq. ( Where the displacement of the wire is , is the tension in the wire, is the mass per unit length of the wire, takes into consideration the added mass per unit length due to the presence of fluid, is the drag force due to damping in the fluid, ( ) is the driving force. In the present work ( ) is the Lorentz force as described in equation ( The D80 wire had a mass per unit length of 46.91×10 -6 Kg/m. It was empirically found that removing sag in the wire having a length of 195mm required a minimum tension of 0.0245N. With the continuation of the experiment, three values of tension 0.0392N, 0.0686N, and 0.1078N were selected for which resonant frequencies along with harmonics were recorded. Resonating frequencies were studied using synchronized acoustic and optical stroboscopic techniques (supplementary section 3). Fourier analysis was performed on the acoustic data of the wire oscillations using MATLAB. Comparing the results obtained from acoustic and video recording techniques provided the resonating frequencies for the applied tension. This analysis also shows that the wire oscillation frequency was the same as that of the input square wave signal frequency. It was found that the wire oscillations were maximum at a tension of 0.0392N for a frequency of 658Hz which is the average of three devices that were constructed (Table For the system to stand for Lab-on-a-Chip application thermal regulation and optical sensing are must. Therefore, for heating the MC and uniform dissipation of the heat in the chamber, we proposed to integrate a hollow aluminium chassis into the device. To confirm this, thermal simulations using COMSOL were done. The geometry was constructed similar to the device that was designed along with the proposed aluminium chassis. The heating element was the source and appropriate power was offered in units of W/m 2 . The stationary study of the system showed that there is uniform temperature distribution with a certain amount of temperature gradient between the chassis and the MC. The results of the same are presented in Fig. It will be naive not to consider the presence of a thermal gradient in between the chassis and the MC in the fabricated device. To facilitate the temperature measurement of the chassis, a pair of PT-100 sensors was attached to it. The device thermal calibration was done by simultaneously monitoring the temperature from these two PT-100 and a thermocouple which was inserted in the MC. The thermocouple was constructed in-house and calibrated (figure S11 in supplementary section 4). The thermocouple had a diameter comparable to the MC diameter. Since PDMS is highly elastic, the inserted thermocouple did not cause any permanent deformation to it. For the micromixer device, the Amplitude of oscillating wire at various frequencies. a Ratio of harmonics to the fundamental frequency range of the thermal calibration was from 24°C to 73°C. These calibrations were referred to while performing temperature-dependent chemical reactions (figure The optical setup was made to measure the completion of the mixing and reactions in the MC. LED was used as a source which was coupled to the system using the optical fiber. Optical calibration of three different devices was done to check for the repeatability of the optical assembly. The complete results of the same are shown in supplementary section 5. The deviation in the data acquired from the three devices must be due to the variation in the coupling of the optical fiber as it was done manually. All the previously mentioned types of calibration results correlate with all the devices that were characterized. To show the usability and repeatability of the device, three case studies were performed using chemical reactions in three different devices. As described in the experimental section, mixing of 10% red ink from the stock solution and distilled water was done in a device. The interfaces of the solutions were brought in contact with each other by manually pumping solutions in the device. The start time of the reaction was considered when the interfaces touched each other. The sample was left undisturbed for it to mix by diffusion and optical sensing was done simultaneously. It was used as a measure to determine the completion of the reaction by measuring the intensity counts of the incident light passing through the sample. Since the optical assembly was off-centered, two different experiments were performed. In one experiment water was pumped on the side of the optical sensor and in another experiment by injecting ink on the side of the sensor. This was done to show that solutions were uniformly mixed by the wire and the mixing in the MC was not dependent on which side the samples were injected. Fig. The acquired data was compared with the control experiment by measuring the relative intensity counts in the device. The mixing caused by diffusion in both experiments was incomplete even after 600 seconds whereas active mixing achieved an average of 95% of the control solution in the same time. Images of the reaction before and after completion are shown in supplementary section 6. This helped to prove that there is no concentration gradient along the length of the MC after it was actively mixed. As described in the experimental section, the experiment was conducted in another device using an acid-base system where phenolphthalein was used as an indicator. Phenolphthalein was already mixed with Sodium hydroxide (NaOH) having a concentration of 0.024M, giving it a pink color. Hydrochloric acid (HCl) of 0.4M was used. In this case, NaOH was pumped through the side of the . sensor. The product of this reaction was a colorless solution due to the change in pH, making it acidic. From the data as seen in Fig. As described in the experimental section, the third reaction was carried out in a device where the temperature of the MC was regulated as discussed earlier. It has been reported that oxidation of oxalic acid in presence of potassium permanganate (KMnO 4 ) is a temperature-dependent reaction Ref. 22. The reaction rate increases with the rise in temperature and the solutions turns transparent from the pink colored solution. The temperature was maintained in the MC throughout the reaction. Along with active mixing for a fixed time of 570s, the light intensity counts were monitored. In Fig. A comparative study of the existing micromixers is presented in Table A novel active micromixer device was successfully constructed using single-step template-assisted soft lithography. The active mixing volume was 1.86μl. The mixing in the device was achieved by Lorentz force acting on an enameled copper wire carrying AC signal in a static magnetic field. The temperature of the mixing chamber was actively maintained and the reaction occurring in the device was optically monitored using the fiber optical assembly. The repeatability in the ratio of harmonic frequency to fundamental frequency showed that the fabrication technique of the devices is standardized. The technique of integrating the principle of Lorentz force with single-step templateassisted soft lithography makes it a cost-effective and simple to fabricate method. Three different mixing reactions were performed to demonstrate the application of the device as having the potential to be a Lab-on-a-chip system. The wire is connected to the load cell and the other end is passing over the pulley holding the suspended weight. A hole was made through the platform for the suspended weight to pass through it. The Optical fiber 1 was connected to the LED source used for optical detection. The light passing through the main chamber is coupled to the spectrophotometer as shown. The dimensions of the optical fiber integrated into the device were different from that of the fiber used to connect the spectrophotometer, hence an additional attachment was made to connect the two fibers. This assembly was optically coupled with the CCD-based spectrophotometer. Two Hamilton micro syringes were used for manually pumping the liquid in the device. The micromixer device was kept in place by the device holder. Harmonics of the wire observed at various tensions and their ratios The K-type thermocouple was made manually by wielding the two metals wire of diameter 200μm (Chromel and Alumel) using a Butane gas torch. The wielded spot was spherical which had a size comparable to the diameter of the main channel. The calibration of the thermocouple was done by placing it in between two Peltier devices. The Peltier devices were used to maintain the constant temperatures. A reference PT-100 was placed with a thermocouple for calibration. The data obtained from the thermocouple is compared with the commercially available PT-100. The readings were taken in triplicates, no hysteresis was observed while sensing the temperature. The in-house made Ktype thermocouple was read using MAX6675 module using Arduino UNO with a resolution of 0.25°C. Their calibration charts with respect to the commercially available PT-100 are shown in Fig. 