Josephson devices with ferromagnetic barriers have been widely studied. Much less is known when the ferromagnetic layer is insulating. In this manuscript we investigate the transport properties of superconductorferromagnetic insulator-superconductor (SFIS) junctions with particular attention to the temperature behavior of the critical current, that may be used as a fingerprint of the junction. We investigate the specific role of impurities as well as of possible spin mixing mechanisms, due to the spin orbit coupling. Transition between the 0 and the π phases can be properly tuned, thus achieving stable π junctions over the whole temperature range, that may be possibly employed in superconducting quantum circuits. The supercurrent flowing across a Josephson Junction (JJ) is usually described by the sinusoidal relation I = I c sin φ, where I c is the critical current and φ the phase difference across the junction. The Josephson energy associated to the latter reads: E J = φ 0 I c /(2π) (1cosφ) The so-called Josephson π-junctions (π-JJs) are currently subject to intense research activity due to their applicability as architectural elements for the development and the improvement of nanostructures. Indeed, they are considered to be very promising ingredients to engineer superconducting circuits, nanoelectronics, spintronics and quantum computing devices Among these applications the possible integration of π junctions in quantum circuits for superconducting qubits is quite promising, in view of the increased robustness against noise and electromagnetic interference induced by magnetic field sources and a more compact and simple design, opening the way to scalable devices The 0-π transitions, between the 0 and the π state of a JJ, in SFS JJs has been experimentally measured varying the thickness of the ferromagnet in different kinds of samples Even though SFS JJs are suitable for achieving 0 -π transitions and π states, these systems are affected by dissipative effects due to their coupling to the environment Therefore, the possibility to arrange an equilibrium superconducting phase difference of π across JJ has been theoretically predicted also in this case In this intriguing scenario, one of the most challenging issues is to find an effective way of controlling the occurrence of 0 -π transitions in SFIS JJs, through a direct action on their I c (T ) behavior. It is well known that tuning the exchange field of the barrier is an available technique to manipulate the critical current In this paper, we recognize spin-mixing effects and lattice impurities as good candidates to approach this kind of task. Spin-orbit coupling (SOC) In this article, we study the Josephson effect in SFIS JJs using a 2D Bogolioubov de Gennes (BdG) tight-binding model We investigate the role of spin-orbit coupling (SOC), onsite exchange field inhomogeneities and lattice impurities, in determining the transport properties of SFIS JJs. In particular, we extend the results in Ref. Moreover, we analyze the peculiar role that impurities play in this respect, finding out the opportunity to reach a temperature stable π regime, starting from a 0 -π JJ, by increasing the strength of the impurity potential. Therefore, by controlling the latter, a well-defined phase difference of π can be established between the two superconductors separated by a ferromagnetic insulator, which shows great stability over the whole temperature range. In addition we present how the interplay between SOC and non-magnetic disorder may be exploited for the engineering of fully tunable 0 -π JJs which can be switched between the 0, 0 -π and π regimes. Furthermore, since S/F hybrid systems are presumed to host triplet superconductivity induced by the proximity effect The manuscript is structured as follows. In Sec. II we introduce our BdG model hamiltonian We describe the SFIS JJ using a two dimensional lattice model, shown in Fig. with ψ † α (r r r) and ψ α (r r r) are the field operators creating/annihilating an electron with spin α at lattice point r r r. Here, the symbols . and . describe the 2 × 2 and 4 × 4 matrices in spin and Nambu⊗spin spaces respectively. In Eq.(1), Ĥ is the normal-state hamiltonian of the junction while ∆ describes the superconducting pairing potential. The former can be written as Ĥ = Ĥs + ĤFI , with Ĥs and ĤFI referring to the S leads and FI barrier, respectively. In Fig. t s δ r r r,r r r ′ +y y y + δ r r r+y y y,r r r ′ σ0 where t s and μ s are the hopping parameter and the chemical potential, respectively, and Θ is the Heaviside step-function. Here and in the followings, we indicate with σ0 and σν (ν = 1, 2, 3) the unit and the Pauli matrices in the spin space, respectively. In this work, we take the pairing potential ∆ different from zero only in the S leads, which, thus, vanishes inside the FI barrier. Here, ∆ is of spin-singlet s-wave symmetry and is expressed as ∆(r r r, r r r ′ ) = ∆δ r r r,r r r ′ i σ2 (4) where φ = φ L -φ R defines the phase difference across the junction and φ L (φ R ) is the phase in the left (right)-hand side superconductor. In our model, the order parameter ∆ is constant in the leads and it is not derived from self-consistent calculations. Further, we assume that there is no disorder in the superconductors. The FI barrier extends from j = 1 to j = L and its hamiltonian consists of four terms ĤK FI is the kinetic energy, ĤK FI (r r r, r r r ′ ) ={-t FI δ r r r,r r r ′ +x x x + δ r r r+x x x,r r r ′ σ0 ( t FI δ r r r,r r r ′ +y y y + δ r r r+y y y,r r r ′ σ0 The spin-orbit coupling (SOC) is ĤSOC FI (r r r, r r r ′ ) = iα δ r r r,r r r ′ +x x x -δ r r r+x x x,r r r ′ σ2 -δ r r r,r r r ′ +y y y -δ r r r+y y y,r r r ′ σ1 Θ ( j) Θ (L + 1 -j). The exchange potential is where σ σ σ is the vector of the Pauli matrices ( σ1 , σ2 , σ3 ). The on-site random impurity potential is Ĥi FI (r r r, r r r ′ ) = v r r r σ0 δ r r r,r r r ′ Θ ( j) Θ (L + 1 -j) . In the above equations, t FI is the hopping integral among nearest-neighbor lattice sites (in the followings we omit the subscript FI for simplicity, i.e. we take t FI = t), μ FI the Fermi energy, α the amplitude of the spin-orbit interaction, v r r r the on-site random impurity potential strength, uniformly distributed in the range -V imp ≤ v r r r ≤ V imp . Finally, the exchange field is assumed to be slightly disordered and is modeled as h h h ′ = h h h + δ δ δ h , where δ δ δ h are small on-site fluctuations given randomly in the range -h/10 ≤ δ h ≤ h/10 (along the h h h-direction). In this work, since the junction plane coincides with the xy-plane, the exchange field h h h ′ is always taken in the perpendicular direction, h h h ′ = h ′ z z z (along the z-direction). In this context, the transport properties of the JJ can be derived from the Green's function (GF) Ǧ of the barrier. Its Matsubara representation is given by Ǧω n (r r r, r r r ′ ), where r r r = jx x x + my y y and r r r ′ = j ′ x x x + m ′ y y y run over all the possible lattice site indices j, j ′ = 0, 1, . . . , L, L + 1 and m, m ′ = 1, . . . ,W . The barrier Matsubara GF is, thus, a 4W L × 4W L matrix in the Nambu⊗spin space, whose blocks with fixed (r r r, r r r ′ ) can be numerically calculated by solving the Gor'kov equation ∆(r r r, r r r 1 ) -∆ * (r r r, r r r 1 ) -Ĥ * (r r r, r r r 1 ) × Ǧω n (r r r 1 , r r r ′ ) = τ0 σ0 δ (r r rr r r ′ ), where ω n = (2n + 1)πT is the fermionic Matsubara frequency and T is the temperature. Here and in the followings, τ0 and τν (ν = 1, 2, 3) are the analogous of the unit and Pauli's matrices in the Nambu space, respectively. We solve the Gor'kov Eq.( For this reason, we introduce the GF in Nambu⊗spin space Ǧ j, j of the stripe j along the x-direction inside the barrier. It is a 4W × 4W matrix, where W is the number of lattice sites in each stripe. It can be visualized as a 2 × 2 block matrix in the Nambu space, where each block consists in a 2W × 2W sub-matrix: where r r r = jx x x + my y y, r r r ′ = jx x x + m ′ y y y with j fixed. The offdiagonal terms of the matrix in the right-hand side of Eq.( In order to compute the GF of the whole barrier, we start from the surface GFs of the two superconducting leads S, as they are reported in Ref. The barrier stripes can be connected (to the leads and to each other) by using the hopping matrices Ť ± , given by involving the hopping and spin-orbit coupling along the xdirection. Since we consider nearest-neighbors hopping, only adjacent stripes can be connected by the Ť ± matrices (i.e. the j-th stripe is linked to the j -1-th and j + 1-th). In particular, with the RGF method we derive the GFs connecting two adjacent stripes (namely the j-th and j + 1th), Ǧ j, j+1 = Ǧω n (r r r, r r r ′ + x x x) and Ǧ j+1, j = Ǧω n (r r r + x x x, r r r ′ ) with r r r = jx x x + my y y, r r r ′ = jx x x + m ′ y y y. From these latter, the Josephson current, at finite temperature and given position j in FI, can be computed as follows where Tr stands for the trace over the Nambu⊗spin space. In the above equation, the summation over the Matsubara frequencies is performed. Furthermore, by taking the off-diagonal elements of the stripes GFs ( Ǧ j, j ) in the right-hand side of Eq.( where f 0 is the spin-singlet component and f ν with ν = 1, 2, 3 are the spin-triplet components. Analogous considerations can be applied to the GFs connecting the j-th stripe with its neighbors j ± 1 (i.e. Ǧ j, j+1 , Ǧ j+1, j , Ǧ j, j-1 , Ǧ j-1, j ), from which we can calculate the oddparity pairing functions: that give rise to p-wave superconductivity. Making explicit the term in right hand side of Eqs.( from which we extract the standard spin correlation functions, In the following we report the choice of the model parameters used for these calculations. Henceforth, we adopt units with h = c = k B = 1, where c is the speed of light and k B is the Boltzmann constant. All the energies are, thus, scaled by t and the magnitude of the spin-orbit coupling α is scaled by ta, where the lattice constant is set a = 1, while the Josephson current is calculated in units of I 0 = e∆. Further, we fix several parameters as t s = t = 1, μ FI = 0, μ s = 3, ∆ = 0.005. The chosen chemical potential mismatch at FI and S interfaces allows to describe the insulating regime in our model. In the numerical simulations, both the temperature dependence of the critical Josephson current (i.e. I c (T )) and correlations functions are averaged over N s samples with different random impurity configurations. We choose N s = 80 -100 for the I c (T ) curves and N s = 300 for the pairing correlation functions. In particular, the ensemble average of the Josephson current (Eq.13) over a number of different samples is obtained as: A. Clean limit: the role of spin-orbit coupling (SOC). Switching between 0 and π state. In order to investigate efficient tools for controlling the transition between 0, 0 -π and π regimes, we focus on how spin mixing and disorder effects can be exploited for this task. In this section, we consider the case of a clean (V imp = 0) 0 -π Here and in the following, we consider the short junction regime, typical of tunnel junctions, where the length of the FI barrier is fixed at L = 8 sites. The other model parameters are: W = 32, h = 0.45, V imp = 0, δ h = 0. In Fig. To better illustrate this mechanism, in Fig. The change in sign of Josephson current, indicating the corresponding 0-π transitions at fixed lengths of the FI layer due to the presence of the exchange potential, is more frequent in the cases with α = 0 and α = 0.07. The effect of SOC increasing is the suppression of the above-mentioned 0 -π transitions and consequently a mostly always positive Josephson current for α = 0.20. Indeed, the SOC produces a shift of the CLR curve from lower to higher current values; negative critical currents are representative of π states while, when I c becomes positive (at fixed length L), the π -0 transition occurred and the system reaches the 0 final-state under the SOC growth. Taking h and L fixed, there is no possibility that, by further increasing α, the system will return to the π state experiencing another 0 -π transition. A qualitative explanation of this effect follows. The shortrange spin-triplet component S z = 0 appears in S/FI systems due to exchange field breaking time-reversal symmetry in F. In the presence of spin-orbit interaction, the spin-mixing effect at S/FI interfaces allows for long-range equal spin-triplet components S z = ±1 inside the ferromagnetic region. The S z = 0 components (singlet and zero-spin triplet) show an oscillating behavior due to the different phase shifts acquired by the up and down-spin electrons of the Cooper pair, as they propagate in F, while the S z = ±1 pairing components show a longrange decay, since the exchange field h has the same effect on the two equal spin electrons where I S z=0 and I S z=±1 are the amplitudes of the opposite spin and parallel spin components, respectively.Increasing the SOC results in an enhancement of the non-oscillating part of the Josephson current, whose superposition with the oscillating term produces, in turn, an enlarged total current and, thus, may prevent that I c vanishes in the 0 -π transition. Ultimately, our results lead to regarding SOC as a useful tool for driving the evolution of the I c (T ) of SFIS JJs from 0 -π to 0 regime. It is legitimate to ask under which conditions the Junction displays a stable π state over the whole temperature range, similar to what happens in the case of the 0 state with strong SOC. Real systems are affected by the unavoidable presence of impurities and in this section, we show that interesting features for the existence of π states in SFIS JJs can be detected in the presence of non-magnetic impurities, modeled as scalar on-site potentials. In what follows we focus on the effect of disorder on the I c (T ) curves exhibiting a 0 -π transition and on the corresponding CPR. In particular, firstly we consider the case of a SFIS JJ in the presence of disorder, secondly we analyze the combined effect of impurities and SOC on the I c (T ) of these devices. As a matter of fact, the influence of increasing V imp results in different scenarios. In the following simulations, we use L = 8, W = 32 , α = 0.04 (for the case with SOC) and four different values of V imp = 0.025, 0.125, 0.150, 0.250. Moreover, here, small on-site exchange field fluctuations are considered (δ h = 0) to model a more realistic scenario in which the exchange field may be non-uniform in the whole barrier. In Fig. In the presence of SOC (Fig. When passing from the 0 -π regime to the π one, with α = 0, the system also shows a peculiar plateau region in the I c (T ) extended over a wide range of temperatures, for intermediate values of V imp (Fig. The combined effect of SOC and impurities allows to stabilize the 0 -π transition over a wide range of temperatures. However, for V imp = 0.250, we observe a sharp change in the I c (T ) behavior, where neither the plateau nor the 0 -π dip are no longer visible, suggesting that the 0 -π transition may oc-cur at very low temperatures and that the pure π regime may be reached at larger values of V imp . We may further analyze the system response to the presence of disorder by looking at the CPRs (Figs. In Fig. In Fig. Finally, we illustrate, in Fig. A detailed analysis of the pairing mechanisms in these devices is beyond the purpose of this manuscript and will be discussed in detail elsewhere Moreover, we notice that SOC breaks also the inversion symmetry at the S/FI interfaces, thus, all four types of pair amplitudes (i.e. s-wave singlet, s-wave triplets, p-wave singlet, p-wave triplets) can be found in the F region In Figs. In the s-wave symmetry, the majority component is the spin-singlet one f 0 (for simplicity only shown in Fig. In the middle of the FI barrier (site # 4) we obtain that, passing from V imp = 0.025 to V imp = 0.250 (Figs. Further, in Figs. Our results highlight the importance of SFIS JJs with SOC and tuned impurities as promising platforms hosting unconventional odd-frequency superconductivity and showing sizeable equal-spin triplet pairings, thus verifying the predictions in Refs. In this work, we focused our attention on the problem of the tunability of 0 -π transitions in SFIS JJs. The possibility to realize controllable devices that can be switched between different working regimes (namely 0, 0 -π and π) would pave the way to the application of JJs with ferromagnetic links in superconducting circuitry Moreover, we figure out the opportunity to obtain a fully tunable system, starting from a π-JJ and tuning the spin-orbit field by external means. Tuning the SO-interaction in semiconducting quantum wells Finally, we complete our analysis by studying the correlation functions in the presence of SOC and impurities. In particular, we observe an enhanced contribution of the oddfrequency pairings, i.e. s-wave triplets and p-wave singlet, due to the increasing of non-magnetic disorder. Therefore, we recognize these tunable SFIS JJs as good candidates to host unconventional superconducting pairing mechanisms and source of sizeable spin-triplet superconductivity, confirming the results of Refs. We also report in Figs. To better illustrate what we explained in terms of the I c (T ) behavior, in Fig. However, it is worth noting that varying h significantly influences the I c (T ) behavior of these systems, producing an even more considerable effect in the short junction regime, namely the situation we are considering in this work. For this reason, manipulating the exchange field of the barrier is effectively a difficult operation to manage experimentally. Conversely, the 0, 0 -π and π switching can be more easily attained acting on the SOC and non-magnetic impurities. The recursive Green's function method (RGF) is a well established technique firstly introduced in the study of electronic transport in mesoscopic systems When dealing with a JJ, the two leads are the superconducting electrodes and the central device is the barrier. Let us specify the discussion to the case analyzed in the main text (see Fig. where Ȟ0 j, j is the Hamiltonian of the stripe, involving only couplings between lattice sites within the same stripe (i.e. Ĥ(r r r, r r r ′ ) with r r r = jx x x + my y y and r r r ′ = jx x x + m ′ y y y in Eq.( Then we have to compute the interacting GF of the stripe j, Ǧ j, j in Eq. We observe that Ǧ j, j can be numerically computed by the means of a Dyson-like equation Here and in the followings we indicate with Ǧ j, j the GF of the j-th barrier stripe when it is linked to both the left and right leads, whereas ǦL j, j ( ǦR j, j ) stands for the GF of the stripe j when it is only connected to the left (right) lead. For the sake of clarity, we show how to calculate the interacting GF for the first stripe of the barrier (with j = 1, Fig. Therefore, we can easily find a Dyson-like equation for the first barrier stripe, ǦL 1,1 , starting from its bare GF, Ǧ0 1,1 : Figure where we exploit the fact that Ť -1,0 is the interaction term between the 0-th (left lead) and the first stripe (barrier). We observe that this expression for ǦL 1,1 in Eq.( where we exploit the fact that Ǧ0 0,1 vanishes, because the bare GFs, Ǧ0 , cannot connect together different stripes. Hence, we obtain two coupled equations for the ǦL 1,1 , Eqs. With straightforward calculations, we manage to find a more compact expression for ǦL 1,1 : where we explicitly use the Eq.( By repeating the procedure, starting from the right (R) side (i.e. starting from the stripe with j = L + 1 in Fig. Ť + -1 L + 1 ≤ j ≤ 1 . (22) Then, the GF Ǧ j, j , in Eq.( -Ť + ǦL j-1, j-1 from which we derive the superconducting pairing correlations with even parity symmetry, in Eq.( Ť + j+1, j Ǧ j, j , Ǧ j, j+1 = Ǧ j, j Ťj, j+1 ǦR j+1, j+1 , Ǧ j-1, j = ǦL j-1, j-1 Ťj-1, j Ǧ j, j , Ǧ j, j-1 = Ǧ j, j Ť + j, j-1 ǦL j-1, j-1 , that we use in the calculation of the Josephson current, Eq.( 