This work addresses the early stages (≤1000 h) of the dissolution corrosion behavior of 316L and DIN 1.4970 austenitic stainless steels in contact with oxygen-poor (CO < 10 -8 mass%), static liquid lead-bismuth eutectic (LBE) at 500°C for 600-1000 h. The objective of this study was to determine the relative early-stage resistance of the uncoated steels to dissolution corrosion and to assess the protectiveness of select candidate coatings (Cr2AlC, Al2O3, V2AlxCy). The simultaneous exposure of steels with intended differences in microstructure and thermomechanical state showed the effects of steel grain size, density of annealing/deformation twins, and secondary precipitates on the steel dissolution corrosion behavior. The findings of this study provide recommendations on steel manufacturing with the aim of using the steels to construct Gen-IV lead-cooled fast reactors. A prerequisite for the deployment of Gen-IV lead-cooled fast reactors (Gen-IV LFRs) is the good compatibility of structural and fuel cladding steels with the heavy liquid metal (HLM) coolant(s), such as lead (Pb) and lead-bismuth eutectic (LBE), so as to prevent in-service steel degradation due to liquid metal corrosion (LMC). Depending on the exposure conditions (i.e., temperature, HLM oxygen concentration, HLM flow velocity, exposure duration, temperature gradients, etc.) and the specific steel/HLM pair, the observed LMC effects are characteristic of steel oxidation, dissolution, pitting, erosion, or a combination thereof In case the formation of a protective oxide scale is suppressed in specific reactor locations or its integrity is locally jeopardized (due to mechanical or chemical reasons), dissolution corrosion occurs, whereupon the dissolution of steel alloying elements (e.g., Ni, Mn, Cr, Fe) in the HLM is accompanied by the progressively deeper, with time, HLM penetration into the steel. The depth of HLM dissolution attack can either be uniform over large steel surface areas, or locally-enhanced, leading to dissolution 'pitting' Moreover, in a non-isothermal system, steel alloying elements dissolving in the 'hot leg' of the system might precipitate in the 'cold leg', as elemental solubility is temperature-dependent, complicating the interpretation of corrosion phenomena Even though active oxygen control is a theoretically sound LMC mitigation approach, it cannot provide complete shielding from undesirable LMC effects in a real nuclear system. Various reasons (e.g., high-temperature transients, oxygen-depleted localized zones of static LBE, mechanical or chemical degradation of the passivating oxides, non-oxidizing steel inclusions close to the steel surface, etc.) may trigger the occurrence of dissolution corrosion. It is imperative, therefore, to understand the dissolution corrosion mechanism of the candidate (structural and fuel cladding) steel grades considered for the construction of a particular LBE-cooled nuclear system, such as MYRRHA. Realizing that dissolution corrosion may start almost immediately at locations where protective oxide scales cannot form due to fabrication-induced steel defects (e.g., non-oxidizing inclusions close to the steel surface) or at locations where the oxide scales are damaged makes the in-depth study of the steel dissolution corrosion behavior imperative for the safe design of the nuclear system. More specifically, it is important to understand the (steel-specific) dissolution corrosion kinetics as function of temperature, so as to determine the corrosion allowances for a particular steel and a specific reactor component. Taking this a step further, such fundamental studies, where the candidate steels are tested under very conservative conditions (static, oxygenpoor HLMs) are needed to even determine the size of the reactor system so as to ensure its safe operation during its intended lifetime. This work performed a series of experiments targeting the manifestation of dissolution corrosion in specimens made of the MYRRHA candidate austenitic stainless steels, i.e., the 316L structural steel and the DIN 1.4970 fuel cladding steel. All steel exposures were performed at very conservative and directly comparable test conditions promoting dissolution corrosion, i.e., at 500°C, in oxygen-poor (CO << 10 -8 mass%), static liquid LBE; all tests were designed so as to ensure that the LBE bath would not be saturated in dissolved steel alloying elements during testing, as this would decelerate the progress of LBE dissolution attack. The exposure time was limited (600-1000 h) in order to investigate the early stages of the steel dissolution corrosion behavior. The exposed steels were the two candidate austenitic stainless steels selected for the construction of the MYRRHA system, i.e., the 316L structural steel and the DIN 1.4970 fuel cladding steel. Specimens of both (316L and DIN 1.4970) steel grades, with known microstructural differences and variable degree of cold work, have been exposed simultaneously to liquid LBE in order to assess the effect of various steel microstructural aspects on their resistance to LBE dissolution attack. Moreover, uncoated and coated DIN 1.4970 fuel cladding tube specimens were simultaneously exposed to liquid LBE, so as to compare the effectiveness of promising anticorrosion candidate coatings as perspective dissolution corrosion mitigation strategies for LBE-cooled nuclear reactors. Three exposures (tests 1, 2 and 3 in Fig. The primary aim of this work was to compare the early stages of the dissolution corrosion behaviour of the uncoated MYRRHA austenitic stainless steels 316L (structural components), and DIN 1.4970 (fuel cladding tubes). Therefore, uncoated specimens of two different 316L steel heats, i.e., one solution-annealed (316L-p-SA) and one cold-worked (316L-r-CW), were exposed to oxygen-poor, static liquid LBE in test 1 together with uncoated DIN 1.4970 steel specimens (bulk and tube specimens, different degrees of cold work, different surface finishes). It must be pointed out that all DIN 1.4970 steels (rod, bars, tubes), as well as the specimens machined out of them and tested in this work (tests 1-4), were fabricated from the same starting steel heat. Table The targeted coating deposition temperature for all coatings made in this work was below 600°C, so as to limit the possible degradation of the bulk properties of the DIN converter, so as to reduce the carbon (C), sulphur (S) and oxygen (O) contents as well as the slag layer Rod 1.4970-r-SA was hot rolled and cold drawn into bars (∅ 14.5 mm), which were further either cold drawn for a second time followed by annealing (1125°C, 5 min), thus producing the annealed 1.4970-b-SA bar (∅ 13 mm), or were subjected to annealing followed by cold drawing, thus producing the cold-drawn 1.4970-b-20CW bar (∅ 13 mm). Both bars retained a bimodal grain size distribution, which was less pronounced than that observed in the 1.4970-r-SA rod. bar was finer-grained than the cold-worked 1.4970-b-20CW bar, presumably due to the two consecutive cold drawing steps. The simultaneous exposure of specimens (∅ 13 mm, 1 cm) made from the complete diameter of bars 1.4970-b-SA and 1.4970-b-20CW to liquid LBE in test 2 aimed at comparing milder microstructural differences (in grain size, type and density of defects induced by cold deformation, etc.) on the DIN 1.4970 steel dissolution corrosion behaviour. The production of DIN 1.4970 fuel cladding tubes started from square blooms that underwent several steps of hot rolling and forging to the appropriate dimensions, thus allowing the hot extrusion of deep-bored cylindrical bar sections. After extrusion, the tube wall thickness was reduced by a cold pilgering process to produce 'hollows', the starting material for the fabrication of tubes (Sandvik-Précitube, France) with very precise final wall thickness (450 μm). Further reduction of the hollows' diameter and wall thickness was ensured by four plug-drawing operations at RT. A short high-temperature annealing treatment was performed between each cold-drawing pass, the last one of which determined the degree of cold work (24% CW) in the 1.4970-t-24CW fuel cladding tubes Prior to exposing the 316L and DIN 1.4970 stainless steels to liquid LBE, the microstructure of both steels was carefully characterized by light optical microscopy (LOM; Zeiss Axio Scope.A1, ZEISS International), electron backscatter diffraction (EBSD; FEI Scios DualBeam FIB/SEM with Hikari EBSD detector & FEI Nova NanoSEM 450 with Hikari XP EBSD detector), and transmission electron microscopy (TEM; JEM-3010, JEOL). Metallographic cross-sections were prepared from the pristine steels with 1 μm diamond paste in the last step. Some of the polished cross-sections were given an additional polishing step with a colloidal silica (OPS) suspension so as to create a subtle surface relief that allowed better inspection by LOM, while others were chemically etched (Carpenter's etchant: 8.5 g FeCl3, 2.4 g CuCl2, 122 ml HCl, 6 ml HNO3, 122 ml ethanol After their exposure to LBE, metallographic cross-sections were prepared from all exposed materials. The longer tube specimens were cut in segments, in order to collect information on the (HAADF) and EDS detectors suitable for Z-contrast and elemental analysis, respectively. Apart from the known differences in their chemical composition (Table The EBSD orientation maps and corresponding inverse pole figures of Fig. The weighted average grain diameter in 316L-r-CW varied in the 68-188 μm range; the average grain diameter in the coarse-grained area of Fig. On the other hand, only 11% of the 1.4970-t-46CW scanned area was occupied by grains >10 μm, the most common (7.5%) grain size was 6.5 μm, and the fraction of annealing twins was 2% (Fig. The increase in the determined twin fraction values for the two fuel cladding steels can be associated with the pickup of finer twins as result of the increase in the EBSD scan resolution (i.e., by reducing the step size used to acquire the scans). As indicated by the inverse pole figures in Fig. twinning at low strain levels (in the present study, the degree of steel cold work varied between 20% and 46%) depends strongly on the crystallographic orientation and it is favored in grains with the <111> orientation close to the direction of tensile loading. Table Light optical microscopy has been used in this work to reveal steel microstructural defects (e.g., grain boundaries, annealing/deformation twins, precipitates) that promote dissolution corrosion. Grain boundaries (GBs) and annealing/deformation twins are visible in chemically etched 1.4970t-24CW, along with a finer grain size distribution close to the (inner/outer) tube surfaces (Fig. The finer-grained steel zones (10-20 μm-wide) next to the inner/outer cladding tube surfaces are also characterized by the absence of the coarser annealing twins that are otherwise homogenously distributed throughout the wall thickness. The finer steel grains and absence of annealing twins close to the inner/outer cladding tube surfaces, even though not reported previously Their density clearly increases in cold worked steels, but due to their fineness it is difficult to monitor their distribution throughout the steel bulk. As the density of deformation twins is higher in cold worked steels, the susceptibility of cold worked steels to dissolution corrosion is expected to be higher, in agreement with previous studies in that earlier study, the 316L-r-CW steel heat was named 316LH2. LOM images of areas with high deformation twin density in chemically etched 316L-r-CW are shown in Figs. The relative severity of dissolution corrosion damages in the 316L and DIN 1.4970 austenitic stainless steels exposed in this work to oxygen-poor, static liquid LBE at 500°C for 600-1000 h is shown in Fig. when the LBE bath becomes saturated in dissolved species (Ni, Mn, Cr, Fe) at the selected exposure temperature. Taking into account that the solubilities of Ni, Cr and Fe (i.e., the main steel alloying elements) are 2.30×10 -1 , 1.60×10 -3 and 2.19×10 -4 , respectively, at 500°C Going forth with the comparison of steel performance, it is clear that an enhanced degree of cold work in 'similar' steels exposed to identical test conditions increases the maximum depth of LBE dissolution attack. This becomes clear by comparing 1.4970-t-24CW (∼24.5 μm) with 1.4970t-46CW (∼34 μm) (test 1); 1.4970-b-SA (∼11.5 μm) with 1.4970-b-20CW (∼16 μm) (test 2); and 316L-p-SA (∼27 μm) with 316L-r-CW (∼39 μm) (test 1). Typically, a higher degree of cold work means higher density of deformation twins and grain refinement (i.e., larger GB area). This is true for the 1.4970-t-24CW/1.4970-t-46CW pair in this work, thus explaining the more severe attack in 1.4970-t-46CW as compared to 1.4970-t-24CW, but it is not exactly true for the other two steel pairs. As mentioned in section 3.1, 1.4970-b-SA was finer-grained (18 μm) than 1.4970-b-20CW (30 μm) due to the steel processing route; moreover, 1.4970-b-SA had only 13% annealing twins, while 1.4970-b-20CW had an extreme annealing twins fraction of 60%. Therefore, as far as this pair of steels is concerned, the deeper LBE dissolution attack observed in 1.4970-b-20CW may be attributed to the combination of coarser grains and numerous annealing twins (on the micrometre scale) with a higher density of deformation twins (on the nanometre scale). Similarly, the much deeper dissolution attack in 316L-r-CW as compared to 316L-p-SA can be associated with the fact that 316L-r-CW was coarser-grained (68-188 μm vs. 44-51 μm), had a higher fraction of annealing twins (39% vs. 21%), and an expected higher density of deformation twins due to the heavier cold working treatment that has been confirmed on the nanometre scale by TEM analysis of the two steels in an earlier study Mild differences in surface roughness do not appear to affect the extent of dissolution damages Taking into account the small differences in surface roughness of the two fuel cladding tubes, as well as the short steel exposure (619 h), it is difficult to assess the effect of steel surface roughness on its resistance to dissolution corrosion. One should not completely disregard this aspect of steel preparation for Gen-IV LFRs, though, especially when it comes to structural components that are exposed to relatively high temperatures (e.g., heat exchangers, core support plate, core barrel in the MYRRHA system), as in these parts of the reactor system, surface roughness specifications are more relaxed (as opposed to the required surface state of fuel cladding tubes), and undesirable dissolution corrosion effects might be more severe due to the high temperatures. Based on the collected data in this work, it might be safe to suggest that rougher steel surfaces result in deeper dissolution, as surface defects (e.g., skin folds and other imperfections) form an inhomogeneous diffusion boundary layer at the steel/LBE interface, which might either create localised crevice corrosion conditions (e.g., inside a skin fold) under static LBE conditions or inhibit the satisfactory refreshment of oxygen supply inside grooves, scratches and other surface undulations under flowing LBE conditions. The effect of texture on the dissolution corrosion behaviour of the steels studied in this work can be assessed only indirectly based on the collected corrosion data. As mentioned in section 3.1, grains with the <111> orientation that lie parallel to the direction of tensile load applied during steel cold deformation have a higher density of deformation twins, as also confirmed in a study of 316L steel dissolution corrosion by Klok et al. High-temperature annealing on the 'reference' 1.4970-t-24CW fuel cladding had a mild effect on its resistance to dissolution corrosion. As mentioned in section 3.1, annealing (1000°C, 2 h) of the 1.4970-t-24CW resulted in grain coarsening (from 12 μm to 27 μm), a steep increase in the fraction of annealing twins (from 5% to 47%), and a change of the preferred grain orientation from a mixed <111> and <001> texture to a more random one (Fig. Before concluding the discussion on the relative performance of the steels used in this work, based on the data shown in Fig. It should be pointed out that even though the 1.4970-r-SA (richer in Ni than 316L) is characterised by a very low density of deformation twins, it suffers the highest dissolution corrosion damages (Fig. Ref. The quantification of dissolution corrosion damages allows the (conditional) assessment of the overall steel resistance to LBE dissolution attack; this assessment is considered 'conditional', as it is unavoidably affected by the test setup limitations (e.g., LBE bath size, presence/absence of LBE mixing), the testing approach (e.g., LBE preconditioning approach prior to steel immersion, exposure of several steel heats with distinctly different microstructures and thermomechanical states), the success in controlling and monitoring the exposure conditions (e.g., by using oxygen sensors, active oxygen control systems), etc. (see also section 3.2). However, full appreciation of all aspects of the dissolution corrosion behaviour of a specific steel can only be achieved via the detailed microstructural analysis of the exposed steel specimens. Such analysis is needed so as to In general, LBE dissolution attack in all 316L and DIN 1.4970 stainless steels used in this work started intergranularly, as GBs are preferred paths for the LBE ingress into the steel bulk BSE images of the time evolution of dissolution corrosion damages in the 316L and DIN 1.4970 steel tested in this work are shown in Figs. 12 and 13, respectively. Fig. The change in dissolution corrosion mode from primarily intergranular (left inset, Fig. Dissolution corrosion in cold-worked stainless steels, such as the 316L-r-CW used in this work, progresses by using preferred paths of LBE ingress (GBs, deformation twin boundaries) into the steel bulk. The higher density of deformation twins in such steels results in dissolution fronts that are highly perturbed; sharp protuberances of the dissolution front (Figs. 12b, 12d, 12f, 12h) are expected to be characterised by high stress intensities in their immediate vicinity, which may nucleate cracks in radiation-hardened stainless steels, as suggested earlier Notwithstanding the need for producing stainless steels without deformation-induced defects, such as deformation twins, for a good resistance to dissolution corrosion, one must seek viable compromises between the possible problems created by LMC and meeting other steel property requirements that demand a degree of cold work (e.g., resistance to radiation & thermal creep). Typical BSE images of early-stage (600-1000 h) dissolution corrosion effects in the reference MYRRHA fuel cladding material 1.4970-t-24CW with different surface states (brushed & polished vs. brushed) are shown in Fig. Even though the formation of very deep dissolution 'pits' did not characterise the pristine fuel cladding tubes 1.4970-t-24CW and 1.4970-t-46CW, presumably due to the grain fineness of these steels, a BSE image of a quite deep (∼42 μm) 'pit' may be observed in Fig. The cause of its formation is unclear, and it could likely be attributed to a local steel inhomogeneity that is atypical for the material and has formed during steel production. The occurrence of such 'pits' is highly undesirable for thin-walled components, such as fuel cladding tubes; hence, their origin must be understood and ideally eliminated by means of controlled steel manufacture. The depth of LBE dissolution attack varied on the 1.4970-t-24CW fuel cladding tube surface from a few (3-6 μm) micrometres just below the outer steel surface (Figs. 13c, 13j, 13k) to many micrometres in the more affected areas (Figs. 13a, 13b, 13g, 13h, 13i). There is no obvious cause for these variations in dissolution depth, other than the failure of a pre-existent oxide scale, which was either a native oxide that formed in air prior to the steel immersion in the LBE bath or a thin oxide film that formed upon steel immersion in the LBE bath (typically this was accompanied by a further decrease in the already low LBE oxygen concentration, CO < 10 -8 mass%, at the moment of steel immersion, as reported earlier Grain boundaries (GBs) are preferred paths for the LBE ingress into the steel bulk; this has been established in an earlier study on the dissolution corrosion behaviour of 316L steels at 500°C The steel grain size must be clearly optimised together with the steel-specific deformation process and the deformation-induced defect population to meet the property requirements of the targeted reactor component, while minimising the steel susceptibility to LMC effects to the extent possible. When this is not achievable with conventional steel metallurgy, surface engineering technologies, such as anticorrosion coatings (see section 3.6) and surface modification, and/or development of new (alumina-forming) stainless steels must be considered. Annealing and deformation twins are very potent steel defects when it comes to promoting dissolution corrosion in stainless steels; this has been firmly established in previous studies on the dissolution corrosion of 316L stainless steels exposed to oxygen-poor, static LBE at 500°C Steel precipitates (oxides, sulphides, δ-ferrite) were reported by Lambrinou et al. The ferritisation of 316L austenitic stainless steels caused by selective leaching (i.e., removal of the austenite stabilisers Ni and Mn, due to LBE dissolution attack) has already been understood and discussed in previous studies 17d and 17e, respectively) confirmed beyond any doubt the fcc-to-bcc phase transformation, due to selective leaching of the steel in contact with oxygen-poor liquid LBE. EDS analysis of the same foil (not shown here) verified that the dissolution-affected zone suffered selective leaching of Ni, Mn and Cr. Moreover, no gradients in the concentration of these steel alloying elements was found close to the austenite/ferrite interface. The BF TEM image of Fig. Charalampopoulou et al. In this work, the γ → α phase transformation was studied in DIN 1.4970 austenitic stainless steels in order to check whether differences in the steel chemical composition and microstructure affect the austenite/ferrite OR. DIN 1.4970 fuel cladding tubes 1.4970-t-24CW (as-received) and 1.4970-t-HT (annealed at 1000°C for 2 h) were exposed to oxygen-poor, static LBE at high temperatures (T ≥ 500°C) for 600-1000 h, thereby undergoing ferritisation of the dissolutionaffected zone. EBSD orientation maps were taken from numerous locations on the metallographic cross-sections of the two DIN 1.4970 cladding tubes, so as to ensure that the population of acquired data was statistically representative of the γ → α transformation. Grain misorientations at the γ/α interface were characterised using both misorientation angles and orientation density functions (ODFs) derived by EBSD, as shown in Figs. The Cr2AlC MAX phase coating had a rather uniform thickness of ∼3 μm and is characterized by a columnar microstructure (Fig. (orthorhombic, ortho). Despite its imperfect state, it was decided to expose the V2AlxCy-coated DIN 1.4970 fuel clad to liquid LBE, so as to check whether the presence of a thin carbide layer on the steel surface would somehow affect the resistance of the substrate clad to dissolution corrosion. The Al2O3 coating deposited by PLD was compact, defect-free, uniform in thickness (∼7 μm), and well-adherent to the 1.4970-t-24CW substrate fuel clad (Fig. Metallographic cross-sections of both uncoated 1.4970-t-24CW (brushed & polished surface state) and coated 1.4970-t-24CW with the Cr2AlC MAX phase, Al2O3, and V2AlxCy were studied by SEM/EDS to assess the coatings' protectiveness against dissolution corrosion of the substrate clad; these specimens have been previously exposed to oxygen-poor, static LBE at 500°C for 1000 h (test 4). As expected, the uncoated 1.4970-t-24CW was affected by dissolution corrosion on both its inner and outer surfaces (Fig. Both Cr2AlC and Al2O3 coatings remained protective to the 1.4970-t-24CW substrate under the exposure conditions of test 4 (500°C, CO < 5×10 -11 mass%, 1000 h). The columnar microstructure of the Cr2AlC MAX phase coating caused some initial anxiety with respect to the possible LBE penetration between the columnar Cr2AlC grains during the performed exposure. However, no LBE was detected in the intercolumnar spaces (Fig. fuel cladding tubes at a limited risk of property degradation due to the mild deposition conditions. In this work, 316L and DIN 1.4970 austenitic stainless steels were exposed to oxygen-poor (CO < 10 -8 mass%), static liquid LBE at 500°C for 600-1000 h. These two austenitic stainless steels are the MYRRHA candidate steels: the 316L steel is intended for structural components, while the DIN 1.4970 is the selected fuel cladding steel. The main objective of this study was to investigate the early stages in the dissolution corrosion behavior of these two steels, and to assess their relative Transgranular dissolution typically refers to the complete consumption of the (Fe-based) ferritized grains in the dissolution-affected zone; for industrial-size steel heats, such as the solution-annealed 316L-p-SA, the alternation of zones of intergranular attack with zones of transgranular attack can be associated with the alternation of "bands" of different chemical composition (esp. Ni), a phenomenon that is often observed upon steel cold rolling. 3. A strong interplay between the steel microstructure and the dissolution corrosion process was observed in both steels, whereby LBE penetrated into the steel via preferred paths, such as grain boundaries, annealing/deformation twin boundaries, and interfaces between steel matrix and secondary precipitates, such as the Ti(C,N) precipitates in DIN 1.4970. 4. The most severely affected steels were either coarse-grained steels with high fractions of annealing twins (e.g., 1.4970-r-SA, 316L-r-CW) or fine-grained steels with high fractions of deformations twins (e.g., 316L-t-46CW). Coarse-grained steels with high fractions of annealing twins (e.g., 316L-r-CW) proved to be very susceptible to dissolution 'pitting', esp. when large grains with annealing twins were unfavorably oriented relative to the steel surface. Dissolution 'pitting' is highly undesirable for thin-walled components, such as fuel cladding tubes and heat exchanger tubes. Hence, the steel optimization for a specific reactor component demands the careful consideration of microstructural aspects, such as grain size and density of dissolution-promoting defects (e.g., annealing/deformation twins). 5. Mild differences in surface roughness (e.g., 'brushed & polished' vs. 'brushed' surface states in DIN 1.4970 fuel clads) did not affect the extent of dissolution corrosion damages. Very rough steel surfaces, however, are expected to affect the dissolution corrosion damages, due to the unpredictability of the LMC effects inside deep surface undulations. 6. The effect of texture on the overall steel dissolution corrosion behavior did not appear to be strong. Textures, esp. those with a strong <111> component parallel to the direction of applied load during steel cold deformation, are expected to increase the steel susceptibility to dissolution corrosion, due to the increased density of deformation twins in grains with that crystallographic orientation parallel to the direction of applied load. However, the effect of grains with a particular crystal orientations on the advancement of the dissolution front is primarily local. However, one cannot exclude the possibility that a strict control of the steel texture might exploit the existing austenite/ferrite orientation relationship in both 316L and DIN 1.4970 steels, thereby limiting the extent of dissolution-induced ferritisation. 7. High-temperature annealing (1000°C, 2 h) of DIN 1.4970 fuel cladding tubes did not affect the severity of dissolution damages, despite the steel grain coarsening and steep increase in the fraction of annealing twins. This is attributed to the fact that the coarsened grains were still not large enough to result in severe dissolution corrosion effects, such as 'pitting'. 8. The deposition of select anticorrosion coatings (i.e., Cr2AlC, Al2O3, V2AlxCy) on DIN 1.4970 fuel cladding tubes proved effective means of dissolution corrosion mitigation, at least for the specific test conditions (500°C, CO < 5×10 -11 mass%, 1000 h) used in this work. microstructural aspects (grain size, degree of cold work, etc.) on its corrosion behaviour, tests 1-3 have exposed different uncoated DIN 1.4970 steel specimens to liquid LBE. cold-worked, SA: solution-annealed, HT: heat treated; t: tube, b: bar, r: rod, p: plate. large annealing twins, and elongated (>150 μm) grains at high angles with the outer specimen surface. The latter is considered potentially problematic, as GBs are preferred paths of LBE ingress into the steel and having such paths that run deep (>150 μm) into the steel might result in the formation of dissolution 'pits'. Lambrinou et al. 1.4970-t-24CW substrate fuel clad. Coating inspection by SEM/EDS revealed a Ni-enriched and Cr-impoverished thin (<300 nm) layer at the interface between the Cr2AlC coating and the DIN 1.4970 substrate fuel clad. It is reasonable to assume that the relatively high deposition temperature (580°C) might have caused interdiffusion of elements between steel and coating at the steel/Cr2AlC interface. © 2021. This manuscript version is made available under the CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 license http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ † RT = room temperature © 2021. This manuscript version is made available under the CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 license http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ Microstructural analysis of the central area of both bars revealed that the annealed 1.4970-b-SA © 2021. This manuscript version is made available under the CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 license http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/