The aim of this Communication is to investigate and demonstrate the possibility to overcome the fundamental limitations of mantle cloaking for antennas by exploiting non-linear metasurfaces. First, we recap and give additional physical insights about the fundamental bounds that apply to the electric properties of an antenna that is made invisible at its own resonance frequency. Then, an innovative strategy is proposed to circumvent these limits through the introduction of non-linear elements that are able to dynamically transform the geometry of the cloaking metasurface depending on the power level of the impinging field. Different non-linear designs are discussed, and their effectiveness is assessed through the relevant benchmark example of a half-wavelength dipole antenna able to efficiently transmit high-power signals while being invisible to low power ones. In addition, the capability of such non-linear mantle cloaks to enable the shaping of the radiation pattern of an antenna array depending on the power level of the received/transmitted signal is demonstrated. These innovative cloaking devices may find applications in different radiating systems enabling unprecedented functionalities. In the context of electromagnetic scattering theory, the optical theorem relates the forward scattering amplitude of a passive object to its total extinction cross section The design of cloaked sensors has been thoroughly investigated in the last years, especially for antenna systems working at microwaves and radio frequencies. In particular, the mantle cloaking approach On the contrary, the synthesis of antennas/sensors able to achieve invisibility at their own operating frequency turns out to be a much more challenging problem both from the theoretical and from the practical viewpoints. Indeed, the design of antennas able to efficiently transmit power while being invisible to an external radiating system operating at the same frequency is theoretically forbidden (as stated by the optical theorem) if a linear, passive, and time-invariant cloak is used. In other terms, if we cloak an antenna in the receiving mode, the presence of the cloaking structure irreparably worsens the performance of the antenna in the transmission mode. In recent years, some attempts to circumvent the limitations of linear, passive, and time-invariant cloaking devices have been made. More specifically, the use of active non-Foster circuits has been proposed to dramatically increase the operating bandwidth of mantle cloaks Inspired by these studies, the aim of this contribution is to investigate the potentialities offered by non-linear elements, such as PIN diodes, to design a covering structure allowing to cloak a radiating element at its own operating frequency. In particular, by exploiting the mantle cloaking technique, the possibility to design an antenna covered with a non-linear metasurface that exhibits minimum scattering response for low-power (LP) levels and, simultaneously, efficient radiation for high-power (HP) signals at the same frequency is demonstrated. The adoption/customization of such an approach in those applicative scenarios where a considerable difference between transmitted and received power levels (e.g., an antenna operating in a hostile environment requiring radar invisibility but normal operation in transmission) is discussed. Furthermore, the effectiveness of non-linear cloaks is also demonstrated in invisibility problems involving multi-antenna complex systems. More in detail, the design of a bi-dimensional array of dipole antennas exhibiting a steerable high-gain beam in the transmitting mode and an omnidirectional radiation pattern for lowpower received signals is illustrated The optical (or "forward scattering") theorem defines the fundamental bounds relating the total scattered and absorbed powers to the forward scattered field of any passive scatterer As known, the power scattered by an antenna is due to the combination of two different quantities: the antenna re-radiation scattering, which is due to the mismatch between the antenna input impedance and its load, and the antenna structural scattering (also referred to as residual scattering In the case of a matched antenna (i.e., assuming zero reradiation scattering), lower and upper scattering power bounds have been derived However, it is worth emphasizing that, in antenna scenarios, the presence of both the re-radiation and structural scattering terms makes the cloak design more challenging compared to the case of passive objects. In fact, the cloaking of a matched antenna introduces a perturbation of its matching condition, since the total scattering of the antenna also depends on the impedance matching through the reradiation scattering contribution. For the sake of clarity, this phenomenon is illustrated in Fig. The idea explored in this paper is to circumvent this fundamental bound by exploiting a non-linear cloaking device able to turn ON/OFF its cloaking effects depending on the power level of the impinging wave To design a power-dependent mantle cloak, the gaps of these conventional metasurfaces can be loaded with diode pairs, as schematically reported in Fig. Furthermore, as long as the power is within the operating regime of the diode, multiple switching can be obtained without incurring in bistability or irreversible effects Fig. Specifically, in the LP scenario (Fig. The same approach can be exploited in the case of inductive metasurface using the configuration reported in Fig. Finally, it is worth noticing that in the HP scenario, for both capacitive (Fig. To demonstrate the validity of our approach, a half-wavelength dipole antenna covered with a non-linear metasurface has been designed to exhibit, at the resonant frequency f0 = 3GHz, minimum scattering for LP and efficient radiation for HP signals. Since an inductive metasurface is required to cloak a dipole antenna at its resonance frequency To analyze the scattering and matching properties of the antenna, circuital-electromagnetic co-simulations of the loaded/unloaded device have been performed using the commercial software CST Studio Suite As it can be appreciated, when the dipole is coated by the designed inductive metasurface without the loading diodes (magenta dashdotted lines), the total scattering cross section of the antenna is massively reduced at f0 compared to the uncoated case (Fig. It is worth noticing that, the magnitude of the cloaking resonance at 0.84f0 is reduced in the HP scenario compared to the case of a perfect short circuit of the interleaved strips, due to the parasitic resistance RHP. Moreover, the antenna is mismatched at the cloaking frequency 0.84f0, as expected from the fundamental cloaking limits discussed above. Finally, it is also worth remarking that the designed antenna system would have been always mismatched at f0 if a linear conventional mantle cloak was exploited and, thus, it would have been an inefficient radiator for both LP and HP signals. On the contrary, the proposed non-linear metasurface cloak allows designing dipole antennas able to efficiently transmit high-power signals, while being invisible to low power ones. In order to further investigate and demonstrate the possibilities offered by the proposed concept, a non-linear cloaking device has been also designed to enable unprecedented functionalities in antenna arrays. As it is well known, the scanning capabilities of phased arrays are usually limited by the presence of mutual coupling effects among the array elements The final version of record is available at http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TAP.2021.3061010 Copyright (c) 2021 IEEE. Personal use is permitted. For any other purposes, permission must be obtained from the IEEE by emailing pubs-permissions@ieee.org. The possibility to circumvent this limitation is addressed hereinafter through the customization of a non-linear powerdependent mantle cloak. More specifically, a radiating system exhibiting a directive pattern when operating in the transmitting mode, while presenting an omnidirectional pattern in the receiving mode, is designed. This solution can be of particular interest for radar system able to scan selectively the environment when transmitting high-power pulses, and able to receive from all directions low-power scattered signals. The considered configuration is depicted in Fig. According to the above discussion, the array is expected to behave like a conventional phased array for HP signals (i.e., in the transmitting mode). Conversely, the array does act as a halfwavelength dipole in the LP scenario (i.e., in the receiving mode, when the surrounding elements are invisible to the central antenna thanks to the coating metasurfaces). This is confirmed by the 3D and 2D radiation diagrams reported in Fig. It is worthwhile remarking that the discussed radiating system is only a benchmark example of the possibilities offered by the proposed approach. Further radiating systems with novel or enhanced functionalities could be envisioned by designing non-linear mantle cloaks and, thus, circumventing the inherent limitations of linear and passive cloaks for antennas are made invisible at their own resonance frequencies. An innovative methodological strategy to circumvent the fundamental bounds of mantle cloaking for antennas through the employment of non-linear cloaking metasurfaces has been introduced in this Communication. The proposed approach relies on the possibility to achieve a dynamic transformation of the geometry of the cloaking metasurface depending on the power-level of the impinging field. The presented idea has been numerically validated with full-wave co-simulations and realistic examples of dipole antennas covered by non-linear mantle cloaks, discussing also different applicative scenarios. In particular, an antenna application involving a phased array able to transmit towards an arbitrary pointing direction and receiving with an omnidirectional pattern has been presented. The illustrated results suggest the possibility to extend and generalize the proposed findings beyond the discussed scenarios to introduce new degrees of freedom for designing complex antenna systems in which both the electric and the radiation properties may be made selective with respect to the input power. gap Gap between the interleaved strip λ0 / 100 L Length of the dipole λ0 / 2.5 a Radius of the dipole λ0 / 50 g Gap of the dipole λ0 / 100 ac Radius of the cloak 1.2•a