Positive-feedback (PF) device and its operation scheme to implement pulse width modulation (PWM) function was proposed and demonstrated, and the device operation mechanism for implementing PWM function was analyzed. By adjusting the amount of the charge stored in the n -floating body (Qn), the potential of the floating body linearly changes with time. When Qn reaches to a threshold value (Qth), the PF device turns on abruptly. From the linear time-varying property of Qn and the gate bias dependency of Qth, fully functionable PWM neuron properties including voltage to pulse width conversion and hard-sigmoid activation function were successfully obtained from a single PF device. A PWM neuron can be implemented by using a single PF device, thus it is beneficial to extremely reduce the area of a PWM neuron circuit than the previously reported one. s a result of recent interest in deep neural networks (DNNs), DNNs show similar level of inference performance to human for specific tasks, such as recognizing hand-written digits and classifying certain images In this paper, a positive-feedback (PF) device and the novel operation scheme for implementing a PWM neuron is proposed. The PWM function was successfully demonstrated using a single PF device. Considering the size and the number of transistors for the previously reported PWM neuron circuit, the size of the PWM neuron can be extremely reduced with a single PF device . In addition, the voltage amplitude to pulse width conversion can be performed without capacitor in the PF device, thus the PWM neuron size would be reduced more. PF devices have been used to implement neuronal functions J.-H. Bae is with the School of Electrical Engineering, Kookmin University, Seoul 02707, Korea (e-mail: jbae@kookmin.ac.kr).. A channel and two gates (G1 and G2) located next to each other on p --and n --doped region. The doping concentrations of n - /p -channel are 1×10 18 and 3×10 17 cm -3 , respectively. The lengths of G1 and G2 are 0.6 μm and 1.0 μm, respectively, and the thickness of p + /n -/p -/n + doped channel is 100 nm. Gate insulator for G1 is SiO2 with thickness of 10 nm and for G2 has EOT of 15 nm. This PF device is basically two connected floating body MOSFETs: nand p-MOSFET having G1 and G2 as a gate, respectively. These MOSFETs are connected in series and their drains are respectively connected to the bodies of each other. When both the MOSFETs are turned-off, applying a positive anode bias (VA > 0) with grounded cathode (VC = 0) cannot turn on the device due to the reverse-biased p-n diode formed by n -/p -junction. However, when a positive G1 bias (VG1) is applied, which is a gate bias of n-MOSFET, electrons are injected from the cathode to the n - region and which is the drain of the n-MOSFET and the body of the p-MOSFET. In that case, the threshold voltage of p-MOSFET(VTp) increases due to the floating body effect. As VTp increases, the amount of the hole injection from anode to pregion exponentially increases and it also reduces the threshold voltage of n-MOSFET (VTn), therefore, more holes are injected from the anode to the p -region. In summary, the drain current of n-MOSFET (IDn) injects electron and the stored electron in n -floating body (Qn) change VTp to increase IDp, thus p-MOSFET turns on and a positive feedback loop is formed. When |Qn| is larger than a threshold value (Qth), the device is turned on and operates as a diode. Fig. The previously proposed PWM circuit consists of three functional circuit elements, a sawtooth wave generator, a differential amplifier and a level shifter (see Fig. Level shifter 10 s 20 s 30 s 0.0 0.5 The PWM function was implemented from a fabricated PF device by applying VG1 and VG2 as a CLK bias (VCLK) and Vin, respectively, as shown in Fig. In order to analyze the origin of the linear relationship between Vin and ton which is a key mechanism of implementing PWM function, a simulation study was conducted with a TCAD simulator (Sentaurus) of Synopsys (Figs. PWM function is implemented by using a single PF device with two gates. VG1 is VCLK which is linearly increase |Qn| when CLK = 1, and VTp linearly increases as time goes by. By applying input signal to VG2, Qth is linearly changed and comparison between |Qn| and Qth is performed, and the result is amplified by the positive feedback operation. The proposed positive feedback device effectively integrates the two basic function elements of PWM circuits: generating linear time-varying variable (|Qn|) and comparing it with input signal (Qth). Therefore, the PWM circuit including a capacitor can be replaced by a single positive feedback, which is beneficial to integrate neuron circuits for neural network area. 