The modification of the wetting properties of marble surfaces upon multi-scale texturing induced by ultrafast laser processing (340 fs pulse duration, 1030 nm wavelength) has been investigated with the aim of evaluating its potential for surface protection. The contact angle (CA) of a water drop placed on the surface was used to assess the wettability of the processed areas. Although the surfaces are initially hydrophilic upon laser treatment, after a few days they develop a strong hydrophobic behavior. Marble surfaces have been irradiated with different scan line separations to elucidate the relative roles of multi-scale roughness (nano-and microtexture) and chemical changes at the surface. The time evolution of the contact angle has been then monitored up to 11 months after treatment. A short and a long-term evolution, associated to the combined effect of multi-scale roughness and the attachment of chemical species at the surface over the time, have been observed. XPS and ATR measurements are consistent with the progressive hydroxylation of the laser treated surfaces although the additional contribution of hydrocarbon adsorbates to the wettability evolution cannot be ruled-out. The robustness of the results has been tested by CA measurements after cleaning in different conditions with very positive results. Marble is a natural material that has widely been used throughout history and up to the present day, where it holds a prominent position in different market sectors related to architecture and decoration, among others. Yet, its durability is harmed by atmospheric and local acidic conditions and its aesthetic appearance endangered by human pollution and contamination. Protection strategies for marble are mostly based on the improvement of the wetting properties of the surface to prevent staining and acidic chemical attack, as hydrophobicity reduces the contact area of the surface with the degrading agent. Several works have reported the formation of hydrophobic surfaces in natural stone by the use of chemical coatings In general, very little research has been reported on the use of laser processing of natural stone for protection applications In the context of natural stone protection, most of the harmful substances for the surface quality and aesthetic appearance are water-based liquids or water soluble acidic/basic substances. Therefore, the improvement of water repellence properties of natural marble is clearly a desirable goal. We have used ultrashort laser pulses to structure the surface and induce a multiscale type of texture The study has been carried out in Crema-Marfil Coto marble samples from the Pinoso quarry (Alicante, Spain), supplied by Levantina y Asociados de Minerales S.A. The samples were cut in 5 cm x 5 cm x 1 cm slabs and mirror polished. Petrographic examination was done at Centro Tecnológico del Mármol (CTM) following the European standard UNE-EN 12407:2007. The analysis is based on petrographic optical microscopy of thin sections samples in transmission with parallel and crossed polarizations. Surface morphology characterization was done, before and after laser processing, by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) in a FEI Inspect working at 15 kV and using a 10-15 mm working distance. The element composition of the samples was analyzed by Energy-Dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) in a Hitachi TM3000 SEM at 15 kV. The compositional data obtained by EDX corresponds to the material composition averaged over the electron penetration depth (a few microns) and is useful to assess chemical modifications in a thin subsurface layer (bulk) after laser processing Luminescence properties were investigated by means of cathodoluminescence in a Hitachi S2500 SEM by recording spectra in the visible range with a Hamamatsu PMA-11 charge coupled device camera and working at 15 kV excitation. No discharge-coating was needed for none of the SEM techniques used. The trench depth measurements were obtained using a high NA optical microscope Nikon Eclipse with a high-precision axial position stage. The laser processing of the marble was carried out using a Satsuma HP 2 Yb fiber laser from Amplitude Systemes. The laser system delivered 350 fs pulses at a wavelength of 1030 nm and a repetition rate in the 1-500 kHz interval. The laser beam polarization was linear and oriented by using a λ/2 waveplate to lie parallel with respect to the scan direction. The laser beam is deflected over the surface under treatment by a galvanometric mirror scanner (ScanCube 14) and focused by F-theta lens with focal length of 100 mm, allowing to scan the laser beam over a large field (7 x 7 cm 2 ) at speeds up to 7 m/s. A telescope and a 5 mm pinhole are placed in the optical beam path to reduce the laser beam diameter at the entrance of the scanner in order to match the entrance pupil of the latter and thus maximize the scanner throughput. The waist radio (1/e 2 ) of the laser beam at the surface was measured leading to a value of 19.4 μm. Fluences per pulse in the 1-4 J/cm 2 range were used during the laser processing experiments. The scanner and the laser system are synchronized by means of the LaserDesk Software, which also allows performing user-designed irradiation patterns. The samples were cleaned with distilled water to remove the residual powder and dirt at the surface before laser processing. Once the surface was processed, it was covered by a film of compacted powder caused by the material ablation. A cleaning protocol has been implemented and was followed for all samples. After irradiation, the samples were cleaned with a mixture of soft liquid soap and distilled water in an ultrasonic bath for 10 minutes to remove the powder. Then, they were dried in a muffle furnace at 50°C for 48h, based on a previous study aimed at determining the optimal temperature and time to achieve proper dehydration of the marble. The processed samples were then stored in controlled atmospheric conditions (22°C, RH 30%, air atmosphere) over all the experiment time (>11 months) in desiccator chamber. To analyze the wettability of the samples, contact angles Surface chemical analysis was performed by means x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and Fourier-Transform Infrared Spectroscopy in the range of 400 -4000 cm -1 , using the attenuated total reflectance configuration (IR-ATR). XPS measurements were conducted using a VG Microtech MT 5000 spectrophotometer with a non-monochromatic Mg Kα x-ray source operating at 300 W. The pressure in the analysis chamber was maintained below 10 -9 torr. The energy scale was calibrated with an Ag 3d5/2 (368.3 eV) standard and the peaks have been fitted by Gaussian-Lorentzian mixed functions, after a Shirley background subtraction. The binding energies were calibrated by means of the C1s band at 285.0 eV (adventitious C). The FTIR measurements were carried out in a Perkin Elmer Spectrum 100 system. Samples with different times of aging were analyzed with both techniques in order to investigate the chemical changes over time. The XPS measurements were conducted in Centro Nacional de Investigaciones Metalúrgicas (CENIM-CSIC) and the FTIR-ATR spectra were recorded at the Instituto de Cerámica y Vidrio (ICV-CSIC), respectively. The samples used in this study were classified as biosparite (Folk classification) or wackestonepackstone (Dunham classification). Its macroscopic aspect shows a light brown appearance where darker veins can be observed. Images recorded with a petrographic microscope (Figure Limestone is a heterogeneous mixture of calcite (CaCO 3 ) and different amounts of dolomite (CaMg(CO 3 ) 2 ) as main constituents. The relative concentration of both minerals is a unique distinguishing mark of each marble. This fact has been used over the last decades in archaeology and cultural heritage to determine the quarry origin of marble in archaeological sites Figure The identification of the samples as constituted mainly by calcite is also supported by the EDX analysis. This technique provides information of the chemical elements presents in the sample. As show in Error! Reference source not found.b, carbon, oxygen and calcium were detected, before and after laser processing while magnesium traces (peaks at 1.254 and 1.302 keV) could not be identified due to their very low concentration. As shown in Figure Many works have reported the formation of laser induced periodic surfaces structures (LIPSS) upon short and ultrashort laser irradiation as a versatile way to modify and to improve certain properties of surfaces. In particular, the effect of LIPSS along with surface chemistry has been used to strongly modify the wettability of different materials As an initial step, the pulse energy required to distinctly mark the surface was determined. This energy threshold was measured in single shot laser exposures. With the focusing optics used, the minimum fluence required to induce surface damage was ∼ 3.2 J/cm 2 . However, in this case, only discrete damage spots at the grains with weak absorption are observed. For fluences above ∼ 3.7 J/cm 2 , most of the treated spots were damaged. If the laser is scanned with a high overlapping factor among consecutive pulses (typically above 90%), the cumulative effect (incubation In order to generate a dual scale roughness structure on the surface for the enhanced control of the wettability As it can be seen in Figure The wettability of a material surface is a complex property where multiple other properties are involved. It is known that the wettability depends on the surface roughness and the surface free energy, which is why it is possible to modify the contact angle varying both of these parameters Morphology and roughness, nevertheless, also affect the wettability of a surface. There are two basic models to explain the role of roughness on the wettability. Wenzel's model Laser processing induces several changes at the marble surface: It creates a pronounced multiscale roughness and "initializes" the surface in terms of chemical reactivity. The contact angle measurements bring thus significant information regarding the roles roughness and chemical evolution of the surface on the wettability. The changes in the wettability properties of the treated surfaces were monitored by means of static contact angle measurements using back-illumination images of water droplets deposited on the surface, as shown in Figure The time evolution of the CA for four representative scan line separations is shown in Figure Figure When the line separation is increased the trenches split and micro-roughness appears. Figure In contrast, the CA at "Day 0" from the measurements perpendicular to the trenches is above that of the pristine surface only in the sample processed with a scan line separation of Δ = 20 μm. Interestingly, for higher separations (i.e 30 μm, 40 μm), the time evolution of the CA perpendicular to the trenches strongly resembles the evolution of the sample with Δ = 2 μm. The time evolution of the perpendicular CA is weaker for Δ = 20 μm, which can be related to the increase of effective surface as the scan line separation is increased, also evident in the sketches in Fig. The micro-roughness was adjusted to Wenzel model and Cassi-Baxter model and compared with the experimental results in Table The micro-roughness is larger than the Wenzel model can support and, therefore, topography cannot be adjusted by this model. However, the Cassie-Baxter model results approach, especially for Δ=20 μm and 40 μm the measured experimental values "at Day 0". The best fitted CA corresponds to Δ = 20 μm, showing this trench separation provides results consistent with the Cassie-Baxter model. The results in Figure Regarding the specific chemical mechanisms responsible for the temporal evolution of the wettability, it must emphasized that the evolution of the CA over time is a well-known behaviour in laser processed metals Although similar processes could be expected to occur at the processed marble surface (a relatively porous material), the temporal evolution of the CA reported in Ref. As described in detail in Section 2, the assessment of the chemical changes occurring in the irradiated surface and their temporal evolution has been performed by analysing pristine and laser treated samples by XPS and infrared attenuated total reflectance (IR-ATR) spectroscopies. Figure A comparison of the different spectra in Figure More information can be obtained from the quantification of the surface composition of the two samples shown in Table In order to gain a further insight in the evolution of the surface chemical composition, part of the samples were also analyzed by IR-ATR. For the identification of the IR bands we have used the discussion in references The IR-ATR spectra corresponding to both samples (pristine and laser treated & aged) is included in Figure The long-term mechanisms responsible for the wettability evolution over time also condition the durability and robustness of the induced modifications. Some functional groups are attached to the surface by Van der Waals forces and their adhesion can be weak. For this reason, is important to monitor the durability of the chemical groups attached at the marble surface. Figure Analysing Figure These results demonstrate that the generated hydrophobicity is relatively robust and is up to some extent self-healing. Crema-Marfil Coto marble samples have been homogeneously processed by means of femtosecond laser processing. This technique induces a multi-scale roughness formed by trenches with different separations (micro-roughness) and depths of tens of micrometers, covered by a flake-like morphology (nano-roughness). In addition, the laser treatment triggers a chemical reaction that leads to a noticeable increase of the wettability over the time. All samples show a rapid and substantial rise of the contact angle within the first 10 days. Afterwards, the contact angle increase slows down, stabilizing around 140° at 8 -11 months of aging. Laser processing thus triggers to two different effects: an "initialization" of the chemical state of the surface that turns much more reactive (likely because the thermal decomposition of CaCO 3 in the near surface laser treated region) and an increase in the surface to volume ratio favoring the extent of incorporation of water (hydroxylation) and (likely) C-H contaminants. The time dependent study allowed disentangling the individual contributions of roughness and chemical evolution at different scan separations. We have found that trenches with a separation of Δ = 20 μm show the highest initial improvement of the hydrophobicity, attributed to microroughness. However, when taking into account the evolution over time associated to chemical reactions, the best results were obtained for Δ = 30 μm, where the effective surface area is maximized. The mechanisms responsible for the enhanced wettability demonstrated to be robust and durable to cleaning, recovering its reference values in few days after the cleaning process. It can be concluded that laser processing is a useful technique for turning marble surfaces hydrophobic, offering protection to marble surfaces against water-based contaminants without compromising their visual aspect.