Several diamond bulk crystals with a concentration of electrically neutral single substitutional nitrogen atoms of 80 ppm, the so-called C-or P1-centres, were irradiated with electrons at 10 MeV energy and low fluence. The results show a complete suppression of the irreversible behavior in field and temperature of the magnetization below ∼ 30 K, after a decrease of 40 ppm in the concentration of C-centres produced by the electron irradiation. This result indicates that magnetic C-centres are at the origin of the large hysteretic behavior found recently in nitrogen-doped diamond crystals. This is remarkable because of the relatively low density of C-centres, stressing the extraordinary role of the C-centres in triggering those phenomena in diamond at relatively high temperatures. After annealing the samples at high temperatures in vacuum, the hysteretic behavior is partially recovered. A. Superconductivity in diamond: a still incomplete puzzle Superconductivity (SC) was recognized in doped diamond through a relatively broad transition in the electrical resistance at 2.5 K . . . 2.8 K after doping it with ∼ 3% boron Furthermore, we may ask whether the SC phase in Bdoped diamond is homogeneously distributed in the reported samples. This does not appear to be in general the case. For example, the SC phase was observed only within a near surface region of less than ∼ 1 μm in heavily B-doped diamond single crystals, showing clear polycrystallinity and granular properties Several recent studies indicate a granular nature of the samples' structure and of the SC phase Another open issue in the SC puzzle of doped diamond is the fact that implanting boron into diamond via irradiation does not trigger SC at least above 2 K According to recent studies, the reported SC in Bdoped diamond appears to be more complicated because not only the boron concentration matters but also some kind of disorder or even magnetic order may play a role. Coexistence of SC and ferromagnetism (FM) was recently reported in hydrogenated B-doped nanodiamond films at temperatures below 3 K We would like to stress that the possible origins for an irreversible behavior in field and/or temperature in the magnetization of a material can be: (a) Intrinsic magnetic anisotropy, (b) the existence of magnetic domains and the pinning of their walls, or (c) the pinning of vortices or fluxons in a superconducting matrix. The origin (a) can be ruled out because the measured behavior does not depend on the direction of the applied field with respect to the main axes of the crystals nor on their shape in the diamond crystals studied in this work. The relatively low average N-content and further details of the measured diamond samples suggest the existence of a granular structure in the concentration of nitrogen To facilitate the comparison of the present results with those of Ref. -(b) The irreversible magnetization of the diamond samples can be phenomenologically understood as the superposition of a diamagnetic, superparamagnetic (or ferromagnetic) and superconducting contributions. We stress that the main characteristics of the anomalous hysteresis are also observed in ferromagnetic/superconducting oxide bilayers for fields applied parallel to the main area (and interface between) of the two layers, see Fig. -(c) The amplitude of the anomalous magnetization signal below ∼ 30 K increases with the nitrogen-related C-centres concentration. -(d) The obtained phase diagrams for both phases found in the N-doped diamond samples below 30 K indicate that the ordering phenomena should have a common origin. In contrast to the amplitude of the anomalous magnetization, the critical temperaturebelow which the hysteretic behavior is measured -does not depend significantly on the C-centre concentration. This result suggests that localized C-centre clusters with similar C-centre concentration trigger the anomalies below 30 K. -(e) The magnetic and superconducting regions are of granular nature embedded in the dielectric diamond matrix. The used Bean-like model to fit the field hysteresis suggests the existence of superconducting shielding currents and field gradients within the grains of size larger than a few nanometers. -(f) The total mass of the regions of the samples that originates the anomalous magnetization behavior was estimated as ∼ 10 -4 of total sample mass, emphasizing its granular nature and the difficulties one has to localize them in large bulk samples. We note that nitrogen, as a donor impurity in diamond, is expected to trigger SC with higher critical temperatures than with boron Interestingly, compression-shear deformed diamond was recently proposed as a new way to trigger phononmediated SC up to 12 K in undoped diamond Finally, SC at two-dimensional interfaces has been recently studied at the stacking faults of pure graphite or multilayer graphene structures theoretically Because of the large penetration depth at the selected electron energy, we use a weak electron irradiation to study the influence of lattice defects produced or changed by the irradiation on the magnetization of bulk N-doped diamond crystals. Weak electron irradiation means that its fluence is of the order of the concentration of Ccentres, i.e., a few tens of ppm. Magnetization measurements can provide valuable information especially in the case the phase(s) at the origin of the anomalies of interest, is (are) not homogeneously distributed in the samples. One aim of this work is therefore to check with temperature and field dependent measurements of the magnetization, whether its anomalous behavior found in N-doped diamond crystals can be affected by a weak electron irradiation. If the irradiation does change the anomalies observed in the magnetization, which lattice defect is mostly affected by the irradiation? Can it be correlated to the magnetic anomalies? A recently published study on the influence of ion irradiation on the SC of heavily B-doped diamond samples, showed that SC is suppressed after Heion irradiation of 5 × 10 16 at 1-MeV producing a vacancy concentration of ≃ 3 × 10 21 cm -3 (∼ 2%) We selected four (111) diamond bulk crystals, three of them were previously studied in detail As in Continuous wave (cw) EPR measurements were performed at room temperature with a BRUKER EMX Micro X-band spectrometer at 9.416 GHz using a BRUKER ER 4119HS cylindrical cavity. Absolute concentrations of paramagnetic C-centres (usually called P1-centres in EPR) and NV --centres were determined in dark by using an ultramarine standard sample with known spin number and double integration of the corresponding EPR spectra. The external magnetic field B 0 was oriented along the [111] crystallographic axis of the diamond single crystals. In order to avoid saturation effects a 10 kHz modulation frequency at a microwave (MW) power of P MW = 630 nW was employed. We verified that the EPR signal intensities I EP R of both centres deviate from a square root dependence on P MW by less than 10 % between P MW = 203 nW and 630 nW and therefore saturation effects can be neglected at room temperature and such low mw power levels. Modulation amplitudes of 0.1 mT and 0.03 mT were employed to measure the C-and NV -centres to avoid broadening effects. A reliable method to characterize the granular, inhomogeneous concentration of nitrogen and the N-based centres, like the C-centres (neutral nitrogen N 0 with a maximum absorption at 1344 cm -1 ) and N + (positively charged single substitutional nitrogen with a maximum absorption at 1332 cm -1 ), is infrared (IR) microscopy. IR measurements and IR spectral imaging were carried with a Hyperion 3000 IR microscope coupled to a Tensor II FTIR spectrometer (Bruker Optik GmbH, Ettlingen, Germany). The microscope is equipped with both, a single element MCT detector and a 64 × 64 pixel focal plane array (FPA) detector. Measurements with the MCT detector were carried out with a spectral resolution of 1 cm -1 , whereas the resolution of the FPA detector used for imaging was limited to 4 cm -1 . Diamonds were fixed in a Micro Vice sample holder (S.T. Japan) and carefully aligned horizontally. The concentration values of C-centres shown in Table I were obtained from IR transmission spectra taken with the MCT detector at various positions of the diamond surface. The MCT detector was favored over the FPA detector for these measurements due to the very low band widths of the above-mentioned bands. Quantitative concentration data of N + -and C-centres were derived from the spectra using the relationships between the peak intensities of these bands and the concentration of corresponding nitrogen centres given by Lawson et al. Electron irradiation was done at 10 MeV energy using a B10-30MPx Mevex Corp. (Stittsville, Canada) with a total irradiation fluence of 1 × 10 18 electrons/cm 2 (sample 3) and 2 × 10 18 electrons/cm 2 (sample 2). The electron irradiation was performed at 900 • C in vacuum, in order to remove a certain amount of disorder. In spite of a large number of studies on irradiation effects in diamond, the available literature on the electron irradiation damage in diamond is less extensive. For example, electron irradiation at high temperatures was used to significantly increase the density of nitrogen-carbon vacancy (NV) centres There are two recent works directly related to our studies. One of them investigated the effects of electron irradiation on in-situ heated nano-particles of diamond In terms of created vacancies, homogeneously induced by the electron irradiation, the maximal nominal concentration would be 5 × 10 18 vac./cm 3 for sample 3, i.e. a concentration of ≃ 30 ppm (60 ppm for sample 2), of the same order as the C-centres obtained by IR and EPR, see Table Figure A broader magnetic field scan with a larger amplification as done for sample 2 (Fig. In a first published study of similar diamond crystals, a correlation between the magnitude of the anomalous magnetization below 30 K and the C-centres was found The concentration range of C-centres determined from IR spectra and measured at different positions of the samples is given in Table As example, we show in Fig. In order to quantitatively estimate the extend of the increase of the concentration of H1a centres [H1a], we use a relation given by Dale Because the concentration of C-centres plays a main role in the origin of the phenomena observed in the magnetization, it is of interest to display the concentration distribution of these centres. Figure Several details are of interest, namely: (1) The average concentration of C-centres after electron irradiation decreases by ≃ 50% and shows a similar granular distribution as in the as-received samples but with a larger difference (up to 50%) between neighboring regions. (2) After annealing, see Fig. The field hysteresis loops were measured at constant temperature after zero field cooling from 380 K. The field was swept from 0 T → +7 T→ -7 T→+7 T. After this procedure, the applied field was set to zero, the sample heated to 380 K and cooled at zero field to a new constant temperature. The main characteristics of the anomalous hysteresis at 2 K can be seen in Figs. We note that the high sample-temperature stabilized during irradiation is not the reason for the changes we discuss below. In order to prove this, we show in Fig. The influence of the electron irradiation on the field hysteresis can be clearly seen in Fig. To further demonstrate that the s-like field loop observed after irradiation, see Fig. C. Partial recovery of the anomalies in the magnetization after high temperature annealing in vacuum In an earlier study, Creedom et al. After electron irradiation m d = (0 ± 1) μemu in the whole temperature range, see Fig. This partial recovering is also observed by measuring the field hysteresis loops after annealing, in particular the field hysteresis width. Figure Pure diamond samples, without N-or B-doping, show no anomalous behavior in the magnetization above 2 K but the usual diamagnetic response. A very weak Curielike behavior in the magnetic susceptibility below 100 K is observed in some of the "pure" diamond samples, with a temperature irreversibility between the ZFC and FC states more than three orders of magnitude smaller than the irreversibility we measured in N-doped diamond A correlation between the anomalous maximum in magnetization and the concentration of C-centres has been obtained in As emphasized in the introduction, the similarities between the magnetization loops obtained in N-doped diamonds and FM/SC bilayers, see Fig. At this point we would like to give a couple of remarks on the EPR measurements. One would argue that below 30 K and if such a mixture of SC and SPM phases in our samples exists, then we would expect to see a broadening of the EPR line related to the C-centres at low temperatures. To check for this effect we have done additional EPR experiments with samples 1, 2 and 3 at 11 K. A significant line broadening for the signals of the C-and NV-centres was not be observed, in comparison with the room temperature spectra. The main reason for the absence of such a broadening of the EPR C-lines is the following. EPR measures the average response of all C-centres, which are distributed through all the sample. From all those regions, only a small part of them have the phases responsible for the huge field (and temperature) hysteresis loops. With our EPR equipment, it is simply not possible to get the signal of such a small amount. Note that there is always an overlap with the dominating signal from the C-centres located all over the remaining parts of the sample. A. How large would be a significant C-centres concentration to trigger ordering phenomena in diamond ? This question is not answered experimentally in the literature. Surprisingly, with exception of To estimate the average distance between C-centres we follow a similar procedure as in Let us take a look at two recent publications that studied the entanglement between single defect spins A concentration of 50 ppm of C-centres is much smaller than the necessary boron concentration ( 2 %) reported in the literature to trigger the observed superconducting transition in the electrical resistance. As we noted in the introduction, new experimental studies do suggest that the relationship between carrier concentration due to Bdoping and the superconducting critical temperature is not as clear. It may well be that the relatively high carrier concentration in those B-doped diamonds is necessary to get percolation, i.e. a superconducting current path between voltage electrodes. But it does not necessarily rule out that localized superconducting grains are formed at lower B-concentration. We may ask now, why the superconducting transition is not observed in the electrical resistance in our N-doped diamond samples From the comparison between the absolute magnetic signals in the diamond samples and those measured in oxides bilayers, a rough estimate of the equivalent mass of the SC phase in the N-doped diamond samples gives ∼ 1 μg, i.e. the volume of a cube of 70 μm side length We note that several experimental details gained from our magnetization results suggest that the SPM phase should emerge simultaneously to the SC one. For example, the anomalous behavior of the difference m d = m F C -m ZF C , see Fig. Clustering of C-centres could produce a spin glass phase arising from their spin 1/2 character of independent magnetic moments. Following the ideas of the RVB model There are at least two possible scenarios that could provide an answer to the simultaneous existence of the two phases. The rather conventional possibility is that at low enough temperatures, in our case T 30 K, a mixture of paired and unpaired C-centres are formed, a spin liquid. The unpaired C-centres start to contribute to the magnetic response under an applied magnetic field as a SPM phase, the reason for the s-like field loop contribution without any field hysteresis. A SPM phase, instead of a FM one, is possible only if the spin-spin interaction (inversely proportional to the distance between the spins) is weak enough within the used temperature range. The successive coupling of the C-centres is predicted to be a kind of hierarchical process, which leads to a non-Curie law in the magnetic susceptibility as, for example, χ ∝ T -α . Such a process has been observed in P-doped Si with α ∼ 0.6 A less conventional possibility follows from arguments published in Let us now discuss the effect of the electron irradiation. One main result is that a nominal induced defect concentration ∼ 50 ppm, of the order of the concentration of C-centres in the as-received state of the samples, eliminates completely the anomalies in the magnetization. In would mean that the two phases, SC and the SPM phases, vanish simultaneously. Taking into account that most of those produced vacancies diffuse and/or give rise N-related defects, and the correlation found in Qualitatively, the irradiation effect we found is similar to the vanishing of SC by He-ions irradiation in B-doped diamond The suppression of SC in B-doped diamond after Heirradiation has been explained assuming that the produced vacancies act as donors, which compensate the holes introduced by the substitutional boron atom From our results we may conclude that one main reason for the vanishing of the responsible phases by electron irradiation is the decrease by ≃ 50% of the average concentration of C-centres, see Table The produced lattice defects through irradiation (H1acentres The studies in Magnetization measurements of electron irradiated Ndoped diamond crystals show the suppression of the anomalous irreversible behavior in applied magnetic field and temperature. The suppression occurs after producing a decrease of a few tens of ppm in the concentration of C-centres measured by IR absorption and EPR. This is remarkable because of the relatively low density of Ccentres, stressing the extraordinary role of the C-centres in triggering those phenomena in diamond at relatively high temperatures. Spectroscopy methods like ARPES to get information on the changes in the band structure produced by nitrogen would be of high interest. However, it is not clear whether such a technique would be successful using similar samples as we studied here, due to the small amount of mass of the phases that originate the anomalies in the magnetization. We believe that future work should try to study the magnetic and electrical response locally in order to localize the regions of interest. According to our results, the regions of interest should be all over distributed in the samples and therefore these local studies should have a reasonable chance of success. However, the main problem would be the large measuring scanning time (at a fixed temperature and magnetic field) for the typical areas of the samples studied here.