Studies involving nanomechanical motion have evolved from its detection and understanding of its fundamental aspects to its promising practical utility as an integral component of hybrid systems. Nanomechanical resonators' indispensable role as transducers between optical and microwave fields in hybrid systems, such as quantum communications interface, have elevated their importance in recent years. It is therefore crucial to determine which among the family of nanomechanical resonators is more suitable for this role. Most of the studies revolve around nanomechanical resonators of ultrathin structures because of their inherently large mechanical amplitude due to their very low mass. Here, we argue that the underutilized nanomechanical resonators made from multilayered two-dimensional (2D) materials are the better fit for this role because of their comparable electrostatic tunability and larger optomechanical responsivity. To show this, we first demonstrate the electrostatic tunability of mechanical modes of a multilayered nanomechanical resonator made from graphite. We also show that the optomechanical responsivity of multilayered devices will always be superior as compared to the few-layer devices. Finally, by using the multilayered model and comparing this device with the reported ones, we find that the electrostatic tunability of devices of intermediate thickness is not significantly lower than that of ultrathin ones. Together with the practicality in terms of fabrication ease and design predictability, we contend that multilayered 2D nanomechanical resonators are the optimal choice for the electromagnetic interface in integrated quantum systems. Interaction between mechanical motion and electromagnetic radiation has been greatly studied in recent years because of its many applications in laser science Much of the study involving 2D NMRs gear towards ultrathin structures approaching the atomic scale In this work, we present an NMR made from multiple layers of graphene in a Fabry-Perot structure characterized through laser interferometry. Its tunability by electrostatic means for the mechanical modes is demonstrated. The enhancement of the optomechanical responsivity as it relates to the number of layers is also shown. To better understand the effect of geometry and material properties, a model for multilayered resonators is constructed. Finally, the resonance frequency tunability of the device is compared to that of ultrathin resonators of a similar structure. By looking at the electrostatic tunability of multilayered 2D NMRs, we can see that they are the optimal choice for transducers, especially between optical and electrical fields. Their significant role in quantum a) Equally contributing authors. communication, for example, will make this choice of device very critical. Figure Figure To analyze these increasing trends in both mechanical amplitude and frequency in detail, we plot the peak amplitude and the resonance frequency as a function of the DC voltage, as shown in Figure As explained earlier, the information about mechanical motion is carried by the modulated laser beam reflected from the device. The modulation amplitude can be converted to the amplitude of mechanical vibrations by obtaining the device's optomechanical responsivity. In order to do this, the total reflectance R is differentiated with respect to the displacement from equilibrium z. However, calculation of the total reflectance is not trivial because each of the layers has its own refraction index that is layer thickness dependent. For this work, however, we will only focus on the graphite flake device's optomechanical responsivity and the multilayer interface approach is explained in detail elsewhere For multilayer structures, it is common to discuss whether the resonator is in the modulus dominated regime, commonly referred to as a plate or disk, or in the tension dominated regime, when the resonator is called a membrane. The transition between these two regimes, however, can be described by the vibrational motion of a plate under tension in the absence of an external force with the following equation The symbols z, T , D and ρ are the mechanical displacement, flexural rigidity, tension and material density, respectively. A more accurate model of the rigidity would be to include the interlayer shear where f p,mn and f m,mn are the plate and membrane resonance frequencies, respectively. We can write down explicitly the corresponding expressions for the membrane and plate resonance frequencies as follows where σ is the tensile stress, h is the thickness of the drumhead, and λ p and λ m are the respective eigenmode numbers for the corresponding plate and membrane resonances. The tensile stress can be further described in terms of the total radial tension T to counteract F dc , where F dc is equal to 0.5 dC dz (V dc -V 0 ) 2 , with C representing the capacitance between the drumhead and bottom electrode, T initial the initial tension, V 0 the offset voltage due to the work function difference of the drumhead and contacts materials The final equation for the frequency of a tensioned plate takes the form: Now that we have a model that approximates the contributions of both rigidity and tension in Equation 6, we can use it to fit the data of Figure From the fitting curves of f 1 and f 2 , we can deduce λ to be 3.56 and 4.13 for f 1 and f 2 , respectively. Comparing it to the singular λ of a circle, which is 3.832, is indicative of an inherent source of circular asymmetry that could be from the aforementioned non-uniform drumhead deformation or eccentricity The mechanical amplitude dependence on V dc when V ac << V dc can be written as where ε 0 , m e f f , and γ mn are the values of the vacuum permittivity, effective mass, and mechanical bandwidth, respectively. As mentioned previously, there is an asymmetry between the tuning of both the mechanical frequency and amplitude observed for the negative and positive voltages. This asymmetry can be attributed to the gate tunable nonlinearity arising from the electronic properties of the material, such as a multilayered graphite flake in this case where the increased number of the nodal lines inherently leads to smaller amplitudes, which then become more susceptible to this nonlinearity. To further understand the mechanical frequency tunability, we vary the parameters of Equation Device Number of r (μm) f 0 (V dc = 0) ∆ f (MHz) a g 0 (nm) EF (Vμm Table In summary, we characterized nanomechanical resonators made from multilayered 2D materials and demonstrated their electrostatic tunability. We showed that the optomechanical responsivity of the NMRs made from multilayers is greater than that of ultrathin ones. Furthermore, by using the multilayered NMR model, we deduced the effect of various device parameters, such as the thickness and radius of the drumhead, on the mechanical frequency tunability. This model revealed that while the mechanical frequency tunability is highest for the thinnest resonators, the resonator thickness can still be increased up to a certain value at which the tunability does not decrease much. Together with the higher optomechanical responsivity, this makes multilayered 2D NMRs the optimal choice for building optomechanical transducers. These properties of multilayered 2D NMRs are important for the development of future coupled and integrated systems for various applications. 