Artificial intelligence is widely used in everyday life. However, an insufficient computing efficiency due to the so-called von Neumann bottleneck cannot satisfy the demand for realtime processing of rapidly growing data. Memristive in-memory computing is a promising candidate for highly efficient data processing. However, performance of memristors varies significantly because of microstructure change induced by electric-driven matter migration. Here, we propose an all-optically controlled (AOC) memristor with a simple Au/ZnO/Pt sandwich structure based on a purely electronic tuning mechanism of memconductance. The memconductance can be reversibly tuned only by light irradiation with different wavelengths. The device can be used to perform in-memory computation such as nonvolatile neuromorphic computing and Boolean logic functions. Moreover, no microstructure change is involved during the operation of our AOC memristor which demonstrates superior operation stability. Based on this and its structural simplicity, the device has attractive application prospects for the next generation of computing systems. Due to increased use of artificial intelligence (AI) in applications such as face recognition, self-driving vehicles, internet search, Go game and internet of things, increasing demands (especially high speed and low energy) are being placed on the supporting computation hardware. Based on the von Neumann architecture, the central processing unit (CPU) (for data processing) and the main memory (for data storage) of modern computers are physically separated and the data transfer between them consumes most of the time and energy. This is known as the von Neumann bottleneck. Arithmetic-in-memory STDP Integrate-and-fire cycle-to-cycle and device-to-device performance variations, which are a major obstacle to their practical application. This device shows excellent operation stability and is used to realize in-memory computing such as nonvolatile neuromorphic computing and logic-in-memory. Therefore, this AOC memristor has a great application potential for designing highly efficient computing architectures. We used polycrystalline ZnO with a wide band gap of 3.2 eV as the active layer (see ). ZnO fabricated by various methods has been widely used as the active layer of memristive devices. In 2 O 3 (ITO)), which formed quasi-Ohmic contact with ZnO given that the electron affinity of ZnO (4.2 eV) and the work function of ITO (4.3 eV) have similar values. The Au/ZnO structure has a mean transmittance of > 60% for light wavelengths from 350 to 1000 nm (Figure with light of appropriate wavelengths results in an increase in the current; after irradiation, although a current decay occurs, the device cannot be restored to its initial conductance state before irradiation, i.e., the conductance state after irradiation is nonvolatile. Therefore, relatively short-wavelength light (350, 420, and 530 nm) could switch the device from LMS to HMS, referred to as the SET operation. On the other hand, when the device was irradiated with long-wavelength light (650, 725, and 800 nm), very weak or even no current change was observed (Figure After irradiating the device with 350 and 420 nm light, subsequent irradiation with 530 nm light resulted in an increase in the photocurrent, whereas 650, 725 and 800 nm light gave rise to a decrease in the current, compared to the case without subsequent irradiation (Figure exposed to 650 nm light (pink curve), and finally kept in the dark for 30 minutes (green curve). In (a-d, g), the light power densities were maintained at 36 μW/cm 2 and the current values were measured at 10 mV. Note that both the V O ionization and V O 2+ neutralization reactions and electron motion actually occurred under nonequilibrium conditions. SET and RESET indexes were used to quantitatively study the optical SET and RESET efficiencies. The index values were calculated by the formula (I 1 -I 2 /I 1 )  100%, where I 1 and I 2 are the device currents before and after irradiation, respectively. As demonstrated in Figure illustrates the dependence of RESET indexes on the light wavelength for the initial SET operation and the following RESET operation. Evidently, the RESET index increased with a decrease in wavelength of the light for both SET and RESET. As mentioned above, the ZnO/Pt Schottky junction dominated the device memconductance under a positive read voltage (10 mV). It could be deduced that this junction played a key role in the optical SET operation (Figure s caused a decrease in the junction width, thus leading to an increased memconductance. The nonvolatility of the light-induced memconductance states is likely due to the following reasons: i) the free electrons generated in the Schottky barrier region were pulled into ZnO by the built-in electric field and therefore could not recombine with V O 2+ s, and ii) an energy barrier originating from the outward relaxation of bonds around the oxygen vacancy sites must be overcome to neutralize V O 2+ s. It has been reported that in a metal/oxide/metal junction, Capacitance of the device initially increased when irradiated with 530 nm light, but decreased upon a second irradiation with 650 nm light. As mentioned previously, the ZnO/Pt Schottky junction dominated the electrical properties under a positive voltage. This implies that the device capacitance could be controlled by the ZnO/Pt Schottky junction. It has been reported that the capacitance of a Schottky junction increased with decreasing junction width. We believe that during the optical SET process, short-wavelength light with relatively high photon energy also induced internal photoemission or photoassisted tunneling of Based on the optical SET and RESET operations, we can realize the reversible tuning of memconductance by applying only optical excitation. Figure To compare the memconductance tuning performance between optically and electrically controlled memristors, we prepared Ti/ZnO/Pt and Cu/ZnO/Pt devices in which the ZnO layer was deposited at the same parameters as the AOC memristor (Au/ZnO/Pt). It has been reported that Ti/ZnO/Pt and Cu/ZnO/Pt demonstrated memristive switching due to electrically controlled electron trapping/detrapping and Cu nanofilament rupture/rejuvenation, respectively. Our AOC memristor could be used to perform in-memory computing, e.g., nonvolatile neuromorphic computing. As schematically illustrated in Figure Another type of in-memory computing, logic-in-memory, could also be performed in our AOC memristor. Boolean logic is a form of algebra in which the variable's values are the truth values, i.e., true and false (generally denoted as "1" and "0", respectively). It fits well with the binary numbering system used by modern computers, where each bit has a value of either 1 or 0. There are 16 Boolean logic functions in two-input (e.g., p and q) systems. Compared to traditional logic gates based on transistors, logic-in-memory computing architectures provide a more efficient way to store and process information. According to the operation complexity, 16 logic functions could be classified in six categories, i.e., i) only needing input light (Figure needing measurement of M C0 , optoforming processes, and measurement of intermediate memconductance (Figure Specifically, the OR and NIMP functions could be implemented with or without 530 and 650 nm light irradiation, respectively; the wavelength of input light was determined by the logic operation type. The AND, TRUE, and FALSE functions were demonstrated by sequentially applying the input light and the control light; wavelength of the control light depends on the logic operation type and the input light. For the RIMP and q functions, prior to the input light, the device was exposed to 530 and 650 nm light and set to an HMS and LMS, respectively; wavelength of the control light was selected according to the logic operation type. As for the NAND, IMP, RNIMP, p, and NOT p functions, the schemes of applying the control light strongly depend on the initial memconductance state (p = 1 or 0), which should be determined first, as well as the logic operation type and the input light. In the case of NOT q and NOR functions, the optoforming operations were necessary; the schemes of applying the control light were determined by the initial memconductance state and logic operation type. Other than the above 14 logic functions, additional steps were needed to achieve the XOR and NXOR functions. Apart from initial state-dependent optoforming processes, it was necessary to determine the intermediate memconductance states prior to applying the subsequent control light. Furthermore, the control light applied before and after the input light was composed of both 530 and 650 nm irradiation. As mentioned previously, memconductance decay occurs after light irradiation. In the case of pʹ = 0, such decay did not affect the device state since the memconductance gradually deviated away from the baseline value (100 nS). On the other hand, for pʹ = 1, the memconductance gradually approached the baseline value as a result of the decay. To confirm the nonvolatility of the output, the decay curves were fitted using exponential functions (Figure An AOC memristor with a simple Au/ZnO/Pt structure was fabricated. The memconductance could be reversibly tuned over a continuous range via varying only the wavelength of the controlling light. The device could be operated at light power densities as low as ≈ 30 μW/cm 2 and the light-induced memconductance states were found to be nonvolatile. The observed memconductance switching behavior most likely stemmed from a reversible width variation of the Schottky junction at the metal/ZnO interface due to electron trapping and detrapping at oxygen vacancies. The device showed excellent operation stability. In-memory computing, including nonvolatile neuromorphic computing and logic-in-memory, was demonstrated using this AOC memristor, indicating its great potential as a candidate for high-performance computing. It deserves mention that before AOC memristors could be practically used for in-memory computing, an answer to the following question must be found, i.e., how can light be controllably introduced into each device to tune its memconductance in a memristor crossbar array? Usage of thin-film optical waveguides based on Si/SiO 2 , Si 3 N 4 /SiO 2 , etc., might be a feasible and effective method to overcome this challenge. These waveguide materials are easy to be integrated into AOC memristors, making high-density integration of AOC memristors possible. Resource Availability Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the lead contact, Fei Zhuge (zhugefei@nimte.ac.cn). This study did not generate any new unique materials. The published article includes all data analyzed during this study. Polycrystalline ZnO thin films were deposited on Pt/Ti/SiO 2 /Si, ITO coated SiO 2 /Si, and quartz substrates at room temperature by RF magnetron sputtering of a ZnO ceramic target of 99.99% purity in pure Ar atmosphere. The sputtering power was 60 W and the pressure was 0.5 Pa. The structure of the as-deposited ZnO films was checked by X-ray diffractometer (XRD, D8 Advance). The thickness was determined to be about 50 nm via variable angle spectroscopic ellipsometry (M-2000 DI, J. A. Woollam Co., Inc.). The resistivity was measured with a Hall effect measurement system (HP-5500C, Nanometrics) using the van der Pauw method. ZnO had a high resistivity, which exceeded the measurement limit (~10 5 Ωcm) of the Hall measurement system. Transmittance spectra were measured by a UV-visible-IR spectrophotometer (Lambda 950, PerkinElmer). Photoluminescence spectra were measured via a confocal microscopic Raman spectrometer (Renishaw inVia Reflex, 325 nm). These measurements were performed at room temperature in air. Au top-electrodes with a thickness of 10 nm and a diameter of 100 μm were deposited onto ZnO films at room temperature by electron beam evaporation with in situ metal shadow 