A non-uniform capacitance profile in the channel of a THz field-effect transistor (TeraFET) could significantly improve the THz detection performance. The analytical solutions and simulations of the hydrodynamic equations for the exponentially varying capacitance versus distance showed ~10% increase in the responsivity for the 130 nm Si TeraFETs in good agreement with numerical simulations. Using the numerical solutions of the hydrodynamic equations, we compared three different Cg configurations (exponential, linear and sawtooth). The simulations showed that the sawtooth configuration provides the largest response tunability. We also compared the effects of the non-uniform capacitance profiles for Si, III-V, and p-diamond TeraFETs. The results confirmed a great potential of p-diamond for THz applications. Varying the threshold voltage across the channel could have an effect similar to that of varying the gate-to-channel capacitance. The physics behind the demonstrated improvement in THz detection performance is related to breaking the channel symmetry by device geometry of composition asymmetry. The generation and detection of terahertz (THz) radiation has been a very active area over the recent decades A high-quality THz signal detector plays a crucial role in almost all THz applications. The present-day THz sensors are mostly semiconductorbased, with Schottky devices being the dominant product Despite all those merits, plasmonic TeraFETs still face a variety of challenges, including the fabrication burden, requirement for high sensitivity, and noise issues Under the DC operation, the gate voltage (Vg) and Cg determine the 2D carrier concentration (n). Following the unified charge control model (UCCM), the relation between n and Vg can be approximated as where Vt = kBT/e is the thermal voltage (kB: Boltzmann constant, T: temperature, fixed at 300 K). η is a subthreshold ideality factor. U = Vg -Vthφ is the gate-to-channel potential. Vth is the threshold voltage, and φ is the channel potential. Well above threshold (U >> Vt), UCCM reduces to n = CU/e. Given a spatially non-uniform Cg, the steady-state density n0 also becomes coordinate-dependent, creating a carrier gradient along the channel at zero drain bias. The existence of density gradient changes the transport of carriers, thus affecting the detection performance of TeraFETs. When we only alter Cg, Vth also changes. A non-uniform Vth can also modify the device characteristics, speed Under the THz detection regime illustrated by Fig. To evaluate in more details the effects of varying Cg on the detection performance, we solve the hydrodynamic equations Here, v and m represent the hydrodynamic velocity and effective mass of the carrier, respectively. γ = 1/τ is the momentum relaxation rate, τ = 1/γ = μm/e is the momentum relaxation time, and μ is the fieldeffect mobility. The energy transport equation is ignored as we fix the operation temperature at 300 K and assume thermal equilibrium. The boundary conditions presented in Fig. In the sub-THz range and at room temperature, the TeraFETs typically operate in the non-resonant regime (ωτ<<1). Under this circumstance, ∂V/∂t << γv, and thus Eq. ( Solving (4) together with (1) and ( where . For the small signal operation, one can assume Se(U) = Se(U0). Inspecting Eq. ( Solving Eq. ( where are complex wave numbers, β = 1/sqrt(1+(ωτ) -2 ). is the real part of k1 or k2. k0 = sqrt(ω/Se 2 τ) is the amplitude of k in uniform Cg channels. Eq. ( To validate the theory proposed above, we compare the theory results with numerical simulations. The model used for simulation is the same as the one in [22], except that we assume thermal equilibrium here and ignore the energy relaxation equation. This model has been validated with the experimental data and proved to be effective Fig. In addition to the non-uniform Cg structures, the manipulation of DC response can also be achieved by a spatially non-uniform threshold voltage Vth under a uniform Cg. The non-uniform Vth can be achieved by the doping modulation Note that U = Vg -Vthφ, for a uniform Vth, Δφ = -ΔU and (9) reduces to (3). With a non-uniform Vth, we obtain and under the non-resonant operation (10) reduces to Combining ( Eq. ( In conclusion, we successfully manipulated the DC voltage response of TeraFETs by non-uniform capacitance profiles, and proposed a theory to qualitative explain this phenomena. The analytical calculations showed a good agreement with the simulation data under the non-resonant, subthreshold condition. In general, the DC response voltage is elevated if Cg rises from source to drain. We compared the modulation performances of 3 different Cg(x) profiles and found that a sawtooth configuration exhibited the largest response tunability. The manipulation of DC response can also be achieved by a spatially non-uniform threshold voltage. Those discoveries could help improve the responsivity of plasmonic TeraFET detectors and promote their industrial applications. See Supplementary Material for details of gate capacitance profiling, derivations of DC response voltage, and the effects of device loading and gate leakage current.