The discovery of superconductivity in the heavy-fermion paramagnet UTe2 has attracted a lot of attention, particularly due to the reinforcement of superconductivity near pressure-and magneticfield-induced magnetic quantum phase transitions. A challenge is now to characterize the effects of combined pressure and magnetic fields applied along variable directions in this strongly anisotropic paramagnet. Here, we present an investigation of the electrical resistivity of UTe2 under pressure up to 3 GPa and pulsed magnetic fields up to 58 T along the hard magnetic crystallographic directions b and c. We construct three-dimensional phase diagrams and show that, near the critical pressure, a field-enhancement of superconductivity coincides with a boost of the effective mass related to the collapse of metamagnetic and critical fields at the boundaries of the correlated paramagnetic regime and magnetically-ordered phase, respectively. Beyond the critical pressure, field-induced transitions precede the destruction of the magnetically-ordered phase, suggesting an antiferromagnetic nature. By bringing new elements about the interplay between magnetism and superconductivity, our work appeals for microscopic theories describing the anisotropic properties of UTe2 under pressure and magnetic field. The recent discovery of superconductivity in the strongly correlated system UTe 2 has sparked enormous interest Applying pressure is the tool of choice to tune magnetism in strongly correlated systems. Often pressure (p) can drive a system towards and through a magnetic instability, giving a direct probe of the relationship between magnetism and superconductivity. For UTe 2 it has already been shown that hydrostatic pressure induces an enhancement of T sc by a factor 2, reaching about 3 K We used a previously described pressure cell 29 allowing magnetoresistivity measurements in pulsed magnetic fields up to 60 T and temperatures down to 1.4 K. Single crystals of UTe 2 were grown by the chemical vapor transport technique as described elsewhere 2 . The crystals were oriented by X-ray Laue diffraction and cut to bar shaped samples of about 0.8 × 0.2 × 0.1 mm 3 . Two successive experiments were performed in a pressure cell, offering the simultaneous measurement of the electrical resistivity of two samples in a magnetic field along the b and c directions. First experiment was performed at pressures above p c on samples A with H b and B with H c (see Supplementary Materials 30 ). Second experiment was performed under a large set of pressures below and above p c , from 0.3 to 3.1 GPa, on samples C with H b and D with H c, and corresponds to the data presented in this manuscript (see also Supplementary Materials 30 ). Both experiments gave similar results, although the samples set up for H b displayed an unintentional misalignment (see Section III), probably having moved on pressurization. A piece of lead was also mounted in the cell to determine the pressure. High-pressure magnetoresistivity measurements were performed at the Laboratoire National des Champs Magnétiques Intenses (LNCMI) in Toulouse under longduration (50 ms rise and 300 ms fall) pulsed magnetic fields up to 58 T and temperatures down to 1.4 K. A standard four-probe method with a current I a of 0.5 mA, at a frequency of 15-70 kHz and digital lock-in detection was used. The temperature dependence of the resistivity was also measured directly in zero field. A. Zero-field high-pressure properties Zero-field electrical resistivity ρ(T ) curves measured at different pressures are shown in Fig. ent heavy fermion state or correlated paramagnetic state (CPM) occurs. In Fig. In Fig. We now look at the case H c (Fig. The full 3D phase diagrams obtained for both configurations of magnetic field H ≈ b and H c are represented in Fig. • For pressures above p c the situation is quite different. Now a 3D bubble formed by the CPM/WMO regime occurs for H c, with a quite well-defined transition into the PPM regime, whereas for H ≈ b this probably occurs as a broad cross-over. This is also consistent with the appearance of a maximum of magnetic susceptibility for H c and the disappearance of such maximum for H b under pressures beyond the critical pressure This reshuffling of the magnetic properties at the critical pressure p c is related to a switch of the anisotropy of the magnetic susceptibility, with the hard magnetic axis b at ambient pressure becoming the easy magnetic axis at high-pressure In heavy-fermion materials, magnetic quantum criticality, generally accompanied by a Lifshitz Fermi-surface instability, is reflected in the enhancement of the effective mass m * as the field is increased towards H m seen by a direct measurement of the specific heat The considerable changes of the magnetic properties with pressure have strong consequences on the superconductivity. In the 3D phase diagrams of Fig. For H c, the extremely steep slope found for H c2 on approaching p c , as well as the very high values (25-30 T) found for H c2 here and in a previous study Interestingly, the electrical resistivity ρ measured here with a current I a captures the physics driving the maxima in the magnetic susceptibility for different directions of magnetic field. T max χ(H c) for p > ∼ p c 27 . A transverse relationship between the electrical resistivity and the magnetic susceptibility anisotropies may be the consequence of an anisotropic Kondo hybridization between conduction and localized f electrons in UTe 2 . Rich information about the electronic interactions responsible for the magnetic fluctuations in UTe 2 in its normal non-superconducting phases may be accessed via a careful investigation of the anisotropy of the electrical resistivity, with different electrical-current directions (see [36]), under different magnetic-field directions possibly combined with pressure. We have seen that the application of pressure and high magnetic field on UTe 2 leads to an extremely complex phase diagram with a complete reshuffling of the magnetic anisotropy and strong associated effects on superconductivity. This helps us understand the intricate relationship between superconductivity and magnetism in this system. The clear signature of the destruction of magnetic order with field, as well as the signature of several field induced transitions inside the magnetically ordered phase, show that this order may be of antiferromagnetic or SDW type. Different domains of stability and exclusion of superconductivity are found under pressure and magnetic fields. Critical magnetic fluctuations, possibly of ferromagnetic kind, associated with H m and H * m , may induce the large values of A observed here, in relation with the enhancement of the superconduct-ing pairing mechanism. However, superconductivity does not necessarily occur in all parts of the phase diagram where A is enhanced. Quite simple pictures can explain some parts of the phase diagram, but understanding why superconductivity is destroyed below or beyond a metamagnetic field, depending on the field direction, and in the magnetically-ordered phase stabilized under pressure remains a theoretical challenge. Experimentally, a full knowledge of the angle dependence of superconductivity under pressure and very high magnetic field would help gain a full understanding of superconductivity in UTe 2 . Our study is a step in this direction.