In this Letter, a ring-core erbium-doped fiber (RC-EDF), with two-layer erbium-doped structure, supporting up to the fourth -order orbital angular momentum (OAM) mode is designed and fabricated for OAM mode multiplexed amplification. Using the RC-EDF, the third-and fourth-order OAM modes amplification with ultra-low differential mode gain (DMG) is demonstrated by observing both the modal intensity and phase distribution and measuring the modal gain under the fundamental mode core-pumping. The measured average gain of four modes (l=+3, -3, +4, -4) multiplexed amplification is higher than 19dB cover the C-band and the DMG is less than 1dB. Additionally, the gain of two conjugate OAM modes are almost the same under different pump power no matter they are amplified simultaneously or separately. In order to break through the limit of transmission capacity of the conventional single mode fiber (SMF) In this work, utilizing the refractive structure of ring-core with trench assisted and two-layer erbium-doped to promote overlap between excited erbium ions and signal modes, we design and fabricate a RC-EDF for higher-order OAM modes multiplexed amplification with ultra-low DMG, which supports up to the fourth-order OAM mode. A four high order OAM modes (OAM3,1 and OAM  4,1) multiplexed amplification with high average gain about 19 dB and an DMG (<1dB) are achieved across the C band. The RC-EDF incorporating both ring-core with trench outside and the two-layer erbium-doped region, was fabricated by using the combination of modified chemical vapor deposition (MCVD) and plasma chemical vapor deposition (PCVD). The MCVD is used for preparing the refractive index and erbium ions doping in the core region, while the PCVD is used for achieving negative refractive index doping trench which is deployed outside the ringcore. Fig. To confirm that the third-and fourth-order OAM mode amplification and multiplexed amplification with low DMG can be achieved by this RC-EDF, a core-pumped OAM amplifier testing system was built, which is illustrated in Fig. To experimentally testify the OAM modal gain properties , we firstly characterized the modal gain of 4 OAM modes ( =+3, -3, +4, -4) by activating separately. In the experiments, the signal power coupling into RC-EDF is about -10dBm after taking the coupled loss of each mode into account. Fig. In conclusion, we have demonstrated the third-and fourthorder OAM modes amplification separately and simultaneously, by using the RC-EDF we designed and fabricated. This is the first report as far as we know. The measured average gain of 4 modes (OAM±3,1 and OAM±4,1) is about 24dB at 1550nm by amplifying separately, and 19 dB by amplifying simultaneously with ultra-low DMG (<1dB) cover C band, and we believe it can achieve higher gain by adjusting the power of pump and signal input 