Two-dimensional (2D) disordered superconductor (SC) in class D exhibits a disorder-induced quantum multicritical phenomenon among diffusive thermal metal (DTM), topological superconductor (TS), and conventional localized (AI) phases. To characterize the quantum tricritical point where these three phases meet, we carry out a two-loop renormalization group (RG) analysis for 2D Dirac fermion with random mass in terms of the -expansion in the spatial dimension d = 2 -. In 2D ( = 0), the random mass is marginally irrelevant around a clean-limit fixed point of the gapless Dirac fermion, while there exists an IR unstable fixed point at finite disorder strength that corresponds to the tricritical point. The critical exponent, dynamical exponent, and scaling dimension of the (uniform) mass term are evaluated around the tricritical point by the two-loop RG analysis. Using a mapping between an effective theory for the 2D random-mass Dirac fermion and the (1+1)dimensional Gross-Neveu model, we further deduce the four-loop evaluation of the critical exponent, and the scaling dimension of the uniform mass around the tricritical point. Both the two-loop and four-loop results suggest that criticalities of a AI-DTM transition line as well as TS-DTM transition line are controlled by other saddle-point fixed point(s) at finite uniform mass. Low-energy fermionic excitation in p-wave superconductors with broken time-reversal and spin-rotational symmetries A phase diagram of the class-D disordered SC models has a close connection with a phase diagram of a 2D ±J random bond Ising model (RBIM). In an exact mapping between the RBIM and disordered fermion models, the diffusive thermal metal phase is absent Cho and Fisher (CF) In this paper, we clarify universal scaling properties around the tricritical point (TCP) and the three phase transition lines on the basis of the renormalization group (RG) analysis of 2D Dirac fermion with random Dirac mass. The 2D Dirac fermion is an effective theory for a topological phase transition between two topologically distinct gapped phases in a clean limit, where a change of a uniform Dirac mass term m induces the topological transition. The transition point in the clean limit is described by a 2D gapless Dirac fermion. Any on-site disorder potentials in the 2D gapless Dirac fermion are marginal around the clean-limit fixed point. Particle-hole symmetry in the class D symmetry restricts a form of the disorders to be of the Dirac-mass type. It is known that the Dirac-mass type disorder is marginally irrelevant around the clean-limit fixed point The organization of this paper is as follows. In the next section, we introduce two-dimensional (2D) random-mass Dirac fermions as a low-energy theory for Bogoliubov excitations in a disordered p x + ip y superconductor on a lattice. The theory has two controlled parameters; a disorder strength of the random-mass type, and the uniform mass that induces the topological phase transition between two gapped phases with distinct topological numbers. In Sec. III, we introduce an effective low-energy theory for the 2D random-mass Dirac fermions, generalize it in general spatial dimension d, and discuss the renormalizability of the effective theory in d ≤ 2. In Sec. IV, we use minimal subtraction method in d = 2and derive two-loop renormalization group (RG) equations for the disorder strength. We obtain an anomalous dimension of the uniform mass as well as the dynamical exponent up to the two-loop level in Sec. IV. In Sec. V, we analyze the RG equation and obtain the critical disorder strength for the TCP, the scaling dimensions of the random mass and dynamical exponent around the TCP. In Sec. VI, we discuss a relation between the effective theory for the 2D random-mass Dirac fermions and (1+1)D SU(N) Gross-Neveu model. The relation gives the four-loop evaluations of the critical disorder strength g c as well as scaling dimensions of the uniform mass m and disorder strength δg around the TCP. Sec. VII is devoted to summary and discussion. A square-lattice model of spinless fermions with p x + ip y Cooper pairing and the random chemical-potential type disorder is considered with uniform chemical potential μ, nearest-neighbor hopping amplitude t and superconducting pairing amplitude ∆ ∈ R. Here j ≡ (j x , j y ) denotes the lattice vectors, and e x and e y are primitive unit vectors in x and y direction, respectively. where • • • dis stands for Gaussian disorder average. W represents the disorder strength of the random potential. With a two-components Nambu vector, the Hamiltonian in Eq. ( with the three Pauli matrices σ i (i = 1, 2, 3). The BdG Hamiltonian in Eq. ( with [C] j,m = δ j,m σ 1 . The Hamiltonian also breaks the time-reversal symmetry. The Hamiltonian belongs to the class D in the 10-fold AZ symmetry class classification The quasi-particle (Bogoliubov) excitation is a gapped excitation, except for μ = 0, ±4t. At μ = 0, ±4t, the Bogoliubov excitation forms point nodes at high symmetric momentum points. Especially, when μ = -4t, the particle and the hole bands form a gapless Dirac-cone dispersion around (k x , k y ) = (0, 0), A finite m ≡ μ + 4t endows the gapless Dirac fermion with a finite gap. In the gapped phase, the bulk state is characterized by a quantized thermal Hall conductivity κ xy = Cπ 2 k 2 B T /6h with C a quantized integer number with p ≡ -i∂ ≡ (-i∂ x , -i∂ y ), σ ≡ (σ 1 , σ 2 ), a uniform mass term m and a Dirac fermion's velocity v ≡ 2∆. The Dirac fermion Hamiltonian generally describes a phase transition between two gapped phases with their topological numbers being different from each other by one. The gapped phase with C = 0 stands for a topologically trivial band insulator phase or a conventional Anderson insulator (AI) phase that is adiabatically connect to the topologically trivial band insulator. The gapped phase with C = ±1 represents a topological superconductor (TS) phase. Whether the positive m corresponds to TS or AI phase depends on a global topology of the BdG Hamiltonian in the clean limit; the Dirac fermion Hamiltonian can only tell that when the positive m corresponds to TS with C = -1 (AI) phase, then the negative m corresponds to AI (TS with C = +1) phase. For simplicity, we call the positive (negative) m side to be in the TS (AI) phase throughout this paper. The chemical-potential type disorder in the tightbinding Hamiltonian Eq. ( V 3 (x) is the Dirac-mass-type disorder potential, which is short-ranged and obeys the Gaussian distribution under a quenched average The disordered Dirac Hamiltonian keeps the particle-hole symmetry. Disorder-averaged Green functions for the disordered single-particle Dirac Hamiltonian can be systematically treated by a replica method with replica indices α, β = 1, • • • R. Here the summation over the replica indices are omitted in Eq. ( Based on the equivalence, we will argue renormalizability of S eff around the gapless point (m = 0) and the clean limit (∆ 3 = 0) in the replica limit (R → 0). To put it generally, we consider the replica action S eff in general spatial dimensions. The d-dimensional action at the gapless point takes a form of, with A. Renormalizability The d-dimensional effective field theory around the clean-limit fixed point has the two spatial dimensions (d = 2) as its upper critical dimension To evaluate a treelevel scaling dimension of the disorder strength, we take the action S eff to be dimensionless, dim[S eff ] = 0. In a perturbative renormalization group analysis around the clean-limit fixed point, the velocity and the coefficient in front of ∂ τ in S 0 are chosen to be marginal at the treelevel: dim[v] = 0. Then, a dimension of the field operator is given by dim[ψ] = d/2. The disorder strength has a dimension dim[∆ 3 ] = 2d from S I in Eq. The Green functions of the action S eff may have ultraviolet (UV) divergences. The UV divergences can be renormalizable, non-renormalizable and superrenormalizable in d = 2, d > 2 and d < 2, respectively. To explain the UV divergences in the Green functions and their renormalizability in general d dimensions, let us put the action S eff = S 0 +S I in the momentum-frequency space, with momentum and frequency integrals, Here Λ is a UV momentum cutoff. The interaction in Eq. ( with According to the standard Dyson-Feynman perturbation theory, the Green functions are given by amputated oneparticle irreducible (1PI) parts of the connected Green's functions (vertex functions) α and Γ αβ , are related to the respective Green functions, Similarly, higher-order 2n-points vertex functions can be defined from the 2n-points connected Green functions Each vertex with four fermion lines imposes a momentum conservation onto four momenta of the four fermion lines. Besides, the total sum of the external momenta is zero. Thus, L = V F -(V -1). Combing them together, we obtain M in terms of N F and V as follows; This shows that the system is renormalizable, nonrenormalizable and super-renormalizable at d = 2, d > 2 and d < 2, respectively The linear divergence in Eq. ( Under the particle-hole symmetry, the logarithmic UV divergence is allowed to take a tensor form of σ 3 ⊗ σ 3 as well as other tensor forms, e.g. σ 0 ⊗ σ 0 , σ j ⊗ σ j with j = 1, 2. The logarithmic divergence with σ 3 ⊗ σ 3 can be absorbed into a renormalization of the disorder strength ∆ 3 . When the logarithmic divergence appears in coefficients of the other tensor forms, one should also include such tensor form of bare interactions into the original action S eff to make the theory to be renormalizable. In the following two-loop calculation, we will see that only the coefficient of σ 3 ⊗ σ 3 has the UV divergence, while the coefficients of the other form have no UV divergence. When all the UV divergences in the vertex functions are absorbed into the renormalizations of field operator amplitude, the single-particle energy ω, disorder strength ∆ 3 and the uniform mass m, the effective field theory is renormalizable. In the previous section, we introduced three kinds of the logarithmic UV divergences in vertex functions Γ (N F ) (N F = 2, 4), Eqs. ( To this end, we use a minimal subtraction method Here φ is a renormalized field and it is related with the bare field ψ by a field renormalization with a field counterterm δ 2 . Ω and δΩ are the renormalized single-particle energy and its counterterm, κ and δκ are renormalized dimensionless interaction strength and its counterterm. Since ∆ 3 has a scaling dimension of 2d: dim[∆ 3 ] = , we normalize ∆ 3 by Ω to have dimensionless κ, In this renormalization scheme, the renormalized singleparticle energy Ω plays a role of a renormalization group (RG) scale, where all the physical quantities are normalized by a proper power of Ω. Taking Ω to be finite, we can also control infrared divergences that could appear in momentum integrals for self-energy and the vertex function. The renormalization of the single-particle energy results in an anisotropy in space and time Here the renormalized frequency Ω in the left hand sides and bare frequency ω in the right hand side of Eq. ( To this end, κ in Eq. ( The velocity v is free from the renormalization in this RG scheme. We henceforth set v = 1 for simplicity. To cancel 1/ divergent terms by the counterterms in the two-points renormalized vertex function, we require the two-point renormalized vertex function as a function of κ and Ω to be on the order of O( 0 ) in the small limit, To cancel 1/ divergent terms by the counterterm in the four-points renormalized vertex function, we require the four-points renormalized vertex function at Ω 1 = Ω 2 = Ω and at k 1 = k 2 = k 3 = 0 to be finite as a function of κ and Ω in the small limit, Γ Note that an external single-particle energy Ω is kept finite, so that the integrals in the right hand sides are free from any infrared divergence associated with the momentum integrals. Based on Eqs. ( For simplicity of the following notation, we rescale the dimensionless disorder strength κ by the spherical integral of d-dimensional momentum We use g instead of κ throughout the remaining part of the paper. The vertex functions of S eff are renormalized at a finite single-particle energy Ω through Eqs. ( ) The divergent contributions in the bare vertex functions in the small limit are included in the three renormalization constants, Z μ = Z 2 , Z ω , Z g (μ = 2, ω, g). Being dimensionless, these constants must be polynomials in the dimensionless disorder strength g. Namely, they generally take the following forms, with μ = 2, ω, g. Here a n,μ (g) is a m-th order polynomial of g in the m-loop perturbative RG calculation. The renormalized vertex functions in the small Ω limit determine ground-state nature of the action S eff When Ω goes to the zero with a fixed ∆ 3 , g changes according to Eq. The derivative gives out a β function of the coupling constant g, β g , that tells how g changes in the small Ω limit, with an RG parameter l ≡ln Ω. The small Ω limit corresponds to the large l limit. Z g is a polynomial function of g [Eq. where Eq. ( We first calculate the one-loop renormalization. Oneloop diagrams to the right hand sides of Eqs. with the zero-th order renormalized Green function G 0 (p) defined in Eq. The diagram [V 1B] and [V 1C] take tensor forms of γ i ⊗γ j (i, j = 0, 1, However, a sum of these two diagrams is on the order of one in the limit of → 0; Thus, at the one-loop level, no new vertex form other than γ ⊗ γ is generated with the divergence. The one-loop counterterms in Eqs. ( with a proper symmetry factor for [V 1A]. We obtain the one-loop counterterms: Here δ (m) κ, δ (m) Ω, and δ (m) 2 stand for the m-loop contributions to the counterterms, δκ, δΩ, and δ 2 , respectively; p p q p q p + qk FIG. 2 vγ • k in SC where δ (1) is given by Eq. ( (1) 2 = 0. Black circle on the dotted line with (1) stands for δ (1) κ in SC . δ (1) κ is given by Eq. ( We now proceed to the two-loop renormalization. The two-loop self-energy diagrams are shown in Fig. The two-loop contributions with the one-loop counterterms are shown in [S2a] and [S2b], [S2a] =κΩ iδ (1) Ω γ [S2b] =δ (1) κ Ω γ Two-loop contribution to the counterterm of the singleparticle energy should cancel these 1/ poles in Eq. ( This gives the two-loop contribution to the counterterm for the single-particle energy, The two-loop contribution to the field counterterm δ 2 comes from the γ The zero-th order in the small k was already calculated and included in Eqs. ( The field counterterm δ 2 should cancel the 1/ -pole from . This gives out the two-loop contribution to the field counterterm δ 2 and the field renormalization factor Z 2 as The two-loop contributions to the counterterm of the four-points vertex function are calculated in the Appendix B. After the lengthy calculation in the Appendix B, we obtain the two-loop vertex counterterm as follows, Ω δ (2) C. Two-loop RG equations At the two-loop level, the bare single-particle energy ω is given by a sum of the one-loop counterterm in Eq. ( The bare interaction is given by a sum of the one-loop counterterm in Eq. ( Equating these two with the renormalization constants defined in Eqs. ( Substituting Eq. (55) into Eq. ( Substituting Eq. ( In the previous subsection, we derived the β function of the Dirac-mass type disorder strength in the absence of the uniform mass. The β function thus obtained is a function only of the renormalized disorder strength g, which has an infrared (IR) unstable fixed point at finite disorder strength (g = g c ) in 2D ( = 0). An important question remains; Is the uniform mass operator relevant or irrelevant around the fixed point at g = g c ? If the uniform mass m is an irrelevant scaling variable around the fixed point with the finite critical disorder strength, the quantum criticality of DTM-AI transition as well as DTM-TS transition are controlled by the fixed point at g = g c ; see Fig. To clarify the scaling property of the uniform mass, we use the same perturbative renormalization theory as in the previous section and calculate the scaling dimension of the uniform mass operator up to the two-loop order (second order in g). To this end, we treat the uniform mass operator as an external perturbation and expand the vertex functions in terms of the uniform mass m Here a m-linear term in the four-points vertex function as well as the higher-order terms in m in all the vertex functions have no UV divergence in the two dimensions. Thus, the bare theory in the presence of finite uniform mass have one additional logarithmic divergent term compared to the bare massless theory. The new UV divergent term can be absorbed into a renormalization of the mass m. We do this mass renormalization by using the same -expansion as in the previous section, where ln Λ in the two dimensions is replaced by 1/ in the d = 2dimensions. The replicated action with the uniform mass is given by an addition of the uniform mass term into S eff and Z eff in Eqs. ( Using the same minimal subtraction method as in the previous section, we rewrite the bare field in the mass term by the renormalized field, where the omitted parts in S eff are already given in Eqs. ( Here a renormalized mass M and its counterterm δ M are related to the bare mass m as; with Z 2 the field renormalization defined in Eq. ( The renormalized vertex functions are given as functions of k, Ω and the renormalized mass M . We determine the previous counterterms (δΩ, δκ, δ 2 ) including δ M in such a way that the following RG conditions are satisfied by the renormalized vertex functions; Namely, such vertex functions are free from the UV divergence as functions of renormalized single-particle energy, renormalized uniform mass and renormalized disorder strength, e.g. The first and the third conditions, Eq. ( α (k, Ω, M ) evaluated at M = 0 is nothing but an amputated one-particle irreducible (1PI) part of a composite Green function at the massless point (Fig. From Eqs. ( Here • • • eff in the right hand side is taken over S eff with the zero uniform mass, M = 0. The two inverse Green functions in Eq. (66) amputate one-particle reducible parts of the composite Green function; In the following, the 1PI part of the amputated composite Green function Γ k = 0 perturbatively in g in d = 2with the renormalized massless theory S eff of Eqs. ( (2,1) α (k = 0, Ω) are cancelled by δ M , satisfying Eq. ( The zero-th and the first order contributions to the right hand side of Eq. ( As in Eq. ( The one-loop counterterm δ (1) The two-loop contributions to the 1PI part of (1 + δ M )Γ (2,1) α (k, Ω) are shown in Fig. The coefficients of γ in the diagrams [M c2], [M d1] and [M d2] are calculated as follows; The two-loop contributions to (1+δ M )Γ (2,1) α (k, Ω) that contain one-loop counterterms are shown in Fig. The diagrams [M f 1] and [M f 2] are the κ's first-order terms that contain the δΩ's one-loop counterterm. A sum of these two is calculated as follows, The diagram [M g] is the κ's first-order contribution to (k, Ω). Up to the second order in g, we use FIG. M . Note that as shown in the previous section, δ2 starts from the second order in g, so that it does not contribute to these diagrams. Eq. ( By taking into account appropriate symmetry factors in each diagram, we let the two-loop counterterm δ (2) M cancels the 1/ divergent terms in Eq. ( M + δ (2) The two-points vertex function has been renormalized up to the linear order in the uniform mass, Eq. ( To determine how M changes in the small Ω limit, let us take an Ω derivative of Eq. (61) with a fixed m and ∆ 3 , This gives an anomalous dimension of the uniform mass, γ O , From Eqs. ( In the clean limit (g = 0), γ O = 0, while γ O can be non-zero around a fixed point with finite g. With an introduction of a renormalized dimensionless uniform mass ρ m as M ≡ Ωρ m , a scaling property of ρ m around the massless theory is obtained as follows, with l ≡ln Ω. The two-loop scaling dimension of the renormalized dimensionless uniform mass is finally obtained around a massless fixed point (ρ m = 0) as V. RG PHASE DIAGRAM OF TWO-DIMENSIONAL DIRAC FERMION WITH RANDOM MASS In the previous section, the two-loop RG equations for the disorder strength and uniform mass as well as the dynamical exponent are evaluated perturbatively in the disorder strength around the clean-limit fixed point in d = 2-, Eqs. (56), (84), and (57). In this section, we set = 0, and study a structure of a RG phase diagram for the random-mass Dirac fermions in the two dimensions, Here g, ρ m and z stand for the dimensionless randommass-type disorder strength, the dimensionless uniform mass, and the dynamical exponent respectively. In the low-energy limit (l → +∞), the two coupling constants flow in the g-ρ m parameter space, forming a phase diagram as shown in Fig. In the massless case (ρ m = 0), the fixed point at g = g c corresponds to a semimetal-metal (SM-M) quantum phase transition point. For g < g c and ρ m = 0, the finite disorder strength is renormalized to zero in the low-energy limit, where the ground state is characterized by the clean-limit massless Dirac-fermion fixed point at (g, ρ m ) = (0, 0) (semimetal phase). For g > g c , the disorder strength grows up into a larger value. The ground state for g > g c is in a diffusive metal phase, which is presumably described by another stable fixed point at larger g. The criticality of the SM-M quantum phase transition point at ρ m = 0 is controlled by the fixed point at g = g c . Since the weak disorder strength (g < g c ) is renormalized to zero, universality class of a phase transition between AI and TS phases is determined by the clean-limit massless Dirac-fermion fixed point. According to the mapping between the random-mass Dirac fermion model and the random-bond Ising model (RBIM), the massless Diracfermion fixed point corresponds to the clean-limit Ising fixed point in the RBIM The renormalized uniform mass is a relevant operator not only around the clean-limit massless Dirac-fermion fixed point but also around the fixed point at g = g c . Accordingly, universality classes of the phase transition(s) between AI and DTM as well as that between TS and DTM must be determined by other saddle-point fixed point(s) at finite ρ m . Exploring these fixed points at finite ρ m goes beyond the scope of this paper and we leave it for future study. Two-loop evaluations of the critical disorder strength, the scaling dimensions of the disorder strength and the uniform mass, and the dynamical exponent around the unstable fixed point are and z(g c ) = 5/2, respectively. A correlation-length critical exponent for the SM-M quantum phase transition at the massless case is obtained from the following relation with ν(g c ) = 1/2 at the two-loop level. This critical exponent violates the Chayes inequality, that dictates νd ≥ 2 with the spatial dimension d The 2-loop RG equation [Eq. ( In the path integral formulation, ψ † and ψ can be considered as independent integral variables. Thus, we can define a new set of integral variables { ψ, ψ} as while keeping ψ unchanged. The action of Eq. ( Under an SU(2) rotation by the 90 degree, the action with { ψ, ψ} can be put into the following form, This action is related to a replicated effective theory for the random Dirac fermion with the chemical-potentialtype disorder potential, Here m and ∆ 0 stand for bare uniform mass and chemical-potential-type disorder strength. The two theories are mapped to each other, where i∂ τ , im and ∆ 3 in Eq. (91) correspond to m and ∂ τ and -∆ 0 in Eq. (92), respectively. In the latter theory, the preceding work employed the renormalized single-particle energy as the RG scale and derive two-loop RG equation for the disorder strength ∆ 0 ( The replicated 2D Dirac fermion theory with masstype disorder Eq. (88) as well as that with chemicalpotential-type disorder Eq. ( Note that the quenched disorder in Eq. ( where g corresponds to ∆ 3 in Eq. (91). To compare these equations with Eq. ( With this normalization, Eq. ( At the two-loop level, Eq. ( The four-loop evaluation of the scaling dimension of gg c and the uniform mass around the fixed point are dim[gg c ] ≈ 1.66 and dim[ρ m ] ≈ 0.817 respectively. The critical exponent associated with the SM-M quantum phase transition is evaluated as ν ≈ 0.60, which also violates the Chayes inequality. In summary, we have performed renormalization group analyses for the 2D Dirac fermion with the random-mass type disorder. We obtained the two-loop β function for the disorder strength and observed an infrared unstable fixed point at a finite disorder strength. The fixed point corresponds to the quantum tricritical point that intervenes diffusive metal phase, and two topologically distinct gapped phases in 2-dimensional class D models. Two phase transition lines between the diffusive metal and the two gapped phases and a transition line between the two topologically-distinct gapped phases meet at the tricritical point. The dynamical exponent and scaling dimension of the uniform mass are also evaluated at the tricritical point up to the two-loop level. The two-loop evaluations of the scaling dimensions of the uniform mass and disorder strength shows that (i) the transition line between the two gapped phases is controlled by the clean-limit massless-Dirac-fermion fixed point with the Ising criticality, (ii) the transition lines between the diffusive metal phase and gapped phases are controlled not by the tricritical point but by another saddle-point fixed point with finite uniform Dirac mass. Using a mapping between the effective theory for the 2D random-mass Dirac fermion and (1+1)D SU(N) Gross-Neveu model in the limit of N → 0, we also obtained the four-loop evaluations of the scaling dimensions of the uniform mass and disorder strength around the tricritical point. The four-loop result gives the same conclusion as the two-loop result about the criticality of the three transition lines. We found that the critical exponent ν for the semimetal-metal(SM-M) quantum phase transition breaks the Chayes inequality (νd > 1) both at the two-loop level and at the four-loop level, indicating an unusual aspect of the disorder-driven SM-M quantum phase transition in 2D class D models. FIG. These integrals always take the tensor-form of γ ⊗ γ and their coefficients are calculated as follows; The second class of the two-loop contributions to the vertex function is shown in Figs. A sum of diagrams [V 2G] and [V 2H] has a 1/ singularity in the small limit, The singularity is cancelled by the two-loop contributions [V 2d] and [V 2e] with the one-loop counterterm δκ: Namely, with proper symmetry factors taken into account, the sum of these four diagrams gives a finite contribution in the small limit, FIG. ] and [V 2J] cancel each other, Here the momentum integral over p in the right hand side reduces to zero, Similarly, diagrams (V 2f ) and (V 2g) cancel each other exactly: We conclude that a sum of all the diagrams in Figs. 10, 11, and 12 generate a γ 0 ⊗ γ 0 -type term, while it has no divergence in the limit of → 0. The third class of the two-loop diagrams for the vertex function is shown in Fig. In the right-hand side, odd terms in p or q vanish: Under an exchange between p and q in the integrand, Eq. (B16) reduces to: (B16) =2κ 3 Ω 3 p,q (Ω 2 + pq) 2 (Ω 2 + p 2 ) 2 (Ω 2 + q 2 ) 2 γ ⊗ γ = 2κ 3 Ω 3 i,j p,q p i q i p j q j (Ω 2 + p 2 ) 2 (Ω 2 + q 2 ) 2 γ ⊗ γ + O(1). Those summands with i = j vanish under the integral over p or q. Those summands with i = j give out (B16) =2κ 3 Ω 3 i p,q The integral in the right-hand side is calculated as follow: Thus, we finally have Eq. (B16) as For Eq. (B17), those terms proportional to p i q j (i = j or i = j) or to p i p j (i = j) vanish under the integral over p or q, Thus, the sum of [V 2L] and [V 2M ] generates a divergent term with a tensor-form of γ i γ ⊗ γ i γ. However, such divergent term is cancelled by a sum of [V 2N ] and [V 2O]. The sum of [V 2N ] and [V 2O] is calculated as follows: G 0 (-p)G 0 (q)γ ⊗ G 0 (p)G 0 (qp) + G 0 (qp)G 0 (p) γ = p,q iΩ -(γ • p) In the right-hand side, odd terms in p or q vanish under the momentum integrals; (Ω 2 + p 2 ) Ω 2 + (qp) 2 γ (B18) -iΩ(γ • pγ • q) (Ω 2 + p 2 )(Ω 2 + q 2 ) γ ⊗ iΩ(γ • q) (Ω 2 + p 2 ) Ω 2 + (qp) 2 γ. (B19) Eq. (B18) takes the tensor form of γ ⊗ γ, whose coefficient is calculated as follows, (B18) = 2κ 3 Ω 3 p,q • 2Ω 2 + p 2q 2 + (q + p) 2 (Ω 2 + p 2 )(Ω 2 + q 2 ) Ω 2 + (q + p) 2 γ ⊗ γ =κ 3 Ω 3 p,q -(γ • p)(γ • q) (Ω 2 + p 2 )(Ω 2 + q 2 ) Ω 2 + (q + p) 2 + Ω 2 (Ω 2 + p 2 ) 2 (Ω 2 + q 2 ) -1 (Ω 2 + p 2 ) Ω 2 + q 2 γ ⊗ γ + O(1). (1) ( (V2a) (V2b) (V2c) FIG. After the momentum integrals, each of the three integrands in the right hand side are diverging with respect to small , (B18) Eq. (B19) takes the tensor form of γ i γ ⊗ γ i γ, whose coefficient is calculated as follows, (B19) =2κ 3 Ω 3 p,q -iΩ(γ • pγ • q) (Ω 2 + p 2 )(Ω 2 + q 2 ) γ ⊗ iΩ(γ • q) (Ω 2 + p 2 ) Ω 2 + (qp) 2 γ =2κ 3 Ω 3 Ω 2 1 d p,q q • pq 2 (Ω 2 + p 2 ) 2 (Ω 2 + q 2 ) Ω 2 + (qp) The first term in the right hand side diverges in the small limit, taking the similar form as (B17) with the opposite sign: (B19) =2κ 3 Ω 3 Ω 2 1 d p,q -1 (Ω 2 + p 2 ) 2 Ω 2 + (qp) 2 i γ i γ ⊗ γ i γ + O(1) Accordingly, the divergent terms in Eqs. (B17) and (B19) cancel each other in the sum of all the diagrams in Fig. The last class of the two-loop contributions to the vertex function is shown in Fig. The two-loop vertex counterterm should cancel the divergence in Eq. (B23): From this, we obtain the two-loop vertex counterterm as follows, Ω δ (2) (B24)