Metasurfaces based on geometric phase acquired from the conversion of the optical spin states provide a robust control over the wavefront of light, and have been widely employed for construction of various types of functional metasurface devices. However, this powerful approach cannot be readily transferred to the manipulation of acoustic waves because acoustic waves do not possess the spin degree of freedom. Here, we propose the concept of acoustic geometric-phase meta-array by leveraging the conversion of orbital angular momentum of acoustic waves, where well-defined geometric-phases can be attained through versatile topological charge conversion processes. This work extends the concept of geometric-phase metasurface from optics to acoustics, and provides a new route for acoustic wave control. Geometric-phase metasurfaces (GPMs) have been widely employed as an efficient and robust means to control the scattering of electromagnetic waves with the controllable geometric phase acquired via a spin conversion process In this work, we propose an acoustic meta-array based on acoustic geometric phases which are obtained through versatile acoustic vortex topological charge (TC) conversion occurring within each pixel of the meta-array-a cylindrical acoustic waveguide with judiciously engineered interior structures. Each meta-pixel waveguide, containing a number of acoustic geometric meta-plates (AGM), is designed to implement sequential manipulations on the incident acoustic wave including generation and conversion of vortex beams of various TCs. A geometric phase arises from the conversion between two different orbital angular momenta, which can be continuously controlled by varying the orientation of the conversion element, i.e., the AGM for the designated TC conversion process. As a proof of principle, flexible acoustic field manipulations including acoustic beam steering and focusing can be realized with the proposed geometric-phase meta-array. Our design opens a new avenue for flexible acoustic field generation and the controllable phase manipulation. We start by a brief description of the geometric phase with optical metasurfaces. When a circularly polarized light is incident onto a geometric-phase metasurface, the transmitted light carries a geometric phase term of exp$%σ '( -σ *+, -θ / 0, where σ '( and σ *+, refer to the spin of input and output circularly polarized light, θ / is the orientation angle of the nanoantenna, as illustrated by Fig. In order to understand the mechanism of the presence of the acoustic geometric phase obtained through TC conversions, we consider a general TC conversion case which involves the orbital angular momentum transfer from TC l '( to TC l *+, . By defining the complex transmission of an AGM of TC l ξ and orientation angle θ 5 as T 8 (θ 5 ), then we have: By rotating the incident beam, the transmission beam, and the AGM in the counter- Hence, the overall geometric phase carried by the transmitted field is exp$i%l '( -l *+, -φ0. Thus, various types of geometric-phase modulations are available via different TC conversion processes. For example, for an incident beam of TC l '( = 1, with an acoustic meta-plate of TC l ξ = 1, the transmitted acoustic wave would have a TC l *+, = 0 and carry the geometric phase of exp(iθ 5 ) when rotating the acoustic meta-plate by angle of θ 5 . Moreover, by converting an acoustic vortex beam of TC l '( = ±1 to the vortex of TC l *+, = ∓1 through an acoustic meta-plate of TC l ξ = 2, the corresponding geometric-phase modulation of transmitted acoustic wave is exp(±2iθ 5 ). Generally, the acoustic geometric phase exp(qiθ 5 ), q = ±1, ± 2 ⋯ can be obtained at will by selecting appropriate TC conversion process. Ideally, an AGM can be constructed by dividing it into many sections along the azimuthal direction and by filling different sections with acoustic material of gradually varying refractive indices but with the same impedance matched to that of air, as shown in Fig. where h is the thickness of AGM and m = 1,2, ⋯ , M, with the corresponding sector angle of each section being 2π %l ξ M-⁄ . The numerical calculation is conducted with the finite element method (FEM). Fig. Here, the acoustic meta-plate consists of 12 sections, and the operating wavelength is selected as 10 cm. In the first case shown in Fig. , which agrees well with the theoretical value calculated according to the geometric phase of 2θ 5 . Interestingly, by inverting the TC of AGM1 and AGM3 from l ξ = 1 to l ξ = -1, the geometric phase inverts its sign. We further show beam focusing realized by an acoustic geometric-phase metalens via |1⟩ → |0⟩ process, as shown by the left panel of Fig. 