Understanding the opto-electronic properties of semiconducting polymers under external strain is essential for their applications in flexible opto-electronic, lightemitting and photovoltaic devices. While prior studies have highlighted the impact of static strains applied on a macroscopic length scale, assessing the effect of a local transient deformation before structural relaxation occurs is challenging due to the required high spatio-temporal resolution. Here, we employ scanning ultrafast electron microscopy (SUEM) to image the dynamical effect of a photo-induced transient strain in the archetypal semiconducting polymer poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT). We observe that the photo-induced SUEM contrast, corresponding to the local change of secondary electron emission, exhibits a ring-shaped spatial profile with a rise time of ∼ 300 ps, beyond which the profile persists in the absence of a spatial diffusion. We attribute the observation to the electronic structure modulation of P3HT caused by a photo-induced strain field owing to its relatively low modulus and strong electron-lattice coupling, as supported by a finite-element analysis. Our work provides insights into tailoring opto-electronic properties using transient mechanical deformation in semiconducting polymers, and demonstrates the versatility of SUEM to study photo-physical processes in diverse materials. Semiconducting polymers are enabling materials for applications such as flexible optoelectronics Concurrently, the one-dimensional nature of the polymer chains is expected to give rise to strong coupling between the electronic states and the chain lattice, causing the formation of polaronic states upon the injection of charge carriers into a semiconducting polymer The strong electron-lattice coupling, in combination with the mechanical properties of polymers The effects of mechanical deformation on semiconducting polymers has been examined both by theory and experiment One major limitation of most existing strain studies of semiconducting polymers is that the applied strain is on a macroscopic length scale, usually using direct tensile testing, stretchable substrates, or mechanical indentation measurements Combining the subpicosecond time resolution of ultrafast lasers and the nanometer spatial resolution of high-energy electron beams, recently developed scanning ultrafast electron microscopy (SUEM) is a suitable technique Here, we demonstrate the space-time mapping of the dynamical effect of a photo-excited transient strain field in P3HT and its blends with the electron acceptor We employed SUEM to obtain time-resolved images of the photo-induced response in P3HT and P3HT/PCBM thin films deposited on doped silicon substrates. The procedure for sample preparation is identical to that in Ref. In brief, a fundamental infrared (IR) laser pulse train undergoes harmonic generations to create the visible pump beam (wavelength: 515 nm) and the ultraviolet (UV) photoelectron excitation beam (wavelength: 257 nm). The visible pump beam travels variable distances, yielding a pump-probe time delay from ∼ -1.3 to 2.7 ns, and is focused onto the specimen to initiate a photo-physical process upon absorption. The UV excitation beam is directed through the column of a scanning electron microscope (SEM) and onto the apex of a cooled Schottky field emission gun, generating electron pulses with sub-picosecond durations via the photoelectric effect. The photo-generated electron pulses (the "primary" electrons) are accelerated inside the SEM column to 30 keV kinetic energy, and are finely focused to nanometer size through the electron optics in the SEM. Secondary electrons emitted locally from the sample surface upon the impact of the primary electron pulses are collected with a standard Everhart-Thornley detector (ETD). The pump beam optically excites the sample, causing changes in the sample that can alter the secondary electron emission yield after the impact of the primary electron pulses. The local change of the number of emitted secondary electrons is collected and used to form the SUEM contrast images. Time resolution is achieved by controlling the delay time between the optical pump pulses and the electron probe pulses using a mechanical delay stage. Several mechanisms can contribute to the SUEM contrast Figure We quantitatively analyzed the spatial-temporal evolution of the observed photo-induced contrast profile as follows. We first generated horizontal line-cut profiles from the contrast images as given in Figs. Next, we used an empirical model to analyze the line-cut profiles in Figs. the following mathematical form: where r is the radial coordinate, w is the radius of the spatial Gaussian distribution, m and b are parameters used to correct the asymmetric background due to the placement of the ETD, and a is the amplitude of the spatial profile. The model is similar to the expression of the second-order spatial derivative of a Gaussian function. We used this model to fit the experimental line-cut profiles using norm-square minimization. The fitted profiles are given as the solid lines in Figs. The fitted parameter w, which is the effective radius of the photo-induced spatial profile, is shown in Fig. Despite the lack of a marked spatial diffusion, we observe nontrivial temporal evolution of the amplitude of the spatial profile, as shown in Fig. To verify this hypothesis, we simulated the dynamic evolution of the elastic strain field in a P3HT thin film after the photo-excitation using the finite element method (FEM) as implemented in COMSOL Multiphysics. We solved the time-dependent linear elasticity equation with an initial stress field with the same spatial profile as the optical Gaussian pump beam, while imposing a free top surface and a fixed bottom surface of the thin film. Given the axial symmetry of the configuration, two displacement components were solved: the out-of-plane displacement u z and the radial displacement u r . Although u z has a larger amplitude than u r from the simulation, u z follows a simple Gaussian spatial profile that cannot explain the experimental ring-shaped profile. The radial displacements u r at different times are shown in Fig. Several observations are worth a more detailed discussion. First, we note that the secondary electron yield, directly detected by SUEM, is more sensitive to the radial strain than the out-of-plane strain, which has a larger amplitude from the FEM simulation. We attribute this observation to the anisotropic polymer chain alignment in a thin polymer film. It is well established that the chains in P3HT are dominantly aligned along the substrate in thin films In summary, we report SUEM measurements of the space-time responses of the semiconducting polymer P3HT after photo-excitation. Combining an empirical model and an FEM simulation, we attribute the observed intriguing ring-shaped spatial profile of the secondary electron emission to the local modulation of the polymer's electronic structure by a photoinduced radial strain. The radial strain compresses or stretches the polymer chains along the in-plane direction, which changes the electronic structure of the polymer due to the electron-lattice coupling. We further estimated the amplitude of the photo-induced stress and concluded that the major contributor to the observed radial strain is the photocarrier generation, namely the photostriction effect, rather than thermal stress. Our results suggest that the photostriction effect can play an important role in the photo-response of conducting polymers, and demonstrates the versatility of the SUEM technique to investigate a wide range of materials beyond inorganic substances. First, a lightly Sb-doped silicon wafer (thickness: ∼ 530 μm, crystal orientation 100 , chlorinated oxide thickness: 200 nm, average resistivity: 0.012 Ω•cm; purchased from International Wafer Service was prepared. The wafer was first wet-cleaned in several ultrasonic baths: soapy water, DI water, acetone, and isopropanol for 5 minutes, respectively, and subsequently dry-cleaned in an oxygen ambient plasma chamber for 5 minutes. The wafer was cleaved to create a square substrate with an in-plane dimension of ∼ 100 mm 2 using a diamond cutter. Regioregular P3HT (regioregularity: 95%, product name: SP001 from Merck KGaA) dissolved into chlorobenzene (anhydrous, Sigma Aldrich) (concentration: 10 mg mL -1 ), after which the solution was stirred at 350 K to fully dissolve the polymer. The solution was filtered using a 0.45 um polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) membrane. Finally, the supported P3HT thin-film was prepared by a two-step spin-coating process (speed: 1000 rpm, acceleration: 500 acc, time: 45 seconds in step 1; speed: 3000 rpm, acceleration: 3000 acc, time: 30 seconds, in step 2). The thickness of the P3HT layer was measured to be ∼ 60 nm using a step profiler (DektakXT Stylus Profilometer by Bruker). For the present thin film, the H-like aggregate character in the ordered regions of the films was found, which does not exhibit a marked difference upon the addition of the PCBM (1 wt%), as measured using ultraviolet-visible (UV-VIS) optical characterizations (See Supplementary Material Sec. III for further details). A fundamental infrared (IR) laser pulse train (Clark MXR IMPULSE, wavelength: 1030 nm, pulse duration: 150 fs, repetition rate: 1 MHz) is directed to beta barium borate (BBO) frequency-doubling crystals to create the visible pump beam (wavelength: 515 nm, power: ∼ 800 μW) and the ultraviolet (UV) photoelectron excitation beam (wavelength: 343 nm, power: ∼ 15 mW). The visible pump beam travels variable distances adjusted by a mechanical delay stage (Newport DL600, delay time range: ∼ -1.3 to 2.7 ns). The UV excitation beam is directed through a window on the column of an SEM (ThermoFisher Quanta 650 FEG) and onto the apex of a cooled Schottky field emission gun (a zirconiumoxide-coated tungsten tip), generating electron pulses with subpicosecond durations via the photoelectric effect. An electron current (I) of 18, and 80 pA is used in this experiment, corresponding to ∼ 110, and 480 electrons per pulse (n). For the results presented in the main text, I of 80 pA was used. The photo-generated electron pulses are accelerated inside the SEM column to 30 keV kinetic energy, and are finely focused to nanometer size through the electron optics in the SEM. During the measurements, the photocathode was refreshed every ∼ 60 minutes to prevent the fluctuation of the cathode work function. A mechanical coupling system is built to make a rigid connection between the SEM air-suspension system and the optical table hosting the laser and the optical system to minimize the relative vibration that affects the alignment at the photocathode. We measured the ultraviolet-visible (UV-VIS) spectra of the samples to characterize the structural order and optical properties of the samples. The corresponding absorbance versus the wavelength for the P3HT and the P3HT/PCBM blend is given in Figure Figure Laser induced heating of the polymer film can lead to a thermal stress that initiates a dynamic elastic response. The magnitude of the thermal stress can be estimated by considering the absorbed optical energy per pulse and the volume over which the optical energy is deposited. Following Ref. where E abs is the absorbed pump energy, V is the volume of the sample that absorbs the pump energy, and C v is the volumetric heat capacity. The volume V = πr 2 d, where d ≈ 100 nm is the optical penetration depth Given the mechanical properties of P3HT 