Spin-charge conversion by inverse spin Hall effect or inverse Rashba-Edelstein effect is prevalent in spintronics but dissipative. We propose a dissipationless spin-charge conversion mechanism by an excitonic pseudospin superfluid in an electron-hole double layer system. Magnetic exchange fields lift singlet-triplet degeneracy of interlayer exciton levels in the double layer system. Condensation of the singlet-triplet hybridized excitons breaks both a U(1) gauge symmetry and a pseudospin rotational symmetry around the fields, leading to spin-charge coupled superflow in the system. We demonstrate the mechanism by deriving spin-charge coupled Josephson equations for the excitonic superflow from a coupled quantum-dot model. Introduction.-Exploring novel approaches to information storage and transport is one of the major challenge in condensed matter physics and quantum information A dissipationless spin-charge conversion can be realized in superfluids that have both charge Exciton condensates in two-dimensional (2D) electronhole double-layer (EHDL) systems are ideal platforms for dissipationless conversion between spin voltage and charge current. In the 2D EHDL, electron and hole layers are separated from each other by an insulating layer In this paper, we propose a dissipationless spin-charge conversion in the 2D EHDL system under magnetic exchange fields. The exchange fields induce a polarization of an excitonic pseudospin. A condensate of such excitons break the pseudospin rotational symmetry around the exchange fields and the U(1) gauge symmetry, having two gapless Goldstone modes. We clarify relations among the pseudospin polarization, physical symmetries and the Goldstone modes in the condensate. We derive spincharge coupled Josephson equations by a quantum-dot junction model Model.-The 2D EHDL system (in xy plane) is described by a Hamiltonian ( Ĥ): , the lowest band is transverse (longitudinal) hybrid mode, where the pseudospin polarization is in the yz (0x) plane. (yz/0x, ±) are exciton levels whose pseudospin polarization field φ are in the yz/0x plane and ± specifies a relative position between the real and imaginary part of the four-components exciton field φ within the yz/0x plane. The figure is for h > -h > 0. Here a ≡ (a ↑ , a ↓ ) and b ≡ (b ↑ , b ↓ ) are annihilation operators of spin-1/2 electrons in the electron and hole layer with a positive effective mass m a and a negative effective mass -m b respectively. 2E g is an energy difference between the bottom of the electron band and the top of the hole band. Electrons in both layers have chemical potential μ, and N is a total number of electrons in the EHDL system. H a and H b are magnetic exchange fields in the two layers. The exchange fields can be experimentally induced by magnetic proximity effect from magnetic substrates. The interlayer interaction is modelled by a short-range interaction with a coupling constant g, while no tunneling between the two layers is allowed. The interaction leads to interlayer s-wave exciton pairing, that can be described by a four-component exciton pairing field φ μ ≡ g 2 b † σ μ a with pseudospin singlet (μ = 0) and triplet (μ = x, y, z) components. The exchange fields lift four-fold degeneracy of the exciton levels, which causes a singlet-triplet hybridization. The hybdrization can be seen from a φ 4 -type effective Lagrangian for the four-component exciton pairing field Φ ≡ (-iφ 0 , φ x , φ y , φ z ) where | Φ| 2 ≡ Φ † • Φ and τ is the imaginary time. Here Φ and Φ are real and imaginary parts of the complexvalued four-component exciton field, i.e. Φ ≡ Φ + i Φ . h and h are weighted averages between the exchange fields in the electron and hole layers, while their coefficients as well as other parameters (η, α, γ, λ) in the Lagrangian depend on detailed material properties. We assume that η < 0, γ < 0, and λ > 0 The pseudospin degeneracy is lifted by the h and h terms (Fig. The nature of the excitonic condensate can be clarified by a minimization of an action S = dτ d 2 rL by a τindependent classical configuration while for |h| < |h |, it is minimized by a longitudinal configuration, with ρ ≡ h c /(2|γ|) and h c ≡ α -2/g. Here e μ (μ = 0, x, y, z) are unit vectors in the four-component vector space. Note also the difference between two coordinate spaces, Φ ≡ (-iφ 0 , φ x , φ y , φ z ) and φ ≡ (φ 0 , φ x , φ y , φ z ). Eqs. φ and θ in Eqs. We call the exciton condensate with one of these two configurations ("⊥" and " ") as transverse (yz) and longitudinal (0x) phases respectively. Both configurations have two arbitrary phase variables. One is φ 0 , an overall rotational phase of the pseudospin vector within the yz or 0x plane Here the "∓" signs in Eq. ( Here (θ(ψ), φ(ψ), φ 0 (ψ)) satisfies the constraint Eq. ( and a U(1) gauge symmetry: where d = a/b, d = a/b, V a/b and H a/b are electric potential and exchange field along x in the electron/hole layer respectively. Spatial differences of V a/b /(-e) and H a/b /(-e) are defined to be charge voltage and spin voltage in the electron/hole layer, where e is the unit charge. Eqs. where a mean-field part: and a tunneling part: with η 1 = -η 2 = 1, a j ( r) ≡ α u ajα ( r) a jα and b j ( r) ≡ α u bjα ( r) b jα . Here u djα ( r) is the α-th singleparticle eigenstate of the kinetic energy part of Eq. ( where T (d) is the kinetic energy part for the electron/hole layer in the junction region (d = a/b). We assume that T (d) is free from spin or electron-hole mixing. A perturbative treatment of the tunneling term in the junction model leads to an effective action of the Josephson junction [78]: with c is the speed of light. N C and N S are differences of total charge and spin between the two domains in the hole layer respectively where I Ca/b and I Sa/b are charge currents and spin currents in the electron/hole layer respectively. Josephson equations can be derived by minimization of Eq. ( The second Josephson equations are: The Josephson equations reveal spin-charge coupled Josephson effects. The term proportional to sin( ψe c Ψ) in Eq. Device setup.-To propose the spin-charge conversion in a feasible experimental setup, we consider to put two magnetic substrates with different magnetizations along the same (x) direction under the hole layer (Fig. with R ≡ R a + R b , a normalized time s ≡ eV S t/ , two dimensionless parameters, k ≡ eI 0 R/V S and h ± . Solutions of the EOM are obtained numerically in the supplementary material Spin-orbit coupling.-A semiconductor hetetrostructure of the 2D EHDL systems breaks a spatial inversion symmetry, causing an effective Rashba SOC in the electron layer Summary.-In this letter, we clarify the spin-charge coupled Josephson effects in the EHDL exciton system under magnetic exchange fields, where the charge Josephson current can be a response to the spin voltage. The spin-charge coupling effects provide a dissipationless way of the spin-charge conversion in a feasible device setup. In the main text, the φ 4 -type effective Lagrangian is introduced for the four-component excitonic fields. The φ 4type Lagrangian is derived from Eq. (1) perturbatively in the exchange fields. The Lagrangian is minimized in terms of a classical solution of the excitonic fields, leading to the prediction of transverse and longitudinal phases. Both of them are excitonic pseudospin superfluid phases. Using a coupled quantum dots model or the effective Lagrangian, we derive spin-charge coupled Josephson equations in these excitonic pseudospin superfluid phases. We also discuss the robustness of the spin-charge conversion against the Rashba spin-orbit coupling (SOC) in an electron layer. In this supplementary material, we explain these derivations and minimizations as well as related details. The structure of this supplementary material is as follows. In the next section, we review possible forms of relativistic SOCs in 2D semiconductor heterostructures for the EHDL systems. In Sec. B, we give the perturbative derivation of the φ 4 -type effective Lagrangian with the Rashba SOC. In Sec. C, we describe the minimization of the Lagrangian without the SOC, where the classical ground-state phase diagram of transverse and longitudinal phases are presented. In Sec. D and E, we clarify what global continuous symmetries are broken in the transverse and longitudinal phases, and we associate the broken symmetries with the gapless Goldstone modes in these phases. In Sec. F, we derive the spin-charge coupled Josephson equations based on the coupled quantum dots model. In Sec. G, we describe solutions of the Josephson equation under a physical experimental setup. In Sec. H, we describe the minimization of the Lagrangian with the Rashba SOC in the electron layer, where a classical ground-state phase diagram of helicoidal and helical phases are presented. In Sec. I, we derive the spin-charge coupled Josephson equation with the Rashba SOC, using Noether's theorem for the φ 4 -type effective Lagrangian. In Sec. J and Sec. K, we give supplementary details of Sec. F and Sec. H respectively. There are some notation simplifications in this supplementary material. We take = c = e = 1 unless dictated otherwise (we recover these fundamental physical constants in the very last expressions of important physical equations). A. Spin-orbit couplings (SOCs) in 2D semiconductor heterostructure systems For a 2D semiconductor heterostructure of the EHDL systems, an effective confinement potential along z direction may break spatial inversion symmetry. This kind of the broken spatial inversion symmetry is called structural inversion asymmetry (SIA). The SIA results in an effective electric field along z direction, which leads to Rashba SOC in the electron layer; where ξ e is a strength of the Rashba coupling. The SIA in the electron-hole double-layer semiconductor systems results not only in the Rashba coupling in the electron layer with S z = ±1/2, but also Rashba coupling in the hole layer with J z = ±3/2. As the Pauli matrices σ x and σ y connect between the J z = ±3/2 Kramers doublet in the hole layer, the SOC for the hole layer is proportional to a cubic in the momentum k and atomic spin-orbit interaction strength and it is therefore negligibly small especially around the Γ point. In addition to the SIA, the bulk crystal structure itself may break spatial inversion symmetry. The bulk inversion asymmetry (BIA) leads to Dirac-type SOC term in the hole layer of the EHDL systems For a typical semiconductor heterostructure system, however, the Dirac-type SOC is still quantitatively negligible, ∆ h ∼ 0.01ξ e In this section, we describe a derivation of the effective Lagrangian from the Hamiltonian Eq. ( The partition function of the four-components exciton pairing fields φ μ = g 2 b † σ μ a (μ = 0, x, y, z) can be derived from Eq. ( where The expansion is perturbative in the excitonic field Ψ(q), the Rashba coupling G -1 R (q) and the exchange fields G -1 H (q). From the gauge symmetry, the expansion contains only the even order in Ψ(q). For the 2nd order in Ψ(q), we expand the exchange fields and the Rashba coupling up to the first order. We ignore their effect in the quartic order in Ψ(q). The expansion has been previously carried out only for triplet-components excitonic field in Ref. and φ and σ denote the three-component (spin-triplet) vectors. The leading-order terms in the expansion are as follows: These terms share the same coefficients as those in the leading-order terms in Ref. ]. (B.12) Putting Eqs. (B.6-B.9) into Eq. (B.1) and add them into the triplet component (Eq. ( where φ ≡ (φ 0 , φ) = (φ 0 , φ x , φ y , φ z ), and ∇ = (∂ x , ∂ y , 0). In terms of Φ ≡ (-iφ 0 , φ) ≡ Φ + i Φ , the Lagrangian takes a more symmetric form: In absence of the Rashba term (D = 0), this reduces to Eq. ( α is the zero-th order term in the expansion; α is positive and it increases on lowering the temperature. In terms of a relation, λ is calculated as follows: In this section, we describe the minimization of Eq. ( The function is a sum of quadratic functions of x ≡ cos(η 1 -η 2 ) and y ≡ cos(η 1 + η 2 ), , the function takes a maximum value at either one of the four corners of the domain; (x, y) = {(-1, -1), (-1, 1), (1, -1), (1, 1)}. By definition, (α 1 , α 2 , x, y) and (α 1 + π, α 2 + π, -x, -y) represent the same vectors. Thus, we take (x, y) at (1, 1) or at (1, -1) and maximize g with respect to α 1 and α 2 . When x = y = 1, η 1 = η 2 = 0, and maximized with respect to α 1 and/or α 2 at the following points, The Lagrangian in Eq. (C.5) is further minimized in Φ and Φ . First, L is decomposed into a function of a ≡ Φ 2 + Φ 2 and a function of b ≡ 2Φ Φ , each of which can be separately minimized; L 1 (a) and L 2 (b) take respective minimum at the following point or region, Case 2: h c ≤ |h| and |h| > |h |, the global minimum in the domain is achieved at a point on the domain boundary, In the case of |h| < |h |, Φ and Φ are on the 0x plane subtended by e 0 and e x (η 1 = η 2 = 0) and the angle between Φ and Φ is α 1 (Figs. 4(a), 4(b), 4(c)). Following the same argument, we obtain the the other two cases. Case 3: h c ≥ |h | and |h| < |h |, the global minimum of the action is achieved on a finite length of a line given by: sin To summarize these four cases, we have the following four phases. The phase boundaries at |h| = |h | are of the first order. To be more specific, Eq. (2) in the main text at h = ±h is invariant under the following SO(2) rotation in the four-component vector space of Φ ≡ Φ + i Φ ≡ (-iφ 0 , φ x , φ y , φ z ), At h = h = 0, Eq. ( Here Φ and Φ are real and imginary part of the four-components vector Φ respectively, and they are real-valued four-components vectors. Thus, for h c > 0, the classical solution at h = h = 0 is given by or equivalently, with an arbitrary phase θ and an arbitrary 4-components real-valued unit vector n. As the exchange fields H a and H b are supposed to be small, in the main text (Eqs. (3-5)) we focus on the regular transverse phase and the regular longitudinal phase. In this section, we clarify what continuous spin-rotational symmetry is broken in the transverse and longitudinal phases, i.e. Eq. ( (D.1) A change of φ 0 by δφ 0 in Eq. (D.1) leads to a pseudospin rotation of the four-component excitonic pseudospin vector Φ ≡ Φ + i Φ ≡ (-iφ 0 , φ x , φ y , φ z ). The rotation is within the 0x plane subtended by e 0 (singlet component) and e x (x-component of the triplet pairing field); The pseudospin rotation within the 0x plane can be absorbed by spin rotations around the x axis in the electron and hole layers through a mean-field coupling term, Namely, the mean-field term φ • a † σb is invariant under the followings; Similarly, the transverse phase is given by the following classical configuration: A variation of φ 0 by δφ 0 in Eq. (D.5) leads to a pseudospin rotation of Φ ≡ (-iφ 0 , φ x , φ y , φ z ) within the yz plane subtended by e y (y-component of the triplet pairing field) and e z (z-component of the triplet pairing field); The pseudospin rotation within the yz plane transforms the mean-field coupling term as The variation can be absorbed by the following spin rotations around the x axis in the electron and hole layers, Eqs. (D.4, D.8) are equivalent to Eq. ( In the main text, the transverse configuration and longitudinal configuration are described by three phase variables, θ, φ and φ 0 . As shown in Sec. D, φ 0 is a rotational angle of the spin rotation of the four-component exciton's pseudospin vector Φ ≡ Φ + i Φ ≡ (-iφ 0 , φ x , φ y , φ z ). On the other hand, θ and φ define an amplitude ratio between Φ and Φ and an angle between Φ and Φ : Here Φ and Φ are real and imaginary parts of Φ ≡ (-iφ 0 , φ x , φ y , φ z ) respectively, and they are four-component real-valued vectors. Roughly speaking, a combination of φ (angle) and θ (amplitude ratio) can be regarded as the relative U(1) phase degree of freedom between the two layers. To show this, consider the U(1) gauge transformations in the two layers, that induces a U(1) gauge transformation of the excitonic order parameters Φ ≡ Φ + i Φ , Under the transformation, the angle and amplitude ratio are transformed as follows, This suggests that sin 2θ sin φ is invariant under the relative U(1) gauge transformation, and a simultaneous change of the angle (φ) and the amplitude ratio (θ) along a loop of sin 2θ sin φ = constant can be regarded as the relative U(1) phase degree of freedom between the two layers. To be more precise, the relative U(1) gauge transformation not only induces the change of the angle (φ) and the amplitude ratio (θ), but also induces a pseudospin rotation of the four-component excitonic pseudospin vector Φ (φ 0 ). To see this, let us show that the relative U(1) gauge transformation can be absorbed into a combination of changes of θ, φ and φ 0 that satisfies the constraint Eq. ( for both the transverse phase (λ =⊥) and the longitudinal phase (λ = ). When there is the Rashba coupling, we can generalize the argument into the helical and helicoidal phase by replacing φ 0 by φ 0 -Ky (see Sec. H). In the following, we only sketch the argument for the transverse phase, while the argument for the longitudinal phase goes as well. Without loss of generality, we take φ 0 to be -φ in Eq. ( From Eqs. (E.9, E.11), we get: -tanφ 0 = cosθsinφsinψ sinθcosψ + cosθcosφsinψ , (E.12) From Eqs. (E.8, E.10), we get: Using Eqs. (E.12, E.13) together with sin 2θ sin φ = h, we have From Eqs. (E.8, E.10), we get: From Eqs. (E.9, E.11), we get: Eqs. (E.12, E.14-E.16) are nothing but the solutions of θ , φ , φ 0 in favor for θ, φ, φ 0 = -φ and ψ. To see that such θ and φ satisfy the same condition as θ and φ, i.e. sin 2θ sin φ = h, we multiply Eq. (E.15) by Eq. (E.16), to have and we square Eq. (E.14), to have Combining these two, we get: Because θ and φ can be regarded as smooth functions of ψ that reduce to θ and φ at ψ = 0 respectively, we can conclude that sin2θ sinφ = h. This completes the proof of Eq. (E.4) for the transverse phase. In other words, the gapless Goldstone mode associated with the symmetry breaking of the relative gauge symmetry is given by a combination of the φ 0 mode and a variation of θ and φ within the constraint of Eq. ( A parameter-plot of (θ(ψ), φ(ψ), φ 0 (ψ)) is given in Fig. In this section, we derive the spin-charge coupled Josephson equation for the transverse and longitudinal phases. In the main text, we introduced a quantum-dot junction model (Eqs. with ω =⊥, and η 1 = -η 2 = 1. Here V C is charge voltage difference between the electron and hole layers respectively, while V S is the sum of (difference between) the spin voltage in the electron layer and the spin voltage in the hole layer for the transverse (longitudinal) phase; Namely, "+" is for transverse (ω =⊥) and "-" for longitudinal (ω = ). Note that we treat V C and V S as external fields. The excitonic mean fields in the two regions are identical to each other except for the two gapless U(1) phase variables; with ± for ω = yz, 0x respectively. Note that V C , V S , and φ ω (ψ = 0, φ 0 = 0) ≡ φ ω are treated as given (e.g. external) static variables, and the gapless U(1) phase variables, ψ j and φ 0j (j = 1, 2), are treated as dynamical variables. In terms of a global gauge transformation in the hole layer, e iψj ±iφ0j σx b jα → b jα , the dependence on the gapless phase variables can be removed from the mean field coupling. After the transformation, the phase variables appear in the tunneling part S T ; accordingly, we have where φ ω ≡ φ ω (ψ = 0, φ 0 = 0), ψ ≡ ψ 1 -ψ 2 , φ0 ≡ φ 01 -φ 02 , and with ψj ≡ ∂ τ ψ j and φ0j ≡ ∂ τ φ 0j (j = 1, 2). The multiple signs in the tunneling matrix element in the hole layer are chosen as "+" for the transverse phase and "-" for the longitudinal phase. ) and their difference parts ( ψ ≡ ψ 1 -ψ 2 and φ0 ≡ φ 01 -φ 02 ), i.e. The difference parts, ψ and φ0 , together with V C and V S , are coupled with charge and spin density differences N C and N S respectively; To see this coupling, we follow a standard procedure and introduce N C and N S and their canonical conjugate variables μ C and μ S , where δ(N Cjα η j b † jα b jα /2) and δ(N Sjα η j b † jα σ x b jα /2) are delta functions defined between real numbers and bilinear Grassmann numbers, whose definition and properties are discussed in Sec. J. An integration over Ψ α and Ψ † α leads to an effective action of the dynamical variables, ψ j , φ 0j , N C , N S , μ C , and μ S , where the subscript "μ" in G -1 μ represents that V C and V S in G -1 in Eq. (F.5) are replaced by V C -iμ C and V S -iμ S in G -1 μ . Tr includes the integral over the time and the summation over single-particle energy-levels as well as a trace of 8 × 8 matrix associated with domain, layer and spin indices. The 8 × 8 matrix-formed G -1 μ can be decomposed into four parts: where for j = 1, 2. As the tunneling matrix elements T are small quantities, the effective action can be expanded in T : - In the expansion, only the even-order terms remains, as T is off-diagonal in the domain index (i = 1, 2). The couplings between N C , N S , i∂ τ ψ +V C and ±i∂ τ φ0 +V S are encoded in the zeroth-order term in T in Eq. (F.18). To see this coupling, we further expand the zero-order term in ∆ μ , The first term is constant in variables. The second term is proportional to dτ ), that vanishes after the integral over the time. The third term forms a saddle point in a space of As the higher-order expansion terms in Eq. (F. Due to a term of μ C N C + μ S N S in the action, the saddle point of the whole action in Eq. (F.11) is deviated from Eq. (F.21) by O(N C , N S ). Given N C (0) = N S (0) = 0, however, the deviation is on the order O(T 2 ), so that the correction term results in higher-order effects in Josephson equations and we can ignore them legitimately. Then an integration over μ C , μ S , ψ and φ0 in Eq. (F.11) under the saddle-point approximation leads to the following effective action for ψ, φ0 , N C and N S ; where μ C and μ S in Eq. (F.11) were replaced by ∂ τ ψ -iV C and ±∂ τ ψ -iV S respectively, and G-1 μ0 in Eq. (F.18) was replaced by G -1 0 + Φ. In Eq. (F.22), one can clearly see that ∂ τ ψ -iV C and ∂ τ φ0 -iV S are coupled only with N C and N S respectively. The couplings result in the second Josephson equations. The first Josephson equation comes from the the second-order term in the tunneling part, T in Eq. (F.18), which can be further expanded in Φ; The first two terms do not depend on ψ and φ0 , when dissipation effect is neglected from the Josephson equation. Namely, G -1 b commutes with σ x and the dissipation effect comes from the time-dependence of ψ and φ0 . The (dissipationless) Josephson equation comes from the third term in the right hand side, in which the spin-charge coupled nature of the Josephson equations are encoded; , and the upper and lower signs of the multiple sign are for the transvere (ω =⊥) and longitudinal (ω = ) phases respectively. In Eq. (F.24), a product between two tunneling matrix element picks up an external magnetic flux Ψ that penetrates through the junction area in the transversal direction; (F.25) Using Eq. (F.25) together with Ḡbβ G aβ G aα Ḡbα = Ḡbα G aα G aβ Ḡbβ , we obtain a tunneling term S tun in the effective action as; where h = h ≡ h/h c for ω =⊥ and h = h ≡ -h /h c for ω = . Since we do not include the dissipation effect in the Josephson equation, we take the zero Matsubara frequency component of F ω (τ ). This leads to where tr is an trace of 2 by 2 matrices associated with the spin index. A 2 by 2 matrix G can be evaluated up to the first order in the exchange fields, (F.30) Substituting Eqs. (F.29, F.27) into Eq. (F.28), we obtain the following spin-charge coupled potential term from the second order expansion in T : h is different for the transverse phase and the longitudinal phase, so we write h± in the main text to explicitly show the difference. Substituting Eq. (F.31) into Eq. (F.22), we finally obtain the effective action for N C , N S , ψ and φ0 : where we recover as base unit of the action, unit charge e in front of V C and V S , and the inverse of magnetic flux unit e/ c. This is exactly Eq. ( Ψ sin φ0 , (F.35) Under the Wick rotation from the imaginary time to the real time, we obtain The spin current I S is defined as a difference between the charge current of the hole layer with up spin (along +x) and the charge current of the hole layer with down spin, Thus, I S is always equal to the +x-component spin current in the hole layer, i.e. I S = I Sb . The +x-component spin current in the electron layer can have the same sign as or opposite sign to I S , depending on whether the pseudospin superfluid phase is either the transverse phase or the longitudinal phase. The transverse phase breaks the continuous symmetry of the spin rotation that rotates spin in the electron layer and spin in the hole layer in the same direction around the x axis in the spin space. Accordingly, for the transverse phase. The longitudinal phase breaks the continuous symmetry of the spin rotation that rotates spins in the electron layer and spins in the hole layer in the opposite direction around the x axis. Thus, for the longitudinal phase. Eqs. (F.43, F.44) are consistent with our intuition. Namely, the electron with spin polarized along +x and the hole with spin polarized along ∓x form a excitonic pairing in the transverse/longitudinal phases, where I Sb must have the same sign as / opposite sign to I Sa respectively. In conclusion, we obtain Eqs. In this section, we solve the spin-charge coupled Josephson equations under a particular physical circumstance depicted in Fig. we have In this section, we will describe (numerical) solution of this non-linear differential equation in favor for ψ(s). Without loss of generality, we take the minus sign, i.e. the longitudinal phase (Eq. (C.13)) in Eq. (G.3), and k and h can be assumed to be positive. h ≡ h(1 + A x /A 0 ) is supposed to be much small than 1; |h| ≡ |h /h c | 1 and A x /A 0 = O(1). Thus, we discuss the solution only in a region of 0 ≤ h 1. For simplicity, we remove the tilde from ψ(s) and call s as t, ψ(s) → ψ(t). When h = 0, the solution is oscillatory in time with 2π periodicity (T 1 = 2π); The solution respects a time-reversal symmetry ψ(π -t) = ψ(t). The amplitude of the oscillation gets larger for larger k, while it is always bounded by π; ψ(t) is in the same branch of the arctan function of Eq. (G.4). A finite h breaks the time-reversal symmetry, and the solution acquires a t-asymmetric component that increases linearly in time t. The form of the differential equation indicates that the t-asymmetric component must be scaled by k ht for k h 1; without loss of generality, we take ψ(0) = 0, such that ψ(t) ∼ k ht, where ψ(t) is an average of ψ(t) over a time scale much longer than T 1 and much shorter than 1/(k h). ψ(t) modifies the short-periodicity (T 1 ) ocillating amplitute by the factor sin(ψ) in front of cos(t). Overall behaviours of numerical solutions are consistent with this indication (see Fig. When k h 1, the two oscillations are clearly distinguishable ('oscillating region'). When k h = O(1), the two periodicities become on the same order and the solution shows a crossover from the oscillating region to a 'stepping region' (Figs. 8(b), 8(c)). When k k h > 1, the solution converges into the stepping behavior, where ψ(t) shows a plateau (ψ(t) = nπ) around t = nπ, and ψ(t) increases abruptly from nπ to (n + 1)π around t = (2n + 1)π/2 (Fig. In this section, we describe the minimization of the Lagrangian in the presence of the antisymmetric vector-product (AVP) type interaction (D = 0), Eq. (B.14). In the absence of the AVP type interaction (D = 0), the classical Lagrangian is minimized by spatial uniform configurations of Φ ( r) and Φ ( r). To discuss the minimization in the presence of the AVP type interaction, let us decompose these four-component vectors into their amplitude parts (Φ ( r) and Φ ( r)) and four-component unit vector parts ( ψ ( r) and ψ ( r)); Φ ( r) ≡ Φ ( r) ψ ( r) and Φ ( r) ≡ Φ ( r) ψ ( r). Spatial gradients of the amplitude parts do not lower the AVP type interaction energy because of its anti-symmetric form, e.g. Thus, we take the amplitude parts to be spatially uniform, Φ ( r) ≡ Φ ψ ( r) and Φ ( r) ≡ Φ ψ ( r). The classical Lagrangian of Eq. (B.14) consists of three parts: The first part describes a coupling between Φ ( r) and Φ ( r). It is free from the spatial gradients of the fields, The other two parts depend on Φ ( r) and Φ ( r) separately and they depend on their spatial gradients, e.g. (H.4) We first minimize S 1 [Φ ψ ] and S 1 [Φ ψ ] in terms of the four-component vectors ψ and ψ respectively. We then show that Φ and Φ thus determined also maximally minimize S 0 [ Φ , Φ ] by optimizing the amplitude parts, Φ and Φ . To minimize S 1 [Φ ψ ] in terms of ψ ( r) ≡ (ψ 0 ( r), ψ x ( r), ψ y ( r), ψ z ( r)), take the Fourier transformation of ψ μ ( r), for μ = 0, x, y, z with ψ * μ, k = ψ μ,-k . The Fourier component ψ μ, k is given by two real-valued functions α μ, k and β μ, k as ψ μ, k ≡ α μ, k + iβ μ, k . They are even and odd functions in k respectively. S 1 [Φ ψ ] is given by these two functions: ). For given w k , f (α μ, k , β μ, k ) in Eq. (H.6) shall be minimized for each k (the subscribe k will be omitted for convenience): In the right hand side of Eq. (H.8), the three-component vectors α , β , k are introduced as, The function f (α μ , β μ ) can be easily minimized for the special k. For k = k e x , it is minimized by The action thus minimized depends only on Φ , In the right hand side, we use a global constraint, k w In Sec. K, we show that it is impossible that ψ μ ( r) given by Eq. (H.13) consists of two wavevector Fourier components. Specifically, we prove that if ψ( r) in Eq. (H.13) consists of the two wavevector Fourier components, k 1 and k 2 ; ψ( r) thus given cannot satisfy the local constraint ( ψ( r) • ψ( r) = 1) in any way. The conclusion can be generalized into a case with more than the two momenta. Thus, we regard ψ( r) is composed only of one component of momentum k on | k| = D/(2λ) and take w = V √ 2 from the global constraint. In conclusion, S 1 [Φ ψ ( r)] is maximally minimized by, with k = D 2λ (cos ω e x + sin ω e y ) together with arbitrary U(1) phase variables, ζ , δ 1 and δ 2 . Note that this satisfies the local constraint, ψ( r) • ψ( r) = 1. Likewise, S 1 [Φ ψ ( r)] is maximally minimized by ψ ( r) given by the same type of the unit vector as Eq. (H. Finally, we minimize S 0 [ Φ , Φ ] within a 'manifold' of Eq. (H.19) for Φ ( r) ≡ Φ ψ ( r) and that for Φ ( r) ≡ Φ ψ ( r). The minimization is carried out in a parameter space subtended by ω (H.26) Here we call ground-state configurations of Eqs. (H.23, H.25) with the substitutions as regular and saturated helicoidal phase and those of Eqs. (H.24, H.26) as regular and saturated helical phase. Both helical and helicoidal phases have a nonzero momentum K, breaking the translational symmetry along y-axis. The phase diagram with D = 0 is given by Fig. In this section, we derive spin-charge coupled Josephson equations in the helicoidal and helical phases. We first apply Noether's theorem to the φ 4 -type effective Lagrangian, Eq. (B.13), to express (conserved) charge and spin currents in terms of the four-components excitonic fields and their spatial gradient terms. We then substitute the classical solutions, Eqs. (H.23-H.26), into the expressions. This leads to the spin-charge coupled Josephson equations in the helical and helicoidal phases. In practice, the magnetic exchange fields within the xy plane can be experimentally controlled by an external magnetic field in the plane. The magnetic field causes magnetic vector potentials in the electron and hole layers. In the presence of the vector potentials, ∂ i in Eqs. (1, A.1) (i = x, y) are replaced by ∂ i + iA a,i in the electron layer and by ∂ i + iA b,i in the hole layer. The two vector potentials, A a,i and A b,i , are generally different from each other, as the electron and hole layers are spatially separated along the z direction. An integral of the difference between them, Ãi ≡ A b,i -A a,i , is the magnetic flux penetrating through the separation layer. The difference appears in the φ 4 -type effective Lagrangian in a covariant way; ∂ i in Eq. (B.13) is replaced by ∂ i -i Ãi . where we have used φ ν ∂ i φ * ν = -φ * ν ∂ i φ ν . Putting Eq. (I.10) into Eq. (I.9), we get the (hole-layer) spin Noether current: Let us next substitute the classical solutions of Eqs. (H.23-H.26) into these expressions for the Noether currents. Thereby, the spatial gradients in the expressions apply not only to an explicit spatial-coordinate dependence of the classical solutions but also to the slowly-varying gapless modes, φ 0 and ψ. Thus, the spatial derivatives in Eqs. (I.11, I.12) can be decomposed into: together with D = 2Kλ, and recover units by substitutions Ãi → e Ãi / c, we finally obtain results for the charge current and the spin current: Ãi ) -h∂ i φ 0 ], (I.15) Ãi )]. (I.16) Eqs. (I.15, I.16) are consistent with Eqs. J. Delta functions between real numbers and bilinear Grassmann numbers in Eq. (F.10) In this section, we define a delta function between a real number and a bilinear Grassmann number and discuss its properties. The discussion can be regarded as a proof for Eq. (F.10). For simplicity, we discuss normal integrals (i.e. zero-dimensional field theory), and the results are easy to be generalized for path integrals (i.e. finite-dimensional field theory). Below (ψ, ψ * ) is a pair of conjugate Grassmann numbers, while N and μ are real numbers. We define a delta function: comparison to Eq. (B.10) gives the relation between λ and D as with arbitrary U(1) variables ζ, δ 1 and δ 2 . For k = k e y , we take a substitution of α 1 → α 2 , α 2 → -α 1 , α 3 → α 3 , α 0 → α 0 in Eq. (H.10), and change β similarly. For general k = k(cosω e x + sinω e y ), the function f (α μ , β μ ) is minimized by a combination of these two,