Bi1-xSbx)2Te3 [x=0.60, 0.65, 0.68, 0.70, 0.75 and 0.80] mixed crystals have been synthesized by solid state reaction. In depth structural, thermal, transport and electronic properties are reported. Defect and disorder play a crucial role in structural and transport behaviour. Disorder induced iso-structural phase transition is observed at x=0.70, which is supported by the structural and transport properties data. Debye temperature has been estimated from the powder diffraction data. Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) data confirms the glass transition in the material. Low temperature resistivity data (ρ(T)) shows Variable range hopping mechanism whereas high temperature data follows activated behaviour. Activation energy is calculated from the semiconducting region of ρ(T). Both Hall measurement and temperature dependent thermopower data (S(T)) confirms that samples are p-type in nature. Density of state effective mass has been estimated from Pisarenko relation and corroborated with resistivity data. Thermal conductivity (к) is estimated using experimentally obtained data. Figure of Merit (ZT) of the synthesized samples are calculated using ρ(T), S(T) and к. Structural and transport properties are correlated, confirms the transition from disorder to order state. Defect and disorder are corroborated with structural and Thermoelectric properties of the synthesized samples. Thermoelectric (TE) materials are those which convert thermal to electrical energy and vicee-versa Nowadays best n-type and p-type TE materials available near room temperature are Bi2Te3, Sb2Te3 based materials Weak interlayer bonding causes anti-site defect in the material. Inherent native defect in Sb2Te3 material shows p-type conductivity with carrier concentration up-to 10 20 /cm 3 in Sb2Te3 material. Thermal variation of resistivity, ρ(T) frequently shows metallic behaviour due this defect induced huge carrier concentration However, physical properties of mixed crystal depend on the synthesis processes. Room temperature ZT as high as 3.0 x10 -3 K -1 is achieved for hot pressed (Bi1-xSbx)2Te3 at the Sb alloying level 0.70<x<0.80 and shows p-type conductivity. In this processes p-type to n-type transition occurred around x=0.67 Reported study of synthesized samples using solid state reaction method are also limited. Furthermore, polycrystalline material with grain boundary scattering may give positive contribution in ZT. It is noteworthy to mention that vacancy and defect along with the surface state play an important role in the structural, transport and TE properties of the mixed crystal. In the present work, polycrystalline samples have been synthesized by solid state reaction method. In-depth structural characterizations have been performed by Rietveld refinement. Thermal variation of resistivity and thermopower measurements have been carried out and correlated with structural data. Glass transition temperature, crystallization temperature and iota of unreacted or materials at grain boundary in the matrix of the mixed crystal have been analysed by DSC (Differential Scanning calorimetry). Thermal variation of carrier concentration of the synthesized samples have been estimated. Further, effect of band structure engineering along with defect and vacancy concentration on the structural, transport properties are studied analytically. Anomalous change in TE properties is correlated with structural, DSC and carrier concentration data. In this maiden attempt iso-structural phase transition has been reported in (Bi1-xSbx)2Te3 for x=0.30. Disorder and defects play a crucial role in transport properties and lead to iso-structural phase transition. Disorder induced iso-structural phase transition has been corroborated with transport properties data and underline physics is discussed. Polycrystalline (Bi1-xSbx)2Te3 (0.60<x<0.80) samples have been synthesized by solid state reaction method. Elemental Bismuth, Antimony and Tellurium are sealed in a quartz tube under pressure of 10 -3 Pa to avoid oxidation. The sealed quartz tube is annealed at temperature 1123 K for 24 hour (hr). After that, it was cooled down to 880 K in 48 hr and then sintered for 96 hr to obtain homogeneous sample. The end ingot was obtained by quenching quartz tube at liquid Nitrogen. Structural characterization of (Bi1-xSbx)2Te3 (for x= 0.60, 0.65, 0.68, 0.70, 0.75 and 0.80) samples have been carried out by powder x-ray diffraction (XRD) using powder x-ray diffractometer [Model: X'Pert PRO (PANalytical)] with Cu-Kα radiation. All the XRD measurements are performed in the range of 15 0 < 2θ< 80 0 in θ-2θ geometry. In-order to analyse in-depth structural parameters, Rietveld refinement of room temperature powder diffraction data were done using MAUD (Materials Analysis Using Diffraction) software XRD data of synthesized samples are depicted in Fig. material FWHM increases with increasing Sb concentration in the mixed crystal till x=0.68. But, there is sudden drop in FWHM for (Bi0.30Sb0.70)2Te3. Increasing Sb concentration in the mixed crystal causes transition from Bi2Te3 crystal configuration to Sb2Te3 crystal configuration. The Te 1 and Te 2 sites at different ambient environment causes Sb-Te 2 bond more polar or ionic than Sb-Te 1 Anti-site defects, vacancy along with segregated elemental Bi/Sb/Te cause shift in diffraction peak. This evolution is also accompanied with other physical properties viz., ρ-T, S-T and carrier concentration data, discussed latter. In depth structural analysis of the synthesized samples have been carried out by Rietveld refinement using MAUD software Experimentally obtained XRD patterns and theoretically fitted curve along with other parameters are given in supplementary information S1 Biso increases with increasing Sb concentration (x), signify increase in positional disorder. It is noteworthy to mention that Sb-Te bond is weaker than Bi-Te bond, owing to difference in Pauling electronegativity Estimated values of θD and corresponding positional disorders are given in Fig. The constituent elements and corresponding melting temperature of the mixed crystal are Bi, Sb, Te: 544 K, 903 K and 722K respectively Samples have been homogenised at 890 K for four days during synthesis. Saturation vapour pressures of Bi, Sb and Te at around 890K are 0.266 Pa, 10 Pa, 100 Pa respectively i.e., ln(ρ) Vs. T -0.5 should show straight line behaviour below TT, where, ρ0 is temperature independent constant coefficient and TES is related with the localization length of the energy states equivalent to Fermi Energy. Experimental and theoretically fitted curves are given in Supplementary information S4 However, TT is more prominent for comparatively compensated samples (discussed latter) viz., (Bi0.32Sb0.68)2Te3, (Bi0.35Sb0.65)2Te3 and (Bi0.30Sb0.70)2Te3. Extended region of activated behaviour may be related with presence of other conduction channel near Fermi surface due to inherent defects Non-monotonic ρ(T) with semiconducting nature are observed for Sb concentration (x) in between 0.60<x<0.70. Thermal gap of the semiconducting samples has been estimated using the equation: Where Eact, kB are activation energy and Boltzmann constant respectively. Estimated value of ln(ρ0), ) . Transition temperature (TT) from VRH to activated behavior of ρ(T) data are also given. (Supplementary information S5 However, solid-solution (Bi1-xSbx)2Te3 may reduce bulk carrier concentration by eliminating underlying defects in bulk material due to increase of formation energy of defects Here, first and second terms are contribution of diffusion and e-ph interaction in S. The estimated ), B and corresponding values of EF are listed in Table However, exact band gap (Eg) of the materials is still illusive. Whereas, Smith et al. reported that degeneracy corrected Eg=0.2eV for 80% Sb2Te3 contained Bi2Te3-Sb2Te3 mixed crystal Michiardi et al. theoretically and experimentally estimated Eg~120 eV for single crystal Bi2Te3 Synthesized samples show p-type conductivity and ρ(T), S(T) follow degenerate semiconducting nature. Hence, position of Fermi surface (or EF) is near the valence band In this report, disorder induced scattering and defect induced carrier concentration are nicely depicted in estimated A, B coefficients. It is evident from the ρ(T) and S(T) data that synthesized samples are degenerate in nature. Underlying defects and VTe have been made samples potential extrinsic semiconductor. However, these degenerate extrinsic semiconductors may also be expressed by the following Pisarenko relation Positional disorder and defects strongly influence the TE properties of (Bi1 Position of most intense x-ray diffraction peak (015), unit cell volume, CH/aH ratio, FWHM of (015) and lattice strain value for different Sb concentration of (Bi1-xSbx)2Te3 samples. However, at x=0.30 structural transition occurs towards end member, Sb2Te3 crystal configuration. Das et al . Estimated values of Areas under endothermic, exothermic peak and Tg from the DSC curve of (Bi1-xSbx)2Te3 samples for different Sb concentration. as obtained during fitting using equation (3) has been shifted towards minimum value. It indicates spurious contribution due to disorder on the semiconducting behaviour decreases. However, ρ(T) of (Bi0.20Sb0.80)2Te3 sample follows metallic nature. Metallic nature may arise due to mix of surface states and bulk states of the synthesized samples