We show theoretically that double photoemission (2e-ARPES) may be used to identify the pairing state in superconductors in which the Cooper pairs have a nonzero center-of-mass momentum, qcm. We theoretically evaluate the 2e ARPES counting rate, P (2) , for the cases of a d x 2 -y 2 -wave superconductor, a pair-density-wave (PDW) phase, and a Fulde-Ferrel-Larkin-Ovchinnikov (FFLO) phase. We show that P (2) provides direct insight into the center-of-mass momentum and spin state of the superconducting condensate, and thus can distinguish between these three different superconducting pairing states. In addition, P (2) can be used to map out the momentum dependence of the superconducting order parameter. Our results identify 2e-ARPES as an ideal tool for identifying and probing qcm = 0 superconducting pairing states in superconductors. Introduction Identifying the pairing symmetries of unconventional superconductors has remained one of the most important and fundamental challenges in quantum materials research. Its difficulty arises from the absence of two-particle spectroscopies that directly probe the properties of the Cooper pair wave-function, which determine the spin structure and momentum dependence of the superconducting order parameter. Single-particle spectroscopies such as tunneling In this article we demonstrate that two electron coincidence spectroscopy (2e-ARPES), in which the absorption of a single photon leads to the emission of two coincident photo-electrons There are two distinct processes that can cause a single photon to lead to the ejection of a correlated pair of electrons [Fig. Theoretical Formalism We compute the 2e-ARPES photo-electron counting rate P (2) in the sudden approximation whereby we neglect relaxation pathways during the photo-electron emission process and work with plane wave electrons at the detector and valence electron states in a sample Here, γ ν (q) is the effective electron-photon dipole interaction, d † k,σ (c k,σ ) creates (destroys) a photo-electron (conduction electron) with momentum k and spin σ, and V (q) ∼ [q 2 + κ 2 ] -1 is the Fourier transform of the (screened) Coulomb interaction, with κ -1 being the screening length. Moreover, since the photon momentum is much smaller than typical fermionic momenta, we set it equal to zero. As the out-of-plane momentum is not conserved upon absorption of the photon, we take γ ν (q) = γ 0 to be independent of the in-plane momentum. The initial and final states of the entire system, |Ψ a and |Ψ b respectively, are described by Here, |1 qλ p describes the initial photon state containing one photon with momentum q and polarization λ, and |1 k 1 ,σ 1 1 k 2 ,σ 2 pe represents the final photo-electron state containing two photo-electrons with momenta k 1,2 and spin σ 1,2 . The initial and final states of the superconductor are described by |Φ a,b , respectively. The 2e-ARPES signal, which depends on the two photo-electron momenta and spin projections, is then computed via (3) where Z is the partition function, the sum runs over all states |Φ a,b of the superconductor, ∆t is the time over which the photon beam is incident in the superconductor, and Ŝ is the S-matrix that we expand to second order in H sc . The detailed derivation of P (2) for a uniform d x 2 -y 2 -wave superconductor, the PDW and the FFLO phases is carried out in SM Sec. 1. While we consider for concreteness a cuprate-like Fermi surface, as shown in Fig. Results We begin by discussing the case of a uniform, spin-singlet d x 2 -y 2 -wave superconductor (band parameters are given in SM Sec. 1) in which the Cooper pairs possess a zero center of mass momentum. For P (2) to directly probe the superconducting condensate, we need to require that the two photo-electrons also have a zero center-of-mass momentum, i.e., k 2 = -k 1 , and opposite spins, i.e., σ 2 = σ 1 . In this case, we obtain 2cp where (at T = 0) where , ω q is the incident photon energy, and ε k 1 is the sum of the kinetic energy and work function of a photo-electron. ∆ω = ω q -2ε k 1 represents the excess energy of the photon over the energies of the two photoelectrons. The first term, P SC , directly reflects the existence of a superconducting condensate, as described by ∆ k , and arises from the breaking and subsequent creation of a Cooper pair. This term vanishes in the normal state, and is absent when the two detected photo-electrons do not possess the same center of mass momentum, or spin structure as the superconducting condensate. As such, the photo-electron pairs that contribute to P (2) SC reside in an entangled state and are therefore Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen (EPR) pairs. Note that the momentum dependence of the Coulomb interaction plays a crucial role in observing a non-zero SC in a d x 2 -y 2 -wave superconductor since for a momentum independent V (q), P SC vanishes identically due to the symmetry of the d x 2 -y 2 -wave order parameter. In contrast, the photo-electron pairs that contribute to the second term, P 2cp , arise from the breaking of two Cooper pairs. As P (2) 2cp , with onset energy ∆ω c ≈ 2∆ k 1 (we will refer to this contribution as the 2CP continuum). The latter immediately reveals that P (2) 2cp reflects the measurement of 2 photo-electrons arising from the breaking of 2 Cooper pairs, requiring an energy of 2∆ k 1 . That the gap between the condensate peak at ∆ω = 0 and the continuum is indeed 2∆ k 1 is a direct consequence of the momentum dependence of the Coulomb interaction, V (q), which suppresses large momentum transfers during the scattering process. As a result, the main contribution to P (2) 2cp arises from those momentum states k along the Fermi surface with k ≈ ±k 1 . As ∆ω c ≈ 2∆ k 1 , it decreases as one moves from the anti-nodal to the nodal points along the Fermi surface (see SM Sec. 3), allowing one to map out the momentum dependence of the superconducting gap along the Fermi surface, in a similar manner to conventional ARPES experiments A qualitatively new feature of 2e-ARPES is that it can be used to identify the center-of-mass momentum of the Cooper pairs, q cm . To demonstrate this, we plot in Fig. (2) sc ≡ 0), as the electrons in a Cooper pair form a spin-singlet state. Thus only a measurement of photo-electrons that are in opposite spin states will exhibit a zero-energy peak in P (2) . In contrast, the continuum in P (2) 2cp is the same for equal and opposite spin states of the photo-electrons, as it arises from the breaking of two Cooper pairs. These results demonstrate that 2e-ARPES experiments provide unprecedented insight into the center-of-mass momentum and spin state of the superconducting condensate, as well as the momentum dependence of the superconducting order parameter. To demonstrate the sensitivity of 2e-ARPES experiments to detecting the center-of-mass momentum of Cooper pairs, we next consider two distinct superconducting phases with non-zero q cm . The first is the PDW phase which has been proposed as a possible explanation for the puzzling phenomenology of the pseudo-gap region of the cuprate superconductors Finally, we consider the FFLO phase where the pairing occurs between states with a single non-zero center-of-mass momentum (strictly speaking, this corresponds to the Fulde-Ferrell phase Conclusions We have developed a theory for the photoelectron counting rate P (2) measured in 2e-ARPES ex-periments in a uniform d x 2 -y 2 -wave superconducting, PDW and FFLO phases. A comparison of P (2) shown in Figs. As discussed in the main text, for the calculation of the 2e-ARPES photo-electron counting rate, we consider the process shown in Fig. Here, γ ν (q) is the effective electron-photon dipole interaction, d † k,σ (c k,σ ) creates (destroys) a photo-electron (conduction electron) with momentum k and spin σ, and V (q) ∼ [q 2 + κ 2 ] -1 is the Fourier transform of the (screened) Coulomb interaction, with κ -1 being the screening length. For all results shown in the main text, κ -1 = 10a 0 (see also SM Sec. 4). Moreover, since the photon momentum is much smaller than typical fermionic momenta, we set it equal to zero, and as the out-of-plane momentum is not conserved upon absorption of the photon, we take γ ν (q) = γ 0 to be independent of the in-plane momentum. The initial and final states of the entire system, |Ψ a and |Ψ b respectively, are described by Here, |1 qλ p describes the initial photon state containing one photon with momentum q and polarization λ, and |1 k 1 ,σ 1 1 k 2 ,σ 2 pe represents the final photo-electron state containing two photo-electrons with momenta k 1,2 and spin σ 1,2 . The initial and final states of the superconductor are described by |Φ a,b , respectively. The photo-electron counting rate, P (2) , which depends on the two photo-electron momenta and spin projections, is then computed via where Z is the partition function, the sum runs over all states |Φ a,b of the superconductor, and ∆t is the time over which the photon beam is incident on the superconductor. Expanding the S-matrix Ŝ(∞, -∞) up to second order in H sc , and using the above described initial and final states of the system, we obtain with ω q being the incident photon energy. To further evaluate the above term, we need to rewrite the term involving the fermionic annihilation operators using the respective Bogoliubov transformations for a uniform d x 2 -y 2 -wave superconductor, the PDW and the FFLO phases, which we will consider in the following. arXiv:2108.04260v1 [cond-mat.supr-con] 9 Aug 2021 A. 2e-ARPES in a uniform d x 2 -y 2 -wave superconductor with zero center-of mass momentum For a uniform d x 2 -y 2 -wave superconductor with zero center-of-mass momentum, the Bogoliubov transformation is given by At T = 0, the contribution to P (2) that directly reflects the presence of a superconducting condensate, P SC [see Eq.( Terms of these forms, however, can only emerge from Eq.(S4) if k 2 = -k 1 and σ 1 = σ 2 . Since momentum conservation in Eq.(S4) requires that this immediately implies k 2 = -k 1 , i.e., the center-of-mass momentum of the two photo-electrons is zero. Moreover, σ 1 = σ 2 implies that the two photo-electrons are in a spin-singlet state. Thus, we obtain a non-zero P SC contribution only if the center-of-mass momentum and the spin state of the two photo-electrons is the same as that of the condensate. We then obtain P (2) = P (2) 2cp where and with nα p = α † p α p and nβ p = β † p β p . Moreover, E p = ξ 2 p + ∆ 2 p (ξ p ) is the electronic dispersion in the superconducting (normal) state. The normal state dispersion is given by with t /t = -0.4, μ/t = -0.5, and t = 300meV, giving rise to the characteristic cuprate Fermi surface shown in Fig. with ∆ 0 = 25 meV. At T = 0, P SC simplifies to the expression which is given in Eq.( SC ≡ 0, and ββ where 3. Equal spin polarization of the photo-electrons, and We next consider the case where the two photo-electrons possess the equal spin polarization, and a non-zero centerof-mass momentum, i.e., k 2 = -k 1 . In this case P (2) = P (2) ββ where Note that for T = 0, P αβ can also exhibit a peak for ∆ω = ω q -2ε k 1 = 0, similar to P SC in Eq.( αβ implies that it vanishes for T = 0, as two electrons with equal spin can only be ejected from the sample at ∆ω = 0 if Cooper pairs have been broken by thermal excitations. We next consider the photo-electron counting rate in the FFLO phase Note that ∆ F F (k) also depends on Q, and in general needs to be self-consistently computed To diagonalize the Hamiltonian, we next use the Bogoliubov transformation which yields where and the coherence factor are given by In order to obtain a non-zero P SC in the FF phase, Eq.(S4) needs to contain terms of the form which together with momentum conservation that the center-of-mass momentum of the two photo-electrons be Q. In this case, we then obtain P (2) = P (2) 2cp where and Similarly, we obtain We next consider the case when k 1 + k 2 = l = Q In this case, we obtain P (2) = P (2) αβ + P (2) ββ where C. 2e-ARPES in the PDW phase We next consider the 2e-ARPES photo-electron counting rate P (2) in the PDW phase, whose mean-field Hamiltonian is given by where the primed sum runs over the Brillouin zone of the PDW phase. Here, ∆ = ∆ P DW is the superconducting gap in the PDW phase which depends on k and Q, and in general needs to be self-consistently computed. However, since in the main text, we consider only photo-electron momenta near the antinodal points (see Fig. with Û being a unitary matrix consisting of the eigenvectors of Ĥk . Thus, we obtain and E i,k (i = 1, .., 6) are the eigenenergies of Ĥk . In this case, we obtain P (2) = P with Ûp ij being the (ij) element of the matrix Ûp , and In this case, we obtain We next consider the contribution to the 2e-ARPES photo-electron counting rate involving the Auger process, P Aug is only non-zero if there exist occupied core electron states with the same momenta as those of the two photo-electrons probed in the detectors. The 2e-ARPES photo-electron counting rate, P (2) , can also be employed to map out the momentum dependence of the superconducting gap. To demonstrate this, we consider two photo-electrons with zero center-of-mass momentum,