AV 3 Sb 5 (A = K, Rb, Cs) is a novel kagome superconductor coexisting with the charge density wave (CDW) order. Identifying the structure of the CDW order is crucial for understanding the exotic normal state and superconductivity in this system. Here, we report 51 V nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) and 121/123 Sb nuclear quadrupole resonance (NQR) studies on kagome-metal CsV 3 Sb 5 . Below the CDW transition temperature T CDW ∼ 98 K, an abrupt change of spectra was observed, indicating that the transition is of the first order. By further analyzing the spectra, we find that the CDW order is commensurate. And most remarkably, the obtained experimental results suggest that the charge modulation of the CDW order is of star-of-David pattern and accompanied by an additional charge modulation in bulk below T * ∼ 40 K. Our results revealing the unconventional CDW order provide new insights into AV 3 Sb 5 . Compounds with kagome or honeycomb lattices provide a rich material base for exploring exotic physical phenomena, including topological electronic states Recently, a new transition metal family AV 3 Sb 5 (A = K, Rb, Cs) with perfect vanadium kagome-net was found Experiments under pressure further elaborated the importance of the CDW order. Transport measurements show that applying pressure can suppress the CDW order and enhance T c by almost three times in AV 3 Sb 5 In this work, we have performed 51 V nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) and 121/123 Sb nuclear quadrupole resonance (NQR) measurements on CsV 3 Sb 5 . By studying the spectra at low temperatures, we demonstrate that the CDW order is commensurate and our result is consistent with the star-of-David type structural distortion. Below T * ∼ 40 K, a further line splitting is observed in 51 V-NMR spectra, while a line broadening was observed in 121 Sb-NQR spectra. This behavior implies the appearance of an additional charge modulation and further demonstrates the unconventional nature of the CDW order. A. Charge density wave order: 51 V-NMR results In the crystal structure of CsV 3 Sb 5 shown in Fig. where K is the Knight shift, eq = V ZZ = ∂V 2 ∂Z 2 is the electric field gradient (EFG) along the principal axis, and V is the electric potential, Q is the nuclear quadrupole moment, and is the asymmetry parameter of EFG. The nuclear quadrupole resonance frequency ν Q is defined as 3e 2 qQ 2I(2I-1)h . γ is the nuclear gyromagnetic ratio, which is 11.193 MHz/T for the 51 V nucleus. Since the nuclear spin I of 51 V is 7/2, there should appear seven transition lines. Indeed, the 51 V-NMR spectrum at 101.7 K (above T CDW ) shown in Fig. ) a charge modulation occurs at low temperatures. For the one dimensional (1D) incommensurate CDW order, the NMR spectrum should have two peaks of equal intensities, and most importantly, a continuum between the two peaks To further investigate the CDW evolution, we make a contour plot of the central lines from T = 100 to 90 K, as shown in Fig. We further measure the temperature dependence of 51 V-NMR spin-lattice relaxation rate divided by T , 1/T 1 T , as shown in Fig. Ni-doped BaFe 2 As 2 systems S b -N Q R I n t e n s i t y ( a . u . ) With decreasing temperature, an abrupt change of the Sb-NQR spectrum was seen in the CDW state (see Supplementary Figure Considering the atomic ratio between Sb1 and Sb2, we can assign that the two peaks around 74 MHz are from the Sb2 site, and another peak is from the Sb1 site. The frequencies of all lines are related to ν Q and the asymmetry parameter η. The deduced ν Q and η as shown in Table . I (the detailed calculation is presented in Supplementary Note 6). As the change of lattice parameter is less than 1% in the CDW state In contrast to the Sb1 site, ν Q of the Sb2 site changes less than 1%, suggesting that the band renormalization of the Sb2-p z orbital is small. However, η increases to ∼ 0.1 in the CDW state, suggesting a population disparity between Sb2-5p x and 5p y orbitals, like the change of the As-4p orbitals inside the nematic state in iron-based high-T c superconductors Along with the CDW transition, the star-of-David and Tri-hexagonal types of order as illus- trated in Fig. In both star-of-David and Tri-hexagonal structures, two V sites exist with the atomic ratio of V1 : V2 site = 1: 1, which explains why 51 V-NMR central peak splits into two peaks with the area ratio of 1 : 1. The other feature for the proposed structures is that the Sb2 site should become two distinct sites, namely Sb2-a and Sb2-b as illustrated in Fig. Next, we distinguish between star-of-David and Tri-hexagonal patterns. For the star-of-David type structure, the average distance between Sb2-a and its nearest V atoms is longer than that between Sb2-b to its nearest V atoms. For the Tri-hexagonal structure, by contrast, the average distance between Sb2-a and its nearest V atoms is shorter than that between Sb2-b to its nearest V atoms. With the smaller distance between the V atom to the Sb atom, the influence to the local electron distribution of the Sb site will be more significant. By EFG calculation, we find that this will enhance the EFG of the Sb2 site(see Supplementary Note 7). Our result shows that the ν Q of Sb2-a is smaller than that of Sb2-b(see Table Inside the CDW state, we further find another charge modulation at lower temperatures. As shown in Fig. An orbital ordering could also cause a Knight shift splitting For NQR measurements, on the other hand, no external magnetic field was applied, so the spectra for different domains are the same, resulting in a move of the NQR spectrum below the ordering temperature as seen in LaFeAsO 1-x F x The increase of the FWHM of the spectra for all Sb sites below T * , as can be seen in Fig. 3 Especially, we have noticed that the in-plane anisotropy of the magnetoresistance was observed in the superconducting state, suggesting the twofold feature of superconductivity In summary, we have performed NMR and NQR measurements on the kagome superconductor, CsV 3 Sb 5 . Below the CDW transition temperature T CDW = 98 K, the abrupt changes of both 51 V-NMR and 121/123 Sb-NQR spectra indicate that the CDW transition is of the first order. By analyzing the spectra in the CDW state, we suggest that the structural distortion is of the star-of-David type, contrasting with DFT calculations. This implies that electron correlations should be considered for modeling this system. Below T * ∼ 40 K, we further find an additional splitting of 51 V-NMR lines and broadening of 121 Sb-NQR lines, implying the appearance of an additional charge modulation on top of the star-of-David type CDW. All these show that the CDW order in CsV 3 Sb 5 is unique, which will be important in future exploration of the relationship between CDW and superconductivity. Note Added: During the preparation of this manuscript, we became aware of two similar NMR works on CsV 3 Sb 5 Single crystal CsV 3 Sb 5 was synthesized by the self-flux method NMR and NQR measurements 51 V-NMR experiments were performed on one single crystal sample at a fixed magnetic field along the c-axis. The spectra were obtained by adding Fourier transforms of the spin-echo signal recorded for regularly spaced frequency values. 121/123 Sb-NQR spectra were measured on a collection of ∼ 50 single crystals by sweeping the frequency point by point and integrating spin-echo intensity. By performing EFG calculation, we find that the EFG principal axis of 121/123 Sb is along the c-axis(details about EFG calculation is present in Supplementary Note 7). Thus, we arrange the CsV 3 Sb 5 single-crystal flakes along the c direction, ensuring the radio-frequency field H 1 in the ab plane(see Supplementary Figure 