Digital single-flux quantum (SFQ) technology promises to meet the demands of ultra low power and high speed computing needed for future exascale supercomputing platforms. However, clocking SFQ logic circuits remains a challenge due to the presence of a large number of on-chip clock sinks, and hence, decomposing large designs into multiple independent clock domains similar to CMOS, have been proposed. However, such clock domains demand efficient synchronizing First-in-first-out (FIFO) buffers and robust interfaces to safely transfer data from one clock domain to another. In this brief, we propose such a FIFO synchronizer and clock-domain crossing interface for both uni and bi-directional data transfer without any significant degradation of the clock frequency. Our proposal scales to complex gate-level pipelined SFQ logic cores while demonstrating extremely low Bit Error Rate (BER) and is unaffected by noise, given current SFQ lithography feature sizes. As we face the fundamental limits of physical scaling dictated by Moores' law, single flux quantum (SFQ) In particular, the gate-level pipelining and ultra-high clock frequencies associated with SFQ logic makes low-skew clock distribution extremely challenging As timing constraints cannot be guaranteed between clock domains, safe/robust communication between them sometimes takes place either at a rate slower than the system clock (e.g. one transfer for every two cycles of the clock) or with some kind of mixed asynchronous design The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section II provides related background on SFQ, including descriptions of the SFQ crossing clock domains and First-in-first-out (FIFO) synchronizers, and identifies the key bottlenecks in previous synchronizer designs However, there are some SFQ cells which do not need a clock input. Unlike CMOS, in SFQ logic, a splitter, shown in Fig. Clocking SFQ circuits is challenging because their deeplypipelined nature makes them more sensitive to setup violations that can increase clock-to-Q delays than their CMOS counterparts. The high degrees of variability further exacerbates the ultra-high-speed low-skew clock distribution of large-scale SFQ circuits. In order to mitigate this problem, multiple independent SFQ clock domains can be used In this section, we present our proposed synchronizer and interface, illustrating uni-directional communication between two unrelated clock domains. Our FIFO is shown in Fig. The first improvement in our proposed synchronizer over In particular, after the ready and enable signals are asserted, the lower C-element C 2 produces a clock pulse that reads the new data into the FIFOs datapath and helps move this data forward through the FIFO with successive pulses on the read clock. The ready signal also sends out a pulse when the ∼enable is active and the FIFO can still accept new data. The combination of these two distinct situations is implemented using the OR gate in the FIFO control path. Note that the enable and ∼enable signals are mutually exclusive, and should arrive in the same clock cycle as new data is available. Since all SFQ logic gates are clocked, the OR gate, followed by the DFF, function similar to a two-flop synchronizer. Should the output of the synchronization OR gate become metastable, it still needs to propagate through the DFF next to it, before its value is used by the write side interface. The extra time provided by the additional synchronization DFF increases the probability that the metastable value will resolve, and is the second improvement in our design. The result is that the FIFO has low BER in the write side, as detailed in Section V. On the read side, as proposed in Although the above description assumes noiseless synchronizers, a real system has noise and the resolution to 0 or 1 of a DFF synchronizer near its metastable point is a stochastic process. Fortunately, Upon reset, the write side of the FIFO interface assumes the FIFO is empty and that it can start operating by sending in data to the FIFO by asserting the enable signal. The output of the synchronizing DFF in the control path, along with the split write clock pulse, trigger the FIFO C-element C 1 and its split output produces the ready pulse, informing the write interface that it can accept new (enabled) data. Once consumed data propagates to the read side of the FIFO, a read clock pulse will produce a valid pulse, and the associated data can be read out. Unlike the write side, we can read out one data token every clock cycle, provided the read clock frequency abides by the timing constraints detailed in Sec IV-B. In principle, generic finite state machines (FSMs), as shown in Fig. Whenever incoming or outgoing FIFO data is blocked, the interface logic must stall to avoid losing new data or overwriting old data, respectively. Stalling is typically implemented by gating the associated interface clock. However, the gate-level clocking nature of SFQ logic implies that the clock distribution networks (CDN) will have relatively high insertion delay which makes efficient clock gating difficult. To address these issues, we develop a custom circuit solution that can enable high throughput communication between clock domains. In particular, we propose a custom CDN and interface for our proposed FIFO that can support bi-communication between clock domains. Our design employs two FIFOs, and hence has two valid and ready signals, which together with the proposed interface, enable bi-directional data transfer. Each interface receives data from one FIFO and writes to the other. The valid signal generated by the first clock domain controls the data transfer to the FIFO clocked by the second clock domain. Once this second FIFO successfully receives a token from the interface, its' ready port generates a pulse, which along with the valid pulse from the first clock domain controls the transfer of the next token between the interface and FIFO 1 . Note that this valid pulse will be generated when the other interface similarly communicates with FIFO 1 . Our proposal is explained below in detail and illustrated in Fig. The steps involved in the bi-directional communication are described below and illustrated in in Fig. 1) When the first pulse of CLK 1 arrives, every ND will produce an output pulse, then the preset DFFs will each generate an output pulse that clocks their respective pipeline datpath stages and, concurrently, reset their associated NDs. For example, the first ND will be reset by the pulse on the net labelled 'e'. Also, note that this same sequence of actions happens in parallel in domain CLK 2 . 2) When the second CLK 1 pulse arrives, only the leftmost ND directly connected to FIFO 1 will produce an output pulse because the others have been reset in the previous cycle. The last DFF in the FSM control, denoted FSM 1 in Fig. 3) Note that until FIFO 2 signals that it is ready to accept new data by sending out a ready pulse, the data in domain CLK 1 will remain stalled in the interface, even if FIFO 1 tries to push more tokens into the pipeline. This is ensured by the reset operation of the ND by the signal '5'. 4) Once the ready pulse is produced, the last ND of in the top row of FSM 1 will be set by signal '9', while the ND below it will be reset by '8'. In the next cycle, the output pulse of the top ND will set the ND to its' left by the signal '2' and will permit any stalled CLK 1 token to enter FIFO 2 . 5) This process continues until the ND receiving the first signal 'c' is set, which will eventually clock the read port of the FIFO 1 . Concurrently, after the data enters FIFO 2 , it will be transferred to the datapath stages of domain CLK 2 . The valid signal will drive the FIFO 2 read port, repeating the above process. To ensure we can write data into the FIFO at least every other clock cycle, the clock period (both CLK 1 and CLK 2 ) has to be larger than which is the critical path delay between the ND receiving the ready pulse and ND driving the write port (see Fig. to ensure the data is transferred correctly to the read side with a valid pulse. The denominator in the right hand side of the above inequality is the critical path delay between the read port and the first DFF in the control path of the read side, which is ∼40 GHz in SFQ5ee process. Note that both the above critical paths are independent of the datapath bit-width. To verify our proposed circuits, we designed our logic cell library in the MIT LL SFQ5ee process with Stewart McCumber parameter In order to evaluate our proposal for bi-directional communication, we designed a 8-stage 32-bit wide circular shift register. We used two FIFOs to transfer the data from each set of four DFFs in the shift register as shown in Fig. We present a FIFO synchronizer, compatible with the deep gate-level pipelining observed in SFQ, which can support bi-directional data transfer between two asynchronous clock domains. We further propose an associated robust interface which can handshake with our FIFO that supports highfrequency clocks. Our proposal demonstrates low BER and scales to large-scale SFQ designs with increased flexibility and negligible area overhead compared to previous designs.