Two-dimensional (2D) materials have many promising applications, but their scalable production remains challenging. Herein, we develop a glue-assisted grinding exfoliation (GAGE) method in which the adhesive polymer acts as a glue to massively produce 2D materials with large lateral sizes, high quality, and high yield. Density functional theory simulation shows that the exfoliation mechanism involves the competition between the binding energy of selected polymers and the 2D materials which is larger than the exfoliation energy of the layered materials. Taking h-BN as an example, the GAGE produces 2D h-BN with an average lateral size of 2.18 μm and thickness of 3.91 nm. The method is also extended to produce various other 2D materials, including graphene, MoS2, Bi2O2Se, vermiculite, and montmorillonite. Two representative applications of thus-produced 2D materials have been demonstrated, including h-BN/polymer composites for insulating thermal conduction and MoS2 electrocatalysts for large-current-density hydrogen evolution, indicating the great potential of massively produced 2D materials. Two-dimensional (2D) materials with intriguing physical and chemical properties are expected to have a variety of applications in thermal management, energy conversion, flexible devices, functional composites, etc. Interestingly, we note that the micromechanical exfoliation method which was used in the discovery of graphene produces monolayer 2D sheets with the highest quality but cannot be scaled up. Inspired by the above facts, here we report an effective glue-assisted grinding exfoliation (GAGE) approach that uses an adhesive polymer solution as the glue to massively produce 2D materials. Taking hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN) as an example, we achieved the controllable preparation of ultrathin boron nitride nanosheets (BNNSs) with large lateral sizes, high quality, and high yield. The exfoliation occurs because the binding energy between the adhesive polymer and h-BN is larger than the exfoliation energy of the layered materials, which is confirmed by density functional theory (DFT) simulations. This method can be used to prepare many other 2D materials, including conducting graphene, semiconducting molybdenum disulfide (MoS2) and Bi2O2Se, and insulating clay materials. The 2D material/polymer composite dispersion produced by the method showed remarkable performance in two scalable applications. First, a BNNS-based composite film has high thermal conductivity, good mechanical performance, and electrical insulation for flexible thermal management. Second, a 2D MoS2-based electrocatalyst has high activity and good durability for large-current-density hydrogen evolution reaction (HER). The results suggest the great potential of the massively produced 2D materials in applications. Inspired by the micromechanical exfoliation method, our idea originates from using an adhesive polymer solution as a "glue" directly to replace the adhesive tape and introducing shear forces by an automatic grinding process to produce 2D materials with large lateral size. h-BN was chosen as the representative material because it is useful in insulating thermal conduction. Guided by the DFT simulations, we have developed a GAGE method for the production of 2D materials (Figure By using water-soluble CMC as the adhesive "glue", bulk h-BN powder was exfoliated by the GAGE method. Scanning electron microscope (SEM) images show that the rigid and thick bulk h-BN powders were transformed into flexible and thin BNNSs after the GAGE process (Figure The morphology of BNNSs was further investigated by atomic force microscopy (AFM) and the corresponding height profile, which confirms the large lateral size and thin thickness of the 2D products (Figure In addition to CMC, other adhesive polymers, such as PEI, sodium alginate, soluble starch, polyacrylamide (PAM), and polyvinyl pyrrolidone (PVP) can also be used as glue media to prepare 2D materials. They are water-soluble with high viscosities and can interact with layered materials. For the exfoliated MoS2 nanosheets, the average lateral size is ~336 nm according to the DLS results and clear lattice fringes in the HRTEM images suggest a thickness of ~8 nm (Figure The Raman spectroscopy shows two characteristic peaks of MoS2, i.e., E2g at 383 cm -1 and A1g at 408 cm -1 (Figure We have performed systematic experiments and summarized the three roles of the polymers in the GAGE method. First, polymers act as glues to interact with the layered materials and provide viscous adhesives. Second, polymers can encapsulate the 2D material sheets, provide effective separation between the sheets and allow enhanced exfoliation. Third, polymers are usually dispersing agents and prevent the 2D material sheets from re-aggregation, thus forming a homogeneous dispersion. Therefore, using a mild grinding process to introduce the shear forces, adhesive polymers are able to produce 2D materials with larger lateral size and thinner thickness. Owing to the feasibility of the GAGE method for the production of high-quality 2D materials in large quantities, we explored the potential use of the 2D material/polymer composite products in two scalable applications. With the advent of the 5G era, there is an increasing requirement for thermal interface materials to improve the heat-dissipation of high-power density electronic devices. Considering their high thermal conductivity, electrical insulation, and excellent stability, BNNSs are ideal nanofillers to fabricate polymer composites with good processability for thermal management. For the thermal conductivity of the BNNS/CMC composite film, it depends on the content of BNNS, and the in-plane thermal conductivity reaches 25.92 W m -1 •K -1 at a BNNS loading of 90 wt%, which is more than 20 times that of a pure CMC film (1.29 W m -1 •K -1 , Figure We also used the "one-step" GAGE method for another scalable application in the energy-related field. MoS2 is a promising electrocatalyst for the HER owing to its high catalytic activity, low cost, and good stability. After the annealing process, 2D MoS2 sheets were still uniformly anchored to the substrate as shown in the SEM images, and the excess polymer residue was removed as confirmed by the thermogravimetric analyzer (TGA) curve of the EC powder (Figure To meet the demands of industrial applications, we tested the HER performance of the 2D MoS2based catalyst in alkaline media at large current densities (j). In a KOH (1M) electrolyte, the polarization curves show that the overpotential (η) of the 2D MoS2-based electrocatalyst at 1000 mA cm -2 is 409 mV, which is close to that of the Pt/C catalyst loaded on Cu foam at a loading of 2 mg cm - 2 (410 mV@1000 mA cm -2 , Figure The above results confirmed that the 2D MoS2-based catalysts prepared by the GAGE method had a good HER performance with a small overpotential and good durability at large current densities. In summary, we have developed an effective and universal GAGE method for the scalable production of 2D materials with large lateral size and high quality by using an adhesive polymer solution as the grinding medium. DFT simulations show that the binding energies between the adhesive polymer and the 2D material are larger than the exfoliation energies of the layered materials, providing the basis for successful exfoliation. Furthermore, the 2D material/polymer composite dispersions produced by the GAGE method have shown remarkable performance in two scalable applications, including flexible BNNS/CMC composite films with ultrahigh thermal conductivity for insulating thermal conduction and MoS2-based electrocatalysts with a small overpotential and good durability for the large-current-density HER. The GAGE method has huge potential for the massproduction of high-quality novel 2D materials and the construction of functional polymer composites for many applications, such as actuators, energy storage devices, and electronic devices. Materials. h-BN (Tanyun Junrong Liaoning Chemical Research Institute New Materials Incubator Co., Ltd., D50 of 30 μm), graphite (Macklin Biochemical Co. Ltd., 99.95%, 325 mesh), MoS2 (Aladdin Chemical Reagent Co., 99.5%, <2 μm), WS2(Macklin Biochemical Co. Ltd., 99.9%, 2 μm), Vermiculite (Macklin Biochemical Co. Ltd., 95%), Montmorillonite (Macklin Biochemical Co. Ltd., K-10), industrial-grade MoS2 (Luoyang Shenyu Molybdenum Co., LTD, D50 of 16~30 μm), and PEI solution (Sigma-Aldrich, average Mn~60000 by GPC, average Mw~750000 by LS, 50 wt% in H2O), were used as received. The bulk Bi2O2Se crystal was synthesized by the chemical vapor transfer method as previously reported and then ground into powders by hand. Preparation of 2D materials by the GAGE method. In a typical GAGE process, taking the exfoliation of h-BN by CMC solution as an example, the bulk h-BN powder (7 g) and the CMC solution (150 g, the content of CMC is 3 g) were added to a mortar grinder and ground for 9 h (Retsch, RM 200). During the grinding process, the mortar was rotated at a speed of 100 rpm, and the h-BN powders were exfoliated into 2D BNNS in an ambient atmosphere. The homogeneous BNNS/CMC dispersion was obtained and used directly for applications. For the other selected 2D materials and polymers, the GAGE process was also performed in an ambient atmosphere with controllable parameters, including grinding time, and the weight ratio of bulk materials and polymers. For the morphology characterization of the 2D materials, most of the polymer was removed by multiple cycles of centrifugation at a speed of 10,000 rpm (10619g) and washing treatments in deionized water, followed by the annealing treatment that completely removed any remaining residue. The yield of 2D materials was calculated using the mass of the exfoliated material from the supernatant after centrifugation at a speed of 3000 rpm (955g) for 15 min. Simulation Package (VASP). Assembly of the BNNS/CMC composite films. A continuous BNNS/CMC film was fabricated by a simple doctor-blade casting technique. Typically, a lab-scale doctor blade coater (KJ-MTI, MSK-AFA-IIID) was used to spread 10 mL of the homogeneous BNNS/CMC dispersion over a silicone-coated PET release liner (release force: 5-10 N). The casting speed of the coater was set to 50 mm s -1 , and the gap of the doctor blade was controlled in the range of 100-1000 μm to obtain a wet film. The wet film was dried in a vacuum oven at 60oC and 100 Pa for 12 hours. Afterward, the dried film was then hot-pressed under a pressure of 15 MPa and a temperature of 100oC for 10 min. Finally, the PET release liner was removed, and a free-standing and flexible BNNS/CMC film with a thickness in the range of 47-63 μm was obtained. Fabrication of 2D MoS2-based catalysts and electrochemical measurements. First, the industrial-grade MoS2 powder (2 g) was exfoliated and dispersed by EC solutions using the GAGE process. Second, the 2D MoS2/EC dispersion was dropped into a Cu foam (1×1.5 cm 2 ) with a controlled loading of 10 mg cm -2 . The samples were then thermally treated in a mixture of H2 (5 sccm) and Ar (100 sccm) at 750°C for 1h. For comparison, the Pt/C catalysts were fabricated by a similar procedure, while 20 wt% Pt/C powder (15 mg) was dispersed in a mixture of isopropanol (4.2 mL), deionized water (1.5 mL), and Nafion solution (0.3 mL) to form the dispersion followed by sonication for 10 min and the dispersion was dropped into the Cu foam. All electrochemical experiments were conducted in standard three-electrode electrolyser in 1M KOH electrolyte, with the Hg/HgO electrode and Ni foam as the reference electrode and counter electrode. The scan rate was 1 mV s -1 and an 85% iR correction was taken. Material characterization. The samples were characterized by SEM (Hitachi SU8010, 5 kV), TEM (FEI Tecnai G2 F30, 300 kV and FEI Titan Themis G2, 60 kV), AFM (Oxford Instruments, Cyper ES, tapping mode), XPS (Thermo Fisher Scientific, ESCALAB Xi, monochromatic Al Kα X-rays, 1484.6 eV), XRD (Bruker D8 Advance, with monochromatic Cu Kα radiation λ = 0.15418 nm), Raman spectroscopy (Horiba, LabRAM ER, 532 nm laser excitation), UV-vis-NIR absorption spectrometer (SHIMADZU, UV-2600), DLS and zeta potential measurements (Malvern Zetasizer Nano-ZS90), TGA (Mettler Toledo, TGA2 Star System), and digital viscometer (Shanghai Lichen Bangxi Instrument Technology Co. Ltd., NDJ-8S). The thermal conductivity of the BNNS/CMC composite film was calculated from the thermal diffusion coefficient, density, and heat capacity. The thermal diffusion coefficient was measured by a laser flash apparatus (NETZSCH, LFA447). The density was measured by a density meter (Mettler Toledo, MAY-ME104), and the heat capacity was measured by a differential scanning calorimeter (Mettler Toledo, DSC 3). Mechanical tests of the BNNS/CMC composite film were carried out on a static testing instrument with two clamps (Instron 5943). The dielectric properties of the BNNS/CMC composite film were measured using wide-band dielectric spectroscopy (NOVOCONTROL, Concept 40). (i) Survey XPS spectra, and high-resolution XPS spectra of (j) the B 1s peaks and (k) the N 1s peaks from bulk h-BN, BNNS-CMC, and BNNS. (l) XRD characterization of the bulk h-BN and BNNS. 