Since discovering the ARECh2 (A=alkali or monovalent ions, RE=rare earth, Ch= chalcogen) triangular lattice quantum spin liquid (QSL) family, its oxide, sulfide, and selenide members have been continuously reported and extensively studied. KErTe2 is the first synthesized telluride member and its spin triangular lattice remains unchanged. It was, however, expected that large tellurium ions could introduce more remarkable magnetic features and electronic structures in this family of materials. In this paper, we performed thermodynamic and electron spin resonance (ESR) measurements to study low-energy magnetic excitations, which were significantly affected by crystalline electric field (CEF) excitations due to relatively small gaps between the CEF ground state and the excited states. Based on the CEF and mean-field (MF) theories, we analyzed systematically and consistently the ESR experiments and thermodynamic measurements including susceptibility, magnetization, and heat capacity. The CEF parameters were successfully extracted by fitting high-temperature (> 20 K) susceptibilities in the ab-plane and along the c-axis, allowing to determine the Lande factors (g ab,calc = 5.98(7) and g c,calc = 2.73(3)). These values were consistent with the values of Lande factors determined by ESR experiments (g ab,exp = 5.69 and gc,exp = 2.75). By applying the CEF and MF theories to the susceptibility and magnetization results, we estimated the anisotropic spin-exchange energies and found that the CEF excitations in KErTe2 played a decisive role in the magnetism above 3 K, while the low-temperature magnetism below 10 K was gradually correlated with the anisotropic spin-exchange interactions. The CEF excitations were demonstrated in the low-temperature heat capacity, where both the positions of two broad peaks and their magnetic field dependence well corroborated our calculations. The present study provides a basis to explore the enriched magnetic and electronic properties of the QSL family. Introduction-Rare-earth chalcogenides AReCh 2 (A = alkali or monovalent metal, Re = rare earth, Ch=O, S, Se, and Te) have recently attracted attention as quantum spin liquid (QSL) candidates We have recently successfully synthesized a high-quality single-crystal KErTe 2 sample In this paper, we performed the thermodynamic (susceptibility, magnetization, and heat capacity) and spectroscopic measurements (electron spin resonance) of KErTe 2 . Based on the measured susceptibility, we successfully fitted the CEF parameters of KErTe 2 . We calculated the Lande factors using the fitting parameters to verify the accuracy of the fitting CEF parameters, and the results were consistent with those determined in the electron spin resonance (ESR) experiments. Compared with the traditional method of the CEF excitations measurement based on the inelastic neutron scattering (INS), our method is more cost effective. Meanwhile, we fitted and analyzed the susceptibility at low temperature (< 10 K) based on the mean-field (MF) theory. Although we tried to fit the susceptibility data with the Curie-Weiss law Samples and Experimental Techniques-High-quality single crystals of KErTe 2 (∼ 3 mm) were synthesized by using Te-flux method The ESR measurements were performed using a Bruker EMX plus 10/12 continuous-wave spectrometer at X-band frequencies (f ∼ 9.39 GHz) in the ab-plane and along the caxis of KErTe 2 at 2 K. Electronic configuration, Er 3+ Ion Environment, and Anisotropic Spin Hamiltonian-The 4f orbital of Er 3+ has 11 electrons, so the total spin quantum number S is 3/2. Considering that the orbital quantum number L is 6 and that 4f electrons exhibit strong SOC In KErTe 2 , with the R-3m space group symmetry, the Er 3+ ion and surrounding Te 2 -anions form an octahedral structure with a D 3d point group. Therefore, the Hamiltonian of the CEF can be written as follows (1) Among them, B n m is the CEF parameter and O n m is the Steven operator. Since Er 3+ is a Kramers ion composed of an odd number of electrons, each CEF state is doubly degenerated and protected by the time-reversal symmetry. When the measurement temperature is at the same energy scale as the CEF excitation energy level, the CEF excitations significant impact the thermodynamic measurement results. At a lower measurement temperature (< 10 K), an electron in the CEF ground state has an effective spin-1/2, and the spin-exchange interaction cannot be ignored. Since KErTe 2 has the same space group as YbMgGaO 4 where J zz , J ± , J ±± , and J z± are anisotropic spin-exchange parameters, the phase factor γ ij = 1, e i2π/3 , e -i2π/3 for the nearest neighbor (NN) interaction along the a 1 , a 2 , and a 3 direction, respectively (see Fig. Considering that the elemental composition of KErTe 2 and KErSe 2 Using the effective Hamiltonian, we fitted the CEF parameters and anisotropic exchange parameters and performed quantitative calculations of the thermodynamic data. Fitting the CEF parameters of KErTe 2 -Proper understanding of the CEF excitations of rare-earth magnetic materials makes the basis for further research on low-energy quantum magnetism, especially for QSL candidate materials. INS is generally considered the most experimental method to accu- rately determine the CEF excitations and the related CEF parameters of rare-earth materials. However, INS is quite expensive, and it is not realistic to perform INS measurements on each rare-earth material. Therefore, finding a cost-effective solution for determining the CEF excitations is worth further studying. As far as magnetic susceptibility is concerned, it theoretically contains enough information to analyze the CEF excitations if the measured temperature can cover the CEF excitation energy levels. We can accurately calculate the CEF susceptibility from the CEF Hamiltonian and the thermodynamic calculation formula if we know the CEF parameters. Similarly, we can also fit the CEF parameters by optimizating the algorithm according to the susceptibility We choose the susceptibility in the ab-plane and along the c-axis under a magnetic field of 1 T to fit the CEF parameters of KErTe 2 , and the fitting temperature range is 20 -300 K. We select the CEF parameters of KErSe 2 The fitting is terminated when the fitting error converges. As shown in Fig. To verify the accuracy of the fitted CEF parameters, we calculated the Lande factors g ab and g c of KErTe 2 . The calculated results are almost identical to those determined from the ESR experiment (see Fig. Besides, the Lande factor ratios of g ab : g c are 1.4: 1 and 2: 1 in KErSe 2 We calculated every CEF energy level of KErTe 2 , Fig. Susceptibility, Magnetization and Mean Field (MF) Fitting-For the susceptibility in a low-temperature range (< 10 K), it is not enough to consider only the contribution of the CEF to magnetism. As shown in Fig. (5) We choose the c-axis susceptibility data below 6 K to fit J ±± and J z± , and the finally determined the range of J 2 ±± +J 2 z± = 12.48 K 2 (see Fig. The magnetization measured by the PPMS at 1.8 K is illustrated in Fig. Heat Capacity-A relatively small energy gap between the ground state and the 1st or 2nd excitation states of CEF in KErTe 2 will also have a significant impact on the heat capacity measurement. This was also reflected in the zero-field heat capacity measurement of NaYbSe 2 When the magnetic field is increased to 1 T, the experimental and calculation results show that the magnetic heat capacity significantly increases at 1.8 K. Both increments are about 3.5 J • mol -1 • K -1 , which may be related to the splitting of the CEF ground state under an external magnetic field. To confirm this, we have calculate the heat capacity contributed by the CEF ground state under different magnetic fields. The calculated data are shown in Fig. Summary-We used the effective Hamiltonian 