Erbium-doped lithium niobate on insulator (Er:LNOI) has attracted enormous interest as it provides gain and enables integrated amplifiers and lasers on the lithium niobate on insulator (LNOI) platform. We demonstrate a highly efficient waveguide amplifier on Er:LNOI. The 2.58-cm long amplifier can achieve 27.94 dB signal enhancement, 16.0 dB internal net gain (6.20 dB/cm), -8.84 dBm saturation power, 4.59 dB/mW power conversion efficiency, and 4.49 dB noise figure at 1531.6 nm. Besides, thorough investigation on the pumping wavelength, pumping scheme, output power and noise figure have been performed to provide a comprehensive understanding on this novel waveguide amplifier. This work will benefit the development of a powerful gain platform and can pave the way for a fully integrated photonic system on LNOI platform. Erbium-doped fiber amplifier has been a great success for the past decades as it provides high-gain and low-noise amplification for the optical signal, which forms the cornerstone for current worldwide optical fiber communication network. Compared to the integrated semiconductor optical amplifiers, the long upper-state lifetime of erbium ions also enables a lownoise amplifier on the chip, which triggers the extensive investigation on the erbium-doped waveguide amplifiers. Various host materials have been chosen including lithium niobate (LN), phosphate, silicate, aluminum oxide and tellurium oxide Recently, erbium doped lithium niobate on insulator (Er:LNOI) has attracted intense interest because it can simultaneously achieve high erbium doping concentration, good mode confinement and low-loss waveguide. Therefore, integrated optical amplifiers based on Er:LNOI platform can potentially support high total internal net gain and high internal net gain per unit length. Moreover, lithium niobate on insulator (LNOI) has proved to be a powerful platform for various photonic applications In the work, we have demonstrated an Er:LNOI waveguide amplifier with a signal enhancement of 27.94 dB, an internal net gain of 6.20 dB/cm (16.0 dB total), a saturation power of -8.84 dBm and a noise figure of 4.49 dB at 1531.6 nm. Moreover, many important parameters have also been investigated including the effect of pumping wavelength and pumping scheme, output power, power conversion efficiency, etc. With this work, a comprehensive understanding of a high-performance Er:LNOI waveguide amplifier can be established, which clearly paves the way for a fully integrated photonic system on LNOI platform. The main fabrication procedures of the monolithically integrated waveguide amplifier on Er:LNOI are briefly explained as follows. In Fig. Before discussing the properties of our Er:LNOI amplifiers, we have characterized material properties of Er:LNOI wafer. The element distribution of the Er:LN thin film was characterized by ion time-of-flight secondary ion mass spectrometer (TOF-SIMS), as shown in Fig. The experimental setup is shown in Fig. where Pon and Poff are the signal power with pump power on and off, respectively. The signal enhancement was directly measured by comparing the signal power with and without pump in the OSA. At a launched (on-chip) 1484-nm pump power of 17.34 mW, a maximal signal enhancement of 27.94 dB has been achieved with -50 dBm signal input power (on-chip), as shown in Fig. With the increase of signal input power, the signal enhancement gradually decreased and reached 1 dB at a signal input power of 11.56 dBm. The internal net gain (Gnet in dB) is defined as signal enhancement with the compensation of total loss on the chip, given by where αtotal_loss is the total loss per unit length, mainly including the erbium absorption loss and waveguide propagation loss caused by the sidewall roughness, and L is the length of waveguide amplifier. Obviously, the total loss is wavelength dependent because erbium ions have different absorption for different wavelength. To estimate the internal net gain from the input to the output of the waveguide amplifiers, the waveguide loss should be correctly estimated. We used the following methods to estimate the erbium absorption loss and total loss. Firstly, the erbium absorption loss was calculated from the photoluminescence (PL) spectroscopy of Er 3+ , which is plotted in Fig. where λ is the wavelength, n is the refractive index of the Er:LNOI waveguide. τrad is the radiative lifetime of Er 3+ ions, which is related to the fluorescence lifetime τpl Combined with McCumber's theory, the absorption crosssection σa(λ) (purple line in Fig. where T is the temperature, h is the Planck's constant, k is Boltzmann's constant, ε is the excitation energy related to temperature, where e (-ε kT ) =7.166×10 where Γ(λ) is the overlap integral between the signal mode and erbium-doped waveguide, and the value is 0.89. N Er is the Er 3+ concentration in LN thin film. Through the above derivation, the erbium absorption loss from 1520 nm to 1560 nm can be obtained, as shown in pink line in Fig. With known total loss, the internal net gain can be calculated based on Eq. ( The signal enhancement and internal net gain at 1550 nm were also measured, as shown in Fig. To evaluate the waveguide amplifier, the noise figure is a key performance index. The noise introduced by the waveguide amplifiers would strongly influence the whole system performance. The noise figure is characterized by comparing the electrical signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) between input and output, given by, Generally, SNR degradation is dominated by shot noise and beat noise between signal and spontaneous emission. So the calculation of noise figure can be simplified to the equation where PASE is the amplified spontaneous emission (ASE) power within the measured bandwidth B, h is the Planck's constant, ν is the optical frequency, and G is the internal net gain. As the internal net gain and optical frequency have been known, only the ASE power was to be measured. The polarization extinction method was adopted to measure the noise figure. The setup is shown in Fig. To estimate an accurate value of the ASE power at signal wavelength, two ASE power values of PL and PR on the left and right side of the signal wavelength with 0.2 nm interval were acquired. The ASE power PASE was then calculated by where IL is the insertion loss from the chip output to the OSA. 3 dB means the ASE power distributed equally in the two orthogonal polarization states. The measurement bandwidth in the OSA was 0.02 nm (~2.5 GHz). The calculated noise figures with respect to different signal input power at 1531.6 nm are summarized in Fig. In addition, for an assessment of the effectiveness of the pump, the power conversion efficiency (PCE) is discussed at 1531.6 nm, which is defined as the ratio of internal net gain and launched pump power, PCE=G net_gain /P pump . As shown in Fig. To establish a comprehensive understanding on the performance of Er:LNOI amplifier, various parameters have been investigated. The effect of pumping wavelength was first investigated. Different from erbium doped fiber whose index contrast is typically ~0.01 or less, the ridge Er:LNOI waveguide has a much larger index contrast of ~0.07. This leads to a mode distribution highly dependent on the wavelength. As shown in Fig. Then the effect of waveguide length was studied. The gain performance in the C band of four waveguides with lengths of 1.38 cm, 1.94 cm, 2.58 cm and 2.8 cm has been compared, as shown in Fig. Finally, Er:LNOI is a promising platform thanks to the versatile property combination of LN and erbium. Er:LNOI amplifiers have shown superior performance recently due to the high doping concentration, good mode confinement and low-loss waveguide. In Table In conclusion, we have demonstrated a high-efficiency erbium-doped waveguide amplifier on the LNOI platform. The comprehensive understanding of the device has been built up, including the emission/absorption cross section, output saturation, effect of pump wavelength and pumping scheme, effect of waveguide length, and noise performance. With the full knowledge of this device, a maximal signal enhancement of 27.94 dB and internal net gain of 15.99 dB have been achieved at 1531.6 nm on a 2.58 cm-long Er:LNOI waveguide and 17.31 mW pump power. This indicates a highly efficient and compact design of an integrated waveguide amplifier. Moreover, the noise figure is only 4.49 dB under a signal power of -50 dBm, indicating the low-noise operation under small-signal regime. The saturation power is -8.84 dBm where internal net gain equals to 0 dB. Our work has demonstrated that Er:LNOI can be a powerful platform to achieve integrated waveguide amplifiers with superior performance. Together with the abundant photonic and optoelectronic properties of LNOI, a fully integrated photonic system on LNOI can be envisaged.