We calculate the non-reciprocal critical current and quantify the supercurrent diode effect in Rashba superconductors with arbitrary disorder, using the quasiclassical Eilenberger equation. The non-reciprocity is caused by the helical superconducting state, which appears when both inversion and time-reversal symmetries are broken. In the absence of disorder, we find a very strong diode effect, with the non-reciprocity exceeding 40% at optimal temperatures, magnetic fields and spinorbit coupling. We establish that the effect persists even in the presence of strong disorder. We show that the sign of the diode effect changes as magnetic field and disorder are increased, reflecting the changes in the nature of the helical state. Introduction.-The interplay between superconductivity, spin-orbit coupling (SOC), and a Zeeman field leads to a variety of magnetoelectric effects widely studied in the past years The non-reciprocity of the critical current can be quantified by the superconducting diode quality parameter where j ± c are the critical currents in opposite directions. It has been shown in Refs. Importantly, the above-mentioned theoretical works assume ideally pure superconducting structures and disregard the effect of disorder. However, the latter is unavoidable in realistic structures, and therefore it is important to understand how it affects the supercurrent diode effect. Moreover, understanding the role of disorder will enable to design devices based on combination of conventional materials. In this Letter, we establish a microscopic theory of the supercurrent diode effect in disordered Rashba superconductors. As a base of our study, we use the quasiclassical equations for superconductors with strong Rashba SOC from Ref. Our results elucidate the mechanisms leading to the diode effect, and show how it evolves in the full range of all relevant system parameters: SOC, magnetic field, temperature and disorder. Namely, the effect stems from the competition between two helical bands in a Rashba superconductor, which prefer opposite modulation vectors of the superconducting order parameter when magnetic field is applied. Both magnetic field and SOC are required for diode effect, however if either is too strong, the band competition ceases as one helical band begins to dominate, leading to the suppression of the effect. This means that a substantial η exists only for some optimal magnetic field and SOC. Disorder further complicates this picture, as it introduces mixing of the two helical bands. We discuss optimal parameter regimes where the effect is strongest (exceeding η = 40% in the ballistic case). We establish that the effect persists at strong disorder, meaning that it can be realized even in disordered materials and hybrid systems. Moreover, we show that the sign η changes as the magnetic field is increased Quasiclassical theory.-The quasiclassical Eilenberger equation for a disordered Rashba superconductor with strong SOC, in the basis of two helical bands denoted with the index λ = ±1, is Here ǧλ is the quasiclassical Green's function in Matsubara representation, which is a matrix in Nambu space spanned by the Pauli matrices τ x,y,z . ω = 2πT (n + 1 2 ) is the Matsubara frequency, with T being the temperature. Importantly, the two bands have the same Fermi velocity v = 2μ/m + α 2 , but different densities of states, ν λ = ν(1 -λα/v). Here, μ is the chemical potential, m is the effective electron mass, α is the velocity associated with Rashba SOC, and ν = m/(2π). We introduced the derivative h is the in-plane magnetic field, and n = p/p F = (n x , n y ) describes the direction of the momentum at the Fermi level. The superconductivity is accounted by the term ∆ = ∆(r)τ + + ∆ * (r)τ -, with τ ± = 1 2 (τ x ± iτ y ), where ∆ is the superconducting order parameter. The normalization condition is satisfied for each helical band: ǧ2 λ = 1. Disorder is described by the self-energy σ imp λ given as Here, ... denotes averaging over n, and we introduced , where τ -1 is the disorder scattering rate. Note that σ imp λ stems from a simple scalar disorder potential, which acquires the form shown in Eq. (3) upon projection to the helical basis Equation ( To proceed, we assume that the superconducting phase varies only along the x-direction, and that the Zeeman field is applied along the y-direction: h = (0, h). We take that ∆(x) = ∆e iqx [27] , where q = q 0 + δq is the phase gradient which contains two contributions: intrinsic modulation of the helical phase q 0 , and an additional phase gradient caused by passing the supercurrent δq. Then, we write the Green's function as ǧλ (x) = g λ τ z + fλ (x)τ + + f * λ (x)τ -, and we may look for the solution in the form fλ (x) = -if λ e iqx . The normalization condition gives g 2 λ = 1 -f 2 λ . The Eilenberer equation then reduces to the following scalar equation Here, we introduced ρ λ = qv + 2λh. The order parameter is determined self-consistently as Here, T c is the critical temperature of the superconductor in the absence of magnetic field. Finally, the current along the x-direction is given as Importantly, j(q 0 ) = 0 -there should be no supercurrent flowing in the equilibrium Eqs. ( Ballistic case.-Before discussing the diode effect, it is first useful to understand the evolution of the helical phase in magnetic fields. The two helical bands with λ = ±1 prefer opposite modulation vectors: q λ 0 v = -2λh. At low magnetic fields, both bands contribute to helical superconductivity, which yields a modulation vector q 0 v ≈ 2 α v h. This regime is known as a long-wavelength or "weak" helical phase two bands have similar densities of states, at α/v 1, the so-called stripe phase might stabilize instead of the strong helical phase at high fields. The stripe phase is beyond the scope of the present work (see also the footnote [27]). In the absence of disorder, the two helical bands are decoupled, and we readily find the solution of the Eilenberger equation ( FIG. The upper left panel of Fig. In Fig. Note that the coefficient η can have non-monotonic dependence on the temperature at some fixed magnetic field, as shown in Fig. ing discussion, we explore the crossover from the strong diode effect in the ballistic case, to its vanishing at sufficiently strong disorder. We examine the diode effect at arbitrary disorder in the GL regime, close to the phase transition to the normal state. This approach is valid for any T , as long as h is sufficiently strong so that the ∆ T . In order to construct the GL free energy, we solve the Eilenberger equation ( λ , and The GL free energy is then where (1) λ and (see the Supplementary Information). The order parameter is determined by minimizing the free energy with respect to ∆, which gives ∆ 2 = -α q /β q . From here, we find the optimal free energy F opt q = -α 2 q /(2β q ). Finally, the current is given as Fig. The diode effect at τ -1 = 10T c reaches a sizeable value of η ≈ -7%. Further increasing disorder (τ -1 > 10T c ) leads to a qualitatively similar picture as in the lower right panel of Fig. In summary, based on the quasiclassical formalism, we establish a theory of the diode effect in Rahsba superconductors with arbitrary disorder. In the ballistic limit, we explore the whole phase diagram of helical superconductivity, and identify the conditions that maximize the diode effect. In the presence of disorder, we identify a new regime of the diode effect, which is qualitatively different from the ballistic limit, and show that a substantial diode effect exists even at strong disorder. Moreover, we show that the sign the quality factor η is related to the nature of the helical state: η > 0 in the "strong" state, and η < 0 in the "weak" state. A possible device to experimentally study the effect is a 2D superconductor with strong SOC in a heterostructure with a ferromagnetic insulator such as EuS In Sec. , we provide analytical expressions for the Fermi surface averages f λ and n x g λ in the ballistic limit. The former is used in Eq. ( In the ballistic limit, the Fermi surface averages f λ and n x g λ can be expressed in terms of complete elliptic integrals of the first and second kind, namely and E(x) = π/2 0 dθ 1 -x sin 2 θ, respectively. We obtain Here, we used n x = cos θ, and introduced Π ± λ = (2∆ ± ρ λ ) 2 + 4ω 2 . In order to construct the GL free energy introduced in Eq. ( Here, f (1) ∼ ∆ and f (3) ∼ ∆ 3 . Then, starting from Eq. ( Here we introduced and the source terms To solve Eq. (S3), we take the averages: from Eq. (S3), which we then use to find the source term X (3) λ from Eq. (S5). Using this source term, we finally solve Eqs. (S6) and (S7) for (i) = 3. This procedure allows us to find an analytical solution for the Green's functions at arbitrary disorder. However, it too cumbersome so we do not write it here. In the absence of disorder, the solution significantly simplifies, and we have (S8) In this Section we demonstrate that the diode effect vanishes close to T c up to linear order in h, in contrast to previous works In the ballistic limit, the coefficients in the GL free energy, defined in Eq. ( Close to T c , we may expand α q and β q assuming small q and small h. We keep terms up to 4-th order in q and up to first order in h. Then we have α q = -α 0 -α 1 q + α 2 q 2 + α 3 q 3 -α 4 q 4 , β q = β 0 + β 1 q -β 2 q 2 -β 3 q 3 + β 4 q 4 . (S10) The coefficients in Eq. (S10) are α 0 = ν Tc-T Tc , α 2 ). The optimal free energy is then In order to simplify the following calculations, we introduced a new quantity in Eq. (S11) -γ q , which combines the GL coefficients α q and β q , namely γ q = α q 1 + β1q β0 -β2q 2 β0 -β3q 3 β0 + β4q 4 β0 ≈ (-α 0 -α 1 q+α 2 q 2 +α 3 q 3 -α 4 q 4 ) 1-1 2 To proceed, we keep terms up to q 4 in γ q and in the leading order in α 0 . This way, we obtain γ q = -γ 0 -γ 1 q + γ 2 q 2 -γ 3 q 3 + γ 4 q 4 . (S13) The coefficients γ i are 