Graphene wetting by polymers is a critical issue to both the success of polymer-aided transfer of large size sheets onto specific substrates and to the development of well performing nanocomposites. Here we show for the first time that high temperature contact angle measurements can be performed to investigate the wettability of CVD graphene by molten polymers. In particular, poly(methyl methacrylate), a widely used polymer support for CVD graphene transfer, has been adopted herein for this proof-of-concept study and the values of contact angle and work of adhesion have been provided in the temperature range 170-200 °C. Graphene, the perfect lattice of sp 2 -bonded carbon atoms, cannot stand alone in real applications due to its atomic thickness and structure, and occurs either in combination with various substrates to form graphene-on-substrate devices or embedded in matrices to form nano-composites. In all these systems, the interface between graphene and the surrounding matrix or the underlying substrate plays a dominant role in both the manufacturing process and in effectively combining the properties of each component in the final structure. Regarding the production of graphene-polymer composites, for instance, it is well known that the control of wetting of molten polymers at solid surfaces and the adhesion forces involved at polymer-filler interfaces are key factors in the preparation of high-quality, high-performing composites In general, the wettability of graphene and its surface properties have been widely investigated by means of static contact angle measurements of low molecular weight liquids (e.g. water) and the "wetting transparency"-i.e. the transmission of the substrate wetting property over graphene coating -has gained significant attention due to its versatility for potential applications and has been a controversial issue in the literature Recently, Raj et al. Contact angle (CA) testing is a generally simple characterization method: consider a liquid drop resting on a flat, horizontal solid surface, the contact angle is defined as the angle θ formed by the intersection of the liquid-solid interface and the liquid-vapour interface (geometrically acquired by applying a tangent line from the contact point along the liquidvapour interface in the droplet profile) (Figure By using a versatile lab-scale mini batch Graphene produced by CVD on 25-μm-thick Cu foil gently supplied by Aixtron SE (Herzogenrath, Germany) and a poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA, Sigma Aldrich, M W ~ 120000 by GPC, M w /M n = 2.0-2.4) in granular form were adopted in this study. According to manufacturer, the composition of the PMMA is 6% isotactic, 39% atactic, and 55% syndiotactic and the T g measured by DSC is ~ 105° C (midpoint). a b A thin film of PMMA (150nm ca.) was spin cast from a 3% wt solution in anisole (Sigma Aldrich) to form the protecting polymer layer on CVD graphene grown on Cu foil (typically 1 cm 2 ). The film was then annealed at 120 °C for 10 min to remove the solvent. Oxygen Plasma was used to remove graphene from the back side of the Cu foil. Cu was then etched away by using ammonium persulfate (APS) 0.15 M. After rinsing the film with distilled water, the target substrate was placed in water with a tilting angle underneath the floating film. Water was pulled out with a syringe to lower the film onto the substrate while positioning the film with a needle. After drying it under vacuum for several hours, the sample was heated at 180 °C in air for over 30 min to enable the flattening of the graphene film. The PMMA was finally removed with an acetone bath. The success of the transfer and the quality of graphene transferred on Si wafer have been evaluated by using Raman mapping and Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM). Raman mapping has been performed on an area of 100x100 μm 2 , by acquiring spectra at steps of 2μm (Renishaw Invia Raman Spectrometer, laser line 514 nm). Peaks were fitted using Lorentzian functions and the spectroscopic parameters (peak position and FWHM) were mapped. AFM was carried out with a commercial AFM (Dimension icon, Bruker Co., USA), in a Peak Force Tapping using silicon nitride tip (Scanasyst-Air, Bruker, nom. tip radius 2 nm, nom. frep. 70 kHz, nom. spring constant of 0.4 N/m) and with scan resolution of 384 samples per line. Height mode images are acquired simultaneously at a fixed scan rate (0.9 Hz) with a resolution of 384 × 384 pixels. Roughness of the CVD graphene samples transferred on the Si wafer was determined by AFM to investigate its effect on the observed contact angle by analysing images of size of 40 x 40 μm (i.e. projected surface area of 1600 μm 2 ). Processing of images and analysis was carried out using NanoScopeTM software (Digital Instruments, version V614r1). All height images are presented after the first-order two-dimensional flattening. The sessile drop method was used to measure the contact angle of two couple PMMA/graphene and PMMA/silicon. All the measurements were performed at high temperature (from 170 to 200°C) and under vacuum to avoid oxidative degradation. The setup designed for the experiment is shown in Figure The evolution process and the equilibrium contact angle were captured by a camera DMK 41AUO2 Germany, placed in front of the window 1 while the background is illuminated by a diffused light through the window 2 (as shown in Figure For each experiment a spherical-shape piece of polymer of around 10 mg was gently laid in the centre of the substrate placed in the middle of the heated chamber. Care was taken to ensure that the substrate was level. Once the vacuum is reached, the temperature is increased to the maximum test temperature (i.e. 200°C) without overshoots and the evolution of the shape of the drop was continuously monitored by using the camera. Figure A large area (5x5 mm 2 ) of CVD monolayer graphene, as shown by the optical image in Figure The HT-CA experiments were carried out under vacuum to avoid thermo-oxidative degradation of the polymer. Once the vacuum was reached, the temperature was increased to the maximum test temperature (i.e. 200°C) and the evolution of the shape of the PMMA drop was continuously monitored by using the camera, as shown in Figure Measurements were repeated on 5 samples and at 170, 180, 190 and 200 °C. A typical temporal evolution of the cosine of the dynamic contact angle of molten PMMA on CVD graphene is shown in Figure In particular, for the system at hand, the equilibrium value of contact angle is reached after several hours and that the duration of the transient is consistent with the characteristic time for the interfacial-tension-driven motions t c of 10h ca. (see section 2.4) Furthermore, the scattering of the long-time relaxation data depicted in Figure The equilibrium values of the apparent contact angle of PMMA on CVD graphene as evaluated from the proposed method are reported in Fig. Furthermore, in order to assess any possible wetting transparency, HT-CA measurements were performed also on a PMMA drop located on a Si/SiO 2 wafer not covered with graphene. In this case, the contact angle of PMMA on silicon is about 41±2° in the investigated temperature range. It is important to note here that, on real surfaces, there may exist a wide range of metastable apparent contact angles Marmur where r is defined by the ratio of the apparent surface area to the projected surface area. The r values found for our CVD graphene on Si/SiO 2 wafer was determined by AFM to be 1.000625. Using the mean value of θ a of PMMA on graphene of 31°, θ Y was determined to be 31.02°. This gives a difference between apparent and Young's CA less than 0.01%, which is within the uncertainty of the measurement and reveals that any error introduced by surface roughness is negligible in our system, as also demonstrated earlier for similar CVD graphenes The measured values of contact angle have been then used to calculate the work of adhesion between graphene and PMMA in the investigated temperature range. In general, it is known that the work of adhesion a solid surface and liquid -that refers to equilibrium energy associated with the reversible process of separation of the interface between two bulk phases -can be expressed as a function of the contact angle by where γ l represents the liquid surface free energy. The work of adhesion between graphene and PMMA evaluated by solving eq.2 is reported in Figure In this study, for the first time the wetting behaviour of graphene by molten polymer has been investigated by performing high-temperature contact angle measurements. Wetting kinetics of molten PMMA drop on macroscopic CVD monolayer graphene were monitored and equilibrium values of apparent contact angle and work of adhesion have been provided. In the investigated temperature range, the contact angle was found to be almost constant, with a mean value of 31±2°, and the work of adhesion was found to slightly decrease, from 0.055 to 0.051 N/m. The technique can be easily exploited to investigate the wetting of different polymer melts on graphene and the results will provide valuable guidance for several applications, from the optimization of polymer-aided graphene transfer adopted in different fields (e.g. electronics) to the design and manufacturing of graphene-based composites. 