The Personal Alert Safety System (PASS) is an alarm signal device carried by firefighters to help rescuers locate and extricate downed firefighters. A fire creates temperature gradients and inhomogeneous time-varying temperature, density, and flow fields that modify the acoustic properties of a room. To understand the effect of the fire on an alarm signal, experimental measurements of head-related transfer functions (HRTF) in a room with fire are presented in time and frequency domains. The results show that low frequency (<1000 Hz) modes in the HRTF increase in frequency and higher frequency modal structure weakens and becomes unstable in time. In the time domain, the time difference of arrival between the ears changes and becomes unstable over time. Both these effects could impact alarm signal detection and localization. Received level of narrowband tones is presented that shows the fire makes the received level of a source vary by >10 dB. All these effects could impact the detection and localization of the PASS alarm, and life safety consequences. The Personal Alert Safety System (PASS) is a device carried by firefighters, typically mounted on their Self Contained Breathing Apparatus (SCBA). The device detects motion and emits an alarm sound if the firefighter has been stationary for too long. Firefighters rely on the PASS alarm to alert others if they need to be rescued. Rescuers can follow the alarm sound to the source and extricate the downed firefighter. The PASS device and the PASS alarm signal are governed by the NFPA 1982 Standard on Personal Alert Safety Systems (PASS). The most recent standards have required an alarm signal consisting of a series of warbled tones The PASS alarm has been in service since 1983 and has been successful as a life safety device. However, anecdotal evidence (including a) mustafa_abbasi@utexas.edu; Corresponding author. personal communication) from the fire service and a survey of National Institute of Occupation Health and Safety (NIOSH) fatality reports suggests that the PASS does not always work as expected The head-related transfer function (HRTF) is the frequency-dependent ratio of the sound present at the apex of the ear canal to the sound at the source. Assuming linear acoustics, and a time-domain description, the received signal at the left ear x l (t) due to a source signal x(t) can be found using the convolution where h l (t) is the response at the left ear due to a delta function at the source. The Fourier transform of h l (t) yields H l (f ), the HRTF in the frequency domain. The same formulation is applied to the right ear. Sound source localization by humans is a complex phenomenon. Two dominant mechanisms are the interaural level difference (ILD) and the interaural time delay (ITD) This paper addresses the impact of the fire on the sound heard by a firefighter in the room. Head-related transfer functions (HRTF) are measured over time as the fire evolves and provide insight into how the fire would change the sound heard by the firefighter. The headrelated transfer function (HRTF) impacts the localization and detection of sound. Much of the previous literature focuses on measuring the HRTF, and the localization and source discrimination it allows. This work focuses on understanding how the dynamic acoustic environment created by the fire affects the HRTF. HRTFs were measured before ignition, while the fire was burning, and after extinction. Compartment fire testing was conducted at the University of Texas burn facility. The total floor area is 5.6 m (X) x 4.6 m (Y ) and the height of the ceiling is 2.1 m (Z). The room was divided into the main compartment and a hallway with a door. A series of eight experiments were designed, of which the results of six are discussed in this article. Experiment 1 is discussed in • The downed firefighter is in a corner of the room, opposite where the fire is burning. A rescuer is crawling on the floor while searching for the PASS beacon. This scenario is addressed in experiments 3 and 4. • The downed firefighter is in a corner of the room and the fire is between the firefighter and the rescuer. This scenario is addressed in experiments 5 and 6. • The downed firefighter is in a corner of the room, opposite where the fire is burning. A rescuer enters the open door and stays in the hallway, crawling to find the PASS beacon. This scenario is addressed in experiment 7. • The rescuer enters the room like in experiment 7, but the door closes behind them. This scenario is addressed in experiment 8. These experiments were designed to gain an understanding of the physical acoustics of the compartment fire, while still being grounded in the reality of the PASS problem. While the above scenarios involve a rescuer crawling on the floor, the receivers were stationary during the experiments. A 150 kW fire is used for all experimental work and is a small fire compared to those seen on a real fireground. However, larger fires also create an uninhabitable environment that rescuers would not enter. In that respect, this fire likely creates an environment representative of compartment fires where rescuers can reasonably enter and extricate a downed firefighter. The acoustic transfer function of a source and receiver pair in a compartment fire was measured using deconvolution of a source and received signal. The source signal was a 0.2-s-long chirp, logarithmically modulated from 100 Hz to 5000 Hz. The signal was generated by a MATLAB ® program and converted to an analog signal using a NI-9263 analog output module at a 100 kHz sample rate. The instantaneous frequency f i of the chirp was where t is time, f 0 is the start frequency, f 1 is the end frequency and t 1 is duration of the sweep (MATLAB, 2014). The frequency response of the system was found from the discrete Fourier transforms of the microphone signals and the input chirp as described in and where s t (t) is the transmit signal and s r (t) is the received signal. The discrete Fourier transform of H(f ) is the complex frequency response of the system and h(t) is the impulse response of the system. The signal processing described in this section was used for all the experiments presented in this chapter. The frequency and impulse response were measured repeatedly in sequence as a function of time T since ignition and will henceforth be referred to as H(f, T ) and h(t, T ) respectively. The interaural level difference (ILD) is computed by 10 log 10 |H r /H l | 2 where H r is the frequency response of the right ear microphone and H l is the frequency response of the left ear microphone. The Interaural time delay is computed using the cross-correlation of impulse responses at the right and left ear. Figure A JBL LSR2328P (8" two-way Bi-Amplified powered studio monitor) speaker was the acoustic source. A 0.2 s, 100 Hz to 5000 Hz logfrequency modulated signal was generated by an NI-9263 analog output module at 100 kHz sample rate. Simultaneous digitization from the microphones at 10 kHz was performed using a NI-9215 Analog Input Module (BNC). Both the NI-9215 and the NI-9178 were installed in a NI-cDAQ 9178 CompactDAQ chassis. The chassis interfaced with a MATLABTM based data acquisition script over a USB-2.0 bus. The burner, burn structure, propane source, and measurement setup were all identical to the setup described in The evolution of a head-related transfer function in a compartment fire was measured in experiments 3 through 8. These were analyzed in the time and frequency-domain representations. The time-domain HRTF conveys the time delay of arrival between the source and the microphone located at each ear. The time difference of arrival between ear 1 and ear 2 is the interaural time delay (ITD), a key localization cue for low-frequency sound (<1500 Hz) If possible, it would have been instructive to conduct multiple replicates of each experiment. Given the difficulty of working with real fire, it was only possible to conduct two replicates of experiment 3 and two replicates of experiment 4. Abbasi (2020, Appendix 1) shows the differences between repeated runs of exper- iments 3 and 4. Differences greater than those observed between repeated measurements with the same conditions can reasonably be assumed to be caused by the different conditions associated with each experiment. The analysis provides evidence that the differences in the HRTF between experiments 3 through 8 are largely real effects caused by differences in the head orientation, fire, and burn structure configurations. They are significantly larger than the differences observed in back-to-back replicates. Experiments 3 through 8 capture the headrelated transfer function (HRTF) between the source and the right and left ears microphones. This is further processed to compute the ILD and ITD. The data is presented in Figure Modeling the ears as a two-element line array, neglecting all effects of the head, and assuming plane wave propagation, the source direction in the plane of the ear θ can be predicted using the ITD and the assumed sound speed c = 343 m s -1 using Equation ( where d is the distance between the ears (or microphones). Changing from c ITD = 0.01 m to c ITD = 0.02 m results in ∆θ = 5.8°. In experiment 4 the head, speaker, and fire are in the same position as experiment 3, with the head rotated such that the right ear is facing the speaker. The following observations can be made. The right 'ear', which points into the room and towards the fire, appears to lose modal structure above 3300 Hz, while the left ear, which points away from the fire, loses modal structure above 1700 Hz. A similar phenomenon was observed in experiment 1 In experiments 5 and 6, the speaker and manikin head are in the same position as experiments 3 and 4, but the burner is moved to a location between the head and the speaker. The head is facing the speaker in experiment 6 and rotated such that the right ear is facing the speaker in experiment 5. The fire was ignited for a shorter period for these two experiments because of the proximity of the fire to the microphones and speaker. The left ear HRTF suffers a significant loss of modal structure at frequency > 1500 Hz while the same happens on the right 'ear' at frequency > 2500 Hz. In both cases, low frequencies are more strongly changed than in experiments 3 and 4. This causes the ILD to be highly chaotic and inconsistent across the entire band. Even at low frequency, there is a loss of modes. Comparing experiments 3 and 4 to 5 and 6 shows that proximity to the fire has a powerful impact on the frequency response and ILD localization cues. The time-domain HRTF also reflects these changes. There is a larger change on the first arrival path in experiments 5 and 6 than in 3 and 4. Some arrivals are entirely lost after ignition, that return immediately after extinction, showing it was the flame that was causing the loss. In Experiments 7 and 8, the head is moved to the hallway next to the room with the fire. The only difference is that in experiment 8, the burn structure door is closed. The burner is returned to the position in experiment 3. The left ear faces into the room and the right ear faces out. Observe that. In experiment 7, both "ears" see a similar acoustic response. ILD is consistent for frequency < 1300 Hz, and loses modal structure above 1600 Hz. This shows that the acoustic environment changes more in the hallway than in the room with the fire. The modal structure in experiment 8 is more consistent over time than in Experiment 7. This is further evidence towards the hypothesis that the flow of hot gas out through the narrow hallway creates a highly chaotic temperature field in the hallway leading to uncorrelated impulse responses. Experiment 8 also shows the largest change in mode frequency, likely because the closed-door resulted in a higher temperature in the burn structure. The burn structure was equipped with thermocouples to measure the temperature during the experiment. This section shows the evolution of the temperature field during experiment 3. The thermocouples were distributed throughout the burn structure. They were grouped into vertical "trees," hanging from the ceiling and anchored to the floor, and the core of the tree was insulated using 2-inch-thick Kaowool blanket S (Morgan Advanced Materials, 2019) (ceramic refractory fiber blanket). Figure ple trees and the height of the thermocouples on the trees. Each tree is labeled TC1 through TC8. Figure Figure This work shows experimental measurements of head-related transfer functions in a room with a fire present. The head-related transfer function was measured using several different head/source positons. Interaural level difference (ILD) and interaural time delay (ITD) were computed and analyzed. Since ILD and ITD are hearing localization cues, the fire changing them could confuse a listener as to where the sound is coming from. Two PASS alarm signals (a 2007 standard and a 2013 standard alarm) were auralized using the measured impulse responses. There was a significant change to the waveform after ignition. Visually it appears that the 2013 standard is more robust to these changes but that cannot be confirmed without human testing. This work showed the changes to the acoustics in a room caused by the fire, in the frequency band of interest to the PASS alarm. The various changes are documented, and possible effects on listener performance (detection and localization) were considered. Future work using human subjects is needed to make conclusions on the effect of the fire on the PASS alarm performance. J. Acoust. Soc. Am. / 27 August 2021