The precise understanding of depletion layers is of major importance to control the optical and electronic properties of metal oxide (MO) nanocrystals (NCs). Depletion layers typically form through the electronic depletion of the near surface region due to the presence of surface states. In this article, we show that depletion layer engineering is possible beyond surface states and that it is the main mechanism of photodoping of MO NCs. Exemplified by the case study of Sn:In2O3/In2O3 core-shell NCs with varying shell thickness, we show that the introduction of more than one electronic interface induces a double bending of the electronic bands accompanied by a distinct carrier density profile. This induces the formation of a depleted region between the shell and the surface of the nanoparticle effectively separating the particle into three distinct electronic regions: a core region with specific carrier density, a transition region with order of magnitude lower carrier density and an undoped depletion region. Notably, the electronic band profile does not coincide with the physical core-shell boundaries. We found that the light-induced depletion layer modulation and bending of the bands close to the surface of the nanocrystal is the main mechanism responsible for the storage of extra electrons after photodoping in MO NCs. We support our results by a combined experimental and theoretical approach in which we compare numerical simulations with empirical modelling and experiments. This allows us not only to extract the main mechanism of photodoping in MO NCs, a process so far not understood electronically, but also to engineer the charge storage capability of MO NCs after photodoping. Our results are transferable to other core-shell and core-multishell systems as well, opening up a novel direction to control the optoelectronic properties of nanoscale MOs by designing their energetic band profiles through depletion layer engineering. Doped metal oxide (MO) nanocrystals (NCs) are gaining the attention of the scientific community thanks to their unique properties, such as high electron mobility, Fig. We performed numerical simulations based on the solution of Poisson's equation 2 within the parabolic band approximation to illustrate the band structure of NCs and their depletion layer formation (extended details on the calculations are reported in the Supplementary Information). Effective control over NC geometry, size and doping level is crucial to make reliable quantitative assessment of . To experimentally investigate depletion layer engineering predicted by numerical calculations, we synthetized ITO-In2O3 core-shell NCs with varying shell thickness and induced a dynamic variation of their carrier density via photodoping (see Supplementary Information for further details on synthesis methods). Fig. The absorption spectra of the representative samples, normalized to the maximum are reported in Fig. ) and modulations of core-shell NCs of increasing upon photodoping are observed similar to from the results from the numerical simulations. We now investigate the same system of ITO-In2O3 NCs with varying thickness with numerical methods as introduced above. The values for were chosen equivalent to the size of synthesized NCs. To further investigate also the photodoping process, we numerically calculate the effects of additional free electrons in the system as a function of . To this aim, we introduced a generation function ( ) = , which extends the Poisson's equation by an additional term that represents the spatial distribution of the extra free carriers introduced into the system via photodoping. The intensity of incident photon flux is reported as , denotes the photon absorption coefficient, and denotes the quantum efficiency, respectively. To further test our theory, we approach the photodoping process by applying an empirical model to fit the spectra of each sample. Representative fits are shown as orange curves in Fig. . Here, the bulk plasma frequency = * ⁄ is a function of the free carrier density ( ) and the effective electron mass ( * ), Γ is a damping parameter accounting for electron-electron scattering and is the high frequency dielectric constant. Within this picture, is directly linked to of the material. The tunability of the LSPR is provided by the proportionality to , which is related to the number of free charges over the active volume ( ~ / ). Hence, we can link the absorption, which is our physical observable, to the electronic structure of the system. In previous works, the effect of depletion layers was addressed by Zandi et al., who introduced an effective dielectric function using a Maxwell-Garnett effective medium approximation (EMA). We give a quantitative comparison between the numerical and empirical approach by plotting the amount of stored carriers in the NC ( ), defined as the difference between the free carriers of the photodoped NC and the as-synthesized NC ( = -). We observe a good agreement between both approaches, finding that increases with with a ∆ ~ trend, reaching values as high as 600 extra electrons (Fig. Finally, we aim at isolating the impact of depletion layer engineering from the volume dependence of as shown from Schimpf et al.. In this work, we demonstrate that depletion layer engineering is an important tool to design and control energetic band profiles in metal oxide NCs. Our results are based on a combination of theory and experiment: we implement a numerical model that is able to account for additional free carriers in the MO NCs, we developed an empirical three-layer model that describes the optical response of the (photodoped) core-shell ITO-In2O3 NCs, and confirmed our results with experimental electron counting experiments through reaction with F4TCNQ. From this combined theoretical and experimental approach, we found that, first, double bending of the bands dominates the electronic structure of (photodoped) core-shell ITO-In2O3 NCs and that the depletion layer predominantly affects the In2O3 shell. Second, the electronic rearrangement of energy bands and the filling of electronically depleted regions resulting in the evolution of different levels of carrier density in core and shell are the main mechanism behind the photodoping process of metal oxides NCs. Third, depletion layer engineering allows enhancing the charge storage capability of ITO NCs of the same size. We can extend this model to other systems as well demonstrating the validity of our approach. Our results show that the modulation of the depletion layer represents an interesting avenue to design and improve the properties of MO NCs and their core-shell or core multishell structures. We foresee multiple practical applications ranging from energy storage to sensing for ITO-and similar metal oxide nanocrystals-based devices that will benefit from the control of electronic band profiles through depletion layer engineering. Core-Shell Nanocrystal synthesis ITO/In2O3 core/shell nanocrystals were synthesized with the following procedure, adapted from Ref. Then, part of the cores was kept for analysis and the rest of the solution reintroduced in fresh oleyl alcohol. For shelling, a second precursor solution was prepared in an analogue manner. In order to yield an undoped indium oleate precursor solution, indium(III) acetate was mixed with oleic acid in a 1:6 molar ratio. Undoped indium oleate was added with the same slow-injection procedure described above. Core-shell samples were washed with ethanol and the process repeated several times until a final size of ~10 nm was reached. All experiments were performed on samples collected at different stages of the shell growth, and hence sharing the very same ITO core. The structural characterization of the samples with different shell thickness were analyzed by transmission electron microscopy (TEM) to determine the size and confirm the successful formation of nanocrystals. TEM measurements were performed with a JEOL JEM-1400Plus operating at 120 kV and using lacey carbon grids supported by a copper mesh. The size distribution of the NCs was extracted using ImageJ tools on the images collected. Inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-OES) was performed on all samples to estimate the doping levels and concentrations of the ITO NCs. The elemental analysis was carried out via inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectroscopy (ICP-OES) on an iCAP 6000 Series ICP-OES spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). In a volumetric flask, each sample was dissolved in aqua regia [HCl/HNO3 3:1 (v/v)] and left overnight at RT to completely digest the NCs. Afterward, Milli-Q grade water (18.3 MΩ cm) was added to the sample. The solution was then filtered using a polytetrafluorethylene membrane filter with 0.45 μm pore size. All chemical analyses performed by ICP-OES were affected by a systematic error of about 5%. Optical measurements were carried out on a Cary5000 UV-vis-NIR Spectrometer. Spectra were collected in anhydrous toluene in the range 280-3200 nm with a scan resolution of 1 nm. After drying the solvent, ITO NCs were transferred in anhydrous toluene (Sigma-Aldrich) in a nitrogen filled glove box. Rectangular anaerobic cuvettes with a sealed screw cap (Starna Scientific) were used for photodoping and titration experiments. Before photodoping, the ITO-In2O3 NCs were dissolved in anhydrous toluene, as described above. Subsequently, the photodoping process on the NCs is achieved by illuminating the quartz cuvette containing the solution with the NCs with a UV LED (central wavelength: 300 nm, bandwidth: 20 nm). The cuvette was placed at a distance of 12 mm from the cuvette window (Thorlabs M300L4). UV power density at the front window of the cuvette was 36.8 mW cm -2 . The titrant was prepared by dissolving 0.34 mg of F4TCNQ (2,3,5,6-tetrafluoro-7,7,8,8tetracyanoquinodimethane) in 30 mL of anhydrous toluene. The titrant addition steps were carried out in the inert environment of a nitrogen-filled glove box to avoid any contact with ambient oxygen. Electron counting was performed after photodoping by spectroscopic analysis of the neutral, anion and dianion forms of the F4TCNQ molecules. The effects of titrants on as-synthesized ITO-In2O3 samples were tested, showing no sign of interaction in the spectrum. The distinct dielectric response of the core-shell NCs is implemented as an effective dielectric function ε (ω) based on the Maxwell-Garnett effective medium approximation (EMA). This model is further extended to consider multiple shell regions and corresponding dielectric environments. We fit the experimental data with a particles warm optimization algorithm in MATLAB (R2020a. Natick, Massachusetts: The MathWorks Inc.) and we extract the carrier densities , and , and spatial extensions ( , ) of the core and shell regions, respectively, for each NC of increasing shell thickness before and after photodoping. Simulations for the energy band and carrier density profiles were solved numerically for spherical NCs using a finite-element method. Poisson's equation was solved with the software COMSOL Multiphysics v5.0 (Comsol Inc., Burlinghton MA USA) using a finite-element scheme (see Supplementary Information for details). peak absorption appears two oscillators are needed. The two-layer model can be seen as a particular case of the three-layer model. As a matter of fact, when the contribution from the shell is negligible a single electronic population can be considered responsible for the plasmonic response. The remaining part of the nanoparticle is just occupied by the depletion layer, which is plasmonically inactive but alters the dielectric environment that the core experiences. In contrast, the three-layer model was needed to correctly fit all samples. Some NCs developed a double peak response only after photodoping (due to the addition of extra charges in the shell), while even bigger NCs presented the double feature even in the as-synthesised case. In this latter case, two of the three layers are plasmonically active (core and shell), while the third layer is held by the depletion region. Moreover, the observed redshifts of the main peak in the absorption spectra after photodoping require the presence of the depletion layer to be explained for both the aforementioned cases. The two-layer model relies on the fit of six parameters, which are the number of electrons in the core, , , the number of electrons in the shell, , , the core radius, , the core damping parameter, , the shell damping parameter, , and the solution volumetric concentration, = • , where , is the density of nanoparticle in the solution and , is the average nanoparticle's volume. The three-layer model adds one more parameter to the previous ones: , which is the radius of the active shell. The algorithm used for finding the best fit with both the models is the particle swarm optimization algorithm, implemented with Matlab software. This is preferable to least squares fitting function because the solution does not depend on the initial guess of the parameters but the global best fit (if exists) is found exploring all the possible combination of parameters between the lower and higher bounds. It must be noticed that the bounds for the photodoped case depends on the solution of the same as-synthetised particle. In order to have consistent solutions without overfitting, a final comparison between the solutions found for the as-synthetized case with the photodoped ones is needed. The best-fit found for the as-synthesized and photodoped samples are showed in Fig. Tab. 2| Extracted parameters for three-layer model fit for the as-synthetized samples. Tab. 3| Extracted parameters for three-layer model fit for the photodoped samples. 