The transition metal dichalcogenide PdTe2 has attractive features based on its classification as a type-II Dirac semimetal and the occurrence of type-I superconductivity, providing a platform for discussion of a topological superconductor. Our recent work revealed that type-I superconductivity persists up to pressures of ∼ 2.5 GPa and the superconducting transition temperature Tc reaches a maximum at around 1 GPa, which is inconsistent with the theoretical prediction. To understand its non-monotonic variation and investigate superconductivity at higher pressures, we performed structural analysis by x-ray diffraction at room temperature below 8 GPa and electrical resistivity measurements at low temperatures from 1 to 8 GPa. With regard to the superconductivity beyond 1 GPa, the monotonic decrease in Tc is reproduced without any noticeable anomalies; Tc changes from 1.8 K at 1 GPa to 0.82 K at 5.5 GPa with dTc/dP ∼ -0.22 K/GPa. The crystal structure with spacegroup P 3m1 is stable in the pressure range we examined. On the other hand, the normalized pressure-strain analysis (finite strain analysis) indicates that the compressibility changes around 1 GPa, suggesting that a Lifshitz transition occurs. We here discuss the effect of pressure on the superconducting and structural properties based on the comparison of these experimental results. The family of transition metal dichalcogenides attracts much attention because of their versatile electronic properties. Notably some members are classified as a type-II Dirac semimetal, which implies a tilted Dirac cone, resulting in the breaking of Lorentz invariance, with a topologically non-trivial surface state The superconducting properties of PdTe 2 have been widely investigated at ambient pressure Since applying pressure can continuously tune struc- tural and electronic states of materials, it is a most useful probe in research on superconductors and topological quantum materials. The effects of pressure on PdTe 2 have already been reported in several papers The Te-Pd-Te layers are weakly bonded by van der Waals interaction. Soulard et al. reported that the P 3m1 structure is maintained up to pressures of 27 GPa at room temperature Additionally, a pressure-induced topological transition is theoretically predicted at higher pressures by Xiao et al.; a type-I Dirac point appears at 4.7 GPa near the Γ point and the type-II Dirac point near the A point disappears at 6.1 GPa due to the pressure induced shifts of the electronic bands In this study, we focus on elucidating the origin of the non-monotonic variation of T c and investigate superconductivity at higher pressures where the occurrence of a topological transition is expected. Furthermore, the detailed structural information below 2.5 GPa is also necessary to reveal the origin of the non-monotonic T c (P ), because the structural parameters of PdTe 2 below 2.5 GPa were not taken in Ref. The PdTe 2 crystals used in the present study were taken from the single-crystalline boule prepared under the modified Bridgman technique A diamond anvil cell (DAC) was used for x-ray diffraction (XRD) under high pressure. A culet anvil of 0.75 mm in diameter was selected to fine tune the experimental pressure in the range below 8 GPa. A powder sample of PdTe 2 was prepared by grinding fragments cut out of a single crystal. It was placed in a sample space, 255 μm in diameter and 96 μm thick, made by drilling a small hole in a SUS301 gasket. We performed the XRD study twice utilizing different pressure tranmitting mediums. For hydrostatic compression, a 4:1 mixture of Methanol (MeOH) -Ethanol(EtOH) was loaded into the sample room together with the power sample in the first run, whereas fluid helium (He) compressed to ∼ 180 MPa was used in the second run Electrical resistivity measurements under high pressures and low temperatures were performed utilizing a Cu-Be modified Bridgman anvil cell Figure Figure where V 0 and V are volumes at ambient and high pressures, P is in units of GPa, B 0 is the bulk modulus, and ′ 0 its pressure derivative. The fits for the first and second runs give parameters B 0 = 62.9(9) and 59(2) GPa and B ′ 0 = 6.7(2) and 7.0(2), respectively, for PdTe 2 with the P 3m1 structure. The pressure error in the second run is a little larger than that of the first run, which is reflected in the error of B 0 . Compared to Ref. Figure We measured the pressure variation of the electrical resistivity on three samples. In the first run, shown in Fig. As mentioned in the Introduction, the appearance of the type-I Dirac point is theoretically predicted at 4.7 GPa. We, therefore, performed two more pressure runs to investigate the reproducibility of this higher-T c phase. shows the pressure variation of the electrical resistivity obtained in the second run. A sharp transition is observed at T c = 1.8 K at 1 GPa, which is the lowest experimental pressure in this run. The superconductivity is depressed with pressure and T c decreases to 0.82 K at 5.5 GPa. Above T c the normal state resistance is close to temperature independent and the anomalous behavior in the first run is not reproduced. The pressure variation in the third run reproduces the one in the second run. Figure Figure First, we discuss the superconducting phase with T R1 c that appeared above a pressure of 3.7 GPa in the first run. It is tempting to relate this higher-T c phase to the occurrence of the pressure-induced topological transition from a type II to type I Dirac semimetal that was predicted by Xiao et al. GPa as shown in the inset of Fig. Here we argue that T R1 c can likely be attributed to the pressure-induced superconductivity of tellurium (Te). According to a past report Next, the non-monotonic variation of the superconducting transition temperature below 2 K, where T c passes through the maximum of 1.91 K at 0.91 GPa, is discussed. In general, applying pressure tends to depress superconductivity. On the other hand, an increase in T c under pressure has been observed in several transition metal chalcogenides, e.g. M X 2 (M =Ni, Pd, Nb, X=S, Se, Te) and ZrTe 3 We here consider the first point qualitatively. The sign of dT c /dP is expected to become positive when the logarithmic volume derivative of η = N (E f ) I 2 is larger in magnitude than two times γ = -d ln ω /dlnV Next, we will examine the second point for the enhancement of superconductivity. Since PdTe 2 shows no structural phase transition up to pressures of 8 GPa, we explore possibilities of an electronic transition. For this purpose, a normalized pressure H v versus an Eulerian strain f E was calculated by employing the experimental lattice constants in the following formula, , f E = 1 2 - where V 0 and V are volumes at ambient and high pressure, respectively, P is in units of GPa, and where B 0 is the bulk modulus, and B ′ 0 its pressure derivative. As noted above, H v and f E have a linear relationship via B 0 and B ′ 0 . The intercept of the linear fit to H v (f E ) and the axis at f E = 0 gives an estimate of the bulk modulus in each region. Additionally, a change in the slope of H v (f E ) indicates a modification of the topology of the Fermi surface, suggesting that a Lifshitz transition occurs Figure Assuming that the topology of the Fermi surface changes around 1 GPa, we first consider the contribution of a saddle-point vHs, which sits ∼ 30 meV above E F near the M -point Fermi surface sheets of PdTe 2 are also positioned near the Γ and K-points We performed synchrotron radiation x-ray diffraction and electrical resistivity measurements on PdTe 2 under high pressure to investigate the effect of pressure on superconductivity up to 8 GPa and the origin of the nonmonotonic variation of T c observed in our previous study The pressure variation of T c depends on the competition between the electronic density of states and lattice stiffening under pressure. In this study, we found that Θ D estimated from ρ(T ) exhibits insignificant changes up to pressures of ∼ 1 GPa and subsequently increases as a function of pressure. Considering this together with the moderate increase in carrier density at 2 K with pressure [25], we infer that the requirement for positive dT c /dP is fulfilled below 1 GPa and, however, large stiffening depresses superconductivity above 1 GPa. On the other hand, the P 3m1 structure is maintained up to pressures of 8 GPa similar to reported in previous literature Supplemental Material for "Superconducting and structural properties of the type-I superconductor PdTe 2 under high pressure" 1. Rietveld analysis of x-ray diffraction patterns and the list of structural parameters of PdTe 2 The Rietveld analysis was performed using the crystallographic program JANA2006 in order to obtain the structural parameter We estimated the pressure variation of the Debye temperature Θ D from the Bloch-Grüneisen (BG) formula. TABLE where ρ 0 is the residual resistivity, Θ D is the Debye temperature, and ρ Θ is the resistivity at Θ D . Besides for sample 2, which is introduced in the main manuscript, we fitted ρ(T ) of another sample (sample 4), which was measured using a piston-cylinder cell in the PPMS, to obtain values of Θ D below 2.5 GPa in detail. Figure 