2D bismuth oxyselenide (Bi2O2Se) with high electron mobility shows great potential for nanoelectronics. Although in-plane properties of Bi2O2Se have been widely studied, its out-ofplane electrical transport behavior remains elusive, despite its importance in fabricating devices with new functionality and high integration density. Here, we study the out-of-plane electrical properties of 2D Bi2O2Se at nanoscale by conductive atomic force microscope. We find that hillocks with tunable heights and sizes are formed on Bi2O2Se after applying vertical electrical field. Intriguingly, such hillocks are conductive in vertical direction, resulting in a previously unknown out-of-plane resistance switching in thick Bi2O2Se flakes while ohmic conductive characteristic in thin ones. Furthermore, we observe the transformation from bipolar to stable unipolar conduction in thick Bi2O2Se flake possessing such hillocks, suggesting its potential to function as a selector in vertical devices. Our work reveals unique out-of-plane transport behavior of 2D Bi2O2Se, providing the basis for fabricating vertical devices based on this emerging 2D material. Two-dimensional (2D) semiconducting bismuth oxyselenide (Bi2O2Se) with sizeable bandgap, high electron mobility, and excellent air stability is promising in high-performance nanoelectronics. Besides microscale charge transport, the nanoscale electrical properties of 2D materials play a significant role in the performance and/or mechanism of related microscopic or macroscopic electronic devices. 2D Bi2O2Se were grown by vapor deposition method Prior to CAFM measurements, AFM scanning was performed to image the microscopic morphology and measure the thickness of the selected Bi2O2Se flake (Figure In contrast, the mechanism of similar phenomena in other 2D materials such as multilayer h-BN was proposed as its breakdown under strong electrical field. Apart from the cycle number, the amplitude of the sweeping electric field also contributes to the outof-plane resistance switching phenomenon of Bi2O2Se. Specifically, resistance switching forms under 30-cycle sweep of the electric field with the amplitude of 10V (red plots in Figure Afterwards, the LR state was maintained under the negative electric field swept from 0 to -10V (Step 3) and restored to HR under the -10 to 0V sweep (Step 4). During the next cycle, a sudden transformation from HR to LR state was observed under the forward sweep of the positive voltage (Step 2 in Figure In order to further verify this hypothesis, two random positions of a flake were selected to apply the same cyclic in air and N2 gas, respectively. In air, we found a hillock formed at the place to make resistance switching happen. As a sharp contrast, in N2, no morphology change on Bi2O2Se was observed and it kept electrically insulating (Figure The out-of-plane resistance switching assures Bi2O2Se for applications in future nanoelectronics with new functionality, high integration and high compatibility. In addition, crossbar electronic devices are subjected to the sneak current in the vertical direction, which can be mitigated by the addition of selector device with unilateral electrical conduction between two layers of electrodes. We have revealed the out-of-plane electrical properties of 2D Bi2O2Se at nanoscale for the first time. We found that hillocks formed on 2D Bi2O2Se under applying cyclic triangular electrical field. The height of these hillocks are controlled by amplitude or cycle number of the cyclic voltage suppress and the thickness of Bi2O2Se flakes. Noteworthy, the hillock positions contain nanoscale conductive pathways, leading to a unique vertical resistance switching behavior in thick Bi2O2Se flakes while ohmic characteristic in thin ones. In addition, the devices based on thick Bi2O2Se flakes exhibited transformation from bipolar to stable unipolar resistance switching behavior. The work not only discloses novel out-of-plane transport behaviors of 2D Bi2O2Se, but also opens an avenue for the use of 2D materials in highly-integrated nanoelectronics with new functionality. Growth, Transfer, and Characterization of 2D Bi2O2Se: 2D Bi2O2Se samples were synthesized on mica substrate by vapor-solid deposition, The surface morphology of Bi2O2Se samples was characterized by optical microscope (Imager A2m, Carl Zeiss, Germany). XPS (ESCALAB 250Xi, Thermo Fisher, USA) was used to reveal the chemical composition of Bi2O2Se flakes. Raman spectrometer (HR800, Horiba JY, Japan) was used to collect the Raman spectra and mapping of Bi2O2Se. The spot size of the incident laser with the wavelength of 633 nm is 500 nm, and each step of Raman mappings is 1 μm. The cross section of hillocks on Bi2O2Se was obtained by focused ion beam (Helios UC, FEI, USA). HAADF imaging and EDS analysis were performed to characterize the chemical composition of hillocks on Bi2O2Se with a TEM (Talos, FEI, USA) at an operating voltage of 200 kV.