Tightly bound dark excitons in atomically thin semiconductors can be used for various optoelectronic applications including light storage and quantum communication. Their optical accessibility is however limited due to their out-of-plane transition dipole moment. We thus propose to strengthen the coupling of dark excitons in two dimensional materials with out-of-plane resonant modes of a cavity at room temperature, by engineering the anisotropy in the Purcell factor. A silica micro-disk characterised by high confinement of light in small modal volume, high Q-factor and free spectral range is used to couple to the excitons in monolayer transition metal dichalcogenides. We show numerically that the tapering of sidewalls of the micro-disk is an extremely versatile route for achieving the selective coupling of whispering gallery modes to light emitted from out-of-plane dipoles to the detriment of that from in-plane ones for four representative monolayer transition metal dichalcogenides. Two dimensional (2D) semiconductors are of great interest for photonic and optoelectronic applications due to their unique optical and electronic properties For a photon with energy hω and q as the projection of momentum on the TMDC plane, the optical selection rules allow the transitions which are conserved in energy (hω = E 2 -E 1 where E 1 , E 2 are energy states), momentum (p = p h + p e , where p h is the momentum of a hole in the valence band and p e is the momentum of an electron in conduction band) and spin (between states with the same spin projection). These transitions result in the formation of the bright (X 0 ) or the optically active excitons, while the forbidden transitions re- * anshuman.kumar@iitb.ac.in sult in dark excitons (X D ) An alternative way to probe these dark excitons is to alter the exciton dynamics using engineered microcavities. The exciton dynamics can be best explained using a two-level quantum model where an excitonic state is described by an excitation frequency and a radiative decay rate. Further refinements include decoherence rate, intervalley scattering and other non-radiative decay channels. It is well known that by engineering the photonic environment of such a quantum emitter one can tune the local optical density of states thereby engineering the radiative decay rate We propose to utilise a silica microdisk resonator platform to selectively couple the dark and bright excitons by engineering the resonator geometry. Whispering gallery modes (WGM) resonators allow light to propagate along their circumference, making evanescent coupling of light in and out of the cavities facile The thickness (t) of the microdisk is varied between 200nm and 1200nm and the permissible modes corresponding to each of these thicknesses are analysed using the Finite-Difference Eigenmode (FDE) solver. Fig. The dependence of θ (angle subtended by the sidewall and the bottom side of the microdisk with θ = 90 0 representing a normal sidewall and θ < 90 0 representing a tapered sidewall as shown in Fig. The resonant cavity alters the decay rate of the emitter without perturbing the frequency of emission, since the Lamb shift is usually quite small compared to the resonance frequency where 0 is the vacuum permittivity, k is the wave number in free space and E s is the scattered electric field of the emitter positioned at r e . P F can also be expressed as the enhancement of total power emitted by an exciton either radiated to the far-field P rad or dissipated into the resonator or in this case that which is coupled to the WGMs of the microdisk P dis P F = (P rad + P dis ) /P 0 with P 0 being the source power. Thus the Purcell factor can be divided into radiative and non-radiative or simply the dissipated terms as In terms of the eigenmodes of the system E n , the Purcell factor is governed by the local optical density of states ρ(e d , r, ω) which can be written in the form where the dipole is oriented along e d . Though it is evident from the above equations that the Purcell factor is also dependent on the emitter location and orientation, we first determine the effect of θ on P F with the help of integrated field strength in order to consider the average effect over the entire typical 2D TMDC flake size. We deduce the horizontal (E h ) and vertical (E v ) components of electric field which are expressed by a combination of the electric field components along x, y, and z axes incorporating θ. The electric field is obtained using the FDE solver where the field intensity is normalized to unity. The E x , E y , and E z components each constitute as a subset of the electric field. The region marked between r 1 and r exhibits significant electric field strength, defined here by r 1 = 3μm for r = 5μm, whereas r 2 denotes the start of the tapering of the sidewall. The E h and E v values are integrated over the disk edge C1 with r 1 ≤ r ≤ r 2 and the taper edge C2 (r > r 2 ) (Fig. Fig. We use dipolar emissions of varying wavelength equivalent to the emissions of different 2D TMDCs including WS 2 , MoS 2 , WSe 2 and MoSe 2 centered at 620nm, 660nm, 750nm and 800nm. The OP and circularly polarised IP dipoles (Fig. Our work should open up new avenues to explore this microdisk taper platform for studying exotic phenomena such as anisotropic vacuum induced excitonic valley coherence 