True to their unconventional nature, multi-band alkaline Fe-selenides and, more recently, the heavy-fermion CeCu2Si2 have shown experimental signatures of fully-gapped but sign-changing superconductivity. A twoorbital pairing state, called sτ3, with non-trivial matrix structure, was proposed as a candidate able to reconcile the seemingly contradictory properties of these superconductors. Motivated by the non-trivial orbital structure of the proposed sτ3 state, which has opposite signs for the pairing functions of the two orbitals, we study prototypical Josephson junctions where at least one of the leads is in a superconducting state of this kind. An analysis of these junctions in the limit of two degenerate orbitals (bands) and with a simple form of junction hybridization reveals several remarkable properties. One is the emergence of gapless, purely electron-and holelike bound states for sτ3 -N -sτ3 junctions with arbitrary global phase difference between the leads, and likewise for sτ3 -N -I junctions. The other is the absence of static Josephson currents when both leads are superconducting. In both of these signatures, sτ3 junctions are dramatically different from more conventional Josephson junctions. We also find that the gapless bound states are protected by an orbital-exchange symmetry, although the protection is not topological. Junctions which break this symmetry, such as sτ3 -N -s, have gapped Andreev bound states. In general, the Josephson effect also re-emerges once the degeneracy of the two orbitals is lifted. We support these conclusions via analytical and numerical results for the bound states, together with microscopic calculations of the Josephson current. Our results indicate that junctions involving sτ3 pairing in alkaline Fe-selenides will generically have bound states with a small gap together with a greatly suppressed Josephson current. Unconventional superconductors (SC's) have led to some of the most important questions in condensed matter physics. One such puzzle came to light not too long ago in a branch of the Fe-based family, the alkaline Fe-selenides In Ref. Although some of the bulk properties of pairing candidates with non-trivial matrix structure have already been mentioned, much remains to be explored as far as characteristic exper- where at least one of the Left (L) and Right (R) leads is in a sτ3 pairing state. In that case, the pairing functions of the two orbitals have opposite signs and thus have non-trivial structure on orbital space. We show the most important results in the limit where the two orbitals are degenerate and couple identically to a single orbital in the Center (C) metallic part. (a) sτ3 -N -sτ3 junctions where the L and R leads are identical up to a global phase difference. For arbitrary global phase differences between L and R leads, the bound states are either electron-or hole-like and become gapless for a set of conserved momenta ky . In this limit, the static Josephson current is zero, since the contributions of the two orbital sectors effectively cancel. For almost degenerate bands, as expected for systems with sτ3 pairing, the bound states acquire a small gap via Andreev scattering, although exceptions can occur for junctions along z. A weak static Josephson current, determined by band-splitting near the FS is also expected. sτ3 -N -I junctions, where the R lead is in an insulating state, has similar bound states. (b) sτ3 -N -s junction, where the R lead consists of a single orbital in a trivial s-wave pairing state. In the same degenerate limit, there are gapped Andreev bound states, but a vanishing Josephson current. For small band splitting, a weak Josephson current is expected. imental signatures are concerned. One promising route involves Josephson junctions, which in principle can take advantage of the inherent phase difference between the two orbital sectors in sτ 3 pairing. Motivated by this observation, we study prototypical S-N-S and S-N-I junctions where at least one of the leads is in a sτ 3 pairing state. Although our study is specifically geared toward junctions with sτ 3 pairing states and thus target the alkaline Fe-selenides, we expect that some of the features discussed here can also manifest for similar pairing candidates with non-trivial matrix structure as proposed for CeCu 2 Si 2 To isolate the most striking features of this pairing state, we describe the superconducting leads via effective two-orbital models. Furthermore, in order to capture the effects of the intrinsic phase difference between the pairing functions of the two orbitals, we consider junctions where the two orbitals couple to a single orbital in the metallic part. As we show, the bound states in these rather unusual setups differ sharply from those in more conventional junctions, which ignore cross-coupling between the various orbital. More precisely, we examine setups where the Left (L) lead, Center (C) metallic, and Right (R) leads are arranged in sτ 3 -Nsτ 3 , sτ 3 -N -I (insulator), and sτ -Ns (trivial single-channel s-wave SC) junctions. We assume that the coupling to the junction does not destabilize sτ 3 pairing. Our salient results are as summarized below. Our most striking results occur when the two orbitals of the sτ 3 SC leads are degenerate. In this limit, both intra-and interorbital hybridization terms which lead to band splitting are absent, and therefore the two orbitals correspond to two degenerate bands. The precise definitions of the intra-and inter-orbital hybridizations are discussed in Sec. II. In addition, the two orbitals couple identically to a single orbital of the C part. Due to the effects of the non-trivial orbital structure of sτ 3 pairing and to the equal coupling to a single C orbital, the usual Andreev scattering processes are effectively "frustrated", leading to gapless bound states which are either electron-or hole-like for sτ 3 -Nsτ 3 for arbitrary global phase differences between L and R leads. This also holds for sτ 3 -N -I junctions. The bound states are non-trivial since they decay into the SC leads. We also find that the gapless bound states are also protected by an orbital-exchange symmetry which is present for these junctions in the limit considered here, although the protection is not topological in origin. We find that breaking the orbital-exchange symmetry leads to a restoration of Andreev scattering which mixes electron-and hole-like states, which, in turn, leads to a gap. An extreme example of this symmetry breaking is provided by sτ 3 -Ns junctions, which exhibit Andreev bound states. A second important feature is that the bound state spectra for the sτ 3 -Nsτ 3 and sτ 3 -Ns junctions are invariant to changes in the global phase difference across the junction. This is also in striking contrast to the typical single-channel Josephson junction, where the Andreev bound state spectrum changes with phase, leading to a static Josephson effect. Our unusual findings are confirmed via microscopic calculations of the Josephson currents in the tunneling limit. We show in this limit that the contributions from the two sectors of sτ 3 pairing, which have opposite intrinsic phases, cancel. We also consider more realistic junctions where the SC leads include intra-and inter-orbital hybridization. We focus on cases where the band splitting in the vicinity of the Fermi surface (FS) is much smaller than the pairing amplitudes. We show that intra-orbital hybridization terms break the orbitalexchange symmetry, leading to bound states more akin to the usual, gapped Andreev bound states. The same terms also make the bound state spectrum sensitive to a global phase difference across the junction. These findings are further con-firmed by microscopic calculation of the Josephson current in the tunneling limit. As a counter-example to the gapped bound state spectrum, we consider setups where the junction is along the z-direction, while the intra-and inter-orbital hybridization are predominantly in-plane. We show that gapless states can still be found for in-plane momenta along the diagonals, where the orbital-exchange symmetry is preserved. In all cases, we show that the analytical solutions are consistent with numerical results. Fig. As discussed in Refs. The remainder of the article is divided into the following sections. In Sec. II, we introduce the microscopic models for the junctions. In Sec. III, we discuss both analytical and numerical solutions for sτ 3 -Nsτ 3 junctions, and we briefly compare these to junctions with orbitally-trivial pairing. sτ 3 -N -I junctions have similar bound states, and are briefly discussed at the end of the section. Section IV is devoted to sτ 3 -Ns junctions. In the final Sec. V, we summarize our findings and discuss possible experimental realizations of the junctions. The appendices contain detailed discussions of some of the points presented in the main text. In Appendix A, we present the analytical bound state solutions for sτ 3 -Nsτ 3 junctions in the important limit of degenerate orbitals. Appendix B briefly touches on the effect of unequal coupling of the two orbitals to the metallic part, while Appendix C discusses junctions with orbitally-trivial pairings. Appendices D and E present the analytical solutions for sτ 3 -N -I and sτ 3 -Ns junctions, respectively, both in the limit of degenerate orbitals. The final Appendix F, presents our results for the Josephson current for sτ 3 -N -sτ 3 junctions, as well as for junctions with orbitally-trivial pairing. The main distinction of the setups considered here are the superconducting leads which are in a sτ 3 pairing state, which was originally proposed for an effective d xz , d yz two-orbital model for the alkaline Fe-selenides When considering Josephson junctions, the gapped nature of the sτ 3 state implies that the relative phases of the pairing of the two d xz , d yz orbital sectors are preserved by the junction. Furthermore, the common s x 2 y 2 form factor has nodes along the k x = ±π/2 and k y = ±π/2 axes. For FS's away from these axes, we can ignore the momentum-dependence of the pairing, which does not introduce any qualitatively new effects. For all of the three types of junctions along x, we adopt the following model H L , H R , and H C are the bulk Hamiltonians for the left, right leads and the center metallic parts, respectively. H L-C and H C-R contain the terms at the lead-center part interfaces, and by convention, are defined on the last and first sites of the L and R leads, respectively. The L lead which includes the pairing terms extends along x[a] ≤ (L xl)/2, where L x is the number of sites for the entire L-C-R system , while l is the number of sites of the metallic C part, along the x-direction, respectively. The length is defined in units of the lattice spacing a. The most general form of the bulk L lead Hamiltonian for sτ 3 pairing is The indices α ∈ {1, 2} stand for the d xz and d yz orbitals, respectively, while the spin is represented by σ ∈ {↑, ↓}. t xα are the nearest-neighbor (NN) hopping coefficients for orbital α, while t 4 is a NN orbital hybridization, with all coefficients taken to be real. These are based on a simplified two-orbital model introduced in Ref. For periodic boundary conditions (BC's), the BdG Hamiltonian for the L lead and for single spin sector reads where D 4h symmetry restricts Three terms ξ 0 τ 0 , ξ 1 τ 1 , and ξ 3 τ 3 determine the normal state, corresponding to a common dispersion, inter-and intraorbital hybridization terms, respectively. Note that terms ∝ cos(k x a) cos(k y a), which preserve the lattice symmetry can also be added to the orbital-diagonal ξ 0 terms The positive eigenvalues are As mentioned previously, we consider cases where the band splittings near either of the two FS's are smaller than the pairing amplitude which ensures that the leads are gapped in the bulk. The Hamiltonian at the L-C interface is As mentioned earlier, the k-dependence of the s(k) factor in the sτ 3 pairing is unimportant for our purpose, and this is reflected in the form of the pairing term of Eq. 13. Crucially, the terms proportional to V α denote the hybridization of the two orbitals in the L lead to a single orbital in the C part along x. Since the point-group symmetry is necessarily broken at the lead-center interfaces, this symmetry does not a priori restrict the values of the V α 's. In the following, we allow these couplings to take arbitrary values and we comment on the effects of the d xz , d yz nature of the orbitals in the leads in Sec. V. The remaining terms are identical to those of H L while the summation is over the y coordinate along the junction. We As already mentioned, we neglect the spatial dependence of the pairing. The Hamiltonian for the bulk of the central (C) part reads As mentioned previously, the C part involves a single channel without any pairing. We consider for simplicity nearestneighbor hopping in this sector, taken to be equal to t 1 . In the case of sτ 3 -N -sτ 3 pairing we choose the Hamiltonians at the C-R junction H C-R for x[a] = (L x + l + 2)/2 and for the bulk of the R lead H R for x[a] ≥ (L x + l + 2)/2 + 1 to have identical form and coefficients to H L-C and H L , respectively, with the exception of a possible global non-zero phase φ for the pairing terms: For sτ 3 -Ns, H C-R and H R reflect the presence of a single channel in the R lead as For simplicity, we always consider V = t = 1. For sτ 3 -Nsτ 3 junctions along z we define the complete Hamiltonian via In addition to the terms already present in the pure twodimensional case, we consider additional NN hopping along z for the L/R leads as where H L, TB was defined in Eq. 3, and the sum over lattice sites is now along all of the three axes. We take the lengths of the L, C, and R parts along z to be the same as for the junctions along x. For simplicity, we consider only orbital-diagonal, NN hopping along the z-direction. Additional terms are of course possible, but they do not qualitatively change our conclusions. For clarity, we ignore the momentum dependence of the two-dimensional pairing, as for junctions along x. Similar expressions hold for the bulk of the R lead, with the exception of a global phase difference φ. Likewise, the C part amounts to We use a NN hopping in the C part which is equal in amplitude to that of the L/R leads t z = 0.2t 1 , unless stated otherwise. The reduced value of t z reflects the tetragonal anisotropy of our target systems. Finally, the Hamiltonians for the L-C and C-R interfaces are obtained via a straightforward generalization to hopping along z HC-R can be obtained via a similar generalization of H C-R . Unless stated otherwise, we choose units where the nearestneighbor hopping and hybridization at the interfaces are t 1 = V 1 = 1 and ∆ = 0.4. We consider the sτ 3 -Nsτ 3 and sτ 3 -N -I setups in the important limit where the two orbitals have identical tightbinding coefficients, zero intra-orbital hybridization (ξ 3 = 0) and inter-orbital hybridization (ξ 1 = 0), and couple identically to the single orbital of the C part. This limit corresponds to The two orbitals in the L (or R if appropriate) lead correspond to degenerate bands in the normal state. We define a local transformation which acts on the L (and R) spinors where This corresponds to an exchange of the two orbitals followed by a gauge transformation which changes the sign of the pairing ∆. Similarly, in the C part the transformation acting on the single-orbital spinor where This operation, corresponding to a gauge transformation for the C part, is required to compensate for the factors of i in H L-C and H C-R if appropriate. Both R and Ŝ are antihermitian operators which obey and similarly for Ŝ. It is straightforward to define an orbital-exchange operator for the entire lattice models, corresponding to each of the junctions. For sτ 3 -Nsτ 3 junctions it reads The sτ 3 -Nsτ 3 and sτ 3 -N -I junction Hamiltonians in the degenerate-orbital limit considered here are invariant under Q. This orbital exchange symmetry plays an important role in classifying the electron-like and hole-like solutions encountered in these cases. We treat sτ 3 -Nsτ 3 junctions in some detail in the following and only briefly discuss sτ 3 -N -I junctions at the end of the section and in Appendix C, since the latter exhibit similar bound states. We consider a sτ 3 -Nsτ 3 junction as defined previously, in the limit of degenerate orbitals ( Eqs. The electron-like bound states with eigenvalues have the form in the L/R leads and in the C part. |A| is a normalization constant, θ 0 A is an arbitrary phase, and a, m are arbitrary integers. Crucially, the C v BdG coefficient is identically zero. Similarly, the hole-like solutions with eigenvalues are of the form for the L/R leads and in the C part. As before, |B| is a normalization constant, θ 0 B is an arbitrary phase, while b, n are integers. In contrast to the electron-like solutions, u C = 0. These detailed analytical solutions present a number of important features. Firstly, the solutions are either electronor hole-like since the corresponding BdG coefficient v or u vanishes in the C part. This is in clear contrast to a singlechannel junction, where electron-like and hole-like solutions are mixed via Andreev scattering. The presence of both open and continuity BC's at L-C and C-R interfaces, as well as the non-trivial structure of the pairing, prevents the existence of solutions which mix electron and hole states. Secondly, electron-and hole-like solutions become gapless when respectively, as indicated by Eqs. 34 and 45. This happens when K F x l is either 0 or a multiple of π. Recall that the solutions are labeled by the momenta (K F x , K F y ) which vary continuously along the FS. Consequently, the gapless conditions can be realized in multiple instances along the FS if the latter and/or junction length l are sufficiently large. Linearizing Eqs. 34 and 45 about these points indicates that the electron-and hole-like states are counter-propagating, as a function of the conserved momentum K F y . Thirdly, the gaplessness of the electron-and hole-like states is protected by the orbital-exchange symmetry defined in Sec. II C. Indeed, it is straightforward to check that together with The last relation follows from the anti-hermitian nature of R. Similar relations hold for Ŝ acting on the C spinors. Together, these imply that any operator Ô added to the Hamiltonian of the junction, which commutes with R and Ŝ, will not mix electron-and hole-like states via which implies that and subsequently that Note that Ô is not necessarily local at the lattice level. A similar reasoning can be applied to Ŝ. Therefore, the orbitalexchange symmetry protects the gapless electron-and holelike states, in analogy to the time-reversal operator for spinpolarized edge states in quantum spin Hall systems Next, we proceed to confirm the analytical solutions via numerical solutions of the lattice model introduced in Sec. II, in the degenerate-orbital limit. The results were obtained for a lattice of 100 sites along x with a C part of 5 sites extending along 49 ≤ x ≤ 53, in units of the lattice constant a. In Fig. We also consider the nature of the bound states. In Fig. A similar picture emerges for the electron-like state marked with a triangle in Fig. are consistent with a solution with m-a an odd multiple of π. Together with the BdG coefficient for the hole-like state, these numerical solutions confirm the analytical results. We briefly discuss the case for a sτ 3 -Nsτ 3 junction along z for the model introduced in Sec. II B. The analytical solution is similar to the junction along x with the exception that both k x , k y are conserved quantities. We therefore linearize about the pair of points (K F x , K F y , αK F z ) and obtain the bound-state spectrum as in Eqs. 34 and 45 which now ex-tend along the z-direction. The eigenvalues are obtained via the replacement K F x → K F z . We comment on the effects of unequal coupling of the two orbitals in either lead to the C part. In this case, both symmetric and anti-symmetric linear combinations of the two orbitals (Appendix A), couple to the C part, in contrast to the solutions presented here. As shown by numerical results presented in Appendix B, unequal couplings induce a gap, as well as a spectrum which depends on the global phase difference φ. The first can be understood via a breaking of the orbitalexchange symmetry, while the second can be confirmed via a direct calculation of the Josephson current, as discussed in Appendix F. Finally, we note that the surprising behavior for sτ 3 junctions coupled to a single orbital in the C part differs dramatically from that of junctions consisting of leads in a pairing state which has trivial orbital structure. We consider junctions with such a state, which we call sτ 0 , where the two orbitals have identical pairing functions, including the signs. For degenerate orbitals, we can apply the same analysis as in the sτ 3 -Nsτ 3 case (Appendix A) and we again find that the symmetric linear combination of the two orbitals in either leads couples across the junction. However, the antisymmetric linear combination is entirely decoupled along the entire junction, and in contrast to sτ 3 junctions, imposes no additional constraints on the bound-state solutions. Thus sτ 0 junctions for degenerate orbitals behave essentially like conventional single-channel junctions. This is illustrated in Appendix C. So far, we have focused on the special case of degenerate orbitals for a sτ 3 -Nsτ 3 junction along x. We now consider more realistic cases, where the L and R leads include terms which lift the degeneracy between the two orbitals. As discussed in Sec. II A, we consider two types of symmetryallowed terms which can lift the orbital degeneracy: (i) intraorbital hybridization terms corresponding to ξ 3 τ 3 in the nonpairing part of the bulk lead Hamiltonians (Eq. 5), and (ii) inter-orbital hybridization terms corresponding ξ 1 τ 1 in the same model. We examine the effects of each of these terms on the bound state spectrum separately. We first consider intra-orbital hybridization terms only by fixing t 1 = 1 and allowing δt = t 1t 2 to vary (Eq. 7). All other parameters are identical to those in the top panel of Fig. As a final example, we consider the effects of intra-and inter-orbital hybridization on the junction along z. The spectrum in this case can be labeled by both k x , k y conserved mo- menta. For general values of the latter, the spectrum is gapped, in analogy to the junction along x. However, along the diagonals of the two-dimensional Brillouin zone |k x | = |k y |, the intra-orbital hybridization terms vanish, and the bound state states again become gapless. This is illustrated in Fig. We consider a sτ 3 -Ns junction, where the L lead is in a sτ 3 pairing state, while the R lead is in a single-channel swave state. As in the case of sτ 3 -Nsτ 3 junctions, both orbitals on the L side couple identically to a single orbital in the C metallic part, which in turn couples to a single orbital in the trivially-paired R lead. The model is described in Sec. II A. We first solve the system in the limit of degenerate orbitals in the L leads, which couple identically to the single C orbital. The analytical solution is presented in detail in Appendix E. Here, we summarize some of the most important results. In contrast to the sτ 3 -Nsτ 3 case, only the L-C interface is subject to both open and continuity BC's. Furthermore, as explained in Sec. II C, this model does not preserve the orbitalexchange symmetry, due to the presence of a single channel in the R lead, even when the two orbitals are degenerate. Thus, in contrast to the sτ 3 -Nsτ 3 case, the sτ 3 -Ns junction allows for Andreev scattering mixing electron and holelike states, and leading to bound states which are generally gapped. However, in the degenerate orbital limit, the bound states states of the sτ 3 -Ns are invariant under a change in the global relative phase φ. The analytical results are confirmed by the numerical solutions. In Fig. We now summarize our main results and subsequently discuss possible experimental realizations. We studied Josephson junctions where the left lead is in an unconventional sτ 3 gapped pairing state which involves two orbitals with opposite-sign pairing. Similar pairing states were advanced as promising candidates in alkaline Fe-selenides We studied the three types of junctions in the important limit where the two orbitals of the sτ 3 pairing state, in the left and, when appropriate, right leads, are degenerate and couple identically to a single orbital of the central part. Our most striking results can be grouped under two headings. One is the emergence of purely electron and hole-like bound states, which become gapless and degenerate for a set of conserved momenta. The other is that the bound state spectrum is invariant under a change in the global phase difference between left and right superconducting leads. In both aspects, the junctions differ sharply from the typical single-or multi-channel junctions without cross-coupling. The first of these two effects occurs for sτ 3 -Nsτ 3 and sτ 3 -N -I junctions along x. Here, the bound states differ from to the typical single-channel junction, where Andreev scattering mixes purely electron-and hole-like states. The absence of Andreev scattering in these cases, which leads to gapless electron-and hole-like states, is due to the combined effects of non-trivial orbital structure of sτ 3 pairing and coupling to a single C orbital. We also find that these gapless bound states are protected by an orbitalexchange symmetry. However, we stress that this protection is not due to any topological property of the junction, unlike the well-known gapless states which occur in a singlechannel π junction. The second property, the invariance of the bound state spectrum with global phase difference, manifests in sτ 3 -Nsτ 3 and sτ 3 -Ns junctions along x. The invariance of the bound state spectrum points toward a vanishing Josephson current Bound state spectrum for a sτ3 -N -sτ3 junction along z, calculated from the model in Sec. II B, with finite intra-and interorbital hybridization. We use δt = 0.4 and 4t4 = 0.4, μ = -3.0 with a NN tz = 0.2 along z. Note that both kx and ky are conserved in this case. In contrast to the junction along x, gapless states are possible here even when intra-orbital hybridization is included. The latter vanishes for |kx| = |ky|. For these momenta, we recover the orbital-exchange symmetry defined in Sec. II C. (a) bound state eigenvalues as a function of ky for fixed kx = 0. The intra-orbital hybridization terms are finite for these momenta, and the states are gapped, as when the junction is along x (Fig. by calculating the Josephson current directly in the tunneling limit. We stress that sτ 3 -Nsτ 3 junctions in the limit of degenerate orbitals differ dramatically from sτ 0 -Nsτ 0 junctions in the same limit. The latter involve orbitally-trivial pairing states which are identical to both orbitals, including the sign. In clear contrast to the sτ 3 -Nsτ 3 junctions, the sτ 0 -Nsτ 0 bound state spectrum is essentially that of a typical single-channel junction. We also considered deviations from the degenerate-orbital limit by introducing intra-and inter-orbital hybridization terms for the normal part of the leads. These terms are allowed by tetragonal symmetry for d xz , d yz orbitals in the context of alkaline Fe-selenides The difference can be attributed to the orbital-exchange symmetry, which is broken for the sτ3 -N -s, thus allowing Andreev scattering which mixes electron-and hole-like states. (b) The spectrum for the degenerate-orbital case of panel (a) with μ = -3.0 is invariant under a change in global relative phase φ. This is due to the absence of intra-orbital hybridization terms, as is also the case with the sτ3 -N -sτ3 junctions in Fig. cases mentioned above. The bound states thus behave as in the intra-orbital hybridization case when both the former and inter-orbital hybridization are present. Important exceptions can occur as exemplified by sτ 3 -Nsτ 3 and sτ 3 -N -I junctions along z, with dominant NN hopping along z. In this case, the bound states become gapless at the zeroes of the intra-orbital hybridization terms, along the diagonal of the two-dimensional Brillouin zone in our case, since the junction recovers orbital-exchange symmetry at these points. We also considered the effects of lifting the orbital degeneracy in the bulk of the leads when a finite global phase difference across the junction is present. Here again we find that the bound state spectrum becomes sensitive to the phase when intra-orbital hybridization terms are in effect for both sτ 3 -Nsτ 3 and sτ 3 -Ns junctions. This is also confirmed by calculations of the Josephson current. In contrast, under the addition of inter-orbital hybridization terms only, the bound state spectrum remains invariant, also in accordance with a vanishing Josephson current. The two crucial aspects behind the striking behavior of all of the junctions considered here involve two-orbital matrixpairing sτ 3 in the leads, together with identical coupling of both of these orbitals to a single orbital in the central metallic parts. These setups ensure that the two orbital sectors of sτ 3 pairing are entangled in a non-trivial way near the interface with the metallic part, even when the two sectors are decoupled far into the bulk of the leads. This is to be contrasted with cases where the pairing has trivial matrix structure, as exemplified by sτ 0 pairing. In those cases, the trivial pairing matrix structure means that two orbitals which are decoupled in the bulk of the leads remain so near the interfaces with the metallic part. Likewise, sτ 3 junctions with central metallic regions which likewise involve two orbitals, which couple in a "one-to-one" manner with those of sτ 3 would fail to fully capture the effects of the non-trivial matrix structure of sτ 3 . As exemplified by sτ 3 -N -I junctions, the interplay between non-trivial interfaces and non-trivial matrix-pairing suggests that exotic edge states could also be engineered for materials which likely involve sτ 3 pairing, such as the alkaline Feselenides. Having given a summary of our main results, we now discuss their potential experimental signatures. We stress that, in the limit of degenerate orbitals, junctions involving sτ 3 pairing are dramatically different from the typical single-channel junction as well as from junctions involving pairing states with trivial orbital structure, such as the sτ 0 states. However, any realizations of the sτ 3 junctions proposed here will involve deviations from the ideal case. We argue that such deviations can be made small, in the sense discussed below, allowing a partial observation of the striking properties of the ideal case. We consider three likely deviations from the ideal case in the form of: (i) unequal coupling of the two orbitals to the single-orbital of the metallic part, (ii) lifting of the degeneracy of the two orbitals in the leads via symmetry-allowed intra-and inter-orbital hybridization, and (iii) weak disorder in the junction. For (i), unequal coupling to the C part gaps the electron-and hole-like states and induces a nonzero Josephson effect, even when the orbitals of the leads are degenerate. A single-orbital intermediate region amounts to an effectively single-band system which remains non-superconducting for temperatures above the critical temperature of sτ 3 , which can be estimated from the transition temperature in alkaline Feselenides A second deviation from the ideal case occurs due to the presence of both intra-and inter-orbital hybridization terms in the leads for junctions involving alkaline Fe-selenide leads. As we have shown, such terms will lead to gapping of the electron-and hole-like states and will furthermore ensure that a static Josephson effect is present. Note however, that, as proposed in Refs. The third source of deviation from the ideal case is the presence of disorder in the junction. The gapless bound states in the ideal degenerate cases are not due to any non-trivial topology, although they are protected by the orbital-exchange symmetry. Therefore, these states are not robust against disorder. Due to these inherent limitations, the junctions discussed here cannot singlehandedly indicate sτ 3 pairing, but they can nonetheless provide strong supporting evidence. Under this transformation, only channel I, corresponding to the symmetric linear combination of the operators for the two orbitals, couples to the single orbital of the C part. Furthermore, the transformation leaves the orbital-diagonal tightbinding part of the Hamiltonian invariant (corresponding to ξ 0 in Eq. 5) while it transforms the sτ 3 pairing as where for simplicity we only consider one spin sector. The model thus reduces to solving for channel I as in a typical, single-channel Josephson junction, while channel II must obey open BC's at the L-C interface. We proceed to find solutions of the model in the transformed basis which lie below the bulk gap, corresponding to solutions which decay into the L lead. We first apply a Fourier transform along y and linearize the BdG equations in the vicinity of two points (αK F x + q x , K F y + q y ) on the FS, with q x , q y small, and α = ±1. This is in analogy to the typical single-channel solution Note that the C part is between -l/2 ≤ x ≤ l/2. Since we are looking for solutions which decay into the L lead, we take κ to be real and positive. Also note that we consider an ansatz which is a linear superposition of solutions with opposite momenta along x. This is due to the BdG coefficients of channel II which must obey open BC at the L-C junction, while the momentum along y is conserved. We ignore corrections due to q y a. The slowly-varying parts obey the BdG equation where we introduced the Fermi velocities along x via Note that the first and fourth, and second and third rows respectively decouple in the bulk Hamiltonian and can be solved independently. We find that the solutions in the bulk of the L lead are where A α , B α are coefficients to be determined from the BC's and ) The general solution in the C part, extending from -l/2 ≤ x ≤ l/2 can be similarly determined to be of the form The solutions in the R lead, which decay away from the C-R interface for x > l/2 are ũky;C-e ṽky;C-e =2|A||∆|e iθ 0 we determine the eigenvalues Similarly, the hole-like solutions are    ũI,ky;L-h ũII,ky;L-h ṽI,ky;L-h ṽII,ky;L-h ũI,ky;R-h ũII,ky;R-h ṽI,ky;R-h ṽII,ky;R-h with eigenvalues The solutions in the original basis, obtained via the inverse transformation of Eq. A1 can be obtained from the solutions shown above. x, where the couplings to the single orbital of the C part, V1 and V2 (Eq. 13), are unequal. We consider degenerate orbitals and compare to the results for V1 = V2 in Fig. part identically. We show that, in clear contrast to sτ 3 -Nsτ 3 junctions, sτ 0 -Nsτ 0 junctions behave essentially like a typical single-channel junction. In Fig. Appendix D: Analytical solutions of the sτ3 -N -I junction with degenerate orbitals The solution in the continuum limit is very similar to that of the sτ 3 -Nsτ 3 case. Instead of continuity BC's at the C-R interface, the C spinors obey open BC's. Using the ansatze and the conventions of Appendix A, these conditions amount to where p, r are integers. As for the sτ 3 -Nsτ 3 junctions, we obtain electron-and hole-like solutions of the form where the two orbitals have identical pairing functions, as a function of global phase φ. In contrast to sτ3 pairing, sτ0 is an orbitally-trivial pairing state. The overall setup of the junction is the same as in the sτ3 cases, with each of the two degenerate orbitals in either L and R leads coupling identically to a single orbital in the C part. All of the parameters of the model are the same as in Fig. with eigenvalues for the electron-like states. The hole-like solutions are (E13) Note that the C spinor is a mixture of electron-and hole-like solutions, as in the case with typical Andreev bound states. Appendix F: Josephson current in the tunneling limit In Sec. III A and IV, we showed that in the limit of degenerate orbitals which couple identically to a single orbital in the C part, sτ 3 -Nsτ 3 and sτ 3 -Ns junctions exhibit bound state spectra which are insensitive to changes in the relative global phase φ. In view of the relation between the Josephson current and the derivative of the ground-state energy with φ, which is typically determined by the Andreev bound state spectrum, our results suggest the absence of a static Josephson effect. In order to confirm these findings, we consider simplified models of the sτ 3 -Nsτ 3 and sτ 3 -Ns junctions and determine the Josephson current in the tunneling limit. We follow the standard approach in Ref. (F1) For sτ 3 -Nsτ 3 junctions, H L/R are those of Eq. 5, while for sτ 3 -Ns junctions, H R is a single-channel s-wave bulk Hamiltonian, determined by the dispersion ξ 0 and ∆ which also enter the expression for the two-orbital H L . The two leads are connected via a tunneling Hamiltonian H T . For the sτ 3 -Nsτ 3 junctions, this takes the form where N L,i is the total charge associated with either orbital in the L lead. As shown in Ref. where eU is a potential drop across the junction. 