Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) imaging is able to visualize micro-to nano-structures of cement and concrete. A prerequisite is that the sample preparation preserves the native structure of the specimen. In this study, argon Broad Ion Beam (BIB) sectioning is compared to state-of-the-art sample preparation (resin embedding, polishing) for hydrated alite. Additionally, it is investigated if during BIB, sample cooling is beneficial to avoid deterioration of cement hydrates. The aim is to quantitatively measure pore size distributions in hardened alite pastes. Therefore, not only optimized sample preparation but also optimized imaging conditions are investigated. Finally, it is demonstrated that by image analysis pores down to a diameter of 5 nm in hydrated alite pastes can be quantitatively analysed. The preparation of smooth, flawless surfaces is an important prerequisite for high resolution scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and image analysis. Good quality images of cross sections are important for an easy image analysis and can be used as reference data to validate other techniques like mercury intrusion porosimetry or to calibrate results of proton nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy Investigations of cement pastes and concrete samples have been performed on specimens which were vacuum impregnated and embedded in low viscosity resins, ground and polished since the 1980s till today A clean and smooth surface of the sample without introducing artefacts like scratches is nearly impossible using abrasive diamond suspensions or polishing pads. This is especially the case, if a specimen contains minerals of different hardness Scrivener et al. described that it is possible to get a feature resolution of calcium silicate hydrate (C-S-H) phases, ettringite and pores down to about 100 -200 nm using con-ventional polishing techniques Desbois et al. presented the advantages of this method to visualize complex structures of e.g. clay stone It is well known, that the electron beam tends to damage phases like C-S-H using TEM and SEM at high magnifications, due to thermal stress The present study will demonstrate and discuss advantages and limitations of BIB sectioning for high resolution imaging and quantitative image analysis of hardened alite pastes. Typical irradiation artefacts, caused by the electron beam and the ion beam on this material are shown and their impact on image analysis is discussed. Additionally, possible solutions for their avoidance or correction methods are proposed. For all investigations, commercially available alite (M3 polymorph, Vustah, Czech Republic) was used. Its chemical composition, as shown in Table Furthermore, some of the samples shown in this study were embedded in low viscosity epoxy-resin (resin R1370, hardener R1376, Agar Scientific) by immersing a 7 × 7 × 3 mm sample-section in resin, followed by degassing in two 30 minute cycles. Subsequently, the specimen was removed from the still uncured resin and placed face-down on a glass surface and cured at 40 • C in an oven. Using standard mechanical polishing, sections were polished in incremental steps with diamond oil slurries of particle sizes 15, 3, 1, and 0.25 μm. Carbon coating of approx. 8 -10 nm thickness was applied on selected samples (SCD 500, Baltec). The dried and polished 7 and 28 d alite samples were transferred into a triple ion beam milling system (EM TIC 3X, Leica). Argon BIB sectioning is carried out under vacuum (10 to 40 mbar) conditions. The three argon ion beams intersect at a sharp edged tungsten mask forming a milling sector of approximately of 100 • (Figure The uncoated, as-prepared surface of all samples was characterized using an ultra high resolution SEM (Helios G4 UX DualBeam, thermoFischer Scientific and Nova Nano SEM 230, FEI). The images shown are acquired using the through-the-lens detector (TLD) in secondary electron detection (SE) or in BSE mode. For the high resolution imaging using the TLD-SE (high vacuum), the SEMimmersion mode was used. In some cases these settings were combined with a stage bias and a monochromator. These settings allow the observation of pores structures of hydrated alite at nano-scale resolution. To segment a statistically relevant amount of pores using the acquired images, a segmentation by hand, using arbitrary thresholds is not suitable. Therefore, the image analysis was performed using a custom-written python script To relate the segmented pores to a phase like C-S-H, it is necessary to segment these phases. In many cases, the gray values of the solid phases like C-S-H, CH and alite are very similar or even overlapping. Therefore, the script offers a method for manual segmentation, to mark areas that should be excluded from the analysis (eg. other phases, large pores or image and preparation artefacts). Overflow based algorithms for pore segmentation as proposed by Wong et al. The goal of this investigation was to achieve high resolution images of hydrated alite with as little influence of the preparation steps. Figure Due to the high water content, the electrical nonconductivity and the delicacy of the C-S-H needles, electron and ion beams can alter the shape of such components of the microstructure as needles and pores. Even very low accelerating voltages and beam currents can induce damages to the needle-shaped structures of C-S-H in a manner of a few seconds. As can be seen in Figure Furthermore, pores within the dense C-S-H-Phase seem to grow if the electron beam scans an area for a longer time period. This can be seen in the marked area of Figure An ion beam is much more destructive than an electron beam and may induce a thermally damaged volume near the prepared surface Neither the specimen nor the ion sources are moveable in the used configuration of the ion beam device. Therefore, the specimen shows some artefacts known as curtaining (also known as waterfall effect) As can be seen in Figures Whereas BIB makes high quality surfaces possible while maintaining structures sensitive to higher temperatures or mechanical stress, it can be hard to correctly segment pores in an automated process. It is not practical to prepare infinitely thin specimens for SEM investigations. Therefore, the pore background of non-embedded samples is often visible (Figures A possibility to avoid this problem is to embed the the specimen in a low viscosity resin to fill the pores. Resin embedded specimens are as easy to polish using argon BIB at room temperature as resin free specimens. As shown in Figure Due to the applied low acceleration voltage for imaging, mainly surface features are visible in SE mode, while the obtainable material contrast is very low. While the trained human eye may be able to differentiate between resin filled pores and the alite/C-S-H-phases, it is difficult to automatically segment those low contrast images. In comparison, images made using BSE benefit from the high material contrast and the flat surface (Figure To determine the damage induced due to thermal stress during the BIB process at room temperature, it was compared against cryo-BIB. Since subjectively no alteration of C-S-H structures in high resolution images after both preparation methods could be found, a pore analysis for the dense inner C-S-H (definition as proposed by Tennis and Jennings As can be seen in Figures For each method (BIB at -140 or 20 • C), seven images were analysed using the presented process. These images and the results can be found in the supplementary data. Since the pixel size and the image areas differed slightly, the images were analysed individually. The position of the mean peak value of the CDF was used to compare both methods. As presented in Table Argon broad ion beam sectioning is widely used to prepare samples containing materials of varying hardness for SEM imaging. This study has shown that it is also applicable for sensitive materials like 7 and 28 d hydrated alite. In contrast to typically presented SEM images, specimens obtained using the BIB sectioning (at room temperature and -140 • C) show flat, high quality surfaces with minor alterations. Similar to FIB serial sectioning, curtaining and redeposition of material can be found using argon BIB. These features are not visible for every specimen or only in limited areas which can be excluded for image analysis. Artefacts like curtaining are introduced using stationary sample holders, but are reducible by various image filters with a certain loss of image resolution. C-S-H structures observed after cryo and room temperature BIB sectioning are very similar, which is in accordance to the findings of Groves et al. When performed at the temperature of -140 • C, the BIB method is more involved, and more time consuming than when it is performed at room temperature. It can also be concluded that, regardless of the preparation temperature, the obtained pore size distribution of the C-S-H will be similar as long as the BIB accelerating voltage is kept within the range of 3 kV to 6 kV. However, this conclusion may not hold for higher values of accelerating voltages. The surfaces prepared using BIB sectioning can be used for image analysis to determine the pore size or the phase distribution. Nevertheless, due to the small size of the area analysed, BIB sectioning as described in this paper is only applicable to statistically analyse a limited range of feature sizes. For more heterogeneous samples like mortar or even concrete it can still provide a qualitative insight into the material, and quantitative-type observations for nano-meter sized features. The good quality of the surface of BIB sections of hydrated alite allowed for the high resolution SEM images. The imaging resolution is thereby depending mainly on the resolution of the microscope. The highest resolution was obtained using the SEM immersion mode, modern in-lens BSE and SE detectors at low acceleration voltage (0.3 to 4.0 kV). Quantification of PSD on SEM images may be beneficial to improve the basic understanding of transport mechanisms in concrete. In this study this was demonstrated using a limited number of images. Furthermore, It must be noted that the PSD determined in this study is based on data derived from 2D-images. A comparison with volumetric porosity measurements would require a transformation of the data, which is beyond the scope of the present work. Another approach could be serial sectioning and 3D-imaging using argon BIB as shown by Desbois et al. For future studies, considerably more images have to be segmented and analysed to be able to make statistically reliable statements considering the PSD in individual phases of hydrated alite. Furthermore, the effects of this preparation method on hydrated Portland cement specimens should be studied. For those types of specimens, using cooled-stage BIB might still be relevant as it will allow to preserve cement hydrates such as ettringite, which contain more structural water than C-S-H. The research was supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG), grant number 344069666. 