High performance metasurfaces for thermal radiative cooling applications can be identified using computational optimization methods. This work has identified an easy-to-fabricate temperature phase transition VO2 nanowire array laid atop dielectric BaF2 Fabry-Perot cavity-onmetal with total coating thickness of 2 μm. This optimized structure has ability to self-adaptively switch between high reflectance at low temperature to high emissivity at high temperature in the broad thermal infrared spectrum. This design demonstrates exceptional turn-down figure-of-merit compared to previously realized configurations utilizing VO2 metasurfaces and multilayers. The mechanism is achieved with a sub-wavelength nanowire array effective medium that switches between anti-reflecting gradient coating and Fabry-Perot interference. This thin metasurface coating could impact self-cooling of the solar cells, batteries, and electrical devices where risk presents at high temperatures. Optical properties of thin films can be manipulated by introducing multilayered nano-patterns or periodic nanoelements that interface with electromagnetic waves from the visible to infrared. Various flavors of engineered nanoscale coatings include sub-diffraction plasmonic gratings VO2 integrated in photonic multilayers and gratings have demonstrated thermal radiative switching This work proposes a high turn-down grating by computational optimization of VO2 nanowires in a thin film. VO2 has a phase transition temperature at 340 K We utilize a Monte-Carlo optimization method to obtain the best nanowire array period and width of square cross-section VO2 nanowires Texas. The flexible coating can be applied to one or both sides of a vacuum gap between a solar cell housing and the roof. Similarly, it can be utilized for cooling compact processor components that gets as warm as 80 to 100°C. Other usages include thermal management for lithium-ion cells casings, passive-switched spacecraft insulation blankets, and other common Earth-temperature thermal regulation applications. In this paper, Rigorous Coupled-Wave Analysis (RCWA), a well-established multilayered diffraction method to solve Maxwell equations In designing toward desirable high reflection or high emission properties, selection of optical parameters is important in tailoring its optical parameters. The contrast of the dielectric layers helps construct an anti-reflecting coating, where each transparent layer satisfies the geometric mean of the surround layers, such that 1 0 2 n n n  The dielectric function of VO2 are obtained from empirical spectroscopy of its thin films Its optical properties are expressed with effective medium and Fermi-Dirac like distribution as shown, where εi and εm is the dielectric function for insulator and metal VO2 respectively. W=3.37 K is width of the temperature range of metal-insulator transition. The partial monoclinic-to-rutile lattice phase transition occurs at Th = 78.5C, where at this temperature, 50% of VO2 is metallic Thus, the onset transition temperature of VO2 from insulator to metal is 68C. In Fig. As shown in Fig. The parameter optimization scheme is conducted by creating four arrays of random N numbers, ri, for randomizing Λ, b, h, and dVO 2 . The arrays consisting of random numbers are then used to produce random value of size arrays for those four parameters as: where ρλ is the spectral reflectivity, and EBB,T is the spectral emissive power which expressed as EBB,T = πIBB,T, where IBB,T = (4π 2 c0 2 ħ / λ 5 ) / [exp (2ħc0 / λkBT) -1] is the blackbody intensity at the corresponding temperature T. The integrated wavelength ranges from 0.3 m and 30 m, which covers adequate sampling of the blackbody spectrum at atmospheric temperatures up to the Solar spectrum. The FOM is based on coating reflectivity to normalize from the opaque metal substrate, for sake of FOM comparison with other configurations on other metal substrates. The reflectivity is used to assess the coating's ability to reject surrounding radiation at higher temperature. On the other hand, for other calculations, the spectral emissivity is calculated as ελ = 1 -ρλ, considering that Kirchhoff's law of radiation is satisfied being the substrate is thick enough to be opaque. By fitting the parameter inputs into this summative FOM metric, further parametric stipulations can be applied to the next round of optimizations as explained in next section. Since the optimization consists of four parameters to randomize, N = 10 4 candidates are sufficient to search for the optimal structure. Yet optimizing more parameters could require additional samples needed, but recent machine learning techniques such as Bayesian optimization may be implemented in the future for its adaptive learning of the best parameters with reasonable convergence In this work, BaF2 is chosen as the dielectric spacer and dBaF 2 is quarter-wave thickness set constant as λ0 / 4nBaF 2 = 1.385 μm. The center wavelength λ0 is chosen as 8.2 μm, corresponding to emissive power at 80C (hot condition). The cold condition is selected to be 30C, a typical warm day or summer night in Texas. BaF2 has a low index of approximately nBaF 2 = 1.5, which contrasts highly against VO2. BaF2 is preliminarily selected as the lossless dielectric due to its broad essentially zero imaginary component of the refractive index up to the Reststrahlen absorption peak near 50 m First, the dVO 2 sub-monolayer is found to have optimal thickness at 450 nm via our randomization trials. It is thinner than the anticipated quarter-wave thickness of λ0 / 4nVO 2 = 840 nm, where nVO 2 = 2.38 at  = 8.2 m. The maximized FOM is quite broad over N = 10 4 samples, with no random scattering of outliers. Deviations of a few tens of nanometers from this value remains high performance. On searching for an optimal filling ratio of VO2 nanowire-to-period ( = w / ), we narrowed it to the range between 0.4 to 0.6. Thus, a reasonable additional restriction can be applied to the optimization method where the width of the VO2 nanowire cross-section is equal to the nanowire height. Optimizations of rectangular nanowires did not result in additional maximization of FOM. Square cross-section VO2 nanowires with high length-to-width aspect ratios have been realized for nanoscale applications The thermal radiation turn-down mechanism can be explained starting with Fig. The normal polar incident angle emissivity in transverse magnetic (TM) and transverse electric (TE) wave calculated in effective medium theory (EMT) are shown in Fig. where  is the width-to-period filling ratio for gratings. The index of air is air = 1.0. The resulting effective refractive index for TM wave is calculated at around nTM ~1.3, and has low κTM value for both 30°C and 80°C, which suppresses the emissivity. On the other hand, the contribution of VO2 is much higher in the effective refractive index for TE waves, which nTE ~ 1.7 and ~3.6 at 30°C and 80°C, respectively. The κTE value is much higher at 80°C, given by 2.0 to 4.0, and so higher emissivity is obtained. We note the near-perfect emissivity of 0.997 at 10.5 m, attributed to the optimized design of the Fabry-Perot mechanism. The following figures further investigate the underlying mechanisms of the turn-down coating's near-idealized performance. Figure Figure PDD in W/m 3 is given by, where  is the angular frequency corresponding to the wavelength, and E is the local electric field as function of the x-z plane. In Fig. On the other hand, from Fig. Although many optical materials and coatings should perform well regardless of radiation incident angle, some angular dependence is observed at far infrared region at around 28 μm. In Figure This FOM can be as high as 1.86, slightly higher compared to the optimized structure with BaF2 of 1.47. In this regard, we learn that other broadly infrared-transparent materials with higher index such as silicon (n = 3.4) could achieve similar turn-down performance. Other low-index materials can have similar FOM as the BaF2 configuration, such as potassium chloride (n = 1.49) and potassium bromide (n = 1.55), as long as the Reststrahlen band is far beyond the thermal infrared regime ( > 40 m). Ideally, medium-index materials such as zinc selenide (n = 2.4) or zinc sulfide (n = 2.2) can deliver FOM > 1.47. It becomes pressing to seek crystalline and interfacial compatibility between these medium-index dielectrics with VO2. Difficulties may arise in more common dielectric oxides with medium-index, such as silicon dioxide or titanium dioxide, due to their Lorentz absorption in the mid-to far-infrared In the next investigation shown in Fig. The highest FOM is achieved for both ZnS and the constant n = 2.2 index at  = 0.3. The slightly lower FOM of ZnS compared to constant n = 2.2 is due to its closer Reststrahlen band peak at 30.5 m with an appropriate filling ratio to improve overall reflectance, but with consideration of realizable nanowire sizing. Other dielectric spacers have been used in other studies of turn-down coatings, which we will make a comparison. Figures 8 (a) and (b) compares the reflectance at cold state and the emissivity at the hot state of our optimized structure (VO2 nanowires / BaF2 / VO2 ) with a rudimentary quarter-wave (QW) layers as first-order approximation (BaF2 QW / VO2 QW), a Fabry-Perot resonator (thin VO2 / Si) Thus, the VO2 nanowire array is a good compromise in gaining the high turn-down, while any Fabry-Perot multilayer configuration has lower turn-down performance due to narrower band emission. We noticed some consequential differences in performance in the multi-component Fabry-Perot cooler system from our recalculations is likely due to absorption by MgF2 near its Reststrahlen band near 20 m where this quantity represents the potential to emit to a neighboring reradiating surface, such as a multilayer insulation blanket where τatm,λ is the atmospheric transparency shown in Fig. Although the emissive power turn-down ratio for the simpler QW layers is higher (14.3:1), the maximum emitted power is lower, therefore the reduced FOM. This FOM accounts for both the turn-down ratio as well as the emissive power difference between hot and cold state. A higher magnitude emissive power at the hot state is therefore more important, especially for compact components with small radiating surface areas. The optimized VO2 NW design can also provide dense thermal radiative energy directed toward the atmosphere, almost doubling the capability for radiative rejection compared to other designs. Furthermore, we learn that the basic quarter-wave structure in fact outperforms a Fabry-Perot solid VO2 layer on dielectric. This means the concept of a Fabry-Perot structure may not be best suited, compared to a simpler dual anti-reflection layer. We note the performance is bolstered by absorption within the dielectric medium at off-normal incident angles. At these emissive power magnitudes at high temperature, these coatings may be capable of passive radiative cooling under the Sun via careful tuning of spectral response in the visible wavelength. This section assesses the possibility of the optimized coating as a daytime radiative cooler, and the metrics developed to quantify this capability. The Daytime Cooling Merit (DCM) is defined in Eq. ( as a ratio of energy balances from the diffuse coating (coat), atmosphere (atm), the Sun (sun), and combined conduction and convective cooling (con) to an ambient temperature in atmosphere Tamb = 290 K. The coating radiative power flux in W/m 2 is obtained by hemispherical integration of the spectral directional emissivity with blackbody temperature function of the coating. The incoming atmospheric power flux is calculated with the diffuse atmospheric transparency spectrum seen in Fig. Applying Eq. ( This cooling capability only in the hot state exceeds that of previously designed daytime radiative cooling coatings, such as SiO2 / HfO2 multilayer We have proposed a self-adaptive high turn-down VO2 nanowire / BaF2 / VO2 / silver thin film of around 2 m for passive thermal management applications. Our Monte-Carlo optimization method was utilized to obtain the optimal structure parameters for VO2 components. It is compared with Fabry-Perot multilayers using VO2, and a higher figure of merit (FOM) of 1.47 is obtained compared to other structures (FOM < 1). Ideally, the optimal refractive index of the dielectric spacer is n = 2.2, which is slightly higher than BaF2 (n = 1.55). The electric field is reflected at the interface between VO2 bottom layer and silver for lower temperature for high reflectance, but a high value of power dissipation density (PDD) is observed within the VO2 in higher temperature, leading to high emissivity in infrared region. The optimized structure provides cooling power of The red, light blue, orange, and green solid lines represent Pcoat, Patm, Psun, and Pcon, respectively. The shaded area represents the metallic phase of VO2. 