Two-dimensional transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) provide an attractive platform for studying strain dependent exciton transport at room temperature due to large exciton binding energy and strong bandgap sensitivity to mechanical stimuli. Here, we use Rayleigh type surface acoustic wave (SAW) to demonstrate controlled and directional exciton transport under weak coupling regime at room temperature. We screen the in-plane piezoelectric field using photogenerated carriers to study transport under type-I bandgap modulation and measure a maximum exciton drift velocity of 600 m/s. Furthermore, we demonstrate precise steering of exciton flux by controlling the relative phase between the input RF excitation and exciton photogenerations. The results provide important insight into the weak coupling regime between dynamic strain wave and room temperature excitons in a 2D semiconductor system and pave way to exciting applications of excitonic devices in data communication and processing, sensing and energy conversion. Moore's law With questionable sustenance for the trend to continue for the next score, various alternative pathways are being explored for next generation data processing and communication technologies. Bound electron-hole pair known as an exciton, provide a viable solution due to its charge neutral nature (free of parasitic capacitance), small dimension, and seamless transition with a photon (ideal for long distance communication links). While the use of excitons for information processing and communication has been proposed for over a decade, In this work, we study spatiotemporal control of exciton flux in a monolayer tungsten diselenide (WSe2) system at room temperature. High frequency (~745 MHz resonance frequency) Rayleigh type SAWs are generated in a piezoelectric 128 0 Y-cut lithium niobate substrate (LiNbO3) using interdigitated electrodes (IDTs) (please refer supporting information section 1 for acoustic response of the device). Mechanically exfoliated monolayer WSe2 encapsulated in hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN) was transferred on the SAW delay line using a dry transfer technique. Using phase-synchronized spatiotemporal measurements Figure More importantly, the underlying bulk h-BN moderates the dielectric environment surrounding the monolayer thereby increasing the exciton binding energy when compared to monolayer directly placed on LiNbO3 substrate. This reduces exciton dissociation under SAW piezoelectric field (type-II modulation) due to increased binding energy. Figure where the exciton drift velocity is insufficient to keep up with the travelling wave and hence, results in a net spatial shift over time of the exciton density. We model the evolution of the gaussian peak under dynamic strain over time using a linear relationship (solid line in Figure where, h(t) refers to the net displacement of the generated exciton density over many SAW periods, v avg refers to the average drift velocity of the exciton density under applied dynamic strain, and hoffset is a constant to accommodate the fitting error. Further improvement in v avg can be achieved by increasing the strain gradient or increasing exciton diffusivity by suppressing scattering from impurity states and surface roughness We determine the extent of exciton coupling to the dynamically varying strain field of the SAW by estimating the instantaneous velocity from the measured instantaneous displacement of the exciton density. The time derivative of the measured displacement at 13 dBm RF input power gives the instantaneous velocity of the exciton flux as shown in Figure where, μ, , and ε 0 refer to the exciton mobility, strain sensitivity of monolayer bandgap, The dynamic acoustic strain field generated by a SAW wave can be represented by: ε(x, t) = ε 0 cos( ωt -kx + φ) where, ε 0 refers to the amplitude of the strain field, ω refers to the angular frequency (ω = 2πf SAW ; f SAW refers to the acoustic resonance frequency), and φ refers to the instantaneous phase of the acoustic wave. Therefore, for a given optical excitation position from the IDT, the generated exciton density interacts with a certain phase of the traveling strain field. Using equation ( where μ ε = μ ) in the laser trigger signal (refer supporting material section 5 for schematics of the characterization setup). Figure Here, n ex , D ex , v ex , τ ex and τ ion refer to the population, diffusion co-efficient, velocity, recombination time and ionization time of the neutral exciton Exciton transport under type-I modulation takes place by spatial trapping at the minimum energy locations The strain induced oscillations result from the dynamic modulation of the energy separation between K and Q valleys under the traveling strain wave In conclusion, we demonstrated room temperature directed exciton energy transport in monolayer WSe2 under a traveling strain field. The dynamic strain gradient obtained under the For τ, the excitons are generated at a position such that the energetically stable position lies in the opposite direction of SAW propagation. Therefore, immediately after photogeneration, the exciton density distribution shifts in the opposite direction of SAW propagation. However, as the excitons couple to the traveling strain field, a net drift in the direction of SAW was observed. For τ+T/4, excitons are generated at the positions of lowest bandgap (position of maximum tensile strain corresponding to minimum exciton potential but lowest energy gradient). Hence, the exciton density distribution does not undergo immediate spatial shift after photogeneration. At τ+T/2, following photoexcitation, the energy gradient drives the exciton flux forward towards the stable position of maximum tensile strain. Therefore, the generated density distribution moves immediately in the direction of SAW propagation. For τ+3T/4, the excitons are generated at the position of maximum compressive strain i.e., maximum bandgap and hence results in no spatial shift immediately after photogeneration. (e)Phase synchronized evolution of the gaussian peak position(circles) extracted by fitting the normalized exciton density measured using TCSPC technique. The gaussian peak position oscillates at the period of the SAW wave. A progressive delay in the Gaussian peak is also observed as the time delay is increased at an increment of T/4. Alongside oscillations, a net drift in the Gaussian peak is observed in the direction of acoustic wave propagation. The solid line in the figure shows numerical fit using the model discussed in supporting information section 7. experimental condition was sufficient to study the weak coupling regime between excitons and the strain wave. Our results show that the weak coupling leads to oscillations in the transported exciton density since the exciton drift velocity is lower than the velocity of the travelling wave. Based on the measurement, we estimate the neutral exciton mobility in the monolayer to be 900 cm 2 /eV/s which is in good agreement with the values reported in literature for the same material. The results show that coupling between excitons and dynamic strain wave in TMDs strongly depends on the transport properties and therefore, is expected to be influenced by various factors like intrinsic and extrinsic defect states, lattice disorders, substrate roughness, scattering from charged and neutral impurities. Hence, improved material system with higher strain gradients would provide a pathway to reach the strong coupling regime. In addition, the use of TMD heterostructures that offer long lifetime could aid in improving the overall transport length. Finally, we also demonstrated acoustic steering over the photogenerated excitons by precisely tuning the exciton photogeneration with respect to the phase of the acoustic wave and provide a modified drift-diffusion model to the describe the observations. The reported results pave the way for exciting future applications that include efficient energy conversion, sensing, detection and room temperature on-chip excitonic information processing and communication. SAW Device Fabrication: The SAW devices were fabricated using standard photolithography-based metal lift-off process on a 128 0 Y-cut lithium niobate substrate (LiNbO3). A bi-layer photoresist stack was used (LOR 3A+ S1813) to achieve high resolution IDT features. The IDTs were patterned using a projection lithography tool (GCA Autostep AS200). Following development of the exposed features, 10 nm Cr and 100 nm Au was evaporated using electron beam evaporation technique. The lift-off was performed by immersing the samples in Remover PG for 12 hours. A second step lithography was performed to pattern the contact pads. The second step lithography was carried out using SPR 220(3.0) as the photoresist layer. The same projection lithography tool was used to pattern the contact pads. Following development of the exposed contact pad features, 10 nm Cr and 480 nm Au was evaporated using electron beam evaporation technique. The lift-off was performed following the same process as step 1. The samples were bonded to a custom-made PCB board using wire bonding. Detailed parameters for the overall process of device fabrication can be found in our previous work. Detailed parameters for the overall process of device fabrication can be found in our previous work The h-BN and WSe2 flakes were mechanically exfoliated from bulk crystals (bulk h-BN crystal was received from Takashi Taniguchi and Kenji Watanabe. Bulk WSe2 was purchased from HQ Graphene) using scotch tapes. The top/bottom h-BN and the monolayer WSe2 were then exfoliated from the scotch tapes onto a thin polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) stamp (GEL-FILM WF-40/1.5-X4) and identified under an optical microscope. Heterostructures were stacked layer by layer using a polymer-assisted dry transfer technique Acoustic Response Measurement from the SAW Devices: The acoustic characterization of the SAW devices was carried out using a network analyzer (Agilent 4396B) connected to a S-parameter test unit (Agilent 85046A). The results of acoustic response measurement can be found in the supporting information section 1. Exciton transport Measurement Setup: The optical characterization was carried out using a phase synchronized time correlated single photon counting (TCSPC) setup. The sample was non-resonantly excited (Excitation wavelength 405 nm) using a pulsed diode(laser diode source -PicoQuant LDH P-C-405 and laser diode driver -PDL 800-D) laser producing pulses ~30 ps in duration. The photoluminescence signal was collected using a highly sensitive avalanche photodiode (MPD PDM series CW PL measurement setup: The CW PL was measured using a 450 nm CW laser using a diffraction limited spot. The PL was collected using a 40X 0.95 NA objective (Nikon Plan Apo 40X 0.95) and analyzed using a high-resolution spectrometer (Princeton Instruments IsoPlane SCT 320) coupled to a highly sensitive CCD camera (Princeton Instruments, Model Pixis 400). 