We discuss a novel physical mechanism which gives rise to a giant magnetoconductivity in noncentrosymmetric superconducting films. This mechanism is caused by a combination of spin-orbit interaction and inversion symmetry breaking in the system, and arises in the presence of an inplane magnetic field H . It produces a contribution to the conductivity, which displays a strong dependence on the angle between the electric field E and H , and is proportional to the inelastic relaxation time of quasiparticles. Since in typical situations the latter is much larger than the elastic one this contribution can be much larger than the conventional conductivity thus leading to giant microwave absorption. Non-centrosymmetric conductors with spin-orbit interaction exhibit interesting phenomena which are forbidden in centrosymmetric materials. Examples include spin magnetization induced by a current in metals The ac conductivity σ relates the current density j to the applied electric field E(t) = E 0 cos ωt. At sufficiently low frequency ω this relation takes the form j = j eq (p s ) + σE(t), (1) where σ is a conductivity tensor, and j eq (p s ) is the equilibrium current evaluated at the instantaneous value of the superfluid momentum p s . The latter is defined as p s = 1 2 ∇χ -2e c A , where χ is the order parameter phase, A is the vector potential, and c is the speed of light. In the presence of microwave radiation p s evolves in time according to The first term in the right hand side of Eq. ( Here e and m denote the electron charge and mass, N s is the superfluid density, and we introduced the notation h = gμ B H /2, with g being the electron g-factor, and μ B the Bohr magneton. The last two terms in the right hand side of Eq. ( We will assume that the electric field E is applied in the x-direction. In this case the component σ xx = σ of the conductivity tensor σ is responsible for the microwave absorption. The dissipative part of the ac conductivity of centrosymmetric superconductors has been extensively studied starting with the classic work of Bardeen and Mattis Below, we show that for non-centrosymmetric superconductors placed in an in-plane magnetic field H the linear conductivity σ acquires an additional contribution σ DB , which is proportional to the inelastic relaxation time of quasiparticles, τ in , and has a pronounced dependence on the angle between the microwave field E and H . Since in typical superconductors τ in exceeds τ el by several orders of magnitude this leads to a giant anisotropic magnetoconductivity. The frequency dispersion of σ DB (ω) takes place at relatively low frequency ω ∼ 1/τ in , which is much smaller than the characteristic dispersion frequency 1/τ el of the normal state conductivity σ n . The existence of this phenomenon can be traced to the fact that the quasiparticle density of states in superconductors ν( , p s ) depends on the superfluid momentum p s . In the presence of microwave radiation the latter changes with time according to Eq. ( Due to the scalar character of the density of states ν( , p s ) its linear coupling to p s induced by the microwave field E is possible only if the symmetry of the system allows for a presence of a polar vector. Therefore, in centrosymmetric superconductors the contribution proportional to τ in is possible only in a currentcarrying state We note that the presence of such an additive contribution to the conductivity is in drastic contrast with the phenomenological Matthiessen's rule, which states that the resistivity (including the microwave resistivity of superconductors) is proportional to the sum of partial momentum relaxation rates due to each type of relaxation process. The latter implies that the resistivity is controlled by the shortest relaxation time. We begin our quantitative treatment by writing down the Hamiltonian of a normal metal, where ξ p = E(p) -E F is the quasiparticle energy relative to the Fremi energy E F . Below we assume isotropic dispersion, E(p) = p 2 /2m, and the spin-orbit coupling of the form which includes both Rashba (β = 0) and Deresselhaus (α = 0) cases. Here σ are spin Pauli matrices, and n is one of the two non-equivalent normals to the sample. The eigenstates of the Hamiltonian (4) can be characterized by helicity (projection of spin on the direction of b(p) + h). The dispersion of the bands with positive and negative helicity has the form Although the spectrum Eq. ( In non-centrosymmetric superconductors in the presence of an in-plane magnetic field the equilibrium current may be written in the form of Eq. (3). To evaluate the coefficients a, b, N s one can use the BCS Hamiltonian for superconductors with spin-orbit coupling. We write our Hamiltonian as H = H 0 + U (r)τ 3 , where Here τ are the Pauli matrices in the Gorkov-Nambu space, U (r) is the random impurity potential, whose strength will be characterised by the value of the electron elastic mean free time τ el . For simplicity, we assume local interactions. In this case the order parameter is a singlet, and ∆ = ∆ Î is proportional to the identity matrix in spin space. The superfluid momentum is included by making the gauge transformation p → p + p s τ 3 . We focus on the temperature interval near the critical temperature, T c -T T c . In this case the coefficients a and b in Eq. ( In the clean and dirty cases the function g(T c τ el ) is given by where ζ(n) is the Reimann zeta function, and we have assumed αp F , βp F max T, T /τ el . In the ground state the current density must vanish. Substituting Eqs. ( where the coefficients ã and b are given by In deriving Eq. ( for the superfluid density. Equations ( where characterizes the sensitivity of quasiparticle energy levels to changes in p s . The derivation of Eqs. ( In s-wave superconductors σ DB given by the integral in Eq. ( , where p (gs) s is given by Eq. ( One can distinguish between ballistic and diffusive regimes of microwave absorption. In the former, the broadening exceeds the rate of elastic scattering of quasiparticles, whose energies lie inside the broadened BCS singularity. In the latter the opposite inequality takes place. The value of the magnetic field h separating the ballistic and diffusive regimes may be estimated by equating h with the elastic relaxation rate for quasiparticles in the energy interval | -∆| ∼ h. Recalling that elastic relaxation rate for quasiparticles depends on the energy as (see, for example, Ref. 22) one finds that the crossover between the ballistic and the diffusive regimes occurs at hτ 2 el ∆ ∼ 1. Ballistic regime, hτ 2 el ∆ 1: In the superconducting state, the excitation spectrum of quasiparticles with positive and negative helicity in the presence of an in-plane Zeeman field H and p s takes the form (up to first order in h |b| and p s ) where ṽF± is the band velocity, ṽ± (p) evaluated on the Fermi circle with the corresponding helicity (±), φ is the azimuthal angle of p, and ν ± = ν n (1 ± b/E F ) is the density of states on the corresponding Fermi circle. The superfluid momentum in Eq. ( (16) Here K(x) = π/2 0 dφ(1 -x sin 2 φ) -1/2 is the complete elliptic integral of the first kind, and we introduced the following variables: w = ( -∆)/∆ 1, and Next, we evaluate the level sensitivity, Eq. ( 2 . Inside the second energy interval, -γ + ≤ w ≤ -γ -, only the band with + helicity contributes to the density of states in Eq. ( Therefore, although the width of this interval is relatively small, 2v F p (gs) s ∝ b/E F , it provides the main contribution to the conductivity in Eq. ( ). The angular dependence of the Debye conductivity relative to the orientation of magnetic field is then restored with the aid of Eqs. ( Here θ is the angle between the electric field E and the in-plane magnetic field h. Diffusive regime, hτ 2 el ∆ 1: In this case we express the single particle density of states in terms of the retarded single-particle Green's function where the trace is performed over both Gorkov-Nambu and spin spaces and ĜR is the retarded Green function averaged over disorder. Using the standard diagram technique for averaging over the realizations of random potential where + = + i0, H 0 (p) is given by Eq. ( Integrating over momentum here, substituting the result into Eq. ( where the disorder-renormalized energy ̃ and gap function ∆ are given by the solutions of the following equations: Here, as in the ballistic case, we assumed longitudinal polarization, p s p (gs) s . Equations 23 are similar to those arising in the theory of superconductors with magnetic impurities. It is easy to see that in the absence of perturbations breaking time-reversal symmetry, h, p s = 0, Eqs. (23) yield ̃ = ∆ ∆ , which reproduces the standard BCS result for the density of states. For weak time-reversal breaking perturbations, (h 1 the density of states Eq. ( α( w) = 16 w3 + 27 + 3 √ 3 32 w3 + 27 Here ) 2 τ el ∆, and w = wA -2/3 . Using Eq. ( Here the numerical constant I D ≈ 0.38727 is given by a definite integral in Eq. (B9) of the Appendix. In summary, we have identified a new mechanism of magnetoconductivity of non-centrosymmetric superconductors, which arises from the quasiparticle spectral flow. It provides a contribution to the conductivity in the presence of an in-plane Zeeman field which is proportional to the inelastic quasiparticle relaxation time τ in . In the ballistic, hτ 2 el ∆ 1, and diffusive, hτ 2 el ∆ 1, regimes this contribution is described by Eqs. ( Although we focused our consideration on the interval of temperatures near T c , the mechanism of magnetoconductance discussed above is present in a much broader temperature interval. In particular, even at small temperatures, T ∆, where the quasiparticle concentration becomes exponentially small, ∝ exp(-∆/T ) it may give a large contribution to the low frequency magnetoconductivity. In this regime the quasiparticle relaxation is characterized by two time scales: i) quasiparticle scattering processes, which conserve the number of quasiparticles, occur on a time scale τ in,sc , which is independent of the quasiparticle concentration, ii) quasiparticle recombination processes are characterized by a relaxation time, which is inversely proportional to the exponentially small concentration of quasiparticles, τ in,r ∼ τ in,sc exp(∆/T ). Since the Debye contribution to the conductivity is proportional to the longest relaxation time in the system, at sufficiently low frequencies the corresponding exponentially small factors cancel in the conductivity. Thus σ DB at low temperatures is, roughly speaking, comparable to that near T c . However, in this case the frequency dispersion of σ DB (ω) takes place at very low frequencies, ω ∼ 1/τ in,r . current is j = eT In the clean limit, T c τ el 1, impurity scattering can be neglected and the Matsubara Green's functions in Eq. (A2) are their given by their values in the absence of an impurity potential, The diagrams in Fig. One can reduce the problem of considering two Fermi surfaces to the consideration of a single Fermi surface as in Eq. (A4) by expanding the spin orbit-coupling about ξ p = 0. For linear spin-orbit coupling, such as considered in Refs. So far we have made no assumptions about the spectrum, only assuming that spin-orbit coupling is weak in comparison to the Fermi energy b 0 E F . For the spectrum assumed in the main text, with spin-orbit coupling given by Eq. ( Eq. (A6) reduces to Eq. ( We now account for impurity scattering in the regime T c τ el 1. Because of the presence of Green's functions with opposite frequencies impurity averaging does not reduce to simply replacing the Green's functions by their disorder-averaged values. The averaging of products of Green's functions leads to the appearance impurity ladders, as shown in Figs In the presence of impurities the quasiparticle energy n → ̃ n = n + 1 2τ el sgn n , where τ -1 el = mn i u 2 is the elastic scattering rate, n i is the impurity concentration, m is the electron mass, and u is the amplitude of the impurity potential in momentum space. In particular, the order parameter vertex is renormalized by the impurity ladder. . (B8b) Then, substituting Eq. ( 