The application of hybrid composites in lightweight engineering enables the combination of material-specific advantages of fiber-reinforced polymers and classical metals. The interface between the connected materials is of particular interest since failure often initializes in the bonding zone. In this contribution the connection of an aluminum component and a glass fiber-reinforced epoxy is considered on the microscale. The constitutive modeling accounts for adhesive failure of the local interfaces and cohesive failure of the bulk material. Interface failure is represented by cohesive zone models, while the behavior of the polymer is described by an elastic-plastic damage model. A gradientenhanced formulation is applied to avoid the well-known mesh dependency of local continuum damage models. The application of numerical homogenization schemes allows for the prediction of effective traction-separation relations. Therefore, the influence of the local interface strength and geometry of random rough interfaces on the macroscopical properties is investigated in a numerical study. There is a positive effect of an increased roughness on the effective joint behavior. The connection of different materials in hybrid structures needs special attention, since the failure of joints can lead to a complete collapse of engineering constructions. Conventional concepts like screw connections There are several homogenization schemes in the literature for thin inhomogeneous layers, where an effective tractionseparation law is obtained instead of a stress-strain relation The current paper enhances the procedure of Hirsch and Kästner The constitutive equations for the different materials of the hybrid joint include models for the metal, fiber and polymer materials as well as their interfaces. Within the concept of continuum mechanics, a body takes the reference configuration B 0 ⊂ R 3 at time t 0 with the domain boundary ∂B 0 and the current configuration B ⊂ R 3 at time t > t 0 with the domain boundary ∂B. Material points are identified by their position vectors X ∈ B 0 and x = φ(X, t) ∈ B, where φ describes the motion of the material body. Their displacement is characterized by the vector u(X, t) = φ(X, t) -X. The deformation gradient and its determinant are defined as Furthermore, the left Cauchy-Green deformation tensor b = F • F T and the velocity gradient l = ∂v/∂x are introduced with v = u being the velocity. The metal and fiber materials, i.e., the aluminum and glass fiber components are assumed to be isotropic and elastic. Hence, the material response is determined by the free energy Ψ(b) = Ψ(λ 1 , λ 2 , λ 3 ), where λ i are the principal stretches. A dissipation rate D per unit of reference volume is formally introduced for the purely mechanical case to satisfy the Clausius-Duhem inequality (CDI) with the Kirchoff stress tensor τ and the deformation rate d = 1/2 l + l T . Evaluation of (2) using the procedure of Coleman and Noll The Cauchy stress tensor σ can be determined with σ = 1/Jτ. Here, the general phenomenological ansatz of Ogden type Many thermoplastics and thermosets used in composites show a complex material response depending on the material state and the environmental conditions. For the considered epoxy system, a stress-state-dependent yield and fracture behavior can be observed in uniaxial tension and compression tests with D ∈ R + and D ≤ 1 being a non-decreasing scalar damage variable. The undamaged material state corresponds to D = 0 and the fully damaged state with no further stress transmission to D = 1. The undamaged stress response and evolution equations follow the large strain elastoplastic model presented by Simo into an elastic part F e and a plastic part F p is employed with the 'damaged' free energy function Ψ = (1 -D) Ψ and the elastic left Cauchy-Green deformation tensor b e = F e • F eT . The evaluation of • b e and τ : - To satisfy the reduced dissipation inequality The elastic response of the model is determined by the 'undamaged' free energy Ψ(b e ) = Ψ(λ e 1 , λ e 2 , λ e 3 ), where λ e i are the principal stretches of b e . For Ψ also the proposed Odgen type Ansatz in ( is applied. In equation ( with the plastic multiplier λ according to the loading-unloading conditions λ ≥ 0, f ≤ 0, λ f = 0 and the consistency condition ḟ = 0. The plastic potential is defined with respect to the effective Cauchy stress tensor σ and enables the control of plastic Poisson effects by the parameter α. The relation α = (9 -18ν p )/(2 + 2ν p ) with respect to the initial plastic Poisson ratio ν p as presented by The tensile and compressive yield strengths σ t and σ c in The initial yield stresses σ 0 t and σ 0 c and the functions for the hardening moduli h t and h c must be chosen to describe the experimental results of tension and compression tests phenomenologically. Isotropic hardening is governed by the equivalent plastic strain and defined by where k = 1/(1 + 2ν 2 p ) 1/2 depends on the initial plastic Poission ratio ν p . Similiar to the yield condition in ( proposed by Melro et al. where κ is a damage driving internal variable. The application of classical damage models leads to localization phenomena and FE mesh dependent results. To overcome these problems, different regularization methods exist. In the current model, a gradient enhancement based on the framework of Peerlings et al. The non-local variable ε is connected to a local counterpart ε by a Helmholz-type equation which forms an additional boundary value problem. A homogeneous Neumann boundary condition ∇ ε • n = 0 is assumed using the outward normal vector n on ∂B. Both, the Laplacian and the Nabla operator ∆ and ∇, are defined with respect to the current configuration. The length parameter l ensures a damage localization within a defined volume instead of a single element to avoid the spurious mesh dependency. If the failure condition in ( The constitutive law for the metal-polymer and the fiber-polymer interfaces is based on the cohesive zone model provided by ABAQUS where the traction coordinates t I are compared to the corresponding pure mode strengths t 0 I . In case of a pure state of compression no damage is initiated by using of the Macaulay brackets After a linear damage evolution, the fully damaged state is governed by the fracture criterion This section provides the general framework for the analysis of interface regions between FRP and metal components as shown in Fig. The effective response on the macroscale is determined by the volume averages of microscopic field quantities. i.e. • = 1/V 0 B 0 • dV. A physically meaningful connection between both scales is achieved by the Hill-Mandel condition with the first Piola-Kirchhoff stress tensor P = F -1 • τ. Different derivations of this condition exist for thin layers and interfaces, where macroscopic traction-separation relations are provided instead of stress-strain relations. For large deformations the framework proposed by Hirschberger et al. to the volume averages of the microscopic deformation gradient F and the first Piola-Kirchhoff stress P . In equation Appropriate boundary conditions have to be defined to fulfill condition Here, (•) α± denote the associated values on opposite RVE boundaries ∂B α± 0 in direction α ∈ {1, 2, 3} with the outward normal vector N and ( •) respresents fluctuation quantities. A discussion of suitable boundary conditions of non-local quantities within an RVE framework can be found in are applied on the RVE boundary. The hybrid boundary conditions can further be used to transform the effective traction in and the antiperiodic traction with the area A 3+ 0 of the positive boundary ∂B 3+ 0 of the undeformed RVE. Hence, the computation of the effective traction for arbitrary microstructures is performed with the average of the microscopic traction over the top surface of the RVE. In The RVE generation consists of two main steps and is implemented within a Python script for an automatic model generation in ABAQUS. In the first step the interface has to be generated. Therefor, a 'random field surface generator' was implemented based on the algorithm proposed by Temizer et. al is used as a characteristic measure for the height distribution of the surface. In with the standard deviation σ and shift τ, see Fig. is introduced as the ratio of the amplitude parameter R q and the spacing parameter l ACF . After the surface generation, fibers with a radius of r F = l ACF are placed in the section of matrix material within the RVE. Finally, the assembly, the mesh generation and application of periodic boundary conditions is performed script controlled with Python in ABAQUS . In this section, the parameter identification of the constitutive models for the fibers, the matrix, the metal component and the metal-matrix as well as fiber-matrix interfaces is addressed. The fibers should mimic E-glass fibers and are parametrized with typical elastic constants taken from The elastic constants as well as the plastic Poisson ratio in Table The tensile and compressive strength for damage initiation in ( proposed in results. The damage law If D = 1, the material is fully damaged and should be excluded from the simulation. However, this point leads to additional numerical instabilities within an implicit solution procedure. As a suitable remedy the damage driving leading to an exponential transition of D towards D = 1 after reaching the threshold κ c , is chosen well below the strengths of the remaining fiber-matrix interfaces and the epoxy matrix. The influence of this parameter set will be studied additionally. In this study, the strengths will be increased to 40, 45 and 50 MPa, i.e. the range of the fiber-matrix interface, where G C will also be increased by the same ratio. Furthermore, the isotropy of the interface will be varied to an anisotropic case, since shear strength and fracture energies are often higher than their normal counterparts. Here, a set with identical ratio is used according to the fiber-matrix interface, e.g. R cz = t 0 n /t 0 s = 50 MPa/70 MPa ≈ 0.71 and an arbitrary lower ratio R cz = 0.5. In the following study, effective traction-separation laws are extracted by homogenization of several interface RVEs under tensile loading. The main objective is to investigate the relation of effective interface strength and the roughness of the local metal-polymer interface. The effective strengths are the maximum values of the effective tractions, which are calculated according to For each roughness one RVE in the failed configuration is shown in Fig. In the following investigation, the interface strength is increased to an arbitrary high value close to the strength of the FRP, i.e. the strength is set to t 0 n = 40 MPa and the fracture energy is increased by the same ratio. The homogenized response is shown in Fig. The interface zone of hybrid material combinations is highly complex, and their performance is of special importance to guarantee operational reliability during lifetime. In this contribution, the connection of a glass fiber reinforced epoxy composite and an aluminum component is addressed. Complex geometries at the microscale, i.e. randomly distributed fibers and a rough interface shape, as well as a strongly nonlinear material behavior during the failure process are considered. A full experimental investigation on this length scale proves to be difficult, so that numerical analyses are suitable means. In this context, a modeling strategy which facilitates an extraction of effective traction-separation laws by performing numerical simulations of representative volume elements of the interface zone is proposed. Local damage phenomena are described as a combination of discrete failure of the interfaces and diffuse failure of the bulk material. To this end, cohesive zone and large strain elastoplastic damage models with gradient enhancement are applied. Several studies with varying interface roughness are presented. The investigations reveal that the homogenized interface properties improve with increasing roughness. Furthermore, the dominating failure mechanism highly depends on the local interface strength. Using a low interface strength, purely adhesive failure is formed independently of the interface roughness. Only when the local interface strength is increased to values close to the remaining material strengths, a shift from purely adhesive to cohesive failure is observable. In this context, cohesive failure is intended, because it indicates a highly performant interface. Both numerically investigated effectsincreased local interface strength and a higher roughness -can be achieved with a pre-treatment as, e.g., sandblasting, a laser structuring process or a chemical pre-treatment. In this contribution only the tensile loading case is considered. The shear loading case is a meaningful investigation for future research. However, this loading case is very complex due to the contact sliding of the metal-polymer interface in combination with failure phenomena.