Motivated by the recent discovery of the anomalously nearest-neighbor attraction arising from the electronphonon coupling, we quantitatively investigate the enhancing effects of this additional attractive channel on the d-wave SC based on dynamic cluster quantum Monte Carlo calculations of doped two-dimensional extended Hubbard model with nearest-neighbor attraction -V . Focusing on the range of 0 < -V /t ≤ 2, our simulations indicate that the dynamics of d-wave projected pairing interaction is attractive at all frequencies and increases with |V |. Moreover, turning on -V attraction enhances the (π, π) spin fluctuations but only enhances (suppresses) the charge fluctuations for small (large) momentum transfer. Thus, at V /t = -1 relevant to "holon folding branch", the charge fluctuations are insufficient to compete with d-wave pairing interaction strengthened by enhanced spin fluctuations. Our work suggest the underlying rich interplay between the spin and charge fluctuations in giving rise to the superconducting properties. The pairing mechanism mediated by virtual exchange of a bosonic mode plays the key role in overcoming the Coulomb repulsion between electrons in order to give rise to a net attractive interaction for Cooper pairing. In conventional Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) superconductors, this bosonic mechanism is realized by the retardation nature of the electron-phonon interaction Regarding the pairing mechanism in cuprates, there has been long debate on the role of the electron-phonon interaction and particularly its relation to superconductivity (SC). Although it is widely believed that the pure electronelectron interaction dominantly drive the Cooper pairing and the electron-phonon coupling (EPC) only plays the minor role, there has been spectroscopic evidence that the effects of strong electronic interaction and the EPC reinforce each other to drive a stronger SC in the strangemetal regime of Bi-2212 Given the structural similarity among the cuprates, the physics with nearest-neighbor attraction of the one-dimensional material should be naturally extended to twodimensional CuO 2 planes. Because how to enhance the superconducting T c is an important open question, the effects of the additional attractive channel and its interplay with the pure electron-electron interaction deserves more systematic exploration. Here we adopt an extended Hubbard model with both strong local repulsion and nearest-neighbor attraction as the minimal model. In particular, we focus on the explicit enhancement of the d-wave SC by the inclusion of additional strong nearest-neighbor attraction. The Hamiltonian reads as with the usual nearest-neighbor hopping t = 1 as the unit energy scale, the on-site Coulomb repulsion U , and an additional nearest-neighbor Coulomb attraction V < 0. Note that this attractive V has importance difference from the conventional extended Hubbard model with repulsive V , which has been widely studied for the physics induced by the non-local Coulomb repulsion Here we adopt the dynamical cluster approximation (DCA) To achieve the goal of simulating a wide range of doping levels, most of our calculations are for smallest N c = 2 × 2 DCA cluster to manage the sign problem of the underlying CT-AUX QMC solver To investigate the superconducting, charge, and magnetic instability of a particular model Hamiltonian, one has to determine the structure of the interaction responsible for these channels. Essentially, the cluster two-particle Green's function with conventional notation K = (K, iω n ), K = (K , iω n ), q = (q, iν) and the time-ordering operator T can be calculated numerically via a DCA cluster solver (CT-AUX in our case). Then the cluster two-particle irreducible vertex Γ cσσ (q, K, K ) can be extracted through the Bethe-Salpeter equation (BSE) where χ 0 cσσ (q, K, K ) is the non-interacting two-particle Green's function constructed from the product of a pair of fully dressed single-particle Green's functions. The usual convention that the summation is to be made for repeated indices is adopted. Note that the above formalism Eqs. (2-3) has their counterparts for the corresponding lattice quantities, whose numerical calculations are, however, impractical due to their continuous nature. Therefore, one of the key DCA assumptions is that the cluster two-particle irreducible vertex Γ c is used as the approximation of the desired lattice twoparticle irreducible vertex Γ. The two-particle irreducible vertex and associated BSE Eq. ( where Γ pp (K, K ) denotes the irreducible particle-particle vertex of the effective cluster problem with the cluster momenta K and Matsubara frequencies ω n = (2n + 1)πT . Note that the spin indices are neglected for simplicity. Besides, for the superconducting channel, q = (q, iν) = 0 is assumed since our focus in this work is the even-frequency even-parity (spin singlet) d-wave pairing tendency is obtained via the dressed single-particle Green's function where k belongs to the DCA patch surrounding the cluster momentum K, μ the chemical potential, ε k = -2t(cos k x + cos k y ) the dispersion relation, and Σ(K, iω n ) the cluster self-energy. In practice, we usually choose 16 discrete points for both the positive and negative fermionic Matsubara frequency ω n = (2n + 1)πT mesh for measuring the four-point quantities like two-particle Green's functions and irreducible vertices. Therefore, the BSE Eq. ( The eigenvalue λ α (T ) gives the pairing tendency of the superconducting channel; while the symmetry of the corresponding superconducting state is manifested by the momentum and frequency dependence of the eigenvector φ α (K, iω n ). Note that the magnitude of λ α (T ) denotes the strength of the normal state pairing correlations. Accordingly, the spatial, frequency, and more generally orbital dependence of the eigenvector φ α (K, iω n ) can be viewed as the normal state analog of the superconducting gap to reflect the structure of the pairing interaction As discussed by Scalapino The corresponding eigenvalues for the particle-hole channels reflect the magnetic and charge instabilities, e.g. spin and charge density waves. In this work we are only interested in the case of zero frequency transfer (iν = 0) similar to the particle-particle superconducting channel Eq. ( Then our interested magnetic (s) and charge (c) lattice susceptibilities χ s,c (q, T ) can be deduced as We refer the readers to Ref. We first illustrate the temperature dependence of the leading d-wave eigenvalue λ d (T ) for different V at fixed V= 0.0, q = (0, 0) ch V=-1.0, q = (0, 0) ch V= 0.0, q = ( , ) mag V=-1.0, q = ( , ) mag on the d-wave pairing On the one hand, apparently, the dominant instability at low enough temperature is d-wave superconducting while at higher temperatures the antiferromagnetic ordering instability exceeds the pairing one To have a better understanding of the pairing interaction and its variation with the additional nearest-neighbor attraction, we resort to the d-wave projected dynamical pairing interaction and its dependence on the bosonic Matsubara frequency wave projection factor, and the fixed ω n = πT is adopted. As shown in Fig. The attractive feature and retardation nature of the dwave pairing interaction can be reflected via the leading dwave eigenvector φ d (K, iω n ) of Eq.( Although the linear change of Γ d (iω m ) in Fig. that the d-wave SC would be finally destroyed and replaced by the competing charge orders As mentioned earlier, the pairing interaction Γ pp has intrinsic relation to the irreducible particle-hole vertex Γ ph . Given that the magnetic channel plays the central role in mediating the d-wave pairing and also the additional nearest-neighbor interactions, either repulsive Compared with the behavior of χ s , the charge susceptibility χ c shows more nontrivial features. In particular, turning on -V attraction enhances the charge fluctuation at small momentum transfer e.g. q = (0, 0), (π/2, 0) instead of q = (π, π) expected for repulsive V interaction In conclusion, we adopted dynamic cluster quantum Monte Carlo calculations of the extended Hubbard model with nearest-neighbor attraction to study the impact of the additional attractive channel on the d-wave SC. In particular, we focus on the attractive interaction with amplitude |V | ∼ t, which is motivated by the recent discovery of an anomalously strong nearest-neighbor attraction probably arising from the electron-phonon couplings It is found that the additional -V enhances the d-wave SC and the variation of T c with ±V has roughly the same scale, which confirms the expectation that the repulsive (attractive) V suppresses (enhances) the SC before it is ultimately destroyed by sufficiently large |V | Our presented work provides complemental knowledge on the extensively studied extended Hubbard model, especially on quantitative examination of the role of the additional nearest-neighbor attraction uncovered recently. These results suggest the underlying rich interplay between the spin and charge fluctuations in giving rise to the superconducting properties.