The outstanding performance of organic-inorganic metal trihalide solar cells benefits from the exceptional photo-physical properties of both electrons and holes in the material. Here, we directly probe the free-carrier dynamics in Cs-doped FAPbI3 thin films by spatiotemporal photoconductivity imaging. Using charge transport layers to selectively quench one type of carriers, we show that the two relaxation times on the order of 1 s and 10 s correspond to the lifetimes of electrons and holes in FACsPbI3, respectively. Strikingly, the diffusion mapping indicates that the difference in electron/hole lifetimes is largely compensated by their disparate mobility. Consequently, the long diffusion lengths (3 ~ 5 m) of both carriers are comparable to each other, a feature closely related to the unique charge trapping and de-trapping processes in hybrid trihalide perovskites. Our results unveil the origin of superior diffusion dynamics in this material, crucially important for solar-cell applications. Organic-inorganic lead trihalide perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have been in the limelight of photovoltaic research The spatiotemporal dynamics of electrons and holes in optoelectronic materials are widely studied by optical measurements such as time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) and transient absorption spectroscopy (TAS) In this article, we directly probe free-carrier diffusion dynamics in Cs-doped formamidinium lead trihalide (FACsPbI3) thin films by laser-illuminated microwave impedance microscopy (iMIM), a unique optical-pump-electrical-probe technique with 20-nm spatial resolution and 10-ns temporal resolution for the electrical detection The PSC thin film in this study, hereafter labeled as Sample A, is 5% Cs-doped formamidinium (FA) lead triiodide deposited on cover glasses (see Methods). Compared with methylammonium (MA) based perovskites, FAPbI3 exhibits superior stability at elevated temperatures and an ideal band gap for sunlight absorption Perovskite films were deposited using the typical anti-solvent-assisted spin-coating procedure. The samples were then capped by spin-coating 15 mgml -1 PMMA (Mw ~ 120,000) film in chlorobenzene solution. For iMIM measurements, we chose a film thickness of d = 250 nm that is greater than the absorption length, such that light is fully absorbed, but much less than the carrier diffusion length, such that the photoconductivity is uniformly distributed in the vertical direction within the relevant time scale in our experiment. External quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra were also measured (Supplementary Fig. PSC devices made from the same material but with thicker film (550 nm) demonstrated a PCE above 20% under the standard Air Mass (AM) 1.5 illumination (Supplementary Fig. The spatiotemporal iMIM setup with a focused laser beam illuminating from below the sample stage is illustrated in Fig. The microwave electronics detect the tip-sample impedance, from which the local conductivity can be deduced , where q is the elemental charge. Here n(r) can be described by the diffusion equation , where L = √Dτ is the diffusion length, D the diffusion coefficient,  the lifetime, and  ~ 1 the incident photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE). The analytical solution to Eq. ( , where K0 is the modified Bessel function of the second kind. By fitting the iMIM data to Eq. ( Fig. In order to shed some light on the tr-iMIM data, we studied the carrier dynamics in perovskite thin films with electron or hole transport layers Finally, we briefly discuss the iMIM results at higher illumination intensities. As shown in Figs. Conversely, with electrons efficiently removed by the ETL, the hole dynamics prevail and A1/A2 < 2 in Sample C. We have also performed photoconductivity mapping on Samples B and C under various PC (Supplementary Figs. Consequently, in addition to the general trend of decreasing diffusion length at increasing excitation, L in Sample B decreases further at high PC, whereas L in Sample C increases slightly at high PC. Similarly, while only one type of carriers is responsible for the low-power photoconductivity, C does not scale with PC in either sample towards 10 4 mW/cm 2 (Fig. The spatiotemporally resolved iMIM experiments reveal rich information on organometal trihalide perovskite thin films. To begin with, we take a close look at the impact of GBs on charge transport in PSC materials, which has been under intense debate Given the extensive use of PL in studying carrier dynamics, it is instructive to compare the TRPL and tr-iMIM results in our samples. In short, TRPL measured excited states such as exciton recombination via emitted photons, whereas tr-iMIM measures the decay of steady-state conductivity following optical injection of free carriers. In TRPL experiments, the signal strength depends on the radiative recombination process that emits photons, whereas the temporal evolution measures the total lifetime of certain carriers or excitons The difference between photo-physical properties of electrons and holes, as evidenced in Fig. Interestingly, iodine interstitials can be both positively (Ii + ) and negatively (Ii -) charged, which leads to spatially separated trapped electrons and holes with very low recombination efficiency. The transition energy for Ii + (0/+) (de-trapping for electron) is calculated to be 0.48 eV below the conduction band minimum (CBM), whereas the transition energy for Ii -(0/-) (de-trapping for hole) is 0.78 eV above the valence band maximum (VBM) Further theoretical work is needed to elucidate this physical picture in a quantitative manner. As a final remark, we emphasize that in solar cells, diffusion lengths of both electrons and holes much larger than the film thickness is desirable for the effective separation of photo-carriers. Because of the unique defect properties in hybrid perovskite thin films, as well as the competition between the recombination and trapping/detrapping process, the imbalance in mobility (e >> h) is largely compensated by the imbalance in lifetime (e << h). As a result, the difference between Le ~ 5 m and Lh ~ 3 m is insignificant in our samples, which is of fundamental importance for the superior performance of PSC devices. In summary, we systematically study the optoelectronic properties of 5%-Cs-doped FAPbI3 thin films (PCE > 20%) by imaging the carrier diffusion in real space and detecting the photoconductivity evolution in real time. For plain perovskite films, two relaxation processes are observed on the sample. By selectively removing one type of carriers, we demonstrate that the fast and slow decay constants are associated with the lifetimes of photo-generated electrons and holes, respectively. The diffusion mapping on HTL/ETL samples allows us to extract parameters such as diffusion coefficient, equilibrium carrier density, and mobility of both carriers. The imbalance in carrier lifetime is offset by the difference in mobility such that diffusion lengths of electrons and holes are comparable to each other. We emphasize that, prior to our work, separate experiments are needed to measure relaxation time (TRPL or TRTS) and mobility (transport or SPCM on doped samples) of free carriers. To our knowledge, it is the first time that diffusion length, carrier lifetime, and charge mobility can be individually addressed for mobile electrons and holes on the same batch (as-grown, HTL-coated, ETL-coated) of samples. The spatiotemporal microwave imaging provides the most direct measurement of photo-physical properties of organometal trihalides, which is crucial for research and development of these fascinating materials towards commercial products. Finite-element analysis. Finite-element analysis was performed using the AC/DC module of commercial software COMSOL4.4. The tip for diffusion mapping is relatively blunt due to the extensive contact-mode scans on the sample surface. We modeled it as a truncated cone with a half-angle of 15° and a diameter of 200 nm at the apex. The ultra-sharp tip was mostly used for point measurements in Fig. necessarily represent the views of the DOE or the U.S. Government. The U.S. Government retains and the publisher, by accepting the article for publication, acknowledges that the U.S. Government retains a nonexclusive, paid-up, irrevocable, worldwide license to publish or reproduce the published form of this work or allow others to do so, for U.S. Government purposes. under a simulated AM 1.5G illumination (100 mW/cm 2 , Oriel Sol3A Class AAA Solar Simulator). The photocurrent density-voltage (J-V) characteristics were measured using a Keithley 2400 source meter. The J-V curves of all devices were measured by masking the active area with a metal mask of area 0.12 cm 2 . Both backward-scan and forward-scan curves were measured with a bias step of 10 mV and delay time of 0.05 s. Typical J-V curves are shown in Supplementary Fig. 