A family of titanium oxypnictide materials BaTi2Pn2O (P n = pnictogen) becomes superconducting when a charge and/or spin density wave is suppressed. With hole doping, isovalent doping and pressure, a whole range of tuning parameters is available. We investigate how charge doping controls the superconducting transition temperature Tc. To this end, we use experimental crystal structure data to determine the electronic structure and Fermi surface evolution along the doping path. We show that a naive approach to calculating Tc via the density of states at the Fermi level and the McMillan formula systematically fails to yield the observed Tc variation. On the other hand, spin fluctuation theory pairing calculations allow us to consistently explain the Tc increase with doping. All alkali doped materials Ba1-xAxTi2Sb2O (A=Na, K, Rb) are described by a sign-changing swave order parameter. Susceptibilities also reveal that the physics of the materials is controlled by a single Ti 3d orbital. Introduction.-The first layered titanium oxypnictides Na 2 Ti 2 As 2 O and Na 2 Ti 2 Sb 2 O were synthesized three decades ago Shortly after the discovery of superconductivity, it was realized that both charge doping on the barium site and isovalent doping on the pnictogen site provide opportunities to control the superconductivity of BaTi 2 Sb 2 O in a significant range. Hole doping via alkali metals increases T c from 1.2 K to 5.5 K in Ba 1-x Na x Ti 2 Sb 2 O The nature of superconductivity in the titanium oxypnictides has been discussed since its discovery Theoretically, calculations of electron-phonon coupling have shown that the small transition temperature of BaTi 2 Sb 2 O can be explained by an electron-phonon mechanism While the electronic structure of individual titanium oxypnictide metals Methods.-We perform electronic structure calculations using the full potential local orbital (FPLO) basis set Results.-The titanium oxypnictide superconductors have been treated as simple Bardeen, Cooper, Shrieffer (BCS) type superconductors in various experimental Unfortunately, as Fig. First, we identify the most relevant orbitals at the Fermi level. In Fig. We now analyze the Fermi surface evolution with alkali doping (Fig. In order to measure the relative importance of the Fermi surface changes, we turn to non-interacting susceptibilities calculated with the 26 band tight binding models on 50 × 50 × 50 integration meshes. Fig. differ: While the ratio between X and Γ values of χ 0 hardly changes with doping, this ratio sharply increases for χ xy 0 due to increases at X combined with decreases at Γ. This improved nesting is shown in Fig. Here, the (π, 0) and (0, π) instabilities favor a signchanging s-wave superconducting order parameter: The gap functions corresponding to the leading eigenvalue λ, obtained using spin fluctuation theory, are shown in Fig. At low alkali doping levels we have found an order parameter, which contains nodes on the Fermi surface sheets around M and a relatively large gap on the central Fermi surface sheets around Γ. With increasing doping, the Fermi surface sheets around M become nodeless, but the reconstructed sheets around Γ, which are almost exclusively of Sb 5p character, are hardly gapped at all. Those strongly non-uniform order parameters need to be taken into account when interpreting thermodynamic and other experiments trying to determine the symmetry of the superconducting state in titanium oxypnictides. Conclusions.-We have investigated the electronic and superconducting properties of Ba 1-x Na x Ti 2 Sb 2 O using density functional and spin fluctuation theory. We modeled the crystal structure evolution using an interpolation of experimental lattice parameters and a DFT predicted antimony position. The density of states at the Fermi level N (E F ) shows a trend which is in sharp contrast to the evolution of the superconducting T c , indicating that transition temperatures may not be accounted for by an electron-phonon mechanism. Although the band structure and density of states show that constituents of Ba 1-x A x Ti 2 Sb 2 O (A=Na, K, Rb) are strongly hybridized and many orbitals lie close to the Fermi level, we have found that the susceptibility is completely dominated by the Ti 3d xy orbitals. Proceeding on the assumption of a magnetic pairing mechanism, which has been suggested by an investigation into the nematicity of BaTi 2 Sb 2 O in Ref. 8 interpolate the lattice parameters in order to sample the doped crystal structures at regular intervals. Note that in the case of the c lattice parameter of Ba 1-x Na x Ti 2 Sb 2 O where the experimental lattice constants are rather nonmonotonous, the overall scale of the variation is small; as there is little justification for a dramatic doping dependence, we expect that the slight smoothing due to the interpolation is reducing error rather than loosing detail. The antimony positions are the only free positions in the P 4/mmm crystal structures, and we obtain them by relaxation using FPLO basis We use projective Wannier functions within FPLO where the t ij are transfer integrals between sites i and j, s and p are orbital indices, and σ is the spin. Fig. Appendix C: Electronic structure Figure We consider the multiorbital Hubbard Hamiltonian with Fermionic creation (annihilation) operators c † isσ (c isσ ), spin operator S is , density operator n isσ = c † isσ c isσ and interaction parameters U , U , J, J (intraorbital Coulomb repulsion, interorbital Coulomb repulsion, Hund's rule coupling, pair-hopping term). The tight binding part H 0 is given by Eq. (B1). Diagonalization of H 0 provides band energies E l (k) and matrix elements a s m and allows calculation of the static noninteracting susceptibility n F (E) is the Fermi distribution function. The observable static susceptibility can be calculated as Applying the random phase approximation (RPA), charge and spin susceptibilities are calculated from the noninteracting susceptibility as This vertex in orbital space is projected onto band space using the eigenvectors of H 0 , Γ ij (k, k ) = s,t,p,q a t * i (-k)a s * i (k)Re [Γ pq st (k, k )] a p j (k )a q j (-k ). (D7) and the gap equation is solved for the pairing eigenvalue λ i and the gap function g i (k). Ba 1-x Na x Ti 2 Sb 2 O with doping level x is shown in Fig. 