Cement is one of the most produced materials in the world. A major player in greenhouse gas emissions, it is the main binding agent in concrete, to which it provides a cohesive strength that rapidly increases during setting. Understanding how such cohesion emerges has been a major obstacle to advances in cement science and technology. Here, we combine computational statistical mechanics and theory to demonstrate how cement cohesion results from the organization of interlocked ions and water, progressively confined in nano-slits between charged surfaces of Calcium-Silicate-Hydrates. Due to the water/ions interlocking, dielectric screening is drastically reduced and ionic correlations are proven significantly stronger than previously thought, dictating the evolution of the nano-scale interactions during cement hydration. By developing a quantitative analytical prediction of cement cohesion based on Coulombic forces, we reconcile a novel fundamental understanding of cement hydration with the fully atomistic description of the solid cement paste and open new paths for science and technologies of construction materials. Concrete, made by mixing cement with water, sand and rocks, is by far the most used man-made substance on earth. With a world population projected to grow past 9 billion by mid-century, there is need for more and better infrastructure The dissolution of cement grains in water and re-precipitation of various hydration products, with Calcium-Silicate-Hydrates (C-S-H) being the most important Net attractive interactions between equally charged surfaces in ionic solutions are common in colloidal materials or biological systems Monte-Carlo simulations of a primitive model for ion confinement (PM), instead, have proven that ions, confined in water between charged surfaces, can induce net attractive forces for a range of surface charge densities relevant to C-S-H We now fill this gap with 3D numerical simulations that feature a simple but molecular description of ions and water, providing a quantitative picture of how cement cohesion develops during hydration. When one considers explicitly the role of water, it becomes clear how its capability to restructure and re-orient around the ions drives the optimized organization of interlocked ionwater structures that determine the net cohesive forces and their evolution. As ion confinement and surface charge density increase, with dramatically weakened water dielectric screening, electrostatic forces and discreteness effects are dramatically amplified and glue together the ion-water-surface assembly into a highly cohesive state. While we quantitatively recover several key experimental findings in real cement The intricacy of chemical reactions during cement hydration and setting makes it hard to identify the fundamental physical mechanisms that control cement cohesion. C-S-H is a non-stoichiometric compound, with structure and composition variability, even more pronounced at the earlier stages of the hydration To address this question we have used a semi-atomistic computational approach, in which ions and water are represented explicitly while the C-S-H surface properties at different hydration stages are recapitulated through surface charge densities σ from 1e -/nm 2 to 3e -/nm 2 . C-S-H is often characterized in terms of Ca/Si ratios, and, with pH values typical of cement hydration, the range of surface charge densities considered here approximately correspond to the relevant range of Ca/Si ratios between 1 and 2 In our 3D study, C-S-H surfaces are planar (walls), consistent with the platelet-like morphology of the nanoparticles Looking at the hydration shell size (c) at large separation, we observe nearly full hydration shells of 7-8 water molecules. As D is decreased, the shell size does not immediately change and the shells make up a larger portion of the water, which affects its ability to screen electrostatic interactions. When confined to D = 8 A, the ions coalesce into a single layer (d) and the shells are pressed against the walls resulting in a barrier to overcome. steric/dispersion and long-range electrostatic forces, as described in the Methods. Explicitly including the molecular degrees of freedom of water (we use SPC/E and in some cases TIP4P/2005 water, as also described in Methods) is key to capture its behavior under confinement Already for the lowest σ = 1e -/nm 2 , corresponding to very early hydration, the inclusion of explicit water leads to a net attraction (Fig. In the confined space between charged surfaces, the ion hydration shells may differ significantly from those in bulk water. In general, we identify the ion-water structures as n-mers, n being the number of water molecules surrounding an ion (see Methods), as in Fig. At σ = 2 and 3e -/nm 2 (later hydration stages), the ions are increasingly localized in the z direction and squeezed with their hydration shells against the walls (see ion density profiles in Fig. At high confinement (D = 8 A), the ions in the two layers have distinct but strongly coupled ordering. With layers being defined by the ion position z i , the ion pair correlation g(r) can be separated into intra-and inter-layer contributions, considering ions in the same (intra) or opposite (inter) layers (Fig. The increase in spatial correlations is associated to strongly correlated dynamics and localization of the ions. The ion intermediate scattering function computed for q z = 5.65 A -1 (roughly corresponding to the peak width of the ion density profiles at the highest σ) is plotted as a function of time t in Fig. To further understand the dependence of the pressure, we note that the level of confinement changes the water arrangement around ions (Fig. Let us now consider that water molecules consist of a spherical particle endowed with a dipole moment, an approach that removes one rotational degree of freedom per water molecule relative to the SPC/E (or TIP4P/2005) water models but allows us to estimate analytically the minimum free energy configurations for the n-mers. With this assumption, the energetic gain when a dipole adsorbs to an ion (neglecting any other effect) is 64 k B T per water molecule (shown by the turquoise line in Fig. creases with increasing n, but is still more than an order of magnitude higher than k B T when going to n = 6. The minimum energy configurations used in the calculations are sketched in Fig. The large energetic gain for forming these n-mers suggests that they are stable objects, and this is exactly what is observed in the simulations where their lifetimes are found to be longer than the simulation time. By computing the dynamics of the water, we determine that, at the high surface charges where these hemispherical n-mers exist, there is now a clear distinction in the behavior of water which is bound in n-mers and free water (Fig. The effect of confinement can be simply understood by considering that the free energy gained when a water molecule is adsorbed on a 3-mer to form a 4-mer, or on a 4-mer to form a 5-mer, is energy-dominated and amounts to negative several tens of k B T : it is always extremely favorable to adsorb water molecules on ions from the bulk to increase n, at least up to n = 5. As a consequence, upon increasing the confinement, i.e. when progressively fewer water molecules are available in the nano-slit, all of them are adsorbed on ions. This observation allows us to predict the expected fraction of adsorbed water (Fig. To ultimately test this picture and distill its essential ingredients, we develop an analytical theory for the pressure profile beyond DLVO taking advantage of the existence of "correlation holes" around each ion The fact that our simulations data in the strong coupling regime are so well described by the analytical theory indicates that the underlying ground state is quite resistant to perturbations, because the high surface charge and electrostatic cohesion dominate the overall behavior of the system. Interestingly, when we consider also the relatively good agreement with several aspects of full atomistic simulations and experiments where surface heterogeneities are naturally present, these findings suggest that our simplifying assumption of smooth planar surfaces may be sufficient, in this regime, to capture the overall behavior of the system. This is consistent with the fact that, in strongly correlated systems, the aver-age inter-ion separation expressed by the g(r) is fixed by electroneutrality. As a consequence, in the real material, the same mechanisms revealed here will remain at play, while absolute values of the net cohesive strength will also depend on surface charge density variation, additional surface heterogeneities, and the presence of other ionic species. While in our approach water molecules are explicitly accounted for, they are all "captured" by ions-justified by the water dynamics at high confinement (SM section S1) and the consequential reduction in dielectric screening (Fig. About one century after the early studies of cement hydration, the properties of C-S-H are still a matter of strong debate. Extensive studies, novel techniques, enhanced characterization and imaging capabilities have greatly improved the knowledge of this complex material, ultimately returning a picture of variability of chemical composition, structural organization and mesoscale morphology. Evidence of this variability has become increasingly clear and is obtained from many sources Our results open the way to do just that. During cement hydration, as C-S-H continously precipitates, ions and water gets progressively confined between increasingly charged surfaces of cement hydrates. We have shown that these two factors, together, change ion-water interlocked structures and their stability, which, in turn, change the net pressure between C-S-H surfaces as hydration proceeds. Our semi-atomistic approach, by including surface charge and ion specificity, captures essential features of cement hydrates detected in experiments, from the ion arrangements to water population and dynamics, to material strength. While it can be extended to include different counterions and mixtures in future studies, here it has provided unique insight into how varying chemical composition that sets the surface charge density changes the water-ion structuring under confinement and hence strength and shape of the net interactions between cement hydrate nano-particles. Understanding the origin and the evolution of cement cohesion in terms of fundamental components and mechanisms is key to identifying scientifically guided strategies, such as modifying the ionic composition and increasing cement strength to do more with less, to reduce the greenhouse gas emissions from cement manufacturing. At the nanoscale, the variability of the structural organization of C-S-H in terms of different interlayer separations The fundamental understanding of the nature of the electrostatic coupling and the role of ion-water structures has implications beyond cement: a wide range of systems, including biological membranes, soils and energy storage materials All simulations were done using LAMMPS, http://lammps.sandia.gov We considered a slab geometry which is finite in the z direction and periodic in x and y (the charged surfaces being at z = 0 and z = D), and we ran separate simulations for each value of the surface charge σ and D. For each set of parameters, exactly 64 calcium counter-ions were included, and the simulation bounds L x and L y were adjusted accordingly to ensure overall charge neutrality. The water is treated explicitly, using the rigid SPC/E model The number of water molecules is set using a Grand Canonical Monte Carlo process, discussed in further detail in the next section. To account for the finite size and dispersion interactions of ions, water, and the walls (C-S-H surfaces), we use a Lennard-Jones potential (LJ): In the SPC/E and TIP4P/2005 models, there is one LJ site per water molecule situated at the Oxygen atom. The LJ parameters for the ions are taken from Cygan et al The final ingredient is the Coulomb forces. Calcium ions are treated as having a point charge of +2e. The SPC/E and TIP4P/2005 water models have 3 point charges, 2 for hydrogen and one for oxygen, though the exact partial charges and their positions vary between the two models. Detailed information can be found in where M z is the z component of the total dipole moment of the simulation cell. A few comparisons are made to primitive model (PM) simulations with implicit water. These are performed with exactly the same parameters except there are no water molecules and, instead, the dielectric constant is set to ε r = 78.0. Effectively, all electrostatic interactions are screened uniformly instead of letting screening effects arise from rearrangement of discrete water molecules. The resulting disparity is due to the fact that this is an insufficient representation of the effects of water in this system. Comparison is also made with PM calculations in vacuum (i.e. with ε r = 1); this gives credence to the "dry water" view discussed in the text for the strongcoupling regime. In order to make direct comparisons with the analytical predictions that use only the dipolar term in the multipole expansion for water, some simulations were performed with purely dipolar interactions for the water molecules (namely Fig. Water in confined geometries (especially in the presence of charges) can have a density that is different from bulk conditions. This density is highly dependent on the level of confinement and the strength of the electric fields in the system because of their effect on water structure, so it is a function of D and σ. To select the number of water molecules for our simulations, we first performed Grand Canonical Monte Carlo (GCMC) based on the chemical potential of bulk water (room temperature, density). Simulations in bulk conditions showed that a chemical potential of μ = -8.8 kcal/mol gave the correct water density. This chemical potential can be maintained using the Metropolis method by attempting insertions/deletions with equal probability, and accepting them with the following probabilities Here β = 1/(k B T ), Λ is the thermal De Broglie wavelength and ∆U is the internal energy change upon attempting a particle insertion or deletion. Using a Monte Carlo simulation, with random insertions and deletions, the Grand Canonical ensemble is sampled and, in equilibrium, the chemical potential is maintained with water density fluctuating around a mean value. The GCMC process alone is very slow to converge to the final density as it only considers single molecule moves. To speed up the convergence, we combined this with Molecular Dynamics (MD), shown previously to significantly decrease the convergence time In the low σ simulations (with larger system size), the convergence was found to be very slow due to the larger number of water molecule insertions required. After 3 • 10 6 MD steps and GCMC exchanges, it remained unclear if the water density had reached the equilibrium value. In this situation, further simulations were performed using initial configurations with randomly placed water molecules at bulk density (ρ = 1 g/cm 3 ). As the initial water density in these configurations was closer to the final one, fewer GCMC exchanges were required to reach an equilibrium value and this significantly reduced the GCMC simulation time required to converge to the equilibrium density. In addition, we were able to observe convergence towards the final water density from different initial conditions, making it clear that the chosen values were appropriate. After determining the equilibrium number of water molecules for a system with given parameters, we have confirmed that all systems have reached equilibrium by checking that there was no drift in the energy and pressure over time, that time correlations had substantially decayed and/or there was no aging sign in two-time correlation functions. We have then generated trajectories in the NVT ensemble, using molecular dynamics and the velocity Verlet algorithm with an integration step of 1 fs. All simulations data discussed here have been averaged over 10 6 MD steps. To ensure sufficient thermodynamic sampling in the cases of high confinement (where dynamics are substantially slower), additional simulations using 10 independent sets of random initial conditions were performed for all samples with D ≤ 12 A. Both initial ion velocities and the random number seed for the GCMC process were varied, resulting in slight differences in the number of water molecules. In all cases, sampleto-sample fluctuations were smaller than the symbol size in our plots, with a maximal standard deviation in pressure (at D = 6 A) of s max < .05 GPa. From the particle trajectories, the pressure and microscopic correlations were computed. The pressure was calculated as the time average of the total force exerted on one of the C-S-H surfaces, which fluctuates around a mean value in equilibrium. This was computed for each value of D, and the pressure profile was obtained from subtracting the large distance (D = 40 A) value of the pressure. To investigate the microscopic origins of this force, we also study the spatial and dynamical correlations that arise in the ions and water. There are theoretical predictions that ions have strongly correlated positions and may even form 2D crystals (see where r ij is the distance between the two ions in the xy plane, ∆r is a binning distance, and H is the Heavyside function. This function was also calculated for spe-cific groups of ions, determined by their z position, which simply involved modifying N ion and the bounds appropriately. In addition to static spatial correlations, significant dynamical correlations also arise. These have been studied by computing the self-intermediate scattering function where the q z values are determined by the system dimension D and the boundary conditions. The q z value sets the length scale of displacements that contribute most to F s (q z , t), and due to boundary conditions the lowest allowable value is q z = 2π/D. We consider all multiples of this value up to q z = 10 A -1 , corresponding to sub-angstrom length scales. To separate the contributions from different groups of ions or water molecules, we modify the N and the bounds of the . A useful and commonly used tool to describe charged solutions at equilibrium, the Poisson-Boltzmann approximation (at the root of the electrostatic contribution to DLVO theory), is a mean-field approach: ions are treated as a charged cloud, whose density depends on the average electrostatic potential. Spatial correlations between ions, and more generally discreteness effects are discarded, since the charged cloud is viewed as continuum. It can be shown that within Poisson-Boltzmann theory, the force between two like-charged surfaces is always repulsive For a salt-free system such as the one under study here, Poisson-Boltzmann theory is a trustworthy approximation under conditions of weak electrostatic coupling where q is the counterions' valence, σ is the absolute value of the surface charge density of the walls divided by the elementary charge e, l B = e 2 /(4πε 0 ε r k B T ) (the Bjerrum length) is the distance between two elementary charges such that their repulsive potential energy is k B T , and μ GC = (2πl B qσ) -1 (the Gouy-Chapman length) is the distance of a charge qe from the wall such that its attractive potential energy is k B T . In practice, q 2 l B quantifies the strength of electrostatic repulsion between counterions, while μ GC quantifies how close to the wall ions tend to stay. When Ξ is small (weak coupling), ions can come relatively close to each other and populate the region within a distance μ GC from the wall without need to form any ordered structure. Conversely, when Ξ is large (strong coupling), ions lie very close to the walls, but feel a strong mutual repulsion, so they need to form ordered planar structures to minimize their energy. At strong coupling (the relevant situation here), an ion on either wall is subjected to an effective electric field written for convenience as κ/(βqeμ GC ) = κσ/(2ε 0 ε r ). The quantity κ can be viewed as the dimensionless local electric field acting onto an ion, with 0 < κ < 1. It depends on wall-wall distance D and stems from electrostatic correlations. For large D, ions that are located in the vicinity of one of the two walls mostly feel the field due to this wall, the other one being screened by the remaining ions: this means κ 1. In the opposite limit, when D becomes smaller than the typical ion-ion distance, an ion feels the field created by both walls, in opposite directions, while the contribution due to other ions is subdominant. In this small-D regime where all ions essentially lie in the same plane, κ has to vanish. An analytical expression of κ as a function of D has been computed for point-like particles and hard walls in In our simulations, the presence of a soft wall potential does not modify much the picture, except for the fact that D must be replaced by D eff = D -2z c , where z c is the equilibrium distance of an n-mer (a Ca ion dressed with n water molecules) from the closest wall. Taking this into account, we find the expression for the effective field given in Eq. (S14) and plotted in Fig. The average ion (n-mer) density is then computed as per Eq. (S15), which can be obtained by deriving the partition function of an ionic system within soft walls, similarly to what is done in The pressure shown in Fig. This is the relevant regime for our study, exhibiting negative P . Note that the pressure prefactor scales as the square of the surface charge and, most importantly, as the inverse of the dielectric permittivity: within our locked water theory, pressure is enhanced by almost two order of magnitudes, compared to the primitive model. More details are given in Sec. S2.2 of the SM. The formation of n-mers due to hydration of Ca ions is an energetically driven process for n < 5, while entropy comes into play for larger n. The minimum energy of an n-mer was computed (within the dipolar model, more convenient to this end) through a simulated annealing procedure, where an ion was considered fixed next to a wall and energy was minimized with respect to the positions and orientations of n water molecules. Due to the presence of the wall, the volume available to water molecules is restricted to a hemisphere. Considering the minimum-energy configuration of an n-mer, the formation energy u n per n-mer is then refined, accounting for the presence of the (infinitely many) other n-mers, lying in the same plane. Due to the long range nature of Coulombic interactions, it is important to keep track of all neighbors. u n turned out to be -50 n k B T for n ≤ 6 (see Fig. The free energy ∆F n→n+1 of formation of an (n + 1)mer, from the absoption of a water molecule on an n-mer, can be assessed using the previously computed values of u n , the chemical potential μ of bulk water used in simulations, and estimating the associated entropy change. Entropy decreases due to increased confinement of water molecules: this can be quantified by single-particle calculations of the volume available to every water molecule when it is bound to an n-mer, as a function of n. For n = 3 and 4, we have ∆F n→n+1 < -30k B T , while ∆F 5→6 0 within a few k B T . Details can be found in SM section S2.1. Since adsorbing water molecules to increase n is extremely favorable, at least up to n = 5, one can assume all molecules to be bound at strong confinement and predict quantitatively distances D n at which all ions are bound to exactly n water molecules: we find where ρ w D is the average number of water molecules per unit surface at distance D. These simple arguments are in excellent agreement with numerical simulations. Our calculations explain the fraction of bound water (Fig. Funding: This work has received funding from the European Union's Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under the Marie Sk lodowska-Curie grant agreement 674979-NANOTRANS. AG and EDG acknowledge the NIST PREP Gaithersburg Program (70NANB18H151) and Georgetown University for support. Competing Interests: The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Data Availability: All data needed to evaluate the conclusions in the paper are present in the paper and/or the Supplementary Materials. Author Contributions: A.G. performed all numerical simulations and data analysis. I. P. performed the analytical calculations. R.J.M.P, E.T. and E.D.G designed the research. All authors provided critical feedback and helped shape the research, analysis, and write the manuscript. (*) Indicates A.G. and I.P. contributed equally ( + ) Indicates A.G. and E.D.G. are corresponding authors The Supplementary Materials contains figures S1-S9 and sections S1-S4 discussing ion and water dynamics, the strong coupling theory, properties of water in simulation, and a historical overview of cement. classified by whether they are bound to an ion at t = 0, exhibit significant decays in correlation over simulation times: though slightly slower for bound water than free water. The water dynamics diverge from that of the ions due to the finite ion-water bond lifetime. However, upon increasing confinement, the situation changes. Ions (c) at D = 10 A exhibit plateaus due to the formation of layers and limited mobility. This partially extends to the water (d) which exhibits much slower decays compared to the water at D = 40 A (ion correlations are relatively unaffected by changes in D). Additionally, we find that for specific q values (4π/D, 8π/D) the correlations exhibit a larger decrease, suggesting that these length scales correspond to specific distances at which elementary rearrangements of the water molecules can occur in confinement. Note that such q-dependent features are erased at larger separations where water mobility is less limited. progresses and C-S-H stoichiometry evolves while it progressively aggregates into a porous structure, an increasing fraction of water becomes significantly slower and is considered as physically bound At strong confinement, water destructuring heavily alters its electrostatic screening properties. This is due to the presence of solvation shells around Ca 2+ ions: as shown in Fig. As a consequence, the relevant Bjerrum length is not l B = βe 2 4πε0εr (with β -1 = k B T ), as in bulk water: it is rather close to l B0 = βe 2 4πε0 , the Bjerrum length in vacuum, that is a factor ε r 78 times larger. The effect of this is twofold: 1) the minimum pressure predicted by the contact theorem Staggered Wigner crystals have been observed in the literature We focus here on the mechanism by which water molecules tend to bind to ions and study the energy gain associated to the formation of an n-mer. In simulations, cations tend to lie on parallel planes, at a distance from the closer wall given by the balance between Lennard-Jones interaction and electrostatic attraction. In doing so, they place themselves as close as possible to the walls, so that they expose only a half of their surface for binding with water. This allows us to consider the hydration shell around each ion a hemisphere, around which no more than 6 water molecules can fit. A good estimate of the energy scale at stake is the single dipole-ion interaction energy; in purely electrostatic terms, it can be estimated, in units of k B T , to -qδlB0 σ 2 LJ,eff -70, where eδ = 0.375 e A is the dipole moment of water, l B0 is the already mentioned Bjerrum length in vacuum and σ LJ,eff 2.5 A is the effective distance between the centers of an ion and a water molecule bound to it. The typical dipole-ion interaction energy is much larger, in absolute value, than the typical dipole-dipole interaction energy, which amounts to -δ 2 lB σ 3 LJ,eff -5. Adding the Lennard-Jones repulsion, the energy gain per water molecule amounts to 64 k B T , so that the formation energy u n of an n-mer can be eventually estimated to -64 n k B T (turquoise line in Figure In order to improve this energy estimate, we take into account also dipole-dipole electrostatic and steric interactions. To do so, we consider an ion and n water molecules, fix the ion position at the origin and look for the minimumenergy configuration. We forbid water molecules to assume negative z coordinates in space, i.e. to go beyond the wall. Minimizing through simulated annealing confirms that water prefers to stay close to the ion, with dipoles oriented radially and directed outwards. The so formed n-mers, for n = 4, 5 or 6 are depicted in Figure Assuming these minimum-energy structures to be the lattice units of an infinite 2D crystal of n-mers, one can eventually compute the energy per n-mer associated to the formation of such crystal, starting from a crystal of ions only. The procedure is non trivial, mainly because of the long range of Coulombic forces: interactions among dipoles and ions were summed discretely up to a sufficiently large distance, from which a continuous approximation was used. The resulting energies u n (green circles in Figure To confirm the locked-water picture proposed in the previous section, we need to compute the free energy gain ∆F n→n+1 in adsorbing a water molecule from the bulk on an n-mer, to form an (n+1)-mer. We will then check that at strong confinement it is always more favorable for a water molecule to be adsorbed on an ion than to stay in the bulk. The mentioned free energy gain can be calculated as where U n is the average potential energy of water molecules in an n-mer, S n is their entropy, and μ is the chemical potential of water, i.e. the increase in free energy when a water molecule is moved from the reservoir to the system. What we call here free energy, by an abuse of terminology, is properly speaking the grand-potential, i.e. the thermodynamic potential associated with the grand-canonical ensemble, by which we describe water. Since the situation is grand canonical for water, and canonical for ions (fixed by electro-neutrality), one sometimes uses the terminology of semi-grand-canonical ensemble. The average energy of an n-mer is U n = u n + 5 2 n k B T : u n is for the minimum-energy configuration (green circles in Figure The entropic term S n can be estimated by considering that a water molecule on an n-mer is confined within a volume v n = l rad l 2 azim,n and that its dipole moment is also confined within a solid angle ω (see Fig. Eventually, estimating entropy S n as k B ln vn n ω , where Λ is the De Broglie thermal wavelength used in μ, Eq. (S10) can be finally rewritten as which is independent from Λ, as it should. While β∆F 3→4 and β∆F 4→5 are several tens below zero (< -30 in our estimates), β∆F 5→6 nearly vanishes (-1.1 in our estimate). This suggests that available water molecules must be adsorbed on ions until every ion has 5 water molecules; beyond that point, it becomes in practice equally favourable for water molecules to be adsorbed on a 5-mer and form a 6-mer or to remain in the bulk. This is indeed shown by an analysis of the composition of n-mers as a function of distance D (Figure An suggested by the relatively high energies involved in the process, the n-mer formation significantly impacts the orientational mobility of water, that is strongly localized close to the ion. At finite temperature, however, water is not completely locked in its ground state configuration and acquires some freedom to move around its equilibrium position. Starting from minimum-energy configurations for n-mers that include interactions with the wall, we analyze the importance of these fluctuations, by computing the probability distribution of the orientation angle of dipoles within the same n-mer. We are thus scrutinizing a fine property, reflecting the effect of temperature on mutual interactions among ions, water molecules and wall altogether. We fix n -1 water molecules to their minimum-energy positions and orientations, and let the remaining one free to move and rotate. Marginalizing numerically with respect to the three spatial degrees of freedom and one of the rotational degrees of freedom, one obtains a probability distribution p(θ) for the angle θ formed by the dipole moment with respect to the normal of the plane (see Fig. In Fig. FIG. Supposing all water molecules to bind to Ca 2+ ions at small D, one can define precise distances D n at which all ions are bound to exactly n water molecules. At such distances, the following limited-resources equation holds, expressing the fact that the number of water molecules in the pore per unit surface (l.h.s) should equal n times the number of ions per unit surface on both sides (r.h.s.): Here, ρ w is the total number of water molecules divided by the total simulation volume (D times the surface), so that ρ w D is the surface density of water. ρ w is a measurable function of D, but it can also be estimated supposing that in the volume effectively available to water (the region at least a Lennard-Jones unit far from walls and ions) the water density is constant (this is true within a 17% error for the considered D range). Anyway, using Eq. (S12) and measured values of ρ w , one obtains D 3 = 5.9 A, D 4 = 6.8 A and D 5 = 7.6 A. These values are in quantitative agreement with peaks in the observed number of 3-mers, 4-mers and 5-mers as a function of distance (Figure where ρ b is the density of bulk water. The factor 10 emerges from the fact that, in a surface q/σ hosting one ion per wall, no more than 10 water molecules (5 on each ion) can be bound. This approximation discards the differences between 5-mers and 6-mers, a valid approximation for our purposes. Also neglected is the presence of a few water molecules, bound to the walls. Nonetheless, this limited resources argument seems to capture all the physical ingredients relevant to explain the numerical curve. In order to compute the density profile and eventually the equation of state, we refined the n-mer minimum-energy configurations discussed in S2.1 by introducing Lennard-Jones and electrostatic interactions with the wall, for the ion and the n water molecules. A numerical minimization of the same kind as the one in SM section S2.1 allows to identify the distances from the wall z c and z d at which, respectively, ion (charge) and coplanar water molecules (d ipole) prefer to stay. These are better defined by Fig. In order to retrieve ion densities, we treat n-mers in their just described minimum-energy configuration as effective charged objects and we use a modified version of the correlation-hole theory described in The theory Now, if we account for Lennard-Jones interactions with the wall, the density ρ of effective charges as a function of distance z between wall and central ion (which is nothing but the ionic density), is given by where N (D) is a normalization constant, ensuring electroneutrality. Results of Eq. (S15) are compared with simulations in Figure Once densities are known, one can compute the pressure using the contact theorem, an exact result relating pressure with the ion density at contact with a hard charged wall Here, F LJ,w (z) is the force exerted on both walls by an n-mer in z and corresponds to the derivative of U LJ,w (z). The sign convention is that positive contributions represent repulsion and negative ones attraction. The first term in Eq. (S16) represents the minimum pressure attainable due to electrostatic interactions, while the second one, always positive, is due to ions pushing against the walls. The predicted pressure is represented in Fig. (S17) This model does not account for solvent layering, which is probably responsible for the non-monotonicity of the curves extracted from numerical simulations. These are plotted in Fig. Using the saddle point method to estimate N (D) and the integral in Eq. (S16), it is possible to write the pressure as where z 0 is the extremum point of the function appearing to exponential in the Boltmzann factor, that is κ z μ0 + βU LJ,w (z). Since κ and F LJ,w depend on D, z 0 does too. The interpretation of this formula is straightforward: since n-mers are concentrated at a distance z 0 from the closest wall (z 0 = z c at large D), the pressure they exert on the walls is the force F LJ,w divided by the surface q σ pertaining to each of them. Agreement with the curve calculated from (S16), in black in Fig. Despite significant advances in the past century, water remains a challenging material to model, as evidenced by the plethora of different models developed during that time. In this study, we have opted to use a relatively simple representation of water: the SPC/E model One weakness of the SPC/E model is that starts to deviate from experimental results in confined or high pressure situations, where the TIP4P/2005 model performs better A final consideration is the effect of polarizability in the water molecule. While one might question whether the interlocked and nearly solid ion-water structure we observe would disappear once polarizability is accounted for, recent studies with polarizable water models for clays have, in fact, demonstrated that the polarizability enhances the slowing down of the water molecule dynamics, indicating that these effects would rather work to confirm our picture The dielectric response of a material can be quite complex at the atomic level. While the relative dielectric constant ε r is a macroscopic quantity, it arises from this complex microscopic behavior. Even ignoring how the confinement in our system would change the macroscopic ε r , trying to use this ε r for interactions at the nanoscale (as in the PM) has a host of problems. With numerous charges enclosed in a small volume, the polarization of the solvent would depend non-trivially on the arrangement of all the ions and solvent molecules, so taking it to behave the same as in the macroscopic material exposed to an external field is a very strong assumption. Explicit inclusion of the solvent allows one to directly incorporate this as a microscopic phenomenon. Unfortunately, this is a feature that is actually quite difficult to capture correctly, and many water models that give otherwise similar results produce drastically different values for the dielectric constant The behavior of the dielectric constant under confinement is not fully understood. The anisotropy introduced by the slab geometry leads to differing behaviors for ε xy and ε z . ε xy can be computed in the same way as the bulk calculation except only considering the x and y components of M , while ε z needs to be reformulated for the very different boundary conditions Using this, we calculate an effective dielectric constant from our simulations (Fig. constant than at larger separations The invention of modern cement cannot prescind from the discovery of natural cements. These are naturally available sands or mixtures whose mortars feature stronger adhesion than regular lime-based mortars, and, most importantly, hydraulicity: the possibility to set in (sea)-water. While lime mortars seem to have been used by many civilizations millennia BCE in Mesopotamia, Egypt, China and Greece, the first examples of hydraulic natural concrete (sometimes called hydraulic lime) date to 700 BCE. The Nabateans, a bedouin population living between present-day Syria and Jordan, used it to build underground water-proof tanks; their extensive water system (reservoirs, cisterns, aqueduct) allowed them to survive and found settlements in the desert. The most intense and, at the same time, documented use of natural cement before the modern era is with no doubts to be ascribed to Ancient Romans. Archaeological findings and subsequent scientific analyses Hydraulicity was not the only property of cement Romans were interested in. They had discovered that concrete was also much stronger than common mortars and started using it for public architecture. The most famous example is undoubtedly the dome of Rome's Pantheon, built by emperor Hadrian in the fist quarter of the 2nd century CE. With its 5 t and 43 m of diameter, it is still the biggest unreinforced concrete dome in the world What were Romans using to make their concrete? In Roman architect Vitruvius' De Architectura, written in the second half of the 1st century BCE, a whole book is devoted to building materials. After describing lime and the proper way to make a mortar out of it, Vitruvius talks about a "powder", that under water suddenly absorbs liquid and quickly hardens, emphasizing heat release. The substance Romans were using, called by Seneca Puteolanus pulvis in Quaestiones Naturales, goes nowadays by the name pozzolan, in Italian pozzolana, from the name of the town where it was quarried (Pozzuoli, ancient Puteoli, in the Naples region). It is a natural ash of volcanic origin: it works in a very similar manner as modern cement, in that it undergoes a hydration reaction producing C-A-S-H (Calcium Aluminum Silicate Hydrates), a variety of C-S-H where some silicon has been substituted by aluminum. It is interesting to note that the word cement, and its translation in most European and many non-European modern languages, derives from Latin caementum (in turn from caedere, to cut), referring to rubble and smashed stone, mostly tuff, that had to be mixed to pozzolana and calcium hydroxide to form concrete. Romans' astonishment for the fact that "dust, the most insignificant part of the Earth", could "become a single stone, impregnable to the waves, the moment of its immersion, and increase in hardness from day to day" (Pliny the Elder, Naturalis Historia) did not lead them to understanding much more about its nature. They only knew, and this was enough for any practical purpose, that it was of volcanic origin and that it must have something to do with high temperature environments ('fire'). This is maybe why the description Vitruvius, in De Architectura, makes of the exothermic hydration reactions (echoed by Saint Augustine four centuries later in De Civitate Dei ) appears so amusingly and surprisingly accurate: "the urgent need of moisture suddenly satiated by water seethes with the latent heat [calor latens] in these substances and causes them to gather into a unified mass and gain solidity quickly." After the fall of the Western Roman Empire, cement went back to being practically unknown to architects and builders. To meet cement again in (documented) History, we need to fast-forward to the beginning of the 15th century. Louis XII is king of France and needs to build a bridge over the river Seine in Paris. He asks Venetian architect and clergyman Giovanni Giocondo to develop the project. A man of letters, Giocondo is probably the best living expert of Vitruvius' texts and decides to make use of Neapolitan pozzolan. According to some sources, the then Pont Notre Dasme, inaugurated in 1515 and then completely destroyed and rebuilt through the centuries, presented foundations in natural cement: for the first time after a millennium, pozzolan was being used again for a large-scale work. Pozzolan is not the only natural earth that produces hydraulic mortars. We know that Dutch builders, at the beginning of the modern era, were using a powder coming from the Eiffel region, between present-day Germany and Belgium. They called it trass. Trass (also referred to as terras) had no fortune in commercial exchanges. It would be interesting to understand why, but we will limit ourselves to noticing, as in In the 18th century, people finally started to look for a scientific explanation for the fact that, at first, lime could transform from powder to solid rock, upon addition and consequent evaporation of water. The first attempts were not much closer to reality than the Romans'. Réaumur, Macquer, Becher speak either of some sort of gravity effect or of fire hidden in the stones. Among these fuzzy chemical theories, the documented tips on how to make better mortars flourished: engineer Giovanni Antonio Borgnis suggested to dilute quicklime in wine and add lard or fig juice, while some of his colleagues recommended rather ox blood and urine If somebody has to be considered the inventor of cement, it should be British engineer John Smeaton (1724-1792) and his baker. The first user of the word "horsepower", before James Watt, and of the expression "civil engineer", as opposed to "military engineer", Smeaton was the designer of a series of bridges, harbours and canals, and, last but not least, of the famous lighthouse of Eddystone. There existed, and still exists, a dangerous stack of rocks, the Eddystone rocks, south of Plymouth, in the English Channel. Throughout history, many ships had sunk there during tempests and since the end of the 17th century people had tried to build a lighthouse to warn sailors of their presence. The first two attempts were taken down due to the strength of storms and to fires. When Smeaton was asked to build the third lighthouse, he started experimenting new kinds of mortars that could resist storms. One day he prepared a mixture of limestone and ordinary clay and took it to the bakery asking that it be baked in the oven at high temperature. When the result of his experiment came back, he noticed that the substance he had produced could harden in water and solidify to form a rock of the same kind as portlandite (from where the modern name of Portland cement). Using this substance, together with pozzolan coming from Italy, that for some reason he seemed to still trust unconditionally, he built a new lighthouse between 1756 and 1759, also known as the Smeaton tower. Had it not been for the underlying rocks, that were eroded by water, the lighthouse would still stand firmly where it was. It was actually removed in 1877. Smeaton's studies were published right before his death and were probably read by James Parker, who filed a patent of dubious originality in 1796 and started the first business producing "Roman cement" -this was its commercial name -together with John Bazley White. Meanwhile in France, Louis Vicat was also studying hydraulicity: probably also influenced by Smeaton's work he published in 1818 the result of his Recherches expérimentales sur les chaux de contruction, les bétons et les mortiers ordinaires, that was translated and read all over Europe. Also a civil engineer, he completed in 1824 the first bridge ever built with artificial cement, in Souillac, Southern France. John Apsdin's patent, filed in 1824, and similar to Maurice Saint-Léger's, filed some years before with Vicat's contribution, marked the birth of another cement-producing company. Most importantly, it gave the opportunity to Apsdin's son, William, to apply his rebellious temperament to experimenting new techniques for making cement. One day he overcooked a sample, to the point that it had vitrified. Before throwing it away, he had the idea to pulverize what appeared as a block of burnt rock: he then noticed that, upon hydration, this magic powder formed a much stronger concrete than what he was used to. He had just invented clinker and modern Portland cement. Aspdin's recipe was then improved by his competitor Isaac Charles Johnson in the 1850's and, besides minor changes, is the one still in use in cement factories nowadays. The fortune of cement in the following two centuries is there for all to see. Starting with the tunnel under river Thames, completed by Marc Brunel in 1843, cement has gained a leading position in infrastructure, public and residential building, and, with a bit more difficulty, in design and architecture. This was a long process that would not have been possible without the mechanization and centralization of the productive chain, initially motivated by entrepreneurs' necessity to get rid of the corporations of stone cutters. It was the 19th century and the second industrial revolution had just begun.