Food x-ray inspection systems are designed to detect unwanted physical contaminants in packaged food to maintain a high level of food safety for consumers. Modern day x-ray inspection systems often utilize line scan sensors to detect these physical contaminants but are limited to single or dual energies. However, by using a photon counting detector (PCD), a new generation of food inspection systems capable of acquiring images at more than two energy bins could improve discrimination between low density contaminants. In this work, five type of contaminants were embedded in an acrylic phantom and imaged using a cadmium zinc telluride (CZT) PCD with a pixel pitch of 330 μm. A set of images were acquired while the phantom was stationary, and another set of images were acquired while the phantom was moving to mimic the movement of a conveyor belt. Image quality was assessed by evaluating the contrast-to-noise ratio (CNR) for each set of images. For imaging times larger than 25 ms, the results showed that the moving phantom data set yielded larger CNR values compared to a stationary phantom. While conventional x-ray inspections often utilize line scan sensors, we report that physical contaminant detection is possible with a CZT PCD x-ray imaging system. The use of photon-counting detectors (PCDs) in medical imaging systems has become increasingly common in the past few years given their superior spatial resolution, multi-energy bin capabilities and improved image quality compared to conventional energy-integrating detectors Aside from the medical industry, PCD-based inspection systems have been developed for the food inspection industry to detect physical contaminants in packaged food products, though literature data on these proprietary systems are limited. Physical contaminants from the environment and processing line can cause glass, stones, metal, wood, plastic and other foreign objects to be integrated into the final food product, which can be a choking hazard and cause harm to the consumer Given the high conveyor belt speeds used in the food industry, previous iterations of food inspection imaging systems typically used line scan image detectors Previously, our research group developed an x-ray imaging system that utilized a CZT PCD to detect several contaminants embedded in a phantom that remained stationary during the image acquisition period The CZT PCD (Redlen Technologies, Saanichton, BC, CA) was connected to a linear motion stage and mounted vertically on an optical table (Newport Corporation, Irvine, CA, USA) to allow the PCD to move perpendicular to the table. The PCD consisted of two detector modules which had 24576 pixels in total and the pixel pitch was 330 μm, resulting in a total detector size of 7.9190.1 mm. At a distance of 50 cm from the PCD, a Comet MXR-160/22 x-ray tube (Comet Technologies, San Jose, CA, USA) was connected to an X-Y motion stage to allow movement along two planes as shown in Figure For all measurements, projection images of each contaminant were captured over a 200 ms acquisition time at a frame rate of 1000 fps. Two types of images were acquired, namely one where the phantom was stationary and another where the phantom was moving at a speed of 1 cm/s, 2 cm/s and 4 cm/s on the sample stage to mimic the movement of a conveyor belt. For the stationary phantom measurements, two sets of data were acquired at 0.5 mA with and without the 2 mm Al filter and another two data sets were acquired using a tube current of 1 mA with and without the 2 mm Al filter. An in-house algorithm was written in Python to capture each measurement and the resulting data was organized into the specified energy bins (Python Software Foundation, https://www.python.org/) while Matlab (The Mathworks, Natick, MA, USA) was used for all data analysis and image reconstruction. A single flat field and dark field image were acquired for 60 s in absence of the phantom. The flat field image was acquired while the x-ray beam was turned on while the dark field image was obtained with the x-ray beam turned off. Both the flat field and dark field images were scaled down to 1 ms equivalent images by normalizing the 60 s images. Scaling these images down to a 1 ms equivalent image resulted in less variations across the detector pixels compared to normalizing with 1 ms images. The flat field corrected image, ICORR, was obtained by using Eq. 1: Where IP is the projection image of the phantom, IDF is the dark field image and IFF is the flat field image. To minimize over-and under-responsive pixels in each projection image, another 60 s flat field image was acquired and the natural log ratio of the two flat field images were calculated to find pixels that had variations greater than 5%. Nearest-neighbour interpolation was used to correct for these over-and under-responsive pixels. The contrast-to-noise ratio (CNR) for each type of contaminant was evaluated for both the stationary and moving phantom data using Eq. 2: Where μROI is the mean signal in the region of interest (ROI) of each contaminant while μ̅ BKG and σ ̅ BKG are the mean and standard deviation of the phantom background ROI along the acrylic portion of the phantom and averaged across four different ROIs to further minimize pixel response variations. For the stationary phantom data sets, it was possible to fix the location of the background ROIs for all measurements. However, this was not possible for the moving phantom data set since the phantom moving at 2 cm/s and 4 cm/s travels across a larger distance across the detector compared to using a speed of 1 cm/s for the same number of projections. Therefore, averaging the background ROIs for the moving phantom data set is highly advantageous to minimize any pixel response variation. Based on the Rose Model, a CNR ranging between 3-5 is required for an object to be considered detectable and a CNR of 4 will be used as a baseline to assess the image quality of each contaminant material For measurements using the stationary phantom, the resulting projection images were cumulatively summed and the CNR was calculated for each cumulative sum for each contaminant material and size. However, for data resulting from the phantom moving at each of the three speeds, a time delay and integration (TDI) algorithm was applied prior to calculating the CNR. This TDI algorithm is necessary to align the contaminants and allow the projection images to be cumulatively summed to reconstruct the final image. Without this TDI algorithm, the contaminants would be smeared across the final image and their detection would be compromised as shown in Figure For the phantom moving at 1 cm/s, it was observed that for every 18 projections, the contaminants shifted across one detector pixel length. Therefore, for the first 18 projections, no pixel shift was required, however the next group of 18 projections were shifted by one column of pixels opposite to the direction of motion. This pixel shift is performed by removing the first column of pixels in the image and stitching it to the end (right hand side) of the image. However, for the third group of 18 projections, the first two columns of pixels were removed and shifted to the end of the image and so forth. This was repeated until all 200 projections were shifted accordingly and each projection image was cumulatively summed. The same principles were applied to the 2 cm/s and 4 cm/s data sets, though the step size was reduced by a factor of two and four, respectively. The floor function in Matlab was used to round the step size in the 4 cm/s data set to the nearest integer that is equal or less than the resulting value, given that the step size was 4.5. Results from imaging the stainless-steel contaminants moving at 4 cm/s are shown in Figure Figure In the presence of a 2 mm external Al filter, the CNR for bin 2 outperformed the other energy bins for acquisition times greater than 100 ms, as shown in Figure In the presence of the Al filter, low energy x-rays will be largely absorbed by the filter. Given that energy bin 1 comprises of low energy photons between 16-30 keV, a 2 mm Al filter will attenuate 98% of a 16 keV photon beam and 45% of a 30 keV photon beam, which could explain why the CNR for all bins decreased in the presence of the filter with the exception of bin 2. The filter is also advantageous in filtering out low energy photons that would contribute to noise and degrade image quality. Another consequence of beam filtration is beam hardening, which leads to a larger average beam energy compared to a non-filtered beam. This energy shift in the beam could lead to a lower CNR given that the beam results in lower contrast. In some cases, the bin 7 provides the largest CNR for acquisition times ranging between 1-20 ms, whereafter the CNR from bin 2 is dominant, thereby suggesting that an Al filter should be used in cases where long acquisition times are required. For bins 1 and 7, the CNR begins to plateau at 25 ms, which suggests that increasing the acquisition time beyond this time point would negligibly affect the CNR. Using a tube current of 1 mA resulted in larger CNR values for all energy bins compared to a tube current of 0.5 mA, as shown in Figure The total number of detected photons from using the tube currents of 0.5 mA and 1 mA is shown in Figure Figure Plotting the CNR as a function of cylindrical contaminant thickness for calcium carbonate (Figure With increasing material thickness, incident photons are exponentially attenuated over a larger distance, which resulted in a larger signal difference between the contaminant ROI (μROI) and background ROI (μBKG), thereby leading to an increasing CNR. For the smallest material thickness of 2 mm, the signal difference between the contaminant and background ROIs is reduced, which makes it more difficult to distinguish thin and less dense objects from the phantom background. Overall, the CNR is the lowest for calcium carbonate and highest for Teflon, which is attributed to the differences in the linear attenuation coefficients compared to the acrylic background. Based on the Rose criterion, the 2-6 mm thick calcium carbonate and 2-6 mm thick polypropylene contaminants could be considered undetectable as the CNRs for all energy bins are less than 4. For the 2 mm Teflon (Figure Figure The CNR for the glass contaminants while the phantom is stationary, moving at a speed of 1, 2 and 4 cm/s is shown in Figure In Figures Figure Figure Future work aims to increase the phantom speed to be more comparable to belt speeds used in the food industry, which typically ranges between 5-100 cm/s. However, in this work, the sample stage was limited to a maximum speed of 4 cm/s. Other limitations in this study included not correcting for pulse pile up and charge sharing effects, which can degrade the image quality and reduce the CNR. Charge sharing occurs when an incident photon is absorbed near the border of two neighbouring detector pixels and causes the resulting charge cloud to generate two signals in both detector pixels, which can reduce spatial resolution and increase image noise Previously, our research group showed that a bin width of 10.7 keV and 15.8 keV resulted in the highest CNRs for gadolinium and gold contrast agents for CT imaging, respectively For all measurements, the phantom was placed equidistant between the CZT PCD and xray tube. However, these distances could be varied to accommodate the size and type of food product being inspected. Therefore, investigating the effect of distance between the phantom, xray tube and detector to find the optimal distance for each type of material could further improve the CNR. For a phantom moving at a speed of 4 cm/s, a step size of 4.5 was used in conjunction with a rounding function in Matlab. In this case, it would have been ideal to keep this step size constant and allow the projection images to be shifted by less than a full detector pixel length. Previous work has shown that shifting an image by less than one detector pixel length can be achieved by using a detector shift and iteration method to improve image quality and spatial resolution The emergence of PCDs in the food industry could offer significant advantages over conventional inspection systems that rely on line scan image sensors. The multi-energy capabilities of PCDs allow a wide range of contaminant materials to be better discriminated from the background in which they may be embedded. Based on the results reported in this work, the CNR in bin 2 (30-50 keV) outperformed the other energy in cases in which the stainless-steel, glass and Teflon contaminants were imaged, which is indicative of the advantages of the multi-energy bin capability of PCDs. The system has demonstrated that it is capable of detecting contaminants embedded in a moving phantom, which yielded larger CNR values for image acquisition times larger than 50 ms compared to a stationary phantom. With further improvements to the system, contaminant detection for commercial use is highly plausible.