Interlayer excitons (ILXs)electron-hole pairs bound across two atomically thin layered semiconductorshave emerged as attractive platforms to study exciton condensation, 1-4 singlephoton emission and other quantum-information applications the exciton itself. This high degree of localization of the interlayer exciton is backed by Bethe-Salpeter equation calculations and demonstrates that the ILX can be localized within small moiré unit cells. Unlike large moiré cells, these are uniform over large regions, thus allowing the formation of extended arrays of localized excitations for quantum technology. Heterobilayers made by stacking different monolayers (1L) of transition-metal dichalcogenide (TMDC) semiconductors support ILXs, states in which the electrons and holes residing in separate layers bind to one another to form a neutral excitation So far, studies on moiré-localized ILXs have been focused on large moiré unit cells due to the prevailing assumption that moiré confinement requires a moiré-period which is much larger than the ILX itself Here we image both the electron and hole momentum-space distributions of an ILX in a TMDC heterobilayer exhibiting a relatively small moiré pattern. From these distributions, we extract both the ILX size and its COM confinement, and find, surprisingly, that even though the ILX diameter is comparable to the moiré-period, its COM coordinate is tightly confined by the moirépotential. Further, we observe the direct bandgap nature of the ILX with the electron and hole residing in the K-valleys of the two layers, and the anomalous negative dispersion of the photoemitted electron, establishing the excitonic origin of the signal. Finally, the hole images, which are acquired independently of the photoemission matrix elements, offer a direct quantitative measurement of the ILX density and exhibit a broadening in momentum distribution when their density surpasses one ILX per moiré site, akin to excitons in quantum dots. In all, these findings promote the prospect of using small-period moiré patterns, which are homogeneous and more robust against strain than the large moiré lattices The studied heterobilayer consisted of 1L WSe2 placed on top of 1L MoS2 with a 2.2±0.8° twistangle between their crystallographic axes. Together with the 3.8 % lattice mismatch between the two layers this is expected to yield a 6.1 nm period for the moiré pattern Having identified the signatures of the heterobilayer in equilibrium, we turned to study the ILX and the momentum-resolved distributions of its electron and hole by photoexciting the sample resonantly at the A-exciton in WSe2 with a 170 fs, 1.67 eV pump pulse. A rapid transfer of the electron from WSe2 to MoS2 results in the formation of the ILX (schematic in Fig. To obtain the quantitative 2D momentum distributions of the holes, we compared TR-μ-ARPES spectra taken before and after excitation (Fig. One of the extracted parameters is the Gaussian widths of these distributions in momentumspace, which provide important information about the ILX. This can be understood by noting the . Here A vck Q is the envelope function of the unconfined ILX, c n,k † is the creation operator of an electron in band n with wavevector k, and |0⟩ is the un-photoexcited ground state of the system To deduce the ILX size and spatial confinement from the momentum distributions of the electron . For Wannier-like excitons, the simultaneous measurement of these distributions allowed us to extract both A vck Q=0 and C(G).Their Fourier transforms provided the envelope functions of the relative electron-hole separation r as ψ(r), and the COM coordinate R as C(R), respectively. With this, one can approximate the envelope of the two body exciton wavefunction as a product of ψ(r) and C(R), with the real-space exciton radius and its COM localization being inversely proportional to the extent in momentum-space of |A vck Q=0 | 2 and |C(G)| Such observations support emerging schemes in quantum technology that utilize an array of quantum-dot-like states created by the periodic moiré potential The PL spectra of the monolayers and their heterostructure were measured in a home-built confocal microscope setup. The sample was held at a controlled temperature in a cryostat (Montana Instruments). Laser light at 532 nm wavelength was used for excitation and was focused to a diffraction-limited spot (~1 μm) on the sample by a microscope objective (Olympus LCPLN50xIR). The infrared PL was collected by the same objective; it was detected and analyzed by a Jobin Yvon iHR550 spectrometer equipped with a Spectrum One InGaAs array. For reflection-contrast measurements (shown in the Supplementary Material) white light from a stabilized tungsten-halogen light source (Thorlabs SLS201L) was delivered to the sample, and its reflection collected, through the same optical setup. To analyze the reflection spectrum in the visible range a Synapse CCD camera was employed as a detector. Time-and angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy is performed by coupling ultrafast pulses with an angle-resolved, energy-resolved electron microscope (Metis 1000, SPECS GmbH) To monitor carrier dynamics, a pump-probe scheme has been developed with a tunable optical pump pulse that photo-excites the sample and an XUV probe pulse that photo-emits the electrons. Both pulses originate in a Yb-doped fiber laser producing 250 fs, 50 μJ pulses at a wavelength of (spatial-and energy-resolved) or in k-space (momentum-and energy-resolved) for different pumpprobe time delays. More details of the TR-μ-ARPES instrumentation can be found in Ref. In the absence of any moiré effects, the excitons that we computed from first principles in the previous section can be labeled with respect to a principal band and wavevector (Q) quantum numbers. To a good approximation, because of vanishingly small exchange terms for ILX, these excitons can be described with an effective-mass approximation. The energy of the lowest moiréunconfined ILX is given by E Q = E 0 + ħ 2 Q 2 /(2M), where E 0 is the energy of the lowest ILX and M is the total exciton mass. However, the presence of a moiré pattern with a periodicity larger than the lattice constants of the constituent monolayers allows for multiple excitons with distinct wavevectors (and, to lesser extent, band indices) to mix. This mixing can be rationalized in terms of an effective moiré potential, Δ(R), that describes the local variation of the bandgap across the moiré unit cell stemming from a different atomic registry at each point R. We follow refs. where the momentum offset of κ (κ is the K point of the hexagonal moiré Brillouin zone) is due to the finite twist angle between the two individual TMDC layers The moiré potential energy is a smooth periodic function with extrema at specific high-symmetry points of the moiré lattice and can be approximated in the lowest-order harmonic expansion 