Degenerate parametric amplifiers (DPAs) exhibit the unique property of phase-sensitive gain and can be used to noiselessly amplify small signals or squeeze field fluctuations beneath the vacuum level. In the microwave domain, these amplifiers have been utilized to measure qubits in elementary quantum processors, search for dark matter, facilitate high-sensitivity spin resonance spectroscopy and have even been proposed as the building blocks for a measurement based quantum computer. Until now, microwave DPAs have almost exclusively been made from nonlinear Josephson junctions, which exhibit high-order nonlinearities that limit their dynamic range and squeezing potential. In this work we investigate a new microwave DPA that exploits a nonlinearity engineered from kinetic inductance. The device has a simple design and displays a dynamic range that is four orders of magnitude greater than state-of-the-art Josephson DPAs. We measure phase sensitive gains up to 50 dB and demonstrate a near-quantum-limited noise performance. Additionally, we show that the higher-order nonlinearities that limit other microwave DPAs are almost non-existent for this amplifier, which allows us to demonstrate its exceptional squeezing potential by measuring the deamplification of coherent states by as much as 26 dB. High performance cryogenic microwave amplifiers have become crucial components for an increasing number of contemporary experiments in condensed matter physics and quantum engineering. Microwave amplifiers that are based on parametric photon conversion are particularly promising since they can operate at the quantum-noiselimit, where only the minimal amount of noise required by quantum mechanics is added to the amplified signal. These amplifiers have facilitated the high-fidelity readout of quantum bits in elementary quantum processors Parametric amplifiers largely fall into one of two classes: phase insensitive or phase sensitive. In quantum mechanics, an electromagnetic field X = X 1 cos(ωt) + X 2 sin(ωt) (with angular frequency ω) can be described by dimensionless quadrature field operators X1 = (â † + â)/2 and X2 = i(â †â)/2, where â † and â are the boson annihilation and creation operators. A phase insensitive amplifier applies gain G equally to both quadratures Ŷ1 = G X1 and Ŷ2 = G X2 (where Ŷ1 and Ŷ2 represent the field at the output of the amplifier), unavoidably adding at least 1/4 photon of noise to each quadrature in the process. Conversely for a phase-sensitive amplifier, one field quadrature is amplified Ŷ1 = G X1 , whilst the other is deamplified Ŷ2 = X2 /G. This allows for amplification of a single quadrature without any added noise In addition to its superior noise performance, a phase-sensitive amplifier can be used to reduce the fluctuations of an electromagnetic field. A mode of electromagnetic radiation cooled to its ground state will exhibit a quantum mechanical noise referred to as 'vacuum fluctuations'. These fluctuations obey the uncertainty relation δ X2 1 δ X2 2 ≥ 1/16, where δ X2 1 and δ X2 2 represent the variances of the field quadratures (in dimensionless units of photons), and establish the ultimate limit to noise for measurements of an electromagnetic field. When a field in its quantum ground state enters a phase-sensitive amplifier, the vacuum fluctuations are deamplified or 'squeezed' along one quadrature at the expense of increasing them along the other. Squeezed noise can be used to enhance the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) in measurements and has been successfully deployed, for example, in gravitational wave detection In the microwave domain, the Josephson Parametric Amplifier (JPA) represents the state-of-the-art in phasesensitive amplification technology. A JPA consists of one or more Josephson junction, typically in the form of a SQUID loop, embedded in a low quality factor superconducting resonator The filter connects at port B to a quarter-wavelength resonator with resonant frequency ω0. c The phase response of the device vs bias current. The bias current shifts the resonant frequency over more than 100 MHz. Measured resonant frequencies at each current are presented (white diamonds), alongside a fit to the inset equation (solid white line). of 10 dB Attention has recently been focused on engineering JPAs with Hamiltonians that more closely resemble that of an ideal DPA, such as those employing junctions arranged in a 'SNAIL' configuration In this work we present a new type of phase-sensitive microwave parametric amplifier that behaves as a nearideal DPA. The device contains no Josephson junctions (making it robust to electrostatic discharge) and is produced with a single-step lithography process on a thin film of NbTiN. The nonlinearity responsible for paramet-ric amplification in this device originates from a kinetic inductance intrinsic to the NbTiN film We demonstrate that the weak nonlinearity of our amplifier has the potential to produce highly-squeezed microwave fields. Through mapping the squeezing transformation of our DPA using coherent tones, we observe deamplification levels approaching 30 dB without the distortions commonly observed in JPAs Kinetic inductance is associated with the energy stored in the motion of charge-carrying particles. For superconducting films, Ginzburg-Landau theory predicts a current-dependence of the kinetic inductance described by where L 0 is the per-unit-length kinetic inductance of the material without a current, and I * determines the strength of the current dependence and is proportional to the critical current I c of the film. This form of nonlinear inductance is analogous to an optical Kerr medium. When a current passing through the film consists of two different microwave tones, i.e. a signal tone (at a frequency ω s ) and a much stronger 'pump' tone (at ω p ), the nonlinearity gives rise to four wave mixing (4WM), where energy transfer from the pump to the signal can produce parametric amplification In addition to the Kerr component (∝ I 2 μw ), a new term linear in I μw appears which can facilitate a three wave mixing (3WM) process. Here a single pump photon produces a signal photon and an idler photon, such that ω p = ω s + ω i . Three wave mixing is advantageous in the context of parametric amplification since there can be a large spectral separation between the pump and the signal. This means that the strong pump tone can be readily removed through filtering, preventing the saturation of any following amplifiers in the detection chain. 3WMtype parametric amplifiers using kinetic inductance have been demonstrated recently in traveling wave geometries Here we implement a resonant 3WM-type DPA that utilizes kinetic inductance and exhibits phase sensitive gain. Critically, the resonant nature of our kinetic inductance parametric amplifier (KIPA) strongly suppresses 4WM and other higher-order processes, permitting extremely high levels of pure 3WM gain. The device (see Fig. The KIPA is defined geometrically by a coplanar waveguide (CPW) quarter-wavelength resonator coupled to a single port via a microwave Bragg mirror To operate the KIPA, we feed the combined bias current I DC , signal and pump into its port, as illustrated in Fig. We have derived the Hamiltonian for the KIPA in the presence of the bias current I DC and a pump tone I p cos(ω p t + φ p ), expressed in a reference frame rotating at ω p /2: HKerr/ where ∆ accounts for a frequency detuning of the KIPA from half the pump frequency ω p /2. H DPA is the Hamiltonian for an ideal DPA We expect the 3WM strength |ξ| ≈ ω 0 (I DC I p /I 2 * ) (see Supplemental Materials) to be linear in the applied DC current. For the remainder of the paper, a bias current of I DC = 0.834 mA is used; close to the critical current of the film but leaving a sufficient margin for additional microwave currents applied through the pump and signal. A comparison of the expressions for |K| and |ξ| reveals why the KIPA functions as an ideal DPA: the photon energy is a minuscule fraction of the characteristic Kerr energy (i.e. ω 0 /(L T I 2 * ) 1) by virtue of I * being large. In fact, it can be shown that the Kerr energy is related to the superconducting pairing energy E p = L T I 2 * Applying a pump tone at the frequency ω p /2π = 14.381 GHz and bias current I DC = 0.834 mA produces an amplification feature centred around ω 0 /2π ≈ 7.1905 GHz (see Fig. DPA (i.e., we assume K = 0) and derive the reflection parameter Γ using input-output theory (see Supplemental Materials for the derivation). We fit the gain data with the reflection model and observe excellent agreement with theory (see Fig. After calibrating the phase of the pump to achieve maximum amplification (i.e. φ p ≈ π/2), we characterise the degenerate 1 dB-compression point of the KIPA as a function of gain (see Fig. The phase-dependent interference of the signal and idler fields in a DPA results in an affine transformation applied to the IQ-plane of the input field, also commonly called the squeezing transformation We probe the squeezing transformation by sweeping the phase of a coherent state incident on the KIPA and use homodyne detection to measure the transformed output. A coherent tone power of -112 dBm (corresponding to ∼ 16 intracavity photons) was chosen to provide sufficient signal-to-noise ratio without saturating the amplifier chain. See Supplemental Materials for details. Our results are shown in Fig. The deamplification level G S is defined as the greatest reduction in amplitude of an input coherent state by the squeezing transformation. We additionally define the amplification level G A as being the corresponding increase in gain that occurs orthogonal to the axis of deamplification. G S and G A are measured after aligning the amplification and deamplification axes along I and Q, respectively, and averaging multiple measurements (refer to Supplemental Materials for details). Fig. We examine the noise performance of the KIPA by monitoring the output power of the setup on a spectrum analyzer. Fig. with P td(tn) the power at the output of the detection chain measured in degenerate (non-degenerate) mode, n th the number of thermal photons occupying the input field and n kd(kn) the noise photons in excess of the quantum limit added by the amplifier in each mode of operation. G k is the KIPA gain, equivalent to the amplification level G A when in degenerate mode. In Fig. In order to extract the noise parameters we measure n td and n tn as a function of G k in the absence of an applied coherent tone and plot the results in Fig. is given by the Bose-Einstein distribution, with T em the temperature of the electromagnetic field. It is important to note that T em can be a different value to the physical temperature of the refrigerator T f due to insufficient filtering and attenuation of the measurement lines. In our noise measurement we are not able to separate the individual contributions of n kd /n kn and n th . At the maximum degenerate gain measured in Fig. We have presented a simple and versatile microwave parametric amplifier called a KIPA, fabricated from a thin film of NbTiN. For the parameter space tested, we report above 40 dB of phase insensitive gain and up to 50 dB of phase sensitive gain. Our device features an exceptionally high input 1 dB-compression point of -69.5 dBm for 20 dB of gain, making it suitable for a wide range of cryogenic microwave measurements. Using input-output theory we have been able to model our device as an ideal DPA, with excellent agreement between theory and experiment. The close DPA approximation makes the KIPA an extremely effective microwave squeezer, which we demonstrate through mapping its squeezing transformation out to G A = 30 dB. We find the amplifier operates close to the quantum noise limit with an input-referred noise of 0.32(3) photons in phase sensitive mode. Future experiments will focus on exploring the noise squeezing properties of the KIPA by using a second KIPA as a following amplifier Squeezing levels in excess of 17 dB would surpass the fault-tolerant threshold for measurement-based quantum computing with cluster-states All measurements are performed with the device situated at the mixing chamber plate (T ∼ 20 mK) of a dilution refrigerator. The Pump Line: A microwave source (E8267D, Keysight Technologies) supplies the pump tone for all experiments via a high pass filter (HFCN-9700+, Mini-Circuits) used to reduce microwave source subharmonics. A 10 dB cryogenic attenuator is used at the 4 K temperature stage, followed by two 3 dB attenuators at the 900 mK and 100 mK stages, respectively. The pump line connects to the KIPA via a diplexer (DPX-1114, Marki Microwave) at the 20 mK stage (shown in Fig. The Signal Line: Three 20 dB attenuators are used to minimise the transmission of thermal noise to the device, and are situated at the 4 K, 900 mK and 20 mK stages, respectively. The signal line then connects to the RF port of the bias-T (PE1615, Pasternack Enterprises), as shown in Fig. The DC Line: The DC line connects to the bias-T via a 1 dB attenuator at 4 K and two low pass filters at 4 K and 100 mK (VLF-7200+ and VLF-105+, Mini-Circuits Technologies), blocking room-temperature noise at pump and signal frequencies. The DC line breaks out to a copper wire that is thermalised to a bobbin fixed to the 20 mK plate before connecting to the DC port of a bias tee (shown in Fig. The Detection Path: A cryogenic circulator (Quinstar Technology, CTH0508KCS) routes the reflected output of the KIPA through the detection chain (shown in Fig. Port 1 of a vector network analyzer (Rohde & Schwarz, ZVB-20) is connected to the signal line via an attenuator, used to reduce the minimum signal power of the network analyzer. We use a low noise amplifier (Mini-Circuits, ZX60-06183LN+) at the output of the detection chain, which connects to port 2 of the VNA. The data presented in Fig. To study the phase sensitive gain, we operate the ZVB-20 as a spectrum analyzer, using it to measure the incident power on Port 2. The signal line is connected to another E8267D microwave source (Keysight Technologies) via an attenuator and is configured for linear phase modulation at half the pump frequency For the remainder of the measurements, the output of the detection chain is connected to a homodyne detection setup consisting of an IQ mixer (Marki Microwave, IQ4509), with the local oscillator supplied by another independent ultra low phase noise microwave source (Keysight Technologies, E8267D) which is phase locked with a 1 GHz reference clock to the pump and signal sources. The local oscillator frequency is set to 7.1905 GHz. The I and Q outputs of the mixer connect to 1.9 MHz low pass filters (Mini-Circuits, SLP-1.9+) followed by two 5 × pre-amplifiers (Stanford Research Systems, SIM914) connected in series. I and Q are then digitized using a data acquisition card (Keysight Technologies, M3300A) configured with a sample rate of 6.25 MHz. The ellipse measurements (depicted in Fig. We interleave a measurement with the pump off to measure the circular response of the reflected signal in the IQ-plane. We measure G S (G A ) by taking the ratio of the peak to peak amplitudes of the pump off response and pump on response for Q (I) after averaging. These results are plotted in Fig. To collect the data presented in Fig. A kinetic inductance can be described as a nonlinear inductance We consider a 'telegrapher model' for a kinetic inductance resonator, as illustrated in Fig. respectively. Note that in this particular geometry, the loop charge equals the cumulative charge k=0 q k . Applying Kirchoff's voltage law around a single loop in the Telegrapher circuit model (see Fig. where in the third line we take a continuum limit ∆x → 0. This is the well-known Telegrapher's equation, with a nonlinear inductance as provided in Eq. ( with I = ∂ t Q. The Lagrangian for the system that reproduces the Telegrapher's equation with its Euler-Lagrange equation is found to be: where in the second line we once again take a continuum limit ∆x → 0. We note that this form of the Lagrangian differs from the work of Yurke and Buks, but correctly reproduces the classical Telegrapher's equations for a kinetic inductance transmission line (Eq. ( The canonical momentum corresponding to Q is: and the Hamiltonian is given by: To express this in terms of Φ and Q we use the approximation: and: Thus, to first order in 1/I 2 * we find: 1. Mode Expansion for the λ/4 Resonator We start by finding the modefunctions of a linear (I * → ∞) λ/4 resonator. In this case, the Euler-Lagrange equation corresponding to L kipa is the Telegraper's equation: with v 0 = 1/ √ L 0 C the linear phase velocity. The λ/4 resonator is shorted at x = 0 corresponding to a boundary condition of zero voltage, or (Q 1 -Q 0 )/C∆x → ∂ x Q(x = 0)/C = 0 in the continuum limit. At x = l we leave the boundary condition general by taking an impedance Z(ω) to ground and imposing Ohm's law V (x = l) = -Z(ω)I(x = l) (for an I convention defined in Fig. In summary: An open (short) boundary condition at x = l is recovered in the limit Z(ω) → i∞ (Z(ω) → i0). We use an ansatz: with a(t) = ae -iωmt and k m = ω m /v 0 . The first boundary condition is met by setting φ m = 0. The second boundary condition gives: where Z 0 = L 0 /C is the characteristic impedance of the λ/4 resonator and Q m (t) is the timedependent component of Q(x, t) oscillating at ω m . The equation must in general be solved numerically for k m . In the case of an open where Z(ω) → i∞, we simply have: The band-stop filter presents the resonator with a large impedance for frequencies within the stop band. To simplify the following analysis we assume an infinite impedance, i.e. an open boundary condition at x = l, which allows us to utilize the relations in Eq. ( In the linear case, the canonical momentum is just Φ = L 0 Q, i.e.: Quantization proceeds by imposing the commutation relations [a m (t), a † n (t)] = δ nm . The normalization constants A m are determined by inserting Q(x, 0) and Φ(x, 0) into H kipa and requiring: which leads to A m = 1/ √ lL 0 ω m . We therefore find: where we define L T = L 0 l as the total zero-bias kinetic inductance of the resonator. More generally, we can interpret Eq. ( The Kerr nonlinearity is thus: Here E * ≡ L T I 2 * /2 can be interpreted as a characteristic energy stored in an inductor with inductance L T and current I * , which is also related to the superconducting pairing energy E p = L T I 2 * In the presence of a current bias, we modify the boundary condition at x = l to be: We take the impedance to be a stop-band filter at the relevant resonator mode frequencies: where Ω 0 represents the frequency band over which we have standing resonator modes, and Ω 1 covers the impedance matched frequency band, where we will have traveling waves. For I b = 0 we can then write: with b † ω (t) = b † ω e iωt . We already know that the first term satisfies the boundary conditions at frequencies ω m from our previous analysis, with ω m , k m given in Eq. In the presence of a current bias, we simply add to Q(x, t) a term q b (x, t) where qb (x, t) = I b (x, t). We assume that the pump frequencies are in the traveling wave band Ω 1 . Equivalently, we can replace b ω → b ω + β(ω), with β(ω) the frequency component of q b (t) at frequency ω. This can be interpreted as separating the continuum mode into a strong average coherent component β(ω) and a fluctuation (or quantum) term b ω . We take the pump to be infinitely narrow in frequency, and therefore set β(ω) = β p δ(ωω p ) + β DC δ(ω). The DC component is independent of space and trivially satisfies both the wave equation Eq. ( where: In our experiments we apply a pump tone I p (x, t) that oscillates at a frequency very close to 2ω 0 and we will therefore assume ω p = 2ω 0 for simplicity. Furthermore, the boundary condition in Eq. ( As before, we will use the strategy of taking the mode expansion of Φ(x, t) in the absence of any nonlinearity, and substitute this back into the nonlinear Hamiltonian H 1 . Using Φ(x, t) = L 0 Q(x, t) we find: For the linear Hamiltonian we have as before: where we have kept only the resonator modes and dropped the continuum modes in Ω 1 . To proceed we will substitute the (Schrödinger picture) flux field into H 1 . In general this will lead to coupling (e.g. cross-Kerr) between resonator and quantum continuum modes. However, given that the nonlinearity of the KIPA is extremely weak, we will neglect the quantum fluctuations of the current, i.e. drop the b ω modes completely from the nonlinearity. We also, for simplicity, truncate to the fundamental resonator mode, and thus use: Dropping fast rotating terms in a, a † from H 1 : We take the time-dependent AC current amplitude to be: Substituting I p (t) into H 1 and transferring to a frame rotating at ω p /2, the KIPA Hamiltonian becomes: where any fast rotating pump terms have been ignored. We thus define the following important Hamiltonian parameters: We note that the term δ p arises from the square of the pump current, which has a non-zero average value of I 2 p /2 and therefore causes an effective detuning of the cavity frequency. As a sanity check, in the absence of a pump tone (i.e. I p = 0) we find the resonance frequency of the cavity to be: neglecting the Kerr term. For (I DC /I * ) 2 1, which is the approximation used in Eq. ( which is the fundamental frequency of a λ/4 resonator with a per unit length capacitance of C and inductance L k (I DC ) (provided by Eq. ( A comparison of the expressions for K (Eq. ( with: which is identical to Eq. ( FIG. The field operators a, Φ and Q and Hamiltonian H kipa so far describe the intracavity field dynamics. In the experimental setting we stimulate the resonator with an input field operator a in and measure a reflected response a out that enter and exit the cavity via the coupling circuit. For example, a Vector Network Analyzer (VNA) measures the reflection parameter S 11 (ω) = a in / a out . To obtain a classical description of the microwave response we would typically adopt a scattering matrix approach Input-output theory, developed by Gardiner and Collett where κ = (γ + κ)/2. The output field operator a out is then given by the input-output relation: Consider now the linear λ/4 resonator Hamiltonian provided in Eq. ( which gives: Substituting for a using the input-output relation (Eq. ( Treating the bath input field b in as a thermal state such that b in = 0, we retrieve the expression for the reflection parameter: We can apply the same mathematics to the idealized KIPA Hamiltonian (Eq. ( Next, we take the Hermitian conjugate of both sides. Note that in the Fourier domain (a[ω]) † = a † [-ω]. To simplify notation the frequency reversal is implied. We find: Combined with Eq. ( where Substituting the input-output relation (Eq. ( where we make the frequency reversal explicit, and define the signal and idler gains: Phase insensitive gain is readily measured with a vector network analyzer (VNA) once an appropriate pump tone and bias current are applied to the device concurrently. For the measurements in Fig. The VNA supplies a signal tone, which is swept about ω p /2, while the reflected response from the KIPA is measured. Because the magnitude response of the KIPA is approximately flat, we measure gain by taking the difference between the response with the pump on and the pump off, depicted in Fig. To characterise the line-shape of the non-degenerate amplification features in the main text, we define the reflection parameter Γ(ω), which is simply the signal gain (Eq. ( To fit the data in Fig. The pump current in our device is not precisely known. We simulate an impedance of Z 0 = 118 Ω for the λ/4 resonator (using the software Sonnet) and introduce a loss parameter λ p that quantifies the amount of pump power transmitted from room temperature down to the sample such that I 2 p = 2λ p P pump /Z 0 , where P pump is the pump power at microwave source. We may predict the parameter ∆ = ω 0 + δ DC + δ pω p /2 from our theory (Eq. ( We observe that κ varies from ∼ 52 MHz to ∼ 54 MHz, corresponding to an average coupling quality factor of Q c ≈ 135. The RMS pump current increases the kinetic inductance and thus modifies the coupling circuit (i.e. it changes the impedance step in the band stop filter), which might explain the pump power dependent coupling rate κ. A weak drift (∼ 30 mrad) in the phase of the coupling rate was necessary to fit the data (see Fig. From the fits, we extract an average pump attenuation of -10log(λ p ) = 22.8 dB. At room temperature the measured loss of the lines and components is ∼ 30 dB. Since the line and component loss is expected to reduce at cryogenic temperatures, this fitted average pump attenuation is realistic. We also note that the extracted pump attenuation increases marginally as the pump power increases, raising by ∼ 0.4 dB over the range of powers explored (see Fig. Overall, we find excellent quantitative agreement with our theory, and are able to predict the observed gain curves from the KIPA Hamiltonian (Eqs. From the fits to the amplification features depicted in Fig. Increasing the pump current I p , and hence ξ, will not increase the gain indefinitely. Past a certain threshold, the device enters the regime of parametric self-oscillation and ceases to behave as an amplifier Although, we do not study the KIPA in the self-oscillation regime in this work, we use our theory to predict the range of pump currents at which the KIPA behaves as a parametric amplifier. The parametric oscillation threshold corresponds to the zero crossing of the denominator of |Γ(ω)|. At the point of maximum phase sensitive amplification, spontaneous oscillations occur when |ξ| 2 ≥ ∆ 2 + (κ + γ) 2 /4. Using our theory along with the coupling rate |κ| extracted from the fits depicted in Fig. We found in practice that the KIPA would self-oscillate beyond a pump power of 4.10 dBm, demonstrating an excellent quantitative agreement between experiment and theory. When applying a signal tone at half the pump frequency ω s = ω p /2, the KIPA enters the degenerate mode of operation, producing phase sensitive gain as the signal and idler tones interfere. From the input-output equations (see Eq. ( where we separate out the modulus of ξ and its argument corresponding to the pump phase φ p (see Eq. (34)d). From Eq. (58) we observe that the KIPA gain is sensitive to the pump phase φ p . Experimentally, we observe phase sensitive amplification by modulating the phase of a signal tone which has a frequency of ω p /4π = 7.1905 GHz. As φ p represents the phase difference between the signal and the pump, phase modulation of either tone will allow us to characterise the phase sensitive gain. Fig. (2)b of the main text (reproduced here in Fig. The 1 dB compression point of the KIPA is characterised in phase sensitive mode. After calibrating the phase of the pump to achieve maximum amplification (i.e. φ p ≈ π/2), we characterise the degenerate 1 dB compression point of the KIPA by increasing the signal power until the gain drops by 1 dB, as is presented in Fig. Re-writing the input-ouptput relation (Eq. ( giving the output quadrature relations: where = g s + g * i and = g sg * i . Using the identities: where β is an arbitrary complex number (such as or ), we arrive at a set of linear equations for the output field quadratures: where I b and Q b are the quadratures of the bath field. As a function of the pump phase φ p , the affine transformation of the quadratures A G is given by: The pump phase φ p has the effect of rotating the basis of the transformation. In fact, one can show that A G (φ p ) = R T (φ p )A G (0)R(φ p ) where R(θ) is the standard 2 × 2 rotation matrix. As the bath is a thermal state, taking the expectation of both sides of Eq. (65) gives the simple expression: Assuming ∆ = 0 we find A G → 1 in the limit that |ξ| → 0, as expected. Conversely, if ∆ = 0 then A G is an affine transformation that will always mix the input quadratures to some degree, limiting the achievable squeezing for a given ξ. Fig. We may align the axis of amplification along Q, as depicted in Fig. The expression for gain as a function of the pump phase φ p is given by: where g ij are the matrix elements of A G (φ p ). This corresponds exactly with the expression for phase sensitive gain provided earlier in Eq. (58). The ellipses depicted in Fig. To be precise, we define 'reflections' to be the total microwave signal that propagates towards the HEMT input that has not been amplified by the KIPA. The total reflected signal will have a constant amplitude that is a fraction of the input amplitude, and, relative to the KIPA output, will be offset in phase according to the difference in path length. Taking the vector sum between the total reflected signal and the phase sensitive output of the KIPA gives a resulting ellipse that we observe at the output of our fridge (see Fig. where T is the coefficient of the input signal transmitted to the KIPA, R is reflection coefficient (with T 2 + R 2 = 1) and R(φ) is the standard rotation matrix that accounts for a phase shift of φ. Fig. The most likely sources of reflections from our setup are the connection from the coaxial lines to our bespoke PCB, and at the wire bonds between the PCB and the chip. down to the sample, a 2% reflection corresponds to an equivalent PCB impedance of: which is realistic accounting for the uncertainty in the design and manufacturing tolerances of the PCB and the temperature dependence of the materials. The maximum deamplification level G S is defined as the greatest reduction in amplitude of a coherent input by the squeezing transformation, whilst G A is the corresponding increase in gain that occurs orthogonal to the axis of deamplification. G S and G A are extracted from the ellipse data of Fig. In Sec. VII we analyzed the gain of the KIPA in phase sensitive mode when coherent states were applied to its input. In this section we consider the case of a vacuum input state (i.e. noise) and derive expressions for the squeezing (noise deamplification) and anti-squeezing (noise amplification) properties of the KIPA. We assume that noise squeezing is measured over a narrow-band such that the frequency dependence of g s and g i may be ignored, allowing us to draw on the theory presented in Sec. VII. In terms of the matrix elements g ij of the squeezing transformation matrix A G , Eq. (65) 20 becomes: To obtain expressions for the vacuum squeezing, we model the input field as a vacuum state with variances ∆I 2 = ∆Q 2 and zero mean: I = Q = 0. Assuming the bath and the input fields are uncorrelated, and using the fact that IQ + QI = 0, we may write a system of linear equations for the second order moments of the output quadratures: Since the vacuum and bath fields are at the same temperature, we define ∆I Thus, the variances of the output quadratures are given by: ∆I The increase/decrease in quadrature variance as a function of the pump phase φ p is described by: and the vacuum squeezing level S v is defined by the minimum of S: Using the DPA parameters extracted from the phase-insensitive gain features (see Sec. V), we can simulate the expected noise variance gain (Eq. ( Equipped with this squeezing model and a realistic set of resonator parameters, we can study the effect of Q i on the maximum attainable squeezing. Fig. We observe an approximate 10 dB improvement in the maximum achievable squeezing for each order of magnitude increase in Q i . The order of magnitude improvement in squeezing performance is a result of the corresponding order of magnitude decrease in γ/κ, which sets the magnitude of the bath variance contribution to the KIPA output (see Eq. ( The output fluctuations of the KIPA operating as a non-degenerate amplifier are found from Eq. (54)) to be: where the signal and idler gains (g s (ω) and g i (ω)) depend on the frequency of the signal being amplified. Here we assume that the input and bath fields (both signal and idler modes) have a thermal occupation a † in a in = b † in b in = n th . One useful identity of the DPA is the relationship between the signal and idler gains which holds for all ω (see Eq. ( Referring the quadrature fluctuations to the input of the KIPA and subtracting the vacuum con-22 tribution, we find: where in the second line we assume zero temperature (n th = 0) and in the third line we assume no loss (γ = 0). As required by Cave's fundamental theorem of phase sensitive amplifiers, the KIPA/DPA adds 1/4 photons to the input referred noise in the limit of high gain To maintain consistency with the input-output models for phase sensitive amplifiers used later in this section (e.g. see Eq. ( where G k = |g s | 2 and n kn is the input referred noise contribution of the KIPA in non-degenerate mode. Comparing Eq. ( The temperature dependence for n kn is depicted in Fig. Operating the KIPA such that ω 0 k B T , we have: We plot n kn0 as a function of Q i = ω 0 /γ and observe rapid convergence to zero as Q i → ∞. The output fluctuations of the KIPA in degenerate mode as a function of the pump phase φ p are given by (see Sec. VIII): with phase sensitive power gain G k (φ p ) = |g s + g * i (φ p )| 2 . Referred to the KIPA input, the excess quadrature fluctuations contributed by the amplifier are: As predicted by Caves, the excess quadrature fluctuations referred to the input can be as small as zero in limit of ω k B T and provided there are no losses in the system (i.e. γ = 0) with, Again, we simulate n kd for varied internal quality factors and temperatures and find similar behaviour to the non-degenerate case. In the limit of high gain, the minimum noise added n kd0 is approximately half the corresponding noise added in the non-degenerate case (see Fig. The detection chain of the KIPA consists of a series of amplifiers and attenuators, which we depict in Fig. At 4 K we have the HEMT amplifier, followed by a second microwave amplifier at room temperature. Each amplifier contributes additional noise to its output field Combining the attenuator models for α 1 and α 2 (Eq. ( where, Rewriting the output field a out as a pump phase dependent quadrature operator I out (φ p ) = (a † out e -iφp + a out e iφp )/2, we have: where I out (φ p ) is the pump phase dependent quadrature operator at the KIPA output, and I h is the detection chain noise quadrature operator I h (-φ p ) = (h † tot e iφp + h tot e -iφp )/2. Assuming h tot and a out are composed of uncorrelated thermal states the quadrature fluctuations at the detector simplify to: where we introduce the effective system noise photon number n sys : The average microwave noise power that would be measured by a spectrum analyzer is simply the sum of the output quadrature variances: We introduce the parameter z here that converts the units from photons to Watts as is measured by the spectrum analyzer over a certain measurement bandwidth resolution. where in the second line we assume that n sys n th + n kn0 . We use this equation to fit the data in Fig. We turn our attention now to the degenerate gain. Because the fluctuations along one quadrature of the KIPA output are squeezed and are therefore considerably smaller than the fluctuations along the orthogonal amplified quadrature, the total noise power measured at the spectrum analyzer may be approximated by: P td = zG T ( ∆I As before, we fit Eq. (115) to the measured noise power at the spectrum analyzer, referred to the input of the KIPA and expressed in photons. The results are depicted in Fig. We can set a bound on n kd (n kn ) by estimating the loss in our KIPA. The reflection magnitude response recorded with the KIPA off appears flat within the 0.7 dB measurement ripple, which implies Q i > 3, 350 and thus n kd < 0.03 (n kn < 0.06), see Sec. X details. High internal quality factors are typical of planar NbTiN resonators, with Q i ∼ 100, 000 often observed for our PBG resonators with higher external quality factors (Sec. X). In Fig. The KIPA operates in the over-coupled regime, where the external coupling rate far exceeds the rate of internal losses (κ γ). As such, the magnitude response in the absence of a pump tone (Fig. Fig. We note that the loss in the KIPA will almost certainly depend on its operating conditions. Large intra-cavity fields can induce two photon losses 