Carrier recombination is a process that significantly influences the performance of semiconductor devices such as solar cells, photodiodes, and light-emitting diodes (LEDs). Therefore, a model that can accurately describe and quantify the net carrier recombination rate in semiconductor devices is important in order to further improve the performance of relevant semiconductor devices. The conventional model for describing the net carrier recombination rate is derived based on the condition that there is no electric current in the considered semiconductor, which is true only when the semiconductor is not part of a semiconductor device, and hence is not connected to an external circuit. The conventional model is adopted and used for describing the net carrier recombination rate in semiconductors that are part of devices (i.e. in semiconductor devices). In this paper, we derive and propose a new model for describing the net carrier recombination rate in semiconductor devices. The newly proposed model is an improvement to the currently used model by considering the fact that electric current can flow in the semiconducting materials of semiconductor devices. We validate the 2 proposed recombination model and show that the use of the proposed model can be crucial for modeling and analyzing the performance of optoelectronic devices such as solar cells and LEDs. Recombination of electrons and holes is a fundamental process that occurs in a semiconductor whether the semiconductor is part of a semiconductor device or not. Carrier recombination is of special interest to several semiconductor devices. In solar cells and photodiodes, all carrier recombination processes should be minimized, whereas in light-emitting diodes (LEDs), radiative recombination should be maximized, and other possible recombination processes should be minimized. Therefore, an accurate description and quantification of the carrier recombination rate is important to accurately identify and evaluate the possible areas of improvement for those devices. An accurate quantification of the carrier recombination rate could also be important for studies on the fundamental properties of semiconductors. For a given carrier recombination process, the net carrier recombination rate per unit volume net R in a semiconductor is given by where total R is the total carrier recombination rate per unit volume in the semiconductor, and 0 G is the carrier generation rate per unit volume that inherently or permanently occurs in the semiconductor. In a semiconductor that is not part of a device (called an isolated semiconductor here), it is well known that 0 G originates from thermal agitation, which causes electrons in the valence band jumping either directly or indirectly into the conduction band, thus producing electrons in the conduction band and electron vacancies (holes) in the valence band The conventional model for describing the detail expression of net R is derived under the condition that there is no electric current in the considered semiconductor, which is true only when the semiconductor is not part of a device and not connected to an external circuit. However, this conventional model is adopted and widely used to describe net R even in semiconductors that are part of devices (i.e., in semiconductor devices). In this paper, we derive a new model for describing net R in semiconductor devices and show that it should be different compared with the conventional net R model. The newly proposed model is an improvement to the currently used model by considering the fact that electric current can flow in semiconductors that are part of devices. We validate the proposed model and show that the use of the proposed model is important to better analyze and enhance the performance of relevant semiconductor devices. This paper is organized as follows. In Sec. 2, we describe the carrier continuity equations and the carrier recombination in semiconductors. In Sec. 3, first we rederive the conventional model for quantifying net R , and then we derive a new improved model for quantifying net R in semiconductor devices. In Sec. 4, we employ organic solar cells (OSCs) as a case study to validate and demonstrate the significance of the newly proposed model. In Sec. 4, we also provide some physical insights regarding the newly proposed net R model. The paper is then concluded in Sec. 5. The continuity equations for electrons and holes in semiconductors are given by [1, pp. 58-63, where q is the elementary charge, n J ( p J ) is the electron (hole) current density, n G ( p G ) is the electron (hole) generation rate per unit volume due to photon absorption, n R ( p R ) is the net electron (hole) recombination rate per unit volume, n ( p ) is the density or concentration of free electrons (holes), and t is time. Carrier generation due to external photon absorption is not a source of carrier generation that inherently occurs in semiconductors, and therefore n G and p G have their own separate terms in the continuity equations (i.e. are not included in n R and p R ). For the one-dimensional case at steady state, the continuity equations become [2, p. n nn The electron current density n J and the hole current density p J for the one-dimensional case are given by n n n dn J q Fn qD dx where n  ( p  ) is the electron (hole) mobility, is the Boltzmann constant and T is absolute temperature. Here, we consider the case where there is no temperature gradient (i.e., 0 dT dx = ) since the effect of the temperature gradient is negligible in general semiconductor devices (hence the current densities consist of the drift and the diffusion components only), unlike in thermoelectric generators where the temperature gradient is purposely maintained. In general, there are three main recombination mechanisms, which are the band-to-band (also called radiative) recombination, Shockley-Read-Hall (SRH) or trap-assisted recombination, and Auger recombination where bb k is the band-to-band recombination coefficient and The total SRH recombination rate is also proportional to np Therefore, the net SRH recombination rate per unit volume is given by [1, pp. 317-324] ( ) where A k is the Auger recombination coefficient and 0(A) G is the 0 G component for the Auger recombination process. To be consistent with bb R and SRH R , we can write Eq. ( ) ( ) The net electron and the net hole recombination rates per unit volume (i.e., n R and p R ) are sum of all possible processes, and hence are From Eq. ( Here, an isolated semiconductor is referred to a semiconductor, intrinsic or extrinsic (doped), that is not part of a semiconductor device, and hence it is not connected to an external circuit and no current can flow inside it. To determine 0(bb) G , 0(SRH) G , and 0(A) G , we need to determine 0(bb) n , 0(bb) p , 0(SRH) n , 0(SRH) p , 0(A) n , and 0(A) p . Let us consider a special case when n R and p R are zero. Let us denote the electron concentration n and the hole concentration p in isolated semiconductors when np 0 RR == as 0(is) n and 0(is) p , respectively. As mentioned in Sec. 2, when n R and p R are zero, bb R , SRH R , and A R must all be zero, and hence according to Eqs. (9), (11), and (13), we must have The result given by Eqs. ( where ( ) If we can determine 0(is) n and 0(is) p , we can determine 0(bb) G , 0(SRH) G , and 0(A) G . When np 0 RR == , the carrier continuity equations at steady state become Since there is no current flow (i.e., n J and p J must be zero everywhere inside an isolated semiconductor), n Jx  and p Jx  must also be zero, which means Eqs. ( To find out 0(is) n and 0(is) p , we simply need to solve n 0 J = and p 0 J = . An internal electric field can exist inside an isolated semiconductor, for example if the isolated semiconductor is attached to another isolated semiconductor with a different Fermi level, or if the isolated semiconductor is non-uniformly doped. Inside an isolated semiconductor, the electric field F is determined by the gradient of the conduction band minimum c E , given by c F dE qdx = , or by the gradient of the valence band maximum v E , given by v When F is not zero, the conditions n 0 J = [refer Eq. ( When 0 F = (hence the gradients of c E and v E are zero), the conditions n 0 J = and p 0 Equations ( First, we will try to determine 0(is) n and 0(is) p for the intrinsic semiconductor case. We know that 0(is) n and 0(is) p are the electron and the hole concentrations, respectively, when the net carrier recombination rate and the external photon absorption are zero. For an isolated semiconductor in general (i.e., intrinsic and extrinsic), no net carrier recombination and no external photon absorption mean the semiconductor is in thermodynamic equilibrium For an isolated intrinsic semiconductor in thermodynamic equilibrium, the electron concentration and the hole concentration are called the intrinsic electron concentration int n and the intrinsic hole concentration int p , respectively, which are given by [2, p. 20] ( ) Therefore, for both cases (when an electric field does and does not exist), it is clear that the parameters 0(is) n and 0(is) p for an isolated intrinsic semiconductor is given by int n and int p , respectively. Next, to determine 0(is) n and 0(is) p for the extrinsic semiconductor case, we follow a similar procedure as for the intrinsic case above. First, we need to know the electron and the hole concentrations in isolated extrinsic semiconductors when there are no net carrier recombination and no external photon absorption (i.e., in thermodynamic equilibrium). When an isolated extrinsic semiconductor is in thermodynamic equilibrium, we know the product of the electron and the hole concentrations is still equal to the product of the electron and the hole concentrations before the semiconductor is doped (i.e., int int np) Therefore, for an isolated extrinsic semiconductor, 0(is) 0(is) np for both cases (when an electric field does and does not exist) is still given by int int np, where int n and int p are the intrinsic electron and the intrinsic hole concentrations, respectively, inside the extrinsic semiconductor before it is doped. . Applying the obtained result to Eqs. ( ( ) ) The results given by Eqs. ( where r k is the general coefficient of the considered recombination process. The recombination model given by Eq. ( To derive the parameters 0(bb) When n R and p R are zero, the continuity equations for the carriers inside the considered semiconducting material become An external voltage bias can be applied to a semiconductor device which can result in non-zero n J and p J . External photon absorption contributes to the excess free carriers. At any given bias condition, n R and p R are expected to reach their lowest value (i.e. zero) when the excess free carriers are at the lowest (i.e. when there is no external photon absorption or np 0 GG == ). Therefore, at any given bias condition, np 0 RR == should happen when np 0 GG == . Considering the case when n G and p G are zero, Eqs. (32) and (33) become Here we show that both 0(is) n (for isolated semiconductors) and that appears in the expressions for n J and p J ) and the relevant boundary conditions at the edges of the considered material. To obtain the analytical expressions for 0(d) n and 0(d) p , we need to make a simplification by assuming F to be uniform (i.e. independent of x ). Applying the assumption and substituting Eqs. ( Applying the obtained result to Eqs. ( ( ) ) Based on our result here, we can propose that the net carrier recombination rate per unit volume net R in a semiconductor device can be modeled as To support the newly proposed model for describing net R in semiconductor devices (as derived in Sec. 3.2) and discuss its significance, we will compare between the use of the proposed model and the use of the conventional net R model (as derived in Sec. 3.1) in obtaining the current-voltage (J-V) characteristic of a specific semiconductor device, namely organic solar cell (OSC). The reason why OSC is used is because the source code for calculating the J-V characteristic of OSCs is available to us, and hence we can modify the recombination model in the code whether to follow the conventional model or the newly proposed model. The OSC considered here consists of an active layer (a blend of an electron accepting material and an electron donating material) sandwiched between two flat electrodes as described in Ref. where a V is the applied voltage bias, and is the built-in voltage. The boundary conditions for the electron concentration n and the hole concentration p at the edges of the active layer (at 0 x = and xL = ) in Ref. [3] are given by ( ) where pa  is the hole injection barrier at anode given by the difference between HOMOd and Fa E (refer Fig. The model in Ref. where  is the bimolecular recombination reduction coefficient, ( ) Langevin recombination coefficient with  being the effective permittivity of the active layer, and int n is the intrinsic electron concentration given by Eq. ( where 0(d) n is given by Eq. (38) and 0(d) p is given by Eq. (39). For brevity, no calculations at exactly 0 F = (i.e., at a bi VV = ) will be made in this paper, and hence Eqs. The parameter values used in our calculations here are the same as used in Ref. used in Ref. The reduction is partly because the free electrons and the free holes are located in different materials of the active layer (which consists of donor and acceptor networks), and this reduces the probability for them to meet and recombine Fig. Finally, we will attempt to shed some light on the physical process of 0 G [refer Eq. ( We have investigated the modeling for the net carrier recombination rate in semiconductors. The net carrier recombination rate per unit volume net R in a semiconductor is conventionally modeled as ( ) where r k is the general coefficient of the considered recombination process, np is the product of the electron and the hole concentrations in the semiconductor, and int n is the intrinsic electron concentration in the semiconductor. The , respectively, where n J and p J are the electron and the hole current densities in the semiconductor, respectively. By using organic solar cells (OSCs) as a case study, we analyzed the calculated J-V characteristics and showed that the newly proposed recombination model is the better model for describing net R in OSCs, and this is expected to be the case for other semiconductor devices too. We showed that the use of the proposed model is important in order to accurately evaluate the performance of OSCs, and therefore we expect that the use of the proposed model is also important to better evaluate the performance of other optoelectronic devices whose performance is influenced by carrier recombination such as LEDs. Finally, we have also provided some physical insights on 0(d) n and 0(d) p . We have explained that 0(d) n and 0(d) p are the electron concentration in the conduction band and the hole concentration in the valence band, respectively, that inherently exist in the semiconducting material of a semiconductor device at a given voltage bias, where 0(d) n and 0(d) p can be contributed by the carrier thermal generation from inside the semiconductor as well as by the carrier injection from outside the semiconductor.