We consider a Cooper pair beam splitter for Iron-Pnictide superconductor and calculate the entangled electron-hole current. We investigate the interplay of various physical parameters such as doping at electron and hole pockets as well as non-zero nesting between the electron and hole pocket. We find that in the absence of magnetic order, the current due to hole pocket and electron pocket add up ordinarily. However in the presence of magnetic ordering the two currents take part in characteristic interference effect to modify the resultant current significantly. This interference effect manifests itself in non-monotonous and oscillatory nature of beam splitter current. We investigate in details this non-monotonicity with the chemical potential as well as nesting vectror |q|. We also investigate the evolution of density of states with system parameters and correlate it with the beam-splitter current. Further we enumerate the relevant parameter space where the efficiency of such beam splitter set up is enhanced. Our finding can be useful in experimental determination or verification of co-existence phase in Iron-Pnictide superconductors and has potential applications in realizing quantum gates or switches. One of the fundamental aspect of quantum mechanics is the superposition principle which dictates that a quantum mechanical system can be described by a linear superposition of many orthogonal wave functions 1 . This superposition principle yields an entanglement or correlations between different parts of the system. In recent times this fundamental aspect has been investigated in detail to construct entangled states having specific properties with application in teleportation, cryptology etc 2 . To realize such entangled states many protocols have been proposed involving various mesoscopic system such as quantum dots, superconducting qubits etc 3-6 . However after preparing such entangled state one needs to confirm that the state is robust against decoherence Starting from the celebrated EPR paradox In this study we have investigated the consequences of beam splitter arrangement for Iron-pnictide superconductors. Firstly we are motivated by the fact that this system is an example where various competing order parameters such as two superconducting pairing interactions and magnetic ordering exist simultaneously Our plan of presentation is the following. In section II we review the basics of Iron-pnictide superconductors In FeAs, the relevant tight binding model which describes the superconductivity contains an itinerant electron system of two electronic orbitals due to two Fe atoms in an unit cell (1) In the above H 0 denotes the non-interacting part of electron and hole pocket. H ∆ denotes superconducting pairing interaction and H m signifies the magnetic pairing interaction. The details of these three terms are given below In the above c = μ c -|k| 2 /2m and f = |k | 2 /2m-μ f . Note that k appearing in 'c' is measured from the center of Brillouine zone and for 'f ' fermion k is measured from (π, π). Henceforth all the momentum indices associated with the 'f ' fermions are understood as measured from (π, π) unless referred otherwise. Note that we have taken an isotropic mass at electron pocket and hole pocket. This assumption may be an approximated one without changing the qualitative aspect of the results found here. The superconducting pairing terms and the magnetic interactions are given by, Where δp = p -p and δk = k -k and [Λ] = αββ α denotes combined spin indices. In the above, Eq. 3 describes the effective pairing interactions in the Iron-pnictide system which arises due to the interband hopping between electron and hole band and the magnetic interaction V sw αββ α (p p : kk ) = V sw p p:kk σ αβ .σ + β α . Following earlier convention Note that the momentum index q appearing in the definition of magnetic order parameter m q refers a small deviation of the centre of hole pocket from (π, π). This is to account for the fact that when q = 0, magnetic order is found to be zero which will be discussed again Sec. IV. We use the above definitions of mean field order parameters to perform a meanfield decomposition of the four fermion interactions as given in Eq. 3 and Eq. 4. The resulting Hamiltonian obtained is written in the following matrix form, where the four component Nambu spinor is, Ψ kα = (c + kα , c -kα , f + pα , f -pα ) with p = k + q and the Hamiltonian matrix Ĥ(k) αβ which we write in short Ĥαβ has the form, Note that initially the superconducting pairing interaction (as given in Eq. 3) is defined such a way that a hole of momenta k can interact with another electron of momenta p belonging to electron pocket centred around (π, -π). However in the final expression in Eq. 5 another simplification has been performed where a hole with momenta k take part in pairing interaction with another electron at hole pocket with momenta k only. The index q signifies that the electron pocket is no longer around (π, -π) but rather around (π, -π) + q to take into account finite magnetic order parameter. In the above we have accounted for two different kind of magnetic order parameter with the following definitions. If α = β, m α,α = m 1 and for α = β, m 2 = m α,β . Following earlier study m and their detail expressions are given in Appendix B. We first derive the self consistent equations for the meanfield order parameter by minimizing Eq. 5 with respect to appropriate meanfield order parameters. Next we evaluate those meanfield order parameters self-consistently with the help of eigenvectors obtained after diagonalizing Eq. 6. Once the meanfield order parameters values are obtained we use them to calculate the beam-splitter current. Note that we evaluate the meanfield order parameters at zero temperature and thus beam-splitter current refers to zero temperature study only. Now we move on briefly to describe the beam-splitter current calculation. Having described the basic model of superconductivity and coexistence of magnetic order with it in Iron-Pnictides we now elaborate on the beam splitter arrangement designed for such system. Our idea of entangled Cooper pair splitter is similar to the seminal work of -k and hence there are possibilities of only two kind of currents. The first one is where the electron with spin up and momentum k enters into one of the quantum dot and the other enters into the remaining quantum dot. This current is defined as I 1 and it shows characteristic oscillations with the separation between the quantum dots. The second kind of current is obtained where both the electrons enter through the same dot with some time gap in between them. This current is defined as I 2 and it is found to be a constant for a given set of parameters. The ratio I 1 /I 2 signifies the efficiency of the beam splitter current so as to differentiate the I 1 from I 2 . In the present scannerio an eigenstate in superconducting phase is of the form Hence in our case the current I 1 is obtained by considering the two participating entangled Cooper pair, one due to c-fermion and another due to f -fermion. Note that we do not consider the current due to tunneling of a c and f fermion which participate in magnetic ordering. The current due to such event vanishes due to singlet nature of the quantum dot and metallic lead. The current I 1 is expected to happen once the quantum dots are kept in the Coulomb blockade regime such that it is energetically unfavorable to accommodate two electrons at the same quantum dot. Finally once two spatially separated electrons enter into two separate quantum dots, they are collected by two fermi liquid leads (represented by L 1 and L 2 in Fig. It is natural to expect that once the electrons tunnel from the superconductor to quantum dots, they interact with the already existing electrons at the quantum dots and this might lead to decoherence between the two separated electrons. One way to avoid this is to work in the co-tunneling regime where the number of electrons in the quantum dots are fixed and also the resonant level 1 , 2 are not occupied. The probability of interaction can also be reduced if the entered electrons spend less time in the quantum dots and this can be achieved by having |T SD | < |T DL |. Also the temperature of the superconductor and the quantum dots should be such that ∆μ > K B T as this will ensure that the stationary occupation due to the coupling to leads is exponentially small. The complete Hamiltonian for the proposed beam splitter device thus contains the intrinsic Hamiltonian of the Iron-pnictide materials, two quantum dots and two fermi (metallic) liquid quantum leads. In addition to the intrinsic Hamiltonians mentioned above, it also involves the tunneling Hamiltonians between the superconductor and the quantum dots and between the quantum dots and the leads. The complete Hamiltonian represented by H T ot for the beam splitter set up thus becomes, In the above the first three terms indicate the intrinsic Hamiltonians of superconducting material, quantum dots and lead respectively. Henceforth the subscript S, D, L will be used for the superconductor, quantum dots and the leads respectively. 'l' denotes the number of leads and quantum dots which can take values 1 and 2. The term H SD and H DL denote the tunneling Hamiltonians from superconductor to quantum dots and quantum dots to leads respectively. Below we give in detail the complete expressions of each terms in Eq. 7. In the above E kq± denotes the energy of Bogoliubov quasi-particle excitations discussed before. γ c kqσ and γ f kqσ are creation operators for Bogoliubov quasi-particle. E 0 denotes the constant energy not important to our consideration and does not affect the beam-splitter arrangements. l denotes the energy levels of quantum dots and U refers the interaction energy if a given energy level of the quantum dot is occupied by two electrons of opposite spins. k describes the energy of the Bloch states of fermi liquid leads. T i SD is the tunneling amplitude between superconductor and i'th quantum dots and Ψ i represents a state of an electron/hole arriving at i'th quantum dot. g 1 and g 2 can take value 0 or 1 depending on which kind of quasi-particle is taking part in the Andreev process. We note that g 1 = g 2 signifies two types of quasi particles can not be present simultaneously in a pair of dots. Lastly T DL denotes the tunneling amplitude between quantum dots and fermi liquid leads. Having provided a brief introduction on Iron-pnictide system in Sec. II and the beam-splitter set up in detail in Sec. III, we now outline the important steps in evaluating beam-splitter current which are finally measured at the fermi liquid leads. The current due to electrons coming from superconductor and finally reaching to lead via quantum dots are represented by is the transition rate from an initial state of electron |i to a final state f | which is discussed below in detail and ρ i denotes the electron density. Here T ( i ) is the on-shell transmission matrix and is given by In the above H 0 denotes the Hamiltonian for superconductor (H 0 = H S ) and H T denotes the successive tunneling from superconductor to quantum dots and subsequently from quantum dots to leads. H = H C , is the total Hamiltonian. As H T << H 0 , we can expand the denominator in appropriate power series and we obtain in η → 0 limit, In the last step we have employed the fact that η → 0 and summation over 'n' runs from zero to infinity as indicated. We note that f where T denotes the tunneling from superconductor to quantum dots and T denotes the tunneling from quantum dots to leads. The expressions for T and T are obtained as In arriving at the above form of the tunneling amplitude we have considered the fact that |T SD | < |T Dl | and while the electron can come and go from the dot to lead many times, there is no possibility of an electron to go back from quantum dot to superconductor Taking into account the orthogonality of states of different occupation numbers and momentum conservation, we obtain which denotes Andreev process. It may happen that in the process of transport one electron with a particular spin(say up) arrives at the quantum dot from the superconductor but an electron with opposite spin(say down) may travel forward from the same dot to the lead but we forbid that process. We want processes such as |SS → |DS → |DD and |SS → |SD → |DD simultaneously. Such that entangled pair of electrons from the superconductor(SS) get transported to two dots (DD) and move forward to the respective leads, because we avoid spin flipping. Where, |SD = γ + kσ d + l-σ |i . We ensure that H S1D1 selects one electron of the entangled pair to dot 1 and H S2D2 selects the other electron of the entangled pair to dot 2. A little algebra gives us the following expression, In the above δr represents the seperation between two quantum dots. For detailed derivation of the above equation we refer Appendix-A. In the above and denotes a constant depended on system specification. Here γ = γ l ; l = 1, 2 and γ l = 2πν l T DL 2 (we remind that l = 1, 2 denote leads). Also γ s = 2πν s T 2 SD , where ν s , ν l are density of states per spin at lead and superconductor respectively. To understand the consequences of the magnetic order parameter and superconducting pairing, we expand the expressions of A k below. In the above we have used E 1kq = E kq+ and E 3kq = E kq-. We note that in the absence of magnetic ordering the first and third term vanishes and we are left with two copies of superconducting pockets. In the presence of magnetic ordering all the four terms are present and consequently the amplitude of the beam-splitter current is modified significantly. As an electron or hole has to participate simultaneously to the formation of superconducting pairing as well as in magnetic ordering the amplitude of beamsplitter current is expected to be modified significantly. In the following, we investigate I D instead of the full current I 1 as in Eq. 18 following earlier convention We numerically solve the self consistent equations for order parameters to get the corresponding values and use them to compute the current as given in Eq. 18. Before presenting our results for the beam-splitter current we briefly discuss the phase diagram in q vs μ plane where q is the nesting vector and μ denotes the amount of doping in the hole or electron pocket. In Fig. self-consistent equations as described in Sec.II. The main feature of the phase diagram is that the co-existence phase which is the salient aspect of Iron-pnictide superconducting system exists for specific values of q and μ. For example, to get the co-existence phase a finite nesting(finite values of q) is needed as evident from Fig. A. Comparison of beam-splitter current for electron doped vs hole doped Here we discuss how the current varies with distance between the leads (which we denoted as δr) when the chemical potential at hole and electron pocket are var- ied independent of each other. First we discuss what happens when there is perfect nesting such that q = 0. In this case we note that there is no co-existence phase and magnetic order parameter does not exist. As a result there is no such entanglement between the hole and electron pocket though the superconducting gap in hole pocket is determined by the electrons at electron pocket through self-consistent equations. Throughout this article we have taken identical shape of the hole and electron pocket which is circular in our case, for simplicity. In the upper panel of Fig. Having discussed the effect of doping at electron and hole pocket on beam current, we move on to discuss how the current behaves for non-zero nesting vector for different sizes of the hole and electron pocket. A non-zero nesting vector imply that if the electron pocket is situated at (0, 0), the hole pocket is situated at Q + q where Q = (π, π) and q is called nesting vector. We also note that for non-zero q, magnetic ordering is present along with superconducting ordering. In Fig. In the previous two sections we have explained that there are characteristic oscillations of beam splitter current. For a given k f δr the current depends on the chemical potential or doping in a non-linear way. To show these oscillations in a more transparent way, in Fig. In the panel (b) we plotted the beam splitter current for various values of q for μ = 0.2 and k f δr = 0. We see that depending on the values of q, current increases or decreases. We note that a finite q represents co-existence phase with simultaneous presence of magnetic and superconducting orderings in the system. The nature of oscillation is different than the previous case. Here we find a Gaussian-like distribution pointing out that there is an optimal value of the nesting vector for which one obtains maximum beam splitter current. To understand this oscillations we note that in the coexistence phase an eigenvector has the linear combinations of electrons and holes from both the pocket. This quantum entanglement resuts in specific interference pattern which yields this oscillations, much similar to double-slit difraction pattern there is central peak with maximum height and subsequent reduced peaks at the two sides of it. We have shown the density of states for different values of μ (for q = 0) in panel (c) and (d) and for q (and μ = 0.2) in panel (e) respectively. In the panel (c), the density of state corresponds to pure magnetic phase while panel (d) corresponds to a pure superconducting phase. The panel (e) corresponds to a coexistence phase. For the pure magnetic phase as in panel (c) the density of states are expected to be peaked around m + μ for excitation at hole pocket and around m -μ for electron pocket where m is the magnetic order parameter. This is due to the reason that the modified chemical potential after meanfield approximation are m ± μ for electron and hole pocket respectively. For μ = 0.05, our phase diagram in Fig. For the pure superconducting phase the density of states are plotted in panel (d) Fig. where ∆ is the superconducting gap and D n (E f ) is the normal state density of states at E = E f . The density of state shows a divergence at E = ∆ which is due to the sum rule D s (E s )dE s = D n (E n )E n where D s and D n are the density of states in superconducting and normal state respectively. E s and E n are corresponding energies in the two phases. One can check that for μ c = μ f = 0 = m, the eigenenergies of the two kind of excitations become identical (with B k = 0, ∆ c = -∆ f = 0.4) and density of states shows a divergence at E = 0.4. In the presence of finite doping μ c/f = 0, this single peak seperates into two peaks as evident in panel D, Fig. For finite q, one gets coexistence phase where superconduc-FIG. tivity and magnetic ordering both exist. Such coexistence implies that the effective density of states contributing to superconductivity decreases as the sum rule D s (E s )dE s = D n (E n )E n no longer holds. Hence we expect a decrease of current as evident from Fig. Till now we have discussed the scenario where only one of the two electrons(or holes) from the electron (or hole) pocket is collected at either dot and the second electron (or hole) is collected at remaining dot. The current generated from this process is the entangled beam-splitter current which is matter of interest to us. However the alternative process such as tunneling of two electrons (or holes) via same dot is a real possibility which yields a contribution to current itself. There are two processes in which electron participating in the Cooper pair can tunnel via same dot. Case (I): First one electron(or hole) tunnels from the superconductor to dot-A let's say, and then following it the second electron(or hole) also tunnel to the same dot, as a result there are two electrons (or holes) at the same dot which costs an additional Coulomb repulsion energy of U. Thus this virtual state is suppressed by a factor 1/U. Finally the two electrons(holes) leave the dot and tunnel to the lead. Case (II): In the other process one electron (or hole) tunnels to say dot-A and then subsequently leaves the dot and tunnels further to lead-A, leaving an excitation on superconductor that costs additional energy ∆ before finally the second electron tunnels to the lead-A via dot-A. The current taking into account these two processes can be written as, γ s = 2πν s |T DS | 2 with ν s is the density of states of the superconductor. γ = γ 1 + γ 2 with γ l = 2πν l |T DL | 2 with ν l being the density of states at lead 'l'. The expression for A k and A k are given below. In the above k = -k and expressions for k are given in the Appendix C. Now in the I S as given in Eq. 20, there are two contributions for above mentioned processes which would add up. For detailed calculation of current we request the reader to look into the Appendix-A. To have a comparison between the current as given in Eq. 18 and in Eq. 20, we estimate the ratio between the two. It is straightforward to obtain, Clearly dominates I 2 . As shown in Fig. Before we conclude and summarize our study, it is imperative to compare the beam-splitter arrangement studied in earlier pioneering work by Daniel loss and collaborators The equivalent relations for the d-channels are given by d . It has been reported that when only ∆ 0 is present the beam-splitter current is larger than the case where ∆ 0 and ∆ 1 are both present. Though for both the cases the physical problem remains two separeted copies of BCS Hamiltonian, the total superconducting quasi-particle density changes when the combinations of order parameters are different. This is ev-ident as the superconducting number density depends on k,ν u kν v kν and u kν and v kν which depends on E k,ν through ∆ 0 and ∆ 1 differently. Thus the physics relies on the re-distribution of quasi-particle density in each blocks. The relation between c and d fermion on the Bogoliubov quasiparticles can be readily compared with the Eqn B2 to Eqn B5. It is evident that in the present case the Bogolubov quasi-particles in c and f channels are not decoupled due to the presence of magnetic order parameters. In the graphene based superconductor such couplings are absent. This coupling between the hole and electron pocket which gives rise to magnetic order parameters are the crucial ingredients for the ironpnictide based beam-splitter studied here. This gives rise to the non-trivial interference pattern between the two bogoliubov quasiparticles coming from hole and electron pockets. To summarize we have proposed a Cooper pair beam splitter arrangement for Iron-pnictide superconductor which is known for hosting Cooper pairs responsible for superconducting property as well as inherent magnetic ordering. The co-existence of these two seemingly noninclusive order parameters in a given material provides an interesting platform to investigate the consequences in a Cooper pair beam splitter current. We have considered various realistic situations found in actual materials such as zero nesting and finite nesting However we note that the magnitude of the Ironpnictide based beam-splitter current is smaller in the co-existence phase in order of magnitude than the conventional two dimensional BCS superconductor based beam-splitter current. With the recently proposed protocol of measuring current produced by single electron detection Finally we note that with the recent significant developments in the field of theoretical and experimental topological insulator based superconductor named topological superconductor, the beam splitter arrangement could serve as an unique set up to detect various quantum mechanical aspect of the topological states as well as the superconducting properties. Recently superconductivity at room temperature has been observed in few-layer Stanene which also host a quantum spin hall phase Similarly for the Andreev process which denotes the tunneling of electrons from superconductor to quantum dots as denoted by Eq. A3, Now it may happen that in the process of transport one electron with a particular spin(say up) comes to the dot from the superconductor but an electron with opposite spin(say down) may travel forward from the same dot to the lead, but we don't want that. We want processes like |SS >→ |DS >→ |DD > and |SS >→ |SD >→ |DD > such that entangled pair of electrons from the superconductor(SS) get transported to dot(DD) and move forward to separate leads, because we avoid spin flipping. Where, |SD >= φ γ φ+ kσ d + l-σ |i >. φ can take c and f two values due to two species of quasiparticles and γ denotes the Bogoliubov quasiparticles in the superconductor. To proceed further we note few important points for the below calculations; (a) H S1D1 selects one electron of the entangled pair to dot 1 and H S2D2 selects the other electron of the entangled pair to dot 2. (b) We take +k for ↑ spin and -k for ↓ spin without loss of generality. We also note that, in the following, we use the Bogoliubov transformations given in Eqs. B2,B3,B4,B5 and the Fourier transformations, Ψ c σ (r l ) = k e ik.r l c kσ = -k e -ik.r l c -kσ and Ψ f σ (r l ) = k e ik.r l f kσ = -k e -ik.r l f -kσ which are required while using H SD as given in Eq. 11. It is also to be noted that since we work close to resonance we use |iη -E kl | ≈ |E k | where E k and l denotes the energy of the Bogoliubov quasiparticle and energy of quantum dot. Now we proceed to simplify < f |T |i > as follows, Note that the sin(k.δr) term associated with imaginary part will go to zero while doing the θ integration in k sum. The factor A k is given in Eq. 19 and 1 , 2 denote the energies at quantum dot 1 and 2 respectively. We have mentioned earlier that there can be two ways of tunneling from superconductor to quantum dots. Both the processes gives identical expressions which results in a multiplicative factor of 2. Incorporating this finally we obtain, Now lets calculate the second term as given in Eq. A5 in the below. Just calculating like before it is straightforward to have In the presence of a Fermi sea in the leads we introduce a cutoff in the sum in Σ at the fermi level given by k ∼ -∆μ and at the edge of the conduction band given by c . Then one obtains Σ = γ l ln( c /∆μ) -iγ/2. Now we note that logarithmic renormalization of the self energy is small i.e., ∼ In the last equation we have used k = -k. After some algebra we arrive at the final current expressions as given in Eq. 18 and Eq. 20. Now let's calculate I 1 /I 2 for getting an idea about their relative strength. Firstly for Breit-Wigner resonance we have 1 = -2 ,which further reduces I 1 = eγ Clearly 1/γ 2 > I S /I D is the the desired regime where I 1 dominates I 2 . We notice that in I S expression there is an additional supression of E kq± comapred to I D which suggests that I 2 is supressed compared to I 1 . Appendix B: Appendixes-B After diagonalisation and filling the negative energy states we obtain the following ground state energy, The ground state energy of the superconductor is given below, Where E kq± = 1 √ 2 ). The Bogoliubov transformations for the present case can be written as follows. In the above we have used ( k = -k, σ = -σ). Also k = k + q, k = -k + q; q is the ordering momentum and u's are the elements of the eigen vectors of the Hamiltonian given in Eq. 12. Considering 'c' or 'f ' to be generally denoted by 'p' and +k or -k denoted by 'z', the expressions for all the u's can be written as One can check that the above expressions get simplified for m = 0 case and we only mention the non-zero elements below. Michael A. Neilson and Isacc L. Chuang Quantum Computations and Quantum Informations, Cambridge University Press (2003). 3 David P. DiVincenzo, Fortschr. Phys. 48, (2000) 9-11, 771-