Topological valley photonics has emerged as a new frontier in photonics with many promising applications. Previous valley boundary transport relies on kink states at internal boundaries between two topologically distinct domains. However, recent studies have revealed a novel class of topological chiral edge states (CESs) at external boundaries of valley materials, which have remained elusive in photonics. Here, we propose and experimentally demonstrate the topological CESs in valley photonic metamaterials (VPMMs) by accurately tuning on-site edge potentials. Moreover, the VPMMs work at deep-subwavelength scales. Thus, the supported CESs are highly confined and self-guiding without relying on a cladding layer to prevent leakage radiation. Via direct near-field measurements, we observe the bulk bandgap, the edge dispersions, and the robust edge transport passing through sharp corners, which are hallmarks of the CESs. Our work paves a way to explore novel topological edge states in valley photonics and sheds light on robust and miniaturized photonic devices. Originated from condensed-matter physics, the valley has provided a fundamentally novel degree of freedom (DOF) beyond amplitude, phase, and polarization, to manipulate light in photonics. When implementing the topological CESs in photonics, one inevitably encounters a big challenge: for photons, the vacuum or air behaves as a "conductor", giving rise to unavoidable radiation leakage to free space, especially when the photons' momenta at edges and in free space are comparable. Given the above demands, we propose and experimentally realize the topological CESs in valley photonic metamaterials (VPMMs) by accurately tuning the on-site edge potentials. Moreover, the designed VPMMs work at deep subwavelength scales--the unit cell size is around λ0/17, with λ0 being the operational free-space wavelength. Thus, the CESs are extremely confined and self-guiding, protected from radiation leakage. Such significantly squeezed CESs are also beneficial to miniaturization and integration of the topological photonic devices, which have been highly pursued but never been realized so far in valley photonics. We start with a metamaterial in a honeycomb lattice (see Figure When δnb = 0, our metamaterial possesses the inversion symmetry and time-reversal symmetry, hence generating a pair of Dirac points around K and K' valleys at 1.36 GHz. Note that the Dirac points are slightly deviated from the K and K' points due to the nearly-C6 symmetry (see more details in Supporting Information). For simplicity, we define the momenta of the Dirac degeneracy as K1 and K1' points. Upon breaking the inversion symmetry (for example, δnb = 0.17), the Dirac degeneracy is lifted, resulting in a bulk bandgap (1.31 GHz < f < 1.46 GHz), as depicted by the magenta curves in Figure , where δk = k-k1 is the displacement of wave vector k to K1 valley in momentum space, vD is the group velocity, σi (i = x, y, z) are elements in the Pauli matrices, and m is the effective mass term induced by the broken inversion symmetry. We also numerically derive the Berry curvatures around K1 and K1' points based on the first-principles calculation, which lead to non-trivial valley Chern numbers (see the Supporting Information). Figure  the CESs at K1 and K1' valleys are exactly opposite, which is a feature of valley-momentum locking property. In the following, we perform the experiments to characterize intriguing properties of the topological CESs. The experimental samples are fabricated using the standard printed circuit board (PCB) etching techniques (see Figure We first experimentally characterize the bulk and edge dispersions of the sample shown in Figure Next, we directly visualize the CESs by mapping the Hz fields. Figure Figure We have thus theoretically proposed and experimentally realized the robust CESs at the external boundaries of VPMMs by precisely tuning the on-site edge potentials. Via direct nearfield measurements, we demonstrate the bulk and edge dispersions, the robust transport through 120° sharp turns, and the smooth transition between two CESs. Such self-guiding CESs do not rely on internal boundaries or cladding layers to prevent radiation leakage, which can be used to design photonic devices with smaller footprints than those based on the conventional valley kink states. Besides, we expect that the realization of photonic CESs by tuning the on-site edge potentials could stimulate theoretical and experimental studies on novel photonic topological edge states by tailoring the unit cells globally or locally. Finally, the highly-confined CESs can find applications in miniaturized topological photonic devices, such as robust delay lines, We numerically simulate the bulk diagrams of the VPMMs in a finite-element method solver (COMSOL Multiphysics). The simulations of the topological CESs are performed in the eigenvalue module of CST Microwave Studio. For bulk (edge) dispersions calculations, periodic boundary conditions are applied on x and y axes of the unit cell (supercell) to form an infinite hexagonal (rectangular) lattice. The field patterns are performed in the time domain of CST Microwave Studio. We also consider the copper and the substrate as a perfect electric conductor (PEC) and a lossless medium in the simulations, respectively. The experimental samples are fabricated with the PCB technique by etching 0.035-mmthick copper cladding on 2-mm-thick dielectric substrates. One rectangular sample consists of Edge 1 and Edge 2 to support the bulk and edge transport. Besides, a triangular sample with Edge-1 boundaries and a rhombus sample with a 60-degree junction between Edge 1 and Edge 2 is fabricated. Feeding microstrips are fabricated along the external boundaries of the samples. A triangular coil-like detector is designed and fabricated with a magnetic resonance around 1.4 GHz to probe the excited modes (Figure In the measurement, a VNA (R&S ZVL13) is utilized to measure the amplitude and phase of the magnetic field. Two ports of the VNA are connected with a source and a detector, respectively. The coil-like detector is fixed at a robotic arm of a 3D movement platform (Linbou NFS03). The field distributions over the fabricated samples can be mapped out by probing both the amplitude and phase of the magnetic field point by point (Figure / 