To address the issues of superconducting and charge properties in high-T c cuprates, we perform a quantum Monte Carlo study of an extended three-band Emery model, which explicitly includes attractive interaction V OO between oxygen orbitals. In the physically relevant parameter range, we find that V OO acts to strongly enhance the long-range part of d-wave pairing correlation, with a clear tendency to form long-range superconducting order in the thermodynamic limit. Simultaneously, increasing |V OO | renders a rapid increase of the nematic charge structure factor at most of wavevectors, especially near q = (0, 0), indicating a dramatic enhancement of nematicity and charge density waves. Our findings suggest that the attraction between oxygen orbitals in high-T c cuprates is a common thread linking their superconducting and charge properties. Introduction-Superconductivity (SC) and mysterious pseudogap in high-T c cuprates have been the challenging issues in the condensed matter physics community Recently, Raman scattering spectroscopies of several copper oxides showed that with decreasing the hole doping density, the pseudogap energy scale increases in a similar manner to the doping dependence of the CDW and antinodal superconducting energy scales. In addition, the latter two have almost equal values over a substantial doping region. These observations revealed that the three energy scales may be governed by a common thread, and the CDW and d-wave SC are intimately related Tremendous theoretical attempts have been made to understand the d-wave SC, nematicity and CDW in high-T c cuprates based on the single-and multi-band models, but so far the answers remain highly controversial. First, both positive In this Letter, we study the superconducting and charge properties in the realistic three-band Emery model Our main results were obtained by the constrained-path Monte Carlo (CPMC) method Model and computational method-To understand the physics of CuO 2 plane, we adopt the following Hamiltonian, where H Emery and H attract stand for the standard three-band Emery model Here, d † iσ is the creation operator of a Cu 3d x 2 -y 2 hole and p † jσ is the creation operator of an O 2p x or 2p y hole. t i j pd = ±t pd and t jk pp = ±t pp are the NN Cu-O and O-O hybridizations, respectively, with the Cu and O orbital phase factors included in the sign. U d and ǫ denote the Coulomb repulsion at the Cu site and the charge-transfer energy. V OO stands for attraction between O sites separated by a Cu site, and the corresponding summation restriction is denoted by j, k . In units of t pd , we choose a physically relevant parameter set U d = 6.0, ǫ = 3.0, and t pp = 0.5, while V OO is varied from 0.0 to -0.6. Our calculations were performed on the square lattices of N = L × L unit cells with periodic boundary conditions imposed using the CPMC method The d-wave pairing correlation is defined as: where The vertex contribution to the pairing correlation is given by, where C ′ (R) is the bubble contribution from the dressed (interacting) propagator , where N ′ is the number of hole pairs with R > 2.0. To understand the charge property, we compute the nematic charge correlation N d (R) and corresponding structure factor N d (q), which are defined as, Here, the minus sign in Eq. ( To determine whether the d-wave SC exists in the extended three-band Emery model, we examine the evolution of pairing correlation and its vertex contribution with the lattice size. In Fig. Nematicity and CDW-Next, we turn to discuss the effect of V OO on the charge property. Fig. In high-T c cuprates, the C 4 rotational symmetry of CuO 2 plane can be broken by a transition from tetragonal to orthorhombic structure. To address the effect of symmetry breaking, we mimic the orthorhombic distortion by modifying the Cu-O hybridization as: |t i j pd | = (1 ± α)t pd , where +(-) applies if the Cu-O bond shrinks (stretches) by α. Fig. We observe that increasing α from 0.00 to 0.03 results in an enhancement of N d (q) at q = (0, 0), but does not affect other ones at nonzero q ′ s. The overlap of curves for different α in Fig. Conclusion-We have studied the superconducting and charge properties of high-T c cuprates within the extended three-band Emery model by using the CPMC method. The simulation results show that it is hard to establish the d-wave SC and charge order in the standard three-band Emery model. Upon turning on the attraction between oxygen orbitals, we observe a strong enhancement for both d-wave pairing correlation and nematic charge structure factor at zero and finite wavevectors, which leads to simultaneous development of d-wave SC, nematicity, and CDW. This finding provides a natural explanation for recent Raman scattering experiments, where it was found that the energy scales of d-wave SC, CDW, and pseudogap seem to be governed by a common microscopic interaction This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 11674087 and No. 11734002). We acknowledge partial support from NSAF U1930402.