The inability of conventional methods to completely remove the contaminants from pharmaceutical effluents led us to study the effect of Electron Beam (EB) irradiation on real pharmaceutical wastewater. In this paper, the samples from different stages of existing treatment facilities of industry are irradiated with varying doses from 25 to 200 kGy. The study aimed to find a suitable combination of EB and conventional treatments for efficient degradation of complex pharmaceutical effluent. It has been successfully demonstrated that electron beam irradiation when combined with conventional techniques like coagulation before or after the irradiation improves the efficiency of the process, resulting in lower Chemical Oxygen Demand (COD). In this investigation, the maximum COD reduction was found to be around 65 percent. The water crisis across the world is now a reality. Climatic changes are not the only reason for this crisis, but a great part of it is primarily due to the non-sustainable use of our natural resources. To make matters worse, the population growth with rapidly growing standards of living have further introduced new pollutants called Contaminants of Emerging Concern (CECs) that include micro-pollutants, endocrine disruptors (EDs), pesticides, pharmaceuticals, hormones, toxins, and synthetic dyes The OH radical is one of the most potent oxidising agents, reacting with many organic impurities with high reaction rate. It mineralises, decomposes, polymerizes, and detoxifies the impurities in wastewater To investigate the efficacy of the EBT in real life situations, samples from different stages of a wastewater treatment plant of a pharmaceutical industry were collected. As mentioned earlier, the EBT works better in conjunction with conventional methods. Depending on the type of effluent, sometimes EBT works better if it precedes the conventional treatment and sometimes if it follows the conventional treatment. In order to investigate whether this order affects the final outcome in our case, we have chosen three samples from different stages of their treatment plant (as outlined in section 2.1). Samples for the present study were collected from a pharmaceutical industry that contains heavy and sizable molecular compounds, primarily organic chemicals, heavy aromatic compounds such as phenol and its derivatives, acids, esters, and heterocyclic compounds. The industry has its own wastewater purification scheme with two different streams. Each stream has different stages of treatment as shown in figure All the solutions that were needed for the COD estimation, as per the APHA manual, were prepared in deionized water Sulphamic acid was used for nitrite free COD estimation as it was observed that nitrite interferes with the estimation of COD (Ferraz, Yuan (2017)). Sulphamic acid concentration required is 10 times the nitrite amount in sample as per the APHA manual Irradiation of effluent samples was performed using a 6 MeV, S-band standing wave side coupled, normal conducting, pulsed linac, situated at Society of Applied Microwave Electronics Engineering and Research (SAMEER) in IIT Bombay campus. The average electron beam current during experiments was 16 μA. In order to optimize the dose deposition in the effluent, a detailed Fluka-Flair simulations were carried out (Battistoni et al. ( Alignment: The accelerator is basically designed for cancer treatment which delivers a pencil beam of radius 6 mm. Due to the pencil beam the dose deposition was not uniform as shown in figure Fluka-Flair simulations were carried out with the same geometry as that during the experiments to determine the absorbed dose in the sample. Dose associated with the irradiation time is given in the Table The irradiation of this waste water by electron beam generates the most reactive specie i. The rate constant of OH radicals for many organic compounds are around 10 6 10 10 mol -1dm 3 s -1 (Buxton et al. ( 