Magic angle twisted trilayer graphene (TTG) has recently emerged as a new platform to engineer strongly correlated flat bands. Here, we reveal the structural and electronic properties of TTG using low temperature scanning tunneling microscopy at twist angles for which superconductivity has been observed. Real trilayer samples deviate from their idealized structure due to a strong reconstruction of the moiré lattice, which locks layers into near-magic angle, mirror symmetric domains comparable in size to the superconducting coherence length. The price for this magic relaxation is the introduction of an array of localized twist angle faults, termed twistons. These novel, gate-tunable moiré defects offer a natural explanation for the superconducting dome observed in transport and provide an avenue to probe superconducting pairing mechanisms through disorder tuning. The prediction of a magic angle in twisted trilayer graphene (TTG) (1,2), at which electrons lose their kinetic energy, laid out a promising pathway to extend the moiré paradigm into three dimensions. This was soon followed by measurements of superconductivity and field dependent quantum interference (3-5), making TTG the only moiré heterostructure outside of magic angle twisted bilayer graphene (MATBG) to exhibit signatures of both a superconducting transition and macroscopic quantum phase coherence. It has been proposed, since both TTG and MATBG share the unique attribute of two-fold rotational symmetry C 2z , that this symmetry is essential to establishing superconductivity in twisted graphenes (4, 6). In fact, superconductivity in TTG appears to be even more robust than in MATBG, with T c reaching up to 2.9K in the first generation of devices. This has led to speculation that magic angle TTG is structurally more stable than MATBG, locking experimental devices into a mirror symmetric configuration that possesses the crucial C 2z symmetry. Theoretical works have proposed several exotic orders for the mirror symmetric configuration, including spontaneous flavor-symmetry breaking, nematic superconductivity, and spin triplet pairing TTG is formed by consecutively stacking three layers of graphene so that the bottom layer (B) is rotated at an angle θ BM relative to the middle layer (M) and the top layer (T) is rotated at an angle θ T M relative to the middle layer (Fig. Several obstacles can stand in the way of achieving perfect mirror symmetry. Despite stateof-the-art fabrication techniques, the highest quality TTG heterostructures will inevitably have a small mismatch between θ T M and θ BM over macroscopic length scales, as was the case in at least one superconducting device (4). In the limit of perfectly rigid graphene layers (i.e., neglecting lattice relaxation), such a misalignment will produce a beating pattern between the top-middle (TM) and bottom-middle (BM) moirés at "moiré of moiré" wavelength Λ ∼ a/δ θ , where δ θ = |θ T M -θ BM | (Fig. The emergent structures of the trilayer moirés in these two regions are distinguished by their different symmetry classes, as visualized by their predicted topographic profiles in Fig. In this work, we utilize the atomic scale imaging capabilities of ultra-high vacuum scanning tunneling microscopy and spectroscopy (STM/S) at temperatures from 4.8K to 7.2K to directly characterize the electronic structure of magic angle TTG. Our devices are fabricated using the "cut and stack" technique and electrical contact is made with a pre-placed graphite finger to which Field's metal μ-solder is subsequently affixed (Fig. The corresponding angle mismatch δ θ ∼ a/Λ for this region is ∼ 0.2 • , which is nearly identical to the mismatch of ∼ 0.3 • measured in a superconducting TTG device The absence of AtB domains in a sample with nonzero angle mismatch δ θ implies that TTG undergoes a reconstruction on the scale of the moiré lattice that favors the lower energy Remarkably, for Λ 30 nm, the average twist angle within each domain (θ I ) saturates to a common value of ∼ 1.5 • that is independent of the relative orientation of the top and bottom layers (Fig. This suggests a natural tendency for TTG to locally lock to the mirror symmetric magic angle structure while "absorbing" twist angle inhomogeneity at the larger moiré of moiré length scale. This does not, however, come at zero cost. The effect of the MLR on the local electronic structure is profound, as evidenced by the Fermi level local density of states (LDOS) map presented in Fig. In Fig. We can examine the role of interactions in determining the band structure of TTG by comparing the experimental spectrum with continuum model As noted above, tuning V g away from zero produces systematic changes in the intensities, separation, and widths of the VHSs. In Fig. In order to isolate and better visualize this reconfiguration of the band structure, we plot in Fig. The inherent electron-hole asymmetry of our spectrum implies that the hole-and electrondoped parent states correspond to highly distinct Fermi surfaces. Whereas the chemical potential lies roughly within the VB VHS in the hole doped parent state, it sits ∼ 10 meV above the CB VHS in the electron doped parent state. The resulting enhancement of the Fermi level density of states for hole doping may explain the comparative robustness of the hole doped superconducting dome observed in transport, however it also implies that there is no clear correlation between the precise Fermi surface of the parent state and where in the phase diagram superconductivity has been observed. A simple hypothesis to alleviate this apparent discrepancy, and to which we appeal below, is that the MLR is instrumental in determining the boundaries of the superconducting phase. Having analyzed the electronic structure at the sub-Λ length scale, we now turn to a detailed study of the MLR at twist angles near those for which robust superconductivity has been observed These observations indicate that the local electronic structure of TTG at small but finite δ θ is primarily determined by the local values of heterostrain and twist angle given by the MLR. Twist angle disorder in TTG does not, therefore, result in a smooth and continuous fluctuation of the electronic structure, as it does in MATBG The expectation that small twist angle disorder in TTG leads to a spontaneous segregation into domains with distinct local twist angles, and hence distinct electronic structures, is borne out by structural relaxation calculations We can explore the implications of this structural and electronic inhomogeneity for the correlated states at partial fillings by performing STS measurements as a function of V g . Figs. 4A and 4B show characteristic filling dependent spectroscopy measured on AAA sites of the magic moiré and twiston respectively. Full filling of the moiré superlattice can be identified as the carrier density at which the derivative of the chemical potential, dμ/dn, undergoes a rapid steplike increase, indicated by the yellow arrow in Fig. In spectroscopic measurements, correlation induced states typically appear as spectral gaps centered on the Fermi level that emerge and disappear as a function of induced carrier density We now reexamine the parent state out of which superconductivity emerges in the context of the observed MLR. The differential rates of band filling on the regions of the Λ-modulation (Fig. At |ν| 3, the flat band resonance is abruptly destroyed as the magic moiré VHS is doped past full filling and swept rapidly away from the Fermi level, consistent with a sharp boundary to the superconducting state on the overdoped side. We can gain further insight into the nature of the parent state by examining the effect of the flat band resonance on the real space electronic structure through doping-dependent LDOS mapping. Figs. 4G-I show LDOS maps acquired at the Fermi level for the three carrier densities marked by arrows in Fig. As we tune the carrier density towards the flat band resonance, however, the LDOS maps become increasingly homogeneous (Figs. V g provides a means to systematically tune electronic disorder, thereby toggling between clean and dirty limits. The interpretation of transport measurements in light of this behavior can lead to significant insights concerning the nature of the superconducting phase. In particular, the cooccurrence of the flat band resonance condition, with its resulting minimization of electronic disorder, and optimal doping for superconductivity strongly suggests that the superconducting phase boundary along the doping axis is disorder driven. This has certain implications for the symmetry of the superconducting order parameter (30). In conventional s-wave superconductors the order parameter is robust against the presence of non-magnetic impurities, a result known as Anderson's theorem At zero magnetic field the superconducting transition in TTG exhibits a single sharp drop in resistivity 