Spatial light modulators (SLMs) are the most relevant technology for dynamic wavefront manipulation. They find diverse applications ranging from novel displays to optical and quantum communications. Among commercial SLMs for phase modulation, Liquid Crystal on Silicon (LCoS) offers the smallest pixel size and, thus, the most precise phase mapping and largest field of view (FOV). Further pixel miniaturization, however, is not possible in these devices due to inter-pixel cross-talks, which follow from the high driving voltages needed to modulate the thick liquid crystal (LC) cells that are necessary for full phase control. Newly introduced metasurface-based SLMs provide means for pixel miniaturization by modulating the phase via resonance tuning. These devices, however, are intrinsically monochromatic, limiting their use in applications requiring multi-wavelength operation. Here, we introduce a novel design allowing small pixel and multi-spectral operation. Based on LC-tunable Fabry-Perot nanocavities engineered to support multiple resonances across the visible range (including red, green and blue wavelengths), our design provides continuous 2π phase modulation with high reflectance at each of the operating wavelengths. Experimentally, we realize a device with 96 pixels (~1μm pitch) that can be individually addressed by electrical biases. Using it, we first demonstrate multi-spectral programmable beam steering with FOV~18o and absolute efficiencies exceeding 40%. Then, we reprogram the device to achieve multi-spectral lensing with tunable focal distance and efficiencies ~27%. Our design paves the way towards a new class of SLM for future applications in displays, optical computing and beyond. Spatial light modulators (SLMs) Recently, a novel approach to realize SLM devices has emerged by using actively tunable metasurfaces As the phase retardation comes from the metasurface itself and the LC acts only as a tunable environment, its thickness can be significantly reduced, in turn helping to shrink the pixel size Here, we introduce a novel SLM that employs LC-tunable Fabry-Perot (FP) nanocavities as pixels, to simultaneously address the limitations of conventional LC-SLMs, as well as those of metasurface-based ones. Previously, this type of structure, in the non-miniaturized version, has been used to realize tunable filters Figure The device comprises two sets of conducting electrodes: a thin layer (23nm) of indium-tin-oxide (ITO) on top, serving as a common electrode and a set of linear pixelated electrodes formed by patterning a 150nm thick layer of Aluminum (Al) at the bottom (two of which are schematically shown in Fig. The two partially reflective mirrors on top and bottom that form the cavity, as shown in Figure where n is the refractive index of the layer and λ the optimization wavelength. In particular, the thicknesses in each DBR (upper & lower) are adjusted such that the DBRs exhibit high reflectance across the whole visible wavelength range (400 nm -800 nm). The detailed description of the optimization can be found in Methods, and the simulated reflectance in Supplementary For the experimental demonstration of our FP-SLM, we fabricated a device consisting of 96 (linear) electrodes, which can be addressed individually. Each electrode has a width of w = 1 μm and is separated from the neighboring pixel by a gap G = 140 nm, resulting in a pixel pitch of P = 1.14 μm (Figure To characterize our device, we first corroborate that all electrodes of the fabricated device can be individually controlled by biasing each of them (square waveform input, 10Vrms at 1 kHz) and looking at the induced intensity modulation under white light illumination in a crossed polarizer-analyzer configuration, where the LC is aligned at 45 degrees with respect to the polarizer. In this situation, the electrodes should become dark after the LC is reoriented vertically upon biasing. We find that all the electrodes are working well, as shown in Supplementary Video S1. Then, we remove the analyzer and measure the reflectance spectrum (see Methods for the details on the characterization setup) when the LC director is parallel to the polarization direction and no voltage is applied to the device. To demonstrate the capability of wavefront control at the individual pixel level, we first program the FP-SLM as a tunable-angle beam steering device. To do so, different voltage profiles are applied to the 96 electrodes so as to create 0-2π linear phase gradients in periodically repeated super-cells. The size of these super-cells determines the diffraction angle (θ ), which, for the first (±1) orders, follows the simple formula 1 θ = ±sin (λ/nP), where n is the number of pixels comprising the super-cell. When a 0-2π linear phase profile is mapped in this super-cell, the energy channels into a single diffraction order (+1 or -1, depending on the sign of the slope of the gradient), resulting in beam steering. We first show in Figure Importantly, this is possible at all selected operating wavelengths of the device (see Supplementary Figures An important feature of the FP-SLM is the fine, continuous control over the phase and the minimized coupled amplitude, which allows to achieve high efficiency levels. This is shown in the top panels in Figures and almost completely disappears for three-pixels (not shown here), which we take as the limit at which the device stops working. Ultimately, this translates into a maximum field of view ~18o (in the red region), corresponding to the 4-pixels case. For completeness, the simulated beam steering efficiencies are shown in Supplementary Figure Finally, to demonstrate the versatility of the FP-SLM, we re-program it to act as a tunable cylindrical lens. For that, the electrodes are configured to impart a position-dependent phase profile following the formula: where x is the distance to the center of the lens (i.e. the center of the device) and f is the lens focal distance. First, we show that by reconfiguring the device, it is possible to focus light at the same focal distance for all the three operating wavelengths (blue, orange and red). Following Eq. ( In summary, we have proposed an architecture to realize phase-only, multispectral reflective SLMs with reduced pixel size. The device consists of an array of FP nanocavities infiltrated with LCs, which can be individually biased to provide continuous 2π phase modulation with high associated reflectivity at RGB wavelengths. By using the phase modulation associated with the FP resonance spectral shifts, we uncouple it from the physical thickness of the LC, which can be reduced down to 530nm only. This allows us to dramatically reduce the inter-pixel cross-talk, enabling miniaturization of the pixel size down to ~1 μm. We demonstrate the concept by realizing a fully programmable device with 96 linear electrodes that can be individually addressed. First, we employ it to perform dynamic beam steering, achieving peak efficiencies >40% and a maximum FOV of ~18°. Then, we reconfigure our device to realize fixed focal distance lensing for the different operating wavelengths with efficiencies ranging from 16% to27% for NA=0.1. The same device is then used to tune the focal distance at a given wavelength, demonstrating NAs from 0.09 to 0.15. Our design could be readily extended to two dimensional SLM devices by using standard CMOS technology for integrated circuits and is amenable to other electro-optical tuning mechanisms. Moreover, we foresee that the voltage and crosstalk could be further reduced, and consequently also the pixel size, if the electrodes (or at least the top one) would be placed inside the cavity formed by the dielectric mirrors, or if one would require single wavelength operation. We believe that the proposed design methodology will have wide implications in the field of ultrahigh resolution dynamic wavefront control, with numerous applications in diverse fields, ranging from solid-state LiDAR to AR/VR and holographic displays, optical communications or quantum computing, to mention some. Reflectance spectra for the FP-SLM. In red, simulated reflection assuming h = 530 nm and θ = 90o. In blue, the measured spectra when no bias is applied to the device. (e) Simulated and (f) measured reflectance spectra as a function, respectively, of θ and bias applied (V ). In the experiment, all pixels are simultaneously biased. For the simulation of the full FP-SLM system, Periodic Boundary Conditions (PBC) are applied in x & y directions, mimicking a single unit cell, and two PML layers are then placed on the top and bottom in the z-direction. The incident light travels through the device along z-direction with the electric field polarized along the x-direction and is then reflected back through different layers. The reflected light is then collected using a plane monitor above the topmost layer of the device. The reflected phase is calculated by averaging over the electric fields recorded at the monitor. The device fabrication starts with sputtering a 150 nm thick Al on an 8 inch silicon wafer with a 1 μm thick thermal SiO2 layer using physical vapor deposition system (AMAT Endura). The wafer is then diced into 20×20 mm substrates. Next, the deposited Al is patterned to create the linear electrodes and fan-outs. The electrodes in the active region are fabricated using electron beam lithography (Elionix ELS-7000) using ZEP-520A-7 positive electron beam (EB) resist, followed by reactive ion etching (RIE, Oxford OIPT Plasma Lab) of Al using chlorine (Cl2) gas and boron trichloride (BCl3), and EB resist as a mask. The electrode fan-outs are fabricated using Photolithography (EVG 62008 Infinity) using positive photoresist S1811, followed by wet etching of Al using the photoresist as a mask. The bottom DBR consists of six pairs of TiO2/SiO2 among which the bottom most layer, i.e. SiO2, is first deposited using an ion assisted deposition tool (IAD, Oxford Optofab3000), and then followed by planarization by spin coating a 600 nm thick flowable oxide layer (FOX 24) and subsequent RIE using C4F8 gas to achieve the desired thickness (during the process, FOX 24 layer is completely etched). The rest of the 11 layers of the DBR stack are then deposited using the same deposition tool. The bottom substrate is then attached to a printed circuit board (PCB) and 96 electrodes are wire-bonded using 1 mil gold wires (where: 1 mil = 0.001 inch). A polymer adhesive is used to encapsulate the wires. The top DBR, which consists of six alternate layers of TiO2 and SiO2, is deposited using the same deposition tool on an ITO-glass with uniform ITO layer (23 nm). A layer of polyimide is then spin coated on the top substrate, followed by curing at 150 °C for 30 minutes on a hot plate. The cured slides are then rubbed unidirectionally with a piece of soft velvet clothes to define a preferred liquid crystal alignment direction. The rubbing strength is controlled by a commercially available rubbing machine (Holmarc Opto-Mechatronics -HO-IAD-BTR-03). The LC cell is assembled by pressing the top (25 mm × 5 mm) against the bottom substrate (20 mm × 20 mm) using homemade press equipped with a multi-point optical profilometer. The resultant cell thickness is defined by a UV adhesive, a spacer and the pressure applied. The cell thickness is measured using a spectrometer. The nematic liquid crystal QYPDLC-001C is then encapsulated into the cell through capillary filling. The device is checked with a microscope under crossed polarizer-analyzer configuration, when the LC alignment is parallel to the polarizer to ensure the uniform extinction of LC in the gap and on the electrodes of the device. Incident light from a halogen lamp is linearly polarized perpendicular to the 96 discrete Al Similarly, in the lensing experiments the spectrally resolved real space is imaged at different distances from the device. The voltages at the 96 electrodes are set using a Texas Instruments (TI) 96-channel, 12-bit digital-to-analog converter (DAC) chip on an evaluation board (DAC60096EVM). The board is addressed by an ESP 32 microcontroller (MCU) via serial peripheral interface (SPI). The MCU, in turn, is connected to a CPU via "universal asynchronous receiver-transmitter" (UART), so that the voltage patterns can be ultimately set and optimized in a python program (see section "Device performance optimization" below for the optimization method). The phase retardation φ of the device is measured at different applied voltages and at different wavelengths with a Michelson interferometer using a temporal phase-shift approach and five step phase retrieval algorithm (where I denotes the intensity) and are used to calculate the wrapped phase map according to a five-step phase retrieval algorithm as shown in equation below. For the five-step algorithm, the phase shift step between two adjacent frames should be 0.5 π, corresponding to the piezo stage moving a distance of quarter (1/4) of the wavelength. As it is a reflection geometry, the light path is doubled, therefore the moving step is one-eighth (1/8) of the wavelength. After the wrapped phase is obtained with the algorithm, it is filtered with a sin-cos filter and unwrapped to obtain the final phase map of the device. A local reference isolated from the electrodes (and hence providing a constant phase irrespective of the applied voltage), is used to calculate the relative phase-change in the area of interest. Properties of the fabricated devices can naturally differ slightly from the intended device design, especially in prototype development. Demonstrating the full potential of a new technology can become challenging if these differences reduce efficiency and are not compensated for. While our device is fairly close to its design, in Fig. Representative results on the obtained optimized voltages are shown in Fig. The aforementioned slight inter-pixel crosstalk and natural fabrication imperfections can be even a bigger challenge for more complex functionalities than beam steering. While for beam steering, optimization parameters are reduced to the supercell size, a drastic reduction of parameters is not possible for e.g. optimizing a lens profile. Symmetry would allow to half the number of electrodes, but 48 optimization parameters is still too much for a real time optimization in our experiments. Therefore, we demonstrate the readiness of our device by realizing efficient lensing without numerical optimization, purely based on knowledge about the phase profile according to formula (2) in the main text and dependence of resonance position and resulting phase from the set voltages. The voltage patterns used for the lensing experiments are provided in Fig. 