The realization of spin-orbit coupling (SOC) in ultracold atoms has triggered an intensive exploring of topological superfluids in the degenerate Fermi gases based on mean-field theory, which has not yet been reported in experiments. Here, we demonstrate the topological phase transitions in the system via the numerically exact quantum Monte Carlo method. Without prior assumptions, our unbiased real-space calculation shows that spin-orbit coupling can stabilize an unconventional pairing in the weak SOC regime, in which the Fulde-Ferrell-Larkin-Ovchinnikov pairing coexists with the Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer pairing. Furthermore, we use the jumps in the spin polarization at the time-reversal invariant momenta to qualify the topological phase transition, where we find the critical exponent deviated from the mean-field theory. Our results pave the way for the searching of unconventional pairing and topological superfluids with degenerate Fermi gases. Spin-orbit coupling (SOC) has triggered extensive concerns in condensed matters and ultracold atoms for its essential role in many exotic phenomena, especially for the realization of topological phases such as topological insulator The ultracold atoms also provide a clean and ideal platform to study the unconventional pairings and related phenomena in the Fermi gases By the tuning of the Fermi surfaces from the SOC and in-plane Zeeman field, which breaks the inversion symmetry In this manuscript, we extend the mean-field study of the superfluid phase to the numerically exact quantum Monte Carlo (QMC) method Our results show that the ratio of Zeeman field h and SOC strength λ play an important role in determining the pairing properties, from the FFLO pairing in the small λ /h limit to the BCS pairing in the large λ /h limit. We present a strong evidence that the FFLO+BCS phase is stabilized between two limits. In large SOC regime, we characterize the topological properties of the superfluids by spin polarization at time-reversal-invariant momenta. We investigate the phase diagram and find the critical exponent associated with the scaling is different from the result given by the mean-field study. The topological superfluids have not yet been realized in experiments. Our results provide strong evidences for the realization of topological superfluids with the current available interactions in experiments, thus pave the way for the realization of these exotic superfluids with degenerate Fermi gases using the state-of-art setups. We start with the Rashba spin-orbit coupled Fermi gas loaded on a 2D square optical lattice which can be described by the following fermionic Hubbard Hamiltonian: where c † i i is and c i i is are the creation and annihilation operators for fermions at site r r r i i i with spin s = (↑, ↓). n i i i = ∑ s n i i is is the total density operator in real space on site r r r i i i with n i i is = c † i i is c i i is . The hopping amplitude between the nearestneighbor sites i i i, j j j is t, which we take equal to unity to set the energy scale. ê e e i i i, j j j is the unit vector connecting sites r r r i i i and r r r j j j . σ σ σ = (σ x , σ y , σ z ) are the Pauli matrices. λ and U(U > 0) stand for Rashba SOC strength and the strength of on-site attractive interaction. μ and h are the chemical potential and Zeeman field, respectively. The desired filling factor n = ∑ i i is n i i is /N on an N-site periodic supercell lattice is obtained by tuning the chemical potential μ, where . . . is the thermodynamic average as defined in Eq. ( To investigate the effect of SOC on the pairing properties, we measure the pair momentum distribution as the Fourier transform of the pairing correlation 39, 50-52 : where ∆ † i i i = c † i i i↑ c † i i i↓ creates a singlet pair at the site r r r i i i and k k k is the momentum. This distribution has a simple interpretation. For BCS pairing, it exhibits peaks at zero momentum; while for FFLO pairing between |k k k, ↑ and The pair momentum distribution is shown in Fig. where k k k F↑ and k k k F↓ are the Fermi momenta of spin-↑ and -↓ Fermi circles, respectively. This nonzero momentum peak indicates the stability of the FFLO pairing in the system As shown in Fig. The exotic pairing arises from the dramatic change of spin texture induced by competition between SOC and Zeeman field To investigate the stability of the exotic FFLO+BCS pairing, we show how the Zeeman field and filling factor change the n pair . In Fig. The system can realize the topological nontrivial superfluid states which break the time-reversal symmetry. The topological nontrivial phase is chiral superfluid phase, which can be characterized by winding number defined from the Green's function at all frequencies where the winding number W is zero for the topologically trivial phase and an nonzero integer for the topologically nontrivial phase. The winding number changes when the system undergoes a topological phase transition. The winding number can be simplified by the 'topological Hamiltonian', which depends only on the zero-frequency Green's function where δ n(K) = n ↓ (K) -n ↑ (K) is the spin polarization at the TRI momentum K. Prior to these results, we have verified that without SOC (setting λ = 0), the jump of spin difference at the TRI momenta is impossible, as expected for the standard BCS superfluids with W = 0. Meanwhile, without Zeeman field (see Fig. Fig. For small Zeeman field, the spin polarization δ n(K) at four TRI momenta are also zero and the superfluid phase is topologically trivial with zero winding number (W = 0). With increasing Zeeman field, the spin polarization at the four TRI momenta jumps from 0 into 1 and the superfluid becomes topologically nontrivial with nonzero topological invariant. We mark the unit spin polarization at the TRI momenta as stars in Fig. We also compare the QMC phase diagram with the phase diagram obtained from the mean-field approach (See Supplementary Material 59 ). There are some significant differences, outlined as following. (A) In the mean-field theory, the order parameter is destroyed when h > 3.8; however, in the QMC simulation, the superfluids can be survived even when h > 5. At half filling, a much larger Zeeman field is required to destroy the pairing. (B) At low filling (n ∼ 0), a finite Zeeman field (h ∼ 2) is required to destroy the pairing, while from QMC, the critical Zeeman field is proportional to the filling factor n. These quantitative difference may imply the limitation of the mean-field theory in the understanding of the topological superfluids in degenerate Fermi gases; and the qualitatively similarities between these two approaches shed light on the realization of the topological superfluids based on the current experimental setups. Topological phase transition and its associated scaling We find the magnetization, equivalent to δ n(0, 0), as a functions of Zeeman field for inverse temperature β = 4, 8, 12 with U = 4, λ = 1 and n = 0.4. The polarization increases from 0 into 1 as the increasing of the Zeeman field. The vertical lines with δ n(0, 0) = 0.5 defines the phase boundary h c = 1.64, 1.72 and 1.73 for respective temperatures. The inset shows the universal scaling law of spin polarization using Eq. 4, by which we obtain the critical exponent ν = 4/3 ± 0.1. The Green curve is the scaling function. To probe scaling near the phase transition, we measure the spin polarization m ≡ δ n(0, 0) at zero momentum as a function of Zeeman field for different temperature β = 1/k B T = 4, 8, 12 with filling factor n = 0.4 as shown in Fig. ) . Using the QMC result, the spin polarization as shown in insert of Fig. where we find critical exponent ν = 4/3 ± 0.1. In the limit of zero temperature(β → ∞), the sharp change of polarization becomes the discontinuous jump and the critical Zeeman field is h c = 1.74 ± 0.08. We have investigated the unconventional pairing and the topological phase transition in the spin-imbalanced spinorbit coupled Fermi gases by unbiased QMC simulation. We study the system at an experimentally accessible temperature. We find the SOC can enrich the properties of the pairing and stabilize the exotic FFLO+BCS pairing. The interplay between FFLO pairing and BCS pairing results from the change of spin texture on the Fermi surface due to the competition between the Zeeman field and the spin-orbit coupling. We develop the scheme to probe the topological phase transition in the QMC method by characterizing the jump of the spin polarization at time-reversal invariant momenta, in which the spin polarization can be measured in the ultracold-atom experiment directly. We find that with increasing the Zeeman field, topological phase transitions between topologically trivial superfluid phase and nontrivial phases occur, and we give the phase diagram. The 2D spin-imbalanced spin-orbit Fermi gas could be further explored with the numerically exact QMC method. One interesting direction would be to develop the method to probe the topological signature such as edge current or other unconventional orders and to further explore the topological aspect of FFLO+BCS phase. Moreover, it would also be beneficial to explore unconventional pairing in the presence of in-plane magnetic fields, and phase diagrams of other related systems. Our results lay the theoretical foundation for the understanding of these topological superfluids, and also for the detection of these interesting physics. Quantum Monte Carlo method is a numerically exact method for investigating strongly correlated systems. It is especially useful in 2D, as the system size and dimensionality cause problems in other techniques like exact diagonalization and density matrix renormalization group method. In this manuscript, we use the finite temperature determinant quantum Monte-Carlo (DQMC), whose correlation functions are given by Ô , where Ô is the measurable operator, β is the inverse temperature, and S is the action with φ i,τ the set of auxiliary fields in both spatial dimension and time dimension (please refer to literature for details To study SOC systems using DQMC Negative sign problem is an unsolved problem in the QMC method 