We demonstrate that polymer composites with a low loading of graphene, below 1.2 wt. %, are efficient as electromagnetic absorbers in the THz frequency range. The epoxy-based graphene composites were tested at frequencies from 0.25 THz to 4 THz, revealing total shielding effectiveness of 85 dB (1 mm thickness) with graphene loading of 1.2 wt% at the frequency f=1.6 THz. The THz radiation is mostly blocked by absorption rather than reflection. The efficiency of the THz radiation shielding by the lightweight, electrically insulating composites, increases with increasing frequency. Our results suggest that even the thin-film or spray coatings of graphene composites with thickness in the few-hundred-micrometer range can be sufficient for blocking THz radiation in many practical applications. The shielding of the electromagnetic (EM) energy in the Terahertz (THz) frequency range is important for both reducing EM interference among various devices and protecting humans. Here, we report the results of testing of the epoxy composites with the low loading of graphene, below 1.2 wt. %. The term graphene, in the context of composite studies, is used to identify a mixture of single layer graphene (SLG) and few layer graphene (FLG), with the thickness approximately below 20 atomic planes, and the micrometer-scale lateral dimensions. It is found that such graphene composites are efficient as electromagnetic absorbers in the THz frequency range. The THz radiation is mostly blocked by absorption rather than reflection. The efficiency of the THz radiation shielding by the lightweight, electrically insulating composites, increases with increasing frequency. Our results suggest that even the thin-film or spray coatings of graphene composites with thickness in the few-hundred-micrometer range can be sufficient for blocking THz radiation in many practical applications. Materials: For this work, we utilized commercially available graphene (xGnP®H-25, XG-Sciences, U.S.A.) to prepare the composites. The samples were prepared in the form of disks with a diameter of 25.6 mm and thicknesses from 0.9 mm to 1.0 mm. The sample thickness affects the total absorption and the total shielding efficiency of the composites. A scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image of graphene fillers and an optical photo of pristine epoxy and a representative graphene composite are shown in Figure The EMI shielding efficiency of the epoxy-based graphene composites were investigated using the Terahertz-Time Domain Spectroscopy (THz-TDS) system (Toptica Photonics AG). A schematic of the THz-TDS experimental setup is shown in the Figure The standard procedure involving measurements of the transmission, T, and reflection, R, coefficients commonly used in the S-matrix method Similarly, the reflection coefficient was determined by measuring the electric field, E ̂11s , reflected from the surface of the epoxy composite. The reference field, E ̂11s , was measured with the THz pulse reflected from the polished metallic plate, which is a good approximate of an ideal reflector in the THz band. An equivalent of Eq. ( The electric fields from Eqs. ( Compared with the standard definition of the absorption coefficient A = 1 -R -T, the modified definition describes the actual absorption of the composite material accounting for the fact that some part of the incident EM energy is always reflected from the surface of the sample. The total shielding effectiveness, SE T , and shielding via different mechanisms of reflection, SE R , and absorption, SE A , can be calculated knowing R and A eff as follows: 41 SE A = -10 log(1 -A eff ), SE T = SE R + SE A . Note that the shielding by reflection is negligible in all composites. The experiments have been conducted using an aluminum plate as a reference. The transmission coefficient, T, for the same set of samples is shown in Figure It is interesting to note that the slopes and the values of the transmission coefficient, T, and the shielding effectiveness, SET, are nearly the same for the composites containing 1.0 wt.% and 1.2 wt. % graphene at the frequencies below f = 0.4 THz. On the other hand, the slopes of SET curves corresponding to the samples containing 1.0 wt. % and 0.8 wt. % of graphene are the same for the frequencies f > 0.4 THz. Similar trends can be observed for the curves representing the shielding effectiveness related to the absorption, SEA (see Figure In conclusions, we have demonstrated that polymer composites with the low loading of graphene, below 1.2 wt. %, are efficient as electromagnetic absorbers in the THz frequency range. The epoxy-based graphene composites were tested up to 4 THz using the Terahertz-Time Domain Spectroscopy system. It was found that the graphene composites with 1 mm thickness have the total shielding effectiveness of ~85 dB at the frequency f = 1.6 THz. The THz radiation is mostly blocked by absorption rather than reflection. This is different from many other materials and composites used for EMI shielding. We have also observed changes in the transmission coefficient and the shielding effectiveness, which can be attributed to the frequency-dependent percolation effect. The efficiency of the THz radiation shielding by the lightweight, electrically insulating composites, increases with increasing frequency. We argue that even the thin-film or spray coatings of graphene composites with the thickness in the few-hundred-micrometer range can be sufficient for blocking THz radiation in many practical applications. The composite samples were prepared by mixing graphene flakes with epoxy using a high-shear speed mixer (Flacktek Inc., U.S.A. with the in-house designed elements 71 ) at 800 rpm and 2000 rpm each for 5 minutes. The mixture was vacuumed for 30 minutes. After that time, the curing agent (Allied High-Tech Products, Inc., U.S.A.) was added in the mass ratio of 12: 100 with respect to the epoxy resin. The compound was mixed and vacuumed one more time and left in the oven for ~2 hours at 70 °C in order to cure and solidify. ASSOCITED CONTENT ■