We study the emergence of superconductivity in rhombohedral trilayer graphene due purely to the long-range Coulomb repulsion. This repulsive-interaction-driven phase in rhombohedral trilayer graphene is significantly different from those found in twisted bilayer and trilayer graphenes. In the latter case, the nontrivial momentum-space geometry of the Bloch wavefunctions leads to an effective attractive electron-electron interaction; this allows for less modulated order parameters and for spinsinglet pairing. In rhombohedral trilayer graphene, we instead find spin-triplet superconductivity with critical temperatures up to 0.15 K. The critical temperatures strongly depend on electron filling and peak where the density of states diverge. The order parameter shows a significant modulation within each valley pocket of the Fermi surface. Introduction -Recently, superconductivity was experimentally observed in a three-layer graphene stack with rhombohedral (ABC) arrangement that is tunable by an applied interlayer bias Similar physics can also be found in three-dimensional (3D) rhombohedral graphite, which is a nodal line semimetal that has a flat electronic band at the top and bottom surfaces of a sufficiently wide stack Inspired by these observations, we analyze here the appearance of superconductivity in rhombohedral trilayer graphene (RTG). We assume that the only electronelectron coupling is via the long-range Coulomb interaction. We analyze the possibility of pairing using a diagrammatic technique, similar to the Kohn-Luttinger approach Tight-binding Hamiltonian -The 3D crystal structure of RTG is shown in Fig. γ0 γ1 γ2 γ3 γ4 δ ∆2 3.1 0.38 -0.015 0.29 0.141 -0.0105 -0.0023 Table where γ i are the hopping amplitudes, ∆ 1 is a potential difference between nearest neighbor layers which takes into account an external displacement field, ∆ 2 is the potential difference between the middle layer compared to mean potential of the outer layers, δ encodes an onsite potential which is only present at sites B 1 and A 3 since these two atoms do not have a neighbor on the middle layer, and u(k) = 1 + 2 cos (k x a/2) e -ikya √ 3/2 , v(k) = e ikya √ 3 u(k), with a = 2.46 Å is the lattice constant of graphene. The optimal values of the minimal tight-binding parameters, γ i and δ, have been reported in the literature The single-particle band structure corresponding to model (1) for ∆ 1 = 50 meV along a high-symmetry path of the Brillouin zone (BZ) is shown in Fig. is the area of one unit cell. We draw attention to the sizeable gap at the charge neutrality point (CNP) generated by the external electric field, and to the van Hove singularities at the gap's edges due to band flattening at K and K . See the Supplementary Information for more details on the non interacting band structure. Long-range Coulomb interaction and internal screening -To account for electron-electron interactions, we assume that two electrons separated by a distance r ex- perience a r -2 long-range Coulomb repulsion where e is the electron charge, 0 is the dielectric constant of vacuum, and is the relative dielectric constant of the environment. In this work, we set = 4, which reproduces accurately the screening by a substrate of hexagonal boron nitride (hBN). The parameter w 0 accounts for the local repulsion, which we set to w 0 = 17 eV following Ref. Screened potential, Vscr(q). The profiles are computed along the high-symmetry path shown in Fig. where q ∈ BZ, the sum runs over all positions R of the lattice, with periodic boundary condition imposed by the finite grid used to sample the BZ. In order to describe internal screening due to particlehole excitations, we use the static random phase approximation (RPA), leading to the usual renormalization of where Π(q) is the zero-frequency limit of the charge susceptivity, as given by where N c is the number of unit cells, n,k is the n-th band energy at wavevector k, ψ n,k is the corresponding six- and μ is the chemical potential. The factor of two in front of Eq. ( Superconductivity -Next, we assume that the interaction which leads to pairing in RTG is the long-range Coulomb interaction (Ref. The critical temperature for the onset of superconductivity in RTG can be obtained from the linearized gap equation Our framework is similar to the Kohn-Luttinger scheme We make use of the time-reversal symmetry of Hamiltonian (1), which implies ξ n,-k = ξ n,k and ψ m,-k = ψ * m,k . At a critical temperature, T c , the largest eigenvalue of the kernel Γ m1m2,n1n2 (k, k ) is 1. The corresponding eigenvector provides the symmetry of the OP. We diagonalize numerically the Kernel of Eq. ( Critical superconducting temperature -Fig. Symmetry of the superconducting order parameter -Finally, we study the superconducting order parameter. Fig. Conclusions -We have analyzed diagrammatically the existence of superconductivity in RTG. We assume that the leading electron-electron interaction is Coulomb repulsion. Our results show that this interaction is enough to induce superconductivity in RTG, although it cannot be excluded that other excitations can contribute 