Highly sensitive photodetectors with single photon level detection is one of the key components to a range of emerging technologies, in particular the ever-growing field of optical communication, remote sensing, and quantum computing. Currently, most of the single-photon detection technologies require external biasing at high voltages and/or cooling to low temperatures, posing great limitations for wider applications. Here, we demonstrate InP nanowire array photodetectors that can achieve single-photon level light detection at room temperature without an external bias. We use top-down etched, heavily doped p-type InP nanowires and n-type AZO/ZnO carrier selective contact to form a radial p-n junction with a built-in electric field exceeding 3x10 5 V/cm at 0 V. The device exhibits broadband light sensitivity and can distinguish a single photon per pulse from the dark noise at 0 V, enabled by its design to realize near-ideal broadband absorption, extremely low dark current, and highly efficient charge carrier separation. Meanwhile, the bandwidth of the device reaches above 600 MHz with a timing jitter of 538 ps. The proposed device design provides a new pathway towards low-cost, high-sensitivity, selfpowered photodetectors for numerous future applications. Photodetectors that operate at room temperature and without an external bias are of great utility, in particular, if they can achieve single-photon level sensitivity. Low dimensional III-V compound semiconductor nanostructures have shown tremendous potential for developing high-performance optoelectronic devices such as solar cells, LEDs, lasers, photodetectors, and single-photon emitters. For most optoelectronic devices, including those based on nanowires, the p-n junction serves as a fundamental building block and affects their functionality and performance. Currently, the most common method to achieve either axial or radial p-n junctions in III-V nanowires is through the bottom-up epitaxial growth, Here, we demonstrate a high sensitivity, self-powered, non-epitaxial InP nanowire photodetector that enables single-photon level detection at room temperature. We show that through the deposition of AZO/ZnO carrier selective contact on heavily p-type doped InP nanowires, a high built-in electric field of more than 10 5 V/cm is achieved at 0 V. At the same time, the diameter of AZO/ZnO/InP nanowire and array pitch size has been optimized to achieve near 100% absorption across a broad spectral regime from 350 to 850 nm for optimum device performance. In addition to single-photon level detection, the detector also demonstrates a high bandwidth of above 600 MHz with a timing jitter of 538 ps. We discuss the important technological implications of these devices, which will pave the way toward achieving lowcost nanowire-based self-powered, high sensitivity photodetectors for future applications. The nanowire arrays were fabricated by the top-down method through inductively coupled plasma (ICP) etching of a p + InP wafer. The ZnO and AZO layers were deposited sequentially onto nanowires to form the p-n junction. The detailed fabrication steps are presented in the experimental section. The cross-section structure of the fabricated nanowire photodetector, shown schematically in Figure One of the primary requirements for broadband spectral sensitivity in a photodetector is to achieve high absorption within the defined broadband spectral regime. Compared to their thinfilm counterparts, nanowire arrays are known to have significantly higher absorption, making them an ideal candidate for highly efficient solar cells and photodetectors. As revealed by previous studies, high absorption in a nanowire is due to an "optical antenna effect", Moreover, to form the radial p-n junction, we deposit a heavily n-type doped AZO/ZnO over the top-down etched p + -InP nanowire using atomic layer deposition with AZO acting as a transparent conductor and ZnO acting as an electron selective contact. As shown in Figure The most critical aspect of our photodetector device design is that it can achieve a built-in electric field of more than 10 5 V/cm at 0 V with a short depletion region width of ~ 40 nm. Figures As shown in Figure As a combined result of optical and electrical device design optimization, we achieved a very high quantum efficiency across a broad wavelength regime, as shown in Figure The corresponding spectral response can be calculated from EQE using equation 1, as follows: In the above equation, EQE is the external quantum efficiency, q is the electronic charge, h is Planck's constant, c and λ respectively are the speed and wavelength of light. The SR calculated using the equation is plotted in Figure As indicated by the simulation, the InP/ZnO/AZO core-shell structure has a large internal buildin electrical field within a ~ 40 nm depletion region, enabling low dark current and highly efficient charge carrier separation of photo-generated electron and hole, which is ideal for achieving ultra-high photo sensitivity in photodetectors. To confirm this, we performed the photocurrent measurements at incident optical power as low as single-photon level. Figure With a further increase of the reverse bias, the current rises slowly until the voltage approaches breakdown voltage of around -1.1 V, where the current increases drastically. It is worth noting that a small breakdown voltage is the direct evidence of an extremely high built-in electrical field formed in such a unique p-n nanowire structure. To focus on self-powered operation, the photocurrent response at 0 V under different incident powers are shown in Figure where α is the dimensionless exponent of the power law. Meanwhile, this photodetector also exhibits a large dynamic range and is able to distinguish the photon flux with power down to the level of picowatts. To further investigate single-photon detection capability, the incident light power was attenuated down to the sub-single photon per pulse. The photocurrent can still be resolved from The small difference between the quantum efficiency calculated in Figures Apart from the sensitivity, the temporal response is another critical parameter of a photodetector. Figure Moreover, the speed of the photodetector can be further improved. In our device, there may be a trade-off between depletion region width and device speed. As emphasized in the manuscript, central to our device's single-photon level detection performance is a high built-in electric field with a short depletion region width to achieve extremely low dark current and efficient carrier collection. This, however, on the contrary, could slow down the device's time response due to the high junction capacitance (which is inversely proportion to the depletion width) and diffusion limited photocurrent arising from the large neutral (zero-field) region outside the small depletion region. In the future, device optimization may be performed through: 1) reducing the NW doping to slightly increase the depletion region width; and/or 2) decreasing the NW diameter to ensure the absorption mainly to occur in the depletion region; and/or 3) adding a thin dielectric layer between InP and ZnO to reduce the junction capacitance without significantly reducing the built-in electric field. Through a good balance among above key device parameters, we believe that improved time response with even higher detection efficiency can be achieved in our self-powered NW photodetector. For applications in ultrafast optical communication and single photon counting, the timing jitter of the photodetector is another crucial criterion. The timing jitter is the uncertainty of timing information of captured arrival events due to the fluctuations of the output electrical signal. For photodetectors, the time from photon absorbed by semiconductor materials to the generated electrical current is not fixed owing to spatial variation of the electrical field and the finite transition time of the carriers within the device. To evaluate the timing jitter performance of the device, a mixed signal oscilloscope was used to collect the periodical output pulse traces at a fixed frequency of incident light excitation. Figure The self-powered photodetector presented in this paper is unique in several aspects, and we use this section to discuss the presented results, their implications, and future work. Firstly, central to the device's performance (i.e., sensitivity down to single-photon level) is a built-in electric field of more than 10 5 V/cm at 0 V and a small depletion region of ~ 40 nm that leads to extremely low dark current and highly efficient charge carrier separation. In conventional, heavily doped p-n homojunction, such a high built-in electric field would form a tunnel junction with an Ohmic behavior, which will lead to limited or no photodetection due to a very high leakage current. On the contrary, in the current device, even with a high built-in electric field, carrier selectivity and a large valence band offset ensure minimum leakage of holes from InP to ZnO, thereby keeping the dark current sufficiently low to enable single-photon detection. A brief comparison between our device (operated under self-powered condition) and some commercial devices (measured under optimum bias voltage) has also been provided in Table Furthermore, we would like to point out that the design and operation of such types of devices are not specific to InP and can be applied to other materials, thereby opening the possibility to fabricate self-powered, high-sensitivity photodetector for a broader wavelength regime beyond 1 μm. In particular, it would be interesting to explore the same device concept for Si and InGaAs, which are commercially more valuable than InP for photodetector because of their wide range of applications in silicon photonics and optical communications, respectively. In particular, the selective contacts for Si are way more advanced and well-studied for implementing such device design. In addition, Si can be more heavily doped than InP while maintaining very high quality with a carrier diffusion length exceeding several microns. Similarly, heavily doped Ga0.47In0.53As can be grown lattice matched on InP to realize similar radial junction nanowire array photodetector through top-down etching. In the future, it is also worth exploring the fabrication of a similar device structure by deposition of carrier selective contact over high-quality epitaxially grown nanowires. Since the epitaxially grown nanowires have much lower surface defect density than that of the top-down etched nanowires, interface recombination at the p-n junction can be significantly reduced, leading to higher detector responsivity and improved temporal response. Moreover, while MOCVD and MBE remain pivotal for the growth of complex structures (such as the ones consisting of different material compositions and doping levels), they suffer from high operational costs. We believe that a simple device structure such as the one reported in this work is expected to be more economical than epitaxially grown nanowire and planar photodetectors. For future application, a more detailed cost analysis is required to understand the cost vs. performance ratio of the proposed device in comparison to epitaxially grown III-V photodetectors. For future work, the nearest aim would be to push the limit of sensitivity down to femtowatt levels by reducing the dark current below 100 fA. This is a realistic proposition considering currently, for 4 mm 2 area, we measure a current of 25 pA. With a further reduction of the device area to 100 μm x 100 μm the current can be reduced to less than 60 fA. Nonetheless, there would still be challenges in measuring such small power, where the stability of laser and electromagnetic noises from the environment can become an issue. Moreover, our device's speed and timing jitter can be improved through a thorough optimization of device design and fabrication. In conclusion, we present high sensitivity radial p-n junction InP nanowire array photodetectors using carrier selective contact. The p-type InP nanowire arrays/n-type carrier selective contact (ZnO) device demonstrates the ability to detect single-photons at room temperature without an external bias, due to its high broadband absorption, extremely low dark current and efficient charge carrier separation enabled by a high internal built-in electrical field of more than 10 5 V/cm at zero bias. Moreover, the detectors also exhibit a high bandwidth of above 600 MHz with a timing jitter of 538 ps. Finally, we discuss the future work to improve device performance, and how these devices stand out from conventional devices and open up possibilities for developing low-cost, high-sensitivity, self-powered photodetectors for future applications in remote sensing, space exploration, wireless environmental monitoring, and medical diagnostics. Device fabrication: The device fabrication started with InP nanowire etching using an ICP-RIE instrument (Samco RIE-400iP) at 180 o C using 1.5/25 sccm of SiCl4/Ar gases at a chamber pressure of 0.1 Pa, with the RF/ICP powers of 50/200 W. The pattern for InP nanowire etching was generated using a Raith 150 Two Electron Beam Lithography (EBL) system, and Cr/SiO2 is used as a mask. Next, the InP nanowires were planarized by spin coating diluted SU-8, and any surface coverage due to spin coating was removed using an oxygen plasma maintained at 100 W for 2 minutes. Next, ZnO followed by AZO was deposited in an ALD system. For all ALD deposition, the chamber pressure was maintained at 9 Pa, with the carrier gas (N2) flow rate fixed at 150 sccm. At the same time, the pulse and purge times were fixed at 0.2 and 7 s, respectively. Next, the back contact (10 nm Zn/100 nm Au) was deposited in a sputter chamber and annealed at 400 o C in forming gas. Finally, 10 nm Ti/ 100 nm Au was deposited as the front contact. Photocurrent measurement: Dark and photocurrent measurements were performed with a fiber coupled Fianium Supercontinuum laser and a Keysight B2902A precision source. A 99:1 fiber beam splitter was used to attenuate the laser intensity and the output laser power was calibrated by measuring the 99% fiber arm in real-time. The attenuated laser beam was sent into a customized microscope system where ambient light had been blocked. The current-voltage measurement was taken in a single sweep, with the sweep direction always from positive to negative voltage. The attenuated laser power in terms of photon per pulse is calculated as follows. Photon energy conversion: The photon number can be estimated by the equation: where P is the excitation power, f is the laser repetition rate, λ is the incident light wavelength, h is the Planck's constant and c is light speed. For the laser repetition rate of 20 MHz, the total photon energy amounts to 5.68 x 10 -12 J/s, which is equivalent to 5.68 pW of laser power. In other words, 5.68 pW of laser power (@700 nm) corresponds to a single photon per pulse with a pulse repitition rate of 20 MHz (20x10 6 per seconds). Photocurrent temporal measurement: Temporal measurement was measured with Tektronix mixed signal oscilloscope 5 series and 1044/522 nm fs-laser, the frequency of which was doubled through a barium borate crystal. The measured device was directly connected to an oscilloscope with a 50 Ω input through an SMA cable without the application of any bias voltage.