A theoretical formalism of Andreev reflection is employed to provide theoretical support for distinguishing between the singlet pairing and the triplet pairing by the point contact Andreev reflection (PCAR) experiments. We utilize our theoretical curves to fit the data of the PCAR experiment on unconventional superconductivity in the Bi/Ni bilayer [arXiv:1810.10403] and find the Anderson-Brinkman-Morel (ABM) state satisfies the main characteristics of the experimental data. The chiral cross-section of the ABM state might explain well the broken time-reversal symmetry determined by the polar Kerr effect measurements and the time-domain THz spectroscopy in Bi/Ni bilayers. Moreover, the Andreev reflection spectra of the Balian-Werthamer state and the chiral p-wave state are also presented. At the interface of a normal metal (N) and a superconductor (S), incident electrons from the N side are reflected as holes and transmitted into the S side as Cooper pairs. This is the Andreev reflection (AR) As the well-known triplet pairing, the p-wave state was firstly found in the electrically neutral superfluid 3 He In this paper, we employ a theoretical formalism of AR by the four-component wave function to naturally obtain the singlet pairing case or the triplet pairing case. Our work provides theoretical support for point contact Andreev reflection (PCAR) experiments to distinguish between the singlet pairing and the triplet pairing. The AR conductance of singlet pairing superconductivity depends on spin polarization, but the case of triplet pairing superconductivity is not related to spin polarization. This paper is organized as follows. In Section II, our formalism is introduced briefly. In Section III, we follow the procedure of the formalism to obtain the results of the Anderson-Brinkman-Morel (ABM) state. In Section IV, by utilizing the theoretical curves to fit the data of the PCAR experiment on the unusual superconductivity of the epitaxial Bi/Ni bilayer, we find that the theoretical conductance spectra of the ABM state can describe well the main features of the experimental conductance spectra. In Section V, we discuss the AR for an arbitrary cross-section of the 3D gap of the ABM state. The chiral cross-section of the gap of the ABM state might explain well the polar Kerr effect measurements and the time-domain THz spectroscopy in the Bi/Ni bilayer. The discussion and conclusion will be given in Section VI. The plane wave at the normal metal side of the N-S junction can be expressed by using the four-component wave function where k and k + (k -) are wave vector components parallel and vertical to the N-S junction interface, respectively. The subscripts + and -denote the electron-like and hole-like quasiparticles, respectively. The dimensionless real number α is related to spin polarization P The wave function at the superconductor side is given by where the superscripts (+) and (-) denote electron-like and hole-like quasiparticles, respectively. u kss ′ and v kss ′ are coherence factors originating from the equation where s is the spin index. a ks is the electron's annihilate operator, and α ks ′ is the quasiparticle's annihilate operator. In this paper, we only consider the unitary solution of the superconductor. More details about Eq. (2) can be found in Appendix A. For simplification, we take q ± ≈ k ± ≈ k F cos θ N where k F is the Fermi wave vector size at the normal metal side, and θ N is the angle between the direction of the incident electron and the normal to the interface. The boundary conditions are given by For the ballistic transport, we utilize the 2D BTK model where is the transparency of the N-S interface and is a function of the incident angle θ N of the electron The 2D model for AR cannot fully describe the case of the 3D anisotropic gap and is only applicable to the case of the isotropic gap, such as the s-wave case, and a specific cross-section of the 3D anisotropic gap. The 3D model for AR can be applied to any k-dependent 3D order parameter and any shape of the Fermi surface Following the steps described above, one can obtain expressions for the coefficients a 1 , a 2 , b, c, and d of the s-wave and d-wave cases, which are consistent with Ref. Note that we have presented the part of our theoretical formalism in the supplementary materials of Ref. There are two important p-wave states in the triplet pairing case Here θ k and φ k are related to the spatial direction (θ k , φ k ) on the Fermi surface. More details about the ABM state can be found in Appendix B. The relation ∆(k) ∆ † (k) = ∆ 2 sin 2 θ k σ0 indicates that the ABM state belongs to the unitary solution. Thus its coherence factors are elements of matrixes ûk = 1 2 (1 + ǫ(k)/E k )σ 0 , and vk = ∆e We choose the coordinate system I in which the I x -I y plane lies in the N-S interface and the I z -axis points to the S side. We restrict the axis of symmetry of the ABM state's gap to the I x -I z plane, so the angle part of the axis of symmetry is (θ n , φ n ) ≡ (ω, 0). For instance, the form of the ABM state in Eq. ( The ABM state's gap is anisotropic in three dimensions, but we first study the gap's cross-section in the case of φ 0 = 0 to get a sense of it. The other parameter ω of this cross-section is free, and the corresponding form of the order parameter is given by ∓∆ sin(θ k ∓ ω)σ z with θ k , ω ∈ [0, π]. We apply the polar coordinates to this cross-section, with the polar angle measured from the positive I z -axis of the I x -I z plane, for simplification. We use θ q to denote this polar angle, with the vector q in this cross-section to avoid confusion. Therefore, the ABM state's order parameter projected onto this cross-section can be written as ∆ sin(θ q -ω)σ z with θ q ∈ [0, 2π]. The calculated coefficients a 1 , a 2 , b, c, and d in this crosssection case are listed in Table Before discussing the conductance spectra of the ABM state, we provide a physical understanding of the Andreev reflection conductance peak to help you understand the results of the PCAR experiments on the Bi/Ni bilayer. It was proposed that the conductance peak in the d-wave case originates from the bound states localized around the N-S interface. These bound states decay into the bulk For example, in the d-wave case of φ = π/4 (φ is explained in Fig. The ABM state is analyzed similarly. In the case of the cross-section of ω = 0 and φ 0 = 0, the incident quasiparticle of the pair potential ∆ + (∆ -) from the S side will not change the phase after being reflected by the interface, as shown in Fig. There is the highly unusual superconductivity discovered experimentally in epitaxial Bi/Ni bilayers The normalized conductance spectra of the point contacts on Bi/Ni bilayers along the different directions are shown in Fig. The gap values obtained by the fitting procedure range from 1.9 to 2.7 meV, as shown in Fig. As said above, we should consider the gap structure of the ABM state in three dimensions for the PCAR ex- periments on the Bi/Ni bilayer. We have presented the conductance formula of an arbitrary cross-section of the 3D gap of the ABM state in Appendix C. As shown in Fig. As shown in Fig. The chiral cross-section (namely, the cross-section of ω = π/2 and φ 0 = π/2) is critical. We propose that the chiral cross-section of the ABM state might explain the broken time-reversal symmetry (TRS) determined by the polar Kerr effect measurements in the Bi/Ni bilayer Our theoretical formalism by quantitatively describing the effects of spin polarization demonstrates that the PCAR experiments can be used to distinguish between the singlet pairing and the triplet pairing. The superconducting state of the Bi/Ni bilayers belongs to the triplet pairing rather than the singlet pairing since the PCAR spectroscopy results are independent of spin polarization. This critical feature can rule out the possibility of the swave and the d-wave. As said above, the zero-bias conductance peak of the PCAR spectra originates from the π phase difference in the cross-section of the gap. According to this simple physical picture, the zero-bias conductance peak signal of the Bi/Ni bilayer in the A and C directions indicates the existence of the π phase difference in the cross-section of the gap. Note that the zero-bias conductance peak is robust for the Bi/Ni bilayers We also rule out the Balian-Werthamer (BW) state of the p-wave because the anisotropic PCAR spectra of the Bi/Ni bilayer are not consistent with the isotropic conductance spectra of the BW state (see Appendix D). We propose that the ABM state of the triplet p-wave seizes the essential features of the superconducting state of the Bi/Ni bilayers, according to our theoretical fitting curves. The mechanism of the ABM state in the Bi/Ni bilayers might be complex. The external perturbation to this system during probing might slightly change the gap values of the ABM state. The qualitative features of the ABM state in the Bi/Ni bilayers are robust, which makes the fitting curves satisfy the PCAR data. We think the ABM state is a simple and elegant description of the superconducting state in the Bi/Ni bilayers. The features of the PCAR data of the Bi/Ni bilayers indicate the unconventional pairing in this system. However, to provide more evidence in favor of the ABM state, other experimental works in the Bi/Ni bilayers are expected in the future, including phase-sensitive symmetry tests and non-phase-sensitive techniques. To further ensure the ABM state in the Bi/Ni bilayers is meaningful. This material will become the first discovered solid material where the ABM state exists if more experiments confirm this. In conclusion, we utilize the theoretical formalism to demonstrate that the AR of triplet pairing superconductivity is independent of spin polarization, contrary to the singlet pairing case. Our theoretical conductance spectra of the ABM state can explain the main features of the PCAR spectroscopy results of the epitaxial Bi/Ni bilayers. In addition, the candidate ABM state demonstrates the exact conductance formula for an arbitrary cross-section of the 3D gap. We can utilize the four-component notations, a k = (a k↑ , a k↓ , a † -k↑ , a † -k↓ ) T and α k = (α k↑ , α k↓ , α † -k↑ , α † -k↓ ) T , to make Eq. ( where ûk and vk are 2 × 2 matrices, i.e., ûk = u k↑↑ u k↑↓ u k↓↑ u k↓↓ and vk = According to Eq. (A1), we can obtain By Eq. (A3), we can construct Eq. ( -k↓↑ ) T which corresponds to the quasiparticle's creation operator α † k↑ where is the energy spectrum of the superconducting quasiparticles, and the gap function ∆(k) is a matrix. For the singlet pairing case where ψ(k) is an even function. For the triplet pairing case where d(k) is an odd vectorial function. Since α k↓ = u * k↑↓ a k↑ + u * k↓↓ a k↓ + v -k↑↓ a † -k↑ + v -k↓↓ a † -k↓ , we have u * k↑↓ = 0 and thus α k↓ = u * k↓↓ a k↓ + v -k↑↓ a † -k↑ + v -k↓↓ a † -k↓ for the unitary solution of superconductivity according to Eq. (A4). We know from Eq. ( by acting as the component corresponding to a k↑ of the quasiparticle α k↑ . However, because there is no transmitted electron with spin down in the superconductor as the inducible factor, the transmitted electron with spin up is unable to induce the other quasiparticle corresponding to the annihilation operator α k↓ = u * k↓↓ a k↓ + v -k↑↓ a † -k↑ + v -k↓↓ a † -k↓ . As a result, the wave function components associated with the quasiparticle α k↓ can be neglected. N , the incident angle of the electron given by θ q N = θq, Z = mU/ 2 kF , and θq ∈ [0, 2π]. online) The normalized conductance spectra of the BW state in the case of Z = α = 0. In the cross-section of ω = π/2 and φ 0 = const., the corresponding orbital part is given by cos θ k ± i sin φ 0 sin θ k . Thus this case is also a linear combination of the cases indicated by Figs. where kx = sin θ k cos φ k , ky = sin θ k sin φ k and kz = cos θ k . The BW state is unitary and its time-reversal symmetry remains unbroken We can deduce from Eq. ( The second case satisfying Eq. (D2) is when the crosssection of the gap of the BW state is parallel to the x-y plane, i.e., d(k) = ∆( kx , ky , 0) with θ k = π/2. In this case, its order parameter is given by ∆(k) = ∆ -e -iφ k 0 0 e iφ k , (D5) which indicates v * (±) -k↓↑ = 0 and a 1 = 0, according to Eqs. (A4) and (D3). The corresponding conductance spectra are isotropic and of a single peak, and do not depend on spin polarization, as shown in Fig. The order parameter of the p + ip state (in two dimensions) is given by ∆(q) = -∆e iφq σz , (D6) where φ q ∈ [0, 2π]. The chiral p-wave belongs to the unitary solution, according to ∆(q) ∆ † (q) = ∆ 2 σ0 . Thus we can utilize Eq. (A4) to obtain its coherence factors, which are elements of matrixes ûq = 1 2 (1 + ǫ(q)/E q )σ 0 , vq = -∆(q) 2E q (E q + ǫ(q)) , where E q = ǫ 2 (q) + ∆ 2 . Following the same procedure, we can quickly obtain the coefficients a 1 , a 2 , b, c, and d, which are essentially the same as the ABM state case. Its conductance is also not related to spin polarization. The conductance spectra of the chiral p-wave state are identical to that of the BW state in the case of the gap cross-section parallel to the x-y plane q