Cu K edge X-ray absorption spectra of overdoped superconducting YSr 2 Cu 2.75 Mo 0.25 O 7.54 and Sr 2 CuO 3.3 show a remarkably strong correlation of their superconductivity with the local dynamics of their Cu-Sr and Cu-apical-O pairs. This finding that the entire alkaline earth cation-apical O "dielectric" layer has an active role in the unusual electronic properties of cuprates has not been previously considered and has far reaching implications. We develop this idea of a possible role for the apical oxygen charge dynamics via a soft mode of the Sr by applying Kuramoto's synchronization technique to exact diagonalization calculations of two neighboring Cu-apical O pairs bridged by Sr and a planar O atom. These calculations show a first order phase transition to a synchronized state of the Internal Quantum Tunneling Polarons (IQTPs) in which a fraction of the hole originally confined to the apical O atoms of the cluster is transferred onto the planar O. This combination of experimental results and theory demonstrates that the Sr-O dielectric layer of cuprates most likely plays an important role in high temperature superconductivity via its collective charge dynamics that extends into the CuO 2 conducting planes . Insofar as more than three decades of study of cuprates and related materials have not provided a consensus on the origins of high temperature superconductivity (HTSC) and related phenomena, there have been calls within the community for new ideas Notably in the search for a universal characteristic, two-site distributions 17, 18 in the dynamic structures of Cu-apical O (O ap ) (or occasionally other Cu-O) pairs (Fig. IQTPs become especially interesting from the perspective of the currently prevailing idea that the HTSC driver is primarily electron-electron interactions IQTPs are identified in inelastic neutron pair distribution function (pdf) analysis 32, 65 , while their coupling to, x Ba/Sr x -O ap= layer that is two atoms thick in the La 2 CuO 4 -type (LCO) compounds. This is often referred to as the "dielectric" domain whose function has been presumed to be passively maintaining the separation of the excess holes injected into the CuO 2 "conducting layers" from the "charge reservoir" layer where they originate The preparation and characterization of the samples and the transmission XAFS measurements at the Cu K edge at end station 2-2 of the Stanford Synchrotron Radiation Lightsource and analysis have been described previously in our reports on the local structure at a single temperatures 10, 13 and the near neighbor Cu-O pairs over a range of temperatures through the HTSC transition EXAFS measurements of the two HPO cuprates were performed to probe their dynamic structure and its coupling to the SC. Descriptions of the materials, sample preparation, and experiments have previously been reported 10, 13, 14 . These previous reports also described the behavior of the Cu-O pairs of the IQTPs in detail, but with only the brief description of the Cu-Sr in YSCO-Mo The novel aspect of this report is the detailed comparative analysis of the IQTP and Sr contributions to the EXAFS over a wide temperature range through the superconducting transitions in both compounds and its ramifications vis-à-vis our recent calcuations. This identifies the surprising strength of the correlation and corresponding coupling to the projection of the Cu-Sr dynamics along the c-axis. This analysis is performed via direct visualization of the isolated contributions of the target Cu-O and Cu-Sr pairs under the assumption that the numbers of neighbor atoms remain constant, i.e., structural transformations are limited to displacements that alter distances but do not move atoms out of their original local environments. Changes in the distributions on the target pairs caused by either shifts of O atoms between different components of their multisite distributions or originating in ther local, pairwise dynamics are easily identified in the amplitudes of the Fourier transforms of their EXAFS, χ(R). Since multifrequency Fourier transforms of altered sine waves over limited ranges are not linear with respect to overlapping peaks it is necessary to separate the contributions of the different neighbor shells. This is especially important for smaller features that overlap larger ones. The first step in this isolation process is curve-fitting that obtains the forms of the individual waves that sum to the total EXAFS 10 ,. Curve-fitting also validates the structural model, finding the static neighbor shells that conform to the crystal structure and the dynamic ones that may deviate from it. The contribution of the target pair in χ(R) is then obtained by subtracting from the EXAFS these waves from those of the other shells of the structure. This process then expands the interpretation from a table of the metrical results from curve-fits to include a more qualitative visualization of correlations. Analogous to amplitude-ratioing analysis Another critical factor is the experimental resolution and the confidence that the signal from the target neighbor shell is not affected by and correlated with those of the neighbors that are being subtracted 72, 73 . This becomes especially important in isolating a smaller signal from a larger one with which it overlaps. The resolution of EXAFS is defined as ΔR=π/2k max where k max = the highest energy in the analysis This disconnect between the actual pair distribution and the shape of its feature in χ(R) is the interpretation of the behavior of the peaks in terms of changes in the distribution. In particular, this poses the question of the cause of the observable, which is amplitude reduction, which in the extreme case results in "spectroscopically" invisible neighbor shells. This originates in the limited range at both ends of the χ(k) spectrum, the inability to determine the amplitude at zero momentum transfer that defines the numbers of atoms, and the limited high energy range that results in the overlap of the contributions in χ(R) and the nonlinear summation of overlapping peaks even when their separation is much greater than the resolution. The Fourier transform moduli of the original Cu χ(k) EXAFS, χ(R), of the total structure, the Cu2-Oap, and c-oriented projection of the Cu-Sr pairs of YSCO-Mo from 53 to 110 K are shown in Fig. The metrical data from from the curve-fits (Fig. Our prior analysis of the Cu-O ap pairs found that, based on the two independent Cu-O distances and numbers of atoms, the IQTPs exhiibit identical patterns of plateaus and discontinuities at the same temperatures. These delineate the normal phase, a fluctuation region at the transition, and two separate regions in the superconducting phase. Reproducing them here with the addition of the χ(R) to the difference in the numbers of oxygen atoms accentuates the novel finding: the peak of the Sr χ(R) displays a remarkable correspondence with the shifts of the two O atoms between their two sites. This even includes the feature at 70 K that would be assigned to a noise spike if it only occurred in one of these results. We emphasize that nothing in the above data analysis would bias this correlation between these three parameters and the superconducting transition. The c-oriented χ(R) peak for the Cu2-Sr (Fig. Although its composition and parent structure are simple, the EXAFS and local structure of our second material, SCO, are much more complicated than those of YSCO-Mo. A notable aspect is the large changes in the amplitudes with temperature. These are often opposite to the normal reduction with increasing temperature, and several occur over narrow ranges both in proximity to and away from the HTSC transition. Also remarkable are the significant features between the principal O and Sr peaks that do not correspond to sites in the crystallographic structure (Fig. We originally postulated that the behavior of the spectra across the transition might include a Sr atom with a Cu-Sr distance less than 3 Å The Cu-Sr contributions were fit with two Sr neighbors at ~3.23 and 3.36 Å. This 0.13-0.14 Å separation is only marginally larger than the resolution for the k=14.2 Å -1 upper limit of the curve-fit. In combination with the disorder that also drives the amplitude down at high k, the increase in the amplitude after the beat will be minimal and the Cu-Sr waves in χ(k) will be indistinguishable from a single, highly damped one. What is clearly observed now that was obscured in our prior report is that χ(R) shows a single, round peak with minimal structure. The Cu-Sr χ(R) amplitude rises as the temperature is lowered from ~78 K, also developing a more distinct shoulder on the high R side, where the second Sr at the longer distance needed for a complete curve-fit makes its contribution. This relatively normal trend is broken by the peak beginning near 106 K that falls immediately at T c , reflecting a narrowing and hardening of the Cu-Sr distribution in the fluctuation region that is eliminated on becoming superconducting. All of these changes can be presumed to originate in the shape and resultant ordering within the single peaked Cu-Sr distribution. Because of the difficulty of curve-fitting to extract metrical parameters when the features have vanished from the spectra, the correlation with the Sr is derived from comparing the isolated χ(R) peaks from the IQTP O and Sr atoms at, respectively, R=2.6 and 2.95 Å. The novel result is the high degree of correlation, or in this case anti-correlation, between the Cu-Sr and the IQTP χ(R) (Fig. Modeling with IQTP-coupled anharmonic Sr. Our demonstration of an anomalous Cu-Sr distribution that is strongly correlated with both the dynamical structure of the Cu-O ap and HTSC poses the questions of the HTSC-lattice coupling and the interaction of the Sr with the IQTPs. We have explored this by applying exact quantum diagonalization 21, 37 to a six-atom cluster (Fig. In addition to the numerically exact diagonalization calculation the charge-lattice dynamics was evaluated via the Kuramoto approach for synchronization of coupled oscillators by equating the anharmonic coupling K of the the O-Sr-O vibration to the coupling between phase oscillators in the Kuramoto model 74, The inverse behavior of the two features is apparent. For K<K c that is the unsynchronized phase the excess charge is localized on either the left or right O ap , forming two separated potential wells (Fig. These results provide a critical extension to our prior EXAFS study that demonstrated that the two-site Cu-O distributions in the dynamic structure that constitute the IQTPs are strongly coupled to the HTSC 17, 19, 23 24 30 in overdoped, superconducting SCO and YSCO-Mo In addition to the challenges to existing theories posed by the HPO phase diagram, these differences between YSCO-Mo and SCO that reinforce their common factor being strong coupling of the anharmonic, dynamic structure of Cu-Sr and IQTPs to each other and the HTSC takes on added significance. These new EXAFS measurements greatly extend the range of the structure and behavior of IQTPs beyond the previously observed partial collapse of the double well potential near the HTSC transition. Not only are the two minima of the double well potential non-degenerate, but also the difference in their energies varies across the entire temperature range with a large shift at the superconducting transition even while their separation is unchanged. The essential factor in the HTSC-IQTP coupling is therefore not limited to the equal splitting in the dynamic structure of the O ap sites into a two-site distribution along the c axis with tunneling frequencies of the order of 100 cm -1 . The coupling is enlarged to include alternative double well potentials and their associated charge dynamics where the two energies, locations in the lattice, and response to the HTSC transition can vary. The novel extension of the IQTP is the varied anharmonicity and coupling of the O ap of the IQTPs to the Sr 2+ ion with which it constitutes the dielectric layer. Far from being passive This mapping of the d-wave symmetry of the HTSC to that of certain phonons, e.g., the B 1g phonon that is the antiphase buckling of the Cu-O-Cu moieties of the CuO 2 plane 