A recent discovery of the pair density wave (PDW) order creates a stir in understanding an underlying physics in the pseudogap states of the cuprate high temperature superconductors. We have performed a Spectroscopic Imaging Scanning Tunneling Microscopy (SI-STM) measurements on Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8+δ and identified that spatially uniform d-wave superconductivity (DSC), dsymmetry charge density wave (CDW), and the PDW play important roles in an intertwined fashion. In this review, we show how these different electronic degrees of freedom emerges in electronic structures of the cuprate and discuss how they are related to each other. In the CuO2 plane of the mother compound cuprate, each Cu d " # $% # orbital is occupied by a single electron and, since the energy required for a double occupancy in this orbital is U~3 eV , a Mott insulator state develops for |E| < Δ * that Δ * (p) decreases to zero at p = p * (Fig. Historically, a PDW is first proposed as the Fulde-Ferrell-Larkin-Ovchinnikov (FFLO) states (or more precisely as the LO state) Cooper pairs with finite center-of-mass momentum are uniquely characterized by a spatially modulating superconducting energy gap D(r) To explore these predictions, we use a spectroscopic imaging scanning tunneling microscopy of the tip and N(r, E) of the sample. Similarly, a PDW order parameter in the sample (if any) would be spatially convoluted with the one on the tip when a tunneling junction is formed. Thus, the superconductor-insulator-superconductor (SIS) tunneling technique enhances the sensitivity to probe modulations in Δ(r). However, it is also the fact that such procedures, by utilizing an unconventional superconducting tip, may involve non-trivial physics behind, and we leave it for a future theoretical study. In this section, a bulk single crystal of Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8+δ at the hole density p ~ 0.17 ± 0.01 with superconducting transition temperature Tc = 91 K is cleaved at room temperature under ultra-high vacuum condition (3×10 -10 Torr), and subsequently inserted into the cryogenic STM head. The superconducting tip is created by picking up a nanometer scale Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8+δ flake from the sample Next, by measuring half the magnitude of the energy that separates the SIS spectrum peaks at every location, and then subtracting Δ W , the local gap energy map Δ(r) in the sample is obtained. A typical example of Δ(r) is shown in Fig. As discussed in the previous sections, the product of a PDW order parameter with itself Δ Q G Δ $Q G * predicts the local density states modulations N(r) ∝ cos(2Q • r) at twice the PDW wavevector. Thus, one natural consequence is an unconventional charge density wave that modulates the CuO2 Intra-unit-cell (IUC) electronic degree of freedom at 2Q since PDW order is expected to have d-wave symmetry. Proposals for such exotic CDWs in underdoped cuprates include charge density waves with a d-symmetry sublattice images consistently show a relative phase difference of p. These observations demonstrate, by the direct sublattice phase-resolved visualization, that the charge density wave found in underdoped cuprates consists of modulations of the intra-unit-cell states that exhibit a predominantly d-wave symmetry. Charge density waves consisting of modulations on the Ox sites that are distinct from those on the Oy sites can be challenging to conceptualize. Therefore, before explaining their modulated versions, we first describe an elementary symmetry decomposition of the IUC states of CuO2. There are three possible configurations Equivalently, we can also judge symmetry from the real space images, Ox(r) and Oy(r), by taking either sum or subtraction of them. For example, in the case of the d symmetry, if exists, the electronic modulations at Ox and Oy are p out of phase, so that Ox(r)+Oy(r) detects no modulations as they are canceled out, while Ox(r)-Oy(r) amplifies the modulations. These characteristics can be regarded as an electronic version of the annihilation rule often seen in the X-ray diffraction measurement. Next we consider periodic modulations of the IUC states with wavevector 2Q, which is twice that of the PDW, that may describe an electronic modulation in the pseudogap states, as shown in Fig. ρ(r) can be a generalized density wave representing whatever electronic degree of freedom is to be modulated, but here we consider CDW; S, S' and D are the coefficients of the density wave form factors with s-, s'-and d-symmetry, respectively, and φ(r) is an overall phase that can be spatially disordered Comparison of all these observations in Fig. It has been predicted that a topological defect with 2π phase winding Experimental detection of these phenomena in single-electron tunneling would constitute compelling evidence for the PDW state. As we saw in the previous sections, the phaseresolved visualization of the d-symmetry modulations is applied to the measured Z(r,E=54meV) 5 near the gap edge, which is now obtained from the SIS single particle tunneling discussed in the previous section (Fig. O " ... (r) ≡ Z(r)δ(r -r q r ) at Ox and similarly for O % ... (r) at Oy. We then subtract these values throughout the image to yield a map in d-symmetry channel, Next, we consider the magnitude of the Fourier transform of D Z (r,E) for E = 54 meV where SIS tunneling has the maximum sensitivity to the PDW state Next, by utilizing the two-dimensional lock-in technique meV) is extracted by eq. ( Φ Q ' (r) = tan $" •-' Q (r) - ̃' Q A(r) is an arbitrary image, Q is a wavevector of interest to filter out, and s is a coarse graining length. The spatial phase Φ ˆQx ... (r) that is extracted from eq. ( Then, the Hamiltonian is mean-fields-decoupled into a simpler but diagonalizable form, in which the mean-fields are on-site hole density δ K , bond field χ K ¢ , and electron-pair field Subsequently, a set of Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) equations, together with selfconsistency equations for the mean fields are obtained by variational minimization of the ground state energy with respect to the unprojected wavefunction |Ψ a ⟩ . Translational symmetry breaking within RMFT is introduced by having site-specific and bond-specific renormalization factors g K, ̈ and g K, © for charge and spin It should be noted that the commensurate PDW+DSC studied here is not the ground state of the cuprate RMFT Hamiltonian, but that its energy above the homogeneous ground state is so tiny Using this model, the atomic-scale characteristics of a unidirectional, eight-unitcell periodic PDW state coexisting with uniform DSC are examined. For comparison with underdoped Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8+δ measurements, quasiparticle states with intra-unit-cell resolution, which is obtained by the RMFT PDW+DSC model with a Wannier functionbased method are evaluated obtained by the first-principles calculations for Cu d " # $% # orbital; the r-space continuum Green's functions G ¢ (r, E) = ∑ G K ¢ (E)W K (r)W * (r) K of a PDW+DSC state, at a height 0.4 nm above BiO terminal plane The bias dependence of Z(r, E) = N(r, +E) N(r, -E) ⁄ from the PDW+DSC model are then calculated for a comparison with the experiment. Figs. Figures. 8(g-l) show the measured Z(r, E) in the energy range 0.5D1≲E≲1.5D1, with each panel compared side-by-side with the equivalent energy from the model. The most intense modulations occur at E≈D1(p) for all p < 0.19 Next, the theory predicts that coherence peak energy Δ 1 varies substantially from one unit cell to the next within the eight-unit-cell periodicity of the PDW. The theoretical gap map and its linecut along x direction for the PDW+DSC state are shown in Fig. and (c). The gap map is obtained by extracting the peak energy Δ 1 (r) for ω>0 at all intraunit cell points over an area of 8×12 unit-cells. Similarly, the gap map obtained by using the same algorithm to determine Δ 1 (r) from measured dI/dV spectra and its linecut along . •r N , where Δ Q G is the amplitude of gap modulations at wavevector Q, and F G the form factor with either s-or dsymmetry. The most obvious and immediate prediction is that the single-electron tunneling should detect a spatially modulating gap at Q in the local density-of-states spectrum N(r, E). It is striking, therefore, that no such modulating Δ(r) has ever been observed in the cuprates. in the superconducting cuprates would be a coexistence of two sets of N(r, E) modulations at Q and 2Q. Finally, a topological defect with 2p phase winding