The inductive response of an object to an oscillating magnetic field reveals information about its electrical conductivity and magnetic permeability. Here we introduce a technique that uses measurements of the angular, frequency and spatial dependence of the inductive signal to determine object composition. Identification is performed by referencing an object's inductive response to that of materials with mutually exclusive properties such as copper (high electric conductivity, negligible magnetic permeability) and ferrite (negligible electric conductivity, high magnetic permeability). The technique uses a sensor with anisotropic sensitivity to discriminate between the different characters of the eddy current and magnetisation driven object responses. Experimental validation of the method is performed through Magnetic Induction Tomography measurement with a radio-frequency atomic magnetometer. Possible applications of the technique in security screening devices are discussed. Magnetic Induction Tomography (MIT) measurements rely on the inductive coupling between a radio-frequency (rf) magnetic field, the so-called primary rf field, and the object of interests, Fig. MIT provides a portfolio of measurements addressing a wide range of contemporary challenges in applied physics. In the area of non-destructive testing (NDT), inductive measurements enable detection of defects either covered by insulation or concealed within the object structure The use of an rf atomic magnetometer as the sensor in MIT brings superior sensitivity Tomography measurement setup. The primary rf field (green arrow) produced by the rf coil (1) causes the inductive response of the object (2) in the form of a secondary field (yellow arrow). The signal is recorded by a sensor Our studies so far have been focused on the implementation of rf atomic magnetometers for inductive tomographic mapping in scenarios of defect detection and object surveillance. These include the demonstration of tomographic mapping of material thinning in steelwork, which represents the detection of corrosion under insu-lation In this paper, we present a technique that can potentially help determine object composition and hence reduce measurement duration. It combines measurements of the angular, frequency and spatial dependence of the signal with comparisons of the object's inductive response to those of reference materials with mutually exclusive properties such as copper (high electric conductivity, negligible magnetic permeability) and ferrite (negligible electric conductivity, high magnetic permeability). While the rf signal frequency dependence has been shown to provide discrimination between different objects, the demonstration was limited to a narrow class of purely conductive materials and required a series of extra measurements for calibration The measurements described here are performed with a radio-frequency atomic magnetometer operating in a magnetically unshielded environment In general, eddy currents and magnetisation induced within the object produce two secondary rf field components that have different amplitude and phase characteristics. Depending on the relative electric conductivity and magnetic permeability values, one of these components dominates the object's inductive response. In this section we show that the measurement geometry, specifically the relative orientation between the normal to the object surface and the sensor axis, can suppress or enhance the contribution to the measurement signal from each component of the secondary field. This provides a mechanism to distinguish between them. Due to eddy current driven dissipation, penetration of the rf field within an electrically conductive object can be limited to a thin layer in the immediate vicinity of the surface. In the particular case of an object made from aluminium, the skin depth is 0.8 mm for a primary rf field frequency of 10 kHz. In general it can be expected that for any object the component of the secondary field due to eddy currents is produced in the immediate vicinity of the surface and its direction is parallel to the normal to the surface. This means that the secondary field direction reflects the orientation of the surface and any change in the orientation of the object surface results in a change of the direction of the secondary field. This will manifest itself as a change in the detected rf signal amplitude and phase. In contrast, in objects with negligible electrical conductivity (and hence low rf field dissipation) and high magnetic permeability, such as ferrites, the direction of the secondary field is defined by magnetisation throughout the object. It is parallel to the primary rf field direction regardless of the orientation of the object. Hence, it can be expected that the component of the secondary field produced by magnetisation in any object mirrors the primary rf field direction. To gain further insight we consider two measurement geometries, the first where the normal to an object's surface is parallel to the primary rf field, Fig. To illustrate the differences between object responses produced by eddy currents and magnetisation in different measurements geometries two sets of amplitude and phase inductive images were recorded. The images were generated by a single scan over three pairs of stainless steel, copper and ferrite 35 ×35 mm 2 plates, marked with red dashed lines in Fig. Figure The secondary field component due to eddy currents changes direction with plate rotation. The detected signal is sensitive only to the projection of the secondary field onto the plane perpendicular to the sensor axis, with the amplitude given by the radius of this projected vector and the phase by the radial angle. Here we rotate the plate about an axis that is perpendicular to the sensor axis (Fig. Because of the measurement configuration, where the sensor has an insensitive axis that is aligned with the primary rf field, the angular dependence of the measured signal amplitude and phase is affected by an object's geometry. In the particular case of a plate the amplitude reaches a minimum for 0 • and 90 • when a surface of the plate faces the rf primary field, because the surface orthogonal to the primary rf field does not contribute to the signal. This can be seen in Fig. Figure Similarly to the angle scan, the set of points representing the amplitude and phase of the signal observed over the ferrite plate overlaps with that observed in the absence of a sample. As pointed out before, non-zero signal amplitude in the absence of the object results from residual misalignment between the primary rf field and sensor axes. The decrease of the signal amplitude with operating frequency is consitent with a similar dependence observed in a standard rf spectroscopy arrangement. It is useful to take the data recorded over ferrite and aluminium plates as the points of reference. Analysis of the frequency dependencies of the stainless steel and brass amplitudes and phases relative to ferrite and aluminium indicates the presence of three frequency regimes. The first, up to 4 kHz, represents frequencies where low induction efficiency results in low eddy current density. In this range the amplitude of the stainless steel overlaps with ferrite. For the frequencies in a second range, 4 kHz -15 kHz, a transition is observed in the stainless steel signal amplitude and phase from the level observed over ferrite to that recorded over the aluminium. In the third frequency range, above 15 kHz, all observed amplitude and phase values are close to their asymptotic levels. It is worth pointing out that the 29 kHz operating frequency used to acquire the inductive images in Fig. In this section we present two methods of the inductive image analysis. The first method uses the frequency dependence of the object response, whilst the second uses the integrated image amplitude. We have previously shown that for conductive objects an optimum value within a 1-2 kHz frequency range can be identified, which maximises the amplitude and contrast of features (defect, edge signatures) observed in the inductive images Figure The second approach to inductive image analysis is based on the signal amplitude integrated over the image area. The method takes advantage of the opposite directions of the secondary fields created by the eddy currents and object magnetisation relative to an external reference such as a background field. Since the signal amplitude in the recorded image includes both the secondary and background fields, its total magnitude provides information on the relative orientation of these two components. Integration over an image area that includes elements like tilted surfaces, edges, etc. is in a sense analogous to the measurement of the angular dependence of the signal and can provide useful information for discrimination between object compositions. The method evaluates a measure of the probability that the object properties are the same as those of three reference standards: ferrite (an approximation of a purely magnetic object), copper (purely conductive object) and the absence of an object (plate presence). The integrated image amplitudes of these references define three vectors of an orthogonal basis for 3D space. Location in this space of the point representing a tested object is identified by three coordinates specified by metrics (proximity) with respect to the three references. This location is a measure of the probability of seeing the object, and of the object being electrically conductive or magnetically permeable. We introduce the metrics, which are a measure of proximity, d, of the given data point (tested object) to the specific reference standard x, as: , where R i is the amplitude of a single pixel, i, in the tested object image, R i x is the amplitude of the corresponding single pixel in the reference image, and N is the number of pixels in the image. The index x refers to either the purely magnetically permeable (1,0,0), purely electrically conductive (0,1,0) and no plate case (0,0,1). The signal amplitudes in the reference image, R i x , are calculated as an average over 70 recorded images. Since the result, i.e. the data point location in 3D space represents probability, the sum of its coordinates is normalised, It is worth discussing the metrics structure in more detail, particularly the choice of the inverse dependence on amplitude difference, (R i -R i x ) 2 . The amplitude difference decreases as the object's properties become more similar to those of the reference. This leads to an increase in the value of the inverted factor, 1/(R i -R i x ) 2 , which eventually becomes dominant over the other two factors, ie. the proximity to the other two references. Normalisation of the sum of the coordinates and projection of its position on the xy (magnetic permeability vs electric conductivity) plane, places the measured point under the line x + y = 1, in other words inside the triangle confined by x = 0, y = 0 and x+y = 1. The smaller the integrated amplitude difference is, the higher its inverted value and the closer its normalised value approaches 1. We have tested different types of metrics, in particular a linear dependence on integrated amplitude difference, as well as metrics including signal phase. While we have verified that all metrics provide similar qualitative results, i.e. spatial distribution of the tested points relative to reference standards, the metrics described here deliver the best differentiation between different materials. Figure The above procedure relies on the fact that all the objects have the same shape and position within the image. More flexible alternatives could be use in the form of machine learning. To test this we implemented a convolutional neural network constructed from a combination of standard layers applied in computer vision tasks (convolutional layer, pooling layer, dense layers and activation layer). The advantage of the algorithm is its ability to make a decision based on the fragments of the whole sample. The model was trained on 8x8 pixel fragments cut from 17x17 pixel images. This allowed us to increase number of 230 images available for training by factor of 100. Similar fragments of scans were then used to test trained model predictions for unknown sample types. Averaged results for all samples are presented in Fig. The ability to discriminate between ferrite plates and a mixture of copper and ferrite plates (Fig. An important concern is the practicality of implementing the presented methods in object screening. The results shown in Fig. The main aim of this paper is the demonstration that a combination of the three degrees of freedom (spatial, angular and frequency) applied in the inductive measurements can provide sufficient information to deduce object composition. We anticipate that similar information combined with advanced machine learning techniques will provide an even more versatile and effective tool, in which an optimised measurement sequence for a specific implementation is determined by the machine controlling the process. In this scenario the actual test would consist of a series of moves using all the degrees of freedom in a sequence that is autonomously decided and continuously updated by a pretrained machine learning model that, at the end of the measurement procedure, would provide some specific information about the interrogated object based on the collected data. In conclusion, we have demonstrated a series of MIT measurements that can assist in the identification of an object's composition. We showed that the angular, frequency and spatial dependencies of the rf signal recorded over the objects can discriminate between objects made of materials with different magnetic permeability and electrical conductivity. The concept relies on the different penetration depth in purely electrically conductive and magnetically permeable materials. The skin depth that reflects this penetration depth is a function of the operating frequency, electrical conductivity, and magnetic permeability. Observed signal dependences confirm that in electrically conductive materials the secondary field is created at the surface. This could explain why permittivity does not play a significant role in our measurements. The discrimination is made possible through the use of a sensor with an insensitive axis. This eliminates the contribution of the primary rf field to the signal and gives the sensor a different sensitivity to the eddy current and magnetisation components of an induced response. We have discussed the influence of object shape on the angular dependence of the rf signal. Whilst frequency scans can be performed at a single location over an object, the measurement of angular dependence requires a physical change of the measurement configuration. This could be performed in various ways. In the specific case of goods screening, the objects are often transferred with a conveyer belt. Location of a sensor at a bend in such a system would allow the measurement of objects at similar distances but at different orientations relative to the sensor axis. Finally, we have demonstrated that even very simple methods for acquiring and analysing inductive images can successfully discriminate between different materials. We acknowledge the support of the UK government department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy through the UK national quantum technologies programme. The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request. Copper (Cu) 