Temperature-dependent London penetration depth, λ(T ), of a high quality optimally-doped YBa2Cu3O 7-δ single crystal was measured using tunnel-diode resonator. Controlled artificial disorder was induced at low-temperature of 20 K by 2.5 MeV electron irradiation at accumulating large doses of 3.8 × 10 19 and 5.3 × 10 19 electrons per cm 2 . The irradiation caused significant suppression of the superconductor's critical temperature, Tc, from 94.6 K to 90.0 K, and then to 78.7 K, respectively. The low-temperature behavior of λ (T ) evolves from a T -linear in pristine state to a T 2 -behavior after the irradiation, expected for a line-nodal d-wave superconductor. However, the original theory that explained such behavior had assumed a unitary limit of the scattering potential, whereas usually in normal metals and semiconductors, Born scattering is sufficient to describe the experiment. To estimate the scattering potential strength, we calculated the normalized superfluid density, ρs (t = T /Tc) = λ 2 (0) /λ 2 (t), varying the amount and the strength of non-magnetic scattering using a self-consistent t-matrix theory. Fitting the obtained curves to a power-law, ρs = 1-Rt n , and to a polynomial, ρs = 1 -At -Bt 2 , and comparing the coefficients n in one set, and A and B in another with the experimental values, we estimate the phase shift to be around 70 • and 65 • , respectively. We correlate this result with the evolution of the density of states with non-magnetic disorder. While the microscopic mechanism of superconductivity is still actively debated three decades after the discovery Another consequence of anisotropic (and, in extreme cases, nodal) order parameter is the violation of the Anderson theorem As far as low-temperature variation of ∆λ (T ) is concerned, already early experiments showed a crossover from T -linear to a T 2 variation of λ (T ), for example in Zn-doped YBa 2 Cu 3 O 6.95 We used relatively large doses of electron irradiation to induce non-magnetic point-like disorder in high quality optimally doped YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7-δ single crystal. The measured suppression of the superconducting transition temperature, T c , gives the estimate of the dimensionless scattering rate Γ/T c0 (see appendix), whereas the variation of the low-temperature London penetration depth, ∆λ (t), is related directly to the normalized superfluid density, ρ s (t) ≈ 1 -2∆λ (t) /λ (0) ,whose temperature dependence is sensitive to the structure of the superconducting order parameter Single crystals YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7-δ were grown in yttria stabilized zirconia crucibles with subsequent annealing to achieve the highest transition temperature as described elsewhere The 2.5 MeV electron irradiation was performed at the SIRIUS Pelletron facility of the Laboratoire des Solides Irradies (LSI) at the École Polytechnique in Palaiseau, France The in-plane London penetration depth ∆λ (T) was measured before and after each irradiation run using a self-oscillating tunnel-diode resonator technique (TDR) described in detail elsewhere In this work we analyze the variation of the London penetration depth, ∆λ = λ (T )-λ (T min ) ≈ λ (T )-λ (0), where T min = 0.02T c is the minimum temperature of the experiment. The normalized superfluid density, ρ s ≡ λ 2 (0) /λ 2 (T ) = 1/ (1 + ∆λ/λ (0)) 2 ≈ 1 -2∆λ/λ (0). This ratio does not depend on λ (0), because the penetration depth is given roughly by λ (t) /λ (0) ≈ 1/ √ 1 -t p in the whole temperature interval, 0 ≤ t ≤ 1 Figure There are two ways to analyze the differences between the curves presented in Fig. We note that the temperatures below 0.05T c were excluded from the analysis due to a clear change in behavior. In YBCO there are several possible complications at very low temperatures that lead to 1/T -type behavior, such as Andreev bound states observed with our technique before The power-law fit is explored in Fig. To analyze the obtained results and compare with the theory, we used t-matrix numerical analysis to calculate the superfluid density, ρ s (t, Γ). Details of the calculations are provided in Appendix A. The calculated ρ s (t, Γ) was fitted to the power-law, fitting, ρ s (t) = 1 -Rt n , results are shown in Fig. To better understand the effect of scattering we now analyze the linear to quadratic crossover by looking at the polynomial series representation, which allows comparing the coefficients (unlike the power-law for which the prefactor has no particular meaning.) Figure Clearly, the quadratic term (the B coefficient) becomes progressively more dominant moving towards the unitary limit. However, we find that the suggested in Ref. The normalized density of states spectrum, N (ω) /N0, calculated by using a t-matrix theory for Γ/Tc0 = 0.125 corresponding to Tc/Tc0 = 0.9. The upper inset shows the low-energy region with a very slow evolution of N (ω) for small θ. The lower inset shows the θ-dependent cuts taken at the Fermi level, at ω/kBTc0 = 0 (left axis) and near the gap edge, at ω/kBTc0 = 1.9 (right axis). Our experimental estimates of the phase shift between θ = 65 • and 70 • are shown by the green band. Interestingly that this is the range of a crossover from T -linear and T 2 behavior. already outside the "low-temperature" region of 0.3T c . For larger scattering, T * practically diverges. Fitting the curves at a fixed T c /T c0 = 0.9 for different θ reveals that T * drops dramatically between 90 • and 70 • and then stays constant at about T * ≈ 0.025T c . Therefore, while this approach was very useful for the discussion of the effect of disorder on a d-wave superconductor, we should not expect a quantitative agreement of the predicted temperature dependence with the experimental data. By examining Fig. To understand our results we analyze the effect of impurity scattering on the density of states, N (ω), for different values of the phase shift. Here ω is the quasiparticle energy counted from the Fermi energy. Transition temperature, T c , depends only on the scattering rate Γ, see Fig. Here .. F S denotes an average over the Fermi surface, N 0 is the normal metal density of states, and ω is the impurity renormalized energy, see Appendix A for details. The low-temperature behavior of the superfluid density, hence London penetration depth, is determined by the low-energy quasiparticle spectrum, N (ω → 0). Strong and weak scatterers affect the functional form of N (ω) in very different ways. Weak scatterers are only able to break the pairs close to the gap edge, while strong scatterers produce resonant modes close to zero energy, thus significantly affecting low-temperature ρ s (t). Figure Controlled point-like disorder induced by 2.5 MeV lowtemperature electron irradiation was used to suppress superconductivity in YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7-δ single crystal with the goal of determining the scattering potential strength in this high-T c d-wave superconductor. The measured superconducting transition temperature, T c , was used as the measure of the the dimensionless scattering rate, Γ/T c0 . Normalized superfluid density was obtained from the measured London penetration depth, λ (T ), as well as from the t-matrix theory. By fitting experimental and numerical data to two different models of the lowtemperature behavior we estimated the scattering potential phase shift is approximately θ = 65 • to θ = 70 • . These results find natural explanation when we considered how the density of states spectra, N (ω) are influenced by weak or strong scatterers. Only the latter affect the low-energy N (ω → 0) ,which determines the lowtemperature behavior of ρ s (t). Our results provide certain boundary conditions for the microscopic investigation of the pairing interactions and scattering in high-T c cuprates for which the knowledge of the scattering phase shift is vital. purity scattering diagrams where ξ k is the electronic dispersion, ∆ k is the momentum superconducting gap, and ω n is the fermionic Matsubara frequency. The impurity renormalized Matsubara frequency id denoted by ωn , which is here n imp is the impurity concentration, N 0 is the density of states at the Fermi energy, g 0 is, and θ s is the s-wave scattering phase shift, defined as, tan θ s = πN 0 V imp . (A4) In the unitary limit, the s-wave scattering phase shift becomes π/2 as the impurity potential V imp goes to ∞. Note, we assume an isotropic Fermi surface and restrict the momentum dependence of the gap to the Fermi surface (∆ k = ∆ 0 cos 2φ), this is a reasonable approximation in the low temperature limit. The impurity dressed Green's function is used to calculate the gap, Here we choose a simple separable pairing interaction V pair = -V d cos 2φ cos 2φ , and Ω c is the pairing cutoff energy scale. A negative value of V d means attractive interaction for d-wave superconductivity. The transition temperature is determined by, log where T c0 is the clean limit T c , Ψ is the digamma function, and Γ is the pair-breaking energy-scale, which is the normal state single particle scattering rate, and within the t-matrix approximation reads, Note, for a single band d-wave superconductor, there is a universal energy scale that determines T c suppression. In the Born limit, Γ is n imp πN 0 V 2 imp . The variation of T c as a function of this universal energy scale is shown in Fig. the Euler-Mascheroni constant. Once we calculate the impurity dressed Green's function, we can calculate the superfluid density, where n is the normal fluid density. The magnetic pen-etration depth can be expressed as, λ(T, Γ)/λ(0, 0) = 1/ √ ρ s . Apart from magnetic penetration depth, another quantity of interest is the density of state (see Eq. ( For the density of state, we perform the analytical continuation of the Matsubara frequency to the upper half the plane (iω n → ω + i0 + ) to obtain the renormalized energy ω. After analytic continuation, the equation for the renormalized energy reads, where g ω is, Note ω is a complex quantity. Figure Point-like disorder was introduced at the SIRIUS facility in the Laboratoire des Solides Irradiés at École Polytechnique in Palaiseau, France. Electrons accelerated in a pelletron-type linear accelerator to 2.5 MeV displace ions creating vacancy -interstitial pairs (known as "Frenkel pairs") The sample is held in liquid hydrogen at around 20 K needed not only to remove significant amount of heat produced by sub-relativistic electrons, but also to prevent immediate recombination and migration of the produced atomic defects. On warming to room temperature the interstitials that have lower barrier of diffusion, migrate to various sinks (dislocations, twin boundaries, surfaces) faster, leaving the metastable population of vacancies. The achieved level of disorder induced by the irradiation FIG. 9. Normalized superfluid density as function of a reduced temperature in Born, unitary and intermediate scattering rate. For the same rate of Tc suppression, the curve is practically unchanged in the Born limit and shows quadratic behavior in unitary limit even for a moderate suppression. is gauged by the change of resistivity. Detailed studies of YBCO samples from the same source is found elsewhere Ion-resolved cross-sections were calculated using SECTE software package developed at École Polytechnique, France specifically for the electron irradiation. Among different projectiles, electrons are best to produce point-like defects due to their small rest mass. As shown in Fig. 