Ferrimagnets, which contain the advantages of both ferromagnets (detectable moments) and antiferromagnets (ultrafast spin dynamics), have recently attracted great attention. Here we report the optimization of epitaxial growth of a tetragonal perpendicularly magnetized ferrimagnet Mn2Ga on MgO. Electrical transport, magnetic properties and the anomalous Hall effect (AHE) were systematically studied. Furthermore, we successfully integrated high-quality epitaxial ferrimagnetic Mn2Ga thin films onto ferroelectric PMN-PT single crystals with a MgO buffer layer. It was found that the AHE of such a ferrimagnet can be effectively modulated by a small electric field over a large temperature range in a nonvolatile manner. This work thus demonstrates the great potential of ferrimagnets for developing high-density and lowpower spintronic devices. Contemporary mass storage for data centers predominantly relies on hard disk drives that are based on perpendicularly magnetized ferromagnetic granular films, the spin states of which can be easily manipulated by external magnetic fields generated by current coils due to remarkable macroscopic moments. However, as limited by the characteristic GHz spin dynamics, ferromagnetic materials could hardly be utilized for the static random-access memory technology and the in-memory computing, which needs a sub-ns response speed. Similar to ferromagnets, ferrimagnets possess large magnetic moments. Besides, they exhibit ultrahigh spin dynamics of THz as a result of antiferromagnetic exchange coupling Tetragonal D022 Mn2Ga with a = 3.905 Å and c = 7.193 Å, a classical ferrimagnet with a high Curie temperature of ~710 K, exhibits large magnetic anisotropy along its However, the information writing (corresponding to the spin state manipulation) of Mn2Gabased spintronic devices such as spin valves and STT-MRAM mostly depend on electricalcurrent-generated magnetic fields or electrical currents, which generates significant Joule heating and hence results in high power consumption. Alternatively, if one can effectively control the spin state of Mn2Ga with a non-electrical-current manner, the energy for writing a bit could be substantially lowered. An electric field applied onto a conductor yields an electrical current. In contrast, for highly insulating ferroelectric oxide materials, the application of an electric field generates a negligible current. Instead, it induces piezoelectric strain Nevertheless, epitaxial growth of intermetallic Mn2Ga on a ferroelectric oxide is quite challenging. The key reasons are: (1) highly-ordered epitaxial films need high thermal energy to let the atoms diffuse into their equilibrium sites during thin film growth and therefore high growth temperatures are required; (2) intermetallic alloys are of strong chemical activity, which can easily be oxidized or form secondary alloys at high temperatures while landing on ferroelectric oxide substrates; (3) lattice mismatch between intermetallic alloys and ferroelectric oxides could break epitaxial growth. Accordingly, a proper oxide substrate or an oxide buffer layer with robust high-temperature stability and low oxygen diffusion coefficient could be crucial for realizing epitaxial growth of Mn2Ga on ferroelectrics. In this letter, we report the optimal epitaxial growth of D022 Mn2Ga on ferroelectric PMN-PT. Furthermore, electric-field control of its AHE has been achieved over a large temperature range, which paves the way for low-power Mn2Ga spintronic device applications. MgO, a transparent insulating oxide with a large bandgap of 7.8 eV, shows excellent hightemperature stability with a melting point of 2800°C. It has a cubic lattice with a = 4.212 Å, which is close to the in-plane lattice constant of D022 Mn2Ga. Therefore, Mn2Ga films were firstly grown on single-crystalline (001)-oriented MgO substrates using the magnetron sputtering technique at different temperatures ranging from 30 to 550°C. The base pressure and the D.C. sputtering power were 7.5×10 -9 Torr and 60 W, respectively. During the deposition, the Ar pressure was kept at 3mTorr. With X-ray reflectometry, the deposition rate was determined to be 35 Å/min and the total thickness was first kept at 100 nm, which was later changed to 50 and 30 nm for thickness dependence studies. The crystal structure of Mn2Ga thin films was measured by X-ray diffraction (XRD). Magnetic characterization and electrical measurements were performed by a Quantum Design VersaLab with a vibrating sample magnetometer option. The standard linear four-probe method and the Hall geometry were used for longitudinal and Hall resistance measurements, respectively. Figure The metallicity, which could be examined by the normalized resistivity relative to roomtemperature values, is demonstrated in Fig. The films fabricated at 450 and 550°C are metallic and the metallicity is improved with enhancing substrate temperature. All these electrical transport results are consistent with the XRD spectra shown in Fig. The out-of-plane and in-plane magnetic moments versus magnetic fields (M-H) are measured at 50 and 300 K for single-crystalline Mn2Ga/MgO films (Fig. In addition, the room-temperature anisotropy field 0Hk is determined to be ~10 T for the 550°C-fabricated Mn2Ga film, which corresponds to a uniaxial magnetocrystalline anisotropy energy Ku of ~1.68 MJ/m 3 , which is of the same order with the previously reported highest Ku (~2.17 MJ/m 3 ) Longitudinal magnetotransport properties of Mn2Ga thin films fabricated at various temperatures were examined for out-of-plane magnetic fields. It was found that for TG < 300°C, the magnetoresistance (MR) effect is rather weak and almost not affected by the growth temperature. Figure However, the MR turns into negative for 50 K, suggesting the important role of magnetic moments of Mn. For TG = 300°C (Fig. The Hall effect of epitaxial Mn2Ga films is shown in Fig. Based on the experimental results mentioned above, 30-nm-thick Mn2Ga films were further epitaxially integrated onto (001)-oriented PMN-PT ferroelectric oxides with a 25-nm-thick MgO buffer layer so as to manipulate its AHE or magnetism by electric-field-induced piezoelectric strain To explore the effect of piezoelectric strain on the AHE in the Mn2Ga/MgO/PMN-PT heterostructure, an electric field EG of -5 kV/cm was perpendicularly applied across the PMN-PT substrate (Fig. To further confirm the nonvolatile nature of the electric-field-induced piezoelectric strain in PMN-PT, the room-temperature electric-field dependent longitudinal resistance of the Mn2Ga film in the Mn2Ga/MgO/PMN-PT heterostructure is measured with the linear four-probe geometry (Fig. Empirically, the AHE in ferromagnetic materials is closely related to magnetization. Motivated by this understanding, we examined the out-of-plane magnetization change of the Mn2Ga film for the Mn2Ga/MgO/PMN-PT heterostructure upon electric-field poling (Fig. In conclusion, we have fabricated epitaxial ferrimagnetic Mn2Ga thin films with perpendicular magnetic anisotropy on MgO substrates. The mechanisms of the AHE were unveiled for different longitudinal resistivity ranges. When MgO is used as buffer layer, Mn2Ga thin films with perpendicular anisotropy have been successfully integrated onto ferroelectric PMN-PT substrates which is useful for utilizing ferrimagnetic materials in high-density spintronic devices and could enable the fabrication of other exotic epitaxial heterostructures with ferrimagnets interfacing with some novel materials 