Plasmonic metasurfaces based on the extraordinary optical transmission (EOT) effect can be designed to efficiently transmit specific spectral bands from the visible to the far-infrared regimes, offering numerous applications in important technological fields such as compact multispectral imaging, biological and chemical sensing, or color displays. However, due to their subwavelength nature, EOT metasurfaces are nowadays fabricated with nano-and micro-lithographic techniques, requiring many processing steps and carried out in expensive cleanroom environments. In this work, we propose and experimentally demonstrate a novel, single-step process for the rapid fabrication of high performance mid-and long-wave infrared EOT metasurfaces employing ultrafast direct laser writing (DLW). Microhole arrays composing extraordinary transmission metasurfaces were fabricated over areas of 4 mm 2 in timescales of units of minutes, employing single pulse ablation of 40 nm thick Au films on dielectric substrates mounted on a high-precision motorized stage. We show how by carefully characterizing the influence of only three key experimental parameters on the processed micro-morphologies (namely laser pulse energy, scan velocity and beam shaping slit), we can have on-demand control of the optical characteristics of the extraordinary transmission effect in terms of transmission wavelength, quality factor and polarization sensitivity of the resonances. To illustrate this concept, a set of EOT metasurfaces having different performances and operating in different spectral regimes has been successfully designed, fabricated and tested. Comparison between transmittance measurements and numerical simulations have revealed that all the fabricated devices behave as expected, thus demonstrating the high performance, flexibility and reliability of the proposed fabrication method. We believe that our findings provide the pillars for mass production of EOT metasurfaces with on-demand optical properties, and create new research trends towards single-step laser fabrication of metasurfaces with alternative geometries and/or functionalities. Due to a progressive miniaturization of technologies such as mobile phone cameras, optical circuits or sensing, optical metasurfaces are becoming one of the most promising key components towards the development of next generation lightweight devices. Metasurfaces consist of two-dimensional, subwavelength (typically resonant) building blocks, which can be either periodically or randomly arranged, and can be engineered to provide on-demand light control While EOT metasurfaces introduce indubitable benefits to current optical and photonic technologies, their reliable large scale fabrication is currently at a low stage of maturity in terms of throughput and cost. This is primarily due to the small size of the patterned features and the high resolution required for the successful realization of metasurfaces (ranging from tens of nanometers to units of microns for electromagnetic metasurfaces operating from the ultraviolet to the mid-infrared spectral region, respectively) In this paper, we introduce a novel fabrication process for the rapid realization of EOT metasurfaces in a single step, based on direct laser writing and thus free from expensive cleanroom environments. As depicted in Figure Prior to the identification and control of the key experimental laser parameters to be employed for the fabrication of EOT devices, it is necessary to understand the influence of the metasurface geometrical parameters on its optical response. For this purpose, we have carried out a finite element analysis using COMSOL Multiphysics ® (RF module). Technical details and boundary conditions of the simulation routine are discussed in the supplementary information, section S1. A generic scheme of the metasurface and its unit cell considered in this work is depicted in Figure Figure eq. 2 being λ0 the free-space excitation wavelength and nCaF2 the refractive index of the substrate 31 (nCaF2 = 1.42 at a wavelength of λ0= 3 μm for reference). In Figure In Figure The finite element analysis discussed in the previous section demonstrates that the three main characteristics of the EOT effect, (spectral position of the EOT peak, transmittance and Q-factor) can be controlled by two key geometrical parameters, namely the period Λ and the hole diameter Ø (thus the fill factor FF), respectively. Therefore, our fabrication method has been specifically developed and calibrated to provide a flexible control of these geometrical variables. The experimental setup employed for the fabrication of EOT devices is depicted in Figure  Sample processing beam path fed by an ultrafast laser (λ0 = 1030 nm, τpulse = 340 fs, maximum repetition rate Frep = 2 MHz, Gaussian profile), which is focused at the sample surface using an aspheric lens (AL).  In-situ observation line employing a CCD camera and LED illumination, which is used for alignment purposes and in-situ monitoring of the fabrication process. The laser pulse energy is controlled by a combination of motorized half-waveplate and thin film polarizer (not shown). A 45• flip mirror is placed prior to the aspheric lens in order to calibrate the incident laser pulse energy with a power meter P. The sample is mounted on a 3-axis stage, with the x-stage being an air-bearing high-speed, high-precision translation stage with scan velocities up to Vscan = 20 mm/s. The samples used were 40 nm thick Au films evaporated on CaF2 substrates (fabrication of the films is described in the supplementary information, section S2). It should be noted that the laser irradiation plane (x-z) was horizontal and the sample mounted vertical, in order to avoid re-deposition of laser-ablated material that could contaminate the sample. The fabricated hole diameter was controlled via adjusting the energy of the focused laser pulse at the sample surface. In order to increase the range of attainable diameters, two different objective lenses with different numerical apertures have been used (NA1 = 0.25 and NA2 = 0.47). Results of the influence of the pulse energy on the hole diameter ∅ for NA1 = 0.25 are displayed in Figure The desired geometrical period Λ for a given metasurface was imprinted by high-speed scanning of the sample along the x-axis in a zigzag fashion, where holes were fabricated via single pulse ablation (i.e. row by row). Periods in the x direction (Ʌx) were adjusted via modification of the scan velocity Vscan for a fixed Frep, according to Λ = V scan F rep eq. 3 whereas periods in the y direction (Ʌy) were adjusted via discrete displacements of the y-motor after writing of each row. Using this strategy, the maximum achievable processing speed is ultimately limited by the pulse repetition rate of the laser, as well as by the sample scan velocity. All the devices reported in this work have been fabricated for a fixed repetition rate of Frep = 1 kHz and different geometrical periods were achieved via varying Vscan. The purple line shown in Figure A range of different EOT metasurfaces with areas of 2 mm x 2 mm have been fabricated using the method described above, i.e. selecting the required NA, pulse energies and scan velocity. The results presented below show their different optical response in terms of quality factor (section 3.1), optical transmission peak (section 3.2), and polarization-selective extraordinary transmission (section 3.3). According to the simulations shown in Figure The capability of our fabrication method to generate extraordinary transmission at specific on-demand wavelength peaks was also explored. As shown in the previous sections (Figures Finally, the potential of our laser processing method to induce anisotropic optical responses for polarization selective extraordinary transmission was also investigated. As depicted in Figure As a proof of concept, two different arrays of elliptical holes in rectangular lattices (namely E1 and E2) were fabricated. Table The experimental transmittance spectrum for device E2 is displayed in Figure We have demonstrated a versatile processing technique based on ultrafast direct laser writing for the reliable fabrication of high performance EOT metasurfaces. Contrary to lithographic-based fabrication methodologies, our technique enables the single-step realization of EOT devices of several mm 2 in a few minutes, carried out in cleanroomfree environments without generating chemical residues. It was shown that the main performance characteristics of EOT devices in terms of transmission wavelength, amount of transmittance and Q-factor can be controlled deliberately via tuning of the period Λ, the hole diameter Ø and the hole ellipticity by means of adjustment of the sample scanning speed, laser pulse energy and shape of the spot respectively. These calibrations have then been successfully employed to fabricate various sets of devices with ondemand control of the transmission peak, Q factor and polarization sensitivity. FTIR measurements have revealed striking agreement between as-fabricated and simulated devices, thus demonstrating the validity, flexibility and versatility of our approach. Based on the reported proof-of-concepts, it appears straight-forward to fabricate cm 2 areas in the same times reported in this paper, by means of exploiting the high-repetition rate of modern ultrafast laser systems, and/or multiplexing techniques. The variety of fabricated shapes can be extended to more complex geometries using alternative beams (such as vortex beams for the fabrication of coaxial apertures) In conclusion, we believe the proposed methodology could be applied not only to other metasurface geometries, or materials, but also for the rapid creation of large area molds for nanoimprint lithography, nanocasting, and stencils or masks for lift off processes 