It is generally believed that sulfur hydride under high pressure is a high temperature superconductor In 2015, Drozdov and coworkers reported the discovery of high temperature superconductivity in sulfur hydride However, we have recently argued that the experimental evidence supporting superconductivity in sulfur hydride presented in ref. Ac magnetic susceptibility is a superior test for superconductivity in materials under high pressure ( The background signal is usually obtained by measuring the susceptibility at a pressure value such that no superconducting transition occurs in the temperature range of interest Reference The results shown in Fig. From the data supplied by the authors, we made plots of the raw data and the background signal and of their difference according to Eq. (1). These are shown in Figs. We also learn from these figures that the background signal, which was collected separately for each tempera- target pressure range was from 155-171 GPa. A welldefined and reproducible superconducting signal was triggered at about 168 K at 155 GPa (Fig. To shed further insight on the pressure dependence of Tc in the high-temperature superconducting sulfur hydride system, we have plotted our experimental data together with all previous experimental measurements and our previous theoretical calculations (Fig. To further examine the validity and significance of the susceptibility data for sulfur hydride reported in Instead, when we do the same plots for the different temperature ranges shown in Fig. If the system is being heated at a constant rate, as we were informed However, the temperature sensor cannot be placed in the diamond anvil cell next to the sample, that is physically impossible Therefore, we have to conclude that the sudden change in the temperature increment coinciding with the assumed critical temperature is an experimental artifact. This indicates that the observed change in slope in the ac susceptibility observed at those temperatures is a consequence of the same experimental artifact and cannot be taken as evidence of a superconducting transition. Fig. In this section we ask: assuming the sample did not go superconducting at the T c 's indicated in Fig. Given the anomalous temperature steps found in Fig. We conclude from this analysis that in the experiment there may have been some unwanted/uncontrolled variations in the temperature step, as well as some discrepancies between what was the actual value of the temperature at the sample position versus what the thermometer measured at a different position. This, combined with a bias towards taking seriously results that seemed to agree with expectations, and discarding other results that did not, may have led to ending up with the results shown in Fig. In this paper we have analyzed the raw data However, when considering the rate of change of temperature of the system shown in the raw data for the cases where a superconducting transition was supposedly detected, we found an anomalous jump that exactly lines up with the inferred transition temperature. This, and the fact that the anomaly is not found in the background signal measurements, strongly suggests that the observed change in slope of the susceptibility curves is not an indication of a superconducting transition but instead is an experimental artifact. Furthermore, we hypothesized that as a consequence of this experimental problem the measurements of the temperature were not necessarily accurate, and with small modifications of the temperature scale we showed for two cases that the jumps interpreted as indicating a superconducting transition completely disappear. It should also be noted that the rise in the amplitude of the signal right before the assumed superconducting transition as the temperature is lowered seen in Fig. Ac magnetic susceptibility measurements of sulfur hydride have not been independently reproduced. In view of the results presented here, we urge that these experiments be repeated to establish whether or not they provide support for the claimed superconductivity of sulfur hydride 