We show that a common language can be used to unify the description of parametrically-coupled circuits-parametric amplifiers, frequency converters, and parametric nonreciprocal devices-with that of band-pass filter and impedance matching networks. This enables one to readily adapt network synthesis methods from microwave engineering in the design of parametrically-coupled devices having prescribed transfer characteristics, e.g., gain, bandwidth, return loss, and isolation. We review basic practical aspects of coupled mode theory and filter synthesis, and then show how to apply both, on an equal footing, to the design of multi-pole, broadband parametric and nonreciprocal networks. We supplement the discussion with a range of examples and reference designs. CONTENTS I. Introduction 2 II. Coupling matrices and graphs 2 A. Coupling matrix formalism 2 1. The equations of motion matrix, M 3 2. Generalized scattering 4 3. Simplifications for network synthesis 4 4. Internal dissipative losses 5 B. Coupled-mode graph representation 5 C. Examples 5 1. Parametric frequency converter 5 2. Parametric amplifier 7 3. Parametric circulator 8 D. Graph Reduction 9 III. Parametric coupling as a circuit element 10 A. Parametric conversion 10 B. Parametric frequency conversion is a generalized impedance/admittance inverter 11 C. Parametric amplification 12 D. Modulated mutual coupling 12 IV. Band-pass impedance matching and filter networks 12 A. Series/shunt band-pass ladder network design 14 B. Coupled-resonator method for band-pass network design 14 C. Impedance-matching of a resonated load 15 D. Coupled-resonator filter design example 15 E. Filter synthesis methodically determines resonator coupling rates 16 V. Engineering coupled-mode networks The success of Josephson parametric amplifiers in enabling high-fidelity readout of superconducting qubits has led to a flurry of research into parametrically-coupled networks, including amplifiers, frequency converters, and parametric non-reciprocal networks Despite significant progress, we make the following observations: a) there is currently no methodology in place to engineer the transfer characteristics (e.g., bandwidth, ripple, gain, return loss, etc.) of parametricallycoupled devices to arbitrary (physically realisable) specifications, and b) there is no unified language for including parametrically-coupled devices on an equal footing with the electrical, mechanical, optical, or hybrid circuit in which they may be embedded. In this tutorial, we will show that the problem of designing parametrically-coupled circuits can be mapped onto a band-pass network synthesis problem. In doing so, we establish a common language to describe parametric interactions as circuit elements-this allows one to design and simulate general circuits that involve both parametric and passive coupling between multiple resonant modes, while also bringing band-pass network synthesis methods to bear on the design of more complicated parametrically-coupled devices. To be clear, this approach is applicable to any system that can be described by a system of linear coupled mode equations, including both resonant and parametric coupling on equal footing. This tutorial is organized as follows. In Section II we briefly summarize the coupling-graph approach and associated coupling-matrix formalism described in Refs. 9, 18, and 19, which provide a convenient way to visualize parametrically-coupled circuits and calculate their S-parameters. In Section III we discuss parametric couplers and show that they function as generalized admittance-or impedance-inverters-common in microwave-engineering circuit design as critical elements in the design of filter and impedance matching networks. Next, we briefly outline in Section IV some basic concepts and methods in band-pass network synthesis, and in Section V we unify the microwave-engineering language of band-pass network synthesis with that of conventional coupled mode theory. We apply the concepts developed throughout the preceding sections to design a range of parametrically-coupled devices: a broadband parametric converter, a broadband parametric circulator, and a broadband non-degenerate Josephson parametric amplifier, all combining both passive (resonant) and parametric couplings to achieve a specific target response. In this section we will sketch a formalism for the analysis and visualization of coupled-mode networks, define terminology, and establish notational conventions. The formalism that we will use is based on Ref. We consider a set of resonant modes having natural frequencies {ω k }. Each mode is characterized by a complex mode amplitude a k , such that a * k a k = n k is the number of photons in mode k. For example, in an electrical circuit we may define where L k (C k ) is the inductance (capacitance) of the mode, Z k = L k /C k is the mode impedance, I k is the mode current and V k is the mode voltage. Note that here a k is classical mode amplitude and the choice to scale to the square root photon (or phonon) number is a convenient correspondence to its formal annihilation operator counterpart. We note that the coupling description given here yields the same linear scattering matrix one would derive with a more rigorous quantum approach (c.f., Ref. (2) where we have included the drive term a in j , and j spans the set of resonances/resonators. The dissipation rate γ j = γ int j + γ ext j is the sum of the mode's internal dissipation, γ int j , and external loading, γ ext j , due to coupling out through the signal ports. In an electrical circuit, the dissipation rate is simply γ = 1/RC, where R is the equivalent shunt resistance seen by a parallel resonant circuit (in recent literature, this quantity is often denoted as κ, but we choose to maintain here the notation of To determine the driven response of this coupled system, it is more convenient to Fourier transform the equations of motion (EoM), Eq. The matrix M encapsulates the frequency-domain equations of motion, describing how energy is coupled between oscillating fields and their mixing products. The matrix K describes external dissipation for all modes in the mode basis, K ≡ diag({ γ ext j }). The prefactor γ 0 is an overall normalization-a characteristic rate in the system-whose form is chosen to suit different physical problems as we discuss below. It is important to note that, in general, the complete mode basis can be quite large, yet many of these mode amplitudes are far off-resonant, and do not contribute to the steady state dynamics. It is therefore customary to reduce the mode basis v by performing rotating wave approximations (RWA), eliminating modes whose frequencies are fast with respect to their corresponding host resonance natural frequency, i.e., if |ω s j -ω j | γ j . The structure of M has a very simple general form, where we define the diagonal detuning terms and the off-diagonal coupling terms The normalized coupling rates |β jk | 2 are related to the cooperativity parameter in cavity QED There are four main blocks in M in Eq. ( since the other equation of motion is just the conjugate of this equation. If, on the other hand, the resonator is parametrically pumped with ω P 2ω A , the modes a[ω s A ] and a[ω s A -ω P ] are coupled and the full 2×2 M matrix is required. We refer the reader to Ref. 18 for a more detailed treatment. The coupling coefficients β jk follow a particular pattern that is determined by the coupling mechanism The input and output drive amplitudes, v in and v out , obey a boundary condition at each port, which connects them to the internal mode amplitudes From this, together with Eq. ( It is useful to write this in component form, When all coupling in the network is passive, there is no frequency translation and Eq. ( In the above, we have cast the problem of mode coupling in a linear system as generally as possible, following the prescription in As an example, a simple 2-port microwave N -pole cavity filter will have N cavities, each with extremely low internal loss, but since it is connected to input/output ports at the ends, γ 1 and γ N present the only available dissipation channels. In other words, the total dissipation rates of the 'internal' modes can be set to zero, {γ 2 , . . . , γ N -1 } = 0, and the subset of scattering elements, is sufficient to describe the filter response. To this end, we will mark a subset of the modes as ports, P ⊂ {v j }, through which energy can be injected and extracted, and set all mode dissipations and input drives to zero, γ k = 0, v in k = 0 for everything that is not a port. Likewise, since the total dissipation of a resonator k is the sum of its internal and external losses, γ k = γ int k + γ ext k , the 'no internal loss' assumption means that γ k = γ ext k and we can drop the 'int/ext' superscripts in the remainder of this tutorial. In this same spirit, we choose a form for the normalization rate that is the geometric mean of the dissipations of all connected ports, where N P is the number of ports. For the 2-port example above, γ 0 = √ γ 1 γ N . Modes that are marked as ports can additionally be characterized with a finite quality factor Since in the rest of this tutorial we will focus on the problem of network synthesis primarily through the lens of electrical circuit design, it will be convenient to connect the notion of input admittance to the general picture presented thus far. These are connected by inverting the usual formula for the reflection coefficient in terms of input admittance, Y in = Y 0 (1 -S kk )/(1 + S kk ). One can then show that the admittance, looking into resonator k at mode frequency ω s k is where Y 0 is the reference admittance of the environment connected to port k, usually taken to be (50 Ω) -1 . We will proceed for the remainder of this tutorial with the "zero internal loss" assumption. This assumption is reasonable for implementations based on superconducting circuits and microwave cavities, however, in optomechanical circuits internal losses play a more central role The topic of coupled-resonator network design techniques in the presence of internal dissipative losses has received considerable attention in the microwave engineering literature, and we point the reader to, e.g., Refs. Noise properties of coupled-mode systems can be calculated using the EoM matrix formalism described in this section by including all internal losses as effective ports The formalism described in Section II A provides a method for calculating S-parameters for driven modes within an arbitrary system of coupled resonators, where ports are generalized to both physical and frequencyspace and the couplings can be complex, carrying the phases of the pumps driving them. This allows one to include both parametric coupling processes (amplification and frequency conversion) and passive coupling structures in a straightforward way, but requires careful bookkeeping. In multiple-resonator systems, the addition of even a few parametric couplings can generate a surprising increase in the mode basis size (see, e.g., Refs. Since the coupled-modes EoM matrix M is square, it can be represented as a directed graph Graph primitives for 1-and 2-mode processes are given in the left-hand column in Figure Since there are only three possible mechanisms for coupling-resonance (passive coupling), parametric frequency conversion (modulated at the differencefrequency), and parametric amplification (modulated at the sum-frequency)-with well-defined relationships between forward and backward couplings, we can simplify the graph representation to show all directed edge pairs (β jk and β kj ) as single (resonant) or double lines (parametric). Parametric frequency conversion and amplification are further distinguished by whether they connect co-rotating or counter-rotating (conjugated) modes, indicated by mode labels and face color for each node. Figure In the simplified graph representation, we only draw self-loops for modes that are connected to ports and therefore have non-vanishing dissipation. Practical use of the tools outlined above is best illustrated through simple canonical examples of parametrically coupled networks. In the examples below, we will highlight a design flow that uses the network graph to extract its EoM matrix, calculate its S-parameters, and derive design parameters based on performance requirements. The 2-mode parametric frequency converter is the simplest non-trivial parametric device. As a concrete example, one may construct a circuit comprised of two LC real complex complex FIG. resonators, coupled by a modulated mutual inductance (Figure If the natural frequencies differ by more than the bandwidths, |ω A -ω B | √ γ A γ B , energy exchange is greatly reduced, but can be recovered if the mutual inductance is pumped (sinusoidally modulated) at the difference frequency, ω P |ω A -ω B |, resulting in frequency conversion-power is transferred from a in to b out , and from b in to a out . The graph representation of the 2-mode frequency converter is shown in Fig. where we have already substituted for ω s B via the pump frequency, ω s B = ω s A + ω P . Observe that since the pump is tuned to the difference frequency, we also have that ω P -ω B = -ω A , so we could have instead written in Eq. ( In other words, the fact that the modes are at different frequencies drops out of the equations. We will use this insight repeatedly here, keeping in mind that deviation of the pump frequency from perfect tuning (while beyond the scope of the present discussion) can open additional useful design space in certain applications. We will want to design the network to be impedancematched to the 50 Ω ports. Using Eq. ( At zero detuning, ω s A -ω A = 0, we have and requiring S AA = 0 for perfect matching results in |β AB | = 0.5. Further, from the transmission S BA we can calculate ∆ω, the 3-dB bandwidth of the network, and find that the bandwidth is optimized when γ A = γ B , where it is equal to ∆ω = √ 2γ 0 . Fig. In Section V we will see that the converter we designed here exactly implements a 2-pole max-flat (Butterworth) response, as Fig. S AA S BA FIG. In Fig. The coupled-mode graph of a 2-mode parametric amplifier is shown in Fig. Observe that the mode B is now conjugated as indicated by its open face shading and the anti-conjugation of corresponding detuning term -∆ * B in the EoM matrix. We have again used the rules in Fig. The detuning terms are: where we have replaced ω s B = -ω s A + ω P . Since it is also the case that -ω P + ω B = -ω A we could have written instead -∆ * B = 1 γ0 ω s A -ω A + i γ B 2 , demonstrating again that under resonant pump condition (ω P perfectly tuned to the sum-frequency), the system has only a single independent frequency variable. The reflection off of the signal mode A using Eq. ( and at the center frequency of the amplifier we get where G is the signal power gain. From Eq. ( which is maximal when γ A = γ B , and inversely proportional to the amplitude gain. The two driven modes of the parametric amplifier are often identified as signal and idler. This terminology is anchored in historical jargon-early nondegenerate parametric amplifiers terminated the idler tank circuit (i.e., the resonator that did not host the incident signal mode) Fig. The parametric converter and parametric amplifier are represented by simply-connected graphs (there are no loops) and therefore the phase of the pump only adds S AA S BA FIG. an overall phase in the S-parameters but otherwise does not affect the behavior of the device. Therefore, in the examples above we could have taken the coupling terms to be real without loss of generality. When the network's graph is multiply-connected, the relative phases of the coupling terms matter. The (anti-)conjugate symmetry of the parametric coupling coefficients, combined with interference from closed loops in these geometries can generate synthetic non-reciprocal scattering If the port coupling is equal for all ports, γ A = γ B = γ C = γ 0 , then from Eq. S AA S BA S CA S AC FIG. e.g., S AA (ω s A = ω A ) = 0. Figure The graph of a coupled-mode system can be simplified by eliminating nodes from the graph, in a process known as Kron reduction For example, referring to the parametric converter in Fig. For the purpose of driving toward our main goal in this tutorial, we are interested in the admittance seen at a certain port, and we will use graph reduction to write Eq. ( where ∆ k is the overall result of successively applying Eq. ( Graph reduction of a four-mode circuit with nearestneighbor connectivity, where couplings are either passive or via parametric frequency conversion processes. Carrying out the successive substitutions as indicated in Fig. Note that the dissipation due to the port connected to mode 4 in Fig. The pattern that emerges from Eqs. ( In Appendix F we show that the continued fraction expression of Eq. ( In the previous section we developed implementationagnostic methods to analyze parametrically-coupled circuits using the coupling matrix formalism We consider an inductor whose value is sinusoidally modulated, L(t) = L 0 + |δL| cos ω P t, as shown in Fig. We can identify signals oscillating at ±ω 1 as the signal, and those oscillating at ±ω 2 as the idler If the pump is driven at ω P,FC = ω 2 -ω 1 we couple the voltage and current components oscillating at ω 1 to those oscillating at ω 2 , corresponding to a parametric frequency conversion process. If the pump frequency alternatively satisfies ω P,PA = ω 1 + ω 2 we couple components oscillating at ω 1 to those at -ω 2 , corresponding to a parametric amplification process. When ω 1 = ω 2 (nondegenerate parametric amplification) we get additional frequency conversion. When the inductance in Fig. yielding the following impedance Z-matrix The Z-matrix (or its inverse, the admittance Y-matrix) can be converted to an ABCD (transmission) matrix What functional role does an element described by the ABCD matrix Eq. ( Microwave engineers will recognize the function of the parametric coupling, as embodied in Eq. ( A key insight of this tutorial is that a parametric coupling driven with a difference-frequency pump generalizes the concept of the passive impedance (admittance) inverter, in that it transforms between impedances connected to ports that are not necessarily at the same frequency where L 1 and L 2 are the total effective inductances (including L 0 ) of the two coupled modes When the inductance in Fig. and can be described by the Z-matrix From the resulting ABCD matrix (Fig. and, in the shunt representation, admittances are transformed according to Eqs. where Y idler is the admittance of the idler circuit. Eq. ( Above we discussed a particular circuit implementation of a parametric coupler, namely, the grounded modulated inductor, which can be implemented by a Josephson junction or a dc-SQUID (Appendix B). We note however, that the same reasoning can be applied to other types of parametric couplers, for example, signal and idler circuits that are coupled via a modulated mutual inductance, as was shown in Fig. This model is more appropriate for circuits like the JPC For a circuit having a signal inductor L 1 and an idler inductor L 2 , which are coupled by the modulated mutual inductance of Eq. ( and Comparison with Eqs. Up to this point we have outlined a graph-based language that facilitates rapid analysis of arbitrary, linearly coupled mode systems, including a direct mapping between scattering parameters and the collections of coupling permutations that generate them. We have seen hints in Sections II C and II D that point to a deeper connection between parametric coupled-mode network design and the problem of filter and matching network design known from microwave engineering. In fact, similar graph-based approaches are already established in the design of microwave frequency cavity-based filters Band pass filter design begins by selecting a target transmission profile (e.g., ripple and rolloff characteristics), from which we can choose the desired number of filter sections N , the filter's center frequency ω 0 , bandwidth ∆ω, and response type (Chebyshev, Butterworth, etc.). We find the corresponding normalized filter coefficients {g i } from tables in e.g., Refs. 28 and 57, where for an N section filter we will have N + 2 zero-indexed coefficients. These coefficients relate to polynomials specifying the input impedance of the network as a function of frequency (Appendix E). The coefficient g 0 , representing the conductance of the source, is often omitted from tables as usually g 0 = 1 by definition. The last coefficient, g N +1 , represents the conductance of the load. The remaining coefficients g 1 . . . g N correspond to the normalized reac- tances of the elements (alternating capacitors and inductors) that make up the low-pass filter prototype, as in Fig. A. Series/shunt band-pass ladder network design Students are usually taught to start with a low-pass prototype network, Fig. For a given set of prototype coefficients {g i }, a specified reference impedance Z 0 = 1/Y 0 , and a specified center frequency ω 0 and bandwidth ∆ω, the resonators should be constructed such that the admittance Y j of the parallel resonator corresponding to the prototype coefficient g j is given by and the impedance Z k of the series resonator corresponding to the prototype coefficient g k is The last coefficient, g N +1 , corresponds to the load immittance, and its denormalization will depend on whether it is preceded by a series section or a parallel section: ; N th section series Once the resonator impedances Z i are known, their inductances and capacitances can be calculated in the usual way, L i = Z i /ω 0 and C i = 1/Z i ω 0 . The coupling rate between the j parallel resonator and the neighboring k = j ± 1 series resonator is a function of their respective impedances: This method of circuit construction will be useful in understanding the results of Ref. 6, as we show in Sec. V D 2. The series/shunt ladder network we get by following the procedure in Sec. IV A may be difficult to implement in practice, as it offers little flexibility in component selection, and does not generalize well to circuits that are not based on lumped-element electrical resonators. A more convenient circuit can be realized by replacing the series-connected series-LC resonators with shuntconnected parallel-LC resonators sandwiched between two admittance inverters In this configuration, the inverters are responsible for the coupling between the resonators. Because the inverters can also transform between impedance levels, the designer is now free to choose the resonator impedances to best fit the available technology. This circuit topology of coupled resonators additionally lends itself more naturally to a description based on the coupled-mode language developed in Section II. Coupled-resonator band-pass network design methods are illustrated in detail in Ref. Next, choose a physical implementation for each of the inverters; in a lumped-element circuit we can choose either the inductive circuit of Fig. The physical implementation of immittance inverters, as in Fig. We illustrated the coupled-resonator design method here with lumped-element parallel LC resonators coupled by admittance inverters. If the preferred resonator type is a series LC, a similar procedure that uses impedance-(K-) inverters can be used We already mentioned that the use of immittance inverters in a filter design offers flexibility in choosing the impedance levels of the constituent resonators. Indeed, it is clear from Eqs. ( In many cases that will be important to our discussion here, we will have to design band-pass networks to match a given 'resonated load'-essentially a resistance shunted by an LC resonator, or more generally, some admittance function Y (ω) that can be approximated by an LC resonator with a finite quality factor Q at a particular frequency of interest. The latter is a case that we encounter in Section V C when matching a parametric circulator. In the case of Josephson parametric amplifiers (Sec. V D), we will be presented with the need to match a load (the parametrically pumped SQUID) that looks like a (negative) resistance in parallel with an inductance; we 'resonate' this load by adding a shunt capacitor to the device. The Q factor of the resonated load can be calculated from its admittance Y (ω) via where ω 0 is the resonance frequency. For a resistor R shunted by a parallel lumped LC resonator with impedance Z res , this reduces to the usual Q = R/Z res . Once the Q factor is known, we can proceed with the network design, with the resonated load accounting for the elements labeled as g 0 and g 1 in Fig. where here, too, w is the fractional bandwidth. Eq. ( Note that the decrement condition Eq. ( D. Coupled-resonator filter design example As an example, we will design a 3-pole, 500 MHz bandpass filter centered at ω 0 /2π = 5 GHz using a 0.5 dB ripple Chebyshev prototype, in a Z 0 = 50 Ω environment. The prototype coefficients for a 3-pole, 0.5 dB ripple Chebyshev network can be found in e.g., Ref. 28: g i = {1.0, 1.5963, 1.0967, 1.5963, 1.0}. We will choose (rather arbitrarily for demonstration purposes) the impedances of the three resonators, highlighted in Fig. to get C 01 = C 34 = 0.186 pF. The values of the inductance L j of resonator Z j is simply calculated using L j = Z j /ω 0 : L 1 = L 3 = 1.27 nH and L 2 = 0.96 nH. The resonator capacitors have to absorb the negative shunt capacitances of the inverters, so that: where we have used (Appendix D, Eq. (D2), and Ref. , and similarly for C 34e . Now that all component values are specified, we can construct the circuit in Fig. The preceding sections, and the example in Sec. IV D, demonstrate that band-pass filter synthesis boils down to determining the values of the immittance inverters that are disposed between the filter resonators, and between the resonators and the environment. We have seen that these structures effectively control the coupling rates in the circuit, as their physical implementation as coupling capacitors or inductors would suggest. A third key insight in this tutorial is that the art of band-pass network synthesis is concerned with methodically engineering the coupling rates in a system of resonant modes. These methods transcend electrical circuit design and could be applied in diverse areas such as mechanical The discussion thus far points toward a deep connection between parametric networks and filter networks. Here, we will build on the insights developed in the preceding sections to unify the language used to describe these systems. A key insight from Section II C is that in parametric networks that are driven by pumps that are tuned to either the sum-or the difference-frequency, the fact that the different modes in the circuit have different frequencies essentially drops out of the equations-the behavior of the circuit can be described using a single reference frequency, usually taken as that of the signal mode. In that respect, the EoM matrices of systems coupled via parametric conversion processes with 1D-connectivity are indistinguishable (up to an overall phase) from those of passively coupled circuits such as band-pass filters. The novelty of parametric coupling only manifests in the off-diagonal elements of the EoM matrix, through nontrivial phases (in the case of multiply connected circuits) and anti-conjugation (in the case of parametric amplification). The second key insight, arising from Section III, is that parametric couplings function as generalized immittance inverters. The use of immittance inverters in the design of filter networks was described in Section IV, where we developed an additional insight, that the art of filter synthesis is ultimately concerned with methodically determining coupling rates between resonant modes in the circuit. Immittance inverters therefore should be thought of as the circuit implementation of the off-diagonal elements in the coupled-mode EoM matrices of Sec. II. Figure The coupling rate provided by an admittance inverter J jk disposed between resonant modes j and k, in a network design based on prototype with coefficients {g j }, is given by where ∆ω is the bandwidth of the network. The loaded quality factors of the first and last resonators due to their coupling to the environment through J 01 and J N,N +1 is given by where ω 0 is the network's center frequency. Comparing Eqs. ( Further, comparing to Eqs. ( where Z S and Z L are the source and load impedances, and Z j is the impedance of mode j. Note that when inverters are connected between modes of different frequencies, the normalized bandwidth w should always be calculated with respect to the reference frequency, so that the absolute bandwidth ∆ω is fixed throughout the whole circuit. Below we will demonstrate how we can use the above correspondence to design parametrically coupled circuits with prescribed transfer characteristics. In Section II C 1 we claimed that a 2-mode frequency converter, designed for perfect port match, exactly implements a second-order Butterworth filter. We can now see that indeed, when using the coefficients for the appropriate prototype The coupled-mode graph for the design is shown in Fig. We can write the EoM matrix associated with the graph in Fig. We use design tables Figure A circuit implementation for a Josephson parametric frequency converter with the above characteristics is shown schematically in Fig. With the resonator impedances now set, we use Eqs. ( The simulations are in good mutual agreement, and both are in reasonable agreement with the calculated S-parameters in Fig. The parametric circulator as described by Ref. 9 consists of three modes connected pairwise via parametric frequency conversion processes. One of the pumps can have a phase of π/2 with respect to the others, giving rise to circulation. The circuit was already discussed in Sec. II C. To broadband match the parametric circulator we will adopt the ideas of Anderson In general, each port of the 3-mode core circuit can be outfitted with a different matching network (having a different prototype, number of sections, or bandwidth), however, here we choose to illustrate the design concepts with a simple, symmetric design, which can be fully worked-out analytically. If all ports have equal coupling to the environment γ A = γ B = γ C and all parametric coupling strengths are equal, the circulator circuit has cyclic symmetry, suggesting that the analysis that follows can be done equivalently on either of the bare circulator modes, and that the same matching network parameters (bandwidth and prototype coefficients) can be used on all ports. The coupling matrix of the bare circulator, Fig. Using Eq. ( whose real part at the center of the band ω = ω A is: We approximate the slope of the imaginary part of the admittance using the line connecting the points Y0 }, i.e., the average slope over the target frequency band (see Fig. If the network that we choose to match the circulator with is symmetric, such that its prototype coefficients satisfy g 0 g 1 = g N g N +1 , then Eq. ( where the 3 × 3 blocks are ∆k = diag(∆ Ak , ∆ Bk , ∆ Ck ), βjk = β jk I, M c is the bare circulator matrix Eq. ( Figure In Section II C 3, we mentioned that the minimal construction of a parametric circulator requires only one of the modes to be at a different frequency than the others. For the circuit implementation of the matched circulator, we will take advantage of this feature, and set the frequencies of both the A and C modes to 5 GHz, while the B modes frequency is set to 7 GHz. We will design with the same prototype as above, and with the same bandwidth of 250 MHz. The circuit schematic is shown in Fig. For the circuit in Fig. The S-parameters from circuit simulations are in reasonable agreement with the calculated S-parameters in Fig. The Josephson parametric amplifier, like its varactorbased predecessors , is equivalent to the inverse of the usual reflection coefficient off of a positive resistance , so that √ G = 1/ρ. Therefore, when we design the matching circuit we will design for a finite reflection-an engineered mismatch-that is either flat or has specified ripple over the band when the network is terminated by |R P A |. This is a different requirement than what is used in typical filter and matching networks (where the goal is to approximate ρ = 0), so we cannot use the usual network proto-types designed for those situations. Appendix E shows how to calculate suitable prototypes based on Butterworth and Chebyshev response characteristics. Tables of Chebyshev prototypes for matching negative-resistance amplifiers can also be found in Ref. As already mentioned, physical realizations of immittance inverters carry their own parasitic frequency dependence; this is true as well for the pumped nonlinear element, i.e., |R P A | is some function of frequency, see for example Eq. ( Here we will design a non-degenerate parametric amplifier with a bandwidth of 500 MHz, a signal band centered at 5 GHz, an idler band centered at 7 GHz, and using a 3-pole Chebyshev prototype designed for 20 dB signal gain and 0.5 dB gain ripple. From Appendix E (Table Figure , and can be written by inspection using the anti-conjugation rules in Fig. (74) From the network prototype coefficients g i we calculate the coupling terms for the passive elements, β 23 = 0.339 and β 12 = 0.270 using Eq. ( Fig. Roy et al. Here, we will show that the design of Ref. 6 can be derived from a synthesized 2-pole network with Butterworth characteristics. The plan is to start with a 2pole matching network prototype suitable for negative resistance amplifiers. One of the poles is the resonated SQUID, the other pole is what Ref. 6 calls the "auxiliary resonator." We will first show how to obtain design parameters for a ladder circuit as shown in Fig. For a given center frequency, ω 0 , and bandwidth, ∆ω, the design is fully constrained by the inductance L p of the Josephson circuit, in this case a dc SQUID, at the operating flux bias point. This is resonated out with a shunt capacitor C p , to match a target frequency ω 0 . The design in We use a 2-pole max-flat (Butterworth) prototype with 20 dB gain, calculated according to Appendix E (Table II) {g 0 , . . . , g 3 } = {1.0, 0.408, 0.234, 1.106}, (75) where g 0 is the pumped junction and g 3 is the 50 Ω load. To obtain the desired ladder topology of Fig. 1/Z p is constrained, we will use this equation instead to find the appropriate reference impedance for the network, Using Z ref above in Eq. ( Finally the load impedance, Eq. ( 8 Ω. To transform Z L to the Z 0 = 50 Ω environment, we insert an admittance inverter, J in Fig. For completeness, before proceeding to the implementation of the circuit shown in Fig. Proceeding with the circuit implementation of Ref. 6, the series resonator was implemented as a half-wave transmission line resonator with impedance Z λ/2 , and the inverter J is implemented as a quarter wave transmission line with impedance Z λ/4 . The two transmission lines are in series with each other as shown in Fig. The impedance Z seen looking through the series resonator Z ser towards a load Z L = 1/J 2 Z 0 (Fig. Likewise, the impedance Z seen through a half wave transmission line with Z λ/2 in series with a quarter-wave transmission line with Z λ/4 (Fig. this is the basis for Eq. (S40) in Ref. 6 and Eq. (2) in Ref. 66. Equating Eq. ( where Z λ/4 = 1/J (Eq. 79), and Z ser found in Eq. (78). Using the numerical values in Eq. ( Figure SQUID resonance frequency to 6 GHz), and pump amplitude Φ ac = 0.111 Φ 0 . The curve labeled (a-c) (red) corresponds to the schematics in Fig. In Section III C we saw that sum-frequency parametric coupling (amplification process) presents the input port with an effective negative resistance, resulting in gain. This negative resistance, as we have seen in Eqs. where g 0 and g 1 are the prototype coefficients, w is the fractional bandwidth, and Z 1 the impedance of the resonance embedding the modulated inductor. In the coupled-mode EoM matrix picture, the pump amplitude is expressed by the dimensionless parametric coupling strength β p . We can calculate it as the normalized dissipation rate of resonator Z 1 due to the effective resistance |R P A |: where we have used γ 0 = ∆ω/g N g N +1 , Eq. ( In a circuit implementation, the pump amplitude is expressed via the parameter α, defined in Figs. as shown in Appendix C. Eqs. 84 and 85 are useful in circuit design and simulation. Eq. 85 in particular should be used to ensure that the chosen physical implementation of the parametric coupler can deliver the required modulation strength. Knowledge of this quantity can also inform the design of the experimental setup, with respect to e.g., choice of pump generator, attenuation in the microwave cable delivering the pump, or on-chip coupling architecture. It can also serve as a starting point for experimentally finding the optimal pump power during the amplifier bringup and calibration procedure. As a summary, we outline a general design flow that we have found useful in prototyping and simulating parametrically coupled networks. For a given required functionality, we find it useful to first sketch the coupling graph, Sec. II B. Doing so we can readily identify the required coupling processes, plan the mode basis, and assign mode frequencies and ports. 3. Assign coupling rates. Given a bandwidth requirement for the circuit, calculate the port dissipation rates γ k using the prototype coefficients and Eqs. ( 4. Write down the EoM matrix. From the network graph, write down the EoM matrix using the rules in Fig. Calculate S-parameters. The S-parameters of the design can now be calculated from the EoM matrix using Eq. ( The configuration of the parametric coupler will constrain the rest of the circuit. In a Josephson junction circuit, we have several options for the coupler, including a shunt-connected dc-SQUID (Sec. V B), an rf-SQUID coupler (Sec. V C), or a balanced bridge 7. Determine resonator implementation. With the resonators embedding the parametric coupler determined in step 6, next choose the implementation (e.g. lumped-element, quarter-wave, cavity) and impedances of the remaining resonators in the circuit based on the available technology. 8. Calculate immittance inverters. With all resonator impedances now known, use Eqs. ( At the completion of the above steps, the design should be ready for layout and manufacture. As noted, many of these steps can be automated based on the rules and equations given in this tutorial, allowing the designer to focus their creative effort on steps 1, 6, and the physical design. The design of parametrically coupled networks and that of microwave filters both boil down to engineering the mutual coupling rates between resonant modes, and between these modes and the environment. These disciplines, however, approach this problem with seemingly different language, tools, and methods. In this tutorial we have shown that, in fact, a common language can be used to describe both electrical filter networks and parametric networks, regardless of their physical implementation. We have shown that given prescribed response characteristics for a 1D-connected system of N modes, which can be fully described by N + 2 prototype coefficients, the coupling rates in the system can be calculated from these coefficients to realize the desired response. The correspondence we established between the β (coupling efficiency) and γ (dissipation rate) of the coupled-modes language, to the admittance (impedance) inverters J (K) of the filter synthesis language, offers agility in designing systems that may contain a mix of both passive and parametric couplings. Techniques developed for matching more complicated electrical systems, like ferrite circulators and amplifiers, as well as techniques for designing with internally lossy components, can now be readily used in the context of parametrically coupled devices. The principles outlined here also open the door for microwave engineers and filter designers to have significant impact on key technologies, components, and subsystems in the quantum computer stack. We presented a range of example designs based on simple filter networks, however, more sophisticated multiplyconnected structures have been researched, both in the microwave filter arena The Z-matrix form is especially useful in helping to identify a convenient circuit representation. This becomes clear if we convert an arbitrary Z-matrix to a transmission (T -or ABCD) matrix From this form, we see that diagonal elements of the Zmatrix represent series impedances, while off-diagonal elements correspond to an inverter-like object sandwiched between these impedances, Fig. If we substitute into Eq. (A1) the Z-matrices we derived for the modulated inductor, Eq. ( and where we have defined a complex inverter constant, From both of these expressions, we see that the timeinvariant part of the inductance, L 0 , looks like a series inductor, with its impedance reckoned at both the signal (ω 1 ) and idler frequencies (±ω 2 ). Meanwhile, the inverter's role is to convert current at the signal/idler frequencies to voltage at the idler/signal frequencies. The strength of this conversion process is determined by the pump amplitude |δL|. In Figure The Josephson equations where Φ 0 ≈ 2.068 μA • nH is the single flux quantum, and I 0 is the junction critical current. This is a nonlinear function of the bias current and, if expanded around I = 0, in the small current limit this can be approximated as where we define the and inductance modulation amplitude a. 4-wave mixing. Eq. (B3) differs slightly from the expression in Eq. ( b. 3-wave mixing. Alternatively, one can choose to add a dc-bias to the pump current, I P (t) = I dc + |I P | cos(ω P t + φ P ), in which case the lowest order expansion for the inductance is with Eq. (B6) corresponds to 'direct' modulation of the inductance at ω P as in Eq. ( While the current nonlinearity above is convenient to use, it requires some care in handling the large pump tone required to modulate the inductance, which can be close to the signal frequency in the case of 4-wave mixing, necessitating additional components in the signal path to cancel or filter it out. In practice, these extra components can impact the overall noise performance and complicate operation and bringup. As an alternative to using the current nonlinearity, one can utilize a loop topology that interferes two supercurrent paths. The result is an effective Josephson inductance that can be tuned by the magnetic flux threading the loop. There are several variants of these SQUID (superconducting quantum interference device) configurations, but in this work, for simplicity we utilize an ideal dc-SQUID. This is comprised of two Josephson junctions in parallel, with no stray inductance and a means to modulate its magnetic flux where Φ A is the magnetic flux induced by an adjacent flux line, and can include both dc and ac components. L J0 (I) is the single junction current-dependent inductance, Eq. (B1). Eq. (B9) is a nonlinear, periodic function in the applied flux. As with the Josephson current nonlinearity, one can likewise choose to bias such that the dominant first order expansion term in flux is either quadratic/4-wave (Φ dc = 0) or linear/3-wave (|Φ dc | = 0 modulo (n + 1/2)Φ 0 for integer n). Just as we did for the current-pumped junction, we can likewise expand the inductance for a given flux pump modulation, Φ A (t) = Φ dc +Φ P cos (ω P t + φ P ). One can then generate both 4-wave (Eq. (B3)) and 3wave (Eq. (B6)) inductance modulation forms as we did above Appendix C: Using the J/K-inverter models of parametric coupling in amplifier design In Figs. As noted in Sec. III C, the immitance inverter models reduce to the 'pumpistor model' In Figs. where the inverter constants J s/i are defined in Fig. The single-pole design in the above section is simple, and can be easily extended to a nondegenerate amplifier. One starts with a modulated inductance with a value that is constrained by its physical realization (e.g., available critical current densities in a given process), and the center frequency of the amplifier can then be set by the value of C 1 . The value of the terminating impedance Z 2 can be chosen to yield the desired bandwidth, ∆ω = 1/2πZ 2 C 1 . In turn, Z 2 can be realized by transforming the 50 Ω source impedance using an immitance inverter (see Appendix D). In designs using multi-pole matching networks, the relative immittances of each of the sections can be systematically determined by the filter prototypes. In Section V D 1 we designed a coupled-mode network for a matched nondegenerate amplifier, but abstracted the physical details of the parametric coupler. Here we demonstrate a physical circuit synthesis procedure using the method of Sec. IV A and the parametric inverter model from Sec. III. Furthermore, whereas in Sec. V D 1 we assumed the same prototype and bandwidth was used for both signal and idler ports, here we treat a more general synthesis problem that does not make this assumption. We start with the circuit shown in Fig. where g m,k is the prototype coefficient corresponding to the kth section in the mth circuit, and with m ∈ {s, i}. Note that the reference impedances for the respective signal and idler circuits, Z m,0 , as extracted from Eq. C3 are not generally going to be 50 Ω. With the reference impedance found from Eq. (C3) and the prototype coefficients {g m,k }, we can proceed to derive a circuit with alternating series/parallel resonators (Section IV A). As in the degenerate amplifier example above, the 2-port scattering parameters can be calculated simply by computing the total transmission matrix product, however in this case, the signal and idler modes correspond to separate physical circuits and ports. Figure Figure Here we show how to calculate the modulation amplitude in a general multi-pole parametric amplifier circuit. Knowledge of this parameter is useful for a few reasons. First, it gives the designer a basis for setting requirements on physical parameters such as the participation ratio of the modulated inductance to the total inductance, or the on-chip coupling strength of the ac bias line to the modulated component. Second, it helps determine whether the required inverter constant (in this example J m , as defined in Sec. III C and Figs. In Figures Here, ω s0 and ω i0 are the signal and idler center frequencies, Y i,Ni+1 is the idler termination admittance, and we have used the definitions in Fig. we can, after recognizing the terms in the denominator of Eq. (C5) as denormalized filter section immittances, derive a general form for the modulation amplitude, The positive and negative signs in the exponent of the gain factor correspond to the use of series/K-type and shunt/J-type inverters, respectively. Likewise, Eq. (C8) is generalized to arbitrary filter orders for the signal/idler circuits, N s/i , different filter prototype coefficients, and differing fractional bandwidth specifications ∆ω m /ω m0 . The p s/i are parity exponents that evaluate to p m = 1 when N m is even, and p m = -1 when N m is odd. This result expands on the examples we have given in the main text, where the same bandwidth and prototype was used for both signal and idler. Since α is physically bounded by the k = 1 mode inductances, α ≤ 1, Eq. (C8) sets limits to the available bandwidth. Likewise, for a fixed bandwidth and gain, one finds that the normalized modulation amplitude √ α gets smaller at increasing prototype order. In practical terms, this means that it gets easier to achieve the target gain as one increases the order of the matching network. The canonical inverter realization consists of either a π network (Fig. shunted by a negative reactance, -C 01e where Here we have set ω = ω 0 so that this transformation is exact at the center frequency. This particular topology is similar to the capacitive π inverter, with a leg removed. The expressions are similar to the symmetric π version, Fig. We start with a power loss function, P L (ω), which is an even function of frequency, normalized to a cutoff frequency of 2π×1 Hz. This function is usually expressed as a polynomial of order 2N , where N usually corresponds to the number of reactances (for low-pass networks) or resonant modes (for band-pass networks) in the circuit. The reflected power at the input of the network is given by: For Butterworth networks, P L can be written as: and for Chebyshev networks, it can be written as: where T N (ω) is a Chebyshev polynomial of order N . In both expressions, A ∈ [0, 1] controls the match (P L = 1 means zero reflection), and k 2 controls the reflection at the cutoff frequency where ω = 1. Our task is to factor Eq. (E1) into |Γ(s)| 2 = Γ(s)Γ(-s), where s = jω. Note that we have a choice of sign for Γ: if we choose a positive sign, then when ω → ∞ the low-pass prototype looks like an open circuit, and we may use Γ(s) to write the input impedance of the network (normalized to 1 Ω) Z(s) = 1+Γ(s) 1-Γ(s) . If we choose the negative sign, then when ω → ∞ the low-pass prototype looks like a short circuit, and we may use Γ(s) instead to write the input admittance of the network (normalized to 1 Ω -1 ) Y (s) = 1-Γ(s) 1+Γ(s) . Since |Γ(s)| 2 is a ratio of polynomials of order 2N , Γ(s) is a ratio of polynomials of order N , Γ(s) = R(s)/D(s), where: where p i are the complex roots of the denominator of |Γ(s)| 2 that are in the left-half-plane (LHP), Re{p i } < 0. z i are the complex roots of the numerator of |Γ(s)| 2 , which we pick either from the LHP or from the imaginary axis in conjugate pairs, or from the origin, until we have exactly N of them. We can then write (for positive sign of Γ) or Y (s) = 1/Z(s) (for a negative sign choice). Expanding out Eqs. (E4) and (E5) to polynomial form and plugging into Eq. (E6), we will get a ratio of polynomials where the order of the numerator is greater than that of the denominator by 1. From here, we proceed to use polynomial long division to write Z(s), or Y (s), as a continued fraction expansion (Cauer form): The coefficients {g i } of the Cauer expansion are the filter prototype coefficients. The procedure for writing the continued-fraction expansion for a fraction of polynomials and extracting {g i } can be automated using e.g. the numpy python package, where the inputs n and d to the function below are the numerator and denominator polynomials of the impedance (or the admittance), Eq. (E6), respectively: In Section V D we saw that the reflection gain from an active negative-resistance load is equivalent to the return loss from a passive termination having the same absolute value of resistance. However, gain in the signal mode also necessitates gain in the idler mode, and because the amplified signals are correlated where G is the signal power gain. This is in contrast to Ref. For the Butterworth response type, we set A in Eq. (E2) so that |Γ(0)| 2 = 1/G P L , and k 2 in Eq. (E2) so that at the cutoff frequency |Γ(1)| 2 = 2/G P L , to define the amplifier bandwidth as the half-gain points (3 dB bandwidth). The power loss function we use to generate normalized Butterworth low-pass prototypes of order N for a desired signal power gain G is therefore given by: where G P L is defined in Eq. (E8). Calculated prototype coefficients for a practical selection of gains are listed in Table . II. For the Chebyshev response type, for a given order N , and specified signal gain G 0 in dB, and gain ripple R in dB, we define: and: If G max and G min are the corresponding signal power gains in linear power units, then we should calculate the power loss function in terms of G P L max = 4G max -2 and G P L min = 4G min -2, similar to Eq. (E8). The power loss function can then be written as: (E12) Note that for Chebyshev response, the parameter k 2 in Eq. (E3) does not correspond to the 3 dB (half gain) points, but rather, it controls the bandwidth over which the gain oscillates by the ripple amount Appendix F: Cauer form of a 1D array of nearest-neighbor coupled modes using graph reduction We start by looking at the example of Fig. For a 1D simply-connected system, we can take β jk to be real, so we drop the absolute value in |β jk | 2 compared to Eq. ( We will make the resonant pump assumption, and change variable to a normalized detuning, as common in microwave engineering: where ω is the signal frequency, ω 0 is the mode frequency, and ∆ω is the bandwidth. With this substitution we can write the detuning terms appearing in Eq. (F1) as follows: Plugging this into Eq. (F1) and using Eq. ( where we have defined: We further define g 0 as the prefactor in Eq. (F6). This brings the continued-fraction expression for the admit-tance, Eq. (F6), to exact equivalence with the Cauer expansion in Appendix. E. The coefficients {g i } are the prototype coefficients of the normalized low-pass network (c.f. Sec. IV) that represents the circuit. Looking at products of the form g j g j+1 , and generalizing to a 1D coupled system of N modes: Calculate network prototype coefficients. Based on the desired response characteristics and the topology of the circuit, find the appropriate prototype coefficients {g i }, either from tables when appropriate