The lunar surface is extremely harsh and current mineral processing and metal extraction technologies are not adequately equipped to address this environment. In this paper we review the metals available for extraction and conditions at the lunar surface, and analyse the challenges associated with comminution, beneficiation, and metal extraction operations. The potential beneficial effects of the natural lunar conditions are also evaluated. This investigation concludes that process plant design on the lunar surface will favour lightweight, schematically simple flow sheets that enable automation, and that utilise the local environment wherever possible. The elimination of traditional comminution and beneficiation stages and their replacement with basic classification could be economically favourable. The most promising metal reduction pathways are identified as molten regolith electrolysis, and vacuum thermal dissociation, other processes with merit are hydrogen reduction, carbothermal reduction, and solid electrolysis. Finally, it is identified that a significant research effort in all areas of astrometallurgy will be required before industrial-sized extra-terrestrial mineral processing and metal extraction operations will be viable. The development of metallurgical processes for use in space, termed astrometallurgy, is a field of research that will be critical for prolonged human and robotic presence in cislunar space and beyond. The processing and use of in situ resources, or space resource utilisation (SRU), is intended to enable the economic industrialisation of space, and specifically in the case of the current work, the Moon. With a prolonged presence on the Moon will come the need for more substantial and complex mineral extraction and metal production operations. Mineral processing or 'beneficiation', as a practice, is predicated on the idea of separating valuable minerals from gangue (waste) based on their different physical and chemical characteristics. The extent to which those characteristics can be exploited is heavily influenced by the surrounding conditions: gravity, pressure, exposure to water, etc. These factors will become major considerations in the design and use of metallurgical processing technologies in space. The ambient conditions on the surface of the Earth have inherently led to the development of existing mineral processing and metal extraction technologies that take advantage of these conditions A significant amount of work has been invested over the last 60 years into the conceptualisation and demonstration of resource extraction from lunar minerals. This work has predominantly focused on the production of oxygen The development of robust mineral processing and metal extraction processes and equipment for use on the Moon will require a thorough understanding of how the local environment will affect existing processes. In some cases, existing processes will need only minor modifications for conversion for In Situ Resource Utilisation (ISRU) activities; in others, entirely new processes will be required to perform tasks that have been rendered uneconomical by the local environment. The current work, therefore, focusses on the broader problem of processing on the lunar surface and the effects, both beneficial and detrimental, of the lunar environmental conditions on potential mineral extraction and metal reduction technologies. The oxidised metal feedstocks available on the lunar surface will be described, along with the characteristics of their occurrence: grain size, geochemical and modal composition, and general petrography. The ambient conditions on the Moon will be contrasted to those of Earth and the effects on metallurgical equipment and processes will be discussed. Historically proposed metal extraction processes will be analysed for viability in industrial sized processing operations. Finally, the potential beneficial effects of the 'challenging' lunar environment will be discussed in terms of possible avenues for the development of novel technologies optimised for use in space. It will be shown in the current work that there is a large amount of research that will be required in the field of astrometallurgy before industrially sized mineral processing and metal reduction processes operating on off-Earth bodies can be considered viable options for a source of metal beyond low Earth orbit. When designing an extraction process, knowledge of the specific chemical and mineralogical compositions, and the physical properties of a process feedstock are important. Compared to the level of detail usually required for process design on Earth, there is very limited data available as to the composition of the Moon. Though knowledge of lunar geology is restricted to the samples returned on the Apollo and Luna missions and from orbital mapping by satellites, there is a general consensus that the lunar geology is significantly more homogenous that that found on Earth Petrographically, the Moon is divided into two major regions, the lighter coloured Al-rich Highlands or Terra, and the darker Fe-and Ti-rich Maria or Mare. Figure The composition of ten returned lunar rock samples, representing the presumed composition of the bedrock based on Apollo mission samples, are provided in Table Highland bedrock geology appears to vary somewhat with a large fraction being predominantly anorthositic in nature. In the Maria, there are two main categories, the High-Ti, and Low-Ti maria Highland Rocks Low- When dealing with macro concentrations, the composition of the lunar surface is composed primarily of those elements listed in Table The unconsolidated layer of regolith material varies between 2 to 10 m in depth all over the Moon The average grain size of the returned lunar regolith samples can be seen in Figure The bulk modal composition of the Apollo 16 regolith sample #64501 can be seen in Figure The exact effects on processing technologies of the mineralogical and geochemical differences between terrestrial and lunar feedstocks, the high glass content and lack of hydrated minerals in the lunar regolith, is uncertain. These effects may be minimal, but it is yet again a factor that warrants further investigation. Whilst most materials found on the Moon are not in sufficient concentrations to be considered ore on Earth, their mere existence outside Earth's gravity-well, and thus significant reduction in transportation costs for use in space, make them significantly more valuable The main metals contained in the lunar regolith along with some of their potential uses can be found in Table Thermal fluid/coolant Energy carrier/storage Current comminution, beneficiation, metal production, and standard business practices for mining on Earth have all been developed and refined over time with base assumptions that come inherently from the physical and chemical conditions found on Earth. With the intent to expand such operations to the Moon, these practices need to be examined in detail in terms of the likely effect(s) that these changed conditions will have on them. Here we will analyse the main metrics that differ between the Earth and the Moon, the immediate effects these differences will have, and some of the more esoteric follow on effects that need to be considered in order to establish industrial scale mineral processing and metal extraction processes on the Moon. A comparison of some of the key metrics is provided in Table Table One of the most used and overlooked environmental factors in mineral processing and metal production technologies is gravity. The Moon has one sixth of the gravity of Earth at its surface, which has wide implications for most processes used in a mineral processing and metal extraction flowsheet.. Whilst some equipment in a generic mineral processing plant, such as slurry pumps, benefit from a lack of gravity due to the reduction of head pressures, the majority of the major processes utilise gravity as a motive force within the equipment or at least as a feed and discharge mechanism. Ball mills for example are unable to operate in microgravity environments, in reduced gravity environments they are theoretically usable but require significant upscaling. A ball mill of 10 m diameter would need to be increased to a diameter of 60 m for an equivalent power draw on the Moon One potentially important side effect of micro-gravity conditions is the effect of surface tension on the wetting capabilities of ores and reagents. When considering heap leaching as a potential concentration technique, very rarely is the question raised of wetting capabilities, gravity and some minor agitation are usually enough to saturate all mineral surfaces when exposed to, for example, an acid. This assumption is challenged under microgravity and to a lesser extent under the reduced gravity conditions on the Moon. In reduced gravity conditions the surface tension of the liquid plays a larger role in the mixing process. Whilst 1/6 g may be enough to render this a non-issue on the Moon, the topic warrants at least cursory inquiry when considering the formation of a slurry. It is possible to artificially induce gravity using apparent centrifugal force. Terrestrially, this method is only used to create increased apparent gravity environments which are used to increase separation efficiencies of processes predicated on separation due to density When considering pressure on the lunar surface it is important to distinguish between absolute measured pressure and the expected pressure range of operation, as this will be increased by a prolonged human and robotic presence on the lunar surface. The absolute pressure measured at night on the lunar surface by equipment placed on the Apollo 14 and 15 missions was 3x10 -15 atm Human or robotic activity will have a noticeable effect on the natural lunar pressure, however, any artificial increase in pressure will naturally dissipate over time The pressure on the Moon, or the lack of gas present under ambient lunar conditions, has varied physical and chemical effects. Take for example the standard passive cooling techniques used for most industrial pumps and motors which rely on convective heat transport to maintain safe operating temperatures. Under vacuum conditions convective heat transport is not a reliable method of cooling. Instead, equipment that includes conductive and radiative heat management will need to be implemented. Similarly, with a lack of ambient atmosphere, dust management becomes significantly harder. The effect of air resistance on the travel distance of falling dust and larger particles is easy to overlook. Agosto There are also significant physiochemical effects. One of these is that of the effect of pressure on phase transitions between condensed and dispersed phases, namely that material will start to evaporate and sublimate at lower temperatures than required on Earth. Solids, as they are heated up, will start to directly sublimate into a vapour phase at these low pressures. Along with the effects on water-based processing mentioned in Table The second chemical effect of the high vacuum environment of interest for metal production is its influence on metal compound stability. There is a direct correlation between total pressure and the energy required for metal compound reduction, namely less energy is required to reduce a metal compound into gaseous products at lower pressures The Ellingham diagram in Figure The field of vacuum metallurgy has been well studied historically and the use of vacuum in industrial processes has been successfully demonstrated The synodic period on the Moon, a lunar day, is 29.53 (Earth) days or 708.72 hours Such a long duration for days and nights will cause significant issues with any continuous processing operation. Any solar powered processes, be that electrically using photovoltaic cells or directly using concentrated solar thermal energy, will have to be run in some variant of a long batch process. For a more traditional process setup (without a solar furnace) there exists the potential to run off nuclear energy or battery power during the night, however, the size of the batteries required may necessitate in-situ fabrication. A secondary option is the use of orbital solar power stations, also called solar power satellites (SPS) An alternative to nuclear power and SPS is to operate in the polar regions. Due to the Moons low inclination to the ecliptic, there exist areas on the lunar poles, specifically crater ridgelines, that have access to sunlight for the majority of the year. These areas, colloquially called the 'peaks of eternal light' Regardless of the power source chosen, energy will be a significant resource that needs to be monitored carefully, especially when considering the large energy requirements usually associated with mineral processing and metal extraction activities The large amount of solar flux and the lack of air for convective heat transport result is a large natural temperature range on the Moon. The temperature in equatorial regions ranges from 123 °C during the day to -178 °C at night During the day, when illuminated parts of equipment will experience high temperatures, and shadowed parts, low temperatures. The ability to regulate temperature will be important. Equipment will need to either be able to operate with large temperature gradients within the structure or utilise thermally conductive substances, like heat pipes and coolants, connected to radiators in order to manage heat build-up. One method that was used on the Apollo missions during transit between Earth and the Moon to minimise thermal loading on the craft was an intentional slow roll. This slow roll of the craft termed Passive Thermal Control (PTC), balanced the thermal loading due to sunlight and stopped any one side of the craft from getting too hot Temperature variation between night and day poses an entirely different issue on extraction equipment. Any equipment that will be operated outside of an artificial atmosphere will need to be able to withstand extended periods of cryogenic temperatures during the night. Such temperatures are known to significantly decrease the strength of some construction materials, such as high strength steel A primary concern for the conversion of terrestrial mineral processing technologies for use in space and specifically on the Moon is the significant lack of available water. With the exception of some mineral sands processing techniques (e.g. electrostatic and magnetic separation), the vast majority of mineral processing technologies rely heavily on water for operation. Whilst water is available on the Moon in PSRs The Lunar dust is the fine (<50μm) portion of the regolith material One of the primary arguments for SRU is Supply chain lead times and the reduction in the mass of the payloads carried up to orbit from Earth, often referred to as the up-mass. Up-mass minimisation is critical to the economic viability of any mission due to the related transport costs. Current estimates of USD $35,000 per kilogram from Earth to the lunar surface (bulk haulage) The cost of transport to the lunar surface is often cited as a justification for ISRU but simultaneously often forgotten in the proposal of processes for use in this field. This is especially notable in terms of extraction and reduction processes that use chemical reagents. In terrestrial processes the use of reagents is preferable if they generate a significant gain in product grade or recovery. However, supply chain logistics will become a significant issue in the operation of an extra-terrestrial processing facility. It is relatively simple to take a well-known terrestrial process, apply a lunar feedstock composition, and decide that this process is possible on the Moon. Ignoring the complexity of process modification to account for gravity as explored above, this paradigm ignores the significant cost involved with on-going reagent use. Some processes, such as hydrogen reduction of ilmenite, and carbothermal reduction, can theoretically be designed to recycle most of the reagent (H and C respectively), others such as solid electrolysis use an electrolyte as a reagent that can also theoretically be recycled with quite good recoveries. All of these processes will however need re-supply at industrial scales. Even small losses at laboratory scales, less than a percent for example, will result in tonnes of reagent loss after scale-up and will represent millions of dollars in transport costs if a terrestrial reagent source is used for resupply. Herein lies a challenge in the repurposing of terrestrial processing technology for extra-terrestrial use. These processes, though very well-known and at high technology readiness levels (TRL), are not optimised for use in space. Other processes, such as thermal dissociation and molten regolith electrolysis, that do not use reagents, are not well understood and require significant research in order to raise their TRL. Due to the launch costs involved in sending the material and equipment required to build a processing facility on the Moon, i.e. the up-mass cost portion of the capital expenditure (CAPEX), it is reasonable to conclude that it is economically beneficial for processing facilities to designed to be lightweight in nature. This compliments the assertion that a simple process schematic is best. A simple process schematic is good from an automation perspective, but also in terms of the required up-mass to begin processing operations. These considerations will of course change drastically when a lunar originating metallic feed stock is available for process plant construction/expansion. In terrestrial industry, the ready access to wear parts means that regular scheduled maintenance and replacement of such parts is considered an adequate measure to save on costs due to equipment failure and downtime. Unless wear parts can be manufactured locally, the cost of transporting these parts from Earth is prohibitive. Equipment design favouring long lasting operation will quickly become far superior to easily replaceable parts. This is particularly important when considering comminution circuit design which historically leans heavily on replaceable wear parts It is important to note that whilst most of the 'detrimental' effects of processing technologies mentioned herein, especially in regards to temperature and pressure, could be attenuated simply by creating a closed system in which such temperature and pressure are carefully controlled, the inclusion of the equipment required for a closed system would represent significantly higher equipment mass and thus initial payload mass and CAPEX estimates. Since the premise of ISRU technologies is specifically to reduce the required payload mass for extended habitation and exploration activities in space, this solution seems counterproductive. The concept of minimising launch costs will be referenced many times in this analysis and until equipment and resources can be routinely sourced from industries based off Earth, the cost of material transport from Earth to the Moon will severely limit the economic viability of many processing options. The surface of the Moon, somewhat protected from solar radiation by the Earths' magnetosphere, experiences considerably higher radiation levels than the surface of Earth. Radiation on the lunar surface consists of electromagnetic (EM) radiation and energetic particles from the sun, as well as galactic cosmic rays This radiation has significant repercussions for both human habitation and material properties over time. The effect on human safety will be considered in the next section, however, both UV radiation and ionising radiation (protons and electrons) can significantly degrade construction materials, especially in the case of polymers Safety considerations are always a primary concern in the design and operation of terrestrial processing facilities, this will be no different in space. In fact, with a myriad more risks to consider for any operation, these risk assessments, both for occupational health and safety (OHS) and to mitigate the potential of equipment damage will be significantly more complicated. The use of human operators is assumed for terrestrial processing operations, and in space, requires a liveable habitat and all the health risks inherent in living in a pressure vessel in low gravity. The risk posed by radiation exposure to human crew is severe and requires significant shielding of a habitat to avoid lethal doses Operations designed for human access would presumably be run in a manner similar to current Fly In Fly Out (FIFO) operations on Earth. However, these operations can be extremely large due to the myriad roles required to keep a camp operational. The most obvious answer is to move to automated machinery with the majority of non-automatable tasks able to be completed remotely from Earth, or in lunar orbit, with only troubleshooting and unforeseen maintenance completed by in-situ workers or rapid landing teams from an orbiting station. Due to the issues with human access, and the cost of transportation, the ability to remotely operate processing equipment and fully automating as much of the process as possible will be essential for extra-terrestrial processing operations. An ideal space-based industrial processing facility would be designed to operate without on-site human operators. Such a facility, while simple in theory, has never been done on Earth to date at any significant scale. Underground mining automation has slowly been progressing with safety and productivity as a motivating factor, and has seen great success in the cases of BHP and Rio Tinto operations in Australia Automation, whilst considered useful on Earth, comes secondary to production and cost. Human labour is comparatively extremely cheap on Earth and most risks considered manageable, however with expansion into space, remote operation will become more economical. The idea of designing a processing plant with complete automation (including maintenance and troubleshooting), as a prerequisite is a challenging prospect. This goal is a reasonable target when considering the aforementioned risks associated with human presence. An automated or even remote-controlled operation can be designed without all the requirements for human habitation and subsequent infrastructure, launch mass, and increased CAPEX requirements. This would represent a significant increase in economic viability of an SRU operation. In the pursuit of automation, it stands to reason that the most optimal processing plant will be a schematically simple process. The fewer moving parts, the fewer complicated interactions, the fewer pieces of critical equipment required, the more likely it is that a plant could, in theory, be automated. Waste, or gangue, generation and handling is a significant part of any mineral processing operation. Terrestrially, waste materials from processing operations are often stored in large tailings dams that allow for water reclamation The initial step of most mineral processing operations is the comminution of the feed material Dust generation and supply chain costs are critically important but can be accounted for with significant planning. Like gravity, the lack of water availability is a significant hurdle for the use of classical comminution flowsheets on the Moon. The lack of available water renders wet comminution techniques, (i.e., grinding processes using a ball mill and hydrocyclones for classification) unpractical. This requires the development of non-standard grinding techniques if traditional particle sizes are still required for the beneficiation and reduction of the lunar ores. When considering the use of traditional comminution methods, it is also important to consider the power requirements usually associated with the comminution circuit. On average ~29% of total electrical energy consumption for modern mining and processing operations is due to the comminution circuit alone In terrestrial operations the primary concern of the comminution circuit is that of particle liberation An argument worth consideration is that of eliminating the comminution circuit from lunar operations entirely. The average particle size of the lunar regolith is already akin to that attained by standard comminution processes, with a large proportion falling into the category of 'fines' (<20 μm) that is historically a hinderance to standard mineral processing operations The second major step in a mineral processing operation is the beneficiation of the (usually) comminuted material. Beneficiation processes result in one or more concentrate streams, and a gangue or waste material stream Static gravity concentration or separation techniques (classic jigs, tabling, etc.) suffer heavily in lunar conditions as they rely on gravity as the main separation mechanism. Equation The beneficiation processes that are more strongly affected by this reduction in gravity tend to have centrifugal variants that could be used instead. Centrifugal variants of equipment for flotation Water is used in the majority of terrestrial mineral processing plants from the grinding stage of comminution onwards The need for dry beneficiation techniques has not been ignored by the ISRU community. Particle trajectory alteration due to lack of air resistance. V.Good (Requires re-design, wear parts a consideration) Electrostatic Separator Does not require water. V.Good (Requires re-design, wear parts a consideration) Good (will require re-design, only applicable to course material) Will lower buoyancy force significantly lowering concentration efficiency Uses liquid media, requires artificial pressurisation. Requires dense media reagent replenishment. V. Poor (Gravity affects primary concentration, significant reagent replenishment required) Electrostatic and magnetic separation have significant promise for lunar beneficiation activities. For electrostatic beneficiation, the lack of ambient gas, in addition to the air resistance effects, will impact the charging properties of particles Along with electrostatic and magnetic separation techniques, sorting machines pose an interesting beneficiation (or classification) prospect. One property of the regolith that significantly affects the potential use of sorting machines, but also other dry beneficiation techniques, is that of the particle size. Figure Metal extraction, or the reduction of oxides, is the final step in the production of usable metal resources. Historically, the focus of the ISRU community has been on the production of oxygen rather than metals The primary concerns in the evaluation of metal reduction processes for use on the Moon are reagent usage and supply chain costs, energy requirements, feedstock availability, and process complexity. The analysis presented in the current work aims to ignore the TRL of the processes mentioned herein, instead the potential of each process based on the above-mentioned concerns will be analysed. A detailed review of the historical work that has been conducted in this field is listed in Table The majority of work in this area has focused on the design of individual reactors rather than considering an end-to-end process as a whole. With this said, the testing of individual reactors and extraction techniques are important for inclusion of these extraction processes in a larger mining flowsheet. As can be seen in Table Three broad categories of reduction can be seen in Table High process complexity, regents required, requires artificial atmosphere, medium electrical load Aluminothermic Reduction Chemical reduction processes have been used for a long time One of the inherently unavoidable issues with chemical reduction methods for lunar use is the supply chain costs associated with reagent use. Whilst supply chain cost are important in terrestrial industry, very rarely are they so prohibitive as to result in the dismissal of a certain reduction mechanism from a process flowsheet. On the Moon this is not the case. Some processes such as hydrogen reduction can theoretically be operated with a lunar hydrogen source, however this lunar derived hydrogen, as mentioned previously in the case of water, is a valuable resource in its own right. Other processes such as carbothermal reduction, ionic liquid extraction, lithium reduction, acid reduction, calcium reduction, fluorine reduction, and carbochlorination, all currently require terrestrially derived reagents. This issue of supply chain costs is not ignored in the literature, all processes described here have reagent recycling built into the proposed process, however, the question of efficiency at industrial scales requires investigation. Even sub 1% losses in laboratory scale tests will result in prohibitive reagent resupply costs after upscaling. A secondary issue with regent recycling is the inherent process complexity added by this pursuit. The recycling of reagents is achieved through the electrolysis of the secondary oxide described in Equation 2 (H2O, CO2, KF, Al2O3, etc.). The use of electrolysis for reagent recycling undermines one of the key advantages of chemical reduction methods on Earth, namely the electrical energy requirements. Several chemical reduction processes (Hydrothermal, Carbothermal, Flourine, and Carbochlorination) also rely on a solid-gas interaction necessitating that the reaction take place in an artificially pressurised atmosphere. Metal reduction using a gaseous reagent cannot be conducted under significantly evacuated conditions due to the pressure of that reagent required for reduction Processes such as the carbochlorination of anorthite (CaAl2Si2O8) and the hydrogen reduction of ilmenite (FeTiO3), the latter being more popular in the literature, also suffer from the issue of feedstock availability. The beneficiation of bulk regolith would be required to produce a concentrate stream of the specific mineral feedstock. The beneficiation of the feedstock also warrants scrutiny when considering the effect of gravity and regolith particle size on the reaction kinetics of solid-gas reaction mechanisms. Of the processes categorised here under 'chemical reduction pathways', bio-reduction is one of the more novel and less well studied. The use of biological agents within a mining or metal extraction flowsheet is not common even terrestrially. Whilst summarising NASA's Lunar Regolith Biomining workshop, held in 2007, Chemical reduction methods, whilst well understood and easily modifiable for lunar use resulting in high TRL levels, are not ideal metal reduction pathways in a lunar context. With the exception of hydrogen reduction, which only uses Fe-bearing minerals as a feedstock (predominantly ilmenite), and carbothermal reduction using carbon monoxide (the solid-gas reaction variant of the process), the chemical reduction methods are schematically complex processes, that inevitably result in larger supply chain costs over time. There is also a significant lack in the literature addressing known process specific issues such as hydrogen embrittlement of metals and loss through permeation Electrochemical reduction processes reduce oxides by passing electrical energy through electrodes and an electrolyte containing or composed of the feedstock material. In an electrolytic process, two separate chemical reactions happen simultaneously, one at each electrode. These reactions are referred to as the anodic reaction (where oxidation occurs) and cathodic reaction (where reduction occurs). Equation 3 is a generalized equation for the electrolysis of a metal oxide that combines the anodic and cathodic reactions into a single equation. 3 There are three main categories of electrochemical reduction pathways that have been investigated in the literature. Molten Oxide Electrolysis (MOE), which involves the electrolysis of regolith that has been dissolved in a molten salt electrolyte. Molten Regolith Electrolysis (MRE), which omits the molten salts in favour of using molten regolith as the electrolyte; and Solid Electrolysis, which operates at lower temperatures and uses sintered regolith as the cathode for the cell . Both MOE and MRE avoid the issues of feedstock particle size and modal composition by working with the regolith material in a molten state. This is very beneficial when considering the arguments presented above in regard to the elimination of the comminution and beneficiation stages of mineral processing. MOE and Solid Electrolysis both still use an electrolyte material that would fall under the category of a required reagent and the detrimental effect of re-supply logistics discussed previously. Solid electrolysis does however have the added benefit of operating at significantly lower temperatures (900 to 950 °C versus the 1300 to 2000 °C of MRE). Of the three variants, MRE and Solid Electrolysis are preferable. Whilst the use of an electrolyte is not ideal, the added benefit of the lower operating temperature for the Solid Electrolysis has a potential to lower the total energy requirements which may be beneficial in a lunar context. Solid Electrolysis also has the potential to reduce all the oxides present in the regolith creating a metal alloy with an oxygen extraction efficiency of close to 100% Regardless of which electrochemical reduction method is used, all three variants require the use of an inert anode. The pursuit of materials that can be used for such a purpose has been ongoing. Information on the significant amount of work that has been put into the development of 'inert' anode materials for oxide electrolysis can be found elsewhere Electrochemical reduction has several benefits over chemical reduction methods. Primarily, the process complexity tends to be lower, potentially allowing for much easier automation of the processes. Also, of significance, especially in the case of MRE, the lack of reagents and subsequent re-supply logistics is very appealing. The electrical loads required for these processes are concerning but not insurmountable with increased CAPEX (preferable to the increased operational costs involved with reagent re-supply). Since the reduction is taking place within a molten bath, electrochemical reduction methods do not require beneficiated feedstock and are unaffected by the modal composition and particle size of the feed material. Geochemical composition of the feed material is important in terms of slag acidity/basicity and its effects on cell operation and electrical efficiency. However, these variations are regional and would need to be considered regardless of the reduction method employed. MRE has been identified as one of the primary candidates for ISRU technology by NASA Thermal reduction, historically also referred to as 'Pyrolysis' in the literature, involves the reduction of oxides at high temperatures due to thermal dissociation. This reduction method is not used terrestrially for bulk metal production due to the prohibitive energy requirements of feed material vaporisation. However, in a lunar context, the increased access to higher flux solar radiation and the longer day/night cycle allows for the use of concentrated solar energy as the heat source for prolonged periods of time. The temperature requirements for thermal dissociation vary from 900 to 2700 °C depending on the target oxide and desired reaction rate. Unlike MRE and solid electrolysis, not every oxide can be reduced using this process, some oxides, such as SiO2 and TiO2 form sub-oxides (SiO, TixOy) instead of fully reducing under high temperature environments. The recovery of metal from a thermal dissociation reaction is predicated on the deposition of the metal vapour created in some manner of cold trap. This deposition can be complicated by the back reaction of oxygen gas (formed from the oxide dissociation) with the deposited metal. Based on thermodynamic analysis of oxygen production from a lunar oxide source, Despite its low TRL, thermal dissociation has a number of advantages over traditional metal reduction processes, at least in the context of extra-terrestrial usage. The process requires no reagents or significant wear parts that would require re-supply from terrestrial sources. The majority of the energy requirement for the process can be obtained using concentrated solar flux rather than electrical energy. Whilst increased surface area will increase the kinetics of dissociation, the process theoretically operates on any feedstock regardless of geochemical composition and modality, making it flexible in terms of applicability to other extra-terrestrial feedstocks. And schematically the process is relatively un-complicated. The complexity of recovering usable metal from the cold trap(s) requires significant study. With a fractional deposition method, similar to that used in fractional distillation on Earth, metal vapours can be condensed and recovered individually, but the practicality of this method requires significant research A further potential benefit to thermal dissociation is the effect of the ambient vacuum on oxide stability as discussed above. The ambient pressure conditions in space, and on the Moon, whilst not helping the kinetics of thermal dissociation, have the potential to significantly reduce the energy requirements of the process. The use of the natural lunar vacuum to replace the pumping equipment usually required for vacuum metallurgical processes on Earth reduces the launch mass of the process. This is the only metal reduction process proposed to date that actively uses the ambient vacuum conditions on the Moon in a beneficial manner. The significant energy reduction requirements for thermal dissociation in vacuum as opposed to at 1 atm has been predicted using thermodynamic modelling in previous work It is of note that in the current study, the processes involving selective ionisation The significant disadvantages of thermal decomposition as a metal reduction method are the kinetics of the reaction at lower temperatures, and the inability to operate without significant electrical loads during the lunar night. It is also important to note that whilst concentrated solar energy can be used for the primary reduction mechanism, electrical energy will presumably still be required for the cooling of the deposition apparatus. Thermal dissociation as a technology is not advanced enough in TRL to be included in initial ISRU testwork in coming years, however, the combination of flexibility in process feedstock, lack of reagents, relatively low process complexity, and lower electrical energy requirements suggest that this technology, with further research, has the potential to become very prevalent in extra-terrestrial metal production operations in the future. In addition to the primary reduction mechanisms discussed above, there are a number of other challenges that must be taken into account when considering operation on the lunar surface. These issues are not process critical in nature but will need to be considered in detail when more complete end-to-end processing operations are designed. Materials handling in terms of the wear rates of the equipment when moving the abrasive regolith material, the operability of the equipment in dusty and/or electrostatic conditions, the heating characteristics of the regolith material, are all topics that require detailed investigation. Some studies into this area have already been conducted, for example: • The flowability of regolith simulant materials in a hopper under various gravitational fields [221] • The microwave heating characteristics of regolith The technological advancement and research required for industrial scale ISRU activities targeting minerals other than ice and producing usable metallic products from the lunar regolith is immense. The challenging conditions on the Moon, the low gravity, ultra-high vacuum, intense solar irradiation, electrostatic susceptibility of the regolith, the cryogenic temperatures in shaded regions, and large supply chain costs, represent a challenging suite of considerations that need to be accounted for in the design of mineral processing and metal reduction facilities on the lunar surface. It has been argued here that the most promising generic flowsheet for a mineral extraction and metal reduction process will: eliminate the comminution circuit, replacing it with basic classification to moderate the particle size of the feed; eliminate beneficiation stages entirely; and utilise schematically simple reduction processes that minimise reagent requirements and can take un-beneficiated, uncomminuted regolith material as a feed source. The metal reduction processes identified as being most applicable to a lunar ISRU/SRU operation are, hydrogen and carbothermal reduction, MRE and solid electrolysis, and vacuum thermal dissociation. Of these, due to the lack of required reagents and subsequent supply chain costs, MRE and vacuum thermal dissociation have the most promise for long term industrial scale implementation. This implementation is subject to concentrated research efforts in these areas to increase TRL levels. Every aspect of a mineral processing and metal reduction process needs rigorous analysis and a targeted research effort to make the concept of industrial scale ISRU operation a viable option on the Moon. The current work has aimed to provide a thorough review of the relevant conditions on the Moon and their respective effects on potential future mineral processing and metal extraction operations, with the intent to help inform future studies in these areas. It is of note that a number of the considerations portrayed in the current work, especially in terms of the supply chain costs of transport from Earth, are only applicable until large scale resource processing in space can provide the required resources from off-Earth sources, at which time some processes that suffer heavily from the added cost of reagent resupply will be made significantly more viable. Following this detailed look at mineral processing and metal extraction processes on the lunar surface the following conclusions have been made: 1. Terrestrial processing technologies take advantage of the ambient conditions on Earth; thus, it is incorrect to assume that modification of these technologies for use in space represents the optimal path to ISRU. 2. It is economically beneficial to develop extraction and processing equipment that uses the natural lunar environmental factors advantageously within a process. 3. A remotely controlled or fully automated processing facility is preferable for extraterrestrial processing operations both economically and when considering human safety. 4. Lunar-based metal extraction operations will favour schematically simple, lightweight processing plants. 5. For beneficiation and reduction processes, reagents should be eliminated wherever possible to minimise supply chain costs. 6. The removal of the comminution and beneficiation circuits, and the development of more robust metal reduction processes that can accommodate un-comminuted and unbeneficiated feed materials has significant merit. 7. The most promising metal reduction processes for industrial scale SRU are MRE and vacuum thermal dissociation. 8. There is a significant amount of research required in all aspects of the field of astrometallurgy to develop and optimise mineral processing and metal extraction technologies for use in space and on the Moon. *a feldspathic basalt characterised by elevated levels of Potassium (K), Rare Earth Elements (REE), and Phosphorus (P). **Quartz Monzodiorite