With the evolution of radio frequency (RF)/microwave technology, there is a demand for circuits which are able to meet highly challenging RF frontend specifications. Silicon-on-insulator (SOI) technology is one of the leading platforms for upcoming wireless generation. The degradation of performance due to substrate coupling is a key problem to address for telecommunication circuits, especially for the high throw count switches in RF frontends. In this context, a novel technique for local substrate removal is developed to fabricate membranes of mm-sized RF switch which allows for total etching of silicon handler. RF characterization of membranes reveal a superior linearity performance with lowering of 2 nd harmonic by 17.7 dB and improvement in insertion losses by 0.38 dB in comparison with High-Resistivity SOI substrates. This improvement leads to a significant increase in frontend efficiency. These results demonstrate a new route for optimization of circuit performance using post-fabrication substrate processing techniques. RF frontends are continuously evolving to support newer generations of communication standards. With each subsequent generation, different system specifications pertaining to losses, linearity and noise become more stringent. Therefore, RF designers are continuously in need of solutions to be able to meet these challenging specifications. RF switches are important components of the RF frontend as they allow to selectively propagate the signal through transmit/receive pathways using antenna-swapping, power and diversity switches to accommodate the increasing number of communication standards. There is a demand for high throw count switches in order to be able to support integration of different communication standards like GSM, TD-SCDMA, WCDMA and LTE within the same chip The key step for the fabrication of membranes of switches is femtosecond laser ablation. A schematic explanation of the process is given in Fig. Isolation structures are specially designed to study and quantify in this work, the effect of substrate coupling in RF circuits. They also serve to demonstrate if membranes of circuit stacks can be reliably fabricated. A schematic illustration of these structures is shown in Fig. Lower value of S21 (dB) corresponds to better isolation between the two ports. Both HR-SOI and TR-SOI substrate types are characterized prior to substrate removal. S21 values before laser processing for different frequencies plotted as a function of chuck bias are shown in Fig. On the other hand, for TR-SOI substrate, the S21 response at a given frequency remains flat regardless of the chuck bias. This behavior is assigned to the elimination of the interface conduction layer and also to the strong pinning of the potential due to the presence of a trap-rich layer that totally screens out the electrostatics below the BOX/handler interface Thus, study of isolation structures demonstrates that coupling due to substrate parasitics can be considerably reduced by suspending the substrate for sub 6-GHz frequencies. In RF switches, substrate coupling occurs through the large number of source and drain fingers present within a transistor stack. A high density of fingers makes the substrate coupling significant. Another important observation is that any type of starting substrate can be used without affecting the final performance. Even low resistivity substrates can be used to achieve the same performance. An SP9T switch test structure is utilized in this work for demonstration of practical application. The switch is fabricated based on the 130nm H9SOIFEM process technology by STMicroelectronics DC characterization is performed to make a first analysis of performance of switch after substrate removal. Additionally, the impact of channel length on the switch ON-state characteristics is also highlighted. The gate bias for the ON branch (VbiasON) is varied and Id-Vd characteristics are recorded. The results are plotted in Fig. (1) Here P is the input power to the PA, P is the power dissipated in the switch, P is the power delivered to the antenna, η is the power amplifier efficiency and η is the frontend transmission efficiency. Consider a PA with 50% efficiency delivering a power of 1 W (30 dBm) to the switch input implying that P is 2 W. The overall Tx efficiency in the case of 180 nm with VbiasON of 3.3 V can be calculated at frequency of 6 GHz as 39.5%, 40.4% and 43% for HR-SOI, TR-SOI and substrate removed, respectively. This corresponds to an improvement of efficiency by 3.5% and 2.6% when comparing removed substrate to HR-SOI and TR-SOI, respectively. While the actual improvement in efficiency depends on the frontend architecture, this calculation shows the importance of switch losses for the overall efficiency of the RF frontend. Harmonic distortion measurement has been performed to characterize the effect of substrate removal on linearity. The measurement is performed at a fundamental input frequency of 1.22 GHz while the 2 nd and 3 rd harmonics (H2/H3) are measured at the output at frequencies of 2.44 and 3.66 GHz, respectively. A low noise-floor setup as described in A novel fabrication method using laser processing is presented which paves the way for complete handler substrate removal of SOI RF circuits. Membranes of isolation structures are first studied to delineate the importance of substrate in the performance of a RF circuit. Based on handler removal, it was shown that coupling is significantly reduced and any starting substrate can be used to arrive at the same final performance. A SP9T test structure was described and characterized to demonstrate the practical application of laser processing in real life circuits. The impact of eliminating substrate parasitics in the reduction of Coff of the OFF transistor stacks was highlighted. Substantial gains in improvements are obtained. A reduction of insertion loss by 0.38 dB and 0.26 dB is obtained for HR-SOI and TR-SOI substrates, respectively. Calculations of frontend efficiency revealed that ~3% improvement can be reached by substrate removal. In addition to amelioration of losses, large signal linearity is also greatly enhanced. The second harmonic is suppressed further by up to 17.7 dB and 10.3 dB for HR-SOI and TR-SOI substrates, respectively. These results demonstrate the significance of local substrate removal methods to greatly improve the RF performance of the circuit and open up new avenues for RF designers.