Superconductivity, an emergence of a macroscopic quantum state, gives rise to unique electromagnetic responses leading to perfect shielding of magnetic field and zero electrical resistance. In this paper, we propose that superconductors with the space-inversion symmetry breaking host giant nonreciprocal optical phenomena, such as photocurrent generation and second harmonic generation. The nonreciprocal optical responses show divergent behaviors in the low-frequency regime and originate from two-fold indicators unique to parity-breaking superconductors, namely, the nonreciprocal superfluid density and the Berry curvature derivative. Furthermore, the mechanism and frequency dependence are closely tied to the preserved temporal symmetry in the superconductor. The relation is useful for probing the space-time structure of the superconducting symmetry. The indicators characterize the low-frequency property of nonreciprocal optical responses and hence quantify the performance of superconductors in nonreciprocal optics. Nonlinear optics is one of the central fields in physics and has been offering extensive interests from fundamental science to engineering. When the system has no space-inversion (P) symmetry, the nonlinear optical response acquires the nonreciprocal property, that is, asymmetry in the response to mutually antiparallel external fields. A prototypical example of the nonreciprocal response is the diode effect where the electric conductivity is allowed or almost forbidden depending on the direction of voltage. The nonreciprocal optical (NRO) phenomena have been explored in various systems The NRO response covers two important phenomena, namely, second harmonic and photocurrent generations which are denoted by σ(2ω; ω, ω) and σ(0; ω, -ω), respectively. The second harmonic generation, where irradiating light with frequency ω induces the light oscillating with the doubled frequency 2ω, is a useful tool for probing the microscopic P breaking in materials. In the field of multiferroic material science, the second harmonic generation led to the successful optical imaging of magnetic domains On the one hand, the photo-induced direct current, namely, the photocurrent generation (photogalvanic effect), is also of interest. The conventional mechanism for the photocurrent response is attributed to spatiallyinhomogeneous and asymmetric structures found in photo-diode devices, whereas recent studies shed light on the bulk photocurrent response originating from microscopic parity breaking The key features of the NRO response are two-fold. One is the absence of the definite P parity in the superconducting state. The other is the temporal symmetry, such as the time-reversal (T ) symmetry and the symmetry of the combined P and T operations, called the parity-time-reversal (PT ) symmetry. Based on the symmetry analysis and microscopic calculations, in this paper, we demonstrate that the parity-breaking superconductor shows the diverging NRO response in the lowfrequency regime. This newly discovered response is useful for sensitive photo-detection and energy harvesting. We also show that the divergent behavior shows the characteristic power law associated with two indicators, namely, the Berry curvature derivative Bd and the nonreciprocal superfluid density f , which are closely tied to the temporal symmetry. Figure The outline of the paper is given below. In Sec. II, we present the symmetry analysis to identify superconductors offering the NRO responses and classify potential candidates. Section III briefly explains the formulation of the NRO response in superconductors. Starting from the general expression obtained with the Bogoloubovde Gennes formalism, we propose the superconductivityinduced NRO response, which we call the anomalous NRO response. The analytical formulas are in agreement with those obtained by two-fold methods, namely, density matrix and Green function methods (the derivations are detailed in Appendices D and E). The results are summarized in Table Throughout this paper, we present formulas with the unit = 1 (Dirac constant), q = 1 (electron charge). First, we present the symmetry analysis of candidate superconductors for the nonreciprocal optics. Broken space-inversion symmetry is an essential ingredient for the NRO response in the superconducting state as well. On the other hand, the emergence of superconductivity gives the stiffness of the U(1)-gauge transformation. Therefore, it is relevant to take into account the combined operations of the usual symmetry operations and U(1)-gauge transformation. In the case of the odd-parity superconductors, the combined inversion operation P×U(1) is still preserved although the usual P symmetry is broken. The surviving "inversion" symmetry also prohibits the NRO conductivity. Thus, we cannot expect any NRO responses in purely odd-parity superconductors, e.g., centrosymmetric ferromagnetic superconductors such as UGe 2 , URhGe, and UCoGe According to the above-mentioned symmetry considerations, superconductors hosting the NRO response have no definite parity under the P operation. To our best knowledge, the parity violation realizes in the following setups; (I) superconductivity occurs in the system where P symmetry has already been broken in the normal state, (II) an external field induces parity breaking unique to superconductors, and (III) multiple superconducting transitions are caused by coexisting even-parity and odd-parity Cooper pairings. Case (I) may exist in a broad range of materials since there are a series of noncentrosymmetric bulk superconductors such as CePt 3 Si and Li 2 (Pd,Pt) 3 B Corresponding to Case (II), an electric current breaks the P and T symmetry. Different from the metal state, the superconducting state allows the electric current to flow in thermal equilibrium with the aid of the superfluidity. Under the electric current, Cooper pairs acquire finite momentum and the Fulde-Ferrell superconductivity is realized Finally, we consider Case (III). This class of the paritybreaking superconductors is intrinsic, nontrivial, and exotic because the superconductivity itself breaks both of the P symmetry and its combination with the U(1) gauge transformation. The resulting parity violation is solely induced by superconducting instability, and thus it is in sharp contrast to the known parity-breaking superconductors classified into Cases (I) and (II). The spontaneously parity-mixed superconductivity may be stabilized near the topological phase transition between swave and p-wave superconducting states Other superconductivity-driven symmetry breaking was also studied in terms of chiral superconductivity Our formulation is based on the Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) Hamiltonian where Nambu spinor Ψ † = (c † , c T ) with the creation (c † ) and annihilation (c) operators of electrons. The BdG Hamiltonian H BdG consists of the normal-state Hamiltonian H N and the pair potential ∆ The vector potential A dependence is taken into account for the electromagnetic field perturbation, while we choose A = 0 in the equilibrium. Following the standard perturbative treatments (Appendix A), we evaluate the expectation value of the electric current density as where J α (ω) (n) is the electric current of the n-th order in A. With the velocity gauge E = -∂ t A(t), we obtain the NRO response function in Eq. ( where indices a, b, c are spanned by the energy eigenstates of the unperturbed BdG Hamiltonian H BdG (0) and the eigenenergy difference is E ab = E a -E b . We introduced the Fermi-Dirac distribution function f a = (e βEa + 1) -1 and accordingly defined f ab = f af b . The infinitesimal positive parameter η appears due to the adiabatic application of the external field. The electric current operators are defined by The first-and second-order ones (n = 1, 2) are called paramagnetic and diamagnetic current density operators, respectively. The detail of the derivation is shown in Appendix A. When the pair potential vanishes, the formula for the NRO conductivity agrees with the prior results for the normal state The failure of the replacement also implies that some useful relations do not hold for the BdG Hamiltonian. For instance, according to the Hellmann-Feynman theorem ensured in the normal state, we obtain the relation between the paramagnetic current operator J α and Berry connection embedded in the band structure as in the Bloch representation with the periodic part of the Bloch states {|u a (k) }. This relation is essential for a remarkable simplification of formulas for transport and optical phenomena in the normal state The failure of the Hellmann-Feynman relation in Eq. ( Here and hereafter in this section, we drop "BdG" of H BdG and H BdG for simplicity. Since the parameter λ plays the same role as the (spatially-uniform and timeindependent) vector potential, we obtain the relation for the paramagnetic current operator. Note that this relation holds even in the BdG formulation. The Hellmann-Feynman relation for the vector potential is obtained as where we define the connection ξ λα with the replacement ∂ kα → ∂ λα in Eq. ( The eigenstates |a λ , |b λ , eigenenergy E a (λ), and modified velocity operator J α λ are defined on the basis of H λ . The quantities defined with the parameter λ become those with λ = 0 in the limit λ → 0. We can apply the Hellmann-Feynman relation to the simplification of the optical conductivity formulas. For instance, the linear optical conductivity and photocurrent response are decomposed into the normal and anomalous contributions with the aid of the λ-parametrization (Appendices C and D). Although the introduction of the variational parameter reminds us of the Kohn's classical work Emergence of the superconductivity leads to unique optical phenomena which we call anomalous optical responses. For example, we investigate the photocurrent response given by the NRO conductivity σ α;βγ (0; Ω, -Ω), and frequency dependence will be suppressed in this section. The real and imaginary parts denote the photocurrent conductivity induced by linearly-polarized and circularlypolarized-lights, respectively Leaving the derivation to Appendix D, we show the formulas for the NRO response used in the following calculation. In the gapful superconductors at low temperatures, the total photocurrent conductivity is given by the two components; The former (σ n ) is a normal photocurrent which is a counterpart of the known photocurrent in the normal state, while the latter new contribution (σ a ) represents an anomalous photocurrent unique to the superconducting state. The normal part consists of the four contributions which are termed electric injection current, magnetic injection current, shift current, and gyration current, respectively. The formulas read F ab = f ab δ(Ω -E ba ) means the Pauli exclusion principle at the optical transition. We also defined the geometric quantities such as Berry curvature (Ω ), quantum metric (g ), and the covariant derivative (D λα ). The covariant derivative is associated with the equienergy Berry connection where bra-and ket-states satisfy E a = E b . Note that we finally take the limit λ → 0. The shift current formula is in agreement with that derived in Ref. Because of the inequivalence of λ and k, the anomalous NRO conductivity appears in the superconducting state. The anomalous part consists of two contributions The expressions are given by In Eq. ( The anomalous term in Eq. ( The nonreciprocal superfluid density f is a totallysymmetric rank-3 tensor. It shows the odd-parity under the P and T symmetry operations, whereas the evenparity under the PT operation. Another contribution in Eq. ( in the low-frequency regime. Here, we represented the conductivity derivative effect in the static limit (σ α;βγ sCD ) by Berry curvature derivative Bd and suppressed O(Ω 0 ) terms. The temporal symmetry of Bd is contrasting with the nonreciprocal superfluid density f ; Bd is T -even and PT -odd. The anomalous photocurrent responses are particularly of interest due to the giant photo-electric conversion for the low-frequency light. The anomalous photocurrent response shows high performance for the light with frequency up to the energy scale of the superconductivity (Ω 0.1 -1 THz). The PT symmetric paritybreaking superconductors show the divergent response as large as O(Ω -2 ) due to the nonreciprocal superfluid density, whereas the T symmetric superconductors host the O(Ω -1 )-diverging response arising from the Berry curvature derivative. Furthermore, the photocurrent converted from the low-frequency light may be carried by Cooper pairs and hence flow without undesirable Joule heating. The energy-saving property originates from the quantum mechanical nature of the superconductors and cannot be achieved by existing photo-electric converters such as the p-n junction of semiconductors. In Sec. III B, the anomalous and normal photocurrent responses are detailed on the basis of the gapped paritybreaking superconducting state. The low-frequency divergent behavior is similarly observed in other NRO responses such as the second harmonic generation. In this subsection, the anomalous contribution to the NRO responses is obtained by the Green function method. Although the derivation is left to Appendix E, the lowfrequency anomalous contribution reads where we suppressed O(ω a 1 ω b 2 ) terms (a + b ≥ 0). The formula is given by the nonreciprocal superfluid density and the static conductivity derivative effects The tensor σ(λ) represents the regular linear conductivity. Since we formulated the NRO conductivity by the Green function method with neglecting vertex corrections, the formulas also hold in the presence of a selfenergy correction such as that originates from disorder scattering. The regular linear conductivity consists of the Drude and Berry curvature contributions. Thus, when the conductivity tensor σ αβ is decomposed into the symmetric and antisymmetric components under the permutation α ↔ β, the static conductivity derivative is further decomposed into the Drude derivative Dd and Berry curvature derivative Bd The Drude derivative defined by Eq. (E57) vanishes without quasiparticle excitation. In contrast to the Berry curvature derivative (T -even and PT -odd), the Drude derivative is forbidden by the T symmetry but allowed in the PT symmetric systems. As a result, the static conductivity derivative effect is rewritten by The obtained expressions reveal that the nonreciprocal superfluid density and Berry curvature derivative contribute to the general NRO conductivity as well as the photocurrent generation. Furthermore, the equation (29) includes the Fermi surface effect such as the Drude derivative contribution, while the gapped superconductor is assumed in Sec. III B. If the Fermi-surface contribution is neglected, we obtain the relation of the Berry curvature derivative Taking ω 1 = -ω 2 = Ω in Eq. ( Finally, we provide a classification table of photocurrent generation (Table In Sec. III, we derived the anomalous NRO responses from the second-order perturbation theory. In this section, we derive a more general formula for anomalous TABLE I. Classification of normal and anomalous photocurrent responses. Parities under the T and PT symmetry operations are denoted by ±. In the column 'e' we specify the linearly-polarized-light-induced ( ) or circularly-polarized-light-induced ( ) photocurrent. The check mark ( ) in the column 'FS (Fermi Surface effect)' indicates the photocurrent which vanishes in the absence of the Fermi surface. As for the normal photocurrent, we reproduce the classification performed in Ref. T responses unique to superconductors, which applies to interacting systems. We consider the many-body Hamiltonian comprising parameters λ which adiabatically evolve in time. We assume that the ground state is separated from the excited states by a finite energy gap. We also assume the zero temperature. The secular equation of the Hamitonian where the instantaneous eigenstates and eigenvalues are introduced. If the many-body wavefunction is initially in the ground state |0 and adiabatically evolves in time, the wavefunction is obtained as with the many-body Berry connection Ξ λα a0 ≡ i a λ |∂ λα 0 λ . The operator ∂ λα H(λ(t)) is evaluated by the perturbed wavefunction |ψ(t) as The many-body Berry curvature is = When we take the vector potential A as the adiabatic parameter, the expectation value of the electric current is obtained as The first term is related to the generalized Drude weight evaluated at the zero temperature The first-order term is dropped because the electric current is absent in the unperturbed ground state. ∂ 2 A ε 0 (A) and ∂ 3 A ε 0 (A) are derivatives of the free energy in the thermodynamic limit which means linear and nonreciprocal superfluidity. The agreement between the Drude weight and superfluid density (Meissner weight) is a property of the gapful superconductor at the zero temperature where ω = ω 1 + ω 2 and the adiabaticity parameter η is suppressed. When we apply the formula to one-body Hamiltonian, Eqs. ( When a one-body Hamiltonian is assumed, the manybody Berry curvature leads to the one-body expression. Accordingly, the first-order expansion coefficient ∂ Aγ Ω AαA β reproduces the Berry curvature derivative. The Berry curvature derivative contributes to the nonreciprocal conductivitity as Thus, the obtained formulas ( Although we here consider the vector potential effect on the electric current up to the second-order, higher-order anomalous contributions are similarly obtained as O(|A| n ) or O(|A| n-1 | Ȧ|) terms (n ≥ 3), which are higher-order A-derivative of the superfluid density and Berry curvature, respectively. These contributions may dominate the nonlinear optical responses such as the high-order harmonic generation in the low-frequency regime, while the resonant contributions have been intensively studied Finally, we give a few comments. We generalized the formulas of the anomalous NRO responses to those for the many-body Hamiltonian [Eqs. Here, we demonstrate the anomalous NRO responses with numerical calculations. In this section, we consider the parity-breaking superconductor classified into Case (III) (see Sec. II), where superconductivity itself breaks the P symmetry, by referring to the recent proposal of the spontaneous parity-mixed superconductivity in a heavy fermion superconductor UTe 2 With the model Hamiltonian introduced in Sec. V A, we investigate the normal and anomalous contributions to the photocurrent response and corroborate our classification based on the preserved temporal symmetry (Sec. V B). The dominant role of the anomalous contribution appears in the numerical calculations of the photocurrent and second harmonic generations (Sec. V C). Finally, we investigate scattering rate dependence of the anomalous NRO response (Sec. V D). The model Hamiltonian consists of spinful fermions on the two-dimensional square lattice. In the tight-binding approximation, the normal part H N of H BdG reads at each crystal momentum k. Pauli matrices σ and ρ respectively denote the spin and crystal sublattice degrees of freedom. The model is constructed on the square network where two crystal sublattices are placed in the checkerboard pattern. The Hamiltonian comprises the chemical potential μ and the intra-and intersublattice hoppings defined as Assuming the locally noncentrosymmetric structure, the staggered spin-orbit coupling is given by the local Rashba type The parity-mixed pair potential consists of the s-wave component ψ k = ∆ e and p-wave component d k = 4∆ o sin k x cos k y ẑ. For a T symmetric parity-breaking superconductor, the pair potential is taken in the s + pwave form at each crystal momentum k, while the s + ip-wave type pair potential is given by for a PT symmetric superconductor. The superconducting state is the admixture of the A g -and E u -type pairings in terms of the irreducible representation of the point group D 4h (4/mmm). The preserved unitary symmetry operations in the parity-breaking superconducting state are characterized by the C 2v (m2m) symmetry, whose two-fold rotation axis is the y-axis. This symmetry allows the NRO conductivity, σ y;yy , σ y;xx , σ x;xy , σ x;yx , σ z;yz , σ z;zy , and σ y;zz . The last three components having the index z are not considered because the two-dimensional model is adopted. The parameters are μ = -4, α = 0.3, t 1 = 0.6, t 2 = 1.0, ∆ e + 4∆ o = 0.1, and ∆ e /∆ o = 4. For a quantitative estimate, we set t 2 = 1 eV and calculate the response coefficients in the SI unit. Thus, the numerical results of the NRO conductivity are given in the unit A•V -2 . Although the model Hamiltonian is twodimensional, we convert the obtained NRO conductivity into the three-dimensional value by using the thickness of the two-dimensional net l = 1 nm . The numerical calculations are performed on the N 2 -discretized Brillouin zone. For numerical convergence, we introduce a phenomenological scattering rate γ (Appendix B) and a finite temperature T for the Fermi-Dirac distribution function. Here, numerical analysis of the photocurrent conductivity σ x;yx (0; Ω, -Ω) is presented. The frequency dependence of the conductivity is implicit unless otherwise mentioned. Figure In the case of the T symmetric system, the real part [σ x;yx ] for the linearly-polarized light in Fig. Similarly, it is shown that the anomalous photocurrent gives rise to the dominant photocurrent creation in the PT symmetric parity-breaking superconductors [Fig. Here, we compare the photocurrent conductivity and the numerically calculated nonreciprocal superfluid density to make the analytical result in Eq. ( The divergent NRO responses are similarly observed in the other photocurrent conductivity components and in other NRO responses such as the second harmonic generation. In this section, we show the frequency dependence of all the allowed components of the photocurrent and second harmonic generation coefficients. We distinguish the two response functions by the second harmonic generation coefficient σ α;βγ SHG = σ α;βγ (2Ω; Ω, Ω) and the photocurrent conductivity σ α;βγ PC = σ α;βγ (0; Ω, -Ω). The numerical calculations are performed with the total NRO conductivity formula [Eqs. We address the scattering rate dependence of the anomalous NRO responses by taking the photocurrent conductivity as an example. For the anomalous NRO responses in the low-frequency regime, numerical results show the diverging behavior. [σ x;yx ] ( [σ x;yx ]) in the low-frequency regime is, however, influenced by the scattering rate for the T symmetric (PT symmetric) parity-breaking superconductor. In contrast, [σ x;yx ] ( [σ x;yx ]) for the T symmetric (PT symmetric) parity-breaking superconductor is intrinsic and hence robust to scattering-rate effects. These contrasting properties are revealed by calculating the photocurrent conductivity with scattering rates ranging over several orders of magnitude (Fig. In the T symmetric system, we do not have any diverging linearly-polarized-light-induced photocurrent response when we take into account scattering effects by implementing the Green function method [Eq. ( This paper elaborated the nonreciprocal optical responses characteristic to parity-breaking superconductors. Based on the analytical and numerical calculations, we showed that the anomalous NRO responses play essential roles in superconductors. The key ingredients, namely, nonreciprocal superfluid density and Berry curvature derivative, manifest in the superconducting state, although they have no counterpart in the normal state. Since the anomalous NRO response is intrinsically divergent under the low-frequency light such as sub-terahertz light, it surpasses the NRO responses of other origins clarified in prior studies A promising application of our work is a probe for superconducting symmetry. The parity-mixing effect of the superconducting pairings has been drawing much attention in superconducting science from the discovery of noncentrosymmetric superconductors The estimate may be demonstrated by incorporating chemical or physical operation, which tunes the paritymixing effect It is also essential to explore novel functional devices utilizing the remarkable properties of the anomalous NRO response in superconductors. Owing to the enhanced NRO response for the low-frequency light, the parity-breaking superconductor may realize a highly efficient optical apparatus for future terahertz light technology. The anomalous NRO response arises from the condensed Cooper pairs, and hence the photo-electric conversion is expected to be carried out without undesirable Joule heating. The photo-diode without energy loss possibly originates from the quantum nature of superconductivity. Interestingly, the energy-saving NRO performance of superconductors can be turned on by injecting the supercurrent Our systematic study of the nonreciprocal optical response is expected to stimulate further investigations of superconductors in the scientific and engineering fields and make essential building blocks for superconductorbased optoelectronics. In the last line, the former and the latter originate from the correction to the density matrix and current operator, which are so-called paramagnetic and diamagnetic contributions, respectively. With the velocity gauge E = -∂ t A(t), the linear optical conductivity is obtained as Similarly, the second-order electic current is divided into three components, The second-order optical conductivity is explicitly given by 2σ α;βγ (ω; in which the first line, second line, and third to fifth lines correspond to the first, second, and third components in Eq. (A28), respectively. Note that only Eqs. (A32) and (A33) appear in electron systems in the continuum space relation where λ dependence is suppressed. The linear conductivity in Eq. (A27) is therefore simplified as From the obtained expression, we see the clear physical meaning of each contribution to the linear optical conductivity. For instance, the second term in the right hand side represents an interlevel transition process and is rewritten by where we introduced the band-resolved quantum metric and Berry curvature In this way, this term has a geometric meaning. In particular, taking the static limit ω → 0, the interlevel transition process is given by the Berry curvature b( =a) We introduce the Berry curvature parametrized by the variational parameter λ Replacing λ with k, we can see that the obtained expression reproduces the formula for the anomalous Hall conductivity in the normal state. Note that the Berry curvature effect does not lead to the quantized Hall conductivity in the superconducting state, since the variational parameter has no periodicity in terms of 2π/L (L is the system size). In the normal state, the recovered periodicity of k(λ) leads to the quantized Hall conductivity in the gapped phase at the zero temperature Recalling the Drude conductivity in the normal state, we can deduce the Drude part in Eq. (C9). Conducting the partial integration, we obtain The second term gives the Drude conductivity, whereas the first term should vanish in the normal state due to the periodicity of the Brillouin zone. On the other hand, the disappearance of the first term does not hold for the superconducting state. With the free energy calculated with the Hamiltonian H λ , The prefactor 2 comes from the doubling of particles and holes. Accordingly, we obtain where the superfluid density is defined by ρ αβ s = ∂ λα ∂ λ β F λ . In the final line, P denotes the principal integral for the frequency Ω. Finally, taking the limit λ → 0, we obtain the real part, which ensures the zero electrical resistivity. As a result, we reproduced the linear optical conductivity in the superconducting state The λ-parametrization works in the formulation of NRO conductivity in superconductors as in the case of the linear optical conductivity (Appendix C). For example, we study the photocurrent response with the condition ω 1 = -ω 2 = Ω in Eqs. ( The entire expression is given by where each contribution is given by For a technical reason, we introduce a finite sum-frequency 2δ = ω 1 + ω 2 First, we take the component σ d . When E a = E b , the expression diverges in the limit δ → 0 due to E ab = 0. Thus, we perform the expansion of what is enclosed in the parenthesis for δ. For instance, taking the first term in Eq. (D5), 1 2 (D7) In the last line, we take the limit δ → 0. Thus, O(δ -1 ) and O(δ 0 ) terms are non-zero in Eq. (D5). The careful treatment can be found in the prior studies where the perturbative calculations are performed on the basis of the Bloch states This contribution will be discussed later. Taking the O(δ -1 ) term, we obtain = Ω 2 /(4iη) We defined the velocity difference matrix ∆ α ac = J α aa -J α cc = -∂ α E ac and used Eq. ( The obtained component σ inj is the so-called injection current. We can decompose the injection current into two terms; one is determined by the quantum metric and symmetric under the interchange β ↔ γ (photocurrent induced by linearly-polarized light, LP-photocurrent), while the other determined by the Berry curvature is anti-symmetric (photocurrent induced by circularly-polarized light, CP-photocurrent). Labeling these photocurrents by "Minj" and "Einj", we rewrite the injection current term by Because the relevant geometric quantities have the contrasting symmetry property, the LP-(CP-)photocurrent is prohibited by the T (PT ) symmetry We defined the Lorentzian function parametrized by the scattering rate γ, (D19) Finally, we obtain the two components from Eq. (D5) with the intralevel transition condition E a = E b as Next, we consider the interlevel transition process (E ab = 0) for σ d . In this case, we safely take the limit δ → 0. The expression is given by Here, Σ indicates the summation of a, b with the condition E ab = 0. Making use of Eq. ( where we use the covariant derivative The gauge degree of freedom associated with the covariant derivative is defined by the eigenstates having the same energy. The degeneracy does not exist in some cases, and hence the covariant derivative is characterized by the U (1) gauge Introducing the Berry connection A α associated with the covariant derivative D α , we symbolically define the covariant derivative of operators by Accordingly, we obtain Meanwhile, σ b in Eq. (D3) reads with the limit δ → 0, Thus, by summing this term and Eq. (D25), the component including J αγ in Eq. (D25) is canceled. The remaining term is given by where 2σ α;βγ abs = - and σ α;βγ abs characterized by the resonant contribution is distinguished from the injection current term [Eq. (D18)] because it is insensitive to the scattering rate. This term is divided into the LP and CP-photocurrents as where we use the identity The resulting terms σ shift and σ gyro are called shift current Following the parallel discussion in Refs. Owing to the definition of the Berry connection A α , the second term vanishes in the last line. Performing the partial integration of the first term, we obtain We should note that the second term enclosed by the derivative of λ α does not vanish in the BdG Hamiltonian while it is dropped due to the periodicitity in the crystal momentum space in the normal state. We label the first and second terms in Eq. (D40) by σ FS1 and σ SC1 , Next, we consider σ a [Eq. (D2)]. Taking δ → 0 and using the relation we obtain The second component in the right hand side is canceled out by σ c [Eq. ( and we accordingly obtain To see the correspondence between the photocurrent responses in the normal state and those in superconducting state, we perform the partial integration for the first term, What is not differentiated by λ is the (nonlinear) Drude term This term can be finite in the normal state. The remaining term is finite only in the superconducting state and labeled by We also denote the λ-derivative term in Eq. (D47) as which is also finite only in the superconducting state. Accordingly, we decompose Eq. (D47) as where we defined Combining σ FS1 and σ FS2 , we obtain a Fermi surface contribution In the final line, the first and second components are called intrinsic Fermi surface term The Berry curvature dipole effect is classified as the CP-photocurrent since it is anti-symmetric under β ↔ γ. On the other hand, the intrinsic Fermi surface effect can be decomposed into the LP and CP-photocurrents as in the injection current [Eq. (D15)]. The LP and CP parts are called electric and magnetic intrinsic Fermi surface effects, respectively Note that we can easily reproduce the photocurrent response in the normal state by replacing λ with k in the normal photocurrent. The nonlinear Drude term, intrinsic Fermi surface term, and Berry curvature dipole effect include the derivative of the Fermi distribution function and thus vanish in a gapped system at low temperature. Summing the contributions enclosed by the λ-differentiation, we obtain the anomalous photocurrent arising from the superconductivity 2σ α;βγ a = 2σ α;βγ SC1 + 2σ α;βγ SC2 + 2σ α;βγ SC3 , (D59) This is the new contribution to the photocurrent clarified by this work. Assuming the gapped system at low temperature, we here ignore the Fermi surface contribution in the second line of Eq. (D61). We denote the remaining new contributions as where "NRSF" denotes nonreciprocal superfluid density while "CD" means conductivity derivative. The nonreciprocal superfluid density is defined as It is convenient for numerical computations to rewrite the formulas by generalized velocity operators. A straightforward example is the injection current contributions in Eq. (D14). Although Eq. (D14) implicitly includes the infinitesimal variational parameter λ, we can obtain the formula without λ by taking the limit λ → 0. The resulting formula is written by the generalized velocity operators and energy spectrum of the BdG Hamiltonian. The quantum metric and Berry curvature are given by where we use Eq. ( where a, b denote the band indices of Bogoliubov quasiparticles. Following the parallel discussion, we can derive the numerically convenient formulas for other contributions by transforming the λ-parametrized formulas into what is given by the generalized velocity operators and energy spectrum. In the case of the shift current and gyration current contributions [Eqs. (D36) and (D37)], the covariant derivative of the Berry connection is rewritten by After taking the limit λ → 0, the right hand side becomes a numerically convenient form. Next, we derive the anomalous photocurrent formulas in the current operator representation. For instance, we take the nonreciprocal superfluid density effect [Eq. (D62)]. When we assume the gapped and low-temperature state for simplicity, we can neglect the term including the derivative of the Fermi distribution function. The obtained formula for the nonreciprocal superfluid density is Similarly, we can rewrite the formula for the conductivity derivative effect [Eq. (D63)] as where we omit the prefactor 1/(2Ω 2 ) and neglect the derivative of the Fermi distribution function. Note that there is an arbitrariness in decomposing the total photocurrent into the normal and anomalous contributions within the independent particle approximation. For instance, although the Berry curvature dipole effect in Eq. (D57) is seemingly different from what has been derived in prior works where we obtain the "conventional" Berry curvature dipole contribution The remaining contributions are enclosed by the λ-derivative, which should vanish in the normal state. Accordingly, the two formulas for the Berry curvature dipole effect [Eqs. (D57) and (D74)] are equivalent in the normal state. On the other hand, when we adopt the formula in Eq. (D74) as the Berry curvature dipole effect, it is necessary to include Eq. (D75) in the anomalous contribution. Such arbitrariness in the normal and anomalous photocurrents may occur because we formulate the response function without any scattering effect. This difficulty is resolved by the Green function method in Appendix E. Some of the normal photocurrents diverge in the static limit, for instance, the Drude photocurrent in Eq. (D49). On the other hand, when the scattering effect is properly introduced, the normal photocurrent is bounded to be finite even in the zero-frequency limit (Ω → 0) where the imaginary-time derivative is performed on the right hand side. It is necessary for calculations of the conductivity to take into account the electromagnetic fields. In this work, we introduce the minimal coupling between the vector potential and the canonical momentum in the normal-state Hamiltonian as We take the vector potential which yields the photo-electric field in the real-time domain as E = -∂ t A(t). Correspondingly, the Gor'kov Green function is replaced with G A whose the normal-state Hamiltonian is H N (A(τ )). The expectation value of the electric current is obtained in a straightforward way once the partition function is given. The electric current is calculated as where the coefficient 1/2 is due to the particle hole doubling in the BdG Hamiltonian. J α A is the current operator for the BdG Hamiltonian and defined as The linear and nonlinear conductivities are systematically calculated by expanding the current operator J α A and Green function G A with respect to the vector potential A. The derivation is similarly performed as in Ref. where Tr represents the trace over eigenstates of the Bogoliubov quasiparticle. We introduced the retarded (G R ) and advanced (G A ) Green functions as Here, η > 0 is an infinitesimal parameter building the causality into the Green functions, H BdG is the BdG Hamiltonian having no electromagnetic perturbation, and [(β, ω 1 ) ↔ (γ, ω 2 )] means the symmetrization of the applied electric fields due to the intrinsic permutation symmetry of external fields. The doubling of the conductivity (2σ α;βγ ) respects the coefficient 1/2 in Eq. (E6). The low-frequency behavior of the NRO conductivity is of current interest. Thus, we take the (ω, ω 1 , ω 2 )-expansion from the static limit with the frequency conservation condition, ω = ω 1 + ω 2 . The leading terms are given by 2σ α;βγ (ω 1 + ω The coefficients are obtained as and is the frequency derivative of the Green function. The coefficient B αβγ is obtained by the permutation β ↔ γ in B αβγ . Simplification of these coefficients is performed by making use of the variational parameter λ as in the density matrix formulation. Let us consider the adiabatic switching of λ in the BdG Hamiltonian as Owing to the correction to the BdG Hamiltonian, the Green functions are modified. For instance, the retarded Green function is Differentiating the Green functions by λ, we obtain When we make use of the λ-switching and the relation (E31), we can simplify the coefficients A αβγ , B αβγ , and B αβγ . First, we consider A αβγ . Based on the adiabatic switching of λ, the current operators and Green functions are converted into those labeled by λ. For instance, we take the line (E16). The third-order current operator is related with the diamagnetic current operator as J αβγ λ = -∂ λα J βγ λ . Accordingly, Using the cyclic property of trace, the second term in the last line is canceled with Eq. (E18). Performing a similar algebra, we finally rewrite A αβγ by As a result, we reproduce the formula for the nonreciprocal superfluid density effect given by 2σ α;βγ NRSF (ω 1 + ω 2 ; ω 1 , ω 2 ) = The obtained formula is the generalized expression of Eq. (D62) and captures the nonreciprocal superfluid density effect in general NRO responses including those other than the photocurrent generation ω 1 = -ω 2 . Next, we consider the coefficients of the O(ω -1 ) term in Eq. (E15). Similarly to A αβγ , the coefficient B αβγ is simplified as Since the λ β -derivative is taken over the whole expression, this contribution vanishes in the normal state. Interestingly, this formula has the similar form to the regular part of the linear static conductivity. The expression is given by Thus, Eq. (E39) is rewritten as The superscript in σ (λ) indicates that the Green functions and current operators contain the parameter λ. We also recast B αβγ as We therefore call the low-frequency divergence from B αβγ and B αβγ (static) conductivity derivative effect. The formula is given by Finally, we present the symmetry analysis of the anomalous NRO conductivity in Eq. (E15). First, we discuss the nonreciprocal superfluid density effect in the Green function representation. Taking Eq. (E16), we apply the time-reversal operation θ to what is in the parenthesis. Owing to the antiunitary property of θ, the expression is transformed as The time-reversal operation is performed in the first line and the T -odd property of J αβγ is implemented in the second line. As a result, the nonreciprocal superfluid density is forbidden by the T symmetry. It is similarly forbidden by the P symmetry, while the PT symmetry does not make any symmetry constraint. Following parallel calculations, we can classify B αβγ by the T and PT symmetries. Imposing the T symmetry, the first term in Eq. (E22) is transformed as γα is expressed by the Berry curvature, this anomalous NRO response is given by the Berry curvature derivative. We reproduce the expression for the Berry curvature derivative by performing the trace. Using the eigenstates of the BdG Hamiltonian H (λ) BdG , we get the relation (E57) This represents the intraband effect. The Drude derivative Dd vanishes in the absence of the Bogoliubov quasiparticles since it contains the Fermi-surface factor ∂ Ω f (Ω). Note that the parameter λ does not break the PT symmetry and we can directly apply the PT symmetry to Eq. (E39). The obtained result is the same as Eq. (E57). As a result, we obtain the static conductivity derivative effect for PT symmetric case as 2σ 