Topological crystalline superconductors are known to have possible higher-order topology, which results in Majorana modes on d -2 or lower-dimensional boundaries. Given the rich possibilities of boundary signatures, it is desirable to have topological invariants that can predict the type of Majorana modes from band structures. Although symmetry indicators, a type of invariant that depends only on the band data at high-symmetry points, have been proposed for certain crystalline superconductors, there exist symmetry classes in which symmetry indicators fail to distinguish superconductors with different Majorana boundaries. Here, we systematically obtain topological invariants for an example of this kind, two-dimensional time-reversal symmetric superconductors with twofold rotational symmetry C2. First, we show that the nontrivial topology is independent of band data on the high-symmetry points by conducting a momentum-space classification study. Then, from the resulting K groups, we derive calculable expressions for four Z2 invariants defined on high-symmetry lines or general points in the Brillouin zone. Finally, together with a real-space classification study, we establish the bulk-boundary correspondence and show that the four Z2 invariants can predict Majorana boundary types from band structures. Our proposed invariants can fuel practical material searches for C2-symmetric topological superconductors featuring Majorana edge and corner modes. The classification of non-interacting fermionic topological phases of matter has been extensively studied and is complete for systems with the basic internal symmetries concerning time-reversal, particle-hole, and chiral symmetries Topological invariants that can predict the type of boundary modes detectable in experiments for a given topological crystalline phase are therefore desirable. For the insulating phases, it has been shown that both the bulk topology and boundary signatures can sometimes be characterized in terms of the crystalline symmetry eigenvalues of occupied bands on the high symmetry points in the Brillouin zone (BZ) Despite being powerful and easy to compute, symmetry indicators cannot distinguish all crystalline topological phases. For insulators of this kind, proper invariants have been proposed based on the band topology in higher-dimensional subspaces rather than high-symmetry points of the BZ Our goal is to study the classification of topological crystalline superconductors that cannot be characterized by symmetry indicators and to systematically derive topological invariants capable of fully characterizing both the bulk topology and the Majorana boundary signatures. In this work, we focus on a case study of 2D time-reversal superconductors with C 2 rotational sym-metry, motivated by the puzzling failure of symmetry indicators previously observed in lattice models of this symmetry class The main challenge in deriving such boundary diagnostics that take band information as inputs is to establish the bulk-boundary correspondence for the considered topological crystalline superconductors. In this work, we approach this problem following a three-step scheme that some of us previously developed Importantly, from the AHSS results, we not only find that the nontrivial topology is fully encoded in the 1D and 2D subspaces (i.e. the high-symmetry lines and general points in the BZ), but also obtain various constraints and hints for writing down explicit expressions for the corresponding Z 2 topological invariants. In particular, the invariants we find are based on the sewing matrix of C 2 T symmetry of the superconductors, where T denotes the time-reversal symmetry. We further propose an alternative expression that can be practically computed for more general cases by identifying these Z 2 invariants as the Stiefel-Whitney (S-W) classes of a real vector bundle defined by the occupied BdG states of the superconductors. Similar sewing-matrix-based invariants and the interpretation as the S-W classes have also been written down for topological crystalline insulators and semimetals Next, we establish how these momentum-space invari-ants correspond to various Majorana boundary signatures in the real space. Specifically, in the second step of our protocol, we conduct a dual classification study in the real space using a method called topological crystal approach Our result shows that all possible phases are given by combinations of four fundamental phases, including two first-order weak phases with Majorana bands on certain edges, a first-order strong phase with helical Majorana edge modes, and a second-order strong phase with Majorana corner modes. Finally in the third step, equipped with the Z 2 momentum-space topological invariants {ν 1a , ν 1b , ν 1c , ν 2 } and all possible types of Majorana boundary modes, we establish the bulk-boundary correspondence by computing our invariants for the real-space representative states. Crucially, since these representative states are adiabatically connected to all other states in each of the phases, the boundary diagnostics that we aim to derive are capable of characterizing each of the phases. By matching the momentum-space and the real-space bases, we find that the final invariants {z 1 , z 2 , z 3 , z 4 } that can diagnose the type of Majorana boundary modes are given by certain combinations of the original invariants {ν 1a , ν 1b , ν 1c , ν 2 }. These practically calculable boundary diagnostics for 2D time-reversal and C 2 -symmetric superconductors are our central results, as we summarize in Table The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II, we specify the symmetry class of our case study and introduce key concepts about the equivariant K theory In this section, we will first briefly introduce the equivariant K group, a mathematical object that gives the classifications of non-interacting fermionic systems with crystalline symmetries. We will then specify the symmetry group of the 2D superconductors for our case study in this work. A gapped non-interacting fermionic system may possess one or more of the following internal symmetries: time reversal, particle-hole, and chiral symmetry. It then falls in one of the ten Altland-Zirnbauer (AZ) classes In addition to the symmetries in the AZ class, the presence of crystalline symmetries leads to finer separation of phases. A formalism called twisted equivariant K theory has been developed to accommodate crystalline symmetries in the classification of gapped noninteracting fermionic systems where k under the action of g is changed to gk. A nontrivial τ arises from the non-symmorphic symmetries in G and/or the projective representation of G. The group homomorphism c : G → Z 2 determines the commutation relation between g ∈ G and the Hamiltonian H by (2) When the system lives on a d-dimensional lattice with translational symmetries, the BZ is a torus T d . One can make use of the mathematical tool of AHSS to construct an approximation to φ K (τ,c),-n G (BZ) In this work, we focus on the classification and topological invariants for 2D time-reversal superconductors with translational and C 2 rotational symmetries. The key reason why we choose to focus on this symmetry class is because this is the simplest example where the bulk topology cannot be revealed by high-symmetry points and that the topological invariants are not symmetry indicators, as we will explicitly show in Sec. III and Appendix A. The symmetry group of our case study is described as follows. For a given 2D mean-field BdG Hamiltonian at crystal momentum k T suppressing indices for other degrees of freedom, we consider the case where the single-particle normal state h(k) transforms projectively under the two-fold rotation as , and the superconducting order parameter ∆(k) transforms trivially as The symmetry group G of the full BdG Hamiltonian H(k), besides the translational symmetries in x and y directions, contains the time-reversal symmetry T , particle-hole symmetry P, and the two-fold BdG rotational symmetry R(k) = diag{U C2 (k), U * C2 (-k)}. The BdG Hamiltonian therefore satisfies the symmetry constraints where the symmetries obey the following group relations We note that the C 2 rotation R squares to -1 since we consider spinful electrons. The transformation rule of the pairing function ∆(k) under C 2 rotation determines the form of R and thus the commutation relation between R and P. Together with the fact that the time-reversal and particle-hole symmetries are anti-unitary such that φ(T ) = φ(P) = -1, the relations in Eqs. ( In this section, we will calculate the K group φ K (τ,c),-n G (BZ) using the AHSS We first provide an intuitive overview of this mathematical tool before diving into the formal construction. AHSS approximates the equivariant K group for systems with crystalline symmetries using the following strategy: Instead of computing the K group on the whole BZ directly, which is generally a difficult task in the presence of crystalline symmetries, one first decomposes the BZ into different dimensional subspaces that do not obey any crystalline symmetries which are not local in momentum. One can then study the 'local K groups' restricted to these subspaces. These local K groups can be interpreted as the classifications of gapped Hamiltonian restricted to different dimensional subspaces, which is dubbed the 'topological phenomena interpretation' These independent local K groups together provide the zeroth-order approximation of the whole K group, and is the starting point of the spectral sequence. Next, one improves the approximation order by order through proper assembly processes of these local K groups until the approximated result converges, where the assembly processes are guided by the compatibility relations between different dimensional local K groups. The AHSS is a formal mathematical tool that encodes all these structures and allows one to systematically consider these compatibility relations. Practically speaking, it is often convenient for calculation purposes to adopt the 'representation interpretation' After performing all the assembly processes dimension by dimension, one can obtain the final groups of the representations on the high-symmetry points, lines, and general BZ points. These representation groups (i.e. local K groups) for different dimensional subspaces can then be characterized by different dimensional topological invariants, such as symmetry indicators, winding numbers, and Chern numbers. The purpose of our AHSS calculation presented in this section is to identify which of the local K groups are nontrivial for our case study of 2D superconductors with time-reversal and two-fold rotational symmetries. The first step of AHSS is to construct a 'cell decomposition' of the 2D BZ in a way such that (1) each symmetry operator in the considered symmetry group G either acts as the identity operation on a given cell or maps it to another cell of the same dimensionality, and (2) the orientations of the cells are consistent among themselves under symmetry actions (see the example in Fig. For our case study, the cell decomposition of the 2D BZ with the symmetry group G is given in Fig. Given the cell decomposition, the second step is to study the local K groups restricted on different dimensional cells and the compatibility relations among them. In the language of AHSS, the first page E 1 is a table that consists of the local K groups (without considering any compatibility relations) bigraded by the dimensionality p and the AZ symmetry class n Next, we assemble the local K groups on p-cells with those on p±1-cells by incorporating the relevant compatibility relations. This is formally done by studying the first differential , which is a homomorphism from every entry in the E 1 page to its right neighboring entry on the same page. In the topological phenomena interpretation, this map represents symmetry-allowed processes that extend a gapped Hamiltonian on a p-cell to a gapless Hamiltonian on the adjacent (p + 1)-cells in the same AZ class n. Examples of such processes include a shift in the chemical potential or a band inversion By taking into account the assembly processes described by the first differentials, the local K groups are now modified into ) and are organized into the table of E 2 page. It is most intuitive to understand this expression for some entries in the E 2 page in the topological phenomena interpretation. Let us consider the entry E 0,-3 2 (see Table ) remain because others correspond to independent irreps on the adjacent (p + 1)-cells. On the other hand, the irreps in Im(d ) can be trivialized by the irreps on the adjacent (p -1)-cells so they do not contribute. Trivialization here means the process of moving irreps on adjacent lower dimensional-cells to a higher-dimensional cell and forming a trivial irrep together with the original irrep on that cell. For detail about the interpretations, we refer the readers to pedagogical discussions in Refs. Following similar procedures of obtaining the E 2 -page by considering the first differentials, we can take into account higher-order assembly processes, which are described generally by the r-th differential d ). (6) A higher page E r+1 therefore provides a better approx-imation to the K group than the previous page E r . By following Eq. 6 to iteratively improve the approximation of the local K groups, the E r page will eventually converge at some r * (i.e. E r * = E r * +r ′ ∀r ′ ≥ 1). Such convergence will happen when r ≥ d + 1 or before that for a d-dimensional system since d r = 0 for any r ≥ d+1. This final converged page is dubbed the limiting page E ∞ . For our case study, the E 1 page and the infinity page E ∞ are given in Table TABLE TABLE III: The E 2 page we find from our calculation. The E 2 page is also the limiting page E ∞ since it is equal to all higher pages. According to the topological phenomena interpretation, the three diagonal entries represent the K groups restricted on 0-, 1-, and 2-cells for the 2D class-DIII superconductors with C 2 symmetry. These three entries together give rise to the full K group. We now discuss how to extract information of topological invariants for the full system from the infinity page. In the topological phenomena interpretation, each of the diagonal entries in the limiting page E p,-(n+p) ∞ , 0 ≤ p ≤ d represents the classification of gapped systems on the p-dimensional subspaces of the BZ for the AZ class n. Moreover, these diagonal entries are subgroups of the full K group and can lead to the full K group through a short exact sequence with certain group extensions (see Appendix A). These diagonal entries can therefore be characterized by a set of topological invariants on different dimensional subspaces that encodes the topology of the full system. There are three pieces of information about the invariants that we can extract from the diagonal entries E p,-(n+p) ∞ . First, these groups directly tell us the type of the topological invariants that are necessary to capture the topology of the full system. Second, these invariants take band data as inputs and we will know from the diagonal entries which dimensional subspace in the BZ contributes to each invariant. Finally, the information of each invariant is in the form of a homotopy group of some topological space, which prompts us to find an invariant characterizing the maps from a subspace of the BZ to that topological space. For our case study of 2D class-DIII superconductors with a two-fold rotational symmetry, there are three diagonal entries in the infinity page: E 0,-3 ∞ , E 1,-4 ∞ , and E 2,-5 ∞ . These three entries are the local K groups restricted on the 0-cells {Γ, X, Y , M }, the 1-cells {a, b, c}, and the 2-cell α, respectively. We find that the three subgroups are (see Table where the (Z 2 ) 3 comes from one Z 2 per 1-cell. We therefore expect that the topology of the full system cannot be inferred from the band information on the high symmetry points (as E 0,-3 ∞ = 1) but can be fully characterized by four Z 2 invariants, three depending on the band data on the high-symmetry lines and one on general points in the BZ. Importantly, we can further deduce the topological spaces for the two types of Z 2 invariants as follows. First, as we show in Appendix A, the two nontrivial local K groups E 1,-4 ∞ and E 2,-5 ∞ are essentially obtained from π 0 (R 0 ) = Z and π 0 (R 1 ) = Z 2 , respectively, where Here N , N 1 , N 2 are integers that should be taken to the infinite limit. To see why E 1,-4 ∞ = (Z 2 ) 3 , we note that there is a modulo 2 operation produced by identifying Im(d 0,-4 1 ) as trivial when calculating the E 2 page out of the E 1 page. We will see this in terms of the definition for the invariant in Sec. IV B. Moreover, the Bott periodicity theorem where R 7 = U (N )/O(N ). We therefore expect that the topological spaces for the two types of Z 2 invariants should both be the space R 7 . In summary, our AHSS results suggest that the topology of a 2D class-DIII Hamiltonian with a two-fold rotational symmetry cannot be inferred from band data on the high symmetry points, but can be fully characterized by three Z 2 invariants defined on the high symmetry lines and one Z 2 invariant on general points in the BZ. In particular, we expect that valid forms of the two types of Z 2 invariants can be constructed by maps from 1-cells to the space R 7 and 2-cells to R 7 , respectively. In the rest of the paper, we will propose specific forms for these topological invariants and show that the set of invariants can diagnose the Majorana boundary type by establishing the bulk-boundary correspondence. From our AHSS calculation, we find that only the K groups restricted on 1-cells and 2-cells are nontrivial, and our goal is to write down topological invariants that can fully distinguish the phases. In fact, they have readily provided us hints for the forms of these invariants. Specifically, the K groups restricted on 1-cells and 2-cells are given by π 1 (R 7 )/Im(d 0,-4 1 ) = Z 2 and π 2 (R 7 ) = Z 2 [see Eq. ( We propose to use the sewing matrix of the combined symmetry T R to construct the object, where T is the time reversal symmetry, R is the two-fold rotational symmetry, and |u n (k) is the n-th occupied state at momentum k. To see why S lives in the space of R 7 , where R 7 = U (N )/O(N ) for N → ∞, first notice that S is a symmetric matrix since S is an anti-unitary operator that is local in k and satisfies (T R) 2 = 1. As a symmetric matrix, S has a (non-unique) decomposition S(k) = U (k)U (k) T where U (k) is unitary, known as Autonne-Takagi factorization Importantly, since the sewing matrix depends on the occupied wavefunctions, S is gauge-dependent. Specifically, under a general gauge transformation V , S transforms as There are two gauge choices that are relevant for the invariants we propose: the first is dubbed the T -constant and smooth gauge and the second is dubbed the real gauge. We first define the T -constant and smooth gauge. In a subspace of the BZ, this gauge satisfies both of the following 1. Smooth: the wavefunctions are smooth; We refer to the first and the second conditions as 'smooth' and 'T -constant', respectively. The T -constant condition was also used in one definition for the Fu-Kane invariant 78,79 and the closely related first Z 2 descendent for the chiral classes in Ref. In fact, these conditions alone do not fix a unique gauge-there exist other T -constant and smooth gauges, which are related to each other by a smooth gauge transformation. All such gauges are considered equivalent as far as the S-based invariants are concerned. In particular, as we will discuss in detail in Sec. IV B and Appendix A, this gauge freedom corresponds to the normal subgroup Im(d 0,-4 1 ) of π 1 (R 7 ) so that the classifying group of the 1D invariants is given by the quotient group π 1 (R 7 )/Im(d 0,-4 1 ) = Z 2 . In other words, for one of the 1D invariants expressed as an integer in the group π 1 (R 7 ) = Z, calculating this invariant in another smooth and T -constant gauge modifies it by an even integer. Next, we define the real gauge. If we carry out a gauge transformation V = U (k), the sewing matrix will become an identity S = I under this gauge (see Eq. ( We now make a final remark about this sewing matrix before moving on. In fact, sewing matrices of time reversal and the combined operation of time reversal and C 2 rotation have been used to construct the topological invariants in several insulating systems Before we write down the actual expressions for the 1D and 2D invariants based on the homotopy groups of the sewing matrix S, we first revisit some properties of elements in a K group and the forms of valid invariants that are capable of distinguishing these elements. In particular, we will see that it is necessary to introduce a universal reference Hamiltonian to the analysis and incorporate it in the invariants accordingly. In K theory We can further associate different equivalence classes of paths [E, H, H 0 ] with topologically distinct classes of gapped phases of matter. To do so, instead of using different reference Hamiltonians H 2 for different triples, it is crucial to define a 'trivial' Hamiltonian H 0 as the universal reference Hamiltonian (i.e. to set H 2 = H 0 ) for all triples. For our purpose of investigating superconductors, we define the trivial Hamiltonian to be the BdG Hamiltonian Given the K group of the considered symmetry class, now the goal is to construct the topological invariants that are capable of distinguishing Hamiltonians that belong to topologically inequivalent phases. Specifically, we are after the phase label ν(E, H, H 0 ), which should take different values for triples belonging to different equivalent classes. Nonetheless, it is practically hard to write down the actual form for ν. We therefore turn to writing down invariants w(ǫ, h) defined for a given Hamiltonian h living in the vector bundle ǫ (instead of a given triple). The key difficulty in writing down w occurs when the symmetry operators carry momentum dependence, which is implicitly encoded in the vector bundle ǫ. In such cases, the topological invariant w is generally non-zero for the trivial Hamiltonian h = H 0 defined in Eq. ( We propose to resolve this issue in the following way. To account for the contribution to the invariant w from the reference Hamiltonian H 0 , we need to find a Hamiltonian H c acting on a vector bundle E c such that all the invariants vanish for H 0 ⊕H c , i.e. w(E ⊕E c , H 0 ⊕H c ) = 0. Such H c is H 0 -dependent, and should cancel out the implicit H 0 contribution to w even when the symmetry operators are momentum-dependent. This implies that when calculating the topological invariant w for a given Hamiltonian H of interest, the correct quantity to calculate is w(E ⊕ E c , H ⊕ H c ), which guarantees that w = 0 when H is trivial for any choice of E. In other words, we have identified this practically calculable quantity as the phase label defined for the corresponding triple This quantity ) is what we will write down and compute for the 1D and 2D invariants for our case study in the following subsections. To provide some examples for the choice of H c , when the invariants w of a given system are symmetry indicators, it has been proposed that the reference Hamiltonian H 0 should be accounted for by subtracting the symmetry indicators of H 0 In this subsection, we propose an explicit form for the Z 2 invariants w 1 defined on 1-cells, which can distinguish phases in the subgroup E 1,-4 ∞ of the K group. We write down this form of w 1 based on our AHSS result, which shows that the contribution to the total K group from the three independent 1-cells {a, b, c} is three copies of The key idea here is to consider the sewing matrix S [see Eq. ( Specifically, for a given BdG Hamiltonian, we start from the quantity which is the line integral of the phase of the sewing matrix S [see Eq. ( Under this gauge, we can further express w 1j as a loop integral over only one of the time-reversal copies in the sewing matrix where l(j ∪ j ′ ) denotes the loop formed by a 1-cell j ∈ {a, b, c}, its symmetry-related counterpart j ′ , and the boundary between them (see Fig. Importantly, it is clear from Eq. ( After establishing that the quantity w 1j is Z 2 , we now proceed to the last step for writing down the 1D invariant for our case study. This last step is to remove the unwanted hidden contribution to w 1j for a given BdG Hamiltonian H from the universal reference Hamiltonian H 0 defined in Eq. (31). Such a contribution is generally non-zero when the combined symmetry T R is momentum-dependent. This issue can be resolved by revisiting the relation in Eq. ( where E c and H c are chosen such that w 1j (E ⊕ E c , H 0 ⊕ H c ) = 0. The second line follows from the fact that the sewing matrix for H ⊕ H c can be written as the direct sum of those for H and H c , which is clear from Eq. ( which guarantees to remove the contribution from the reference Hamiltonian H 0 implicitly hidden in w 1j (E, H) regardless of the momentum-dependence of the symmetry operator T R. Finally, we make a remark about the relation between our Z 2 invariant w 1j and the Berry phase. Berry phase γ is a well-known quantity that captures the topological properties in various systems. It is defined as the path integral γ = C dk • A k (mod 2π) of the Berry connection A k = u k |i∇ k |u k for an eigenstate |u k at momentum k, and is quantized when the path C is a closed loop. When the combined symmetry T R of time-reversal and twofold rotation is momentum-independent, similar to what was shown in Ref. In this subsection, we propose a way to compute the Z 2 invariants ν 2 defined on 2-cells, which can distinguish phases in the subgroup E 2,-5 ∞ of the total K group. This expression of w 2 that we find is based on our AHSS result, which shows that the contribution to the total K group from 2-cells is π 2 (R 7 ) = Z 2 . Similar to the w 1 case, it is tempting to identify the second homotopy class of the sewing matrix as the invariant w 2 since the sewing matrix lives in the space R 7 . However, in contrast to the case of w 1 , which is clearly the winding number of the sewing matrix along a 1-cell loop, it is not clear how to explicitly calculate the second homotopy class of the sewing matrix defined on 2-cells. In the following, we will show how to construct an expression for w 2 by mapping this quantity to a transition function defined on a 1D path, which is calculable under certain cases that have no obstruction to the T -constant and smooth gauge condition over the 2-cells. This Z 2 invariant w 2 , as we will see in Sec. V, can diagnose the higher-order topological superconducting phase protected by the two-fold rotational symmetry. For the purpose of mapping the second homotopy class of the sewing matrix to a more tangible quantity, we invoke two isomorphisms For the left-most term in Eq. ( Next, by forming a concrete construction through the middle term in Eq. ( The second step is to transform the sewing matrix S I/II (k) under the smooth gauge, which can be factorized into S I/II (k) = U (k)U (k) T using some unitary matrix U (k), into the real gauge such that S I/II (k) = I for all k on the 2-sphere. Specifically, this can be done by Eq. ( For simplicity, consider the case where the occupied wavefunctions in the real gauge are everywhere smooth but suffer discontinuities across some closed loop l 2 . In this case, the real-gauge wavefunctions |u L (k) and |u R (k) defined on the two hemispheres k ∈ L and R [see Fig. Here, m, n = 1, • • • , N 0 are band labels for the occupied wavefunctions, and the prime symbol ′ in |u ′ indicates that the wavefunction is in the real gauge. Importantly, since the wavefunctions are in the real gauge, the transition function matrices O 1 (k) along the closed loop k ∈ l 2 are orthogonal and belong to the space O(N ). This discontinuity carried by the real-gauge wavefunctions is also embedded in the transformation matrix U (k), which transforms the sewing matrix S I/II (k) from the smooth to the real gauge. Specifically, suppose the wavefunctions transform from the smooth to real gauge on each of the two hemispheres The transformation matrices U L (k) and U R (k) on the two hemispheres are both defined on the loop l 2 , but are related by a transition function O 1 (k) along the loop l 2 : The third step is to relate the above-mentioned construction to the middle term π 2 (U (N ), O(N )) in Eq. (17). To this end, we focus on a specific smooth gauge for which the left and right transition matrices along the closed loop l 2 are ŨL (k) = I and ŨR (k) = O 1 (k), respectively. We can choose this specific gauge for convenience and without lost of generality because all gauges that satisfy the T -constant and smooth conditions are considered equivalent. It follows that the right transformation matrix ŨR (k) lives in the space of U (N ) within the internal right hemisphere, but lives in O(N ) on the boundary loop l 2 . The map from the right hemisphere k ∈ R (including the boundary loop l 2 ) to the space of ŨR (k) is therefore described by an element in the middle term π 2 (U (N ), O(N )) in Eq. (17). Under this construction, we can further interpret the right-most term in Eq. ( FIG. Given the limitation of the w 2 expression we proposed in section IV C, in this subsection we seek for a more generally calculable expression for w 2 . Our strategy is to employ the fact that mathematically for a given real vector bundle, there are a series of Z 2 invariants given by the S-W classes, which characterizes various properties of the real vector bundle. Specifically, the i-th S-W class takes value in the i-th cohomology class of the base space with Z 2 coefficients, which indicates how similar the vector bundle is to a product vector bundle on the i-dimensional subspaces of the base space 85 . For instance, the first S-W class assigns the value 0 or 1 to each non-contractible loop when the bundle is orientable or non-orientable on the loop. Since both of the invariants w 1 and w 2 for 2D time-reversal superconductors with C 2 symmetry are Z 2 quantities, which we know from our AHSS results in Table III, our goal is to obtain a real-vector-bundle description for the considered superconductors and examine if the S-W classes can distinguish phases that w 1 and w 2 are supposed to discern. This strategy of writing down topological invariants has in fact been applied to insulators with a combined symmetry T R of time reversal and two-fold rotation by Refs. We first show that w 1 can be identified as the first S-W class of a rank-N 0 real vector bundle E 1 , which is defined as follows. The base space of E 1 is a closed loop formed by a 1-cell j ∈ {a, b, c}, its symmetry related 1-cell j ′ , and the boundary between them (see Fig. The first S-W class of the vector bundle E 1 is the orientability of E 1 , which can be extracted from the set I of real-gauge occupied wavefunctions as follows. Although it is always possible to demand the wavefunctions to be in the smooth gauge along the base space lj = l(j ∪ j ′ ), which is a 1D loop, the wavefunctions may inevitably suffer discontinuous π-phase shifts when transformed into the real gauge. In such cases, we can detect a π-phase shift that occurs at momentum k ∈ lj by the transition function matrix where |u ′ n (k L/R ) is the n-th real-gauge occupied wavefunction within the left and right neighborhoods about k ∈ lj . Since the transition function formed by real-gauge wavefunctions is an orthogonal matrix, its determinant det O(k) = 1 or -1, which corresponds to the absence or presence of a π-phase shift at k. Thus, the vector bundle E 1 is said to be orientable and non-orientable if there exists even and odd numbers of momenta k with det O(k) = -1, respectively. We can therefore determine the first S-W class for each loop lj , which is a Z 2 number that labels the orientability of the vector bundle. We now further relate the first S-W class to our 1D invariant w 1 [see Eq. ( where k L/R are momenta in left and right neighborhoods about k. Each of the transition function O 1 (k) with det O(k) = -1 contributes a nontrivial π phase winding for U (k). This implies that the phase winding of U (k) along the closed loop lj is given by lj dk∂ k log det U (k) = 0 or π when the first S-W class is trivial or nontrivial, respectively. This orientability of the vector bundle E 1 is also carried by the smooth-gauge sewing matrix through the winding of U (k) since S I/II (k) = U (k)U (k) T . Specifically, the phase winding of the sewing matrix S I/II (k) along the 1D loop lj is given by twice of that of U (k). The corresponding winding number of S I/II , which is just the 1D invariant w 1 we obtained from our AHSS result [see Eq. ( when the first S-W class is trivial or nontrivial, respectively. We have thus identified our proposed 1D invariant w 1 as the first S-W class of the real vector bundle E 1 . Next, we show that w 2 can be identified as the second S-W class of the following rank-N 0 real vector bundle E 2 . The base space of E 2 is the closed space formed by an orbit of 2-cells and the boundary between them, which is the entire BZ (see Fig. where W n for n ≥ 1 denotes the n-th S-W class with W 0 being the trivial cohomology class 85 , ⌣ denotes the cup product, and E, Ẽ are real vector bundles. Since this formula relates higher-order to lower-order S-W classes of different vector bundles, we can apply Eq. ( To apply the Whitney sum formula to our case, we consider a given time-reversal BdG Hamiltonian H with 4N 0 bands and write H = N0 s=1 H s sub as the direct sum of N 0 four-band 'sub-Hamiltonians' H s sub labeled by s. We can then construct a rank-1 real vector bundle E s for each sub-Hamiltonian H s sub , where the base space is the BZ and the rank-1 vector space is spanned by one of the two time-reversal-related occupied states in the real gauge. The direct sum of these rank-1 real vector bundle E s leads to the vector bundle E tot = N0 s=1 E s , for which the vector space is spanned by one of the two sets of time-reversal-related occupied states of the full BdG Hamiltonian H. We can now relate the S-W classes of these rank-N 0 and rank-1 bundles using the Whitney sum formula where the sum is over all unordered pairs of (s, s ′ ) with s, s ′ = 1, • • • , N 0 . Here, we have made use of the fact that the second S-W class for a rank-1 bundle is always trivial such that W 2 (E s ) = 0 for all s 86 . The last step is to express the 2D invariant w 2 in terms of the 1D invariant w 1 through Eq. ( where w s 1j can be calculated by Eq. ( Equipped with calculable expressions for the 1D and 2D invariants w 1 and w 2 , we now show that instead of just diagnosing the bulk topology, these bulk invariants are also capable of diagnosing the type of boundary Majorana modes. To establish this bulk-boundary correspondence for our case study, our strategy is to turn to classification analyses in the real space, where the boundary modes for each phase can be most naturally studied. In this section, we first study the real-space classification as well as the Majorana boundary type of each phase for 2D time-reversal superconductors with C 2 symmetry. We then study our invariants ν 1j , j = a, b, c and ν 2 for each of these phases, whose Majorana boundary type is known, to understand how to predict boundary signatures from the momentum-space invariants. This is the key step in our protocol, which combines the momentumspace and real-space classification results to establish the bulk-boundary correspondence for our case study. The real-space classification method we adopt is the topological crystal approach The first step of the topological crystal approach is to perform the C 2 symmetric cell decomposition in the real space. Fig. The second step is to identify the 0D, 1D, and 2D building blocks that live on different dimensional cells. For our systems, there are no 0D building blocks since the classification of the effective 0D BdG Hamiltonian is trivial. This can be seen from the following. The two irreps of C 2 rotation labeled by R = ±i are mapped to each other by T or P. At any high symmetry point (0-cells), the emergent AZ class for either irrep is therefore AIII since the chiral symmetry PT maps one irrep to itself. Since the classification for 0D class-AIII BdG Hamiltonians is trivial, there are no nontrivial 0D building blocks in our topological crystal analysis. We nonetheless have nontrivial 1D and 2D building blocks. Since the 1-cells and 2-cells (i.e. any point in a unit cell besides the high-symmetry points) exhibit emergent time-reversal and particle-hole symmetries, there exist a 1D building block of a time-reversal-invariant Kitaev chain (spinful Kitaev chain) and a 2D building block of a 2D time-reversal-invariant topological superconductor (TSC) with helical edge states. By stacking these nontrivial building blocks into 2D superconducting states in different symmetry-allowed ways, we can obtain the representative states for all topologically distinct phases in the considered symmetry class. These representative states built by building blocks, which are dubbed the building-block states, can be generated from the following four fundamental block constructions: The first three are 1D-block states built by placing a spinful Kitaev chain on one of the 1-cells e in every unit cell. The last one is a 2D-block state built by placing a 2D TSC on the 2-cell e Based on the topological crystal classification, the classifying group K of the 2D time-reversal superconductors with C 2 symmetry is described by the short exact sequence Here, the entry Z 3 2 is generated by the 1D block states with a spinful Kitaev chain placed on each of the three 1-cells e (1) i , i = 1, 2, 3, and the entry Z 2 is generated by the 2D block state with a 2D TSC placed on the 2-cell e The boundary signatures of these building block states can be naturally obtained from their block constructions. For each building-block state, we describe the protecting symmetry and the Majorana boundary signature separately using the following terminology. Depending on whether the protecting symmetry of the state is the translational symmetry or one of the time-reversal and C 2 symmetries, the state is said to belong to a weak or strong phase, respectively. On the other hand, we define the order of a state with symmetric boundary terminations to be the lowest co-dimension of boundaries with gapless Majorana boundary modes. Following our definition, the order of a state directly indicates the dimension of Majorana boundary modes that can be probed in experiments. For example, a state that supports gapless Majorana modes on partial or all edges is a first-order state, regardless of the protecting symmetry. A state that supports Majorana zero modes at two C 2 -related corners is a second-order state. Finally, a state built by stacking a first-order and a second-order states is considered first order in our definition. In this case, we expect only Majorana edge modes are visible under experimental probes since the corner modes are embedded in the edge modes. We now discuss the protecting symmetries and the boundary signatures of a few important building block states. First, the 2D-block state built by placing 2D TSCs on 2-cells e (1) 3 (1) 1 that threads through the C 2z -rotational axis will survive. Due to this single 1D block that survives due to C 2 , the resulting state supports two C 2 -related 0D Majorana zero modes and is therefore a second-order strong phase protected by the C 2 symmetry. We can further achieve a weak state by a 1D-block state built with a spinful Kitaev chain on the 1-cell e 3 . This state is purely weak because when the translational symmetry is broken, the Kitaev chains in different unit cells can move to annihilate each other completely such that no boundary signature is left. Under our definition, this weak state is first order since we expect Majorana bands along y-direction edges. Similarly, the first-order weak state with Majorana bands along x-edges can be constructed by placing one spinful Kitaev chain on each of the three 1-cells. Finally, the 1D-block state built by placing a spinful Kitaev chain on e 2 , which are the 1-cells that thread through the C 2z -rotational axis, can be viewed as the combination of a first-order weak state and a secondorder strong state. This is because when we break the C 2 -rotational symmetry, all 1D blocks (the spinful Kitaev chains) can still survive under the translational protection such that the state supports Majorana bands along y-or x-edges. In contrast, when we break the translation but preserve the C 2 rotational symmetry, all 1D blocks can annihilate in pairs in a C 2 -symmetric way except the spinful Kitaev chain that threads through the C 2zrotational axis. Due to this single 1D block, the resulting state supports two C 2 -related 0D Majorana zero modes and is therefore a second-order strong phase protected by the C 2 symmetry. As a combination of the above two states, this 1D block state is considered a mixture of weak and strong states in terms of the protecting symmetries, and is considered first order in terms of the boundary signature under our definition. We emphasize that these building-block states serve as the representatives of the whole phase-any other state is adiabatically connected to a building-block state if they are in the same phase (see Sec. V A.). We therefore expect that the same Majorana boundary signature found in a representative building-block state is shared by the entire phase to which it belongs. In the following, we will construct minimal models for the four fundamental 1Dand 2D-block states and explicitly compute our proposed topological invariants w 1 and w 2 [defined in Eq. ( We start from the 1D-block states. First, we focus on the state formed by stacking spinful Kitaev chains 50 on the 1-cells e only. According to our topological crystal analysis in Sec. V B, this state belongs to a firstorder phase with Majorana bands along the y-directional edges. To explicitly compute our proposed invariants w 1 and w 2 , we consider the following minimal BdG model where |m| < 1, and τ i and σ i are 2 × 2 Pauli matrices in the particle-hole and spin spaces, respectively. We denote the vector bundle on which this model H KC acts by E e (1) 1 , and the symmetry operators respecting the commutation relations Eq. ( where K is complex conjugation. To compute the proposed topological invariants, the first step is to write down the wavefunctions explicitly in the basis of the eigenstates | ± ± of both τ z and σ z , where the former and latter ± denote the corresponding τ z and σ z eigenvalues ±1, respectively. In the basis of {++, +-, -+, --}, the two real-gauge occupied states of energy -ǫ 0 are where Note that these two occupied states are Kramers pairs such that T ψ 1 (k) ∝ ψ 2 (-k), and they are not continuous across The second step is to write down the reference Hamiltonian H 0 . By taking m in H KC to the negative infinity, we find which acts on E e (1) and the symmetry operators have the same forms as in Eq. ( where j = a, b, c labels the 1-cells in the momentum space (see Fig. Correspondingly, in the real space this superconducting state supports Majorana bands along the y-directional edges (with undetectable Majorana corner modes buried in the Majorana bands). Similar to the above case but with k x and k y interchanged, the 1D-block state formed by stacking spinful Kitaev chains on e (1) 2 supports Majorana bands along the x-directional open edges (also with embedded Majorana corner modes). With a similar calculation, we find that this state is characterized by 1D and 2D topological invariants ν 1a = ν 1c = 0, ν 1b = 1, ν 2 = 0. Next, we consider the 1D-block state formed by stacking spinful Kitaev chains on the real-space 1-cells e where we denote the corresponding vector bundle as E e (1) . Importantly, while the system and the reference Hamiltonians are also given by H KC in Eq. ( where R acquires extra momentum dependence. This extra factor e iky arises from the fact that upon rotation, the position y = 1 2 in any unit cell is mapped to the position y = -1 2 in another unit cell, which differs from the original position by an integer multiple of lattice vectors in the -y direction (1) 2 , is a weak phase protected by the translation symmetry alone and supports Majorana bands along the y-directional edges without any embedded Majorana corner modes (see Sec. V B.). For the 1D invariants, note that the phase of the sewing matrix S I/II (k) along a 1-cell loop lj acquires nontrivial winding from the explicit k y -dependence of the combined symmetry operator T R = ie -iky τ z σ x K. In such a case, the 1D topological invariants w 1j of not only the system Hamiltonian H KC , but also the reference Hamiltonian H 0 can become nontrivial. Thus, to correctly obtain the 1D invariant ν 1j that characterizes the weak phase this 1D-block state belongs to, we need to add the contributions from both Hamiltonians, as we discussed in Sec. IV A and Eq. ( 3 , H 0 ), (35) where the invariants for the reference Hamiltonian are w 1a (E e (1) 3 3 , H KC ) = 1, whereas the invariants for the system Hamiltonian are w 1j (E e (1) 3 , H 0 ) = 1 for all j = a, b, c. We thus arrive at 1D invariants ν 1a = ν 1c = 1 and ν 1b = 0. For the 2D invariant, same as the previous 1D-block states, we can again interpret w 2 as the second S-W class of the rank-1 vector bundle Ẽ formed by either ψ 1 or ψ 2 . The only difference is that when applying the Whitney sum formula in Eq. ( invariant for the phase is thus given by where we have chosen 3 and H c = H 0 in Eq. ( To summarize, we find that the 1D-block state formed by stacking one spinful Kitaev chain per 1-cell e (1) 3 in the real space is characterized by the momentum-space topological invariants This superconducting state shares the same 1D invariants ν 1j with the state of stacked chains on e (1) 1 [see Eq. ( Finally, we move to the 1D-block state that belongs to a second-order strong phase with C 2 -protected Majorana corner modes. Such a state can be built by placing spinful Kitaev chains on both of the real-space 1-cells e 3 . In this case, the system and reference Hamiltonians H HO and H ′ 0 are given by where both act on the same vector bundle 1 . On this vector bundle E HO , the relevant symmetry operators have the form We can obtain the 1D invariants from those we found for the 1D-block states of stacked Kitaev chains on e 3 -state, we find that the 1D invariants for the higher-order Hamiltonian H HO and the reference Hamiltonian H ′ 0 in Eq. ( The final Z 2 1D invariants ν 1j for the second-order phase are therefore trivial for all three momentum-space 1-cells j = a, b, c where we have employed Eq. ( To obtain the 2D invariant for the second-order phase, we can make use of the w 2 -w 1 relation in Eq. ( (1) 3 -states listed in Eqs. (40) and (41). Specifically, first we account for the nontrivial contribution from the reference Hamiltonian by choosing in Eq. ( , and E e (1) , respectively. Written more explicitly, the 2D invariant for the higher-order phase is given by 3 1 3 3 3 1 3 1 3 3 3 1 3 To summarize, for the higher-order phase with C 2protected Majorana corner modes, we find the 1D and 2D invariants to be ν 1j = 0, j = a, b, c and ν 2 = 1 [see Eqs. ( There is only one 2D-block state, which belongs to the time-reversal-protected topological superconducting phase with helical Majorana edge modes (2D TSC). To compute our 1D and 2D invariants w 1 and w 2 , we consider the following minimal BdG model 50 where we set |m| < 2, and τ and σ represent the Pauli matrices for the particle-hole and spin spaces, respectively. We denote the vector bundle on which the Hamiltonian H T SC acts by E e (2) , and the symmetry operators respecting the commutation relations are given by where K is complex conjugation. The real-gauge wavefunctions of the two occupied states are given by in the eigenbases {++, +-, -+, --} of τ z and σ z , where each of the former and latter signs ± denote the eigenvalues ±1 of τ z and σ z , respectively. Here, the momentum-dependent parameter η 0 is given by η 0 (k) = (cos k x + cos k y -m) 2 + sin 2 k x + sin 2 k y . We point out that although both -2 < m < 0 and 0 < m < 2 regimes contain the 2D TSC phase and support helical Majorana edge modes when placed next to vacuum, they are topologically distinct in the sense that when placed next to each other there will be gapless Majorana edge modes localized on the boundary. In fact, the two regimes differ by a weak phase (see Appendix. B), but one cannot tell them apart from their boundary modes against the vacuum because the edge signature of their difference is hidden in the bands of the helical states. In the following, we will study the invariants for both regimes. To compute the invariants ν 1j and ν 2 for this 2D TSC phase [see Eq. ( and we can simply compute w 1j and w 2 for the system Hamiltonian H T SC without worrying about the reference Hamiltonian H 0 . We first focus on the regime with 0 < m < 2 (denoted as TSC + ). For the 1D invariants w 1j , we transform the wavefunctions φ 1 (k) and φ 2 (k) in Eq. ( where I 2×2 is in the basis of φ 1 and φ 2 , and Θ(k x ) is defined as +1 for k x ≥ 0 and -1 for k x < 0. Due to the k xdependent phase factor e -i kx 2 in U (k), the corresponding sewing matrix S I/II = U U T exhibits a 2π-phase winding along the loop la . We thus find w 1a = 1 using Eq. ( For the 2D invariant, however, we can calculate w 2 (E e (2) , H T SC ) using neither our expression in Sec. IV C nor Eq. ( From a similar calculation, we find that the other regime -2 < m < 0 (denoted as TSC -) with helical Majorana edge modes is characterized by The 2D invariant ν 2 is ill-defined in both regimes due to the same reason, that is the obstruction to satisfying the T -constant and smooth gauge for the occupied wavefunctions over the full BZ. In fact, this obstruction is similar to the obstruction to the T -constant and smooth gauge in the 2D topological insulator 78,79 . Nonetheless, it is desired to detect such a phase by well-defined invariants rather than by the fact that the 2D invariant ν 2 is ill-defined. Before ending this subsection, we therefore show that such obstruction can be detected by the well-defined 1D invariants from the condition ν 1a + ν 1c = 1. The realgauge wavefunctions φ 1 (k) and φ 2 (k) in fact already satisfy the smooth and T -constant conditions everywhere except at one point, which we refer to as the singular point of the wavefunctions. When we approach the singular point from different directions, the wavefunctions take different values and are thus not well defined at the singular point. This happens because we only take one of the time-reversal-related partners, whereas the well-defined quantity throughout the entire BZ is the 2D Hilbert space spanned by both partners. In fact, in both 0 < m < 2 and the -2 < m < 0 regimes, there is no gauge in which we can remove this singularity and still satisfy the T -constant and smooth conditions elsewhere in the BZ. However, as we demonstrated when computing ν 1a , when we consider a single 1-cell loop that passes through the singular point, we can always remove the singularity while satisfying the smooth condition by a momentum-dependent gauge transformation with phase winding [e.g. the transformation matrix in Eq. ( Boundary signatures and protecting symmetries ν1a ν 1b ν1c ν2 Stacking spinful Kitaev chains on e (1) 1 Majorana bands along y-directional edges; First-order mixed phase 1 0 1 0 Stacking spinful Kitaev chains on e (1) 3 Majorana bands along y-directional edges; First-order weak phase 1 0 1 1 Stacking spinful Kitaev chains on e and e (1) 3 Second-order strong phase 0 0 0 1 TABLE IV: A summary of the computed 1D invariants ν 1j , j = a, b, c and 2D invariant ν 2 for the representative building-block states of a few important superconducting phases. The bulk-boundary correspondence can be readily established from the results for these states. The first column specifies the real-space construction for each of the building-block states. For the schematics on the right, the square denotes a real-space unit cell, a thick brown line denotes a 1D block (spinful Kitaev chain), and a filled square with '+' or '-' denotes a 2D block of TSC + or TSC - state, respectively. The second column specifies the Majorana boundary modes and the protecting symmetries of each phase the building-block state belongs to, and the third to sixth columns are the computed invariants. Note that the state in the fourth row is adiabatically connected to the direct sum of the states in the first three rows. The 2D-block states in the fifth and sixth rows, formed by stacking TSC + and TSC -states, respectively, are off by a weak phase with Majorana bands on partial edges. However, it is in principle impossible to determine which belongs to the strong phase and which the mixed phase. We choose one to be the strong state and the other is thus fixed as the mixed state. Moreover, since the Majorana bands from the additional weak phase are expected to be buried by the Majorana edges from the strong phase, the two phases are practically speaking indistinguishable. In this section, we summarize the computed topological invariants, Majorana boundary modes, and protecting symmetries we find for the important building-block states we studied in Sec. V (see Table In the following, we first describe how to extract the Majorana boundary signatures from the original momentum-space invariants {ν 1a , ν 1b , ν 1c , ν 2 } for any given time-reversal and C 2 -rotational symmetric superconductor with translational symmetries in the x and y directions. This is summarized in the Fig. Next, since the 1D and 2D topological invariants {ν 1a , ν 1b , ν 1c , ν 2 } are not expressed in a basis that naturally has one-to-one correspondence to the type of Majorana boundaries and protecting symmetries, we now explain how to re-express them into a new set of Z 2 invariants {z 1 , z 2 , z 3 , z 4 }, which has a simpler relation with the boundary signatures. The results are summarized in Table The mixed phase in the bottom right box is the combination of a second-order strong phase and a first-order weak phase. A state formed by stacking more than one of the above four states can be easily detected by more than one nontrivial new invariant z i . In other words, a state with a mixed boundary signature must have more than one nonzero entry in the new set of Z 2 invariants {z 1 , z 2 , z 3 , z 4 }. It is worth pointing out two subtleties in the implications of these new invariants. First, the C 2 -protected corner Majoranas are only expected to be visible in experiments for a pure second-order strong state characterized by {z 1 , z 2 , z 3 , z 4 } = {0, 0, 0, 1}. When any other invariants are non-zero, the corner Majoranas are expected to be buried by 1D Majorana modes on all or partial edges. Similarly, Majorana bands on partial edges are expected to be buried by Majorana edge modes on all edges. Second, we made an arbitrary choice for the 2D block since it is in principle impossible to determine which of the states built by T SC + and T SC -belongs to the pure first-order strong phase. Under our choice of T SC + , the other building-block state formed by stacking T SC -consists of a first-order strong state and some weak state(s). Such a mixed state is characterized by z 1 = 1 along with other non-vanishing invariants z 2 and/or z 3 . One can equivalently choose the TSC -state to be the 2D building block and arrive at another self-consistent set of new invariants. Expression Boundary signature Protecting symmetry z1 ν1a + ν1c helical edge modes time reversal z2 ν 1b Majorana band translation along x z3 ν1c Majorana band translation along y z4 (when z1 = 0) ν2 + ν 1b ν1c + ν 1b + ν1c Majorana corner modes C2 rotation TABLE V: A summary of the final set of Z 2 momentum-space invariants that can diagnose the Majorana boundary signatures. For each of the new invariants z i , we specify the relation to the original invariants ν 1j and ν 2 (listed in the second column). Each new invariant detects only one type of Majorana boundary mode protected by a single symmetry, as specified in the third and fourth columns. Any superconducting state that is formed by stacking more than one of these four fundamental states can be detected by a sum of their invariants. Since the invariants are Z 2 numbers, the addition and multiplication in the expressions are up to modulo 2. This table is obtained by choosing the 2D-block state built with stacking TSC + as the pure first-order strong phase with helical Majorana edge modes, which has {z 1 , z 2 , z 3 , z 4 } = {1, 0, 0, 0}. By making the other equivalent choice of TSC -, one can arrive at another set of self-consistent new invariants zi . In this work, we study the classification and the topological invariants for 2D time-reversal superconductors with two-fold rotational symmetry C 2 . We choose superconductors with this symmetry group because this is one of the simple examples where the symmetry indicators cannot distinguish crystalline topological phases or infer their Majorana boundary features, as observed in previous studies The three-step protocol we use to derive topological invariants for topological crystalline superconductors consists of the following steps. The first step is to conduct classification study in the momentum space by approximating the K group using the AHSS, where the converged result produces exact subgroups of the K group (2) The K group restricted to each of the three highsymmetry lines and the K group for general points in the BZ are both Z 2 . The bulk topology can therefore be fully characterized by Z 2 invariants that take band data on high-symmetry lines and general points in the BZ as input. We dub such invariants 1D and 2D invariants, respectively. (3) Since the K group contains π 1 (R 7 ) and π 2 (R 7 ) when restricted to 1-and 2-cells, respectively, we write down explicit expressions for the 1D and 2D invariants using the first and second homotopy classes of the sewing matrix for the C 2 T symmetry, which lives in the space R 7 . Based on our AHSS results, we propose practically calculable expressions in the momentum space for three Z 2 1D invariants defined on the three independent highsymmetry lines (1-cells) and one Z 2 2D invariant defined on the BZ (2-cells). Specifically, we express the 1D invariants ν 1j by the winding number of the sewing matrix along the 1-cell j. Importantly, by requiring this winding number to be invariant under gauges that satisfy the T -constant and smooth conditions, this integer winding number becomes a Z 2 number. For the 2D invariant ν 2 , we propose the following two expressions for practical computation The second step of our protocol is to conduct a classification study in the real space for the considered class of superconductors. The purpose of this step is to understand the Majorana boundary signatures carried by different superconducting phases in this symmetry group, given that the boundary types can be naturally obtained in the real-space picture. The method we adopt is the topological crystal approach. This method offers a systematic way to construct representative states (dubbed 'building-block states') for each of the phases, where these building-block states naturally reveal their Majorana boundary types and are adiabatically connected to other states in the same phase. From our topological crystal results, we find a Z The third step of our protocol is to establish the bulkboundary correspondence for the 2D topological crystalline superconductors with time-reversal and C 2 symmetries. The purpose of this step is to arrive at topological invariants that do not only discern the bulk topology, but can also predict the type of Majorana boundary modes that we expect to be observed experimentally for a superconductor of interest. Given the 1D and 2D topological invariants ν 1j 's and ν 2 we obtained in the momentum-space approach and the Majorana boundary types of building-block states we obtained in the realspace approach, we establish the bulk-boundary correspondence by explicitly computing the invariants for each of the building-block states. We have summarized our findings from the third step as a flowchart in terms of the Z 2 1D and 2D invariants {ν 1a , ν 1b , ν 1c , ν 2 } in Table This final set of Z 2 topological invariants {z 1 , z 2 , z 3 , z 4 } is our central result (summarized in Table We make three remarks about our results. First, in Ref. Second, when a given superconducting state contains a first-order strong state, we expect inevitable obstruction to the T -constant and smooth gauge conditions, similar to the obstruction in the time-reversal protected 2D topological insulator 78 . While we can detect such obstruction by the 1D invariant condition z 1 ≡ ν 1a + ν 1c = 1, as we showed in this work, we point out that the 2D invariant ν 2 is ill-defined under such obstruction. In the absence of a first-order strong state, ν 2 is well-defined and can be computed as the second homotopy class of the sewing matrix or as the second S-W class of a vector bundle that characterizes the system, as we propose in this work. In particular, the second S-W class can be obtained from first S-W classes through the Witney sum formula. Other ways of computing the second S-W class have been proposed in previous works for specific cases, such as a method using Wilson loop operators Finally, in this work we have characterized one example of topological crystalline superconducting system, where the AHSS method provides information on the momentum-space topological invariants. We expect that our discussion can extend to other spinful systems with time-reversal and C n (for an even integer n) rotational symmetries. In such systems the combined time-reversal and C 2 rotational symmetry is present and the same sewing matrix can be utilized to obtain well-defined topological invariants. While the expressions for the invariants depend on the specific symmetries in the system, the same procedure can be applied to any other symmetry class, where crucial information about the invariants is extracted from the AHSS calculation and the bulk boundary correspondence is established by matching the real-space analysis. have d 0,-4 1 given by where each entry is the number of generating states formed by an irrep on the 0-cell of the column extended to the 1-cell of the row. Note that the sign is negative if the orientations of the 1-cell and of the adjacent 0-cell disagree. Other first differentials are all trivial. From the first differential and Eq. ( The calculation we have done so far is based on the representation interpretation, which serves as a formal calculation tool. It is illuminating to make connection with the topological invariants defined in Sec. IV. Recall that the entry E 1,-4 1 in the E 1 page was obtained from π 0 (R 0 ) for each 1-cell, where is the classifying space for the emergent AZ class AI of the n = 4 row on the 1-cells. Invoking the isomorphism where R 7 = U (N )/O(N ), the right-hand side of Eq. A1 corresponds to the 1D topological invariants defined in Sec. IV B. We can also understand the first differential d 0,-4 1 as the gauge freedom in the 1D invariants based on the first homotopy group of the sewing matrix as follows. Recall that we obtained the entry E 0,-4 1 from π 0 (C 0 ) for each 0-cell, where C 0 = U (N + M )/(U (N ) × U (M )) is the classifying space for the emergent AZ class A of the n = 4 row on the 0-cells. Moreover, there is an insomorphism where C 1 = U (N ). Following Ref. In the topological phenomena interpretation, a second differential encodes the process where a band inversion occurs at a 0-cell and generating gapless points in the neighboring 2-cells. We model this process by the following Hamiltonian around a 0-cell at k 0 : Time reversal and C 2 rotation act as T = iσ y K and R = iσ z τ z . The gapless points arise when the chemical potential is tuned from μ < 0 to μ > 0. At one of the gapless points, however, a mass term (k y -k 0,y )σ 0 τ y which respects the effective symmetry T R on the 2-cell can open up a gap. This suggests that d 0,-4 2 , and further d 2 , is trivial. In a 2D system, d r = 0 for any r > 2. The E 2 page is therefore the limiting page E ∞ . From the diagonal entries of the limiting page E ∞ , we extract the three subgroups of φ K (τ,c),-3 G (BZ): (A4) In Sec. III we omitted the detailed relation between a generic φ K (τ,c),-n G (BZ) and its subgroups from the AHSS calculation. We now briefly review it before presenting the result for our system. Denoting the p-skeleton in the cell decomposition of the BZ by X p , one can write the classification excluding contributions from subspaces of dimensions lower than p as where f is given by restricting the BZ to its subspace X p-1 and (τ, c)| Xp-1 describes the symmetry action restricted to X p-1 . The diagonal entries on the limiting page then satisfy a series of short exact sequences: In 2D systems, φ K (τ,c),-3 G (BZ) satisfies: (A7) From these and E ∞ in Table where k x , k y are replaced with -i∂ x , -i∂ y , respectively. The wavefunction Ψ(x, y) satisfies the eigenequation They are related by time reversal and cannot be gapped out. Similarly, the two edge states around (0, π) are related to each other by time reversal. The translational symmetry forbids the states around (π, 0) and those around (0, π) to couple and open up a gap. This implies that the two regimes 0 < m < 2 and -2 < m < 0 correspond to different phases and differ by a weak phase. To determine the extension in Eq. ( where 0 < m(x, y) < 2, x 2 + y 2 < r 2 0 ; m(x, y) > 2, x 2 + y 2 > r The gap is therefore non-vanishing everywhere on the circular boundary, in contrast to the boundary of the high-order phase. In conclusion, the direct sum of the 2D TSC to itself is in the trivial phase. To see examples of other symmetry classes where the group extension like the one in Eq. ( The determinant of the transition function Eq. C4 is -1, which signals the nontrivial w 1a = w 1c . The transition function Eq. C4 has a winding number 1 around the loop l 2 , giving w 2 = 1. Similar calculation can be carried out for the higher-order state to obtain w 2 (E e (1) 1 3 , H KC ⊕ H KC ⊕ H 0 ). The AHSS result itself does not specify the group extension in Eq. (A8). Taking the real-space building block states as examples, we can determine the extension by explicitly calculating the group multiplication rule of the K group, i.e. how the invariants add up. Table IV summarizes the invariants for the real-space building block states and some of their direct sums. The group Z where c is a 2-cocycle, i.e. c ∈ Z 2 (Z 3 2 , Z 2 ). From the group structure in the real-space block sates and the correspondence with the topological invariants in Table The group multiplication rule can also be partially deduced from the Whitney sum formula. Without any singular point in the real-gauge wavefunctions, there is a well-defined rank-N 0 vector bundle with the entire BZ as its base space. Its first S-W class takes value in the cohomology group H 1 (BZ, Z 2 ) and its second S-W class in H 2 (BZ, Z 2 ). In this case w 1b and w 1c (= w 1a ) correspond to the Z 2 numbers associated with the two noncontractible loops l(b ∪ b ′ ) and l(c ∪ c ′ ) (in the same homology class as l(a ∪ a ′ )), respectively. Similarly, w 2 corresponds to the Z 2 number associated with the 2-cycle in the BZ. After taking the reference Hamiltonian into account, we may interpret ν 1j 's and ν 2 as the S-W classes of either the original vector bundle or its direct sum with the reference Hamiltonian. The n = 2 case in Eq. (24) suggests that c is determined by the cup product of the first S-W classes for the two summand vector bundles. This is ν 1b ν ′ 1c + ν 1c ν ′ 1b , or equivalently, ν 1b ν ′ 1a + ν 1a ν ′ 1b . The choice can be subsequently fixed by the case where a singular point is present and ν 1a = ν 1c .