ABSTRACT: Magnetism in semiconductor two-dimensional (2D) materials is gaining popularity due to its potential application in memory devices, sensors, spintronic and biomedical applications. Here, 2D Cobalt Telluride (CoTe) has been synthesized from its bulk crystals using a simple and scalable liquid-phase exfoliation method. The atomically thin CoTe shows over four hundred times enhancement in its magnetic saturation values compared to the bulk form. The UV-Vis absorption spectra reveal superior absorption in the high energy region, suggesting a semiconducting nature. Furthermore, we explain bandgap and origin of high magnetic behavior by density functional theory (DFT) calculations. The 2D CoTe shows a larger magnetism compared to bulk CoTe due to the reduced coordination number of the surface atoms, shape anisotropy and surface charge effect. Graphene and other two-dimensional materials have recently taken the center stage in research due to their extraordinary physical properties, and have found applications in electronic devices, sensors, biomedical, environmental, energy storage devices, etc. Recently, various transitional metal tellurides are being explored due to their structural, electronic and electrical properties, and magnetic behavior. CoTe has a hexagonal crystal structure of tellurium with the cobalt atoms occupying the octahedral voids. Bulk cobalt telluride was obtained via the vacuum induction melting route. Stoichiometric amounts of 99.99% pure Cobalt and Tellurium were taken based on Co-Te binary alloy phase diagram. The alloy was prepared by melting the constituent elements at a temperature of 950 °C in a quartz tube using a vacuum induction melting furnace. Although the melting point of cobalt is 1495 °C, for proper mixing, the furnace temperature should have been higher. But due to the lower boiling point of tellurium (988 °C), a higher temperature would lead to its evaporation and thus, the maximum temperature was limited to 950 °C. Instead, the mixture was kept at an elevated temperature for a long duration to ensure mixing by diffusion. High vacuum conditions of 1×10 -5 mbar were maintained inside the melting chamber to prevent the melt from oxidation. The high vacuum also resulted in lowering of the melting points of the metals, thus ensuring that mixing is proper. The as-cast sample was polished and made ready for further characterization. 2D CoTe samples were prepared using an ultrasonication-assisted liquid exfoliation method. The as-cast sample was powdered by using a mortar and pestle. 50 mg of the powdered sample was dispersed in 150 mL of 2-propanol (iso-propyl alcohol or IPA) and exfoliated in a probe-sonicator for 4h at room temperature to obtain a suspension of 2D CoTe sheets. For the characterization of 2D sheets, we drop-cast the suspension on silicon or glass substrates. The morphology of the samples was observed using a JEOL (JED 2300) scanning electron microscope under a high vacuum with an accelerating voltage of 20kV and 7.475 nA. Energy Dispersive X-Ray Spectroscopy (EDX) was used to determine the chemical composition of the product. The low-resolution TEM and HRTEM images were obtained from an advanced Titan transmission electron microscope. The crystal structure and purity of bulk and 2D CoTe were examined by X-ray powder diffraction (XRD) using a Bruker D8 advance diffractometer with Cu-Kα (λ = 1.5406 Å) radiation. For the XRD pattern of the bulk sample, we use powdered CoTe, while for the 2D sheets, we use a drop-casted sample on glass substrate. The scanning range for the samples was 10° -90° with a step of 0.3° under 40 kV and 100 mA. XRD patterns of both bulk and 2D CoTe samples were analyzed and indexed using Panalytical X'pert high score plus software and Pearson's Crystal Database Software. The surface composition and the oxidation state of exfoliated CoTe were studied using X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) (Instrument: ThermoFisher Scientific Nexsa) using the Al-Kα radiation (1486.71 eV) as the source of the X-rays. Room temperature Raman Spectroscopy was done using WITec UHTS Raman Spectrometer (UHTS 300 VIS, Germany) at a laser excitation wavelength of 532 nm. UV-Visible Spectroscopy was used to study the optical absorbance and to calculate the optical band gap of 2D CoTe sample. The measurement of magnetic properties of the bulk and 2D CoTe were performed by employing a vibrating sample magnetometer based on a superconducting quantum interference device (Cryogen-Free Magnet System, Cryogenic Limited, UK). Magnetic hysteresis loops were obtained at room temperature in an applied magnetic field -15 to +15 kOe. Powder sample weight of 62.07 mg CoTe was used to measure the magnetic moment, magnetic saturation, coercivity, and retentivity. Theoretical calculations: Although 2D CoTe undergoes cleavage from the bulk in many crystal directions during sonication, for the theoretical calculations, the structures cleaved along the [100] crystal direction were considered. This choice was based on the fact that the largest x-ray intensity peak was for planes along this direction. The crystal visualization software, VESTA, The calculations of the electronic, magnetic, and optical properties of 2D CoTe monolayer were performed with density functional theory (DFT) methods assuming the generalized gradient approximation (GGA) and Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof (PBE) functional for the exchangecorrelation part. To estimate the absorption optical coefficient, first, we obtained the real Ɛ1 and imaginary Ɛ2, components of dielectric function by Kramers-Kronig and Fermi's golden rule, respectively. The absorption coefficient can be calculated by real and imaginary components of the dielectric constant by: It is well known that GGA-DFT methods underestimate the bandgap energy value of materials because the Kohn-Sham equations consider only the ground state charge density. Besides, our system contains Co atoms, composed by valence atomic orbital d, producing large correlation effects. In this work, we adopt the scheme based on the Hubbard model, the so-called LDA+U Bulk and exfoliated CoTe were characterized by Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM). Figure Inset shows the lattice spacing and it was measured as ~0.32 nm corresponds to (100) plane. The lower inset shows the FFT pattern corresponding to a square box of the HRTEM image. An elemental analysis performed using Energy Dispersive X-Ray Spectroscopy (EDX) (Figure Among these peaks, the (100), (101), and (002) diffraction peaks are dominant in 2D CoTe, which indicates that compared to others, these planes were exfoliated in excess during liquid exfoliation from bulk. The observed difference in peak intensity can be due to the different crystallographic orientations in bulk and 2D sheets. As shown in Figure The presence of lattice strain (ε) is calculated using Williamson Hall plot and it is presented in Figure The optical performance of 2D CoTe was analyzed using UV-Vis Absorption Spectroscopy in the energy range of 1.5 to 3.5 eV. Figure For a material to be suitable for photocatalytic and water splitting activity, it should have an appropriate band-gap value, high carrier mobilities, and absorb a significant portion of the incident UV-visible light. The DFT calculations and experimental results suggest the suitability of 2D CoTe monolayer for catalytic applications in both visible and UV regions. The electronic band structure of 2D CoTe was calculated using DFT. Figure The room temperature (300K) magnetic behavior of the as-synthesized bulk and atomicallythin CoTe was investigated using Vibrating Sample Magnetometry, as shown in Figure When ferromagnetic materials are converted to ultrathin nanostructures, they become superparamagnetic and show no hysteresis. This type of behavior has been observed in iron oxide nanoparticles and is the result of the presence of single magnetic domains. The magnetic saturation of such materials is higher than those of paramagnetic materials, although the coercivity is zero. However, in the case of exfoliated CoTe, a hysteresis loop with a coercivity of 174.304 Oe (1.39 x 10 4 A/m) is observed indicating a ferromagnetic/ferrimagnetic nature (Figure The enhancement of coercivity of the 2D material is due to the localization of Co 3d state leading to an increased spin-orbit coupling and thus magneto-crystalline anisotropy. Due to the nature of the exfoliated materials, it is important to take into consideration possible extrinsic factors in the measure magnetisation. Accordingly, in our de-convoluted XPS spectra, we observed the presence of cobalt in its oxidized state, instead of metallic. Therefore, it is possible that the oxidation state of Co can be contributing to the observed magnetism in the 2D CoTe. In most of the Co-based oxides, the magnetic ordering temperature is far below the room temperature (RT), except CoO, which exhibits Néel temperature close to RT (precisely 298 K). The hysteresis loop is extremely sensitive to the presence of even small quantities of CoO. Because of the antiferromagnetic nature of CoO, there is in an asymmetric shift in the hysteresis loop along the applied field axis. However, in the present measurement, no such shift has been noticed at RT measurement and hence, the presence of CoO can be ruled out. Moreover, since all other Co-based oxides are paramagnetic at RT, their contribution towards magnetization can be ignored as the observed value scales much higher. The enhancement of coercivity in the 2D CoTe is primarily arising from larger spin-orbit coupling of the localized electrons in the spin down 3d band of Co (Figure DFT calculations show (Figure We also examined other multilayer structures corresponding to 2L, 3L, and 4L, assuming the same parameters used for 1L, where the used Hubbard parameter was U = 5.0 eV. We observed that one-layer has the largest values for the gap energy and magnetization. More importantly, some characteristics of the 1L, such as the ferrimagnetic order and the semiconductor character are preserved for multilayers (but not for the bulk). Figures Few-layer CoTe were obtained by ultrasonication assisted liquid exfoliation route. The obtained bandgap of CoTe indicates that exfoliated sample has a semiconducting nature. Magnetic characterization using VSM reveals a ferromagnetic behavior in 2D CoTe even at room temperatures, where other nanostructures achieve the same at near absolute zero temperature, which is further confirmed using the DFT calculation. In 2D CoTe, the 3d band of the Co atom becomes narrower which enhances the exchange splitting and magnetic moment per atom near the surface. Additionally, localization of surface charge is giving rise to the high magnetic moment and explains the different magnetic behavior of the bulk and 2D systems. Therefore, the coexistence of 2D magnetic and semiconducting behavior, that too at room temperature, makes 2D CoTe an ideal candidate for spintronics and also opens up the opportunity to form heterostructures with other van der Waals materials. AUTHOR'S CONTRIBUTIONS §-SD and RT contributed equally.