ωs=2|D|-g ǁ μ B B z 2π×11.49 GHz 0 2|D|+g ǁ μ B B z a) b) Width (mm) Height (mm) 0 8 -8 -4 4 0 -4 -8 4 8 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 Normalized RF Magnetic Field c) FIG. 1. Ruby resonator design. a) The electronic ground state of trivalent chromium (Cr 3+ ) in sapphire consists of two pairs of degenerate spin doublets separated by a 2π × 11.49 GHz ZFS. External magnetic fields applied along the crystallographic c-axis lift the degeneracy of the |ms = ± 1 2 and |ms = ± 3 2 sublevels as shown, allowing the |ms = + 3 2 ↔ |ms = + 1 2 transition with frequency ωs to be addressed spectroscopically. b) Device cross section. MWs are coupled into the ruby resonator shown in pink, with a single probe loop on the left. While the shield supports up to four probe loops, only a single probe is used in this work. The ruby resonator is centered on a semi-insulating wafer of silicon carbide (SiC) and is clamped in place by a spring-loaded fused-silica tube. A copper shield encloses the ruby resonator and decreases radiative losses from decreasing the resonator's quality-factor. c) Simulated RF magnetic field distribution of the ruby resonator's TE 01δ mode. The RF magnetic field is denoted by white arrows, the ruby resonator is outlined in pink, and the SiC and fused-silica support structures are indicated by white dashed lines. Quantum sensors based on spin defect ensembles have seen rapid development in recent years, with a wide array of target applications. Historically, these sensors have used optical methods to prepare or read out quantum states. However, these methods are limited to optically-polarizable spin defects, and the spin ensemble size is typically limited by the available optical power or acceptable optical heat load. We demonstrate a solid-state sensor employing a non-optical state preparation technique, which harnesses thermal population imbalances induced by the defect's zero-field splitting. Readout is performed using the recently-demonstrated microwave cavity readout technique, resulting in a sensor architecture that is entirely non-optical and broadly applicable to all solid-state paramagnetic defects with a zero-field splitting. The implementation in this work uses Cr 3+ defects in a sapphire (Al2O3) crystal and a simple microwave architecture where the host crystal also serves as the high quality-factor resonator. This approach yields a near-unity filling factor and high single-spin-photon coupling, producing a magnetometer with a broadband sensitivity of 9.7 pT/ √ Hz. Solid-state spin systems have transitioned from physics demonstrations to promising quantum sensors The key advance of this work is combining initialization and readout techniques to enable a simple sensor architecture which maintains performance. In particular, this sensor harnesses the crystal zero-field splitting (ZFS) to thermally polarize the spins at room temperature and extends the recently-demonstrated microwave (MW) cavity readout technique In contrast to optically-polarized sensors, the device demonstrated here employs passive thermal spin polarization for quantum state initialization. Thermal spin polarization relies on energy differences between quantum states to induce population differences via the Boltzmann distribution. In related systems, such as those used in EPR spectroscopy or in experiments probing cavity QED effects, this energy difference is typically produced by strong magnetic fields Operation of ruby as a magnetometer is explained by its Hamiltonian under application of an external magnetic field B = [B x , B y , B z ]. With the z-axis defined parallel to the ruby c-axis, the Cr 3+ ground-state Hamiltonian is where μ B is the Bohr magneton, g || and g ⊥ are the axial and transverse g-factors, and D is the ZFS parameter. The total spin angular momentum is S = 3 2 , and S x , S y , and S z are the spin matrices. At room temperature, the ZFS is 2D ≈ -2π × 11.49 GHz, and g ≈ g ⊥ ≈ 2 Without an applied magnetic field, the eigenstates form a Kramers doublet with degenerate pairs |m s = ± 1 2 and |m s = ± 3 2 Microwave cavity readout interrogates the spin transition frequency ω s by applying a MW probe signal at frequency ω d to the ruby resonator and measuring the reflected signal where κ c ≡ κ c0 + κ c1 is the loaded cavity linewidth, κ c0 and κ c1 are the intrinsic cavity linewidth and input couplings rates, ω c is the bare cavity resonance, and Π is an interaction term incorporating the absorptive and dispersive effects of the spins on the ruby resonator. The interaction term Π may be written as where κ s = 2/T 2 is the homogeneous width of the spin resonance, κ th = 1/T 1 is the thermal polarization rate, n cav is the average number of MW photons in the cavity over the cavity lifetime 1/κ c , and N is effective number of polarized spins, given by the population difference between the |m s = + 3 2 and |m s = + 1 2 states. The single spin-photon coupling is Vcav , where γ is the electron gyromagnetic ratio, V cav is the ruby resonator modal field volume, μ 0 is the vacuum permeability, and 0 ≤ n ⊥ ≤ 1 is a geometric factor, which occurs because only fields transverse to the spin quantization axis can drive transitions. The reflection coefficient Γ is maximally sensitive to changes in magnetic field when all frequencies are equal: ω c = ω d = ω s . By measuring the reflection coefficient for various values of ω s , ω d , and applied MW power, the spin-cavity interaction can be characterized. Such characterization allows straightforward optimization of the device as a magnetometer. Previous room-temperature spin-cavity coupling experiments employed a solid-state spin system coupled to an external MW cavity The resonator is centered coaxially in a cylindrical copper shield with inner height of 16.1 mm and inner diameter of 24 mm The shielded ruby resonator is placed in a uniform magnetic field B 0 created by an electromagnet, which is driven by a bipolar operational amplifier power supply. The field is oriented along the c-axis of the ruby resonator. This bias magnetic field lifts the degeneracy of the |± In the MW cavity readout technique, the spin resonance frequency ω s is inferred from the ensemble's dispersive shift of the cavity resonance The signal is downconverted to baseband by the IQ mixer, and both the I and Q channels are digitized. Capturing both the I and Q mixer channels allows the reflected signal to be reconstructed in software as if there were a physical phase shifter (see Supplemental Sec. VII G). The software reconstruction is configured to separate the signal into an absorptive channel and a dispersive channel. , providing best-fit system parameters as described in the main text. Data were recorded with 0 dBm applied to the ruby resonator under critical coupling, and the reflection coefficient is normalized to unity. To quantify the strength of the interaction between the cavity and spin-ensemble, a low-power MW signal is applied to the ruby resonator. The reflection coefficient is measured as the MW drive frequency ω d and the magnetic bias field (and thus the spin resonance frequency ω s ) are independently varied To characterize the system's performance as a magnetometer, the system is probed under optimal applied MW power (see Supplemental Sec. VII F). The cavity interaction with probe MWs is observed by fixing the bias magnetic field so that ω s ≈ ω c then sweeping the MW drive frequency ω d and monitoring the reflected signal, seen in Fig. Small changes in the external magnetic field may be detected by monitoring the dispersive shift of the reflected MW probe signal. For high sensitivity magnetometry, the bias magnetic field is chosen so that the device operates in the region of maximal slope M max where the reflected signal is most sensitive to the applied magnetic field. Magnetometry measurements are performed using an independently applied AC test magnetic field. The chosen field magnitude is small compared to the spin resonance linewidth κ s so as not to perturb the system from the optimal configuration. A low-noise signal generator drives a coil to generate a test field with amplitude B RMS test = 242 nT, frequency ω m = 2π × 10 Hz, and orientation along the ruby c-axis. This frequency is chosen high enough that flicker noise does not limit the digitization fidelity, but low enough that the test field is not significantly attenuated by the copper shield. The amplitude of the applied test field is verified using three independent methods (see Supplemental Sec. VII D). By computing the spectrum of the RMS voltage in the dispersive channel and evaluating the peak at the test field frequency ω m , which we denote V m , we can calculate the projected magnetic sensitivity as where e n is the RMS voltage noise floor of the single-sided spectrum and B RMS test is the RMS amplitude of the applied test field. There are competing effects which dictate the optimal interrogation MW power. Increasing the MW power increases the signal amplitude, but also causes power broadening, decreasing the fractional change in signal for a given change in applied magnetic field -900 -600 -300 0 300 600 900 The dispersive shift is near-linear around the zero-crossing. The asymmetry in the cavity reflection profile is due to nonmonotonic amplifier gain near saturation. b) Reflected absorptive ( ) and dispersive ( ) voltage signal as a function of spin-cavity detuning (ωs -ωc). The dispersive shift varies approximately linearly with small changes in the spin-cavity detuning about zero. The maximum slope on the dispersive component, Mmax ≈ 3000 V/T, sets the device's response when operated as a magnetometer. The slight observed asymmetry in both components is hypothesized to result from the off-resonant spin transition interacting with the ruby resonator mode and imperfect alignment of the bias field with the optical axis ( 10 • ). The applied MW power for both panels is 11 dBm. Measurements suggest that 11 dBm of MW power and a bias field of B 0 = 31 G are optimal for the present system (see Supplemental Sec. VII F). This bias field B 0 produces ω s ≈ ω c , consistent with the expectation that ω s ≈ ω c ≈ ω d is optimal for magnetometry The measured sensitivity is limited by phase noise from the MW source, so sensitivity would improve with a lower phase noise MW source (see Supplemental Sec. VII I). However, sensitivity improvements through modifications to the readout and MW electronics are fundamentally limited by the thermal-noise-limited sensitivity η th = 1.1 pT/ √ Hz (see Supplemental Sec. VII I). The sensitivity could also be enhanced by increasing the collective cooperativity parameter ξ, which can be improved by increasing the number of polarized spins, reducing the spin resonance linewidth, or by increasing the cavity quality-factor. This work demonstrates a generalization of the MW cavity readout technique combined with spin states prepared by thermal spin polarization arising from a zero- Sensitivity (T/ Hz) Johnson-Nyquist limit FIG. field splitting. By removing the requirement of optical polarization, solid-state spin sensors can be made smaller, lighter and more power efficient. Furthermore, the challenges associated with optical excitation are avoided, including light delivery; high heat loads; and laser pointing, polarization, and amplitude noise. The technique demonstrated in this work is applicable to a broad class of paramagnetic defects, including those with a GHz-scale ZFS. As a result, paramagnetic defects which are currently unsuitable for sensors due to poor optical initialization or poor optical readout may become viable candidates for high-performance bulk solid-state sensing. For example, the approach demonstrated here is expected to work well with siliconvacancy or -divacancy in silicon carbide Under application of a magnetic field B = B z ẑ along the c-axis of the ruby, the eigenstates are |m s = ± 1 2 and |m s = ± 3 2 , with eigenenergies [68] As D < 0 [68], the |m s = ± 1 2 states are higher energy than the |m s = ± 3 2 states at B z = 0 (and for all |B| < 2|D|/g || μ B ≈ 0.2 T). For magnetic field orientations not aligned along the c-axis, the pure |m s eigenstates mix together so that the eigenenergies no longer vary linearly in magnetic field. The eigenenergies are calculated numerically for four distinct magnetic field orientations in Fig. Two features are important to note about the resulting eigenstates show in Fig. The modal field volume V cav is defined as In Ansys HFSS, and through analytical calculations found in Using HFSS we compute the filling factor of the ruby resonator to be ζ = 0.69. The HFSS model used to estimate ζ includes the SiC substrate used for thermal and mechanical stabilization. In thermal equilibrium, the probability of occupying a state with energy E i is given by the Boltzmann distribution, where k B is Boltzmann's constant and T is the temperature, taken to be 293 K at room temperature. We neglect the Zeeman energy shift, which at the bias field used (31 G), is negligible compared to the ZFS. Taking p 1 and p 2 to refer to the | ± 3 2 states, we have E 1 = E 2 = D ≈ -5.75 GHz, and with p 3 and p 4 referring to the | ± 1 2 states, E 3 = E 4 = -D ≈ 5.75 GHz. Equation (8) then yields p 1 = p 2 = 0.25024 and p 3 = p 4 = 0.24976. We only address the | + 3 2 ↔ | + 1 2 transition, and therefore only consider p 1 and p 3 . Furthermore, because we can only observe population differences between spin states, the effective polarization is P = |p 1 -p 3 | = 4.7 × 10 -4 of the total Cr 3+ population. In this work the | + 3 2 ↔ | + 1 2 and | -3 2 ↔ | -1 2 transitions are spectroscopically resolved, and probe MWs are chosen to address the positive m s states, so that negative m s states do not contribute to the effective polarization. Since only half of the states are addressed, the effective polarization fraction is half as large as it would be if all of the states were used. The total number of spins addressed by the interrogation MWs is where V cav = 52.2 mm 3 is the modal field volume (see Supplemental Sec. VII B), V cell = 0.2548 nm 3 is the unit cell volume The 2D data from Fig. To account for slight experimental non-idealities, additional parameters are added to the fit. The reflection coefficient amplitude is modified by a constant factor A, along with a component linear in ω d with slope b to account for cavity asymmetries. To accommodate slight phase misalignment, a constant phase offset ψ is added. Additive offsets are accounted for with parameters o r and o i for the real and imaginary parts, respectively. The MW frequency and spin resonance frequency have offsets ω s,off and ω d,off applied, respectively. Due to a difference in electrical length of the signal and reference arm, a delay term τ is applied to model the phase rotation as a function of frequency. A summary of the additional parameters being fit is given in Table where ω d is the mean value of ω d over the data taken. For fitting, both the real and imaginary components are used, with the objective function given by L1 norms were used instead of L2 norms because the former were found to yield more accurate data reconstruction. To ensure that the auxiliary parameters don't change the model appreciably, the parameters o r , o i , A, and ψ should be small compared to 1. Comparison of the numeric values found verifies that this is the case. With the given range of ω d (a span of ∼5 MHz), the fit value of b results in an amplitude correction of ∼0.05. The delay term τ is a physical parameter and should be consistent with the experimental setup. From the value estimated for τ , an electrical length of ∼3 m is calculated, which is roughly the length of cabling used in the experiment. The values for κ c , κ c1 , κ s , and g eff extracted from the data are found to be insensitive to the method of the fit and applied MW power. However, the fit for κ th is sensitive to the fitting method and applied MW power. Specifically, fitting becomes very poor at lower applied MW powers (compared to T 1 values in The dependence on κ th = 1/T 1 is entirely captured in the first multiplicand. To obtain an accurate estimate on κ th , the term must therefore be on the same order or greater than κ s /2 = 1/T 2 . Using the literature values T 1 = 2.6 μs and T 2 = 5.5 ns For sharpest slope, and consequently highest sensitivity, the magnetic bias field should be configured so that the spin resonance frequency ω s and the cavity resonance frequency ω c are equal To optimize the bias magnetic field and applied MW power, we sweep both the bias magnetic field and the applied MW power and compute the sensitivity for each configuration. For each bias magnetic field B and applied MW power P , this gives a sensitivity η(B, P ). The optimal sensitivity at a fixed bias magnetic field is then given by η mag (B) = min P η(B, P ). The resulting plot of η mag (B) as a function of bias field is shown in Fig. To optimize the applied MW power, we instead compute η MW (P ) = min B η(B, P ), which finds the optimal sensitivity for each applied MW power. A plot of η MW (P ) as a function of applied MW power is shown in Fig. We can further probe the effect of varying MW power by looking at the reflected dispersive signal as the bias magnetic field is swept across the cavity resonance (shown in Fig. continually sharper slopes as applied MW power increases indicates that the observed spectral peak amplitude in sensitivity measurements increases with applied MW power. We introduce a new metric, which we call the noise-normalized slope, defined by M norm = M/ √ P R, where M is the slope of the dispersive reflected voltage as a function of applied magnetic field, P is the applied MW power, and R = 50 Ω is the termination impedance. Since the system is phase-noise-limited, we can approximate e n ∝ √ P R. The signal-to-noise ratio can then be approximated by SNR ∝ M norm . By Eq. ( The signal generator output is s(t) = e iω d t . After reflecting off the ruby cavity, the signal becomes r(t) = Γ(ω d )e iω d t+φ0 , where φ 0 is the phase delay of the reflected signal due to differing path lengths between the signal and reference arms. Mixing the signals gives The reflection coefficient Γ contains the absorptive signal in its real component and the dispersive signal in its imaginary component. The mixed signal m(t) no longer has this property because of the phase e iφ0 . As both the I and Q channels of the mixer are digitized, the full complex signal m(t) is available for signal processing. The complex multiplication by e -iφ can therefore be performed in software, giving the final signal Setting φ = φ 0 restores the reflection coefficient: w(t) = Γ(ω d ). To distinguish this signal from the physical outputs of the IQ mixer, the real part of w(t) is referred to as the absorptive channel and the imaginary part as the dispersive channel. The shape of the reflected noise spectrum in Fig. Because we encode our signal on the imaginary dispersive channel, we are sensitive only to phase noise on the carrier. To model the resulting noise on the output signal, we therefore need to understand how phase and amplitude noise transform through the system. For simplicity, we assume our signals are centered at zero frequency. That is, we mix down by the MW frequency ω d so that Γ(0) corresponds to the reflection coefficient at ω d . Since amplitude and phase noise manifest as modulation on the carrier ω d , this allows us to treat these noise sources as baseband signals. We decompose the reflection coefficient into real and imaginary parts, so Γ(ω) = Γ re (ω) + iΓ im (ω) where Γ re and Γ im are both real. Define so that Γ(ω) = Γ p (ω) + Γ s (ω). The inverse Fourier transform of a real, symmetric signal is real, while that of a real, anti-symmetric signal is imaginary. Equations ( where 1 -iφ(t) corresponds to noise from the mixer and * is the convolution operator. Only phase noise propagates through the mixer since it is driven in saturation and amplitude noise is suppressed. The corresponding frequencydomain signal is then We want an expression for the noise, so we remove 2πδ(ω)Γ(ω) which corresponds to the noise-free signal. Furthermore, we can ignore higher order products of noise since we assume the noise to be small relative to the signal. This gives the expression for the output noise signal Amplitude (V/ Hz) Phase Noise Amplitude Noise FIG. We need only consider the phase noise on the output signal, which is given by All of the terms in the above equation are independent. The first is amplitude noise and is independent of the other two because they depend on phase noise. The last two are independent because iΦ(ω)Γ p (ω) corresponds to phase noise reflected off the cavity, while iΦ(ω)Γ p (0) corresponds to the noise-free carrier reflected off the cavity with noise added on by the mixer, which has enough of a time delay relative to the reflected signal to be considered independent. To take the power spectrum, we can therefore add each term in quadrature. The final power spectrum is then where P 0 accounts for digitizer, thermal, and amplifier noise, which has a flat spectrum. Using Eq. ( By comparing A(ω)Γ s (ω) against Φ(ω)Γ p (ω), the relative contributions of amplitude noise and phase noise to the noise floor are revealed. These two noise contributions are plotted in Fig. While the experimentally projected sensitivity is limited by phase noise of the MW source, this limit can be circumvented in the future with improved electronics. Thermal noise in the MW signal chain, however, is fundamental and will limit the attainable sensitivity at a given temperature. Given the measured slope M max in Fig. where G is the total gain of the amplifier and mixer, k B is Boltzmann's constant, T is the temperature, R = 50 Ω is the termination impedance, and M max denotes the maximum slope of the reflected RMS voltage under application of a sweeping bias magnetic field. F is a constant of order unity that depends on the signal processing employed. In practice, F = √ 2 because our signal is isolated to one channel of the IQ mixer. With an optimized slope of M max = 2994 V/T and total gain G = 21 dB, Eq. ( where 0 ≤ ≤ 1 determines how much lower the phase noise should be relative to the thermal noise. Taking = -6 dB gives the phase noise requirement Φ th = -140 dBc/Hz. 