Extreme events gain the attention of researchers due to their utmost importance in various contexts ranging from finance to climatology. An observable that deviates significantly from its long-time average will have adverse consequences for the system. This brings such recurrent events to the limelight of attention in interdisciplinary research. There is a need for research efforts in many systems in the real world to find solutions that can predict and mitigate the unfavorable effects of these recurring events. A comprehensive review of recent progress is provided to capture recent improvements in analyzing such very high-amplitude events from the point of view of dynamical systems and random walkers. We emphasize, in detail, the mechanisms responsible for the emergence of such events in complex systems. Several mechanisms that contribute to the occurrence of extreme events have been elaborated that investigate the sources of instabilities leading to them. In addition, we discuss the prediction of extreme events from two different contexts, using dynamical instabilities and data-based machine learning algorithms. Tracking of instabilities in the phase space is not always feasible and precise knowledge of the dynamics of extreme events does not necessarily help in forecasting extreme events. Moreover, in most studies on high-dimensional systems, only a few degrees of freedom participate in extreme events' formation. Thus, the notable inclusion of prediction through machine learning is of enormous significance, particularly for those cases where the governing equations of the model are explicitly unavailable. Besides, random walks on complex networks can represent several transport processes, and exceedances of the flux of walkers above a prescribed threshold may describe extreme events. We unveil the theoretical studies on random walkers with their enormous potential for applications in reducing extreme events. We cover the possible controlling strategies, which may be helpful to mitigate extreme events in physical situations like traffic jams, heavy load of web requests, competition for shared resources, floods in the network of rivers, and many more. This review presents an overview of the current trend of research on extreme events in dynamical systems and networks, including random walkers, and discusses future possibilities. We conclude this review with an extended outlook and compelling perspective, along with the non-trivial challenges for further investigation. 1 Introduction 2 Extreme events give rise to massive challenges among different scientific communities and become one of the active topics in interdisciplinary researches due to the disastrous impact and irregular occurrences of these low-probability events. Examples of extreme events are numerous, and their emergent behavior is visible in several processes ranging from environmental disasters to call drops in cellular networks, economic drawdowns, epileptic seizures, global pandemics, to name a few. The studies on a broad spectrum of extreme events deserve special attention to get rid of its erratic behavior. This review aims to present a repertoire of the recent trend of research on this important interdisciplinary topic using dynamical systems and various random walk models that recreate some realistic situations in daily life. Extreme events, one of the essential unifying paradigms, gain significant recognition among many scientific disciplines for their severe detrimental consequences and potential applications. Various aspects of this interdisciplinary topic have customary involvement with our society rather say, in the progress of our civilization. In our recent experiences, the super cyclone Amphan is one of the worst storms recorded over the Bay of Bengal, packing winds reaching 185 kmph and triggering torrential rains across a wide swath of West Bengal (India) from deltaic regions to urban neighborhoods of Kolkata on May 20, 2020. Another example may be considered as the spreading of the pandemic COVID-19 worldwide, which does not require any further introduction. These are the few intriguing real-life instances that belong to the genre of extreme events. One or two of these examples attest to the necessity of understanding extreme events from the fundamental zero ground level. Concerning the widespread impact, extreme events have been studied from different perspectives in various fields like oceanography As much as our society has progressed and technology has improved, we have faced different threats of extreme events in the form of share market crash There is no strict definition However, the study of extreme value theory includes the limiting distribution (if exists) of maxima or minima of an observable. Obviously, in terms of magnitude and intensity, extreme events are the extrema of the time evolution of an observable generating a statistical transition from symmetric near-Gaussian statistics to a highly skewed probability density function Recurrence of extreme events is reflected in studies of return intervals Rare events are events with a low frequency associated with a random mechanism Up to now, the interest has been focused on the need to find new tools for characterizing extreme events based on several folds, viz. (i) causes, (ii) characteristics, (iii) early warning detections and predictions, and (iv) mitigations. In oceanography, research of extreme events is explored around ocean rogue waves significantly and several theories, quantifications, and predictions are flourished From this perspective, some new motivations have emerged in the dynamical systems. From the point of view of extreme events, the trajectory of a dynamical system evolves within its bounded attractor most of the time but occasionally visits the outside of the bounded region. This excursion is reflected as a large amplitude deflection (as a form of spikes or bursts) in a dynamical variable of the system due to the appearance of the region of instability Recently, a trend of research has started with isolated dynamical systems to observe extreme events-like scenarios and then understand the underlying mechanisms of origin of such events and suggest a possible method of prediction and control. In many dynamical systems, intermittent large deviation in the amplitude of a state variable is seen in their temporal dynamics. It is found that regions of instability The extreme events may be observed near a bifurcation point when the transition between two states is occurred, such as switching from the periodic dynamics to chaotic or switching from chaotic dynamics of one feature to another with different features. Scientists are utterly interested in finding the systems which exhibit extreme events and in which route these are generated. One of the most important route for originating extreme events in chaotic systems is intermittency But, the study of extreme events is not limited within the confined regime of the isolated dynamical system. Extreme events are noticed in coupled systems connected via different coupling functions. Researchers focus on collective behaviors Recently in the 21 st century, the attention of researchers has been shifted to a new discipline named network science This is important to understand the origin of extreme events like epileptic seizures Fortunately, these challenges attract the attention of an increasing number of scientists nowadays, and few initial investments are proposed in this direction to recognize the role of interplay between system's intrinsic dynamics and network's topology in the causation of extreme events Transportation network The Google search engine received approximately 2.9 million search requests per minute by the end of 2009 Motivated by these facts, a section is devoted to understand the emerging extreme events in networks of random walkers. As we have already discussed, information flowing through an edge and a node is a critical task, as each node and edge has its limited capacity. This limited handling capacity of the ingredients of a network and the inherent fluctuations in the flux passing through them may constitute extreme events. Extreme events in networks of random walkers are often observed in the form of the heavy load of HTTP requests, power blackouts, traffic jams, gridlock on highways, etc. Therefore, systematic studies on extreme events in networks of random walkers deserve special attention. The articulation and development of effective control strategies are in demand to avoid the catastrophic consequences of extreme events. A few available efficient and physically implementable methods, along with their analytical theories to understand its working, are reviewed in this report. Prediction of extreme events to trigger early warning signals is very relevant issue for every field of studies like finance Control or suppression of extreme events Our motive is to review the recent development of extreme events associated with dynamical systems and related to random walk. We enrich this review with an extensive introductory preamble on relevant concepts. The Chronicle of this review article is separated by some sections, which are organized as follows: In Section 2, we summarize different mechanisms that are capable of triggering extreme events. We provide the discussions on different models generating extreme events. Section 3 contains a wide variety of models on random walks taking place on top of complex networks. Possible controlling strategies of extreme events in random walker related problems, an utmost important issue, are included. Section 4 includes a rather complete overview of available prediction schemes for extreme events using dynamical instabilities and machine learning approaches. Depending on the nature of dynamical instabilities, some powerful prediction algorithms have been proposed, which are reviewed. We also encourage the model-free prediction using machine learning, which is beneficial and useful, particularly for the cases where the governing models are unavailable. Then, we also analyze reservoir computer, one of the promising approaches of model-free prediction. Section 5 emphasizes a discussion on existing controlling strategies of dynamical systems. We consider some of the promising aspects of several methods along with various coupling configurations, which are helpful for mitigating extreme events in particular cases. Section 6 provides a concise summary of the well-designed experimental studies on extreme events. Section 7 sketches our conclusive remarks, which will be helpful for the readers. We summarize the main features of extreme events, observed so far in dynamical systems and in networks of random walkers, with perspective unsolved problems. Some open questions regarding the extreme events, which are not explored yet, are accumulated for the future progress of this field. A trend of research has started, in the last two decades, on extreme events in dynamical models and laboratory experiments in laser systems 1. In a dynamical system, one may notice a sudden large expansion of an attractor with the variation of a system parameter. This observation leads to the following systematic steps for further exploration of extreme events in the system. 2. Collect a long-term time series x i (i = 1, 2, ..., n) of a state variable for a system parameter, if it reveals occasional large amplitude events. Otherwise, define an appropriate observable since large events might not always be visible from a temporal dynamics of a state variable. 3. Extract the extreme events using either the block maxima method After collecting the time series by simulating the system numerically for a sufficiently long interval, one can use that the collected data for prediction and predictability of extreme events. One can draw probability distribution of extreme events too for estimating their return time. A major advantage of dynamical system related studies is that we can originate an enormously large number of events using numerical simulations. These large numbers of collected data may give us clues on how to extract information from simulated data in absence of real data, and this may also be helpful for more accurate characterization of the statistical properties. We can repeat the study with several system parameters and locate the parameter space of a system, where such extreme events may appear. 6. After a confirmation of the existence of extreme events for a particular set of parameters in a system, the sources of instabilities (saddle point, saddle orbit, and other sources of singularity if present in the system) in the system can be investigated for understanding the generation of extreme events. Over the last few decades, researchers have considered enormous numerical frameworks as well as experiments to interpret the underlying processes that can trigger extreme events in dynamical systems. Several mechanisms are found responsible for such an emerging phenomenon. However, due to the lack of a general underlying process, scientific communities are still motivated to explore it from different perspectives. Till now, systematic studies have been made using various models (excitable systems, neuronal models, electronic circuit models, optical systems) to see the response of such models due to parameter variation, external forcing, and even for induced noise. So far, a few nonlinear processes have been identified that originate extreme events such as interior crisis-induced intermittency In the following subsections, we elaborately discuss various processes that can yield such extreme events in the dynamical systems. Initially, we discuss the results on isolated dynamical systems and then focus on two coupled dynamical systems. Lastly, we explore a few recent works on static and time-varying networks. One of the vital characteristics of extreme events is its irregular occurrences. This striking feature of extreme events makes the chaotic dynamical systems Crisis-induced intermittency or crisis is a commonly observed mechanism through which a sudden transition occurs from one state to another in dynamical systems. Due to crisis, attractors generally vanish or enlarge suddenly in the phase space. Three possible types of crisis are found in the literature For example, such an interior crisis has been reported earlier Few more works along the same line have also documented that shows the interior crisis as a responsible route for the emergence of extreme events. The Liénard-type system where k(t) = k 0 (1 + a cos(2πf t)) is an external periodically modulating signal of amplitude a and frequency f , k 0 is a scaling factor. I is proportional to the radiation density, N and N 0 are the gain and the unsaturated gain in the active medium, τ is the transit time of light, and γ is the gain decay rate. This system undergoes a period-doubling cascade leading to chaos with decreasing values of forcing frequency f where h 1 , T 1 , and T 2 represent the thermocline depth of the western Pacific, equatorial sea surface temperatures of the western and eastern Pacific, respectively. Interpretations of all parameters are given in Refs. Such a type of interior crisis due to the collision of advancing period-doubling and period-adding cascades against a variation of a system parameter is observed in another diffusively coupled heterogeneous FitzHugh-Nagumo system (Bonhoeffer-van der Pol model) The crisis process initiates rogue waves in the form of extreme intensity pulses in an optically injected laser Zamora-Munt et al. where κ is the field decay rate, γ n denotes the carrier decay rate, α represents the line width enhancement factor, ν indicates the injection current, and P inj is the injection strength, D is the noise strength, ∆ω is the detuning between the lasers, and ξ is the complex Gaussian white noise representing spontaneous emission. Here, the observable |E| is taken as |E| = E 2 x + E 2 y . For this case study, the predefined threshold is chosen as T = |E| max + 8σ for defining extreme events. Here, the mechanism of crisis is different from the other described cases above. In this case, after a specific value of the critical bifurcation parameter, the trajectory of the chaotic attractor collides with the stable manifold of an unstable equilibrium point (say, S1). Thereby it reaches the vicinity of another equilibrium point (say, S2) along its stable manifold. Then the trajectory finally gets repulsion and traverses for a long excursion along the unstable manifold of that equilibrium point (S2). The mechanism of extreme events is delineated by using the Poincaré surface of section at a plane drawn in two-dimensional plane for describing the pre-crisis and post-crisis scenarios in Figs. Figure Pomeau and Manneville first reported the intermittency where α, β and γ represent nonlinear damping, strength of nonlinearity and intrinsic frequency, respectively. F and ω, respectively, are the amplitude and frequency of the external forcing. ω is varied to observe extreme events in this system. Note that, the origin is a saddle equilibrium point of the autonomous Liénard system (F = 0). But, a saddle orbit arises around the origin in the forced Liénard system (2.4) Extreme events via this intermittency route have been reported in many other systems. It may appear from periodic or quasiperiodic motion Extreme events may also occur in a system for a suitably chosen parameter space if a discontinuous boundary is embedded in the phase space of that system. Recently, Kumarasamy et al. where α and ω are the amplitude and frequency of an external forcing, respectively. γ is the damping term, and β is the strength of the nonlinear electrostatic actuation force. The variables x and y delineate displacement and electrostatic voltage Another kind of intermittency is discussed here that also originates occasional large events via noiseinduced attractor-hopping in a multistable laser system that possess more than one coexisting stable states (steady state, oscillatory state, or both). Depending upon initial conditions, the trajectory converges to one of the coexisting stable states The intracavity laser power and averaged (over the active fiber length) population of the upper level are denoted by P and N (0 ≤ N ≤ 1), respectively. The diode pump current at the fiber entrance is Here, m d is the external harmonic modulation, and f d is frequency of the external harmonic modulation. Additionally, noise amplitude is η, and random fluctuation ζ ∈ [-1, 1] with noise cutoff frequency f n . Interpretations of all parameters are provided in Ref. Besides isolated dynamical systems, the researchers are equally interested in interpreting the underlying mechanism of the emergence of extreme events in the interacting oscillators. From this point of view, few studies are performed both numerically and experimentally. In the next section, we discuss the results on two coupled dynamical systems. In general, complete synchronization is the most desired behavior in coupled systems. This desired state is disrupted in the presence of noise, heterogeneity in the system, or both. A common scenario is noticed that the trajectory of the coupled system occasionally departs from an invariant manifold (the synchronization manifold) and jumps along the transverse direction of that manifold. As a result, occasional bursts with varying amplitudes are observed in the time evolution of the synchronization error. The trajectory, being repelled along the transverse direction of the synchronization manifold, ultimately comes back to the invariant manifold after a brief time interval. These short-lived, and intermittent excursions away from the synchronization manifold is known as attractor bubbling where x M and x S are the state variables of the master and slave systems, respectively, and c is the coupling strength, K is the coupling matrix. In a state of synchrony, both the subsystems evolve in unison on an invariant synchronization manifold x M =x S . Two new variables are introduced as x = ( x M +x S ) and ) that describe the evolution within and transverse to the synchronized manifold. In a stable synchronized state, x = x M = x S and x ⊥ = 0. Cavalcante et al. Besides the process mentioned above, extreme events may also be generated due to instability of phase synchrony in dynamical systems. Such type of mechanism has been reported by Ansmann et al. where A = [A ij ] N ×N is the adjacency matrix defining the topology, k is the coupling strength, and N = 2. Here, heterogeneity is introduced in the parameter b. x = x1+x2 2 is considered as an observable. The coupled units are phase synchronized most of the time, when the oscillations are small in amplitude. But occasional desynchronization between two oscillators occurs, when both become excited. The temporal evolution of x 1 (dashed red line) and x 2 (solid blue line) are plotted in Fig. Now, we discuss about the generation of extreme events that occur due to occasional in-phase synchrony in two coupled neuronal models. This kind of formation of extreme events is quite different from others. For demonstration, Mishra et al. (2.10) where j=1,2. The chemical synaptic coupling function for the j-th neuron is defined by Γ(x j ) = 1 e -λ(xj-Θ) The origin of extreme events is regarded as the instability in the phase space due to a saddle point. A time evolution of x consisting extreme events and T = x + 6σ are plotted in Fig. In-out intermittency where i = j and i, j = 1, 2. The parameter values are taken as a = -0.025, b = 0.00652 and c = 0.02. If M 2 = 0, then the only effective coupling strength is M 1 with single delay τ 1 . Here, x and y and y for all τ ∈ [0, max{τ k }] is the only stable attractor for small M = M 1 + M 2 . The period-adding cascade of mixedmode oscillations situated at the synchronization manifold meets the period-doubling cascade of the limit cycle, causing extreme events. During the collision of both the cascades, extreme events occur for several suitable choices of parameters. The extreme events are almost equal in size, but appear irregularly in the time domain. For M 1 = 0.005 and M 2 < 0.0048, the invariant synchronization manifold is transversally stable. At M 2 ≈ 0.0048, one or many periodic orbits in the synchronization manifold lose their transverse stability due to bubbling transition Now, in this section, we discuss the progress of research on extreme events in networks Few case studies have been performed regarding the generation of extreme events in static networks. Generally, heterogeneity in the nodal dynamics plays an important role in generating extreme events in such networks. In the following, we present two examples to demonstrate the formation of extreme events due to an interplay between the parameter mismatch and the nature of coupling, namely, repulsive and attractive interactions. Extreme events are observed in a globally coupled network of Josephson junctions. It has been reported in Ref. where is the damping parameter. For each i-th node, damping parameter is denoted by α i , and taken as α i = 1.1 + 0.002(i -1), for i = 1, 2, • • • , N . β, R and C denote McCumber parameter, intrinsic resistance, and capacitance of a junction, respectively. i rf and Ω rf are the normalized amplitude and frequency of a radio-frequency (rf ) forcing signal, respectively. i dc is a constant bias current normalized by the critical junction current I C . K defines the coupling strength of the meanfield interaction between the junctions. Two conditions are imposed in the network, (i) heterogeneity in the parameter α of the oscillators, and (ii) a repulsive global mean-field interaction, i.e., K < 0. For selected parameter values, an isolated junction (K = 0) exhibits rotational motion like an inverted pendulum Now, we discuss another example where extreme events occur in globally coupled oscillators under attractive coupling. In the Sec. (2.2.2), we have already discussed the origination of extreme events in two coupled excitable units of FitzHugh-Nagumo (FHN) system All these studies attest that parameter mismatch plays a crucial role in manifesting extreme events in global networks. In fact, the results contemplated in Ref. In a recent work, Bröhl et al. So far, we have discussed about extreme events in isolated dynamical systems and under the framework of static network formalism. But in the real world, most of the existing interactions among physical, biological, and societal entities are time-varying. A variety of collective states has been explored earlier in time-varying dynamical networks of mobile agents (2.13) To confine the agent's motion within the XY-plane = [-g, g] × [-g, g], whenever p i (t), q i (t) exceed |g|, a new θ i (t) is re-generated so that -g ≤ p i (t), q i (t) ≤ g remains for all the time. In Ref. On top of each of these moving nodes, an oscillator is placed. And thus, the agents' motion affects the adjacency matrix at each time step and hence, influences the system's collective dynamics. However, one should note that the states of those oscillators situated on top of those agents do not influence the agents' mobility. If all the interaction zones are attractive, complete synchronization occurs in the system with a suitable uniform modulus velocity v and for an appropriate coupling strength K ≥ K c . But, along with the attractive zones, if few repulsive zones with an appropriate repulsive coupling strength are introduced in the plane, the synchronization becomes intermittent and occasionally blows out from the synchronization manifold. The observed phenomenon is independent of the shape of the coupling zones and the number of zones. To verify this claim, two paradigmatic chaotic oscillators, namely Lorenz Here, the synchronization error E is chosen as the observable, and it is defined in terms of the standard Euclidean norm as where • • • t stands for time average. Figure The efficient functioning of large networked infrastructures, such as the Internet, power grids, and socioeconomic and transportation networks, poses one of the greatest challenges among scientific communities. One needs to minimize the congestion and transit time emerging due to the continuous increment of traffic flow in most of the communication networks. These challenges are fairly commonplace experiences in the real world in the form of power blackouts due to tripping of power grids, information packet transmission via the Internet, traffic jams in transportation networks, to name but a few. Efficient interdisciplinary approaches to control such extreme events are recently addressed via modeling. Usually, routes to such congestion are investigated in different transport networks by considering the handling capacity of each node (or edge). The packets in the form of random walkers are sent from one node to another adjacent node within a static (time-independent) complex network. The congestion will take place in a particular node (edge), if and only if its capacity to provide a service to the incoming random walkers is exceeded. In the present section, we discuss the results of extreme events on complex networks due to random walkers. One should note that we demonstrate the onset of extreme events of random walkers in a network and not in the sense of arbitrary random walkers and Brownian motion. Here, random walk contemplates those dynamic processes, where a walker on a node of the finite undirected network hops to one of its nearest neighbors with equal transition probability at every time step. For a detailed understanding of random walk processes in complex networks, we refer interested readers to Refs. We carefully distinguish the results between monolayer and multilayer networks. Multilayer networks facilitate to study of several types of ties between the edges by accompanying multiple layers. The connections between different layers may produce various unexpected results, which can not be observed in monolayer networks. In the following sections, we first emphasize the results on monolayer networks and then focus on the rich playground of multilayer networks. A larger flux in a scalar time series may imply higher probabilities of occurrences of extreme events. In contrast, Kishore et al. Let A be a connected, undirected, finite networks with N nodes and E links, given by the adjacency matrix A = [a ij ] N ×N , where a ij = 1, if there exists a connection between i-th and j-th nodes, otherwise, a ij = 0. The topology of this network may be taken as (i) random The stationary state which physically implies that more walkers will visit a given node if it has more links. An extreme event is defined in the spirit of extreme value statistics as that event which is typically associated with the tail of the probability distribution function of the events and has little probability of occurrence. A node exhibits extreme events if the number of walkers' arrival is larger than a threshold q. Clearly, q should depend on the traffic flowing through the node. Otherwise, a uniform choice of q leads to a situation, where few nodes always experience extreme events, while few of the rest nodes may never encounter any extreme events. To deal with this, q = m + dσ has been considered in Ref. represents the standard deviation. By considering the entire possible situations, the probability of finding more than q independent random walkers traverse a given node with degree K can be obtained as where W = W -∆ and p is the probability of finding a walker at a given node of degree K. Here, it is assumed that the total number of walkers is a random variable uniformly distributed in the interval [W -∆, W + ∆]. The probability for the occurrence of an extreme event with respect to the degree K is shown in Fig. is verified empirically. Here, S d is the slope of F d (K) representing extreme event probability for a threshold value q with parameter d ∈ R. Temporal correlations among the extreme events are inspected through the recurrence time distribution in Fig. with mean recurrence time τ = 1 F (K) , which fits well with the numerically observed simulations (See Fig. Here, α is the bias parameter, where α > 0 implies that walkers preferentially hop to hubs and α < 0 indicates biasedness towards smaller degree nodes. The master equation, in this case, can be written as Let w be the number of random walkers out of W noninteracting walkers passing through a node with generalized strength φ. Then the probability of finding w walkers is p w i , while the rest of W -w walkers are distributed randomly on the rest of the nodes of the network. This leads to a binomial distribution while properly normalized. Here, is the stationary distribution for the number of walkers in the i-th node. So, the occurrence of more than q i walkers passing through the node is given by the probability The threshold q i is taken as q i = m i + dσ i , with d ≥ 0. Here, m i = W p i is the mean flux and σ i = W p i (1 -p i ) is the standard deviation. Figures Extreme events occur in transportation networks due to excessive flux fluctuations in the flow dynamics. This overloading in the form of large fluctuations beyond the capacity disrupts the efficient functioning of the flow of transport where is the stationary probability to find a walker on i-th node with degree k i . W is the number of interacting walkers that perform random walks at each time step on a scale-free network of N nodes and E edges. Under the assumption of finite capacity of each node, the excess number of random walkers on i-th node can be treated as a queue of length where θ(•) is the Heaviside step function and w i (t) represents the number of walkers on the i-th node at time t = 1, 2, • • • , T . The mean queue size S in excess of nodal capacity for a network with N nodes at every time instant is given by, where the distribution of the w number of walkers (out of W non-interacting number of random walkers) passing through the i-th node is f i (w). The probability for the occurrence of an extreme event on the i-th node is given by where I z (a, b) is the incomplete beta function Clearly, this is equivalent to the threshold (3.9) for extreme events in absence of noise ∆ and α = 1. The mean number of extreme events over the entire network E ∆ scaled by E 0 is In Fig. A control scheme has been recently proposed by Chen et al. On the other hand, most of the works on extreme events based on random walkers are concerned about the appearance of extreme events on nodes. The probability of occurrence of extreme events is found highly dependent on the node and its degree. We have already discussed the novel analysis as discussed in Ref. The study of extreme events due to nodal flux fluctuations on single-layer transportation networks gains immense attention. However, the internal competition for common resources is one of the realistic thing, which uncovers a wide variety of phenomena in a society. Chen et al. Results To explore the location dependence on the probability of extreme events, Amritkar et al. where the total number of independent and noninteracting Brownian particles is N and p is the probability of finding a Brownian particle in a region R = {x ∈ (c, d)} is given by Here, kT is the stationary solution of the Smoluchowski equation where d is the measure of rarity of extreme events. Hence, extreme events are defined as those events which occur in the tail of a probability distribution. Whenever, the number of particles in a region R is greater than q, an extreme event occurs. The relation (3.17) clearly implies that any two among p, N and q are independent. Another consequence of the Eq. (3.15) that the probability distribution F is independent from R, though depends on (p, N, q). The above investigation suggests that this probability shows oscillations as well as exponential decay (See Fig. Prediction of extreme events is challenging, yet it is useful for mitigating such devastating events. Research efforts have been directed In dynamical system approach, the challenging part is to locate the instability region embedded in the phase space of a system. When the trajectory passes through this region before forming an extreme event, then it may be possible to find an extreme event indicator. Here, we present a few explored system-dependent studies, which help to predict extreme events. Figure An attempt is made in Ref. In Ref. An alternative method has been proposed by Zamora-Munt et al. for the master subsystem and s signifies the slave subsystem. Now, synchronization errors of the main and auxiliary systems are defined as respectively. Here, x ⊥ is the observable, whereas y ⊥ plays a role of an indicator for the prediction of extreme events in the temporal evolution of the observable. As a result of attractor bubbling, trajectories of master and slave subsystems in the main system become desynchronized intermittently. So, synchronization error x ⊥ becomes positive during this desynchrony. In Fig. Reservoir computing is one of the powerful tools for model-free prediction of extreme events in dynamical systems. This approach employs a nonlinear input-output neural network with randomly generated values of the parameters, and uses linear regression to choose "output weights" that fit the network output to a set of "training data". This approach is computationally simpler compared to the other artificial neural network approaches, since only output weights are adjusted during the training process, while the network parameters are fixed. Recently, the reservoir computer has been successfully used to predict various low-dimensional and spatiotemporal chaotic systems which do not belong to the class of models generating extreme events. The underlying principle for reservoir computing is as follows: Consider a dynamical system in the form of We also assume that this model is capable of generating extreme events. We process the signal σ in such a way that the input signal has zero mean and unit variance, where σ is the standard deviation, x i (t) is the mean of the given data and the angle bracket denotes time average. The reservoir computer has three components: an input layer, a nonlinear reservoir network with N dynamical reservoir nodes, and a linear output layer. . Both the matrices A and W in are initially generated randomly, but then kept fixed for further iterations. The output layer contains Wout ∈ R N ×M , which depends functionally on the matrix P . The elements of P are the large number of parameters, which are trained to minimize the mean squared difference between the desired state and v(t) using Tikhonov regularized regression process. (b) The prediction phase corresponding to predicting reservoir: After the initial training session, the future evolution of u(t) is predicted from earlier processed v(t), by replacing the input vector u(t). The evolution of this feedback loop is demonstrated in the bottom schematic figure (b). The parameters of the reservoir are chosen in such a way that all of the conditional Lyapunov exponents of the training reservoir dynamics conditioned on u(t) are negative for sufficiently large t so that the reservoir state r(t) does not depend on initial conditions. The state of the reservoir is determined by the N -dimensional state vector r(t) that satisfies a discrete time deterministic model where ∆t is the time-step and u(t) is the input signal of the reservoir. There are many different ways to choose the nonlinear function f of the reservoir. Using Tikhonov regularization, the output signal v(t) of the reservoir is minimized so that the output gives a good approximation of the input signal u(t). The generalized synchronization (GS) Pyragas et al. where ∆t is the time step, ξ is a scalar, α ∈ (0, 1] is the leaking rate and 1 denotes a column vector of ones. The reservoir adjacency matrix A is a sparse N × N random matrix, where the non-zero entries are drawn independently from a uniform distribution [-1, 1]. Thus, A ∈ R N ×N is a function from the input state space to the output state space. A is multiplied by a positive factor to rescale the largest value of the magnitudes of its eigenvalues, commonly known as spectral radius, to the desired predefined value ρ. The transient time t 0 should be large enough so that the state of the reservoir is essentially independent of its initial state at time t = 0. Starting from a random initial state r(-t 0 ), the reservoir evolves following Eq. (4.4) with input u(t). The data is recorded for distinct Υ reservoir states {r(∆t), r(2∆t), • • • , r( T )} for the training 0 < t ≤ T = Υ∆t. The output of the listening reservoir is given by The elements of the matrix W out ∈ R N ×M is adjusted by minimizing the following quadratic form with respect to where ||b|| 2 = b T r b denotes the sum of the squares of elements of b and tr is the trace of a square matrix. The ridge regression parameter β > 0 is chosen such that regularization term βtr(W T r out W out ) helps to avoid overfitting of W out . If the training is successfully occurred based on the Tikhonov regularization, then the reservoir output should yield a good approximation to the input, v(t) ≈ u(t) for t > T . Interested readers may consult Refs. To verify the effectiveness of the proposed algorithm (2.2.2). The distance between two successive extreme events in this two coupled system (2.9) is approximately around T EE ≈ 100. The necessary condition for the generalized synchronization between the system (2.9) and the listening reservoir is verified using the negativity of all conditional Lyapunov exponents. The maximal conditional Lyapunov exponent is approximately equal to λ ≈ -0.036. Using the reservoir computer, extreme events can be predicted and up to the prediction time τ ≤ 40, the RMS (root mean square) error among the predicted output of the reservoir and the two coupled system is relatively small. Based on this predicted signal, a control p 1 is applied only to the variable x 1 , whenever the predicted signal crosses a predefined value s * = 0.7. The perturbation amplitude is = 10 -3 . Due to this perturbation, it destroys the generalized synchronization and as a result of that the reservoir computer fails to provide accurate prediction of the input signal immediately after the control pulse. However, the characteristic time of the generalized synchronization 1 |λ| ≈ 27.78 is significantly less than T EE , which helps to re-gain the generalized synchronization between them within two successive applied control pulses. Increment of system size reduces the prediction time τ . For 101 globally coupled Fitzhugh-Nagumo units, τ is approximately around 16, which is almost half the width of the spikes of extreme events. Although the prediction time is comparatively lower, but still sufficient enough to suppress extreme events with small perturbations. The route of generation of extreme events for this system (2.9) is already discussed in Sec. (2.2.2). For this system, the control is applied to all x i 's. The perturbation strength = 5 × 10 -3 is larger due to the choice of bigger system size. The system is not perturbed for the next 25∆t time units after each control event. For further validation of the proposed strategy Recently, a comparative study Prediction of extreme events can also be done using different neural dynamics and network topologies. Lellep et al. is considered. To set the system dynamics in the chaotic regime, values of the parameters are taken as a = 1.4 and b = 0.3. The prediction task is assigned here by means of a predefined threshold θ. This approach is quite different from the early discussed article 1. Input layer: We have the information about the system's current position at k-th iteration as well as its past (k -1) iterations. The dimension of the system (4.7) is 2. Thus, the number of neurons required in the input layer is 2k. As the chosen system is fully observed and is a deterministic chaotic map, smaller values of k improve the prediction performances. Lellep et al. 2. Hidden layers: Initially, 6 hidden layers are considered. By increasing the number of hidden layers of fixed size, one can observe an improved performance in the sense of expanded prediction horizon α. The number of neurons per hidden layer is chosen using the algorithm suggested by the Ref. The first hidden layer contains 32 neurons. Other hidden layers contain 32, 25, 20, 18, 16 following an approximately linear interpolation. ReLU activation function, ReLU(x)=max(0, x) is used for the hidden layers. The binary categorial cross-entropy 3. Output layer: The output layer consists 2 nodes. Softmax activation function Along with the prediction of extreme events using data-driven approach, the role of key parameters, viz. (i) the network size N P , (ii) the prediction time, α, and (iii) the number of training samples N α is discussed Instead of predicting the exact trajectory of the system, final equilibrium statistics can be predicted using model free prediction. Qi et al. where g h = C i=1 h i * x i is the convolution operator. Here, h i is the convolutional filter kernel and it covers a small window with size w 1 × w 2 , where w 1 governs the correlation in the spatial direction and the temporal correction determines w 2 . The scalar parameter b is treated as bias term. For different layers and for different output channels, b and g h change. The rectified linear unit (ReLU) function is taken as the nonlinear operator σ(x) = max{0, x}. The prediction time in the truncated KdV equation is found to be beyond the decorrelation time scale of the state, defined as integration of autocorrelation function. For the prediction purpose, a moderate number of layers L = 80 is used. Further increment in the number of layers does not improve the results significantly. After the saturation of the relative error, the result can not be improved even after inclusion of larger number of training iterations. Due to system's nonlinearity and its subsequent instabilities, the amplitude of an extreme event is larger compared to that of a regular event. So, a predictor of an extreme event should classify optimally between quiescent events and the extreme events. Guth et al. provides a better prediction in a qualitative sense than total accuracy. Here, q is the extreme event rate and α(q) is given by The interpretation of TP, FP and FN is represented in table True Positive (TP) an extreme event which is predicted to be extreme False Positive The control or suppression of extreme events in nature, such as Tsunami, floods, cyclones, droughts, etc., is difficult in principle, if not impossible. The main reason for the difficulty is the lack of any model, low-or high-dimensional. On the other hand, in humans-made systems, power grids, share market crashes, etc., a control strategy can be attempted if any well defined model or a network structure of a system is available. Any control strategy aims to apply additional feedback or temporary perturbation in a system to suppress any instability whenever any spurious event occurs. Then, one can perturb the system with an appropriate function to mitigate such events. Such a method is successfully applied in two nearly identical unidirectionally coupled chaotic electronic circuits in a master-slave configuration where the coupling matrix of the feedback is denoted by K DK with (K DK ) ij = 1 for i = j = 1 and 0 otherwise. θ(•) is the Heaviside step function. The subfigure in the upper panel of Fig. Using the prediction of the occurrence of extreme desynchronization events, Zamora-Munt et al. The two coupled FHN neuronal models with environment is described as ẋi where d is the decay constant. Here, M = 2 and i, j = 1, 2 with i = j. This system is interacted here with the environment Occurrence of extreme events is exhibited in the time evolution of the observable x = x 1 + x 2 2 , when maxima of x exceeds a predefined threshold 0.6. In absence of any interaction strength ( = 0), then extreme events occur in time series of x for a suitable choice of k as shown in Fig. Finally, we want to conclude this section by mentioning the limitations of these proposed mitigating strategies. We discuss different existing methods, viz. i) self-time-delay feedback approach, ii) threshold-activated coupling, iii) feedback control, iv) corrective resetting approach, and v) controlling through environmental coupling. This summary suggests that mitigation of extreme events, although, is an essential helpful topic. But, the existing literature on this topic is very thin, and most of these control policies are dynamical systems-dependent. A generic systematic theoretical framework needs to be proposed soon to suppress the appearance of extreme events. Planners and researchers mostly talk about extreme events as natural calamities due to their huge impact. For a long, they have been analyzed statistically from recorded data such as locational variation of rainfall and temperature, which has been used for studies of flood The most important question has been addressed what is the mechanism of the origin of large intensity events in the laser system. Two important routes, interior-crisis and intermittency, have been identified as responsible for the formation of extreme events that are basically confirmed by the numerical studies obtained from deterministic nonlinear dynamical systems However, the elegant investigation on absence epilepsy by Frolov et al. The studies on extreme events have become increasingly promising for their huge impact. Tsunami, floods, droughts, power blackouts, share market crashes, traffic jamming are a few devastating familiar examples which attest to the necessity of this evolving topic. A long history of human endeavor exists to save the life from the aggression of devastating natural events caused by unknown processes. Prediction of extreme events is thus a vital task to mitigate its' harmful effect. An early warning indicator may help different disaster management groups to take pre-emptive measures for saving life. Efforts to understand extreme events from available data records motivate several scientific communities. By studying this topic from the perspective of statistics, it is possible to extract information about the probability of its occurrence and its return interval. However, the availability of limited data, particularly, in the case of natural events, makes it really difficult to reach statistical convergence. In fact, most of the models representing such high dimensional phenomena do not necessarily contain the whole ingredients. The challenges lie in the discussion of such devastating events that demand to be looked at from a different perspective in order to provide a better understanding of the topic. Driven by this motivation, we have revisited the studies of extreme events based on two different approaches, viz. i) dynamical systems and ii) random walkers in this review. The studies of extreme events in dynamical systems have been started using mathematical models and dynamical networks. This initiates a plethora of research activities from a dynamical system perspective using physical, climate, biological models, and so on. The results of these studies are very encouraging with quite a few possibilities. Although no common unique definition of extreme events can be established, still some effective measures exist in the literature. These measures can identify extreme events from a long time series and thereby scrutinize their existing statistical properties. The prediction of extreme events remains challenging, however, attempts are being made both from the dynamical system perspective and machine learning. Few control methods for the suppression of extreme events have also been explored. On the other hand, researchers are equally interested in the problems of extreme events in traffic dynamics. The increasing volume of flux challenges the efficient functioning of the system. The theory of random walkers in networks can explain uniquely many real-world paradigms that arise in public infrastructures such as road networks, communication networks, power grids, to name a few. The important effect of network parameters like hubs, vertices, edges has been inspected recently on the study of extreme events in models of random walkers. These studies enrich our understanding of extreme events. We have also incorporated some relevant studies on extreme events in models of random walkers, that deal with some controlling strategies for mitigating extreme events. These control strategies have significant applications, including cybersecurity. In this review, we have presented the recent progress of interdisciplinary research done to advance our understanding of extreme events that have become of increased interest among various disciplines in recent years. Usually, such events occur with low probability compared to the regular behavior of the system. But, a sudden occurrence of extreme events draws the attention of several scientific communities due to its destructive impact. We organize our review into separate sections as follows. In Sec. (2), we have focused on the issue of how extreme events originate in nonlinear dynamical systems and try to cover up some known mechanisms with examples in isolated systems, two coupled systems, and networks of dynamical systems. We have discussed few important routes to the chaos that may lead to the origin of extreme events in isolated and two coupled dynamical systems. Besides these routes, instability of the synchronization manifold may generate extreme events in the coupled dynamical systems. We have also observed that extreme events may also appear in static as well as time-varying dynamical networks due to various possibilities like heterogeneity of parameters, coupling topology, network architecture, or others. In Sec. (3), we have discussed the emergence of extreme events on random walkers. Models of self-driven many-particle systems reflect many aspects of cooperative congestion phenomena. These models resemble many real-life instances ranging from the diffusion of e-mail viruses to traffic jams in road networks, and disease spreading on spatial networks. Congestion on such large infrastructures arises unexpectedly and gives rise to a breakdown of the system's normal functioning. We have contemplated the effect of several attributes like the degree of nodes, enhancement of nodal capacity, biased strategies of random walkers, the velocity of random walkers, to name but a few, on the extreme events due to transport on complex networks modeled via random walkers. In Secs. ( We provide a concise discussion on the advancement of experimental studies on extreme events in optical systems and electronic circuits in Sec. Finally, the open problems discussed below promise interesting discoveries and tremendous progress in our understanding of extreme events. 1. In case of extreme events, the trajectory of the dynamical systems occasionally visits a region of instability resulting in a faraway excursion to locations in the phase space, and ultimately it returns to that region where trajectory stays most of the time after a short duration. Whenever this large excursion in a dynamical state variable (observable) exceeds a predefined threshold level, it qualifies as an extreme event. However, the choice of this extreme event qualifier threshold is somewhat arbitrary and system-dependent. A wide variety of difficulties arises in the case of the determination of a clear-cut threshold. Thus, a promising future prospect will be the discovery of a non-arbitrary unique threshold. 2. The most common routes of such devastating events for an isolated dynamical system are generally associated with the onset of chaos. As a parameter of the system is varied continuously, the dynamics of those systems become chaotic. This review suggests that most of the emergence of extreme events in an isolated dynamical system is dependent significantly on the route to chaos. Generally, thus a trivial query arises here does there exist any correlation between the route of formation of extreme events in an isolated dynamical system and the route to chaos? Does a question arise if a more generic process is involved in the origin of extreme events in dynamical systems besides the route to chaos, in general? 3. We have tried our best to provide a rather complete overview of the current results regarding the different possible types of mechanisms responsible for extreme events in dynamical systems. A very relevant subject of investigation along this aspect, that will certainly attract attention, is which type of isolated and coupled dynamical systems are capable of generating extreme events. 4. Our extensive review discloses several ways of formation of extreme events in dynamical systems. Most of them are due to instabilities caused by various factors in phase space. It demands an integrated mathematical procedure that will help to locate these instabilities. 5. Undoubtedly, other routes to extreme events may exist and mostly remain undiscovered. The task becomes more daunting in high-dimensional systems, where many interacting degrees of freedom contribute to extreme event formation. Very few works have been done on the occurrence of extreme events in the dynamical network. But it is still elusive to understand the exact mechanism behind the occurrence of extreme events from the perspective of network science. In fact, it would be really significant to investigate the possible types of dynamical networks that are capable of generating extreme events. 6. Results presented here related to the extreme events due to random walkers in a network are found to occur in all circumstances due to inherent fluctuations in the model. The absence of any external driving force makes extreme events an integral part of the systems. Thus, one can use the capacity of each node 8. We have observed that some regions of instability embed in the phase space through this review. This instability region is responsible for the origination of extreme events. This region of instability may arise due to the presence of the saddle Moreover, the choice of a threshold is very significant to broaden the horizon of prediction time as revealed in Ref. 11. The control schemes so far reviewed in this report are applicable for low dimensional dynamical systems only. A question may arise if these schemes can be applied to high dimensional systems? In particular, how such control strategies are applicable to complex networks with a variety of coupling topologies? We hope this review will succeed in demonstrating different ways to detect the underlying mechanisms that trigger extreme events and to suppress the formation of such events based on current researches. We believe that the research reviewed above has the potential to broaden the scope of prediction of such events using the instability of phase space, and machine learning algorithms. It is noteworthy to mention that there are lots of other relevant important questions related to extreme events, and directions for future research are many. In fact, the domain of extreme events is vast spreading over many disciplines, and it is a subject of numerous theoretical and experimental investigations. Presenting an exhaustive account of them is really not an easy task. Any unintentional omission of relevant references has been apologized for. We aim to bring together a substantial body of literature published over the last few decades to provide a comprehensive picture of extreme events. We conclude with the hope that this review will provide a guiding path for future researchers interested in extreme events' studies.