Ultrafast lasers are an increasingly important tool to control and stabilize emergent phases in quantum materials. Among a variety of possible excitation protocols, a particularly intriguing route is the direct light-engineering of microscopic electronic parameters, such as the electron hopping and the local Coulomb repulsion (Hubbard U ). In this work, we use time-resolved xray absorption spectroscopy to demonstrate the light-induced renormalization of the Hubbard U in a cuprate superconductor, La1.905Ba0.095CuO4. We show that intense femtosecond laser pulses induce a substantial redshift of the upper Hubbard band, while leaving the Zhang-Rice singlet energy unaffected. By comparing the experimental data to time-dependent spectra of single-and three-band Hubbard models, we assign this effect to a ∼ 140 meV reduction of the onsite Coulomb repulsion on the copper sites. Our demonstration of a dynamical Hubbard U renormalization in a copper oxide paves the way to a novel strategy for the manipulation of superconductivity, magnetism, as well as to the realization of other long-range-ordered phases in light-driven quantum materials. The electronic dynamics of strongly correlated materials is governed by a subtle competition between itinerancy due to hopping and localization driven by Coulomb repulsion In the specific case of the high-T c cuprate superconductors, the local Coulomb repulsion has a pervasive effect on normal state properties, as well as magnetic and superconducting phases Here, we demonstrate a pump-induced renormalization of the onsite Coulomb repulsion in La 2-x Ba x CuO 4 (LBCO), a single-layer cuprate with coexisting hightemperature superconductivity (up to 32 K), and charge and spin order Time-resolved x-ray absorption spectroscopy (trXAS) is a valuable element-specific probe of the local electronic structure in light-driven materials As shown in Fig. The equilibrium O K and Cu L 3 edge absorption spectra are shown in Fig. The higher-energy peak corresponds to a transition into the UHB (3d 9 → 1s3d 10 ), which becomes dipole-allowed due to the mixing of 3d 10 L and 3d 9 configurations in the ground state Having assigned the spectral features at both absorption edges, we are now able to track light-induced changes to the LBCO electronic structure. Figure These photoinduced changes are prompt (close to the ∼80 fs pump-probe cross correlation) and relax to equilibrium following a single exponential behavior with a decay constant on the order of 100 fs (see Fig. Intriguingly, the UHB recovers more slowly than the ZRS peak. The UHB approaches equilibrium in 320 fs (220 fs) at the O K (Cu L 3 ) edge, while the ZRS decays over 100 fs (see SM). This is consistent with holondoublon recombination dynamics in Mott-Hubbard and CT insulators, a mechanism also at play in other copper oxides As consequence, the UHB relaxation rate gets exponentially suppressed with the increasing CT gap These data cannot be rationalized in terms of pumpinduced doping or heating effects. Hole doping in the closely related La 2-x Sr x CuO 4 To determine which electronic interactions are affected by the pump, we calculate the transient x-ray absorption of a three-band Hubbard model with renormalized electronic parameters While providing quantitative information about the electronic interactions, it is not obvious a priori that the transient dynamics can be fully captured by a quasiequilibrium three-band Hubbard model with tuned electronic parameters. Therefore, we perform a full timedependent exact diagonalization calculation of the lightdriven x-ray absorption spectrum. We downfold the three-band Hamiltonian to an effective 2D, single-band Hubbard model We now discuss the possible microscopic origin of the observed Hubbard U reduction. A first scenario involves the dynamical enhancement of dielectric screening A second scenario involves instead a Floquet-type dressing of the effective electronic interactions In summary, our experiment provides clear spectroscopic evidence for a transient and reversible renormalization of the Hubbard U in a cuprate superconductor. This result has broad implications for photoinduced phase transitions and nonlinear phenomena in strongly correlated materials. First, it provides a possible key to interpret the recent observation of light-enhanced superconductivity in cuprates A dynamical renormalization of the band structure has also been discussed as an essential ingredient to boost high-harmonic generation (HHG) efficiency in correlated materials, e.g. NiO Finally, achieving on-demand manipulation of the Coulomb repulsion in correlated materials may enable the observation of novel nonequilibrium states of matter, such as fragile quantum spin liquids in frustrated magnets Laboratory was supported by the U.S. In this Appendix, we consider whether the transient reshaping of the experimental x-ray absorption spectrum could be due to pump-induced sample heating. We first determine the maximum electronic temperature increase expected under the experimental pump excitation conditions and then perform an exact diagonalization calculation of the theoretical XAS spectrum of a threeband Hubbard model at such electronic temperature value. For the first step, we follow the procedure described the Supplementary Material of Ref. being the electronic and lattice specific heat coefficients, respectively. Assuming that the pump pulse varies on a timescale shorter than the heating-cooling dynamics, the maximum temperature increase ∆T = T f -T i is obtained from the absorbed fluence as: Given the reflection coefficient of the material (R = 0.15) and the estimated penetration depth at 800 nm (l p ≈ 370 nm), we estimate the absorbed energy according to the relation: where F = 10 mJ/cm 2 denotes the laser fluence, V uc = 3.787 × 3.787 × 13.23 Å3 is the volume of the unit cell, and N A is the Avogadro constant. The factor 2 accounts for the presence of two LBCO formula units per unit cell. Setting the initial temperature equal to the base temperature (17 K), we obtain a final temperature T f = 120.3 K. In order to get an estimate for the maximal electronic temperature increase, ∆T e,max = T e,max -T e,0 , we make the following approximation of the absorbed fluence: Here, C e (T e ) = γT e is the electronic (temperaturedependent) specific heat capacity. Using the fluence value estimated from Eq. (A3) and setting the initial T e,0 equal to the base temperature, we obtain a maximum value for T e,max ≈ 3240 K. However, the pump is attenuated while traveling across the photoexcited volume, hence a more refined approximation for the maximum electronic temperature increase is According to Eq. A5, the maximum electronic temperature increase allowed within our experimental conditions is T e,max ≈ 2561 K. Having determined the maximum electronic temperature, we examine the corresponding changes in the XAS spectrum. We perform finitetemperature ED calculations within the three-band Hubbard model for temperatures ranging between T e = 0 and T e = 5300 K. In Fig. Appendix B: Field dependence of the upper Hubbard band shift In this section, we compare experimental shifts of the UHB with the theoretically expected fluence-dependent trXAS spectra of a single-band Hubbard model. The trXAS calculations are performed on a 12D Betts cluster with two holes (in order to preserve SU (2) symmetry) and for variable peak electric fields between E 0 = 1.75 MV/cm and E 0 = 17.5 MV/cm. The spectra, reported in Fig. 