Plasmonic sensing is an established technology for real-time biomedical diagnostics and air-quality monitoring. While intensity and wavelength tracking are the most commonly used interrogation methods for Surface Plasmon Resonance (SPR), several works indicate the potential superiority of phase interrogation in detection sensitivity. Here, we theoretically and numerically establish the link between ultra-high sensitivities in phase interrogation SPR sensors and the critical coupling condition. However, reaching this condition requires a technically infeasible angstrom-level precision in the metal layer thickness. We propose a robust solution to overcome this limitation by coupling the SPR with a phase-change material (PCM) thin film. By exploiting the multilevel reconfigurable phase states of PCM, we theoretically demonstrate ultra-high phase sensitivities with a limit of detection as low as 10 -10 refractive index unit (RIU). Such a PCM-assisted SPR sensor platform paves the way for unprecedented sensitivity sensors for the detection of trace amounts of low molecular weight species in biomedical sensing and environmental monitoring. Detection and measurement of chemical species is of paramount importance in diverse areas such as biosensing for cancer monitoring However, even though impressive performances were achieved with SPR sensors, improving sensitivity remains an active field of research for this technologyand for optical sensors in general. Accurately measuring low molecular weight compounds or small quantities of chemical species would lead to breakthrough developments in early stage cancer diagnostics or in early detection of hazardous chemicals in air for environmental monitoring and health security. While intensity and wavelength tracking are the most commonly used interrogation methods, many experimental works indicate the potential superiority of SPR phase interrogation in detection sensitivity. Interferometric and polarimetric methods have been developed to measure * lotfi.berguiga@insa-lyon.fr the optical phase of SPR reflected light In the following, we derive an analytical framework that explicitly establishes a direct relation between the SPR phase sensitivity and the SPR minimum of reflectivity at resonance as well as a relation between phase sensitivity and the usual figure of merit (FOM) for optical sensors. This formal link reveals that phase interrogation should lead to unprecedented sensitivity levels for the measurement of refractive index modifications (down to 10 -10 RIU). However, reaching this metric would require controlling the metal thickness to a sub-nanometric precision, which is technically unrealistic. Here, we propose an original hybrid SPR platform in which ideal critical coupling conditions can actively be achieved by a direct reconfiguration technique using phase-change materials (PCM) thin films. Phase change materials provide interesting pathways for reconfigurable light management in nanophtonic systems such as active beam-steerers In a first part, we revisit the theory of SPR reflectivity in angular interrogation and establish an analytical relation between phase sensitivity and minimum of reflectivity. This formalism identifies the crucial role of the critical coupling condition to reach ultra-high sensitivities. In a second part we describe the optical properties of GST and their evolution from amorphous to crystalline state as well as in several intermediate partially crystallized states. The phase sensitivity of the device is numerically analyzed for small refractive index variations and for various crystalline fractions of GST. The fine tuning of GST phase states allow us to design extremely sensitive hybrid GST-SPR sensors. We finally discuss the implications and future implementations of such PCMassisted SPR sensors. FIG. A surface plasmon at the interface between a semiinfinite metal and a dielectric medium follows the disper-sion relation: With m and 2 the optical dielectric constants of the metal layer and the dielectric medium, respectively. In the Kretschmann geometry, using the total internal reflection method, an incident light wave incoming with an angle of incidence θ from the coupling medium (usually a prism) with refractive index n 0 will excite a surface plasmon wave at the interface of a thin metal layer when θ equals the angle θ p i.e. when the following coupling condition is fulfilled Consider a prism on which is deposited a gold layer, which is directly in contact with an analyte (Fig. With γ i and γ rad , the leakages due respectively to surface plasmon absorption in the metal and radiative leakage (reconversion of surface plasmon in radiative light trough the prism). Numerical simulations have been done with a homemade software based on the transfer matrix method SPR is very sensitive to changes at the metal/analyte interface: when the refractive index of the analyte is modified, the resonance condition changes and leads to an angle shift. For example in the case of an SPR supported by a 47-nm-thick gold layer, a variation of the refractive index of the analyte as small as 0.005 will lead to an angle shift of 0.38 • (Fig. To quantify the phase shift with standard metrics, we define the bulk sensitivity S φ as the slope of phase variation curves: Fig. Using coupled mode theory (CMT), we can model the system as a resonator in which the leakage rate due to surface plasmon absorption is characterized by γ i and the radiative leakage rate by γ rad . From this model, we find an expression for the complex reflection coefficient (see Appendix A) and we also derive an original relation between the phase sensitivity and the minimum of reflectivity. To get this relation, we first express the derivative of the phase as a function of wavelength. After some algebraic manipulations in order to rely phase derivative to phase sensitivity, we extract an expression for the sensitivity at the resonance wavelength that is inversely proportional to the minimum of reflectivity (See Appendix B). The relation is : With Q the quality factor, S λ the bulk sensitivity in wavelength interrogation (S λ = ∆λ ∆n ), λ sp the SPR wavelength and r min the reflection coefficient at resonance (r min = R p (θ p )). The theoretical curve with a coefficient 7015 • /RIU superposes very well with the numerical simulation (Fig. With equation 5, we understand in more details the role of the minimum of reflectivity: it acts as a gain factor on the phase sensitivity. Said otherwise, the phase sensitivity S φ is the equivalent of the wavelength sensitivity S λ amplified by a gain factor 1/r min . As a direct consequence, phase sensitivity becomes much higher than Au Thickness (nm) wavelength sensitivity when r min converges to zero i.e. towards critical coupling. Moreover, this compact formal expression explicitly shows the role of the quality factor Q in phase sensitivity. As we have established a direct relation between phase sensitivity and wavelength sensitivity, we can reformulate the expression for the phase sensitivity : with the widely used figure of Merit (FOM) defined as Equation 6 implies that very sensitive SPR sensors in wavelength interrogation will lead to even more sensitive sensors in phase interrogation. The simulations results clearly indicate that reaching such an ultimate phase sensitivity requires adjusting the metal thickness at an angstrom-level precision (Fig. To summarize, the theory presented here shows that high sensitivities can be obtained using SPR sensors with a phase interrogation method by precisely adjusting the critical coupling via the gold layer thickness. However, demonstrating ultimate sensitivities appears technically infeasible due to the angstrom-level accuracy needed for the thickness of the metal layer. In the following, we show that introducing phase change materials in the device not only enables overcoming this experimental limitation but also considerably expand the fabrication tolerance and overall robustness of the device to reach ultimate sensitivity. A. Optical properties of GST Phase change materials such as GST present specific chemical bonding properties in which the long range or-der between atoms produces a very large refractive index, typically around n ∼6-7 in the infrared region Most of the works using GST for tunable photonics leverage the refractive index modulation and try to mitigate the optical absorption. In the present work, we do not use the refractive index modulation but rather exploit the associated increase in extinction coefficient as a means to adjust the optical absorption. To mimic numerically the evolution of n and k as a function of the wavelength in the phase transition range we have reasonably approximated it with a linear regression As explained previously, upon crystallisation of GST, the absorption coefficient k largely increases at the selected wavelength of 750 nm while the refractive index does not significantly change (fig. In Fig. The calculated phase variation ∆φ when the refractive index of the analyte is changing is displayed in Fig. We propose in this work a new approach to achieve ultimate phase sensitivities in surface plasmon sensors, up to a theoretical LOD of 3 × 10 -10 RIU. In the following, we highlight the usefulness of our approach by calculating typical amounts of chemical species that could be detected with such an ultimate sensitivity. To do so, we have selected four other works and extrapolated their experimental SPR measurements with our simulated LOD for PCM-SPR system. Giorgini et al. In order to reach the very high phase sensitivity presented previously, the crystallization fraction τ of GST has to be progressively adjusted with a fine sampling. Such a fine tuning of partial crystallization was already demonstrated by different groups Note that the thickness values chosen for gold and GST in Fig. We have theoretically and numerically revisited the SPR in phase interrogation. To the best of our knowledge we establish for the first time in SPR a theoretical and quantitative relation between phase sensitivity, reflectivity at resonance and sensitivity in wavelength interrogation. From there, we explicitly show the superiority of phase interrogation SPR in detection sensitivity compared to intensity interrogation and we highlight the role of critical coupling in phase SPR sensors. This analysis provides a rational clarification on the large fluctuations reported in the phase sensitivities of SPR sensors measured by different groups, which result from non-optimal thicknesses of the metal layer. However, we also reveal that the ultimate phase sensitivity is hardly reachable since subnanometric precision would be required for the metal thickness, a condition that is ruled out by the roughness of the metal. We propose a practical solution to overcome this drawback by coupling the surface plasmon resonance with a layer of GST that can be reconfigured in a multilevel phase state. With that system, on can expect theoretical phase sensitivities with a limit of detection as low as 1 × 10 -10 RIU, i.e. one order of magnitude better that the previous reports in SPR phase measurements between sensitivity S φ and the derivative of the phase φ if we make appear the wavelength shift of the resonance λ sp in the equation. dλsp dn is the resonance shift versus refractive index of the analyte and is usually measured in spectroscopic measurements. In others words it is the transducer wavelength sensitivity that we will name S λ and hence we establish a relation between phase sensitivity S φ and wavelength sensitivity S λ :