Proximity effect facilitates the penetration of Cooper pairs that permits superconductivity in normal metal, offering a promising approach to turn heterogeneous materials into superconducting and develop exceptional quantum phenomena. Here, we have systematically investigated proximity-induced anisotropic superconductivity in monolayer Ni-Pb binary alloy by combining scanning tunneling microscopy/ spectroscopy (STM/STS) with theoretical calculations. By means of high temperature growth, the (3 √ 3 × 3 √ 3)R30 o Ni-Pb surface alloy has been fabricated on the Pb(111), where the appearance of domain boundary as well as lattice transformation are further corroborated by the STM simulations. Given the high spatial and energy resolution, tunnelling 1 By exploiting proximity effect, In this work, we have systematically investigated the proximity-induced superconductivity in monolayer Ni-Pb binary alloy by employing STM/STS together with theoretical calculations. By depositing Ni onto Pb(111) at elevated temperature, the (3 In addition, the apparent height difference at various bias voltages has also been examined, displaying a rather small variation within ± 0.1 Å in the bias range of ± 1.0 V (see Supplementary Fig. These two observations offer important clues that the formation of ordered superstructure only limits to the outermost atomic layer on surface. Despite the existence of two types of nanodot arrangements on the ordered superstructure, the dot-like protrusions all have the uniform size and the indentical shape, a single nanodot thus indicates a nanocluster with the same constituent element, i.e., either Ni or Pb atoms. According to the first-principle adsorption energy calculations, we have been aware of that Ni atoms prefer to penetrate into Pb(111) to develop subsitutional surface alloy at elevated growth temperature. On the other hand, due to a lower cohesive energy, the Pb atoms would like to stay on top of surface giving rise to bright protrusions of nanodot arrays. Along with these understandings, at the bottom of Fig. In order to have a quantitative comparison, the normalized dI/dU curve of Pb (111) have been fitted to the BCS-like density of states (DOS), and the corresponding values of ∆ P b ≈ 1.3 meV has been obtained (red line in middle panel of Fig. 