Laser-produced plasma (LPP) induced during irradiation of a liquid tin droplet with diameter of 150 μm and 180 μm by CO 2 laser pulse with various pulse durations and energies is considered. The twodimensional radiative magnetohydrodynamic (RMHD) plasma code is used to simulate the emission and plasma dynamics of multicharged ion tin LPP. Results of simulations for various laser pulse durations and 75÷600 mJ pulse energies with Gaussian and experimentally taken temporal profiles are discussed. It is found that if the mass of the target is big enough to provide the plasma flux required (the considered case) a kind of dynamic quasi-stationary plasma flux is formed. In this dynamic quasi-stationary plasma flux, an interlayer of relatively cold tin vapor with mass density of 1÷2 g/cm 3 is formed between the liquid tin droplet and low density plasma of the critical layer. Expanding of the tin vapor from the droplet provides the plasma flux to the critical layer. In critical layer the plasma is heated up and expands faster. In the simulation results with spherical liquid tin target, the CE into 2π is of 4% for 30 ns FWHM and just slightly lower -of 3.67% for 240 ns FWHM for equal laser intensities of 14 GW/cm 2 . This slight decay of the in-band EUV yield with laser pulse duration is conditioned by an increasing of radiation re-absorption by expanding plasma from the target, as more cold plasma is produced with longer pulse. The calculated direction diagrams of in-band EUV emission permit to optimize a collector configuration. Intensively emitting plasmas of multiply-charged ions (further multicharged ion plasma) have been extensively studied in the last decade for radiation sources in the soft X-ray and extreme ultraviolet (EUV). Interest has been stimulated by various possible applications in academic and applied research to study radiation absorption, angular resolved reflectivity, diffraction and scattering processes in matter, metrology, lithography applications etc. Laser pulses and electric discharge current may be used individually or in concert to heat up and to confine the plasma at a suitable temperature. The harder photon energy with high enough efficiency is required, a higher plasma temperature and laser intensity or pulsed-power should be used. Laserproduced plasma (LPP) is derived through an interaction of focused single or multiple laser pulses (of the same or different wavelengths) with a solid or liquid target To generate EUV radiation at 13.5 nm wavelength (92 eV photon energy) important for lithography applications, LPP sources using a tin target are the current industry source choices Actually, the most developed scheme of LPP EUV source for high-volume manufacturing (HVM), is based on combined irradiation of the mass-limited target (liquid tin droplets with diameter of 20-30μm) with laser pulses of Nd:YAG laser as pre-pulse and of longer wavelength CO 2 laser as main pulse at high 50-100 KHz frequency operation Laser-plasma modeling results are investigated here to study physical phenomenon of multicharged ion plasma and EUV emission generation features from a spherical tin target as a function of laser energy and pulse width for the parameters similar to experimental setup in Wuhan National Laboratory for Optoelectronics. The two-dimensional radiative magnetohydrodynamic (RMHD) plasma code Zstar Calculations were done for LPP EUV radiation source with Ø150÷180 μm tin droplet under CO 2 laser interaction for 90 ns full width half maximum (FWHM) pulse duration and 160÷240 mJ pulse energies with experimentally taken temporal profiles to reproduce the conditions of experimental setup. After initial simulations the Gaussian temporal profile for laser power was used to study the influence of CO 2 -laser pulse duration on 13.5 nm EUV emission features and on the conversion efficiency. Laser energies considered, varied from 75 mJ to 600 mJ corresponding to laser pulse durations from 30 ns to 240 ns. The RMHD code Zstar for self-consistent modeling of plasma dynamics together with plasma radiation is designed on the basis of the magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) formalism Plasma radiation properties, ionization and equation of state (EOS), as well as excitation and ionization rates, and plasma kinetic coefficients are calculated by means of interpolations from a set of tables prepared in pre-processing with the Hartree-Fock-Slater (HFS) model The laser light transport is calculated by means of simplified two-direction transfer model The basic equations underlying the physical model of the code Zstar are presented in Appendix. More detailed description on models, numerical methods and difference schemes, on solvers implemented in Zstar RMHD code, database contents and examples of simulations as well can be found in Extensive simulations were done for LPP extreme ultraviolet (EUV) radiation source with Ø180 μm and Ø150 μm tin droplets under CO 2 laser interaction for 30 ns ÷ 240 ns FWHM pulse durations and 75÷600 mJ pulse energies, with gaussian and experimentally taken temporal profiles. At the initial stage of simulations, the modeling of LPP EUV radiation source was done with Ø180 μm tin droplet under CO 2 laser interaction with 300 μm spot size, 90 ns FWHM pulse duration and 160÷240 mJ pulse energies with experimentally taken temporal profiles to match the experimental conditions The CO 2 laser power temporal shape measured in experiment and applied in the simulations discussed above experiences the oscillations of high magnitude. This fact hampers the analysis of obtained results. Strong apparent peaks of EUV emission power can be resulted from either by laser emission peaks influencing on plasma heating and behaviour, or by instabilities in plasma itself. To observe better the dynamics of the plasma and EUV generation phenomenon without such impact from laser pulse variation, another sample of experimental laser power temporal shape was used To investigate the influence of laser pulse duration on plasma behavior and EUV emission generation, a laser-produced plasma (LPP) induced during irradiation of a liquid tin droplet of 150 μm diameter by CO 2 -laser pulse with various pulse durations at FWHM in the range of 30÷240 ns was considered. Laser intensity amplitude on the target was kept at the level of 14 GW/cm 2 and its temporal shape was chosen as Gaussian. The laser beam is focused on target with a focal spot diameter of 150 μm FWHM with Gaussian spatial profile as well. An example of the laser pulse temporal profile together with spectral integrated radiation power and EUV emission in 2% spectral band at 13.5 nm wavelength (so called in-band radiation) is shown in Figure The plasma density in flux above the critical layer decreases to N e =1.0÷1.6•10 -5 N A , where the plasma electron temperature reaches the maximum of 124 eV (for laser intensity of 14 GW/cm 2 ), and expands further forming a corona. Plasma temperature in such corona decreases, as the cooling rate due to expansion and radiation cannot be compensated by laser power absorption in low density coronal plasma. The optimal temperature for emission of in-band EUV photons of 92 eV energy is T e =30÷40 eV. This temperature is attained in a zone below the critical layer at electron density N e =7÷8•10 -5 N Amuch higher of the critical one. The in-band EUV emission is localized in this zone (Figure Figure The temporal evolution of the plasma distribution at three time instants 46.95 ns, 67.59 ns and 97.42 ns is shown in Figure In In experimental measurements a pin-hole image of in-band plasma emission can be recorded using a CCD image camera (Figure Calculations using the 2D RMHD code Zstar have shown the effect of pulse on the conversion efficiency and behavior of CO 2 laser-produced tin plasma. In the considered case the mass of the target is big enough to provide the plasma flux required to form a kind of dynamic quasi-stationary plasma flux. In this dynamic quasi-stationary plasma flux, an interlayer of relatively cold tin vapour with mass density of 1÷2 g/cm -3 is formed between the liquid tin droplet and low density plasma of the critical layer. Expanding of the tin vapour from the droplet provides the plasma flux to the critical layer. The maximum conversion efficiency of 4% into adopted 2π was found using a 30 ns FWHM pulse and 75 mJ laser energy. The conversion efficiency decreases slowly with laser pulse duration increase for the same laser intensity of 14 GW/cm 2 and is about 3.67% for 240ns FWHM. This phenomenon is explained by the radiation re-absorption raise by expanding plasma, because the amount of colder plasma produced from the target is increasing with laser pulse duration. These results for in-band CEs correspond well to the values obtained before experimentally for CO 2 laser pulses with solid tin plate target. According to simulation results, the in-band EUV emission (corresponding to CE = 4%) is concentrated in an annular cone with less of 0.6π steradian solid angle allowing the optimization of a collector. ; . The radiation flux density r F in the electron energy equation is calculated by means of the radiation transport equation considered below. The term G is introduced to take into account possible external heating, by laser light for example. The laser interaction with substance is considered separately below. The dielectric constant ε and magnetic permeability μ are introduced to describe homogeneously the plasma dynamics together with the electromagnetic field behavior in insulators and metallic objects (if necessary). For the plasma and gas 1 = = μ ε are imposed. Different plasmas and solid materials may be considered as differing from each other only by their properties, especially if solid materials can be sublimated and transformed to plasma medium. These properties of plasma and other substances are described by the equation of state (EOS), the thermal pressure ) , , ( , and radiation properties mentioned above and discussed below. Dependence of coefficients on the magnetic field is described in The EOS and the kinetic coefficients are obtained by means of the cross-sections of collisional processes between the electrons, ions and atoms, and the interaction with radiation calculated in the frames of the general quantum-statistical model and ionization kinetics The computational model of equations ( The influence of radiation on spectral characteristics of plasma and ionization degree is important. Partial radiation trapping can induce a significant deviation from the optically thin coronal equilibrium or collisional-radiative equilibrium (CRE) approximations for non-LTE plasma description as well as from LTE. Meanwhile, at high temperatures the radiation field is formed in the process of plasma dynamics, affecting the microstates of the plasma ions, and the radiative properties of plasma. Respectively, the microstates of the ions determine the emissivity and spectral absorption coefficients of the plasma. Re-absorption in the spectral lines can change the ionization stage and internal energy of the plasma at the same electron temperature, as these are strongly coupled to the electrons via level kinetics. The radiation transfer equation for spectral intensity I ω with photon energy ω  , without free electron scattering processes, has the form 1 ( ) where c is a speed of light, Ω  is the unit vector in the direction of the radiation ray. The spectral absorption coefficient k ω and emissivity j ω are written in a form taking into account an induced emission. They depend on the local properties of a plasma, e.g., density and temperature and the ion distribution, which, in turns, are dependent on the radiation field and should be calculated in non-LTE, i.e., depending on spectral radiation field through the level occupancy balance considered in the last section. From the radiation transport equation ( are calculated and used in the energy balance of the RMHD system of equations As a rule the characteristic size of the DPP or LPP plasma of interest is much smaller than the distance traversed by the radiation during the evolution time, and quasi-stationary approximation may be applied, i.e., the time derivative in eq. ( The laser light transport is calculated by means of simplified two-direction transfer model w . The stepwise ionization described by probability n w is also possible if several quanta are absorbed consequently, i.e. the first quantum excites a ground state, the second one excites once more, etc and just the last one ionizes the atom. The parameter γ is defined by these probabilities and spontaneous emission probability se w , viz. ( ) 