Superconducting resonators are widely used in many applications such as qubit readout for quantum computing, and kinetic inductance detectors. These resonators are susceptible to numerous loss and noise mechanisms, especially the dissipation due to two-level systems (TLS) which become the dominant source of loss in the few-photon and low temperature regime. In this study, capacitively-coupled aluminum half-wavelength coplanar waveguide resonators are investigated. Surprisingly, the loss of the resonators was observed to decrease with a lowering temperature at low excitation powers and temperatures below the TLS saturation. This behavior is attributed to the reduction of the TLS resonant response bandwidth with decreasing temperature and power to below the detuning between the TLS and the resonant photon frequency in a discrete ensemble of TLS. When response bandwidths of TLS are smaller than their detunings from the resonance, the resonant response and thus the loss is reduced. At higher excitation powers, the loss follows a logarithmic power dependence, consistent with predictions from the generalized tunneling model (GTM). A model combining the discrete TLS ensemble with the GTM is proposed and matches the temperature and power dependence of the measured internal loss of the resonator with reasonable parameters. Two-dimensional (2D) planar high internal quality factor (Q i ) superconducting resonators have been widely fabricated and investigated in recent times for applications such as single photon detectors, ) and the coherence time (T Qubit 2 ) We have designed a 2D half wavelength resonator with a tapering geometry that gradually shrinks the signal line width w from 50 μm down to 1 μm at the center where many three-junction flux qubits could be hosted and strongly coupled for the study of the collective behavior of quantum meta-materials. Analogous to cavity quantum electrodynamics, qubits serve as artificial meta-atoms with mutual coupling Aluminum (Al) half-wavelength (λ/2) CPW resonators on sapphire substrates were designed with a center line width w = 50 μm and spacing s = 30 μm (the distance between center conductor line and ground plane as illustrated in Fig. This CPW resonator was fabricated using standard photo-lithography procedures. First, a 70 nm thick Al film was deposited on a 3-inch diameter sapphire wafer using thermal evaporation technology with a background pressure of ∼ 3 × 10 -7 mbar. Then a thin SHIPLEY1813 photo-resist was coated on top of the film and exposed to UV through the designed photomask. The UV exposed wafer was developed and then wet etched by commercial Transene Aluminum Etchant. The remaining photoresist was stripped off by acetone and the entire wafer was cleaned by methanol and isopropanol. Finally, the wafer was coated in a protective photo-resist and then diced into many chips. After dicing, the protective photo-resist was removed and the chip was mounted on a printed circuit board bolted inside a copper box. Several lumps of indium were pressed between the on-chip ground planes and the copper box ground to achieve a continuous ground contact, which mitigates parasitic resonant microwave modes due to uneven electrical grounding. The indium lumps also secured the chip in the center of the printed circuit board. The on-chip transmission line is wire-bonded to the center conductor of the transmission line on the printed circuit board by gold wires. Finally, the copper box is capped by a copper lid to eliminate stray light illumination. The device was placed in a closed Cryoperm cylinder in a BlueFors (BF-XLD 400) croygen-free dilution refrigerator (base temperature 10 mK) to minimize any stray DC magnetic field, and the shield was thermally anchored to the mixing chamber plate. The microwave excitation was attenuated by a series of attenuators in the input line at different cooling stages in the dilution fridge before going into the resonator to reduce the noise. The transmitted signal was amplified twice through a cryogenic amplifier and a room temperature amplifier before being measured by a Keysight N5242A vector network analyzer (VNA). The low power measurements were performed using the smallest intermediate frequency bandwidth (1 Hz) of the VNA, with a 400 kHz span across the resonance, following 5 averages to reduce the random noise. A thru calibration of the setup was performed in a separate cool down to determine the overall loss/gain in the transmission lines leading to the resonator. Further details of the experimental setup for the high SNR measurement at very low microwave power can be found in section S1 of the Supplemental Material. The measured transmitted signal (S 21 (f )) has a fundamental (λ/2) resonance peak around f = 3.644 GHz at the fridge base temperature when sweeping the frequency, f . The complex S 21 (f ) signal is fitted to an equivalent circuit model of a two-port resonator capacitively coupled to external microwave excitation where |S 21,in | and |S 21,out | are the net loss or gain in the transmission of the input and output line, respectively. Q L is the loaded quality factor. Q c is the coupling quality factor representing the dissipation to the external circuit, i = √ -1, f 0 is the resonance frequency of the half-wavelength (λ/2) CPW resonator, φ is the phase and C 0 is an offset in the complex S 21 plane due to background contributions. for a two-port device, where ħ is the reduced Planck constant, and ω 0 = 2πf 0 is the angular frequency of the resonance. i ) at its first harmonic frequency of a Aluminum co-planar waveguide resonator on sapphire substrate measured at different circulating photon numbers ⟨n⟩. Some of the error bars are smaller than the data point such as those for the high power and temperature measurements. Figure The temperature dependence of the measured internal loss is shown in Fig. The power and temperature dependent frequency shifts have primarily been attributed to TLS and the dynamics of quasiparticles. These two mechanisms could overlap and become difficult to distinguish in the operation of many superconducting devices, including resonators and qubits, where ζ = hf 0 2k B T , f 0 is the resonance frequency as a function of the temperature, δ 0 is the zero temperature and zero power loss tangent from the TLS, Ψ(•) is the digamma function, α = L kinetic /L total is the kinetic inductance fraction of the CPW resonator, N 0 is the single spin density of states, ∆ S0 is the aluminum superconducting gap at zero temperature, and I 0 (•) is the 0th order modified Bessel function of the first kind. The first term in Eq. 2 represents the frequency shift caused by the TLS mechanism (valid for T ≪ T c ) seems to match the measurement sufficiently well, where N 0 = 10 47 J -1 m -3 ≈ 1.74 × 10 4 μeV -1 μm -3 is the single spin density of states at the Fermi level The fit to the frequency shift data is shown in Fig. Since the temperature dependent internal loss is dominated by the well-known thermal quasiparticles above 150 mK, this analysis focuses only on the low temperature data. The power dependence of the loss Q -1 i (T ) is shown in Fig. To account for the slower power dependence, many improvements on the STM have been proposed, such as introducing more than one species of TLS in the dielectrics, The TLS formalism is based on a simple model for a single TLS that can be described by the Hamiltonian, where ∆ is the asymmetry of the double well potential and ∆ 0 is the tunneling barrier energy between the potential wells Eq.( In STM, the resonant dielectric response of a single TLS is expressed as where m = tanh(ε/(2k B T ))/2 is the equilibrium value of ⟨S 0 z ⟩. The single TLS loss corresponds to the imaginary part of the response function in Eq.( where For a typical TLS with ε/h ≈ 5 GHz and at reasonably low temperatures and powers, the width of its response w ≈ Γ 2 ∼ 1 MHz ≪ ω. Due to this sharp Lorentzian response function, the total loss is dominated by the resonant TLS whose energies ε ∼ ħω. The total dielectric loss is simply the integral of the single TLS contribution Eq.( where ε r ε 0 is the permittivity of the host dielectric material, P (ε, ∆ 0 ) is the distribution function of coherent TLS, obtained from P (∆, ∆ 0 ) with a change of variable from ∆ to ε, d 0 is the maximum transition electric dipole moment of the TLS with energy splitting ε, ⃗ E is the applied microwave electric field on the TLS dipole, and θ is the angle between the applied electric field and the TLS dipole moment. Evaluating this integral leads to the famous STM prediction of TLS loss where Ω c ∝ Γ max 1 Γ 2 is the critical Rabi frequency that characterizes the saturation of TLS. The loss is expected to have an inverse square root dependence on power after the TLS saturation, δ TLS ∼ Ω -1 ∝ P -0.5 ab for Ω ≫ Ω c , which is much faster than observed in the data in Fig. The dephasing rate Γ ds introduced in Eq.( , where E a is the activation energy. For a uniform distribution of E a ∈ [E a,min , E a,max ], the distribution of the fluctuator rates is thus P (γ) ∼ 1/γ in an exponentially wide range [γ min , γ max ], with γ min = γ| Ea=Ea,max ∼ constant in T and γ max = γ| Ea=E a,min ∝ exp -E a,min k B T which has the same form as Eq.( Clearly, the last fraction in the integral is a Lorentzian which evaluates to a constant after integration over ε, resulting in the same prediction for internal loss as the STM On the other hand, when the dynamics of the resonant TLS is dominated by a fast jump rate, γ ≳ Ω, Γ 1 , Γ 2 , a probabilistic description of the resonant TLS must be adopted. Instead of directly solving the linearized Bloch equations Eq.(S2,S3), the master equation or the evolution equation of the probability distribution ρ( ⃗ S) of the Bloch vector ⃗ S = (⟨S where d ⃗ S/dt is given in Eq.(S2, S3) with a time independent ε where the random jumps ξ(t) are dropped since the fast jumps are averaged out over a long time. (See Supplementary Material Section S3.2). The TLS loss is then extracted by solving for the average y component of ⃗ S, ⟨S 1 y ⟩ = ρ⟨S 1 y ⟩d ⃗ S, and integrating the solution over the probability distribution of fast fluctuator jump rates P (γ) ∝ 1/γ where γ ∈ [max(Ω, Γ 2 ), γ max ], and the distribution of resonant TLS energies P (ε, ∆ 0 ). The loss has a logarithmic dependence on power : This expression explains the high power limit of the data in Fig. where and n is the probability that a given TLS is resonant, and is typically small for a system of many (∼ 10) fluctuators (see supplementary material for These limits translate to a range for power Ω where the power dependence of the loss is dominated by this model: 2 )/(2Ω 2 )], a faster logarithmic power dependence than Eq. ( Although the power dependence of our data as in Fig. where the index n denotes the coherent TLS near the resonance and ∆ε is the average energy spacing in the TLS spectrum. We believe that Eq.( ∝ T -1 at low power, and is the classic result for the single TLS model in STM It is thus required that the TLS is not always on resonance (ν = ε 0 /ħ -ω ̸ = 0 where ε 0 stands for the energy level of the coherent TLS closest to resonance), a reasonable assumption given the sparse TLS distribution in the frequency spectrum for a small volume of TLS-inhabiting dielectrics. Mathematically, the width of the Lorentzian in the summation w = Γ 2 √ 1 + κ + Γ f dictates the transition from the low temperature reduced loss to the high temperature equilibrium result. For small w, a discrete sum will deviate from the integral since the Lorentzian is under-sampled. While for a Lorentzian with large w, a discrete sum with the same sampling rate will approximate the integral better. Specifically, at low powers (κ ≪ 1), w = Γ 2 + Γ f increases with the temperature and w = Γ 2 + Γ f ∼ ν marks the transition temperature between the two regimes. For low temperatures (w ≪ ν), the Lorentzian term becomes roughly proportional to w = Γ 2 + Γ f which gives the almost linear temperature dependence of loss. For higher power, w increases with κ, which pushes the transition temperature lower and suppresses the low temperature reduction in loss. And eventually at high powers (κ ≫ 1) such that w > ν for all temperatures, the equilibrium temperature dependence m = (1/2) tanh (ħω/(2k B T )) in STM is recovered in the entire temperature range. The same discrete summation can be applied to Eq. ( The fit shows reasonable agreement with the data, with root mean squared error RMSE = 0.0124. There are in total 10 fitting parameters, fewer degrees of freedom compared to fitting the data from different temperatures individually. The different contributions to the loss below TLS saturation power are plotted in Fig. The discrete and detuned TLS formalism will not affect the high γ-fluctuator contribution to internal loss, since the width of Lorentzian in the calculation of loss of high γ fluctuators w is widened by γ such that w ∼ γ > ∆ε/ħ (See Supplementary Material Section S3.2), which is indicated by the almost flat region in the green dotted curve at low temperature in Fig. The discrete TLS formalism only approximates the effect of a sparse TLS spectral density where despite the spectral diffusion with a width Γ 2 , and the random telegraph noise characterized by the rate γ, the coherent TLS spends most of its time detuned from the resonance. The assumptions of even energy spacing between TLS, ∆ε, and constant energy levels, are convenient for numerical evaluation of the model, but are not necessary to reproduce the loss reduction at low temperature. Two other estimations of the probability of the TLS being on resonance, as well as the number of strongly coupled fluctuators that can bring a detuned TLS into resonance, are given in Supplementary Material Section S3.1. Both calculations show that for any TLS with a spectral width Γ 2 and a detuning to the resonance ν, the TLS becomes less likely to be on resonance once Γ 2 (T ) < ν with decreasing temperature, qualitatively agreeing with the experimentally observed loss reduction at low temperature. The treatment above is largely classical where the TLS are treated as dipoles under classical field. A quantum mechanical approach that studies the Jaynes-Cummings model of a single TLS strongly coupled to a photon predicts a linear temperature dependence of the loss similar to our observation Although the fluctuators significantly affect the TLS internal loss, they should have limited effect on the frequency shifts Ever since the importance of TLS interactions in amorphous solids was recognized by Yu and Leggett At higher temperatures (above 150 mK), the quasiparticle effects become important, which corresponds to the upturn in loss in Fig. where where n noneq is the non-equilibrium quasiparticle density. Similar to the fit for frequency shift, the model with only n th matches our data with the same set of fitting parameters ∆ 0 = 170 μeV and α = 0.014. A calculation of the increased quasiparticle density including both thermal and non-equilibrium quasiparticles at high photon numbers in the half wavelength resonator based on Mattis-Bardeen equations We have designed and fabricated capacitively-coupled half wavelength superconducting aluminum microwave resonators with minimum critical dimension of 1 μm in the center conducting line of the CPW. The temperature and power dependence of the resonator Q i deviate from the classical standard tunneling model results. At high applied powers, the internal loss shows logarithmic power dependence, a signature of the generalized tunneling model with fluctuators. At powers below TLS saturation, the internal loss decreases from 50 mK down to the fridge base temperature. We attribute this behavior to the detuning between TLS and the resonance frequency in a discrete TLS ensemble. Upon cooling, the single TLS response bandwidth, proportional to Γ 2 ∝ T 1.3 , decreases. When the bandwidth drops below the detuning between TLS and the resonance frequency defined by the CPW resonator, the resonant TLS response decreases and contributes less to the internal loss. The generalized tunneling model is revisited and modified with the discrete TLS formalism resulting in a comprehensive fit to the measured loss in the entire low temperature and low power range, with a reasonable set of parameters. The Supplemental Material discusses the experimental details and measurement setup, reviews the standard and generalized tunneling models of two-level systems, reviews the master equation formalism for the fluctuators, presents an overview of the nonequilibrium quasiparticle and phonon model used to describe the nonequilibrium quasiparticle loss in the resonator, and includes the finite element simulation of the resonator to determine the electric field coupled to the TLS dipoles. Fig. The TLS formalism is based on a simple model for a single TLS that can be described by the Hamiltonian, , where ∆ is the asymmetry of the double well potential and ∆ 0 is the tunneling barrier energy between the potential wells where P 0 ≈ 10 44 J - The dynamics of a single TLS can be described by the linearized Bloch equations of the pseudospin ⃗ S(t) = ⃗ S 0 (t) + ⃗ S 1 (t), where ⃗ S 0 is the solution to the homogeneous system without the external field, and ⃗ S 1 is the linear solution with frequency ω of the driving field. Under the rotating wave approximation, the Bloch equations become: with the Rabi frequency Ω characterizing the absorbed power, Ω ∝ √ P ab , and is defined as where S + = S 1 x + iS 1 y , Γ 1 and Γ 2 are the two phenomenological rates that describe the longitudinal (S z ) and transverse (S x,y ) relaxations, and m = tanh(ε/(2k B T ))/2 is the equilibrium value of the ⟨S 0 z ⟩. In STM, the dielectric response of a single TLS can be obtained from the stationary solution to ⟨S + ⟩ The single TLS loss corresponds to the imaginary part of the response function in Eq.(S5) which is in the form of a Lorentzian in ε/ħ centered at ω with a width: The total dielectric loss is simply the integral of the single TLS contribution Eq.(S5) over the distribution of the TLS Eq.(S1) where ε r ε 0 is the permittivity of the host dielectric material, P (ε, ∆ 0 ) is obtained from Eq.(S1) with a change of variable from ∆ to ε, d 0 is the maximum transition electric dipole moment of the TLS with energy splitting ε, ⃗ E is the applied microwave electric field on the TLS dipole, and θ is the angle between the applied electric field and the TLS dipole moment. For a typical TLS with ε/h ≈ 5 GHz and at reasonably low temperatures and powers, the width of its response w ≈ Γ 2 ∼ 1 MHz ≪ ω. Due to this sharp Lorentzian response function, the total loss is dominated by the resonant TLS whose energies ε ∼ ħω. Before analytically evaluating the integral in Eq.(S7), the expressions for Γ 1,2 need to be introduced. The longitudinal relaxation rate (Γ 1 ) of a single TLS is dominated by the phonon process: where γ L and γ T are the longitudinal and transverse deformation potentials, respectively, v L and v T are the longitudinal and transverse sound velocities, ρ is the mass density, and Γ max The transverse relaxation rate (Γ 2 ) is defined as Γ ds is the dephasing rate of the resonant TLS energy level ε, caused by its interactions with thermally activated TLS whose ε ≲ k B T , and is valid for low temperature measurement (T < 1 K) After substituting the expressions for Γ 1 , Γ 2 and Ω from Eqs. (S8, S9, S4) into the integral for the loss Eq.(S7) and using μ = 0, the famous STM prediction of TLS loss is obtained, where Ω c ∝ Γ max 1 Γ 2 is the critical Rabi frequency that characterizes the saturation of TLS. The loss is expected to have an inverse square root dependence on power after the TLS saturation, δ TLS ∼ Ω ∝ P -0.5 ab for Ω ≫ Ω c , which is much faster than observed in the data in Fig. The theoretical work on master equation of the fluctuator coupling to TLS is based on The solution to the Bloch equations depends on the relation between the transition rates induced by fluctuators γ, whose distribution follows P (γ) ∼ 1/γ in an exponentially large range [γ min , γ max ], and the other inherent dynamics: Ω, Γ 1,2 , ω -ε/ħ. To systematically present the predictions from the different solutions to the mater equations under different limits, this section is structured according to the three regimes of the rate γ, namely high γ > Ω, Γ 2 , intermediate γ ≈ Ω or Γ 2 , and low γ < Γ 1 . For low γ fluctuators (γ min < γ < Γ 1 ), the single TLS response is given by the stationary solution to Eq.(S2,S3), since the TLS dynamics is much faster than the jump rates γ. We can further separate the analysis for two different types: the common weakly-coupled fluctuators which shift the energy level of TLS by a small energy ξ and result in a widening of the spectral width of the TLS, and the rare strongly-coupled fluctuators whose ξ is large enough and produce large stochastic jumps on the TLS energy level ε. The weakly-coupled fluctuators induce detunings that follow a Lorentzian distribution with width Γ f ∝ (k B T /ħ)(k B T /ε max ) μ ≲ Γ 2 similar to the spectral diffusion The single TLS imaginary response under a single weak fluctuator can be obtained from Eq.( S5) by replacing ε with ε + ξ(t) where κ = Ω 2 /(Γ 1 Γ 2 ). Integrating Eq.(S12) over the distribution of detuning P (ξ(t)) and the distribution of the fluctuator rate P (γ), one can obtain the single TLS loss: The second fraction is in the form of a Lorentzian with width Γ 2 √ 1 + κ + Γ f , and the first term is the same as the STM formula. If a continuous distribution function for TLS P (ε, ∆ 0 ) is assumed, one can obtain the total internal loss by integrating Eq.(S13) over P (ε, ∆ 0 ), resulting in the same internal loss as in STM. The distribution P (ξ(t)) may not apply to the strongly-coupled fluctuators which completely shift the TLS in and out of resonance, since there are typically only a few strong fluctuators in surface dielectrics Three methods were used to estimate the average effect of the low γ fluctuators on the internal loss. Intuitively, we could estimate the total loss by summing up the contribution from all the TLS near the resonance. The key assumption is the low density of the resonant TLS which justifies the discrete treatment. An estimation based on The second method assumes that the detuning ν is not much larger than Γ 2 so that the distribution P (ξ(t)) for the weakly-coupled fluctuators can still be applied to the case ξ/ħ ∼ ν ≲ Γ 2 . The probability of a TLS with a detuning ν to be on resonance under the influence of the low γ fluctuators can be calculated by integrating P (ξ(t)): which also leads to a monotonic increasing temperature dependence below 50 mK as in the data. The third method estimates the number of strongly-coupled fluctuators capable of moving the coherent TLS in and out of resonance. Since the energy drift caused by fluctuators is directly related to the interaction energy, which is dipoledipole like, U (r) ∼ r -3 , we could find a volume around the near-resonant TLS which hosts fluctuators that interact strongly enough. For Γ 2 < ν, the TLS is detuned, and the criterion for being a strong fluctuator is that the induced energy shift can bring the TLS in resonance such that ħ(ν -Γ 2 ) < U (r) < ħ(ν + Γ 2 ). This volume is a spherical shell with inner and outer radius defined by the bounds on the interaction energy U (r). For Γ 2 > ν, the TLS is already in resonant, and the strong fluctuators are those that move the TLS out of resonance, with U (r) > ħ(Γ 2 -ν). This volume is a sphere with radius defined by U (r) = ħ(Γ 2 -ν). The total number of strong fluctuators can then be estimated as: where the density of states for TLS from Eq.(S1) is used, and the energy range is set to the thermal energy k B T . The two expressions Eq.(S14,S15) are plotted below as a function of Γ 2 ∝ T 1+μ . The x axis of Fig. It should be noted that if applied to TLS exactly on resonance (Γ 2 /ν → ∞), the above arguments will lead to the conclusion that low γ fluctuators present no temperature dependence for both the strong and weak low γ fluctuators, which forms the basis of the claim that no anomalous temperature dependence on the loss is expected in the original GTM work and high γ fluctuators. The dynamical effect is still described by a similar master equation Eq.(S16) for high γ fluctuators with ρ replaced by ρ k for each different state k of the fluctuators. Moreover, the fast random telegraph noise is not averaged out, and the dynamics of the transverse component can be treated as stationary in a rotating wave approximation (d⟨S + ⟩/dt = 0). The resulting master equation to be solved is then where ⟨S 0 z ⟩, ⟨S 1 y ⟩ are abbreviated as z and y, and , and γ kn is the transition rate between the fluctuator state k and n. Γ 1 and m are not subscripted with k since their ε k dependence contains a slowly varying function in the form tanh[ε k /(2k B T )] that should not vary much near the resonance. z k can be solved from Eq.(S20) and substituted in Eq.(S21) to obtain y k where n k is the probability for a TLS to have energy ε k , γ = n (γ kn + γ nk ) is the total effective jump rate for fluctuator state k. The single TLS y-component response with the energy level ε k can then be calculated from integrating Eq.(S22) over the probability distribution P (γ) ∝ 1/γ where when the TLS is on resonance (ε k = ħω). The upper and lower bounds for the intermediate fluctuators are obtained from the TLS dynamics as in Sec.S3.2 such that The total loss can then be obtained from summing up the contribution from all the different TLS energy levels just as in Eq.( If one assumes that the energy drift induced by the individual fluctuator follows the same Lorentzian distribution P (ξ) for the weak fluctuators in Sec.S3.1, the total drift will follow a Lorentzian distribution with a wider width P (ξ) ∝ N Γ f /((N Γ f ) 2 + ξ 2 ) since there are N fluctuators affecting the TLS in the case of intermediate fluctuators. If we assume that this width N Γ f is comparable to the detuning ν , then the broadening of the TLS energy levels will ensure the existence of resonant TLS. Therefore, one can apply the continuous distribution of TLS P (ε, ∆ 0 ). The final result of the internal loss after the integration is then The loss takes on a logarithmic power dependence in the intermediate power range 2 )/(2Ω 2 ) . This loss saturates to a constant ∼ m ln Γ 2 2 + ν 2 /Γ 1 for lower powers, and to a small constant ∼ m ln(2) for higher powers. In summary, the power dependence of the loss can be separated into three different regimes where in the high power limit Ω ≳ Γ 2 , the effect of fluctuators that induce large γ dominates and leads to a logarithmic power dependence; in the intermediate power regime Γ 2 ≳ Ω ≳ √ Γ 1 Γ 2 , the fluctuators with intermediate γ give rise to a faster logarithmic power dependence, but meanwhile the saturation of TLS just as in STM has a comparable if not stronger power dependence and overlap in the same power regime; and finally in the low power limit Ω < √ Γ 1 Γ 2 , the typical TLS saturation in STM is recovered as the fluctuator contributions from all three different regimes become constant in power. The above description matches our experimental observation in Fig. The final fit to the data can be obtained from summing up all three contributions from different regimes of fluctuators: the discrete summation for the low and intermediate γ fluctuators, Eq.( None of the existing TLS models shows a strong temperature dependence of loss below TLS saturation. Hence alternative models need to be combined with the discrete TLS formalism to account for the observed temperature dependence of loss. Here we examine two models commonly adopted to explain the slow power dependence above TLS saturation power, as well as an alternative version of the discrete GTM fit used in the main text in which an energy dependent density of states is assumed with μ ̸ = 0. The two TLS or, by extension, multiple TLS model is a popular alternative in explaining the slower power dependence than STM. The multiple species of TLS could be attributed to nonuniform field distribution in the resonator where m n = tanh(ε n /(2k B T )) and its subscript explicitly denotes its dependence on ε n . The difference between the two species of the TLS is encoded in their intrinsic losses δ T LS,1 0 , δ T LS,2 0 which accounts for different participation ratios, and the factor η which could be due to different field strength experienced by the TLS dipoles, different dipole moments, or different relaxation rates of the two species of TLS. The resulting fit in Fig. [Hz] the fit are Γ 2 = 4.7 × 10 5 to 2 × 10 7 Hz and Γ 1 = 6.8 × 10 3 to 10 4 Hz. The losses from the different contributions are determined as δ other = 1.29 × 10 -5 , δ T LS,1 0 = 6.9 × 10 -6 , and δ T LS,2 0 = 6.8 × 10 -6 . The other fitting parameters are volume of the TLS-inhabiting dielectrics 2μm 3 , the asymmetry ratio η = 18, and the exponent of the power dependent density of states of TLS μ = 0.2. We should note that this fit might be improved by including more species of TLS. However, this multiple-TLS model lacks a physical motivation and is not considered in this work. Another well-known phenomenological fitting method introduces a free power law dependence to the saturation power term 1 + κ where β is the exponent for the free power law dependence, and β = 1 corresponds to the STM prediction. The discrete free power law fit has a large deviation from the data as shown in Fig. In Faoro and Ioffe's original work on GTM, an energy dependent density of states (DOS) for the TLS is assumed where μ ∼ 0.3 and ∆ max ∼ ε max ∼ k B (100K). The small exponent μ approximately characterizes the logarithmic reduction of the density of states of TLS at low energy in a system of interacting dipoles model with an energy dependent density of states where μ is a free fitting parameter is used to fit to our data and is shown in Fig. The fit shows reasonable agreement with the data, with RMSE = 0.014, slightly larger than that of the μ = 0 fit in the main text. There are in total 11 fitting parameters. The different contributions to the loss below TLS saturation power are plotted in Fig. The aim of this section is to examine the non-equilibrium quasiparticle density by simulating the physics using the nonequilibrium energy-dependent distribution of quasiparticles. This model (scattering model) was established by considering the coupled quasiparticle and phonon systems. From the quasiparticle distribution f (E), one can calculate the quasiparticle density, n qp , by numerical integration over all energy, with its density of states ρ(E) The calculated n qp at different circulated photon numbers ⟨n⟩ are shown in Fig. For the quality factor due to the quasiparticles, Q qp is defined as where the kinetic inductance ratio α = 0.0185 was obtained from the frequency shift fit in the main text. The real and imaginary parts of the complex conductivity σ = σ 1 -jσ 2 can be expressed respectively by the Mattis-Bardeen formula where σ N is the normal-state conductivity, g 1 (E) = h 1 (E, E + ħω)ρ(E) and g 2 (E) = h 1 (E, E + ħω) E * E ′ )ρ(E ′ ). Here we use the non-equilibrium distribution function f (E) discussed above. The calculated result of Q qp as a function of average circulated photon numbers is shown in Fig. is the maximum Γ 1 for the TLS with energy splitting ε, when ∆ 0 = ε.