Detecting mechanical fatigue of metallic components is always a challenge in industries. In this work, we proposed to monitor the low-cycle fatigue of a 6061 aluminum alloy based on internal friction (IF) measurement, which is realized by a quantitative electromechanical impedance (Q-EMI) method using a small piezoelectric wafer bonded on the specimen. Large strain amplitude (3.3×10 -3 ) was employed thus the fatigue life can always be below 10 5 cycles. It was found that except for the initial testing stage, the IF always increases steadily with the increasing fatigue cycles. Before the fatigue failure, the IF can reach 2.5 to 3.4 times of the initial value, which is thought to be caused by the micro-cracks forming and growing. In comparison, the resonance frequency of the specimen just drops less than 2% compared with the initial value. Finally, a general fatigue criterion based on IF measurement is suggested for all the metallic materials. Metallic structures are mostly widely used in modern industries and statistics has shown that over 80% of their failure is caused by mechanical fatigue. The fatigue problems of metals had been investigated over one century. However, so far the fatigue status of engineering structures still cannot be identified and their remaining life cannot be predicted yet. In practice, to ensure the safety of equipment, the operation period is usually fixed and the equipment is forbidden to work out of this period even if its condition is still quite good. Furthermore, routine nondestructive testing is usually required to detect the possible damage during the operation period. However, currently none of the existing NDT methods can effectively detect the micro-cracks generated at the early stage of mechanical fatigue. In the past decades, intensive efforts had been made to study on the NDT methods for fatigue damages, among which the nonlinear ultrasonic testing (NUT) method may be the most well-known However, such a small increase in α makes little sense in practical applications. Ogi et al studied the ultrasonic attenuation coefficient α of surface waves in different metals during torsional-bending fatigue Actually since 1950s, physicists had studied the relationship between internal frictions (IF) and fatigue in common metals including copper, aluminum, etc They found that the IF significantly drops after irradiation, and before the fatigue failure, IF also increases rapidly. Kenawy et al From above, it can be seen that the internal friction (IF) of metals is very sensitive to fatigue deformation. However, previously employed IF measurement methods, i.e., the torsional pendulum method, the resonant bar method, DMA In this work, we employed our recently proposed, electromechanical impedance based IF measurement method (called Q-EMI or M-PUCOT) In this work, our previously proposed IF measurement method As the volume of the PZT wafer is much smaller than that of the specimen (typically below 1%) and the resonance frequency of the two-component system is far below that of the PZT wafer, the IF contribution by the PZT wafer can be neglected here and Eq.( cycles. The fatigue testing were frequently interrupted for the IF measurement, typically with the interval of 3000 cycles. The susceptance curve measurement were conducted immediately when the fatigue testing was interrupted, and the stabilized admittance curve after 10 mins were used for the IF calculation. Fig. It can be seen that the yielding stress is about 350MPa and the Young's modulus is about 68.7GPa. Then the loading stress amplitude of 230MPa is 65 percent of the yielding stress and the fatigue life can be controlled in the low-cycle fatigue range. A series of 6061 aluminum specimens were tested and the results of three typical specimens were presented for discussions. Fig. The variation of the mechanical resonance frequency of Specimen #1 is just opposite to that of the IF, as seen in Fig. After that, it drops steadily with the loading cycles, arriving at 13,068 Hz after 45,000 cycles of loading. It should be noted that the variations in the mechanical resonance frequency during fatigue loading is very small, about 3% in Specimen #1. Therefore, the resonance frequency is not a good measure for fatigue detection. The measured IF of the three 6061 Al specimens during fatigue loading were listed in Table From above, it can be seen that for the 6061 Al during low-cycle fatigue, the IF is very sensitive to fatigue loading. Except for the very early stage of loading, the IF increases steadily with the loading cycles and can reach 2.5 to 3.4 times of the initial value. Therefore, the IF can act as a good indicator of fatigue damage and a fatigue criterion based on IF measurement can be established. This sounds reasonable since all the fatigue failure is accompanied by micro-cracks forming and growing, which will significantly enlarge the internal frictions. The fatigue criterion can be based on absolute IF value or relative IF. For example, if we take "IF=4.0E-3" as the fatigue criterion, then based on Fig. In 