Understanding light-matter interaction at the nanoscale by observation of fine details of electromagnetic fields is achieved by bringing nanoscale probes into the nearfield of light sources, capturing information that is lost in the far field. Although metal coated probes are often used for nearfield microscopy, they strongly perturb the electromagnetic fields under study. Here, through experiment and simulation, we detail light collection by uncoated fiber probes, which minimize such perturbation. Second-harmonic light from intensely-irradiated sub-wavelength sub-surface features was imaged to avoid otherwise dominating fundamental light background, yielding clear nearfield details through a 50 nm aperture uncoated probe with ~23 nm optical resolution. Simulations shows how a metallic coating distorts optical nearfields and limits optical coupling into the probe in comparison to an uncoated probe. As silicon-based electronics started facing physical challenges such as limited bandwidth, power dissipation and cross talk among carrier channels, photons and optics have been studied as alternative information pipelines and logic gates Second harmonic probe microscopy (SHPM) was used to collect nanoscale optical signatures of samples. The experimental setup used near-infrared femtosecond laser pulses to excite the sample, and an uncoated silica scanning probe with 50 nm aperture to collect near-ultraviolet second-harmonic generation (SHG) light. Fundamental light scattered from subsurface dislocation defects then localized and frequency-doubled within the scattering medium (see the Method Section for details). By collecting SHG light, the setup filtered out strong reflected fundamental light, which otherwise would have dominated the detected signal We define aperture as the near flat fiber tip end with ~50 nm diameter created by melting, pulling and tapering process that serve as the dominant conduits for incoming light. See the second part of Method Section for more details about 50 nm aperture fiber probe and its melting/pulling process. We have previously demonstrated the fidelity and resolution of SHPM imaging. To replicate different intensity of EF, we used propagating EF with different widths and checked the feed through of the probe by plotting the power-flow (W/m 2 ) streamlines. Figure Figure We raster scanned over 2x2 μm of the same sample with the laser focal spot centered on the probe axis and again when stationed ~5 μm to one side of it (figure To further compare uncoated and coated probes, we simulated two weak 30 nm wide sources of P-polarized EF separated by 80 nm while 50 nm uncoated and Al-coated probes scanned over them 20 nm above the sample plane. Figure Figures 4i, j plot profile cuts of the EF 18 nm above the sample surface (2 nm below probe aperture) for the configurations shown in Figures We demonstrate that a second-harmonic probe microscope (SHPM) that collects SHG light from fs-laser-irradiated surfaces with a 50 nm uncoated scanning fiber probe tip images sharp-edged features with ~ 23 nm resolution. We observed in both experiments and simulations that 390 nm light couples into an uncoated appropriately-tapered dielectric probe mainly through its 50 nm aperture. Experimental data shows SHG features maintain their shape and pattern over a wide range of excitation intensity, despite lateral offsets of excitation and probe tip, showing that light collection occurs mostly though the 50 nm aperture, not the tapered sides. Simulations corroborate the conclusion that SHG light couples predominantly through the 50 nm tip, if it is appropriately tapered. They also show that an uncoated probe perturbs near-surface electric fields much less than an equivalently-shaped metal-coated probe, enabling more faithful scanned images of sub-wavelength features. Overall, the study shows that an uncoated tapered probe with 50 nm aperture is the right microscope tool to study the propagating electromagnetic waves with resolution below the diffraction limit. 1) System: SHG optical study of semiconductor thin film was performed by a fiber based nonlinear nearfield scanning optical microscope (NSOM) system with 50 nm fiber aperture. This uncoated probe scanning approach was used to avoid and minimize any enhancement and perturbation of the electromagnetic field at the probe area. The probe was kept at ~ 20-30 nm above the sample with a feedback loop system monitoring the amplitude of the scanning probe. A 76 MHz laser with ~150fs pulse width at ~780nm was focused on an area about ~10 μm on the sample and collection was done at 390 nm. The incident excitation angle is ~45 o with P polarization. The Sample was scanned by a piezoelectric stage under the stationary probe. Fiber probe which supports light only below 600 nm picks up the propagating SHG signal of III-V film at nearfield regime and the signal gets filtered for residue of fundamental light. Photomultiplier tube (PMT) sensitive only to photons at 200-700 nm range was used with a photon counter system to measure the photons. The nonlinear response of the GaAs-Si film is typically ~10 Instead of the linear study, if we look at the nonlinear response of the III-V film at 390nm, then there would not be such a problem of dominating reflection light from the surface of the sample as the only reflected and dominating signal at the surface is 780 nm which is filtered. Then scattered and localized SHG light intensity can be distinguished from the film typical SHG background response. This filtering approach is capable of distinguishing the very weak SHG scattered and localized hotspot in the presence of dominating surface reflection. The high resolution of the scanning probe microscope was explored and confirmed. Prior experimental work 