Electronic materials harbor a plethora of exotic quantum phases, ranging from unconventional superconductors to non-Fermi liquids, and, more recently, topological phases of matter. While these quantum phases in integer dimensions are well characterized by now, their presence in fractional dimensions remains vastly unexplored. Here, we theoretically show that a special class of crystalline phases, namely, higher-order topological phases that via an extended bulk-boundary correspondence feature robust gapless modes on lower dimensional boundaries, such as corners and hinges, can be found on a representative family of fractional materials: quantum fractals. To anchor this general proposal, we demonstrate realizations of second-order topological insulators and superconductors, supporting charged and neutral Majorana corner modes, on planar Sierpiński carpet and triangle fractals, respectively. These predictions can be experimentally tested on designer electronic fractal materials, as well as on various highly tunable metamaterial platforms, such as photonic and acoustic lattices. Introduction. Crystals are ubiquitous in nature, manifesting discrete reflection, rotational, and translational symmetries. On the other hand, quasicrystals and fractals are paradigmatic examples of noncrystalline materials. While quasicrystals are projections of higherdimensional crystals on lower-dimensional branes, realized by completely tilling the physical space in an aperiodic fashion, thereby exhibiting local discrete, often crystal forbidden, rotational symmetries Here, we explore this territory by focusing on a newly emerged family of crystalline phases, namely higher-order topological (HOT) phases, and show realizations of both HOT insulators and HOT superconductors on Sierpiński carpet and glued Sierpiński triangle fractals (Figs. The HOT phases on fractals are unique in the sense that they harbor inner corner modes, besides the conventional outer corner modes which can also be observed in crystals. However, due to distinct internal geometries such inner corner modes are at finite but close to zero energy (still separated from the rest of the states) in the Sierpiński carpet fractal (Fig. Model. To outline the general protocol of engineering HOT phases, here we consider its paradigmatic example on a square lattice, captured by the Hamiltonian operator ĥ = ĥ1 + ĥ2 , where The uniform first-order Wilson-Dirac mass opposite spin projections, thereby yielding a first-order quantum spin Hall insulator. Otherwise, the system is a trivial or normal insulator, devoid of any topological edge states The second-order Wilson-Dirac mass ĥ2 anticommutes with ĥ1 . It thus acts as a mass to one-dimensional counter propagating edge modes of ĥ1 by causing hybridization between them. Naturally, ĥ2 gaps out the edge modes, however, only partially as it assumes the profile of a domain-wall mass flipping sign four times under 2π rotation and vanishing along the diagonal 11 directions. Thus ĥ2 breaks four-fold rotational (C 4 ) symmetry. As a result, when the corners of a square lattice reside along its diagonals, four corner modes with d c = 2 get pinned therein, following the spirit of the generalized Jackiw-Rebbi mechanism Fractal HOT insulators. This mechanism is not restricted to the square lattice. If we maintain the symmetry of the model and cleave the system such that four corners are placed along the inversion axes of the HOT Wilson-Dirac mass, it can support corner localized zeroenergy modes. To extend the jurisdiction of this model (d) Scaling of the spectral gap (Eg) between the zero energy corner modes and the closest to zero energy modes that are not outer corner localized for HOT insulators (HOTIs) and HOT superconductors (HOTSCs) in two fractal lattices, ensuring that Eg remains finite (inset) in the thermodynamic limit. Here Eg is computed by finding energies of a few states near zero energy using the Lanczos algorithm (not an exact diagonalization). beyond the realm of topological crystals, we consider a real space version of ĥ, given by H = H 1 + H 2 , with and Here c jστ is the electron annihilation operator at site j, with spin projection σ =↑, ↓ and on orbital τ = α, β. The azimuthal angle between the jth and kth lattice sites, located at r j and r k , respectively, is φ jk , measured with respect to the horizontal direction. For the derivation of Eq. ( Here r 0 is the decay length, typically set to be the nearest-neighbor distance. In principle, this generalized model for a HOT insulator can be implemented on any noncrystalline systems, such as fractals, amorphous materials The ultimate origin independence of Q xy allows us to construct a global phase diagram in the (m 0 , |g|) plane [Fig. Next we investigate the possibility of realizing HOT insulators on a glued Sierpiński triangle fractal. In order to obtain four outer corners along the inversion axes of the second-order Wilson-Dirac mass, we glue two Sierpiński triangle fractals, each being a right angled triangle, slightly different from its known geometry The LDOS of zero-energy modes predominantly occupies four outer corners in a system with open boundaries [Fig. The HOT insulators with outer and naked inner corner modes on glued Sierpiński triangle fractals possess quantized Q xy = 0.5, which slowly becomes origin independent as we approach the thermodynamic limit [Fig. The slowness of F r → 1 possibly stems from the inner edges at the π/4 angle, which always absorb a tiny fraction of the LDOS associated with the zero energy modes. The global phase diagram of this system in the (m 0 , |g|) plane is qualitatively similar to the one in Fig. Fractal HOT superconductors. Continuing the journey through the territory of HOT phases on quantum fractals, next we search for HOT superconductors on Sierpiński carpet and glued Sierpiński triangle fractals. In principle, with suitable choices of Hermitian matrices and the corresponding spinor, which includes both electron and hole like components (Nambu doubling), ĥ can also describe a second-order topological superconductor [Eq. ( Primarily, the Hamiltonian ĥ does not reveal any microscopic origin of the p + id pairing nor does it unveil any potential material platform where such pairing can be realized. Even more importantly, when we extend ĥ to a real space hopping Hamiltonian [Eq. ( The local second-order topological superconductor can be unambiguously identified from its requisite symme-tries. For example, it must anticommute with the Dirac kinetic energy, captured by the terms proportional to t in ĥNam , such that the pairing represents a topological Nambu-Dirac mass. In addition, it must commute with the first-order Wilson-Dirac mass, so that the boundary modes of this pairing are not uniformly gapped. Finally, it must anticommute with the second-order Wilson-Dirac mass such that the Majorana edge modes are gapped, but only partially, producing localized zero energy Majorana modes at four corners, when they reside along the 11 directions. These constraints select a unique candidate for the second-order topological superconductor, for which the effective single particle Bogoliubov de-Gennes Hamiltonian reads ĥpair = ∆ (η Here ∆ is the pairing amplitude and φ is the U(1) superconducting phase. The Nambu Hamiltonian ĥtotal Nam = ĥNam + ĥpair can be implemented on any fractal lattice following Eq. ( The resulting energy spectra and LDOS corresponding to the near zero energy modes are qualitatively similar to the ones shown in Figs. Summary and discussions. Here, we construct a concrete path to theoretically harness HOT phases on a family of fractional materials, quantum fractals, and demonstrate their realizations on Sierpiński carpet and glued Sierpiński triangle fractals. While the HOT insulators are intrinsic in nature, their superconducting cousins are possibly extrinsic. Nonetheless, the HOT paired state in a second-order Dirac insulator is energetically most favored among all symmetry allowed local pairings over a wide parameter range Electronic fractal materials, such as the ones recently engineered in designer electronic Note added. Recently, we became aware of two experimental works 