Scanning superconducting quantum interference device (SQUID) microscopy is a magnetic imaging technique combining high field sensitivity with nanometer-scale spatial resolution. State-of-theart SQUID-on-tip probes 1,2 are now playing an important role in mapping correlation phenomena, such as superconductivity 3 and magnetism 4 , which have recently been observed in two-dimensional van der Waals materials. Here, we demonstrate a scanning probe that combines the magnetic and thermal imaging provided by an on-tip SQUID with the tip-sample distance control and topographic contrast of a non-contact atomic force microscope (AFM). We pattern the nanometer-scale SQUID, including its weak-link Josephson junctions, via focused ion beam milling at the apex of a cantilever coated with Nb, yielding a sensor with an effective diameter of 365 nm, field sensitivity of 9.5 nT/ √ Hz and thermal sensitivity of 620 nK/ √ Hz, operating in magnetic fields up to 1.0 T. The resulting SQUID-on-lever is a robust AFM-like scanning probe that expands the reach of sensitive nanometer-scale magnetic and thermal imaging beyond what is currently possible. Nanometer-scale magnetic imaging techniques, based on optical, electron, x-ray, or scanning probe sensors, reveal magnetization patterns, spin configurations, and current distributions. They provide local information about length-scales, inhomogeneity, and interactions, that is inaccessible in bulk measurements of transport, magnetization, susceptibility, or heat capacity. In recent years, these techniques have shed light on nanometer-scale phenomena such as domain walls, magnetic and superconducting vortices, and magnetic skyrmions. The techniques combining the highest sensitivity and highest spatial resolution are being used to map recently discovered correlated states hosted in some two-dimensional (2D) van der Waals materials and their heterostructures, because they can provide information on quantum phases, including on the spatial variation of order parameters, the presence of domains, and the role of defects. Correlated states in 2D materials are extremely sensitive to disorder and inhomogeneity. In such a fragile environment, local measurements -with sensors whose characteristic size is smaller than the length scale of the disorder -are essential for making sense of the system. Foremost among sensitive and high-resolution magnetic imaging techniques is scanning superconducting quantum interference device (SQUID) microscopy with so-called SQUIDon-tip probes apex of a cantilever force sensor, combining the capabilities of a SQUID-on-tip with those of non-contact atomic force microscopy (AFM). All components of the SQUID, including superconducting leads, loop, and weak-link Josephson junctions are patterned via direct FIB milling of a sputtered Nb film, overcoming the challenge of patterning directly on a highaspect-ratio tip. The result is a SQUID-on-lever scanning probe that provides exquisite magnetic, thermal, and topographic contrast. The non-contact AFM cantilever platform provides excellent control of the tip-sample spacing, as well as topographic contrast further than 1 μm. In addition, FIB patterning offers flexibility in the possible designs of the SQUID. In contrast, the minimum size and complexity of SQUID-on-tip probes are restricted by the fabrication process, e.g. not allowing for the integration of field coils for susceptibility measurements or flux feedback. The fabrication of a SQUID at the apex of a commercially available Si-cantilever designed for non-contact AFM is presented schematically in Fig. The resulting SQUID-on-lever is mounted in a custom-built scanning probe microscope operating under vacuum at 4.2 K. Piezoelectric positioners move the sample under the cantilever with nanometer-scale precision and a specialized cantilever holder allows for both electrical contact to the SQUID-on-lever as well as mechanical excitation. The cantilever's flexural motion is driven by a piezoelectric disc mounted next to the cantilever at its fundamental resonance frequency f 0 of around 300 kHz and is detected using a fiber-optic interferometer. As the cantilever is approached to the substrate, f 0 shifts, due to tip-sample interaction. This shift ∆f is plotted as a function of tip-sample distance z in Fig. The inset of Fig. This mismatch is likely due to both magnetic field lensing by the superconductor on the triangular plateau and the suppression of superconductivity caused by ion implantation in the Nb near the milled regions. The interference pattern shows a large asymmetry between positive and negative V b , due to the asymmetry of the two JJs. By appropriate choice of V b , this asymmetry increases the range of applied fields, in which the SQUID is sensitive, including at B a = 0. We determine the thermal sensitivity of the device, by analyzing measurements of In order to demonstrate the capabilities of the SQUID-on-lever as a scanning probe, we first image a current-carrying Au-wire patterned on a Si substrate. We image the topography of the wire with our SQUID-on-lever by implementing a standard non-contact AFM technique: scanning in the xy-plane while feeding back on the piezoelectric scanner controlling the of the SQUID at f AC . By introducing a few mbar of 4 He exchange-gas into the vacuum chamber, we also make our SQUID-on-lever sensitive to the local temperature modulation T AC produced by Joule heating as AC flows through the Au wire. The ability to sensitively map T AC is made possible by the thermal coupling of the sensor to the sample. In particular, this exchange-gas-mediated coupling must be stronger than the coupling of the sensor to its support. To be a non-invasive probe, this coupling must also be weaker than the coupling of the sample with its substrate. Both of these conditions are met in our system, where the sensor is very weakly coupled to its support, because of the small geometrical cross-section of the cantilever and the absence of thermal conductivity along the superconducting film. Because T AC T , where the bath temperature T = 4.2 K, T AC is in the small signal limit and is proportional to the power dissipated, i.e. the square of the flowing current Therefore to image T AC , we map the second harmonic response of the SQUID to the current at 2f AC The image of the Biot-Savart field produced by current flowing through the Au wire, shown in Fig. In order to demonstrate the probe's applicability to nanomagnetic samples, we image an artificial spin ice Fig. Previous attempts at realizing on-tip SQUIDs have all involved either micrometer-sized sensors and/or coupling to stiff tuning fork resonators, which preclude topographic contrast or tip-sample stabilization for spacings larger than tens of nanometers 