Twisted graphene multilayers provide tunable platforms to engineer flat bands and exploit the associated strongly correlated physics. The two-dimensional nature of these systems makes them suitable for encapsulation by materials that break specific symmetries. In this context, recently discovered two-dimensional helimagnets, such as the multiferroic monolayer NiI2, are specially appealing for breaking time-reversal and inversion symmetries due to their nontrivial spin textures. Here we show that this spin texture can be imprinted on the electronic structure of twisted bilayer graphene by proximity effect. We discuss the dependence of the imprinted spin texture on the wave-vector of the helical structure, and on the strength of the effective local exchange field. Based on these results we discuss the nature of the superconducting instabilities that can take place in helimagnet encapsulated twisted bilayer graphene. Our results put forward helimagnetic encapsulation as a powerful way of designing spin-textured flat band systems, providing a starting point to engineer a new family of correlated moire states. Magnetic van der Waals materials have become a fundamental building block in artificial heterostructures Their two-dimensional nature provides a versatile platform to electrically control magnetism Twisted graphene multilayers have become paradigmatic systems to engineer flat bands, leading to a variety of unconventional many-body states Here we put forward helimagnetic encapsulation as a powerful tool to control flat bands in twisted graphene heterostructures. In particular, we show that quasi-flat bands of twisted bilayer graphene (TBG) can be im- printed with strong spin textures purely by exchange coupling with helimagnets. Such spin textures do not rely on any kind of spin-obit coupling effect in graphene. We show the emergence of spin-textured bands for short and long helimagnetic wavelengths and different commensuration with the graphene sublattice structure, demonstrating the robustness of helimagnet spin imprinting. We finally discuss how helimagnet imprinting impacts possible superconducting states in the flat band systems. Our results promote helimagnet encapsulation as a new strategy to design unconventional correlated states in twisted van der Waals heterostructures. We consider twisted bilayer graphene at a twist angle 1.44 • , slightly above the flat band regime where l = 1, 2 is the layer index, i, j are site indexes, and α, β are spin indexes. t and t ⊥ are intra-and interlayer hopping in TBG, i, j restricts the sum to nearest neighbours in the first term. The interlayer hopping takes the form t ⊥ (i, j) = t 0 The structure of the twisted multilayer is built as follows. We take a 1,2 as lattice vectors of the bottom layer graphene: , where a is the lattice constant. The reciprocal vectors of graphene are then n 1 = 1 3a ( √ 3, 1) and n 2 = -2 3a (0, 1). The moire superlattice vectors are then given by where m is an integer and in our case we take m = 11. The reciprocal vectors of the moire superlattice are b 1 = and b 2 = mn1-(m+1)n2 3m 2 +3m+1 . We consider a general helimagnetic order that can be incommensurate with the graphene sublattice structure. For the sake of concreteness, we consider when the magnetization on sublattice B has a relative rotation θ 0 w.r.t. that on sublattice A with M 0 being the magnitude of the local magnetization, q being the characteristic wave vector of the helimagnet, and R i being the coordinate of site i. Due to the superexchange mechanism For the sake of simplicity, we consider q parallel to b 1 -b 2 , which is a high-symmetry direction of the moire Brillouin zone. When θ 0 = 0, there is no sublattice imbalance and the magnets are fully characterized by the helimagnetic order (Fig. At low energy, the influence of the helimagnetization on the band structure of TBG depends only on the effective exchange field J 0 = JM 0 and the ratio between the characteristic vector q and the moire periodicity. Given that the moire periodicity can be tuned by the twist angle θ, we explore the following two regimes: (i) the helimagnetization is commensurate with the TBG moire lattice, or (ii) the helimagnet periodicity is much smaller than the periodicity of the moire lattice. We show that in both cases the helimagnetization imprints a spin texture in quasi-flat bands in TBG. In the commensurate regime, the system can be solved with Eq. (1). In the incommensurate regime, however, the whole system no longer has the periodicity of the moire lattice, and we adopt the generalized spinor-Bloch theorem to diagonalize the system with σ z,i the spin Pauli matrix in site i. The transformed Hamiltonian becomes: where J 0 = JM 0 is the effective local exchange field, Since the magnetization is uniform up to a sublattice imbalance in H , H has the same periodicity as an isolated TBG. With no proximity effect, i.e. when J 0 = 0, the only difference between H and H is the additional phases in the hopping terms, resulting in a momentum shift of ±q/2 for spin-up/down channels, respectively (Fig. In the following we address the spin-textured quasi-flat bands in TBG due to the proximity to the helimangets for both commensurate and incommensurate helimagnets. We start with the simplest case when the helimagnets are commensurate with the TBG supercell and the band structure can be computed with the Hamiltonian in Eq. ( We now focus on the case of θ 0 = 0, which leads to a strong change in the electronic structure induced by the helimagnetic field. The band structure along b 1b 2 for different values of q and J 0 are shown in Fig. a small bandwidth. The previous phenomenology takes place for different values of q at J 0 = 0.2t 0 ⊥ as shown in Fig. We now move on to investigate the modification of the band structure with helimagnetization in the small q regime. In particular, we focus on q ≤ 0.2(b 1 -b 2 ) such that the helimagnetization does not result in intervalley scattering. We consider both θ 0 = 0 and θ 0 = π cases. For θ 0 = 0, we have a helimagnet that induces a nearly ferromagnetic exchange in neighboring sites. In this case, the band structure with q = 0.05(b 1 -b 2 ) and different values of J 0 is shown in Fig. We now move on to the case when θ 0 = π, i.e. the magnetization on the sublattices are opposite and we have a helimagnet inducing a nearly antiferromagnetic field in neighboring sites. The band structures with q = 0.05(b 1 -b 2 ) and different J 0 are shown in Fig. Compared to the large q regime as discussed in Sec. III, the small q regime with θ 0 = 0 shows bands whose dispersion is less dependent on q whereas the spin texture is more sensitive on q, making it more favorable for designing spin-textured flat bands. In addition, in the case when θ 0 = π, the quasi-flat bands in TBG can be further flattened with helimagnetic encapsulation. In all the regimes discussed, quasi-flat bands with spin texture can be engineered in TBG by proximity to helimagnets. In this section we discuss the impact of the imprinted spin texture on the superconducting instability in TBG. ing states. We consider a hole doping with two holes per moire supercell. In the absence of exchange coupling to the helimagnets, the Fermi surfaces have six-fold symmetry around the center of the Brillouin zone and are spin-degenerate, such that all types of spin-configuration for the Cooper pairs are possible. As a reference, in the absence of the effective exchange magnetic field, the Fermi surface of the Hamiltonian in the rotated basis Eq. ( Interestingly, as the proximity to the helimagnet introduces inversion symmetry breaking, the mixing of superconducting states of different parity is allowed To summarize, we have shown how nearly-flat bands of twisted graphene multilayers can be imprinted with nontrivial spin textures via helimagnet encapsulation. In particular, we have shown the emergence of strong spin textures both in the limit of large and small q-vector in comparison with the moire unit cell. Interestingly, we demonstrated that the magnetic encapsulation alone is capable of opening up a gap at the Dirac points of the flat bands, maintaining the flatness of the low energy bands. We have shown that the existence of such spin textures dramatically impacts the spin structure of the Fermi surface. Finally, we discussed the potential of helimagnetic encapsulation to promote unconventional superconducting states in the system. Our results put forward helimagnet encapsulation as a powerful technique to design spin-textured flat bands and promote unconventional superconducting states in twisted graphene multilayers.