The present work deals with the synthesis of crystalline carbon nitride thin films by microwave plasma assisted chemical vapour deposition in N2/CH4 gas mixture. The discharge analysis by optical emission spectroscopy shows that the increase in the CH4/N2 ratio involves an important production of the CN and C2 radicals. In the films X-ray energy dispersion spectroscopy shows that the N/C ratio decreases when the CH4 percentage in N2 increases. Xray diffraction and electron diffraction are used to study the carbon nitride films nature. Scanning electron microscopy shows that the films consisted of nano-crystalline grains. Carbon balls are also present on the film surface for CH4 percentage higher than 4%. The transmission electron microscopy confirms the nano-structure of the film and shows the isotropic etching of the substrates, during the film growth. In 1989 Liu and Cohen predicted that the β-C3N4 would exhibit properties close to those of diamond, MPACVD is a very powerful technique, which was successfully used to synthesise diamond using H2/CH4 gas mixture. Unfortunately, polycrystalline diamond deposits do not meet all industrial requirements for mechanical applications because of fragility and delamination problems. There is still good hope that CNx polycrystalline films, which are probably at least as hard as Carbon diamond (Cd) will solve these problems. MPACVD gave excellent results for good quality Cd synthesis, and was naturally tested for the CNx ones. First results obtained are still not fully satisfying. It is then so proposed to improve the MPACVD process by understanding the growth mechanisms. To do so, special care is taken to correlate the plasma diagnostic data to the films characteristics. The growth was carried out using Si substrates and N2/CH4 gas mixture. Firstly, systematic study is performed to determine the influence of the CH4 %. Secondly, to precise the growth mechanism, the optimised condition found on silicon substrates was exploited on a Si3N4/Si substrate. The growth of carbon nitride films is carried out in a MPACVD reactor which was described elsewhere. After introduction of the substrate into the chamber, the treatment starts when the residual pressure is about 10 -5 Pa. The working total pressure inside the reactor lies in the range of 3-10 kPa. The typical total gas flow ranges from 30 to 150 sccm. The microwave power used can vary between 600 and 2000 W. The apparent temperature of the sample, measured with a monochromatic ( μm) infrared pyrometer evolves between 700 and 1200 °C during the treatment. The characterization of the plasma is made by OES using a Jobin Yvon TRIAX 550 monochromator equipped with a CCD camera. The emitted light of the plasma is collected through an optical fibre. The observed spectral region extends from 300 to 700 nm. This technique will allow correlations between the plasma chemistry and the film properties. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) observations are performed on a JEOL JSM 6500 F using an accelerating voltage of 5 kV to analyse the general morphology of the films. The transmission electron microscopy (TEM) is used to deepen the knowledge on the films morphology. TEM observations are carried out on a Philips CM20 microscope operating at an accelerating voltage of 200 kV. They are performed on matter chips sampled on the films by the microcleavage technique. Chemical composition of the films is systematically estimated by energy dispersive Xray spectroscopy (EDSX). The EDSX spectra are recorded on the CM 20 Philips microscope equipped with an ultra thin window X-ray detector. Some samples are also analyzed by Scanning Auger Electron Spectroscopy (AES) in order to determine their chemical composition, which will be given in atomic percentage. The crystallographic structure is determined by X-ray diffraction. The XRD patterns are performed on a Philips X'PERT PRO apparatus (Cu Kradiation, =1.54056 Å). The optical emission spectroscopy (OES) is a non-intrusive technique used to identify the emissive species present in the plasma and to follow their density evolution while varying the experimental parameters. Indeed, the intensity emitted by specie is proportional to its density. The N2/CH4 plasmas in MPACVD system are stable in a small interval of microwave power and total pressure in our study. The useful parameters permitting the achievement of a stable MPACVD discharge shape suitable for large sample surface treatments, important duration and various CH4 percentages have been determined. These parameters were thus fixed to 1000W for the microwave power, 5000 Pa for the total pressure and 50 sccm for the total flow rate. Figure The intensity of the C2 emission increases with the CH4 percentage until 4% and then slightly decreases over the rest of the range. The surface temperature curve profile is similar to that of the CN emission intensity. The follow-up these two emission evolutions thus showed that the highest reactivity of the MPACVD N2/CH4 discharge is obtained for CH4 percentage lower than 4%. Several techniques of characterization were combined to determine the morphology and the chemical composition of the films. TEM investigations (figure The TEM cross-section view of the film (Figure The spherical voids observed at the substrate/film interface clearly show that the erosion is isotropic proving the chemical nature of this process during the growth. The voids observed at the substrate/film interface are spherical, such an etching geometry is typical from chemical etching processes. If the process had been physical etching, the obtained geometry should have been anisotropic. This behaviour can only be observed when the substrate is negatively biased, favouring ionic bombardment. Auger measurements revealed that the balls are only made of carbon and that the underlying film contains N, C, Si and O. The chemical composition of the underlying layer was also analysed by EDSX and the N/C ratio was calculated. All the results are summarized in table I. These analyses inform that the films are very rich in silicon. However, the silicon concentration is certainly overestimated. As a matter of fact, the way the measurements are done implies that a small part of silicon coming from the substrate is probably analyzed with the film. Moreover, this shift to high values is reinforced by a higher sensitivity of the technique for Si than for N, C and O. The crystallographic characterization performed by 2X-ray diffraction on the films showed that they are all similar. One pattern is exemplified in figure Such observation indicates that the identification of the phases requires further investigations. Electronic diffraction characterizations confirmed this point. As shown by the XRD electron diffraction experiments, the phases present in the films are limited to β-C3N4, cubic C3N4 and SiCN. Probably other phases are present in the films depending on the experimental conditions, as actually observed in literature. At these values, the films are still too rich in silicon, and too poor in nitrogen (N/C (0.5-0.7)). Indeed the β-C3N4 N/C ratio is 1.33. According to the results published by Jiang et al the N/C ratio obtained at low temperature (100-700°C) is about 50% and the obtained films are mainly amorphous. Obviously, high temperature is not sufficient to increase nitrogen incorporation in the film. In our case, we work at high temperature in order to synthesize crystalline CNx films. To insert more nitrogen inside the films, we propose a preliminary growth on another type of substrate, namely Si/Si3N4 (100 nm of Si3N4 on Si). The chosen experimental conditions for this deposition were 1000 W, 50 sccm, 4 % CH4, 5000 Pa. The TEM cross-section view displayed in figure A possible growth mechanism can be proposed. First, two kinds of sites have to be considered: germination and etching sites. On germination site, carbon, nitrogen and silicon recombine and deposit to growth the film, at the contrary, on etching site species coming from the plasma (atomic nitrogen, atomic hydrogen ...) desorbs the adsorbed surface elements ( Si, C...) that are further pumped. This is principally the cause of the substrate etching. It has already been mentioned that the etching seems to be chemical and the etching element is mainly atomic nitrogen. The etching produces, CN and probably SiN radicals and the growth simultaneously occurs on the germination sites. The EDSX profile presented in figure Nano-crystalline carbon nitride films were synthesised by MPACVD in CH4 and N2 gas mixture. The OES analyses of the plasma show that the highest reactivity of the discharge is obtained for a CH4 percentage lower than 4%. The study of the morphology and the nature of the films as a function of the CH4 percentage shows that their thickness is limited to approximately 100 nm. This study also highlights that the growth is assisted by the etching of the silicon. Further experiments are needed to clarify the exact nature of the films. Atomic concentrations and N/C ratio of the carbon nitride films deposited on Si for different CH4 percentages Carbon nitride thin films were synthesised by MPACVD in N2/CH4 gas mixture. OES was used for in situ diagnostics of the plasma and the films were characterized by SEM, TEM and DRX. Films were nano-crystalline and may contain β-C3N4, cubic-C3N4 and SiCN. A growth mechanism was proposed.