Interior gap superfluidity was introduced together with Frank Wilczek. Later on together with our collaborators, we generalized this new possibility of superfluidity to a broader concept, breached pair superfluidity. In the occasion to celebrate Professor Frank Wilczek's seventieth birthday and his productive career in several major areas in physics, I dedicate this note to recall the exciting times of developing this idea, the main aspects of the proposed phase, and the discussion on its stability condition. Modern history of physics has proudly recorded a group of great luminaries having broadly impacted on the areas of high energy, statistical, and condensed matter physics. Among those who are still live and active in today's physics, many would immediately point out Frank Wilczek in this class. I was lucky to have had the privilege of working with him-during my postdoctoral times at MIT-on one of the topics of great interest in such an interdisciplinary area. It was about exotic superfluidity arising from the effect of mismatched Fermi surfaces. The phenomenon of mismatched Fermi surfaces occurs in a number of physical systems. It happens in electronic superconductors when an in-plane magnetic field is applied or when superconductivity and ferromagnetism coexist. It should happen in dense quantum chromodynamics (QCD) matter-arguably the inside of neutron stars or a quark-gluon plasma realized in the heavy ion collision experiments at CERN. Understanding the Zeeman effect in the electronic superconductors was a key motivation in the early proposal by Fulde-Ferrell-Larkin-Ovchinnikov (FFLO) Frank Wilczek and his collaborators are among the early pioneers to initiate the field of color superconductivity. In high density QCD, the phenomenon of mismatched Fermi surfaces is guaranteed to exist by two facts combined: six quark flavors carry two different fractions of electrical charge and each flavor has its own unique mass, hence different from each other. Let us illustrate this by considering an intermediate high density quark matter with average chemical potential μ ∼ 400MeV, which probably corresponds to the nucleon density in the core of neutron stars. At such an energy scale, the charm, top and bottom flavors are not present due to their individual masses being significantly high above. The QCD matter then is made of (approximately) massless up and down quarks and massive strange quarks. The strange quark has a mass M s ∼ 300MeV, comparable to the chemical potential scale under consideration. It plays a crucial role, as we see below, to cause a mismatch in flavor chemical potentials. Electric neutrality requires a nonzero density of electrons present, estimated to be μ e ∼ 50MeV. In many body physics, μ and μ e are treated as Lagrangian multiplier to enforce the conserved quantum numbers of quark flavor and electric charge, respectively. A simple algebra shows that they are related to the individual flavor chemical potentials and Fermi momenta as follows: The above crude estimate shows that the three flavors would have three different Fermi surfaces. An immediate consequence is that the color-flavor-locking superconductivity would be unstable towards crystalline color superconductivity, the manifestation of FFLO in high density QCD. This was analyzed in the context of color superconductivity by Alford, Bowers, and Rajagopal Frank, together with his collaborators, pioneered in revitalizing the idea of color superconductivity. Progressive developments in ultra-cold gases have revitalized interest in some basic qualitative questions of quantum many-body theory, because they promise to make a wide variety of conceptually interesting parameter regimes, which might previously have seemed academic or excessively special, experimentally accessible. Advances in the spatiotemporal control and readout of ultra-cold quantum gases are rapidly expanding the scientific range of current and near-future experiments in this growing field. The FFLO actually represents a class of superconducting states, because the FFLO order parameter in principle can be a superposition of Cooper pairs condensed at a set of different finite momenta, where I assume a fermion model of two spins σ =↑, ↓, σσ is the antisymmetric tensor, and the summation over α represents a set of Cooper pair momenta under choice to minimize the postulated ground state energy. Hence, it yields a rich phase diagram of different ordering crystalline structures. In other words, generic FFLO phases break both spatial translational and rotational symmetries in addition to the phase U(1) rotation symmetry. A FFLO pairing order parameter with a single momentum component is an exception as it would be still translationally invariant. The rich phase diagram however poses an experimental challenge to realize, observe and identify the nature and symmetry of the actual FFLO phase being realized, in part due to an abundance of competing FFLO phases which differ in crystalline symmetry. The energy difference between similar but symmetrically different FFLO phases often is very small, from variational calculations. The overall condensation energy saved in FFLO scenario is also exponentially smaller than that of the corresponding BCS phase if the condition of Fermi surface match restores while everything else being kept the same. The reason is quite easy to understand. Unlike the BCS case, FFLO pairing only takes place in certain spots of the Fermi surfaces, so the density of states of fermionic particle states participating in pairing and condensation is fractional, not a whole shell along the Fermi surface in a 3D setting. The energy gap and critical temperature both depend on the density of states of paired fermions exponentially, if the BCS mean field theory is taken as guidance. The new experimental regime in cold atomic gases motivated Frank and me to think whether it was possible to have some homogeneous phase -on this regard like the BCS but not like the FFLO-that can be energetically better than the nonhomogeneous FFLO. Our initial proposal, as a phenomenological trial wavefunction for the superfluid ground state was interior gap superfluidity. where σ = {↑, ↓} (or {A, B}) is the spin indices, m σ are the masses of fermions, and μ σ are the chemical potentials to enforce the condition of spin population imbalance, say N ↑ < N ↓ . Unlike previous studies, a key additional feature that I believe was first explored by Frank and me where p F σ are the Fermi momentum for the two spins (σ =↑, ↓) and the non-vanishing condition in the above is for momenta sitting within the stripes of width λ around each of two Fermi surfaces. Here is a subtle point-λ behaves like the ultraviolet cutoff, in the sense λ ∆/v F (where ∆ is the energy gap due to Cooper pairing), but should be kept smaller than the Fermi surface mismatch, λ < δp ↑ . This type of model was used in the calculation of our 2003 PRL Similar to type I interaction in a qualitative sense, for the BP phase to prevail, the falling off momentum scale λ needs to be within the Fermi momentum difference between the two spins. The BP state is similar to the BCS in terms of symmetry of the superfluid order parameter-Cooper pairs condensed at zero momentum and the state is uniform in position space. Then, how does the state accommodate the spin population difference N ↑ < N ↓ ? This question can be answered precisely by contrasting the many-body wavefunctions of the well-known BCS state and the new BP state, Momentum-space phase separation. The BP state accomplishes the population imbalance by a mechanism that I would refer to as momentum-space phase separation of superfluid and normal components. The momentum region of p : p ∈ [p - ∆ , p + ∆ ] is a normal component breach: it is filled by only one fermion species, namely, the majority species (spin ↓ in our example here), hence there is no pairing. Superfluid components exist, in a way similar to what happens in BCS state, in the momentum regions outside this "normal" breach. The BP variational wavefunction consists of the usual coherence variables (u p , v p ) as well as additional variational parameters p ± ∆ , to be determined by variationally minimizing the ground state energy with fixed chemical potentials and solving the energy gap equation self-consistently. The following summarizes the results obtained in this manner, with σ (p) = p 2 /2m σ -μ σ . The Bogoliubov quasi-particle spectrum in the BP superconducting state takes a different form than in the BCS state, shown as follows: Taking the usual notation, ∆ denotes the excitation energy gap appearing in the superconducting state. What is special in the BP excitation spectrum is the presence of gapless Fermi surface while being superconducting (or superfluid for charge neutral fermions). The gapless surfaces are the zero mode solution of the quasi-particle excitation in momentum space, The peculiar features of the BP state are illustrated in Fig. (a) It realizes a momentum-space phase separation to accommodate the population imbalance between two spins. (b) It exhibits coexisting superfluid and normal Fermi liquid components in the quantum ground state through such a momentum-space phase separation. (c) It is a superfluid with a full surface of gapless quasiparticle excitations. In the case illustrated in Fig. (e) Unlike the FFLO phase, it does not spontaneously break the translational and rotational symmetries. Since the initial proposal, the concept of interior gap and BP phase has received much attention and debates regarding its stability and competition with other viable phases. Based on studies and discussions so far, our general conclusion is that the BP phase requires two crucial conditions: 31 (a) a relatively large mass ratio between the two fermion species and (b) strong momentum dependence of a two-body attractive s-wave interaction. The latter is equivalent to requiring strong spatial dependence of the interaction in position space, by Fourier transformation. The examples we have found include the Gaussian type of long range interaction in position space or the type of interaction restricted to a narrow momentum strip as in the BCS model. The BP phase has been found as a competing phase in the phase diagram by other studies. An effective field theory approach by Son and Stephanov 33 showed a universal phase diagram of a homogenous gapless superfluid phase which corresponds to the BP phase. The quantum critical theory based on the renormalization group analysis by Yang and Sachdev 