Silicon photonics has been studied as an integratable optical platform where numerous applicable devices and systems are created based on modern physics and state-of-the-art nanotechnologies. The implementation of quantum mechanics has been the driving force of the most intriguing design of photonic structures, since the optical systems are found of great capability and potential in realizing the analogues of quantum concepts and phenomena. Non-Hermitian physics, which breaks the conventional scope of quantum mechanics based on Hermitian Hamiltonian, has been widely explored in the platform of silicon photonics, with promising design of optical refractive index, modal coupling and gain-loss distribution. As we will discuss in this chapter, the unconventional properties of exceptional points and parity-time symmetry realized in silicon photonics have created new opportunities for ultrasensitive sensors, laser engineering, control of light propagation, topological mode conversion, etc. The marriage between the quantum non-Hermiticity and classical silicon platforms not only spurs numerous studies on the fundamental physics, but also enriches the potential functionalities of the integrated photonic systems. Non-Hermitian physics describes open quantum systems that have interactions with environment in the form of matter or energy exchange. In quantum mechanics, the Hamiltonian (H) describing a closed quantum system is a Hermitian operator satisfying H ϯ = H Towards the end of the 20 th century, the traditional scenario of quantum theory was expanded by introducing non-Hermitian Hamiltonian, which satisfies H ϯ ≠ H, to describing open systems About a decade later, non-Hermitian physics sent a new wave of ripples in classical systems Silicon photonics has played an indispensable role in the progress of non-Hermitian physics in optical systems. They offer unique advantageous features for optical design, including integratability, low cost, scalability, roomtemperature operation, flexible control of optical parameters (field intensity, phase, polarization, refractive indices, mode coupling strengths and optical damping rates), compatibility with other degrees of freedom, etc. In this chapter, we review the study of non-Hermitian physics and the associated engineering progress in silicon photonics. The chapter is organized as follows. In section 2, we introduce the theory on how non-Hermitian physics can be realized in optical systems in an analogous manner to quantum scenarios. In section 3, we target on the eigenspectrum of non-Hermitian system, where we discuss the spectral singularity associated with the exceptional points, and how it leads to ultrasensitive sensors. In section 4, we review the studies about the mode interaction and eigenstate features in non-Hermitian optical systems. In particular, the supermodes in PT-symmetric systems and the chiral eigenmodes at EPs enable a series of unconventional lasing behavior. In section 5, we turn to the optical scattering properties enabled by EPs and PT symmetry, i.e., the system response when probed by optical waves. Such properties exert significant influence on various light propagation features including directionality, nonreciprocity and group delay. The topological properties associated with the EP eigenspectrum are discussed in section 6, which paves new way in the control and switch of optical modes by topological operations. Finally, we conclude the chapter by offering an outlook in section 7. Non-Hermitian physics in quantum mechanics Non-Hermitian quantum mechanics is an alternative formalism to standard Hermitian quantum mechanics and presents a unique approach to describe open quantum systems. Non-Hermitian theory is introduced to quantum mechanics mainly for two reasons One of the most important ways of introducing non-Hermitian formalism to quantum systems is to consider complex potentials in Schrödinger equations. It is known that in standard quantum mechanics the potential can only be a real function, conserving the total particle numbers or stored energy, while the non-conservative open features can only be depicted by more complicated formalism using density matrix approach. Non-Hermitian quantum theory makes sense of the complex potential that breaks Hermiticity. To be more specific, the Schrödinger equation describing the evolution of a quantum wavefunction Ψ(r, t) in a time-invariant complex potential is given by where the complex potential V(r) implies non-conserved probability ∫|Ψ(r, t)| 2 dr. Non-Hermitian quantum theory not only offers an alternative approach for open quantum problems, but also introduces unconventional physical concepts and phenomena, such as self-orthogonal eigenstates, parity-time symmetry, etc. One can find considerable disparity between Hermitian and non-Hermitian systems. Closed systems with Hermitian Hamiltonians always have real eigenvalues and orthogonal eigenstates under which the Hamiltonians are represented by diagonalized matrices. Their eigenstates |ψ i ⟩ are orthonormal under the inner product, i.e., ⟨ψ i |ψ j ⟩ = δ i,j . Non-Hermitian systems, however, can possess complex eigenvalues and non-orthogonal eigenstates. Let us consider a non-Hermitian operator A with eigenvalues λ i and the corresponding eigenvectors |φ i ) , i.e., A|φ i ) = λ i |φ i ) . In order to find an orthonormal eigenbasis, we define bi-orthogonal product (c-product) in replacement of the inner product, such that (φ i |φ j ) = δ i,j A peculiar situation occurs at non-Hermitian degeneracies where two or more non-orthogonal eigenvectors coalesce, which is also named as branch point, or EP. The bi-orthogonality yields (φ EP |φ EP ) = 0, i.e., the eigenstate at an EP is self-orthogonal. Such self-orthogonality is responsible for a great many singular phenomena, including divergence of expectation values of non-Hermitian operators, creation of probabilities, Berry phase accumulation by adiabatic encircling EPs, and so on On the other hand, the complex potential can generate purely real eigenvalues, if preserving symmetry under a joint operation of parity (P) and time-reversal (T) operators, known as parity-time (PT) symmetry which yields a requirement for the complex potential So far, we have provided the basic concepts of non-Hermitian quantum mechanics, including the definitions of EPs and PT symmetry, in the context of open quantum systems. Below we show how these quantum concepts and the associated phenomena can be readily mimicked and applied in classical optical systems. We classify the optical realization of non-Hermitian physics including PT symmetry and EPs into three categories: wave propagation under paraxial approximation in a transverse complex potential, wave scattering in a longitudinal complex potential and discrete optics with a matrix form of Hamiltonian. Paraxial propagation of electromagnetic field in a transverse complex potential The classical realization of non-Hermitian physics can be first seen by investigating the propagation of electromagnetic waves in an optical medium with planar structures If the medium is uniform along z direction, we can rewrite the Helmholtz equation under the paraxial approximation E(x, z)~E(x)e ikz ε ̂, where ε ̂ is the direction of the electric field, which takes a similar form to that of the Schrödinger equation. The time evolution is replaced by propagation along the z direction. The potential V(x) in Schrödinger equations is represented by a term consisting of the complex permittivity ε(x), or equivalently the squared refractive index n(x) 2 . Thereby, the propagation of electromagnetic field in paraxial approximation is in natural analogy to the quantum evolution of wavefunction within a 1D complex potential. It is now obvious that the concept of PT symmetry can be introduced to the optical context with the complex potential satisfying which can be realized in linear media by designing the refractive index distribution indicating that the complex potential has symmetric real parts and anti-symmetric imaginary parts (Fig. Similarly, in the two-dimensional potential, the condition for PT-symmetry is modified to n(x, y) = n * (-x, -y). Eqs. ( Wave scattering in a longitudinal complex potential In this section, we turn to the discussion of the physical realization of wave scattering in a longitudinal complex optical potential with ω c being the cut-off frequency. The approximation made so far has reduced all higher order terms of Δω/ω c so that the time evolution term is linearized to a simple form. Reconverting Eq. ( It is not hard to find that Eq. ( . Therefore, non-Hermitian phenomena can be generated by judiciously designing the optical structures. For example, the condition of PT symmetric scattering potential for the mode with near-cutoff frequency is V(z) = V * (-z) . This can be achieved, for instance, by engineering the gain loss distribution in the waveguide to realize a simple form of ξ(z) as Non-Hermitian optical waveguides and resonators Being the most indispensable elements in photonic devices and systems, guided wave optical structures such as waveguides and resonators are common platforms for the realization of non-Hermitian behavior and functionalities. Moreover, the above-mentioned wave propagation in paraxial approximation can be readily applied to optical transport in guided wave structures. Therefore, in this section, we take a further step to introduce the coupled mode theory describing the non-Hermitian guided wave optical structures. Without loss of generality, let us consider a 1D coupled waveguide system consisting of two waveguides with a difference in their uniformly distributed loss (or gain). By finding the extremum of Lagrangian with respect to the mode amplitude a 1 (z) and a 2 (z), one can derive the coupled-mode equations with γ 1 and γ 2 representing the loss rates for the first and second waveguide modes, respectively, and κ being the coupling strength between the two modes. Note that H ≠ H ϯ implies the non-conservation of energy induced by, for instance, the existence of loss, even though we usually have κ 12 = κ 21 * for energy-conserved coupling. If one waveguide is engineered to have loss and the other has an equal amount of gain, i.e., γ 1 = -γ 2 > 0, then the system respects PT-symmetry. On the other hand, optical resonators are another set of ideal candidates for implementing non-Hermitian potential. As a counterpart to the spatial propagation dynamics in coupled waveguides, the coupled resonators have dynamic temporal evolution described by temporal-coupled-mode theory where ω 1,2 are resonant frequencies of the mode 1 (with field amplitude a 1 ) and mode 2 (with field amplitude a 2 ), γ 1,2 are intrinsic loss rates of the resonators, and κ 12 (κ 21 ) is the coupling strength from mode 2 to mode 1 (mode 1 to mode 2). For two directly coupled resonators, κ 12 = κ 21 * = κ due to conservation of energy. The phase factor of a coupling constant usually does not exhibit physical meaning unless the relative phase is considered If the coupling strength κ is larger than a critical value , then the two eigenvalues have two real parts and identical imaginary part, corresponding to two supermodes with the same gain/loss feature but split in resonant frequencies. If κ < κ th , however, the two eigenvalues overlap in real frequency, but have different imaginary parts, leading to two optical supermodes with identical resonant frequency but disparate gain/loss. At the phase transition point where κ = κ th , the eigenvalues are degenerate and the associated eigenstates also coalesce, leading to the emergence of an EP. The above mentioned phase transition with changing coupling strength or gain/loss rates define different regimes for PT systems, and can be observed in both optical waveguides The EP of a non-Hermitian system is characterized with coalescence of both eigenvalues and eigenvectors, which can be engineered by introducing a small perturbation to the system. Generalized perturbation theory on the eigenvalue bifurcation at an N th -order EP yields a unique N th -root dependence on the perturbation strength Spectral singularity at exceptional points In the systems with non-Hermitian Hamiltonians, the spectral singularities associated with EPs manifest themselves as the simultaneous coalescence of several eigenvalues and eigenvectors. The Hamiltonian becomes nondiagonalizable at these singularities and can only be transformed into Jordan canonical form by a similarity matrix, where the order of EPs determines the length of Jordan block within the Jordan canonical form. For example, an N th -EP corresponds to a Jordan block of length N that takes the form below It is of natural instinct to investigate how perturbation to the system will cause bifurcation of eigenvalues and eigenvectors. Square-root and third-root dependence in the bifurcation with respect to the perturbation strength have been found in second-and third-order EPs which holds as long as the first term λ 1 is not vanishing. This condition is true for most physical perturbations that could affect the systems. Therefore, it was proposed as a novel method to enhance the response of sensors to small signals The unique N th -root topology in the vicinity of an EP can be utilized to enhance the sensor performance, for example, EP enhanced nanoparticle sensing based on an optical microcavity The first term describes the unperturbed system, with the off-diagonal elements A (M) and B (M) representing the intrinsic backscattering. The second term is the Hamiltonian of perturbation. 2V and 2U are the complex frequency shifts for positive-and negative-parity modes due to the perturbation, m is the azimuthal mode order and β is the relative angle of the (M + 1) th scatterer. Conventional micocavity sensors working at DPs have no intrinsic backscattering between CW and CCW modes, i.e., A (M) = B (M) = 0. Therefore, the complex frequency splitting caused by a perturbation can be computed as ∆Ω DP = 2(V -U) = 2ε. Here we define (V -U) as the complex perturbation strength ε, so we show that the surface of eigenfrequencies for conventional sensors has a linear (coneshaped) topology around DPs (Fig. which gives rise to a square-root topology (Fig. This implies that the sensitivity of sensor to sufficiently small perturbation can be enhanced by operating the sensor at EPs. EP enhanced nanoparticle sensing has been demonstrated in a silica microcavity-scatterer system The sensitivity enhancing effect at EPs has also been exploited in silicon-photonic gyroscope based on Brillouin laser To analyze the EP-enhanced Sagnac effect predicted by previous theoretical work where ω 0 is the Stokes cavity mode without pump, γ is the cavity damping rate, Γ is the bandwidth of Brillouin gain, κ is the dissipative coupling rate, ΔΩ j = ω pj -ω s -Ω phonon , for j = 1, 2, is the frequency mismatch of Brillouin scattering corresponding to CW and CCW lasing modes where Δω p = ω p2 -ω p1 is the pump detuning and Δω c = 2Γκ/γ is the critical pump detuning to reach an EP. To quantify the EP enhancement, the Sagnac scale factor for small rotation rate is defined as Therefore, if the gyroscope operates near an EP, i.e., Δω p → Δω c in the regime of |Δω p | > Δω c , its small-signal Sagnac scale factor will be much larger than the conventional value 2πD (n g λ) ⁄ . In the experiment, the disk resonator is packaged in a box and experiences a small rotation rate of 410°/h produced by a piezoelectric stage. The measured Sagnac scale factor upon the variation of pump detuning is shown in Fig. It is not hard to see that the interaction between optical modes have played critical roles in non-Hermitian photonic devices and systems. Conversely, the non-Hermitian features can exert significant influence on the optical modes and their interactions. As we have discussed above, by coupling optical modes with gain/loss features in confined optical structures, non-Hermitian optical systems render not only complex eigenspectral, but also non-orthogonal eigenmodes, i.e., the eigenstates of the systems are no longer orthogonal. This is true even for PT-symmetric systems in unbroken regime where real eigenfrequencies are obtained. What is most interesting is the eigenstate at EP singularity, where two eigenstates not only coalesce, but lead to a special chirality, as will be discussed in this section. One of the most intriguing results of mode interactions can be found in lasing and emission behavior of non-Hermitian optical systems. Silicon photonic platforms have provided versatile designs of microlasers with high efficiency and low threshold Chiral mode at exceptional points The most exotic phenomena arising from the interaction of optical modes in non-Hermitian systems can be found at EPs. When two eigenstates of a non-Hermitian system coalesce at an EP, one can obtain a self-orthogonal eigenstate which is a superposition of the original basis. For the system comprising of two modes, the eigenstate is typically in the form of ( 1 ±i ), with a typical ± π 2 phase shift between the two components. Such form of eigenstate possesses a particular handedness, which can be defined as chirality In optical resonators, EPs with specific chiral eigenmodes have been engineered and verified experimentally where the CW and CCW modes with azimuthal mode number m have identical resonant frequency ω 0 and intrinsic loss rate γ 0 . The supermodes are given by ψ ± = √Aψ ccw ± √Bψ cw , where A = ε 1 + ε 2 e -2imβ and B = ε 1 + ε 2 e 2imβ . By manipulating the position of the second nanotip, one can engineer one of the non-diagonal element (A or B) to vanish, leading to an EP with a singular form of H (one non-diagonal element vanishes) and only one eigenstate ψ EP = √Aψ ccw or ψ EP = √Bψ cw . Such eigenstate is purely chiral with one directional propagation, by which we can define chirality -1 for a CCW eigenmode and 1 for a CW eigenmode The chirality at an EP can manifest itself with the assistance of optical modes operating beyond lasing threshold and the directionality in laser emission. The chiral mode at an EP which rotates in one direction has been demonstrated in a silica microresonator with gain and unidirectional lasing behavior is observed The chiral mode can also be exploited to generate vortex beam and orbital angular momentum lasers if the amplifying mode emit vertically out of the plane of the circular optical path in the cavity Single mode laser Cavities in lasers, which provide wavelength selection and coherent amplification of light, usually support multiple resonances and optical modes By leveraging the threshold of PT -symmetry breaking, single-mode lasing operation can be established in microcavities which support multiple modes in the gain spectrum Such lasers have been realized in various semiconductor platforms Revival of lasing by loss More unconventional lasing behavior can be engineered by leveraging non-Hermiticity of open lasing systems, especially around the EPs where phase transition occurs. One counterintuitive example can be found in a photonic molecule comprising coupled microresonators, where increasing the loss rate of one microresonator can induce the suppression and revival of laser emission in another, seemingly contradictory to the common sense that loss always acts as a negative and detrimental factor to laser operations In the demonstration of this idea, two silica microtoroid resonators are coupled via evanescent field and probed by fiber-taper waveguides (Fig. Such bizarre lasing behavior managed by the loss is a direct result of the interaction between optical modes with gain and loss, as well as the redistribution of optical field among the whole system with the occurrence of phase transition. Similar observation has also been made in other optical structures and platforms Peterman factor and laser linewidth The linewidths of lasers determined by quantum noise can be significantly influenced by modal coupling in laser systems. With the interaction between the optical modes with different gain/loss features, non-Hermitian systems render non-orthogonal eigenmodes and consequently have nontrivial effects on the laser linewidths. It has been predicted and demonstrated that the non-orthogonality of the eigenmodes can lead to amplified quantum noise in lasers, as well as significant enhancement of laser linewidth quantified by the Peterman factor beyond the Schawlow-Townes quantum limit The enhanced noise in EP laser systems has significant influence on the performance of EP sensors which rely on enhanced lasing mode splitting. It has been shown in a high-Q silica microresonator that the ring-laser serving as a gyroscope does not offer enhanced signal-to-noise ratio compared to conventional ones, as a result of the mode nonorthogonality and Petermann-factored noise Other non-Hermitian lasing behavior The inverse operation of laser, which is referred to coherent perfect absorber (CPA), can also exhibit peculiar features in non-Hermitian setting. It is proposed and demonstrated that a PT-symmetric waveguide with gain/loss modulation operating in broken phase can simultaneously function as a laser and a CPA Phonon laser operation is also investigated theoretically for an PT-symmetric optical medium Scattering properties of light describe the relation between output and input optical signals in optical devices and systems, laying the foundation of a great many applications in optical communication and information processing. Optical devices in silicon and silica material such as optical fibers, on-chip waveguides, microresonators and photonic lattices have played indispensable roles in guiding light transport due to their transparency and low material loss. Furthermore, silicon/silica photonic structures allow for strong nonlinear optical effects Unidirectional reflection at exceptional points We consider a one-dimensional PT-symmetric photonic heterostructure, where complex index modulation yields spatial separation of gain and loss regions. The relation between the output and input electromagnetic waves can be described by a scattering (S) matrix as where a in,L(R) represents the input optical wave from the left (right), and a out,L(R) is the output optical wave from the left (right). Generalized unitary relation leads to the conservation relation where T = |t| 2 , R L = |r L | 2 and R R = |r R | 2 . Specifically, the transmission rate T is smaller than 1 when the system is in the PT-symmteric unbroken regime, and larger than 1 when the PT-symmetric phase is broken. Peculiar phenomena in the scattering can happen at the phase transition point, i.e., the EP, in the PT-symmetric 1D scattering potential, where the eigenspectra turned from real to complex and the transmission T is equal to 1. As a result, the vanishing left hand side of the conservation relation yields a zero reflection rate for either R L or R R , leading to unidirectional reflection of incoming optical field As reflection of light is generally generated by scattering of an optical structure or system, the suppression of reflection can make an object invisible. Conventionally, invisibility can be engineered by encompassing an object with a cloak medium. Here the suppression of reflection from one side at EPs can be exploited to create optical structures with complete unidirectional invisibility over a broad frequency range Nonreciprocal light transport in nonlinear parity-time symmetric systems Nonreciprocal light propagation breaks the symmetry in transmission for opposite direction of light propagation, allowing light to propagate only in one direction and completely blocking the opposite transmission The nonreciprocal light transport is observed in a PT-symmetric nonlinear system as a result of the strongly enhanced nonlinearity in the PT -broken regime Due to the giant nonlinearity enhanced by gain medium and PT-phase breaking Electromagnetically induced transparency in non-Hermitian systems Electromagnetically induce transparency (EIT) describes the phenomenon that light can pass through an opaque dielectric medium due to the destructive interference established by strong coherent light-matter interaction. The strong cancellation of absorption enabled by EIT leads to a vast change of material dispersion which gives rise to slowing down of the group velocity of light EPs have been found to offer novel manner to control EIT in non-Hermitian silica optical structure. The eigenmode at EPs with certain chirality has been exploited to realize switching on/off EIT in an indirectly coupled WGM microresonator system For a chirality of -1, the reflection from CCW to CW vanishes, and the optical path loop is broken. Thus, EIT is switched off and a narrow absorption dip is shown in the transmission spectrum (Fig. Non-Hermitian features have also been proposed to modify OMIT processes in cavity optomechanical systems. For example, OMIT can be engineered in a WGM resonator with its chirality being adjusted by two scatterers The special topological features of EPs not only attract attention in the applications of sensors, but also unveil profound physics in the dynamical behavior of eigenstates under variation of parameters. For example, the neighborhood of a second order EP in the parameter space was found to resemble the Riemann surface of the square root. Any cyclic parametric loop around the EP has a 4π periodicity, and adiabatic evolution along such loop is predicted to have many interesting effects, such as state transfer Dynamics of encircling EPs An adiabatic process, in quantum mechanism, is a process that allows the system to stay in the instantaneous eigenstates when the variation of time-dependent Hamiltonian H(t) is sufficiently slow. As the quantum adiabatic theorem states In the context of non-Hermitian Hamiltonian, the study of adiabatic processes predicts new phenomena. In the vicinity of a second-order EP associated with a non-Hermitian Hamiltonian, the parameter space has a self-intersecting topology with a 4π periodicity where λ is the parameter and EP is defined at the origin. To satisfy the orthogonality and unitary normalization conditions, the amplitudes are evaluated as . It seems straightforward that under stationary condition, encircling an EP (choose a circle of radius R around the EP, that is, λ = Re iφ ) would result in an exchange of eigenstates and acquisition of Berry phase Taking a non-Hermitian two-mode system for example, its dynamics is described by a Schrödinger-type equation i dψ dt ⁄ = Hψ, where ψ is the amplitude of the modes. The system has a Hamiltonian in the form below where ω j and γ j , for j = 1, 2, are the resonant frequencies and loss rates of the modes, respectively, and κ is the coupling rate. Then the parameter conditions for an EP are Δω ≡ ω 2 -ω 1 = 0 and κ = |γ 2 -γ 1 |/4. The surface of eigenfrequencies with respect to Δω and κ has two Riemann sheets, on which dynamic encircling the EP with different initial states and directions is considered. If the initial state is on the red sheet (Fig. The chiral exchange of states by encircling EPs was first demonstrated in two kinds of platform. The first one is based on the metallic microwave waveguide Asymmetric mode switching The demonstration of chiral exchange of states by encircling EPs relies on precise control of system parameters, which was also achieved in the silicon-based waveguides Since the temporal behavior is now transferred to the propagation behavior along the waveguide system, the reduced parameters p(t) and q(t) denote the real and imaginary wavevectors, representing the difference in propagation constant and loss, respectively. The unitary off-diagonal terms correspond to the constant coupling rate. The parameters are controlled by the spatial profile of waveguides to form a loop that smoothly encloses the EP at p = 0, q = 1. The dynamics of encircling the EP is numerically computed in both anticlockwise (ACW) and CW orientations, over a broad wavelength range from 1.25 μm to 1.70 μm. Shown in Fig. In the experiment, standard nanolithography technique is used to fabricate the devices for anticlockwise and clockwise operations. The initial state is always chosen to be a symmetric state |s⟩ =|ψ 1 ⟩ + |ψ 2 ⟩, and the final state is measured by fitting the diffraction patterns of the output light. The final state |ψ final ⟩ = a 1 |ψ 1 ⟩ + a 2 |ψ 2 ⟩ is assessed by two quantities: the complex amplitude ratio ρ 12 = a 1 /a 2 , and the power ratio of symmetric mode that is defined as The measurements are repeated with devices in different lengths L = 0.5, 1.0 mm and under various laser wavelengths ranging from 1.48 μm to 1.58 μm. The results show the complex amplitude ratio matches well with the theory (Fig. In this chapter, we have summarized and reviewed the initiative studies of non-Hermitian optics based on silicon photonic platforms, emphasizing throughout the fundamental physical phenomena and the associated novel applications. Transforming from quantum mechanics to classical electromagnetic waves, the broken Hermiticity of a Hamiltonian has brought forth rich opportunities for engineering photonic structures with unconventional optical behavior by judicious design of optical amplification/dissipation and coupling between those elements. The silicon photonic platforms fabricated with standard techniques, full integratability and strong scalability breed the optical structures to meet those requirements, including coupled guided wave structures with gain/loss distribution, scatterer perturbed microresonators, Brag gratings with periodic index modulation, synthetic photonic lattices, etc. Grounded on the rich light-matter interactions and versatile approaches of manipulating material properties in these devices and systems, numerous counterintuitive non-Hermitian properties have been revealed and demonstrated ranging from spectral singularity, chiral modes, non-orthogonal eigenstates, field localization, to unidirectional reflection, enhanced nonlinearity and exotic topology. Consequently, significant development has been spurred in applications of ultrasensitive optical sensors, unconventional lasing behavior, unidirectional and nonreciprocal light propagation, modified EIT, asymmetric mode switches, and so on. Though vast achievement has been witnessed, we envision that much greater potential of future development of non-Hermitian silicon photonics lies in its incorporation with quantum optics domain and topological photonics. Integrated photonic circuits fabricated on silicon chips have become an important platform that enable the implementation of quantum optical devices and networks for quantum sensing, computation and communication PT-symmetry has been implemented in the quantum optics domain based on an on-chip waveguide directional coupler made by the cutting-edge femtosecond direct laser writing on a fused silica wafer Up to now, the non-Hermitian physics in quantum optics remains as a nontrivial issue. There have been numerous proposals and open questions along this route. First, it has been shown that it is impossible to introduce full PTsymmetry to quantum optics in a similar fashion to that in classical optics, because the noise introduced by quantum gain medium will break the PT-symmetry Topological photonics On the other hand, the combination of topological photonics and active media provides innovative ideas in the design of optical components. Topological photonic lasers have been achieved in a greats variety of systems 