Kagome lattice, made of corner-sharing triangles, provides an excellent platform for hosting exotic topological quantum states. Here we systematically studied the magnetic and transport properties of RMn6Sn6 (R = Tb, Dy, Ho) with clean Mn kagome lattice. All the compounds have a collinear ferrimagnetic structure with different easy axis at low temperature. The low-temperature magnetoresistance (MR) is positive and has no tendency to saturate below 7 T, while the MR gradually declines and becomes negative with the increasing temperature. A large intrinsic anomalous Hall conductivity about 250 Ω -1 cm -1 , 40 Ω -1 cm -1 , 95 Ω -1 cm -1 is observed for TbMn6Sn6, DyMn6Sn6, HoMn6Sn6, respectively. Our results imply that RMn6Sn6 system is an excellent platform to discover other intimately related topological or quantum phenomena and also tune the electronic and magnetic properties in future studies. The kagome lattice, made of two-dimensional a network of corner-sharing triangles Recently, RMn6Sn6 (R = trivalent rare earth elements) kagome magnet family has attracted growing interest due to the pristine Mn kagome lattice. Owing to the chemical pressure from R atoms, the Sn atoms move away from Mn kagome layer. Large intrinsic anomalous Hall conductivity (AHC) has been observed in in-plane ferromagnetic LiMn6Sn6, in-plane ferrimagnetic GdMn6Sn6, and helical antiferromagnetic YMn6Sn6 In this work, we systematically study the transport and magnetic properties of RMn6Sn6 (R = Tb, Dy, Ho) with pure kagome layers of Mn. The RMn6Sn6 (R = Tb, Dy, Ho) single crystal have been grown by the self-flux method, and they are collinear ferrimagnet with different easy axis. The value of magnetoresistance (MR) gradually declines and changes from positive to negative with the increasing temperature. Through the results of transport and magnetic, we find that RMn6Sn6 (R = Tb, Dy, Ho) all have large AHC originated from the intrinsic mechanism. Single crystals of RMn6Sn6 (R = Tb, Dy, Ho) were synthesized by Sn-flux method The first principles calculations were performed based on density functional theory as implemented in Vienna Ab initio Simulation Package (VASP) STM experiments were carried out with a Unisoku low-temperature scanning tunneling microscope at the base temperature of 4.3 K. The HoMn6Sn6 single crystals were cleaved at 77 K under ultrahigh vacuum, and then transferred into the STM head for measurements. RMn6Sn6 (R = Tb, Dy, Ho) crystallizes in the hexagonal HfFe6Ge6-type structure with space group of P6/mmm We define that the moment deviates from the [001] direction with θ, and the θ for TbMn6Sn6, DyMn6Sn6 and HoMn6Sn6 are reported to be about 0°, 45° and 50° at low temperature, respectively (Fig. Where the first term ρyx 0 in the formula is the normal Hall resistivity and the second term ρyx A is the anomalous Hall resistivity. R0 and Rs represent the ordinary and anomalous Hall coefficient, respectively. Using equation (1), we are able to separate the contribution of ρyx 0 and ρyx A parts for RMn6Sn6. The obtained R0 is positive in a large temperature range for RMn6Sn6 (R = Tb, Dy, Ho) (the inset of Fig. In conclusion, we grow RMn6Sn6 (R = Tb, Dy, Ho) single crystal with clean Mn kagome lattice using the self-flux method and systematically study their transport and magnetic properties. A large intrinsic AHC of 250, 40, and 95 Ω -1 cm -1 is observed for TbMn6Sn6, DyMn6Sn6, and HoMn6Sn6, respectively. The results imply that RMn6Sn6 system is an excellent platform to study the relationship between the magnetic and electronic structure and helps to explore more kagome magnets with extraordinary properties. See the supplementary material for x-ray diffraction pattern and, detailed magnetic and transport measurement of TbMn6Sn6 and DyMn6Sn6. It also contains the zoomed in plot of magnetization and transverse conductivity for HoMn6Sn6.