The nature of the Cooper pairing in the paradigmatic unconventional superconductor Sr2RuO4 is an outstanding puzzle in condensed matter physics. Despite the tremendous efforts made in the past twenty-seven years, neither the pairing symmetry nor the underlying pairing mechanism in this material has been understood with clear consensus. This is largely due to the lack of a superconducting order that is capable of interpreting in a coherent manner the numerous essential experimental observations. At this stage, it may be desirable to reexamine the existing theoretical descriptions of superconducting Sr2RuO4. This review focuses on several recent developments that may provide some clues for future study. We highlight three separate aspects: 1) any pairing in the Eu symmetry channel, with which the widely discussed chiral p-wave is associated, shall acquire a 3D structure due to spin-orbit entanglement; 2) if the reported Kerr effect is a superconductivity-induced intrinsic bulk response, the superconductivity must either exhibit a chiral character, or be complex mixtures of certain set of helical p-wave pairings; 3) when expressed in a multiorbital basis, the Cooper pairing could acquire numerous exotic forms that are inaccessible in single-orbital descriptions. The implications of each of these new perspectives are briefly discussed in connection with selected experimental phenomena. Following the discovery of the high-temperature superconductivity in cuprates, an effort to look for superconducting layered perovskites that do not contain copper ended in Sr 2 RuO 4 1 . This material features a relatively low transition temperature T c ∼ 1.5 K in the best available samples, and the unconventional nature of the pairing is evident in its extreme sensitivity to disorder The potential topological property put aside, Sr 2 RuO 4 probably constitutes one of the best solid state material platforms where both the mechanism and the detailed form of the unconventional Cooper pairing can be exactly solved. Its fermiology Here, we do not seek to provide a thorough overview of how various order parameter symmetries may or may not interpret certain essential signatures. In fact, the said task has been nicely conducted at multiple stages during the last two decades. Interested readers are referred to Refs. 13, 46-56 for more details. Our primary objective is to highlight several recent developments, which we believe bring some new perspectives and may provide some clues for future studies. We cover the following three independent aspects: In one way or another, these aspects have not received due attention in the past. Before we proceed, it is important to stress that these studies in no way encompass all of the recent theory advances the community has made towards unraveling the mystery in Sr 2 RuO 4 . It is worth first pointing out what is perhaps the most widely accepted view, that Sr 2 RuO 4 condenses at least two superconducting order parameter components. This has been inferred from a variety of experiments, including μSR 8,41 , optical polar Kerr effect Here, φ s m and φ t n stand respectively for the order parameter components of spin-singlet and spin-triplet pairings, while f m, k and d n, k depict the forms of the pairings in the corresponding symmetry channels. Table I lists all of the five possible odd-parity pairing channels for Sr 2 RuO 4 . For a long time, the E u pairing with (k x ẑ, k y ẑ) dominated the narratives. The spatial part of this Cooper pair wavefunction lies in the xy plane. However, there is in fact an out-of-plane pairing, (k z x, k z ŷ), which shares the same symmetry and has received far less attention. Given the enormous challenge the former faces at present, it is worth exploring the new physics brought about by this often-ignored ingredient. In this section, we argue for the general presence of the k z -like pairing in the E u symmetry channel and discuss its consequences We begin by noting that, in the presence of SOC, spins are no longer good quantum numbers. Hence the spin and spatial parts of the Cooper pair wavefunctions are entangled, and symmetry operations must act simultaneously on both parts. One can check that the two types of pairings mentioned above behave the same way under any D 4h operation. For example, a C 4 rotation turns (k x ẑ, k y ẑ) to (k y ẑ, -k x ẑ), and similarly (k z x, k z ŷ) to (k z ŷ, -k z x); while a mirror reflection about the yz-plane transforms (k x ẑ, k y ẑ) to (k x ẑ, -k y ẑ), and (k z x, k z ŷ) to (k z x, -k z ŷ); etc. Note that the spin part of the wavefunction (i.e. x, ŷ, ẑ) transforms like a pseudovector. The in-plane pairing forms the commonly discussed chiral p-wave state when the two components k x ẑ and k y ẑ develop a phase difference of π/2 or -π/2. On the other hand, if the two develop a phase difference of 0 or π or, if only one component is condensed, the resultant state is a nematic p-wave that breaks in-plane rotation symmetry. The out-of-plane basis (k z x, k z ŷ) has often been ignored in the discussion of Sr 2 RuO 4 , thanks to its quasi-2D electronic structure around the Fermi level. However, there are indeed finite interlayer couplings, which generate a 3D variation of spin-orbit entanglement where is a non-universal real constant determined by the relative strength of the effective interactions responsible for the respective in-plane and out-of-plane pairings. In other words, the E u pairing in Sr 2 RuO 4 shall be 3D. Including the out-of-plane pairing has a nontrivial consequence on the selection of the superconducting ground state, which we now analyze through a Ginzburg-Landau (GL) theory. One may write the generic two-component E u gap function as ∆k = (φ where φ 1(2) label the order parameter components associated with d 1(2),k . The GL free energy, up to the quartic order, reads, Within mean-field theory, it can be shown that the stability of the phases is determined by the sign of β . If β > 0, φ 1 and φ 2 preferentially develop a π/2 phase difference, i.e. φ = (φ 1 , φ 2 ) = φ(1, ±i), thereby breaking time-reversal invariance (TRI), as for the chiral p-wave order; whilst if β < 0, the system favors a time-reversal invariant order parameter, φ = φ(1, ±1) or φ(1, 0). The latter breaks rotational symmetry and is often referred to as nematic pairing. It turns out β relates to the structure of d i,k through the following approximation, where C is a positive constant and • • • FS denotes an integral over the Fermi surface. Plotted in Fig. Between the chiral and nematic E u pairings, a nematic state stands a better chance to explain several other outstanding puzzles. Foremost, being time-reversal invariant, it easily explains the absence of spontaneous surface current A prominent observation in superconducting Sr 2 RuO 4 is the optical polar Kerr effect, in which a linearly polarized light normally incident upon the sample is reflected with a rotated polarization. This peculiar effect implies finite a.c. anomalous Hall conductivity, and it reveals crucial information about the symmetry of the superconducting order parameter. Attempts to explain this phenomenon invoked either extrinsic or intrinsic mechanisms As the Kerr rotation is closely related to the Hall effect, it is natural, by analogy with quantum (anomalous) Hall effects, to expect the underlying Cooper pairs to exhibit finite orbital angular momentum, such as in the form of chiral p+ip and d+ id pairings. This leads us to two distinct scenarios. One is a genuine chiral superconducting order, and the other is overall non-chiral but effectively consists of copies of chiral pairings with opposite chirality and inequivalent gap functions. The most frequently discussed pairings in the first scenario includes the p x + ip y (including its 3D generalization discussed in Sec. II), d xz + id yz and d x 2 -y 2 + id xy states, which belong to the E u , E g , and mixed B 1g and B 2g irreps, respectively. Similar to the p x + ip y state, the other two states both suffer some shortfalls in regards to their compatibility with experiments. The d xz + id yz state, although consistent with the discontinuity in the shear elastic modulus c 66 in ultrasound spectroscopy The second scenario is rarely recognized. Specific to candidate two-component pairings, there are two possibilities: non-unitary A 1u + iA 2u and B 1u + iB 2u pairings Note that the setup of the Kerr measurement of Sr 2 RuO 4 9 necessarily implies a superconducting state without any reflection symmetry about the mirror planes perpendicular to the xy-plane. However, the breaking of these mirror symmetries, combined with broken time-reversal symmetry, do not constitute a sufficient condition for finite Kerr rotation. One example is the mixed-parity A 1g + iA 1u state -a mixture of an s-wave and a helical p-wave order parameter. It has no vertical mirror symmetry, yet the Hall conductivity vanishes, irrespective of the underlying microscopic model details. Since early days Previously, intrinsic Kerr effect was also regarded as a means to indirectly probe the microscopic distribution of the Cooper pairing on the multiple electron orbitals or bands in this material. On general grounds, clean single-orbital chiral superconductors do not support intrinsic Hall effect A multiorbital/multiband model, on the other hand, is non-Galilean-invariant, as the Cooper pair center-of-mass motion and relative motion now become entangled. The connection between the Kerr effect and the multiorbital superconductivity in Sr 2 RuO 4 was first recognized in 2012 The resultant Kerr rotation, calculated based on reasonably realistic estimate of the pairing gaps, equally well accounts for the experimental observation. In brief, intrinsic Kerr effect may not resolve the distribution of superconducting gap on the multiple d-orbitals. Sr 2 RuO 4 has three Fermi sheets derived mainly from the Ru 4d t 2g -orbitals An alternative perspective is the orbital-basis description, wherein the Cooper pairs are formed between electrons with well-defined orbital characters. In this case, the usual classifications into even-parity spin-singlet and odd-parity spintriplet pairings are no longer complete. One must also consider Cooper pairs symmetric and anti-symmetric in the orbital manifold Here σ i and s i with i = x, y, z are the Pauli matrices operating on the respective orbital and spin degrees of freedom, (t, t, t ) designate the kinetic energy and η the onsite spinorbit coupling (SOC). It is instructive to first analyze how the individual terms in Eq. 5 respects D 4h . Most crucially, it must be recognized that the point group operations must act jointly on spatial, spin and orbital degrees of freedom. For example, a C 4 rotation, in addition to rotating momentum and spin, also exchanges the label of the two orbitals and induces a π phase change on one of them, e.g. (d xz , d yz ) → (d yz , -d xz ). As a consequence, the bilinear σ-operators, which are formally c † m,s σ mn i c n,s (m = xz, yz), transform according to irreps of D 4h in the following fashion: σ 0 , σ x , σ z and σ y as A 1g , B 2g , B 1g and A 2g , respectively. A Hamiltonian invariant under all D 4h operations is then constructed by appropriate product of the σ, s, and the momentum-space basis functions, as in Eq (5). Note that, amongst the terms in the Hamiltonian, s z transforms as A 2g . Further, since the orbital wavefunction of the t 2g -electrons are even under inversion, the only effect of inversion is to invert electron momentum. This differs from the model with p x and p y -orbitals, where inversion also changes the sign of the fermion creation and annihilation operators (the bilinear operators are however unaffected by this). The symmetry classification of the pairing gaps can be performed in a similar manner, with transformation properties of σ and s matrices essentially following the same pattern. Table Here, ' Î' stands for σ 0 ⊗ s 0 . The first and second terms correspond, respectively, to intra-orbital spin-singlet and interorbital spin-triplet pairings. The latter is also an orbital-triplet. The two do not necessarily coexist in the absence of SOCwhen spins are good quantum numbers. To see how SOC induces a mixing, we again resort to the Ginzburg-Landau theory. The singlet and triplet pairings are found to couple at quadratic order, with λ 12 ∝ η a real constant. The complex phase is a consequence of the particular structure of the SOC in Eq. 5. A similar conclusion was reached in Ref. 96, and has also been argued from an experimental standpoint , where E is a real constant describing the relative amplitude between the two terms. Finally, it is easy to check that all of the four A 1g pairings in Table II are coupled, and therefore coexist, due to orbital mixing. The natural spin-triplet and spin-singlet mixing calls for caution in regards to the interpretation of the spin susceptibility drop below T c . More interestingly, had an E u pairing acquired a dominant form of (ik x σ y , ik y σ y ) in Table Having focused only on several works the author was involved in, this review is certainly limited in scope. Nevertheless, sound arguments were provided in each instance to justify the necessity to refine certain crucial aspects of our theoretical description of Sr 2 RuO 4 . Meanwhile, since our main purpose is to introduce these theory apparatuses, we have stopped short of combining these somewhat independent aspects to formulate a coherent interpretation of the ultimate puzzle in this material -which lies beyond the capability of this brief review. Finally, this review is clearly not in a position to comment on the many other interesting and insightful recent theoreti-cal proposals put forth by various groups, such as Refs. 101-108 and many others unwittingly omitted here. These rich variety of proposals remind us of the very fact that we are nowhere near a full comprehension of the presumed unconventional Cooper pairing as a fundamental condensed matter phenomenon in what is perhaps one of the best studied superconducting materials. This is what, in part, molds the beauty of Sr 2 RuO 4 , as much as it brings about constant frustration to theorists. ⊗ kx ŷ• s + σ 0 ∓σz 2 ⊗ ky x• s, σx ⊗ (kx x + ky ŷ)• s Eu (ikxσy, ikyσy) (σx ⊗ ky ẑ •ŝ, σx ⊗ kx ẑ • s) σ 0 ±σz 2 ⊗ kx ẑ • s, σ 0 ∓σz 2 ⊗ ky ẑ • s