We develop the Gutzwiller approximation method to obtain the renormalized Hamiltonian of the SU(4) t-J model with the corresponding renormalization factors. Subsequently, a mean-field theory is employed on the renormalized Hamiltonian of the model on the honeycomb lattice under the scenario of a cooperative condensation of carriers moving in the resonating valence bond state of flavors. In particular, we find that the extended s-wave superconducting state is more favorable than the d ± id-wave superconducting state in the doping range close to quarter filling. The pairing states of the SU(4) case reveal the property that the spin-singlet pairing and the spin-triplet pairing can coexist simultaneously. Our results might provide new insights into the twisted bilayer graphene system. When the resonating valence bond (RVB) state or quantum spin liquid (QSL) is doped sufficiently, the preexisting magnetic singlet pairs of the RVB state become charged superconducting pairs. This idea is proposed for the mechanism of superconductivity of the Copper oxide superconductors To realize the QSL, it is an alternative approach that the spin symmetry group of the electrons is extended from SU Recently, the discovery of the superconductivity and correlated insulating state in the twisted bilayer graphene (TBG) In addition to possible explanations for the real materials, the study of the SU(4) t-J model is a natural generalization of the famous SU(2) t-J model, which may provide a fascinating insight into unconventional superconductivity. However, similar to the SU(2) t-J model, the SU(4) t-J model is too difficult to solve analytically. The application of Gutzwiller approximation (GA) to the SU(2) t-J model is quite successful In this paper, our starting point is a SU(4) Hubbard model on the honeycomb lattice, with four flavors of single-electron states per site, including both the spin and the orbital. We only consider the strong correlation limit case, the SU(4) t-J model. Moreover, we develop the GA method This paper is organized as follows. In Section II the model is introduced, and the renormalized Hamiltonian is derived. In Section III a mean-field theory is utilized to handle the renormalized Hamiltonian on the honeycomb lattice. Section IV presents the numerical results. The discussion and conclusion will be given in Section V. As introduced above, our starting point is a two-orbital Hubbard model on the honeycomb lattice. The SU(4) Hubbard model with four flavors of single-electron states on each site: (1) where i, j represents the nearest-neighbor sites pair and nj,α = c † j,α c j,α . Let's consider the limit of strong correlation of the SU(4) Hubbard model, i.e., U ≫ t, with lightly hole doping away from integer filling number ν 0 = 1, 2 or 3 (i.e., the number of electrons on each site is ν 0 ) and follow the procedure of the perturbation theory with the trick of Fierz identity and its wavefunction |Ψ = P G |Ψ 0 , where J = t 2 /4U , T a i = αβ c † i,α Γ a αβ c i,β , Γ a which is the generator of SU(4) group satisfying the relation Tr Γ a Γ b = 4δ ab , |Ψ 0 being unprojected wave function and P G being the projection operator which excludes the particle occupancy states that stay at the very high energy levels arising from the Hubbard U term in Eq. Essentially the effect of P G projection operator originates from the configuration minimizing the interaction energy (i.e., U term in Eq. ( The GA ) represents the expectation value with respect to the wave function |Ψ (|Ψ 0 ). The starting point of GA is the calculation of the probabilities for the occupancy at any site i. In this paper, for simplicity, we only consider the situation of a homogeneous wave function with fixed particle number and flavor symmetry. We need to calculate the probabilities of a site occupied by any number of electrons with different flavors. For the case of hole doping away from integer filling number ν 0 , the probabilities for different occupancies on site i in |Ψ and |Ψ 0 are listed in Table Using Table Probabilities in |Ψ Probabilities in |Ψ0 tribute is the renormalization factor for hopping terms. The corresponding hopping progress is described by Fig. T a i T a j which can be rewritten as We should keep in mind that when we calculate the renormalized factors about the interaction term we suppose lightly hole doping away from integer filling number ν 0 , because this is the precondition from Hubbard model to obtain the J term. Therefore we obtain T mn+ i where T a i T a j . We propose that the RVB state is the ground state of the SU(4) t-J model on the honeycomb lattice near the integer filling number. Before proceeding further, let us examine the interaction term of the SU(4) t-J model. With the help of Fierz identity the interaction term can be rewritten as where -→ ∆ ij and ∆ - ij are the pairing fields with 6 and 10 components, respectively. -→ ∆ ij is the even pairing field satisfying the relation -→ ∆ ij and ∆ - ij have SO( -→ ∆ ij the previous three components describe spin-triplet with orbital-singlet pairing field and the last three components describe spin-singlet with orbital-triplet pairing field. For ∆ - ij the first component describes spin-singlet with orbital-singlet pairing field and the last nine components describe spin-triplet with orbital-triplet pairing field. With the consideration of pairing order parameters ∆ i,j ,αβ = Ψ 0 |c i,α c j,β |Ψ 0 we take the expectation value of Eq. ( Here we neglect the contribution from ∆ - ij due to J > 0. -→ ∆ ij 0 describes the smearing of the pseudo-Fermi surface but is not the superconducting order parameter With the help of Fierz identity the interaction term can also be rewritten as Here we also consider the kinetic energy order parameters χ i,j α = Ψ 0 |c † iα c jα |Ψ 0 On the honeycomb lattice, we denote by d and c the electron annihilation operators related to the A and B sublattices of the honeycomb lattice, respectively. We redefine the pairing order parameter: Here τ m (with m = 1, 2, 3) denotes the three nearest neighbour bond directions of the A site. Therefore, the superconducting order parameter is given by We use the parameter φ to represent the phase difference between the pairing order parameters on the three nearest neighbour bonds, namely, ∆ τ2 αβ = e iφ ∆ τ1 αβ and ∆ τ3 αβ = e i2φ ∆ τ1 αβ . φ = 2π/3 yields the d ± id state and φ = 0 yields the extended s-wave state. According to crystal field theory, in the twodimensional hexagonal lattice there are two reasonable and favorable irreducible representations for even-parity gap functions (recall that we only consider even pairing fields and here we set k z = 0). The first is the onedimensional representation and its basis functions can be chosen as 1 or k 2 x + k 2 y which can yield the extended s-wave. The second is the two-dimensional representation and its basis functions consist of k 2 x -k 2 y and 2k x k y . The best equal weight combination of degenerate states k 2 x -k 2 y and 2k x k y yields the d ± id state by their expressions with respect to Bogoliubov transformation matrices ûk and vk . More details can be found in Appendix A. Here we only concentrate on numerical results about the cases of hole doping away from integer filling number ν 0 = 1 (corresponding to quarter filling) and ν 0 = 2 (corresponding to half-filling). t = 1 and J/t = 0.3/8 are chosen for calculations. We obtained the extended s-wave state and the d ± id state, and here "extended s-wave" and "d ± id" describe the orbital part of the FIG. The case of the extended s-wave state with the broadening factor η = 0.001t and electron density n = 0.984. (b) The case of the d ± id state with the broadening factor η = 0.0002t and electron density n = 0.984. pairing. In addition to U (1) symmetry, the time reversal symmetry of the d ± id state is also broken and this is a prominent difference with respect to the extended s-wave. In our numerical calculations we only found the flavor antisymmetric states ∆αβ = -∆βα (α = β) and this can be easily understood from its definition. The states in this paper all belong to the flavor configuration: ∆ = ∆12 = ∆34 = ∆14 = ∆23 = ∆13 = -∆24 . This flavor configuration corresponds to -→ ∆ Ri+ τ1,Ri 0 = 0, 2 ∆, 0, 2i ∆, 0, -2i ∆ = ct i 0, iσ 02 , 0, -σ 23 , 0, σ 21 cj 0 which indicates the spin singlet pairing and the spin triplet pairing exist simultaneously in this flavor configuration. More detail about the physical meaning of the flavor configuration can be found in Appendix B. As a matter of fact, let's make a multiplication of phase factors to four kinds of electrons with different flavors, i.e., c ∆23 , and ∆13 = -e -iθ2 ∆24 . This indicates there are a large number of degenerate states arising from the flavor phase degrees of freedom between different flavor pairing fields. These degenerate states can be transformed into each other by the gauge transformation listed above, and therefore we only need to study one flavor configuration. For the case of hole doping away from quarter filling, the electron density dependence of the pairing order parameter (RVB gap or flavor gap) is shown in Fig. We also calculated the local density of states (LDOS) of the extended s-wave state and the d ± id state in the doping region close to the integer filling number ν 0 = 1 as shown in Fig. e ω/k B T +1 dω. For the case of hole doping away from half-filling, as shown in Fig. Since there is a considerable overlap between the nodes of the d± id form factor and the Fermi surface near quarter filling Next we discuss the relevance of our results to TBG. For TBG, the microscopic two-orbital extended Hubbard model on the emergent honeycomb lattice reference point for understanding the correlated electron physics in TBG. Due to TBG's similarity to the cuprates, the large U regime of the SU(4) honeycomb Hubbard model is important for TBG. Based on the real-space density matrix renormalization group (DMRG) simulation, the metal-insulator transition around U c /t =2.5-3 and a nonmagnetic Mott insulator in the large U regime are identified in the two-orbital Hubbard model on the honeycomb lattice (i.e., Eq. ( The RVB state is of rare occurrence in Mott insulators. However, the RVB superconducting state may be realized by introducing a finite number of holes into the Mott insulator For comparing with other studies of the pairing in TBG, we remark that the spin-singlet and spin-triplet Cooper pairs are not sharply defined for our extended s-wave and d ± id pairing due to the SU(4) symmetry. In TBG, it is important to consider the effects of SU(4) symmetry-breaking perturbations on the honeycomb Hubbard model. We assume that the dominant interaction is the Hund's coupling -V i (S i ) 2 , where V > 0 and S i denotes the total spin on site i. Then the previous three components of -→ ∆ ij defined in Eq. ( The Gutzwiller approximation adopted in our present study is a conventional method to treat the strong cor-relation problem. The homogeneous electron density and the flavor symmetry are assumed. For studying the charge density wave stability, the spin-orbital density wave stability, and the local effects due to vortex cores and impurities, the more complicated renormalization factors derived from the case of the inhomogeneous particle density, are much demanded. Furthermore, the more complicated two-orbital extended Hubbard model for TBG can be studied by this technique. We leave these studies to future work. In summary, we obtain the Gutzwiller renormalization factors of the SU(4) t-J model and the corresponding renormalized Hamiltonian. Utilizing the RVB state as a trial wave function and the mean-field approximation to this renormalized Hamiltonian on the honeycomb lattice case, we find that the extended s-wave state is much more favorable than the d ± id state in the doping region close to quarter filling, and the superconductivity almost disappears in the doping region close to half-filling. The spin-singlet pairing and the spin-triplet pairing can exist simultaneously in the pairing state of the SU(4) case. which yields the variational relation 0 where For an operator Ô, δ Ψ 0 | Ô|Ψ 0 /δ Ψ 0 | = Ô|Ψ 0 . Therefore we obtain the Schrödinger equation H MF |Ψ 0 = λ|Ψ 0 and Here in Eq. (A4) being the derivate of Ψ 0 |H ′ |Ψ 0 with respect to n via the renormalization g-factors and α = β in Eq. (A6). -∂W/∂n can be viewed as the effective chemical potential and we let μ = -∂W/∂n. For simplicity, in this paper we only consider real χ i,j ,α . On the honeycomb lattice, for convenience, Eq. (A3) can be rewritten as Here we denote by d and c the electron annihilation operators related with the A and B sublattices of the honeycomb lattice, respectively. We can Fourier-transform the Hamiltonian and diagonalize the kinetic part by using the trick where φ k = arg(γ k ) and γ k = 3 m=1 e -ik• τm . Here τ m , with m = 1, 2, 3, denotes the three nearest neighbour bond directions of the A site. Finally we obtain with Here φ represents the phase difference between the pairing order parameters in the three nearest neighbour bond directions, namely, ∆ τ2 αβ = e iφ ∆ τ1 αβ and ∆ τ3 αβ = e i2φ ∆ τ1 αβ . According to crystal field theory, in the two-dimensional hexagonal lattice there are only the d ± id state and extended s-wave state which are reasonable and favorable where σ = σ 1 ê1 + σ 2 ê2 + σ 3 ê3 . With respect to pairing order parameters, its expectation value within the unprojected state Ψ 0 can be written as -→ ∆ Ri+ τ1,Ri 0 = i( ∆12 -∆34 ), ( ∆12 + ∆34 ), -i( ∆14 -∆23 ), i( ∆13 -∆24 ), ( ∆13 + ∆24 ), -i( ∆14 + ∆23 ) . ∆24 . And insert this general flavor configuration into Eq. (B2) to obtain -→ ∆ Ri+ τ1,Ri 0 = i ∆12 (1 -e iθ1 ), ∆12 (1 + e iθ1 ), -i ∆14 (1 -e iθ3 ), i ∆13 (1 + e iθ2 ), ∆13 (1 -e θ2 ), -i ∆14 (1 + e iθ3 ) . We can clearly see that when θ i = 0, π, (i = 1, 2, 3), the six components of -→ ∆ Ri+ τ1,Ri 0 are simultaneously nonvanishing.