Ensembles of solid state defects in diamond make promising quantum sensors with high sensitivity and spatiotemporal resolution. The inhomogeneous broadening and drive amplitude variations across such ensembles have differing impacts on the sensitivity depending on the sensing scheme used, adding to the challenge of choosing the optimal sensing scheme for a particular sensing regime. In this work, we numerically investigate and compare the predicted sensitivity of schemes based on continuous-wave (CW) optically detected magnetic resonance (ODMR) spectroscopy, π-pulse ODMR and Ramsey interferometry for sensing using nitrogen-vacancy centers in the low-frequency (< 10 kHz) range typical for signals from biological sources. We show that inhomogeneous broadening has the strongest impact on the sensitivity of Ramsey interferometry, and drive amplitude variations least impact the sensitivity of CW ODMR, with all methods constrained by the Rabi frequency. Based on our results, we can identify three different regions of interest. For inhomogeneous broadening less than 0.3 MHz, typical of diamonds used in state of the art sensing experiments, Ramsey interferometry yields the highest sensitivity. In the regime where inhomogeneous broadening is greater than 0.3 MHz, such as for standard optical grade diamonds or in minaturized integrated devices, drive amplitude variations determine the optimal protocol to use. For low to medium drive amplitude variations, the highest sensitivity is reached using π-pulse ODMR. For high drive amplitude variations, relevant for widefield microscopic imaging, CW ODMR can yield the best sensing performance. Defect centers in diamond are promising candidates for applications in quantum sensing due to high attainable sensitivity, their atomic scale dimensions, the chemical stability of diamond and compatibility with biological samples NV center based sensing most commonly involves applying a static magnetic field to lift the degeneracy of the m S = ±1 spin states and addressing either the m S = 0 ↔ m S = 1 or m S = 0 ↔ m S = -1 transition as an effective two-level system Choosing the right scheme for the specific sensing task is essential to achieving the best possible sensitivity. To maximize bulk sensitivity, it is necessary to use a large ensemble of NV centers as in the shot-noise limited regime In this article, we numerically investigate and compare the sensitivity of different sensing schemes for different levels of inhomogeneous broadening and drive amplitude variations. We note that for high frequency AC field sensing, such as sensing nuclear spins using single NV centres We model an ensemble of N nitrogen-vacancy centers as the sum of independent single NV, denoted i, following the level structure in Fig. We simulate inhomogeneous broadening across our ensemble via a distribution of transition frequencies, which can be modelled as varying detuning, δ i , from a central transition with frequency ω 0 = 2π•f 0 . This detuning contributes to the total detuning between the transition frequency and the driving frequency ω M W = 2π • f M W . We define the term drive detuning to correspond to the difference f M W -f 0 between the driving frequency f M W and the central transition frequency f 0 . The drive detuning can be altered without changing f 0 by varying f M W . We simulate microwave drive amplitude variations as an effective Rabi frequency α i Ω R varying across the ensemble. Here, α i is defined as the ratio between the effective Rabi frequency and the intended Rabi frequency in the non-detuned case Ω R , which is kept fixed The ensemble is modelled as consisting of NV centers, each with a particular value of δ i and α i , while all other parameters are assumed to be constant across the entire ensemble. A pump laser pulse is assumed to return every NV center to the m S = 0 ground state |0 and the readout is assumed to reflect the exact state distribution. For simplicity, we consider only NV centers aligned along one crystallographic axis of diamond and assume that the magnetic field is aligned along that axis. The δ i -values are considered to follow a Gaussian distribution centered at zero with a full width at half maximum (Γ). The values of δ i are taken in the range ±Γ. In our results and discussion below, the upper limit of this range is used to indicate the level of inhomogeneous broadening L IHB for a given simulation, i.e. a Γ of 0.5 MHz equals L IHB = 0.5 MHz. The α i -values follow a flat distribution between 0 and 1 to approximate a decaying MW drive field. The range below 1 spanned by the α i -values is used to indicate the level of MW drive amplitude variations, termed L DAV below, i.e. if α i varies between 0.9 and 1, L DAV = 0.1. MW drive amplitude variations can be neglected by setting α i = 1 in all cases. Simulations of Ramsey interferometry were performed using a Hamiltonian representing a coherently driven single NV two-level spin system in a rotating frame where σx and σz are Pauli spin-matrices, and is equal to one. The simulations are performed in three steps. First, an input state representing an NV center initialized in state m s = 0, |ψ i = |0 = (1 0) T , is allowed to evolve under the influence of Ω R for a duration T p = π/(2Ω R ) corresponding to and simulating the effect of a π/2-pulse. In the second step, the resulting state is then used as the input state for an evolution where Ω R = 0 for a duration equal to the considered free precession time τ . In the final and third step, the resulting output state after free precession is used as the input state for an evolution where Ω R is again non-zero for a duration of T p = π/(2Ω R ), accounting for the effect of the final π/2-pulse. For the output of our simulation, we define a normalized contrast C i , obtained for the resulting final output state |ψ f by determining its overlap with state |1 = (0 1) T corresponding to either m s = 1 or m s = -1, The obtained value of C i represents normalized fluorescence contrast between on and off microwave resonance, calculated for a single NV center in the ensemble with parameters ∆ i and α i . The parameter C i is a valid measure of the normalized contrast, given that the contrast will be minimal when the NV center is in state |0 and maximal when the NV center is in state |1 . We assume that a normalized contrast of C i = 1 corresponds to a fluorescence contrast of 30%, the maximum typically measured in an optically detected magnetic resonance experiment using a single NV center in bulk diamond We can also include pure dephasing in the simulation by using a quantum master equation for a two-level system where ρ = |ψ ψ| for a pure state and the rate of pure dephasing is given by Γ pure ≈ 1/T * 2 . Otherwise, the simulations are performed using the exact same threestep approach that was previously described for the case without pure dephasing. In density matrix notation, the input state corresponding to an NV initialized in state m s = 0 is ρ i = 1 0 0 0 , and the normalized contrast C i is directly obtained from the second diagonal element of ρ f , which is the output density matrix obtained from the third and final step of the simulation. As a demonstration of the effect of inhomogeneous broadening, we present in Fig. In order to provide a quantitative measure of the presence of Ramsey fringes and their relative strength, we define a figure of merit q that is equal to the difference in normalized contrast between the second-highest fringe maximum and the second-lowest minimum, as indicated in Fig. For direct comparison with CW and π-pulse ODMR, it was necessary to convert the change in normalized contrast as a function of the target sensing parameter into the equivalent normalized contrast change (slope) as a function of variation in microwave drive frequency f M W , C =dC/df M W . Unlike CW or π-pulse ODMR, where sensing is simply dependent on the change in microwave resonance frequency of the ODMR features caused by a change in the parameter to be sensed, e.g. magnetic field or temperature, the sensitivity of the Ramsey scheme approach is not directly related to the maximum slope of the Ramsey fringes. Instead, a change in the parameter to be sensed will change the resonance frequency, thereby changing the total detuning ∆ i and thus the oscillation frequency of the Ramsey fringes. This causes the Ramsey fringes to be compressed or stretched in free precession time τ and leads to a measurable oscillation in the contrast for a fixed τ = 0 as a function of the sensing parameter. This is exemplified in Fig. In this work, we performed this conversion by determining the change in ensemble average normalized contrast in a simulated applied magnetic field between -3.6 μT and 3.6 μT with varying τ up to 5 μs. In each case considered in the simulation, the driving frequency ω M W was chosen such that the total drive detuning ∆ i without field (B = 0) maximizes the figure of merit q to ensure clear Ramsey fringes. From these simulations we determined the maximum dC/dB and converted this to C =dC/df M W using the above conversion factor. This permitted direct comparison of the Ramsey interferometery scheme with CW and π-pulse ODMR sensing. For the case of simulating the π-pulse ODMR scheme, simulations were performed using the same methods as for simulating the Ramsey protocol, but by replacing the three-step sequence with a single step where an input state |ψ i = |0 was allowed to evolve under the influence of a drive field with strength Ω R for a duration T p = π/Ω R equal to a π-pulse. The normalized contrast C obtained for the resulting output state |ψ f was then calculated using Eq. 2. This approach was repeated for varying values of the drive frequency f M W , from which a normalized contrast spectrum and the measurable maximum slope was extracted. We performed the simulation of the CW ODMR protocol using a five-level model of the NV center The steady-state solutions for the ground state populations for a single NV can be obtained directly via the expressions and and where Γ p is the optical pumping rate, k nm is the decay rate from level n to level m, K n is the total decay rate from level n, γ 2 = γ 2 +Γ p /2 is the optical dephasing rate, and γ 2 = 2π/T * 2 + k 21 /2 is the spin dephasing rate. The steady-state solutions for the ground state populations can be used to obtain the CW ODMR spectrum as where We include pure dephasing via 2π/T * 2 in the term γ 2 = 2π/T * 2 +k 21 /2+Γ p /2 and can neglect the influence of pure dephasing by setting 2π/T * 2 = 0. Eqs. (4-9) can thus be used to obtain the CW ODMR spectrum for a single NV center as a function of microwave drive frequency. The spectrum values I CW were converted to contrast relative to the value obtained when the microwave drive is far off-resonance. These values are divided by the maximum contrast obtained in the asymptotic limit where Ω R is very large in order to obtain a normalized contrast value C i . By repeated simulation for all values of ∆ i and α i , we then calculate the ensemble average normalized contrast C as the mean of all C i values in the ensemble. By varying the simulated microwave drive frequency f M W , we can then derive the maximum slope as a function of drive frequency C =dC/df M W . This can be directly compared to the equivalent values obtained from the simulation of a Ramsey or π-pulse scheme, representing a measure of the maximum achievable sensitivity for CW ODMR sensing. We first calculated how the visibility of the Ramsey fringes depended on the degree of drive detuning and the inhomogenous broadening (L IHB ). This was done in terms of the figure of merit q, to give a clear picture of how well the interferometry performs as a function of these parameters. Figure By the procedure outlined in Methods, we calculate the maximum fluorescence contrast slope C for Ramsey interferometry. We initially focus on a particular scenario for an ideal high sensitivity measurement with a strong, uniform microwave field across the diamond resulting in no ensemble drive amplitude variations and a high Rabi frequency (Ω R > 2π • 2 MHz). We then simulate the influence of Rabi frequency and inhomogeneous broadening on the predicted maximum slope C . Figure Two aspects are clear from the data shown in Fig. The slight increase can be attributed to the relationship between Rabi frequency and π/2-pulse performance. As Rabi frequency is increased, the π/2-pulses will be able to perform well for NV center spins with larger detuning from the driving frequency. However, once the pulses are able to perform well for most or all of the target ensemble, increasing the Rabi frequency further does not significantly improve the overall pulse performance and thus does not significantly improve the achievable slope. The point where the π/2-pulses are able to affect most of the ensemble correctly naturally occurs at a lower Rabi frequency for ensembles with lower levels of inhomogeneous broadening. This result implies that for sensing experiments using the Ramsey scheme, increasing microwave amplification or enhancing antenna design to achieve a higher Rabi frequency will not necessarily lead to significant enhancement in sensitivity. This is an important result for both benchtop systems aiming for state of the art sensitivity and for systems with low Rabi frequency, such as microfabricated NV sensors with low available microwave power The difference between the slopes obtained decreases with higher inhomogeneous broadening. In the regime of large values of L IHB , the maximum achievable slope is limited by the inhomogeneous broadening. For low values of L IHB , the maximum C is constrained by pure dephasing. This implies that even if long T * 2 times are achieved, as is often sought in sensing experiments through well designed pulsed protocols, the inhomogeneous broadening will still act to ultimately constrain the maximum sensitivity of the Ramsey scheme, and that increasing the Rabi frequency (through increasing the MW power) of the MW pulses will not necessarily overcome this issue. This highlights the critical importance of material (diamond) design to minimize IHB (e.g. by minimizing inhomogeneous non-NV diamond nitrogen content or minimizing material strain). B. CW and π-pulse ODMR Fig. We note that for CW and π-pulse ODMR, the relationship between slope C and Rabi frequency is not straightforward and larger Rabi frequency can result in lower slope. This is due to the fact that while larger Rabi frequency will result in larger achievable ODMR contrast, which serves to increase the slope, the additional microwave power necessary to achieve it will broaden the NV resonance linewidths, which acts to decrease the slope C . The inverse is also true for green laser intensity/pumping rate, where resonance linewidth can narrow with higher laser intensity We compare the maximum sensitivity for the Ramsey interferometry, CW and π-pulse ODMR sensing schemes. Again, we assume zero noise such that the sensitivity is directly proportional to the ensemble response via slope C . For simplicity of comparison, we compare the best possible Ramsey interferometry simulations using Ω R = 2π • 10 MHz with the other two schemes. We consider that Ω R = 2π • 10 MHz is a reasonable upper limit that can be achieved experimentally We first consider only the effects of inhomogenous broadening, while neglecting drive amplitude variations and pure dephasing. Figure The plots in Fig. Having investigated the behavior of the three sensing schemes in the absence of variations in microwave drive across the ensemble, we then perform the same comparison with finite drive amplitude variation L DAV . Figure (L DAV = 0.1-0.). Here we see that increasing the level of MW drive amplitude variation increases the performance (higher C ) of CW and π-pulse ODMR relative to Ramsey interferometry. For π-pulse ODMR, this effect is relatively small, with the same distinction in performance above and below L IHB = 0.3 MHz as simulated in Fig. We consider this result to be particularly relevant for sensing schemes where such a wide variation in drive amplitude may occur. This includes two particular scenarios: 1) where the diamond is relatively large with respect to an antenna and the field of view of fluorescence collection is large and 2) where the microwaves are particularly localized to maximize contrast in a particular region. The first such scenario describes widefield imaging with NV centres, where there can be considerable variation in drive frequency across a diamond Elements of both scenarios cover sensing experiments looking at nanodiamonds, for example for temperature sensing in biological tissue Finally, we seek to perform our simulations using experimental data from a real diamond sample, to estimate the optimal sensing scheme for a real diamond. We achieve this through widefield CW ODMR imaging to extract the variation in zero offset magnetic field microwave resonance frequency across a 10×10 μm 2 region of a diamond. We use a chemical vapor deposition (CVD) diamond overgrown with 15 N with 12 C purification. The procedures and diamond details we use for the measurement are the same as given in In this work, we compared Ramsey interferometry, π-pulse ODMR and CW ODMR sensing schemes using nitrogen-vacancy centers and investigated the impact of inhomogeneous broadening and MW drive amplitude variations. We demonstrate that the achievable response of the sensing ensemble in terms of the contrast slope C , which is directly proportional to sensitivity, plateaus with increasing Rabi frequency for Ramsey interferometry. The performance of Ramsey interferometry can therefore not necessarily be improved simply by increasing the MW power. This is of considerable interest for realization of devices with low available power, such as microfabricated sensors with integrated semiconductor amplification, where significant MW amplification is not easy to realize due to e.g. heat dissipation concerns. We demonstrate that when the inhomogeneous broadening exceeds 0.3 MHz, π-pulse ODMR yields a larger C than Ramsey interferometry, indicating that π-pulse ODMR gives higher sensitivity in this regime. This indicates that Ramsey interferometry should only be considered when using a high-quality diamond with low inhomogeneous broadening, such as in low impurity samples with a relatively low nitrogen content The influence of MW drive amplitude variations is demonstrated to significantly improve the relative performance of CW ODMR compared to pulsed sensing schemes and π-pulse ODMR. For MW drive amplitude variations of around 80% or larger, CW ODMR can outperform both Ramsey interferometry and pulsed ODMR for even a low level of inhomogeneous broadening. These results are of particular significance to applications that naturally have high levels of drive field variation, such as wide field of view NV center imaging Finally, we apply our simulation to measurements from a real diamond, recently used for CW imaging Our results represent an important step towards a greater understanding of the relation between sensor material properties, sensing regime and the ideal sensing scheme. We consider our results of particular interest to groups working with DC to low-frequency magnetometry and temperature sensing, particularly from biosamples, using diamonds both off-the-shelf or irradiated where low inhomogeneous broadening cannot be guaranteed. Plot of the experimentally measured δ i -distribution used for the simulations in Fig. 