The unconventional multi-gap superconductivity in elemental Pb were reported previously by surface sensitive tunneling experiments, as well as predicted by several theory works. To obtain bulk evidence for such multiple gap behavior, the thermodynamic critical field Bc was measured along three different crystallographic directions ([100], [110], and [111]) in a high-quality Pb single crystal by means of muon spin rotation/relaxation. No difference in temperature evolution of Bc for all three directions was detected. The average reduced gap α = ∆/kBTc = 2.312(3) (∆ is the zerotemperature gap value and Tc is the transition temperature) was further obtained by employing the phenomenological α-model. Our results imply that the elemental Pb is an isotropic superconductor with a single energy gap. Onnes in elemental Hg in 1911 The description of lead within the weak-coupled BCS formalism was unsuccessful, thus leading to the corresponding development of the strong-coupled extension within the framework of the Eliashberg theory (see Ref. Evidence for multi-gap superconductivity should be present in the temperature evolution of various thermodynamic quantities, e.g., electronic specific heat, entropy, critical fields, etc.. Among them, the thermodynamic critical field B c , which is related to the condensation energy of superconducting carriers via [B c (0) = B c (T = 0), N F (0) is the density of states at the Fermi level, and ∆ is the zero-temperature value of the superconducting energy gap], becomes a direct probe of multiple superconducting energy gaps By combining experimental data of Refs. 10-12, the 'big' and the 'small' reduced gaps in Pb were found to T u n n e l i n g ( B i g g a p ) T u n n e l i n g ( S m a l l g a p ) μS R E x p e r i m e n t s In this work, in order to test whether the superconducting gap structure of elemental lead is of a singleor a two-gap type, measurements of the thermodynamic critical field B c (T ) along three crystallographic directions were performed by means of the muon-spin rotation/relaxation (μSR) technique. Experiments were carried out by applying external magnetic field B ex along [100], The Pb single crystal sample was supplied by Goodfellow The transverse-field muon-spin rotation/relaxation (TF-μSR) experiments were conducted using the Dolly spectrometer (πE1 beam line) at the Paul Scherrer Institute, Switzerland. Measurements were performed in the intermediate state of superconducting Pb, i.e., when the sample volume is separated into the normal state and the superconducting state (Meissner) domains [100] configuration and by keeping the temperature unchanged, the sample was rotated by 45 o . After such rotation, measurements at similar fields were repeated for B ex [110] [exp.#1, Fig. The magnetic field distribution in a type-I superconductor in the intermediate state, which is probed directly by means of TF-μSR, consists of two sharp peaks corresponding to the response of the domains remaining in the Meissner state (B = 0) and in the normal state (B ≡ B c > B ex ). Consequently, the value of B c could be directly and very precisely determined by measuring the position of the B > B ex peak The results of TF-μSR experiments are summarized in Bearing in mind that in elemental Pb two superconducting energy gaps might be present (see Refs. 10-14 and Fig. The B c (T 2 ) curves were analyzed within the framework of the empirical α-model of Padamsee et al. must be substituted with Here, C en and S en are the normal state electronic specific heat and the electronic entropy, respectively; λ el-ph is the electron-phonon coupling constant; γ 1 (T ) is the function accounting for nonlinear temperature dependence of the electronic specific heat; and γ 0 is the electronic specific heat coefficient in the absence of electron-phonon coupling. Note that by setting λ el-ph = 0, i.e. by ignoring the electron-phonon interaction, Eq. 4 reduces to Eq.3. For elemental Pb, the quantity γ 1 (T )/γ 1 (0) was calculated by Grimvall with the temperature dependences of the normal state S en (t) and the superconducting state S es (t) entropies described as Here, t = T /T c is the reduced temperature, From the results presented in Fig. It is worth to emphasize, that the results of bulk μSR measurement presented here may not rule out the possibility that the superconducticting response of elemental Pb changes by approaching the surface. Following predictions of the self-consistent two-gap model Here indexes '1' and '2' denote the first and the second gap, respectively. By decreasing the interband coupling, the gaps start to behave differently, but they are still opened at the same transition temperature: ∆ 1 (T ) = ∆ 2 (T ), T c1 = T c2 = T c . Finally, in a case of zero coupling between the bands, the temperature dependencies of the gaps are different, and the gaps vanish at two different temperatures: ∆ 1 (T ) = ∆ 2 (T ), T c1 = T c2 . Based one the above presented arguments one may assume that the difference between our μSR measurements, where muons stopped at a distance of 0.23 mm from the Pb sample surface (see the Supplemental Material [41]) and tunneling experiments, which are sensitive to the top most atomic layer of the material, could be caused by the corresponding decrease of the interband coupling constant. The weakening of the coupling constant between two electronic bands by approaching the surface, would naturally explain the two-gap observation by means of tunneling. An interesting follow up study to consider, would be to perform low-energy muon experiments, which may allow probing down to ∼ 10 nm thick surface layer To conclude, measurements of the temperature evolution of the thermodynamic critical field B c along three crystallographic directions in elemental Pb were performed by means of muon-spin rotation/relaxation. Experiments which were carried out by applying the external magnetic field along the [100], [110], and [111] crystal axes suggest the presence of a single superconducting energy gap with the absolute value independent of the crystallographic orientation. Overall, our experiments imply that elemental Pb is an isotropic single-gap superconductor.