Integration of single-photon emitters (SPEs) with resonant photonic structures is a promising approach for realizing compact and efficient single-photon sources for quantum communications, computing, and sensing. Efficient interaction between the SPE and the photonic cavity requires that the cavity's resonance matches the SPE's emission line. Here we demonstrate a new method for tuning silicon nitride (Si3N4) microring cavities via controlled deposition of the cladding layers. Guided by numerical simulations, we deposit silicon dioxide (SiO2) nanolayers onto Si3N4 ridge structures in steps of 50 nm. We show tuning of the cavity resonance over a free spectral range (FSR) without degradation of the quality-factor (Q-factor) of the cavity. We then complement this method with localized laser heating for fine-tuning of the cavity. Finally, we verify that the cladding deposition does not alter the position of nanoparticles placed on the cavity, which suggests that our method can be useful for integrating SPEs with photonic structures. Integrated quantum photonic devices are considered critical elements for future quantum networks, elements of quantum computers, and sensors Methods of tuning micro-cavities include thermal and electro-optical tuning, application of mechanical stress, and functionalization of the surface Silicon nitride (Si3N4, or SiN) stands out as a material of choice for many device prototypes due to its CMOS compatibility, broad transparency range, and relatively high refractive index (n~2) In this work, we propose and realize a method for broadband tuning of Si3N4 cavities. It is based on depositing a silicon dioxide (SiO2) cladding over Si3N4 cavities with tens of nanometers step size. We show that within some range of thicknesses of the cladding layer, we can tune the resonance position within one FSR. Although this method can only tune the resonance in relatively coarse steps, it can be complemented with other methods for fine tuning. Nevertheless, this method allows us to first bring the cavity resonances and SPE emission wavelength closer to a rough approximation, before fine-tuning with an another approach. To this end, we demonstrate fine tuning of the cavity by applying laser heat after depositing the SiO2 layer. We also show that SiO2 deposition does not change the position of the SPE (a diamond nanocrystal in our case) placed on the ring cavity. We consider a ridge waveguide with the lower and upper cladding being SiO2 and air, respectively. Figure We assume that the deposition of SiO2 forms a layer with thickness t on top of the lower cladding layer and core layer, parallel to the x-axis. This is schematically shown in Figure The waveguide optical properties as a function of t are obtained by solving the two-dimensional time-independent Maxwell's equation Figure Here both group index n g and D = dn eff dλ ⁄ are also functions of t. These parameters can be evaluated as follows. For each t = t0, the effective index for a range of wavelengths in the proximity of  = 737 nm is calculated. The resulting n eff (λ, t 0 ) is fitted with a linear line. The regression coefficients are used to estimate n g (t 0 ) and D(t 0 ). This process is repeated for other values of t to obtain ng(t) and D(t). Figures If a microring cavity is constructed using a waveguide of effective refractive index n eff (λ, t), then the resonance frequency can be obtained from the resonance condition mλ = n eff (λ, t)L, where L = 2πR is the round-trip length, and m is a positive integer. Using this condition, and Eqn. 1, it is straightforward to express λ as Figures where B and a are positive constant coefficients, and λ ∞ represents the resonance wavelengths for t = ∞. The fitted values of B and a are tabulated in Table Experimental Procedure We fabricated ring cavities with a radius (R) 8 μm and bus waveguides with identical height (h) and width (w) at a commercial CMOS foundry. The gap between the bus and the ring is 160 nm. This value is close to the critical gap of the ring resonator that maximizes the busring coupling. For the efficient coupling of light from a lensed optical fiber, each waveguide has 150 nm tapered edge couplers for the efficient transformation of TEM00 mode of the lensed fiber into propagating modes of Si3N4 waveguide. The fabrication started with a standard 8-inch silicon wafer. A 3.1 μm-thick SiO2 layer and a 250 nm-thick Si3N4 were formed using the thermal oxidation and low-pressure chemical vapor deposition (LPCVD) method. Before patterning the Si3N4 layer, chemicomechanical polishing (CMP) was used to reduce the thickness of the SiO2 to 3 μm. Then 248 nm KrF deep ultraviolet (DUV) lithography and inductively coupled plasma (ICP) etch were used to define the Si3N4 waveguides and ring resonators. This was followed by the upper cladding deposition of 3.4 μm-thick SiO2 via plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition (PECVD). To expose the Si3N4 ring resonators to the air, a window was opened in the upper cladding layer of SiO2 using lithography and a combination of dry etch (3.1μm) and wet etch (0.3μm). The edge coupler for light coupling with fiber was fabricated by the deep etch of the cladding and Si substrate to realize a trench. The layers of SiO2 were deposited in steps of 50 nm by ICP-CVD Oxford PlasmaPro System 100 in SiH4 and N20 atmosphere at 4 mT pressure, 150 C temperature, and 1000 W ICP power. After each deposition, we characterize the shift of resonances. The accuracy of deposition for SiO2 and its distribution around the waveguide and the cavity was studied by making Focused Ion Beam (FIB) cross-cut for cavities with radius 8 microns and waveguide widths 480 and 330 nm, and then studying them under Transmission Electron Microscope (TEM) (Figure The nanodiamonds (Sigma-Aldrich) in IPA solvent (0.1 wt%) were ultrasonicated for 30 minutes and then deposited on the chip by spin-coating at 2000 rpm for 5 minutes. Occasionally, the nanodiamonds were deposited on top of the Si3N4 cavities. SEM imaging was then performed to locate nanodiamonds on photonic structures. We perform measurements at the wavelengths around 738 nm by probing the chip with either attenuated broadband femtosecond (80 fs) pulses (Mai Tai, SpectraPhysics) or tunable narrowband (less than 1 MHz linewidth) diode laser (Sacher), see Figure Results and Discussions For very thin layers deposited onto the cavity, we cannot precisely characterize the shift, as it is larger than one FSR = λ 2 (2πn eff R) ⁄ . The measured Q-factor is at the order of 10 4 (see Experimental Section), which we confirm to be unaffected by the deposition of the cladding layers, see Supplementary Figure In Figure Comparing theory and experimental results, we can see that tuning with SiO2 cladding is not very precise. At the same time, it strongly shifts the cavity resonance. We suggest that our method could be complementary to other existing methods for fine-tuning. Cladding with SiO2 brings the resonance close to the desired wavelength, and then precise tuning can be achieved by other methods. This two-step approach can be useful when tuning requires significant power consumption and/or heat dissipation. One particular scenario is when cavities with nanoparticles containing SPEs are used at cryogenic temperatures. The heat produced by the chip can degrade the properties of SPEs, for example, by causing the drift of the emission line. We further demonstrate the two-step tuning by depositing 300 nm cladding and heating the cavity by a laser. We use a 532 nm continuous wave laser focused onto the ring cavity by a 100x objective (Nikon, NA=0.9). By adjusting the laser power, we can precisely tune the resonant frequency line of the cavity within the range of 12 pm, see Figure Integration of nanoparticles hosting SPEs with photonic platforms is one of the main targets for the successful realization of quantum photonics. Here we demonstrate that SiO2 deposition does not significantly affect the positioning of nanoparticles deposited on top of photonic structures. We spin-coat nanodiamonds on top of our samples so that with some probability, the nanodiamonds are localized on top of the ring cavity. We then deposit the SiO2 layer of 500 nm, as described above. By comparing Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) images taken before and after SiO2 deposition, we find that the position of nanodiamonds does not change within the resolution of the SEM, see Figure We demonstrate a technique for broadband tuning of Si3N4 microring cavities. The method relies on the deposition of SiO2 nanolayers onto the waveguide cladding and combining it with localized laser heating. Experimental results show good agreement with the theoretical predictions; some discrepancy in the explicit values can be attributed to the non-uniform distribution of SiO2 layers. Our technique could be complemented by thermal tuning method that provides high accuracy tuning. Thus we are able to tune the cavity resonance without significant heat dissipation, which is important for operation at cryogenic temperatures. In contrast to the application of photochromic or polyelectrolyte films, we do not observe the degradation of the Q-factor. Furthermore, we verify that nanoparticles placed on the cavity are not displaced by the deposition of SiO2. Our technique can be helpful for small-volume, high Purcell-factor cavities with large FSRs, when the resonance and target wavelengths can be separated by several nanometers. The demonstrated technique will be a valuable addition to the toolkit for developing integrated quantum photonic devices. 