Waveguide characterization of dielectric materials is a convenient and broadband approach for measuring dielectric constant. In conventional microwave measurements, material samples are usually mechanically shaped to fit the waveguide opening and measured in closed waveguides. This method is not practical for millimeter-wave and sub-millimeter-wave measurements where the waveguide openings become tiny, and it is rather difficult to shape the sample to exactly the same dimensions as the waveguide cross-section. In this paper, we present a method that allows one to measure arbitrarily shaped dielectric slabs that extend outside waveguides. In this method, the measured sample is placed between two waveguide flanges, creating a discontinuity. The measurement system is characterized as an equivalent Π-circuit, and the circuit elements of the Π-circuit are extracted from the scattering parameters. We have found that the equivalent shunt impedance of the measured sample is only determined by the material permittivity and is rather insensitive to the sample shape, position, sizes, and other structural details of the discontinuity. This feature can be leveraged for accurate measurements of permittivity. The proposed method is very useful for measuring the permittivity of medium-loss and highloss dielectrics from microwave to sub-terahertz frequencies. Material characterization is an essential step in designing electromagnetic devices. The recent fast developments of wireless communications (5G and beyond) impose strong demands for the characterization of dielectric materials at millimeterwave and even higher frequencies. In general, the methods for measuring dielectric constant can be divided into two groups: one is based on resonating systems and the other is utilizing non-resonant transmission-lines structures In order to avoid the problem of imperfect contact with the waveguide walls, it is preferable and easier to test the sample outside waveguides In this paper, we propose such a method that can be used to measure arbitrary-shaped dielectric slabs outside rectangular waveguides (see Fig. The paper is organized as follows: in Section II, we introduce the physical principle of the proposed method. In Sections III and IV, we separately discuss the permittivity extraction methods for electrically thin and thick dielectric slabs. The measurement uncertainties are analyzed in Section V. In this section, we introduce the physical principle of the proposed measurement method. We start from the field analysis for the measurement setup. Then, we model the discontinuity as an equivalent circuit, and verify stability of the equivalent shunt impedance. Figure According to the field distribution in Fig. Any passive two-port electromagnetic system can be modeled by an equivalent Π-circuit. We model Region I as a Π-circuit formed by two parallel admittances Y p (these two admittances are identical due to the structural symmetry) and one series impedance Z a , as shown in Fig. In the equivalent circuit of Fig. ( The matrix elements, A, B, C, and D, can be expressed as functions of S-parameters Here, is the characteristic impedance of the TE 10 mode in the rectangular waveguide. Another equation can be written as Solving Y p from ( Next, we numerically demonstrate that Y p is insensitive to the shape of the sample as well as to possible additional structures inside the waveguide discontinuity. In the simulations, the values of the permittivity and the thickness of the dielectric slab are the same as assumed in Fig. Therefore, the size of the test slab should be larger than (L + ∆s cr ) × (W + ∆s cr ) to ensure that the higher-order modes are negligible at the edges of the sample. The critical extension size for Case I in Fig. In Case II, we choose an arbitrarily shaped dielectric slab that is larger than the critical size. It is shown that the shunt impedance still keeps unchanged. In Case III, the waveguide flanges are modified into a circular shape with actual screws, alignment pins, and choke grooves. We see that even with such a complicated gap environment, the shunt impedance Y p is still not affected at all. In Case II, the sample shape is randomly chosen but it is larger than the critical size. In Case III, the waveguide flanges are round with small accessory structures. The above numerical experiments fully verify the predictions based on circuit modeling, confirming that the shunt impedance of the gap is insensitive to the gap environment as well as to the shape and size of the sample. In the next section, we will show how to extract the permittivity from the measured Y p . Next, we discuss how Y p is related to the permittivity of the dielectric slab under test. Unlike the conventional waveguide characterization, here, the S-parameters have no explicit analytical relations with r . Therefore, it is not straightforward to find the permittivity from measured S-parameters and the shunt admittance Y p . In this section, we discuss the extraction methods for electrically thin dielectric layers (d < λ d /10), derive the extraction formulas, and show the measurement results. For samples with ultra-subwavelength electrical thickness (d < λ d /10), the fields in Region I are similar to the field in a material slab placed in a continuous rectangular waveguide. This is because very thin flange gaps have very large parallelplate capacitances, allowing the currents on metal walls of the waveguides to pass through the gap. Therefore, the shunt impedance of Region I can be approximated considering the same dielectric slab in a closed waveguide. To find the shunt impedance of a dielectric slab inside the waveguide, a convenient way is to use the corresponding ABCD matrix. By equating the matrix elements with that in Eq. ( where is the propagation constant in dielectric slab (TE 01 mode), and Z d = 1/Y d = μ 0 ω/β d is the corresponding characteristic impedance. After equating the matrix elements in Eq. ( Once the S-parameters are measured, the above equation uniquely determines r [note that in Eq. ( To examine the accuracy of extraction formula Eq. ( It is important to stress that the permittivity extraction formula Eq. ( can make the following additional approximations in Eq. ( Equation The extraction formula Eq. ( Here, we measure the permittivity of common copy paper and experimentally show the stability of shunt impedance. We stack four layers of 80 μm thick STAPLES copy paper, forming a 320 μm thick sample (d = λ d /10 at 60 GHz). The sample is cut into an arbitrary shape but larger than (L + ∆s cr ) × (W + ∆s cr ) to ensure the stability of shunt impedance. The measurement comprises several steps: 1) Calibrate the system using Thru-Reflect-Line (TRL) method. SUT Fig. 2) Embed the sample between the flanges (see Fig. The extracted complex permittivity [using Eq. ( Importantly, one should remember that the extraction formula Eq. ( When the thickness of dielectric slabs increases (λ d /10 < d < λ d /2), the higher-order TM modes become more and more significant in Region I, and the field in Region I can be obviously different from the field in the closed waveguide. Therefore, one cannot use a simple transmission-line section model for Region I, and the extraction formula Eq. ( Here, we utilize numerical tools (Ansys HFSS), to find the relation between Y p and r . Numerical fitting is a common method to extract material parameters from measured data. By modeling the measurement setup in numerical tools and fitting the simulated S-parameters with the measured values, one can estimate the permittivity of the sample. In the conventional numerical fitting method, one should accurately model the actual measurement setup 1) The sample is measured in a waveguide junction. The shunt admittance is extracted from the measured Sparameters using Eq. ( 2) The physical setup is modeled in the simulation tool. Note that it is not necessary to accurately model the mea-surement setup in the simulation since the complicated structures of the waveguide junction and the shape of the sample (as long as it is larger than the critical size) does not affect the shunt admittance. 3) At the frequencies of interest, different values of permittivity (both real and imaginary parts) are assumed in the simulation, and the shunt admittance is extracted from numerical results. The simulated shunt impedance is then compared with the measured values. When the simulated and measured values are identical, the permittivity assumed in the simulation is the actual permittivity of the material under test. For example, we assume the thickness of SUT is d = 660 μm and the frequency of interest is f = 75 GHz. We model the measurement setup in HFSS and vary r and r within reasonable ranges. For each pair of r and r , we can calculate the corresponding shunt admittance using Eq. ( In this section, we measure the permittivity of a mobile phone screen glass (Corning Gorilla In numerical simulations, we model the setup and perform parametric studies in terms of f , r , and r . From simulations, we obtain more than 2000 sets of data, [f, r , r , (Y p ), (Y p )] simu . The task is to use the simulated dataset to find r and r for a given set of The real part of permittivity is between 6.6 and 6.8, which is in good agreement with the reference value ( r = 6.69 -j0.087 at f = 3 GHz, measured in In this section, we study the measurement errors caused by uncertainties of the measured S-parameters. The uncertainties of S-parameters on both magnitude and phases are denoted as |∆S α | and ∆θ α (α = 11, 21). To analyze the impact of these parameters on the extracted permittivity, we use the differential method, where the dependent variable, r , is differentiated with respect to each possible error parameter (the magnitudes and phases of the S-parameters involved in the extraction method) where In Eq. ( with F = 1 + S 11 + S 21 . Furthermore, in Eq. ( The uncertainty of r is plotted in Fig. In the second example analysis, the uncertainty of the imaginary permittivity is evaluated. In this case, we fix r = 5 and vary r from r = 0 to r = 1 in simulations. We can see in Fig. Finally, we should note that the S-parameter uncertainties provided by the VNA manufacturer are their worst values. In reality, the perturbations of S-parameters are not so strong, and the uncertainties shown in Fig. 