On the basis of density functional calculations, we report on a comprehensive study of the influences of atomic arrangement and Ni substitution for Al on the ground state structural and magnetic properties for Fe2Ni1+xAl1-x Heusler alloys. We discuss systematically the competition between five Heusler-type structures formed by shuffles of Fe and Ni atoms and their thermodynamic stability. All Ni-rich Fe2Ni1+xAl1-x tend to decompose into a dual-phase mixture consisting of Fe2NiAl and FeNi. The successive replacement of Ni by Al leads to a change of ground state structure and eventually an increase in magnetocrystalline anisotropy energy (MAE). We predict for stoichiometric Fe2NiAl a ground state structure with nearly cubic lattice parameters but alternating layers of Fe and Ni possessing an uniaxial MAE which is even larger than tetragonal L10-FeNi. This opens an alternative route for improving the phase stability and magnetic properties in FeNi-based permanent magnets. The demand for permanent magnets for modern application technology is very high. Permanent magnets are used in automating and robotics industry and constitute a parts of an electric vehicles, wind turbines, drives, and storage and magnetic cooling devices Nowadays, the most widespread high-performance permanent magnets are based on rare earth elements. However, such materials are extremely expensive and finding inexpensive analogs consisting of abundant elements with similar performance is one of the most urgent and challenging tasks in modern materials science 1,4, However, up to date, the synthesis of L1 0 ordered FeNi is very challenging, because it becomes thermodynamically stable at temperatures lower than the orderdisorder transition temperature, which is in the range of 200 -300 o C. This leads to an extremely slow atomic diffusion. Indeed, natural tetrataenite is found in mete-orites with a slightly Fe-rich (Fe: 50.47 ± 1.98 at.% and Ni: 49.6 ± 1.49 at.%) composition and a body centered tetragonal (bct) structure with alternating layers of Fe and Ni along the elongated c-axis Over the past decades, also full Heusler alloys of X 2 Y Z stoichiometry were considered for permanent magnet applications. The properties of these alloys can be tuned flexibly depending on composition and structural defects. Recent theoretical studies Recently Herper Gao et al. Fe 2 Y Z (Y = Ni, Co, Pt) and Co 2 Y Z (Y = Ni, Fe, Pt), where Z =Al, Ga, Ge, In, Sn for both series, were considered by Matsushita et al. As FeNi represents one corner of the ternary Fe-Ni-Al phase diagram, these systems may be of interest as potential permanent magnets, as well. However, so far mainly stoichiometric Fe 2 NiAl is reported in the literature, which does not provide a uniform picture. The-oretical studies Structural, magnetic, and thermodynamic properties of Fe-Ni-Al were calculated from first-principles using the plane-wave basis set and the projector augmented wave (PAW) method implemented in the Vienna ab initio simulation package 50 (VASP). For the exchange and correlation functionals, the generalized gradient approximation (GGA) in the scheme of Perdew, Burke, and Ernzerhof (PBE) energy difference between two consecutive steps reached 10 -7 eV. The alloys were modeled in a 16-atom cubic supercell, which represents off-stoichiometric compositions Fe 2 Ni 1+x Al 1-x with concentration steps of x = 0.25, while still allowing for extensive calculations of phonon dispersions and the accurate determination of the MAE (see the supplemental Material, SM, in Ref. 53). The atomic positions for the distorted configurations were considered fully relaxed when interatomic forces were smaller than 10 -2 eV/ Å. We considered five types of ordered atomic arrangement depicted in Fig. To determine the MAE for the fully relaxed structures, we made use of the magnetic force theorem where E tot 001 and E tot 100 are the total energies with the respective spin orientations. For a positive value of MAE, the out-of-plane spin configuration (easy axis) is energetically favorable and vice versa the in-plane spin direction (easy plane) is preferred. For a deeper analysis of the dependence of the MAE on the composition in the range x from 0 to 0.25, we carried out calculations using a 2×2×1 supercell containing 64 atoms. Here, a 6 × 6 × 6 k-point mesh was taken into account. By this means we considered Fe 2 Ni 1+x Al 1-x with x = 0, 0.0625, 0.125, 0.1875, and 0.25 in austenitic state. Finite-temperature properties were obtained from the calculations of the vibrational density of states (VDOS) in the harmonic approximation within the direct (forceconstant) approach using the Phonopy 61 code. Depending on the composition and the respective primitive cells, we employed 3 × 3 × 2, 3 × 3 × 3, 4 × 4 × 2, 4 × 4 × 4, and 6×6×4 supercells to calculate Hellmann-Feynman forces from a set of non-equivalent atomic displacements using the VASP code, to construct the force constant matrix of the system. From the eigenvalues of the resulting dy-namical matrix we obtained the VDOS and, finally, the lattice free energies. Curie temperatures were determined from the meanfield approximation to Heisenberg model parameterized from ab initio data. The Heisenberg exchange coupling constants were obtained with the SPR-KKR package To determine the equilibrium ground-state properties of Fe-Ni-Al, we apply a volume conserving tetragonal distortion to the fully optimized cubic 16 atom unit cell of the Heusler compound. From the calculations of the total energy as a function of the volume and the c/a ratio we determined the optimized lattice constants for all compositions with the investigated crystalline structures in austenite (c/a ≈ 1) and martensite (c/a = 1), the data of the most important ones are summarized in Table Figure We first focus on the stoichiometric case Fe 2 NiAl. It can be seen from Fig. T p is ≈25 meV/atom lower in energy than T # , the inverse Heusler, and the T c structures, which are very close in the energy to the regular L2 1 Heusler structure. The close competition between of T p , T # , T c , and inverse structures hampers the chemical ordering of the samples under typical experimental conditions and makes the B2-type structure a likely outcome, rather than the inverse Heusler structure, as reported previously A small deviation from the stoichiometry up to x = 0.25 keeps the T p structure in austenite as the most favorable one, while the energy difference between other structures is reduced, which increases the competi- TABLE I: Favorable crystal structure, lattice parameter a (in Å), tetragonal distortion ratio c/a, and formation energy E form (in eV/f.u.) of Fe2Ni1+xAl1-x as well as the total energy difference ∆E c/a (in meV/atom) between the austenitic (c/a ≈ 1) and martensitic states (c/a > 1) with the lowest energy. The data are collected from the full geometric crystalline structure optimization. For the martensitic phase of Fe2Ni1.5Al0.5, the data represent the average over individual tetragonal distortions of a 16-atom supercell along the three Cartesian axes tion between them. Apart from the regular Heusler structure, all ordering motifs of Fe 2 NiAl and Fe 2 Ni 1.25 Al 0.75 remain stable against a tetragonal distortion of the unit cell, see Figs. In turn, for compositions with x ≥ 0.5, the global energy minimum is obtained around c/a = 1.45 for the regular L1 0 Heusler phase, see Figs. For compositions between x = 0.5 and 0.75, the energy difference ∆E c/a between the tetragonal regular L1 0 -type Heusler phase and the most favorable stable cubic structure lies in the range of thermal energies (cf. Table We obtain insight into the structural stability of the compounds in the austenitic phase from the formation and decomposition energies of the fully optimized configurations with respect to atomic positions and cell parameters for each composition around c/a = 1. In a first step, we evaluate the formation energy (E form ) in terms of the difference of the total energy of the ternary compound and the weighted sum of the energies of the stable phases of the corresponding pure elements. This quantity is relevant e. g. for the preparation of thin films from the sputtering of elemental targets. A negative sign of E form points out the a stability of a compound under study against decomposition into its pure constituents. This analysis reveals that the inverse structure at c/a = 1 keeps the cubic symmetry for all compositions, while T p and T # structure remain almost cubic (c/a ≈ 0.98 or 0.99) for compositions with x = 0 and 0.25. The T c structure also turns to be slightly tetragonally distorted with c/a about 1.036 and 1.064 for x = 0 and 0.25. With further increase in Ni excess, T p , T # , and T c structures deviate from the nearly cubic lattice vectors, which become clearly tetragonal. According to the large energy difference with respect to other structures, we skip here the discussion of the regular L2 1 ordering. The ground state structure, lattice constants, and formation energy found for all compositions in austenite and martensite are listed in Table TABLE II: Calculated total magnetic moment (μtot in μB/f.u.), saturation magnetization Ms (in Am 2 /kg), and MAE (in meV/f.u. and MJ/m 3 ) for the most stable structures (austenite and martensite) of Fe2Ni1+xAl1-x. For FeNi, the magnetic properties are also presented for the T c structure. Literature MAE values for L10-FeNi are mainly collected from theoretical studies using different methods (FLAPW-GGA where E Fe2NiAl , E Fe , and E NiAl are the total energies of Fe 2 NiAl, bcc Fe and bcc NiAl, respectively. According to Eq. (1), a negative value of E dec indicates again the stability of a compound against a spinodal decomposition. Figure a long-term instability with respect to the above decomposition reaction. Nevertheless, the minimum value of E dec = 12.14 meV/atom found for Fe 2 NiAl with the T p structure is rather small, corresponding to a temperature of around 100 K. As one can see from Fig. We now turn to the magnetic properties of Fe 2 Ni 1+x Al 1-x in the lowest energy austenitic and martensitic structures. In Table As a consequence, the replacement of Al by Ni excess atoms successively reduces the MAE in the austenitic phase and it vanishes when the inverse Heusler structure becomes favored, consistent with its cubic symmetry. In contrast, tetragonally distorted ternary L1 0 -type Fe 2 Ni 1+x Al 1-x with x = 0.5 and 0.75, which represents the ground state in this composition range, demonstrates a considerable MAE being comparable of L1 0 -FeNi with only little degradation. To obtain a better resolution in the range of low Ni excess, we performed additional calculations for intermediate compositions with Ni excess between x = 0 and 0.25 using a 64 atom supercell Fe 32 Ni 16+n Al 16-n with n = 0, 1, 2, 3, and 4, which corresponds to Fe 2 Ni 1+x Al 1-x with x = 0, 0.0625, 0.125, 0.1875, and 0.25, respectively. Figure Calculated MAE of L1 0 -FeNi of about 0.59 MJ/m 3 is in a good agreement with the experimental data (Table II). It is worthwhile to calculate MAE of T c -FeNi since the energy difference between the ground state L1 0 and the tetragonally distorted T c structure is with about 17 meV/atom comparatively small. MAE of T c -FeNi is smaller in its absolute value and has moreover a negative sign, which tells us that the preferred orientation of the moments changes direction from the uniaxial easy axis to a cross-plane-direction. Thus, the competition of the different types of order might not only inhibit a perfect L1 0 ordering -we must also expect a substantial impact regarding its hard-magnetic properties. In addition to the MAE, we also calculated the orbital moment anisotropy, given by the difference ∆μ l = μ 001 l -μ 100 l between the orbital moments μ l in the respective crystallographic directions, see Table In a recent high precision first-principles investigation, the decrease of the MAE with increasing disorder in FePt could be related to the presence of a rather low concentration of anti-site defects We have already seen that the magnetic properties of this compound are very sensitive to change in composition and atomic arrangement. In this section, we investigate the effects of atomic arrangement in austenitic and martensitic phases of Fe 2 Ni 1+x Al 1-x on the magnetic exchange interactions and Curie temperature in detail to unravel the impact of competing interatomic exchange interactions of Fe and Ni atoms at different sites, which are frequently observed in Heusler compounds. In Fig. As evident from the Figs. In the case of alloys with inverse cubic structure, which is shown in Fig. The tetragonal distortion of the L1 0 martensite with a large c/a ratio results in a clearly visible competition between FM and AFM exchange interactions of Fe pairs in the range of 0.7 < d/a < 1.2 as shown in Fig. ), which are collected in Table As discussed in Sec. III B, Fe-Ni-Al alloys near the stoichiometric composition are prone to a phase separation by spinodal decomposition, see also Refs. 47-49. During the slow cooling from the high-temperature ordered bcc phase, Fe 2 NiAl becomes unstable against the segregation and decomposes into two bcc phases consisting of FM Fe and a weak magnetic NiAl solid solution. To optimize the magnetic properties, sophisticated heat treatment procedures, including various temperatures, waiting times, and also magnetic fields become important which may help to develop further guidelines for the successful synthesis of the desired compound. Here, E tot refers to the total energy for the respective structure from DFT calculations. F lat represents the lattice free energy in the harmonic approximation derived from the VDOS of the respective structure calculated at the optimized lattice constant, which also includes the quantum mechanical zero point contribution to the lattice energy. Finally, F el is the electronic free energy, which contains the change in internal energy E el (T > 0) at finite temperatures arising from the redistribution of electrons from occupied to unoccupied states according to the Fermi distribution function and the corresponding entropy S el . Both are estimated with sufficient accuracy within the Sommerfeld approximation, which relates F el to the electronic density of states at the Fermi level D(E F ): The contribution E el (T = 0) is naturally included in E tot obtained from our DFT calculations, whereas we neglect in our work the finite temperature contributions to the free energy from the magnetic degrees of freedom. This can be considered an appropriate approximation at sufficiently low temperatures, where the magnetic moments can be considered in an almost perfectly ordered arrangement. In the vicinity of the Curie temperature, which is in our case in the order of 1000 K and thus rather high, contributions from magnetic entropy may indeed become significant. In turn, the accurate prediction of the magnetic entropy at low temperatures in terms of a classical spin model is subject to difficulties which may arise, e.g., from the violation of Nernst's theorem in classical systems with continuous degrees of freedom. The solution requires advanced modeling approaches (see, e. g., Ref. 84), which is beyond the scope of the present investigation. Referring to Fig. Since T p corresponds to a free energy minimum in the range of realistic annealing temperatures, we can now discuss the stability of the off-stoichiometric Niexcess compounds Fe 2 Ni 1+x Al 1-x with respect to a decomposition into the stoichiometric ternary compound T p -Fe 2 NiAl and binary L1 0 -FeNi. This bears some analogy with experimental findings of a decomposition tendency in Mn-excess Ni 2 Mn 1+x Z 1-x Heusler alloys, for which a dual-phase system consisting of the L2 1 -cubic Ni 2 MnZ phase and the L1 0 -tetragonal NiMn phase has been reported where F aust/mart Fe2Ni1+xAl1-x is the free energy of the ternary, off-stoichiometric compositions under consideration in austenitic or martensitic phase; F T p Fe2NiAl and F L10 FeNi are the corresponding free energies of Fe 2 NiAl with the T p cubic structure and FeNi with the L1 0 tetragonal structure; S mix accounts the mixing entropy arising from the partial disorder in the off-stoichiometric ternary system, where the excess Ni is distributed randomly over the four sublattices: Here x i is the concentration of Ni on the i th sublattice and k B is the Boltzmann constant. Since these structures are fully ordered, S mix = 0 for stoichiometric Fe 2 NiAl and FeNi and is thus left out in Eq. (4). The resulting behavior of the mixing free energy at different temperatures as a function of composition is depicted in Fig. For the non-stoichiometric compositions, the impact of temperature on F mix increases substantially due to the presence of the mixing entropy. This leads in particular for the regular L1 0 to a significant reduction of the difference in free energy compared to a respective phase mixture of the stoichiometric compounds, which may stabilize L1 0 -type solid solutions at the very Ni-rich content at high temperatures. Still, the off-stoichiometic compounds remain unstable in general against this decomposition for all temperatures under consideration. A very similar trend was reported recently for off-stoichiometric Ni-Mn-based Heusler compounds In Fig. The dependence of mixing free energy Fmix on the Ni-excess concentration for selected FM austenite and martensite structures of Fe2Ni1+xAl1-x at various temperatures in the range between 0 and 1000 K. Temperature variation of the free energy of the austenitic T p and T c phase at x = 0.25 and martensitic T c at x = 0.75. The free energy is plotted as the difference ∆Fmix to the free energy of the regular L10 structure at the respective composition. free energy of T p (at x = 0.25) and T c (x = 0.25 and x = 0.75) both at the respective optimum lattice parameters relative to the free energy of the tetragonal L1 0 phase with the respective composition, i. e., ∆F mix = F T p ,T c mix -F L10 mix . We see that for x = 0.25 the T c structure is more stable than L1 0 for temperatures below T = 800 K, while T p preserves the lowest free energy in the entire temperature range. However, extrapolation of ∆F mix implies that a crossover may occur somewhere below T = 1200 K and the temperature of the crossing point may decrease further, if a larger amount of Al is substituted by Ni. On the Ni-rich side only T c is competitive but its free energy remains considerably above the L1 0 phase. Although here ∆F mix decreases with temperature, we can not predict a stabilization at a reasonable temperature. However, since the sign and the slope of ∆F mix changes between x = 0.25 and x = 0.75 we might rather expect interesting cross-over effects between these structures at intermediate compositions. To resolve the corresponding phase transitions from first principles with sufficient accuracy, better structural models for the partially disordered phases are needed, which require significantly larger supercells. As this severely increases the computational demands, the corresponding phonon calculations have been left for future investigations. The substitutional series of the Heusler compounds Fe 2 Ni 1+x Al 1-x (0 ≤ x ≤ 1) in austenitic and martensitic phases with different kinds of atomic arrangements were investigated theoretically to address their phase stability as well as structural and magnetic properties including the MAE. The present study was motivated by the potential importance of Fe 2 NiAl and L1 0 -FeNi for a perma-nent magnet application. It predicts phase segregation tendencies in Fe 2 NiAl and addresses the complexity of the synthesis of FeNi with L1 0 order which may arise in part from the presence of competing structures. We learn how the phase stability and MAE can be controlled by exchanging the positions of Fe and Ni atoms, by considering three kinds of atomic arrangements which can be derived from the inverse Heusler structure of Fe 2 NiAl by shuffling Fe and Ni atoms on particular sites. To this end, the formation and mixing energies of a series of compositions with considered crystalline structures were calculated at zero and finite-temperatures. Our calculations of the saturation magnetization, exchange constants, and finally Curie temperature confirm that all considered compounds exhibit sufficiently large values, as required for permanent magnet applications. For the austenitic phase of Fe 2 NiAl, we found that all recently proposed structures denoted as T c , T # and T p are lower in energy compared to the inverse and regular structures, which were mainly discussed so far in the literature. The ground state corresponds to the ordered T p structure, which was proposed recently as a stable low temperature structure for some quarternary stoichiometric Heusler alloys Regarding the decomposition of Fe 2 NiAl into bcc-Fe and NiAl, our total energy calculations reveal that the T p structure has a positive formation energy (E form ≈ 12.4 meV/atom) at T = 0 K being several times lower than other structures including the regular and inverse Heusler structure. Despite still lying above the convex hull, it can be expected that T p -Fe 2 NiAl can be stabilized by a proper choice of annealing condition, since due to the contributions from vibrational entropy calculated in the harmonic approximation, the free energy of the T p phase becomes lower compared to a phase mixture of Fe and NiAl above T = 474 K, which is reasonable for typical temper-annealing procedures. The finite temperature approach to study the segregation tendency in Ni-rich Fe 2 Ni 1+x Al 1-x have shown that in particular the contributions from mixing entropy render the free energy quite sensitive to temperature. This reduces the free energy offset to a phase mixture between stoichiometric Fe 2 NiAl and FeNi substantially, which enhances the probability to obtain off-stoichiometric phases. Nevertheless, all off-stoichiometric compounds demonstrate the tendency to decompose into a dual-phase mixture consisting of Fe 2 NiAl and FeNi at temperatures below T = 1000 K. In general, we consider the fundamental understanding of the role of atomic arrangement in a crystalline structure in Heusler alloys of great interest for both the shape memory and the permanent magnet community as this might be employed to deliberately modify the phase stability, structural and magnetic properties as well as MAE. We believe that the T p structure in Fe 2 NiAl and related materials could be interesting and promising candidate for systems exhibiting a large intrinsic MAE, saturation magnetization and high Curie temperature, suitable for a potential application in low-cost hard magnets. R. Skomski and J. Coey, Scr. Mater. 112, 3 (2016). R. Skomski, Permanent Magnets: History, Current Research, and Outlook (Springer International Publishing, Cham, 2016), pp . 359-395.3 K. Hono and H. Sepehri-Amin, Scr. Mater. 151, 6 (2018). 4 K. Skokov and O. Gutfleisch, Scr. Mater. 154, 289 (2018). 5 J. Mohapatra and J. P. Liu, Rare-Earth-free permanent magnets: the past and future (Elsevier, 2018), vol. 27, pp.