In sub-10nm FinFETs, Line-edge-roughness (LER) and metal-gate granularity (MGG) are the two most dominant sources of variability and are mostly modeled semi-empirically. In this work, compact models of LER and MGG are used. We show an accurate process-induced variability (PIV) aware compact model-based circuit performance estimation for Design-Technology Co-optimization (DTCO). This work is carried out using an experimentally validated BSIM-CMG model on a 7nm Fin-FET node. First, we have shown performance benchmarking of LER and MGG models with the state-of-the-art and shown ~4x(~2.3x) accuracy improvement for NMOS(PMOS) in the estimation of device figure of merits (DFoMs). Second, RO and SRAM circuit's performance esti-mation is carried out for LER and MGG variability. Further, ~22% more optimistic estimate of (σ/μ) SHM (Static Hold Margin) compared to the stateof-the-art model with V DD variation is shown. Finally, we demonstrate our improved DFoMs accuracy translated to more accurate circuits fig-ure of merits (CFoMs) performance estimation. For worst-case SHM (3(σ/μ) SHM @V DD =0.75 V) compared to state-of-the-art, dynamic(standby) power reduction by ~73%(~61%) is shown. Thus, our enhanced variability model accuracy enables more credible DTCO with significantly better per-formance estimates. The MGG variation in TiN is due to the presence of two different workfunction 4.4eV and 4.6eV with the probability of occurrence as 40% and 60% in <111> and <100> orientation respectively (Table To introduce these LER variability information in circuit simulation, earlier, a semi-empirical model to capture the impact of LER on device performance has been reported in the literature In this work, we have extended the previously proposed PIVaware SPICE framework for state-of-the-art 7nm CMOS technology FinFET to study the translation of device model accuracy to improvement in circuit performance estimation. At first, to ensure the accuracy of the results, we have calibrated the TCAD deck against the experimental data presented in This paper is organized as follows. The device details and simulation parameters are discussed in Section II. The TCAD and SPICE calibration is shown in section III-A and III-B followed by benchmarking of PIV-aware simulation framework with TCAD in III-C. Impact of PIVs on typical circuits performance -RO and SRAM are discussed in section IV-A and the comparison of accuracy in performance estimation with state-of-the-art is discussed in section IV-B. The impact of improved accuracy in device variability estimation on circuit performance is discussed in section IV-C followed by conclusion in section V. Fig. In TCAD Sentaurus We have calibrated the BSIM-CMG with the experimental data of the nominal device for NMOS and PMOS. The calibration is extended for the range of LG and Wfin using data generated from calibrated TCAD deck. The model parameters used for calibration are discussed below. First, device physical parameters are fixed to define device geometry. Further, to capture the threshold voltage, the workfunction of the device is tuned using PHIG. Second, U0 and UA parameters for low field mobility and phonon/surface roughness scattering are used to capture the mobility degradation. While the velocity saturation effects are captured using VSAT and VSAT1 parameters. Third, the short channel effects are captured using DVT0 and DVT1, and PCLM is used to capture the channel length modulation. In the sub-10nm regime, small geometryinduced effect, i.e., quantum confinement, became severe. QMFACTOR is enabled in the model for quantum correction. DVT1SS, U0 and VSAT are used for subthreshold swing (SS), mobility and saturation velocity correction respectively for calibration across different device geometries. The BSIM-CMG model calibration for the nominal device data is shown in Fig. Using the calibrated BSIM-CMG model, statistical simulations are performed on the developed PIV-aware framework in the SPICE. SPICE simulation shows well consistency with the statistical data from calibrated TCAD as shown in Fig. This work shows ~4x(~2.3x) σerror reduction for NMOS(PMOS) as compared to the referenced model To study the impact of variability and fabrication aspects, (a) RO and (b) 6T SRAM cell are used as shown in Fig. RO: Fig. The RO and SRAM analysis shows the (σ/μ)RO and (σ/μ)SHM peaks as Λ/LG tends to 1. This is because the initial increment in Λ makes the fin edges more regular, which increases the σ and μ, however, the increment rates are different for σ (faster) and μ (lower). Moreover, as Λ/LG>1, the sigma saturates while the μ saturates as Λ/LG ~ 3 To study the impact of MGG variability, SRM is analyzed for σVT variation (Table To check the accuracy in performance estimation as compared to the referenced model To summarize, we demonstrated the relative improvement in DFoMs estimation using our PIV aware SPICE simulation framework using in-house LER and MGG models c.f state-ofthe-art advanced nodes, Titanium Nitride (TiN) is the most commonly used gate metal in high-k metal gate (HKMG) stack technology. This work is partially funded by Department of Science and Technol-ogy (DST) India, Indian Institute of Technology Bombay Nano-fabrication (IITBNF) facility IIT Bombay and Centre for Excellence (CEN) IIT Bom-bay.Shubham Patil, Amita Rawat and Udayan Ganguly are with the Department of Electrical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, India (email: udayan@ee.iitb.ac.in).