Superconducting joints are one of the key technologies to make Ba1-xKxFe2As2 (Ba-122) superconducting wires or tapes for high-field applications. Herein, superconducting joints were fabricated by a simple cold-pressing method, and the joint resistance of the iron-based superconducting joint was estimated for the first time. The superconducting properties, microstructures, and elements distribution in the joint regions were investigated. At 4.2 K and 10 T, a transport critical current Ic of 105 A for the joint was obtained, and the critical current ratio (CCR= I joint c /I tape c ) of the joint was 94.6%. On the other hand, the joint show very low joint resistance of 2.7× 10 -13 Ω in self-field at 4.2 K. Among iron-based superconductors (IBS), this work is the first to successfully realize a superconducting joint with such high CCR and low joint resistance. This work shows great potential to apply Ba-122 in a range of practical applications, where superconducting joints are essential. The K doped '122' type (AeFe2As2, Ae= alkali or alkali earth elements) iron-based superconductors are considered to be one of the most promising superconducting materials for the fabrication of high-field magnets , due to their high superconducting transition temperatures (Tc) up to 38 K The achieved critical current ratio (CCR) was 35% at 4.2 K and 10 T and the joint resistance was estimated to be below 10 -9 Ω In the paper, we prepared Ba-122 superconducting joints via a simple cold-pressing method, which is considered to be preferable for the practical use compared with the HP method. Samples of the Ba-122 joints were connected by the cold-pressing method. The problem of inhomogeneous along the joint interface has been solved and the macro-cracks in the joint region are well controlled. The critical current Ic of the best joint was 105 A at 4.2 K and 10 T. The resistance of the iron-based superconducting joint was first measured by the field-decay measurement. The resistance of the joint was 2.7×10 -13 Ω in self-field at 4.2 K. The Ba-122 tapes were fabricated by the ex-situ PIT method. Firstly, Ba filings, K pieces, As powders were loaded into Nb tube under argon atmosphere for 10 hours, and then sintered at 900 °C for 35 hours. The sintered precursor was ground into fine powder in an agate mortar in an argon atmosphere. Then the fine powder was packed into Ag tubes (OD 8 mm and ID 5 mm). These tubes were finally drawn into wires of 1.9 mm in diameter and then rolled into tapes of thickness 0.4 mm. Finally, the tapes were sealed into quartz tubes and heat treated at 880 °C for 0.5 h in an Ar atmosphere. Figure Then to make close contact with the tape core, uniaxially pressure was applied, shown in figure To determine joint resistance, a field-decay measurement was carried out. The field-decay measurement setup is shown in figure Microstructures in joint area were observed by Electron Probe Microanalysis (EPMA, Model: JEOL JXA8230). The temperature dependence of the resistivity at 0 T was carried out using a four-probe method by PPMS (Model: PPMS-9). Transport critical currents (Ic) of the samples were measured at 4.2 K using a standard four-probe technique, with a criterion of 1 μV cm -1 . The magnetic field dependence of transport Ic values for all samples were evaluated at the High Field Laboratory for Superconducting Materials (HFLSM) in Sendai or Institute of Plasma Physics, CAS in Hefei. To evaluate the current-carrying capacity of the jointed Ba-122 conductor, firstly, we carried out Ic measurements, as shown in figure In order to investigate the relationship between the micro-cracks and the transport properties of the joint samples, the longitudinal cross sections of Ba-122 superconducting joints were examined by SEM, as shown in figure The study on the transport properties of superconducting twin films shows that iron-based superconductors have the problem of weak grain boundary connection similar to copper oxide superconductors Figure On the basis of scanning electron microscopy and electron probe microanalysis, it was said that micro-cracks and loss of K at the connection area will degrade the CCR performance of joints. We conducted SEM/EPMA image to investigate the influence of CP process on the microstructure of the connection area of the joint samples. An SEM image of the connection area of joint sample CP80 is shown in figure Figure In our opinion, that silver is very soft at high temperature, so hot pressing at high temperature will bite silver into the crack, which will enlarge the crack in the joint connection area. There is no such problem as cold pressing. Finally, to evaluate the performance of the joint in an actual MRI magnet system scenario, that is, in the persistent mode, the field-decay technique was employed. This method is extremely sensitive to decay in the transport current and resistance of the joint. The decay behavior normally has two stages as shown in figure Where B is the field at time t, B0 is the magnetic field at time t0, L is the inductance of the closed-loop coil. The estimated joint resistance according to the L-R circuit decay equation was 2.7×10 -13 Ω in self-field at 4.2 K. The measured joint resistance meets the application requirements of such joints in persistent mode MRI magnets. This is very exciting news for the practical application of iron-based superconductors in the future. According to our results, it is clear that the transport properties of Ba-122 superconducting joints could be significantly improved by cold-pressing. Firstly, in this work, the problem of inhomogeneous distribution of elements along the joint interface has been well controlled. As is known to us, the elements along the joint interface are easy to lose during the fabrication of superconducting joint. This will result in a wide superconducting transition temperature Tc In conclusion, we fabricated the superconducting joints between Ba-122 tapes by the cold-pressing method, and estimated the iron-based superconducting joint resistance by field-decay method for the first time. Unprecedentedly, the joint shows almost identical current-carrying capacity compared to the bare tape from 4 to 14 T at 4.2 K, joint resistance of 2.7×10 -13 Ω in self-field at 4.2 K. Our microstructure SEM, EPMA and EBSD examination revealed a very small crack, few K loss and less texture in the joint cross-section area. The macrostructure XCT examination revealed there are almost no macro-cracks in the joint cross-section area. However, these artifacts did not affect the performance of the joint. There is no doubt that this result will be very conducive to the practical application of iron-based superconductors in the future. 