We investigate a system composed of an ensemble of room temperature rare-earth ions embedded in a bulk crystal, intrinsically coupled to internal strain via their sensitivity to the surrounding crystal field. We evidence the generation of a mechanical response under resonant atomic excitation. We find this motion to be the sum of two fundamental, resonant optomechanical backaction processes: a conservative, piezo-orbital mechanism, resulting from the modification of the crystal field associated with the promotion of the ions to their excited state, and a dissipative, non-radiative photothermal process related to the phonons generated throughout the atomic population relaxation. Our work opens new research avenues in hybrid optomechanics, and highlights new interactions that may be key for understanding the dephasing dynamics of ultra-coherent rare-earth ions. Hybrid mechanical systems consist of a mechanical oscillator coupled to a quantum degree of freedom. They have been identified as a promising platform to prepare, detect and manipulate non-classical macroscopic states of mechanical motion Various hybrid designs based on strain coupling have been proposed, where the quantum emitter is either a single system, namely a quantum dot (QD) The first step towards controlling the optomechanical interaction in a strain-coupled hybrid system is to investigate the sensitivity of its quantum degree of freedom to an applied strain by measuring the induced detuning of the atomic resonance Further control of a hybrid optomechanical system requires exploring the associated backaction effect, ie generating strain or motion by addressing the quantum states of the atomic system, using an optical excitation. In REIC, this backaction stems from the alteration of the ion's electronic orbital following a change of state. This affects the crystal field around the excited ion, which results in a local rearrangement of the host matrix, therefore inducing strain. From an optomechanical point of view, an important distinction between this piezo-orbital backaction and the recently reported piezoexcitonic backaction In this work, we demonstrate the generation of mechanical motion following resonant atomic driving in a strain-coupled hybrid mechanical system based on a large ensemble of ions embedded in a cm-scale monocrystal. The absence of sharp mechanical resonances in such a bulk system enables full temporal and spatial reconstruction of the optically induced motion. We present an ultra-sensitive, time-resolved, tomography setup allowing us to separately address the dissipative and conservative backaction contributions. Remarkably, the dissipative component is fully described by the non-radiative relaxation dynamics of the ions, whereas the conservative contribution is caused by the piezo-orbital effect. Overall the degree of understanding and control of both the conservative and dissipative part of the optomechanical backaction confirms the potential of rare-earth-based systems as hybrid optomechanical systems. A probe beam is reflected on this surface with a 45 • angle of incidence. In the presence of an optomechanical transduction, the surface is distorted, leading to a vertical deflection of the reflected probe beam, captured by a quadrant photodetector. In REICs, the optical transitions within the 4f configuration are shielded from environment perturbations by the outer 5s and 5p electrons. Due to this shielding, the rare-earth ions can exhibit very long population and coherence lifetimes We consider the geometry depicted in Figure As for a majority of quantum emitters, the relaxation process in Tm:YAG involves both radiative and nonradiative contributions, that will lead to the conservative and dissipative components of the optomechanical backaction process, respectively. The former is the aforementioned piezo-orbital backaction, that is the generation of strain resulting from the population transfer amongst different electronic states, whereas the latter results from non-radiative decay mechanisms, and is also known as the photothermal effect. This effect has been studied in the literature and triggered on purpose to elucidate the non-radiative processes in various REICs The principle of using time-resolved tomography for separating the conservative and dissipative contributions to the measured surface deformation is depicted in Figure expected piezo-orbital response, synchronized with the population dynamics. We repeat this measurement while scanning the position y of the probe beam around the pumping position. This enables point-by-point reconstruction of the surface shape, with a spatial resolution given by the probe beam waist on the crystal surface. The experimental data [Figure The measured tilts φ exp (y i , t) at positions (y i ) are fitted to the following expression: The first term corresponds to the piezo-orbital backaction, whose time dependence g m (t) is imposed by the atomic population evolution and whose space dependence Φ i (y i ) is left as a set of adjustable parameters. The second term is the photothermal contribution, whose temporal and spatial dynamics are not separable due to the heat diffusion mechanism. For this contribution the factor η is the only adjustable parameter. The two functions g m (t) and φ therm (y, t) are inferred from a theoretical model developed specifically for this geometry and described in detail in the SI. The result of the fit is depicted as filled area plots in Figure In Figure About the piezo-orbital backaction Using the conservative nature of the piezo-orbital backaction, and given FIG. the experiment geometry, the expected surface displacement ∆x due to the excitation of N ions can be written: where G stress = ∂ω ∂σ is the pressure sensitivity of the Tm atomic line, w p is the pump beam waist and L is the crystal thickness along the pump laser propagation direction (see SI). The exact value of G stress is not known for the 3 H 6 → 3 F 4 transition in Tm:YAG. From the measured ∆x = 230 pm displacement we estimate it to G stress ≃ 2π × 80 Hz/Pa, compatible with the typical values observed in a broad range of host crystals, rareearth dopants, and transitions Additional insight can be drawn by quantitatively estimating the force associated with the measured maximal piezo-orbital displacement, F po = EL∆x ≃ 0.27 N, where E is the Young modulus of the crystal (see SI). This force, obtained with 230 mW pump power, is 8 orders of magnitude larger than the radiation pressure force exerted by a similar laser beam that would be perfectly reflected on the surface of the crystal. We note that the force contribution from a single ion F 0 po = F po /N ≃ 700 aN is about 10 times larger than the estimated piezoexcitonic backaction force from a single quantum dot Interestingly, by comparing the experimental piezoorbitally-driven surface displacement [Figure Perspectives An important aspect of this work relates to the comprehensive characterization of photothermal effects, which is generally difficult in hybrid systems, especially in micro-and nano-structures for which thermal actuation processes largely depend on defects and asymmetries Moving further towards quantum hybrid optomechanics may be achieved by addressing a narrow spectral subset of ions via spectral hole burning (SHB) at cryogenic temperatures, where coherent quantum state manipulation becomes possible Finally, rare-earth ion-doped crystals offer an unprecedented level of control that may be very attractive in the field of optomechanics. Indeed, in these materials, the relaxation mechanisms strongly depend on the transitions addressed, the choice of the ion amongst many possible atomic species In this work we have considered a hybrid optomechanical system composed of an ensemble of identical rare earth ions embedded in a bulk crystal, and coupled to internal strain. We have evidenced the generation of a mechanical response within this system under resonant atomic excitation, which we find to be driven by two fundamental contributions: First, a conservative backaction force coined as piezo-orbital, appearing with the promotion of the atoms to an excited state. This effect is expected in all impurity-doped crystals and reflects the interplay between the ions' orbital shape and the crystal field in their host matrix. The second contribution corresponds to a dissipative, photothermal backaction force associated with the non-radiative relaxation dynamics of the rare-earth ions. The resonant nature of the two effects and their fundamental connection to the internal atomic state dynamics were quantitatively confirmed. This work reports for the first time a general method enabling to separately address these two fundamental mechanisms. Our approach sheds new light on hybrid systems and on the comprehension of non-conservative relaxation mechanisms to determine their associated fundamental quantum limits. Our results were obtained at room temperature, but could in principle be transposed to cryogenic temperatures, where rare-earth ion-doped crystals exhibit exceptional coherence properties, setting interesting perspectives for quantum hybrid optomechanics and quantum technologies. One remarkable advantage of rare-earth ion-doped crystals (REICs) is the possibility to address a large ensemble of identical ions, which altogether behave as a single quantum degree of freedom The spectroscopic properties of room-temperature REIC are well documented, motivated by the development of solid-state lasers Let us focus on the Tm ion's four Stark multiplets that take part in the laser operation in Tm:YAG, namely 3 H 6 , 3 F 4 , 3 H 5 and 3 H 4 , respectively denoted as g, m, h, and e in the following. The four-level system is depicted in Figure Level Energy (cm -1 ) Occupancy The sample used in this work is a commercial YAG (Y 3 Al 5 O 12 ) single crystal (Scientific Materials) where Tm 3+ ions substitute to c Tm = 2% of the Y 3+ ions. It is a 4 × 10 × 10 mm cuboid, polished on all 6 faces. The crystal sits on a piece of aluminum, and contacted with a thin layer of thermal paste. The rest of the crystal is in contact with air. A 230 mW pump beam is focused on a w p = 22 μm waist radius spot inside the crystal, entering the 10 × 10 surface of the crystal with normal incidence. The associated depth of focus is 4 mm, matching the crystal length L along the pump beam propagation axis. The number of thulium ions in the pump beam volume is about n Y c Tm πw 2 p L = 1.7 • 10 15 where n Y = 1.38 • 10 28 m -3 is the volumic density of yttrium ions in a pure YAG matrix. Each electronic level is split into several sublevels due to the crystal field in the YAG matrix. At room temperature, the thulium ions are distributed among the ground state 3 H 6 multiplet following a Boltzmann distribution (see Table The pump beam is generated by a Toptica DLPro extended cavity diode laser, injected into a tapered amplifier. The laser is coarsely tunable over tens of nm around 785 nm. The amplifier, on the other hand, is optimized for 793 nm operation and its 3 dB bandwidth is limited to a few nm. Therefore the optical power at the output of the amplifier drops by a factor of ∼ 5 when the wavelength is varied from 793 to 781 nm. The probe beam is provided by a Nettest Tunics external cavity diode laser emitting a few mW at a completely different color (1550 nm), focused on the crystal distorted surface with a 60 μm waist radius. The reflected beam is then collimated and directed towards the center of a Thorlabs PDQ30C quadrant photodiode with 150 kHz bandwidth. The quadrant photodiode signal is filtered via a DC-block and averaged over 128 shots to filter out slow technical noise due for example to air turbulence in the lab. In the time-resolved tomography experiment (main text, Figure In this section we first describe the atomic population evolution under resonant laser excitation, using a simple rate equation formalism. Then we present how we model the piezo-orbital and photothermal backaction mechanisms associated to this population evolution, in our specific bulk geometry. Relaxation mechanisms in the Tm ion level system. The vertically oriented numbers correspond to the relaxation rates (in s -1 ) inferred from references The complete relaxation mechanisms at room temperature in the Tm ion's four-level system are represented in Figure and the populations verify n g + n m + n h + n e = 1. The notations are as follows: Γ ij is the total relaxation rate from level i to j, including radiative and non-radiative channels. W CR is the concentration-dependent cross-relaxation rate. Solving this differential system yields the time-and space-dependent atomic populations in all four levels. The spatio-temporal variations of the atomic populations excited by a pulsed pump beam are given by the rateequation formalism described above. Considering the Gaussian pump beam profile, we obtain the space and timedependent atomic populations dynamics in the four Tm levels. In Figure Since the populations in levels e and h never exceed 5% in the center of the beam, we only focus on the piezo-orbital backaction triggered by the population transfer between levels g and m. For simplicity, we consider that the effect of this population transfer is a mere change of the ionic radius, defined as ξ = (r mr g )/r g where r m , r g refer to the ionic radii in the metastable and ground states respectively. We focus on the fraction of the displacement field exclusively oriented in the x direction towards the nearby crystal surface at x = 0. We estimate the displacement e piezo of the surface as the sum of the local displacements along the x direction: where n Tm is the volumic density of Tm ions in the crystal, and n m is the fractional population in the m state at position (x, y) and time t. The ionic radius of Tm 3+ in the ground state (r g = 0.994 Å) is found in Given the values of the maximum pumping rate R = 340 s -1 at the center of the pumping beam and of the pump pulse duration T P = 3 ms, we have RT P < ∼ 1. Therefore we consider the population to be linearly dependent on the laser power. Consequently the atomic populations can be written as the product of two separable functions of time and space. For example the metastable population reads as: n m (x, y, t) = n m (x, y, T P )g m (t) where g m (t) = nm(0,0,t) nm(0,0,T P ) . Using this property for the metastable population, Equation C. Photothermal surface displacement We now address the mechanical deformation associated with the heating contribution of the pumping pulse linked to the phonons emitted throughout the atomic relaxation process. The modeling is done in two steps. First, we use the population dynamics to estimate the non-radiative phonon contribution to heat using the parameters documented in the laser literature. Second, we solve the associated heat equation to obtain a thermal map of the crystal in space and time. According to Figure (3) where N Tm is the number of atoms addressed by the pump beam in the illuminated volume. Each term of the sum can be expressed in terms of atomic populations: where ∆ CR is the energy detuning between the two transitions involved in the cross-relaxation process, ∆ ij is the energy splitting between levels i and j. Γ N R ij is the non-radiative part of the relaxation rate along transition i → j. Each contribution to the heatload therefore exhibits a time dependence related to the population evolution in the 4-level system, and a space dependence originating from the pump laser Gaussian profile. Note that we do not include radiation trapping The total calculated heatload P heat (r = 0, t) in the center of the beam is shown in Figure The shortest timescale of the heatload variation is around τ heat = 1 ms, leading to a corresponding thermal diffusion length L diff = √ α diff τ heat ≃ 60 μm (where α diff = 4 × 10 -6 m 2 .s -1 is the thermal diffusivity in YAG Given the problem geometry, we write the heat equation in cylindrical coordinates, assuming translational invariance along the cylinder axis (pump laser beam) as a simplification, and rotational invariance around its axis: The temperature at the start of the pumping pulse is assumed uniform and equal to zero. The source term q(r, t) is the time-and space-dependent volumic heatload derived from P heat (r, t) (see Eq. 3). The presence of the nearby surface alters the heat diffusion mechanism. Indeed, the low air conductivity imposes a zero heat flow through the surface. To account for this boundary condition we make the problem symmetric by assuming a second identical cylindrical heat source inside the infinite crystal centered at position (D 0 , 0). Solving the heat equation yields the temperature distribution in the crystal volume T (x, y, t). The thermal expansion of the crystal in any direction is given by κT where κ = 8 × 10 -6 K -1 is the YAG linear thermal expansion coefficient. Finally, considering again only the displacement field directed towards the nearby surface at x = 0, the displacement of the crystal surface due to the photothermal effect reads as: To sum up, besides being deeply linked to the internal dynamics of the Tm ions via the source term of the heat equation, the photothermal effect also reflects the diffusion mechanism that occurs in a bulk sample through the timeand space-dependent temperature distribution. In Figure where E is the Young modulus of the medium. The conservative piezo-orbital force resulting from this pressure in the x direction reads as F po = σ d y d z . Using Eq. 7 we derive k m , the mechanical stiffness of the material associated with the normal deformation of the crystal yz surface, assuming d x = d y : F po can also be written as the spatial derivative of the N excited ions' internal energy and undergoing the volumic change The factor ∂ω ∂x is the atomic line sensitivity to a displacement of the yz surface. Again, using Hooke's law, we obtain The number of ions is given by N = N Tm n active where N Tm was estimated in Section II and n active ≃ 0.6 is the fraction of ions in the volume that generate the volumic change (see Figure The pressure σ in the cuboid volume due to the piezo-orbital backaction leads to a shift of the atomic resonance frequency, that we can relate to the piezo-orbital displacement using Hooke's law (Eq. 7): We apply these results to the geometry of our photodeflection experiment, using d y = w p and d z = L, to obtain the relevant expressions used in the main text: ∆ν po = G stress 2π E w p ∆x 