Integrated circulators and isolators are important for developing on-chip optical technologies, such as laser cavities, communication systems, and quantum information processors. These devices appear to inherently require mirror symmetry breaking to separate backwards from forwards propagation, so existing implementations rely upon magnetic materials, or interactions driven by propagating waves. In contrast to previous work, we demonstrate a mirror symmetric nonreciprocal device. Our device comprises three coupled photonic resonators implemented in thin-film lithium niobate. Applying radio frequency modulation, we drive conversion between the frequency eigenmodes of this system. We measure nearly 40 dB of isolation for approximately 75 mW of RF power near 1550 nm. We simultaneously generate nonreciprocal conversion between all of the eigenmodes in order to demonstrate circulation. Mirror symmetric circulation significantly simplifies the fabrication and operation of nonreciprocal integrated devices. Finally, we consider applications of such on-chip isolators and circulators, such as full-duplex isolation within a single waveguide. Circulators are nonreciprocal devices that allow propagating signals to cycle between three channels, e.g., in 1 → out 3 , in 3 → out 2 , in 2 → out 1 as shown in Fig 1a . A circulator can isolate components from each other, i.e., it can prevent reflections from returning to the source of a signal, simply by terminating one of its three channels through absorption. For example if we terminate port 2 in Fig. The mirror symmetry of our circulator means that its physical implementation can be simpler than more traditional circulators and isolators, which require mirror symmetry breaking. Many of these demonstrations use magnetic materials, 2-7 traveling waves, We demonstrate a device on a thin film lithium niobate (TFLN) platform that consists of three coupled photonic racetrack resonators. The first resonator is coupled to a bus waveguide, as shown in Fig. We set the desired operating point by using the DC bias to tune all of the bare mode frequencies to be equal, which yields three evenly spaced resonances in the coupled or dressed basis with frequencies ω i . In an ideal system, the spacing is Ω = √ 2μ with μ ≡ |μ 12 | = |μ 23 |. These three resonances couple to the bus waveguide through their spatial overlaps with the first racetrack and therefore lead to dips in the transmission spectrum, as shown in Fig. We apply an RF modulation of the form: The frequency Ω corresponds to the microwave modulation frequency. In an ideal system with equal intermodal couplings μ, we would set Ω to √ 2μ. Fabrication disorder and tuning imprecision means that the μ ij 's are slightly different. For example, μ 12 /2π = 1.864 GHz and μ 23 /2π = 1.861 GHz, as inferred for the data in Fig. This characterizes the asymmetry between forward and backward frequency conversion for a pair of modes. As shown in Fig. We obtain the scattering and isolation parameters described above by first characterizing the device's linear spectrum, with the RF modulation turned off. We measure the optical transmission parameter t(ω)| RF,off as a function of frequency, which we then use to infer and DCtune the device's parameters. This transmission amplitude evaluated at frequencies ω j corresponds to S jj | RF,off since it describes transmission through the device without a change in frequency. We place a laser tone at frequency ω 0 , blue-detuned from all of the resonances, and feed it through a commercial electro-optic modulator (EOM) before sending it to the device. Driving the EOM with a vector network analyzer (VNA), we generate two sidebands at ω 0 ± ∆. By sweeping the VNA modulation frequency, we move one sideband across the cavity response, which then beats against the optical feed- through, ω 0 , on a subsequent RF photodiode connected to the VNA. Sweeping the VNA frequency allows us to see, nearly in real-time, the hybridized mode structure of the device, as shown in Fig. We then measure the "active" device by turning on the RF drive and characterizing the scattering between frequency channels. Since VNA measurements only find linear scattering parameters, characterizing the scattering between frequencies requires a different measurement scheme than that described above. Keeping the laser at ω 0 , we modulate the EOM at frequency ∆ in order to generate and input light at frequency ω j = ω 0 -∆. We infer all of the optical powers in the different channels by making RF measurements of their beating against the feed-through light at ω 0 . This presents a minor complication for inferring S jj , as the beat notes generated by both EOM sidebands ω 0 ±∆ interfere at RF frequency ∆. This ambiguity can be resolved by comparing measurements of S jj to the independently measured scattering parameters (see previous paragraph) when RF modulation to the chip is turned off. Note that the other scattering parameters S ij , i = j can be inferred without this complication, so the isolation parameters I ij are unaffected. For all scattering parameters, we record the RF power in the beat note corresponding to optical frequency ω i , while varying the RF phase φ 2 . This power is proportional to |b i | 2 . We take the ratio of the measured power in ω i to that of the unmodulated transmission at the signal frequency ω j . By factoring out the contribution from the non-resonant input tone at ω 0 + ∆, we obtain the scattering parameters The scattering parameter measurements shown in Fig. We next characterize the RF power-dependent operation of our device by varying the modulation amplitudes A 1 and A 2 . For each power combination, we sweep the phase condition of the RF sources through multiple periods and extract the peak isolation observed for each transition. We generate maps of the isolation versus RF power, depicted in Fig. We can understand the trends in the isolation factor RF power dependence by studying the coupled mode theory description of the dynamics. 1 ∝ Ã2 . This condition is found by noting that for cancellation to occur, the rate at which direct 1 → 3 scattering occurs, Ã2 , needs to match the rate of indirect scattering 1 → 2 → 3, which is approximately Ã2 1 /γ 2 28 . Here, γ 2 is the linewidth (full-width, half-max -FWHM) of the second dressed mode. A more detailed analysis 1 indicates that maximum I 13 isolation is given by: where γ 2 = (κ 1 + κ 3 )/2. A similar line of reasoning explains the large isolation regions in Fig. Our platform's most significant limit is due to optical loss in the cavities. In the ideal realization the dressed mode linewidths are entirely due to coupling out into the feed waveguide. When the RF drives are off, the absence of intrinsic loss means that the dressed modes are overcoupled, so |S kk | = 1. As we increase the RF driving power, the scattering between dressed modes appears as additional loss at the signal frequency. This moves the mode from being over-coupled into a critically coupled condition, when the scattering-induced loss at mode k equals the mode's coupling rate to the waveguide and leads to |S kk | = 0. However, in the experimentally realized system, there is additional intrinsic loss in all three cavities, and the dressed modes are already close to being critically coupled when the RF drives are off. The RF induced scattering then acts to increase transmission |S kk | as it moves the mode farther away from being critically coupled. This means that in contrast to the ideal circulator, the diagonal elements of the scattering matrix are FIG. nonzero in our realization. We expect that with improvements in optical Q of on-chip LN devices, this problem can be largely eliminated. Another limit of our approach is due to its resonant nature. The isolation bandwidth of our device depends on the dressed mode linewidths, and we measured sustained isolation over more than a few hundred megahertz. This too can be increased, but at the cost of greater RF power as the Ãk also scale with bandwidth. One strategy to make the modulation more efficient would be to include modulation into the third racetrack. Alternatively, since we only need narrowband RF modulation, we could use the extremely efficient optomechanical modulation schemes recently demonstrated on LN A novel feature of our device is its operation as a bidirectional isolator -a property that emerges from mirror symmetry and frequency-domain operation. For example, two transmitters/receivers can operate simultaneously along a single channel. Node 1 can transmit a signal down a waveguide at frequency ω 1 to node 2, who recieves at ω 3 . This communication is isolated. Meanwhile, node 2 can then send a signal backwards along the waveguide at ω 1 to node 1, who also receives at ω 3 . This communication is also isolated. With the standard optical isolator, this behavior would require two optical channels, one for each direction of transmission. Overall, we have demonstrated an integrated frequency isolator/circulator on thin-film lithium niobate, an emerging platform for classical and quantum photonics. We measured peak isolation of nearly 40 dB with 4.4 dB insertion loss for dual RF drive powers of P 1 = 73.2 mW P 2 = 59.0 mW. Our device is reconfigurable, enabling isolation over a wide range of powers for different operating frequencies. For example, we also measure ω 1 → ω 3 isolation of more than 25 dB for dual RF powers of P 1 = 7.32 mW and P 2 = 0.74 mW, but with a commensurate increase of insertion loss (∼ 16 dB). Furthermore, we also measured insertion loss as low as 3 dB for different power and isolation conditions. Ultimately, the mirror symmetry and frequency-domain operation of our device provide for novel applications as an isolator/circulator and frequency router in photonic circuits. Fabrication. The device is fabricated in a two-mask process from 500 nm-thick film of lithium niobate (LN) atop a sapphire (Sa) handle. The components are air-clad, and the electrodes are fabricated as a Ti:Au metal bilayer. The first mask, for photonics fabrication, is defined from hydrogen silsequioxane (HSQ), a negative-tone electron beam resist, patterned with 100 kV electron beam lithography (JEOL JBX-6300FS). We transfer the patterns into the LN with argon ion mill etching (IntlVac ion mill), followed by an acid cleaning procedure. We confirm the device's optical performance prior to fabricating electrodes. The electrodes are defined with a standard photoresist lift-off bilayer. The patterns are written using direct-write lithography (Heidelberg MLA150), and metal is evaporated (Kurt J. Lesker LAB18) prior to solvent-based liftoff. Lastly, we wirebond on-chip to connect electrodes across the optics, thereby defining proper modulation polarity on-chip (West Bond 7476E). The device is optically pumped from a telecommunications wavelength diode laser (Santec TSL-550). We lock the optical pump blue-detuned from the modes at 1543.6 nm (via a Bristol Wavemeter). The light is passed through a polarization control wheel and in-line fiber polarizer to maximize TE transmission. This light is passed into a commercial electro-optic amplitude modulator (EOM). We drive the EOM from a VNA (R&S ZNB20) in order to generate sidebands. The pump and sidebands are then passed through another polarization controller, into a variable optical attenuator (VOA), then a power meter before being passed onto the chip. By sweeping the frequency of the VNA output (or by driving a particular frequency) we can sweep the sideband across (or directly drive) the optical dressed modes of the system. The light undergoes modulation on-chip. Output light from the optical waveguide passes through an erbium-doped fiber amplifier (EDFA) and an X-switch, which switches our detector between a photodiode for linear optical characterization, and a fast photo-diode (Optilab PD-40M), which records beat tones between the optical pump, the EOM sideband, and converted sidebands when applying on-chip modulation. The output of the fast photodiode passes through a bias-tee. One arm passes back to the VNA to record the broad-band response of the cavity, and the other arm passes to a spectrum analyzer (R&S FSW26) to record converted sideband powers with high precision. This setup enables us to simultaneously observe the full cavity response on the VNA in nearly real-time while adjusting DC bias across the device and manipulating the optical pump, while also observing sideband powers at particular frequencies when driving on-chip modulation. In order to characterize our device mirror symmetry, we separately insert a second X-switch and polarization control just before the device. We record transmission through the device from both waveguide propagation directions, demonstrating equivalence of scattering matrix elements (see SI). On-chip modulation is driven from two pulsed signal generators (PSG, Keysight E8257D). One PSG drives the Ω tone while the other drives the 2Ω tone. We vary the relative phase between these sources. The clocks of the PSGs are locked together, and these are in turn locked to the clock of the FSW26. The two PSG outputs are combined at a power splitter and passed through a high-power microwave amplifier. The output of the amplifier is then passed to a probe, which is contacted to the on-chip electrical pads. Importantly, the rate of direct phase modulation on the PSG is much faster than the global phase drift of the system, enabling us to visualize power modulations at sideband frequencies on the FSW26. Author contribution. J.F.H. fabricated the device. J.F.H. and V.A. led the experimental effort. J.W. developed the device operating theory and characterized theoretical device performance. J.F.H, J.D.W., and J.W. determined physical device designs. J.D.W. assisted in early experimentation. A.H.S.N and S.F. provided experimental and theoretical guidance and support for this experiment. We derive the cavity response in the bare-mode basis according to standard coupled mode theory. In the following, κ i describes the total decay rate of bare mode i, μ ij is the coupling between bare modes i and j, and κ e is the extrinsic coupling rate of the first ring coupled to the waveguide (κ 1 = κ 1,i + κ e ). The triple-ring system is described by the Hamiltonian: We take the Heisenberg equations of motion to arrive at the coupled mode theory for the three resonances, âi : We go into a frame rotating with the laser frequency, ω 0 . This shifts our resonances relative to the drive tone, ω 0,i → ∆ i = ω 0,i -ω 0 . Fourier transforming into the frequency domain and taking b in = 0, we obtain the eigenvalue equation 2. Here, a = (â 1 , â2 , â3 ) T . The real part of the eigenvalues corresponds to the dressed mode frequencies ω i , and the dressed mode loss rates are twice the magnitude of the imaginary part. Taking the Fourier Transform of the equations of motion has the effect of the following further substitutions: (and similarly for modes 2,3). We solve the Fourier transformed equations 1 for the linear cavity transmission in the frame rotating with the laser: We calculate the photodiode response to light modulated by an EOM traveling through our device. In the above, (α in , 0) T is the laser input in the rotating frame of the laser. Furthermore, b, a describe asymmetric loss between the arms of the integrated modulator. The phase accumulated in the EOM is given by a DC phase shift, θ, plus harmonic modulation: β is small, so we can neglect higher-order sidebands. We solve for the time-dependent transmission through the EOM: In our experiment, the laser is blue-detuned from the cavity, so the -|Ω| sideband sweeps across a mode as we sweep the modulation frequency Ω. The carrier and both sidebands are then filtered by the linear cavity response in eq. 3 to yield the time-dependent transmission through our device. This leads to an output field amplitude: This transmitted field is recorded on a photodiode and routed to a VNA. We AC-couple the output to neglect DC offsets: The voltage from the photodiode is given by V (t) ∼ R{Z(Ω)e iΩt }, and the VNA trace is proportional to the amplitude of the comlex number Z(Ω). We normalize by the far-detuned response (t(ω) = t(0) ≈ 1, ∆ 1), which allows us to cancel pre-factors corresponding to the carrier tone amplitude, RF modulation amplitude, global phases, and frequency-dependent cable and detector losses. We can fit the normalized phase response of the VNA (arg{Z(Ω)}) to determine system parameters. Our model has many free parameters, so our fit quality is sensitive to an initial guess. We account for this by applying a modified bootstrap algorithm. We repeatedly fit subsets of the VNA trace using random parameter guesses within physical bounds. We obtain distributions of the fit parameters, summarized in table S1 B. After fitting ∆ 1 , ∆ 2 , ∆ 3 , we can solve eq. 2 for the dressed mode detunings, ω i , from the carrier tone. We generate input signals at dressed mode frequencies by driving the EOM at |ω i |. When the EOM DC bias phase θ ≈ π, the VNA trace appears symmetric, and we can approximate the super-mode locations by extracting the peaks in the VNA trace. In order to improve the symmetry of the mode transitions in the conversion experiment, we apply RF modulation at Ω = (ω 1 -ω 3 )/2, and we position the ω 2 input at (ω 1 + Ω)/2π = 8.391 GHz. In order to establish non-reciprocity, we must demonstrate that the scattering matrix describing input and output of the device is asymmetric. The power in a given sideband is proportional to the integration of the autocorrelation function S V V , which is recorded on the FSW. This integration is proportional to |Z(Ω)| 2 from 8. We therefore measure sideband power as a function of the transmitted signal power: We identify η j such that we factor out the non-resonant sideband contribution in 10. All of the free parameters in equations 10 and 11 are obtained via the fits demonstrated in section S1 C. The diagonal elements S jj also contain a non-resonant contribution in the transmitted power measurement, so they require a slightly modified normalization factor. For a fixed phase condition, ∆φ = 2φ 1 -φ 2 , and modulation amplitudes, P 1 = 73.2 mW and P 2 = 59.0 mW, the scattering matrix S takes on an asymmetric form demonstrating circulation. The diagonal elements correspond to feedthrough at the original signal frequency as described in the main text. Here we present the scattering matrices for both forward (1 → 3 → 2 → 1) and reverse (1 → 2 → 3 → 1) circulation for left-to-right-propagating signals. normalize these traces to the maximum amplitude of the modes before any modulation is applied (i.e., before taking data in Fig. We detune the microwave drive from the ideal value and observe changes in lineshape and fluctuations in the isolation parameter, as depicted in Fig. Detuning the optical signal from the resonance location has a similar effect as RF detuning on the S ij lineshapes and isolation parameters. There is disorder in the hybridization, evidenced by misalignment between the maximum isolation and the resonance condition. From coupled mode theory, we can predict the isolation bandwidth at the ideal power matching condition A 1 and A 2 , as given in the main text. For input and output frequencies detuned from the signal frequencies by ∆ = ω -ω i , isolation parameters in the ideal system (i.e., no disorder in the mode hybridization) are given by: The 3 dB isolation bandwidth (FWHM) is given by twice the linewidth of the intermediary mode in the indirect transition pathway. In practice, our modes have disorder and exhibit some drift with RF drive power. We observed isolation that remained within a few dB of maximum over hundreds of MHz. We characterize optical power in the three resonators. Following the procedure set out by, E res = ω|â 1 | 2 (16) Substituting for the input flux, |α in | 2 , in terms of optical power, we can solve for the circulating power in the first resonator: In this expression κ 1 = κ e + κ 1,i and P wg refers to input signal power at a signal frequency ω i propagating in the waveguide. We can similarly solve the input-output relations to obtain expressions for the power circulating in the second and third resonators: From equations 18,19,20, using the average fit parameters obtained in section S1, we obtain power in resonators 1,2, and 3 for various signal frequencies (table FIG. S8. Microwave Detuning Effects. |S31| 2 (red) and |S13| 2 (blue) as a function of the phase condition, ∆φ = 2φ1 -φ2, for varied RF modulation detuning, as indicated on each panel.