In this study, the effects of surface roughness and pore characteristics on fatigue lives of laser powder bed fusion (LPBF) Ti-6Al-4V parts were investigated. The 197 fatigue bars were printed using the same laser power but with varied scanning speeds. These actions led to variations in the geometries of microscale pores, and such variations were characterized using micro-computed tomography. To generate differences in surface roughness in fatigue bars, half of the samples were grit-blasted and the other half machined. Fatigue behaviors were analyzed with respect to surface roughness and statistics of the pores. For the gritblasted samples, the contour laser scan in the LPBF strategy led to a pore-depletion zone isolating surface and internal pores with different features. For the machined samples, where surface pores resemble internal pores, the fatigue life was highly correlated with the average pore size and projected pore area in the plane perpendicular to the stress direction. Finally, a machine learning model using a drop-out neural network (DONN) was employed to establish a link between surface and pore features to the fatigue data (logN), and good prediction accuracy was demonstrated. Besides predicting fatigue lives, the DONN can also estimate the prediction uncertainty. Laser powder bed fusion (LPBF) is an additive manufacturing (AM) technique that uses high-power laser heating to melt and fuse fine metallic particles layer-by-layer in a powder bed However, uncertainty and perceived risk associated with the mechanical properties of the products from this new technology have slowed its adoption to take advantage of its merits. Uncertainties are typically associated with concerns surrounding the processing and resultant material of a component. Factors such as laser power, scanning speed, powder contamination, process interruptions, unremoved powder, laser instability and surface finishing can all impact the microstructure of the printed material, leading to engineering uncertainty in the mechanical performance of the printed part It would be ideal to have the capability to control the LPBF-printed material properties by controlling machine process parameters in the printing process. However, with the diversity of LPBF machines and raw material powders available and the uncertainties related to the operating conditions (e.g., laser stability and powder contamination), it is virtually impossible to establish a universal correlation between process parameters and material properties. In addition, it is difficult to benchmark a process with respect to certain properties, such as fatigue tests, since the relevant tests require a large number of samples and are timeconsuming. On the other hand, non-intrusive characterization of porous structures can be done in a much faster manner and consumes much less resources. If one can establish a robust correlation between the porosity of the LPBF-printed materials and their mechanical properties, it is then possible to use nonintrusive characterizations, such as a computer tomography (CT) scan, to evaluate if the part is acceptable. Such correlations have been studied in the literature using physics-based modeling techniques However, such models also demand high computational resources and their accuracy depends on input parameters (e.g., melt pool size, crystalline orientation), which usually require extensive experiments to determine. Moreover, the integration of pores into such simulations is not trivial as this is limited by the finite domain size the model can handle. It is thus desirable to have simple surrogate models to avoid the above-mentioned challenges, and data-driven models can be a potential solution. To address some of the above-mentioned challenges, in this study, we investigated the effects of surface roughness and pore characteristics of LPBF-printed Ti64 parts on their fatigue lives and established datadriven surrogate models for their relationships. 197 fatigue bars were printed using a metal AM system (3D Systems ProX 320TM) with varying the laser scanning speed, which altered the local melting and fusion process of the powder and in turn led to variable porous structures. The pores were then characterized using micro-CT. To investigate the surface roughness effect, half of the samples were grit-blasted, and the other half were machine-finished, which are characterized using optical surface profilometry. The statistics of the micro-pore density, location, size and shape, as well as surface roughness were systematically analyzed. Selected samples were then mechanically tested for their fatigue properties. The correlations between surface and pore features and fatigue properties were analyzed. Finally, a machine learning model using a drop-out neural network (DONN) was trained to link the porosity and surface roughness to the fatigue data. Besides predicting fatigue life, the DONN also has the unique capability of estimating the prediction uncertainty. The evaluation of fatigue life given pore and surface input data only take a few seconds using this DONN model. Practically, such efficient surrogate models may serve to reduce the amount of physical testing needed for LPBF-generated components by informing the user if the property of a printed component is within acceptance limits. As described above 197 fatigue bars (21.08 mm × 2.54 mm × 84.58 mm) compliant with ASTM test methods were printed using a ProX DMP 320 AM system. 72 samples were used for fatigue life tests, 12 samples were utilized for CT scans, and 113 samples were scarified for preliminary tests (e.g., repeatability, laser power, speed and hatch distance tests). Ti64 metal powder (3D Systems LaserForm® Ti Gr23 (A) powder), which is of critical importance to a wide range of applications, like many aerospace and orthopedic components, was the material used. Different processing parameters including laser power, scanning speed, hatch distance and surface finish were varied so that the porous structures could be tuned in the preliminary porosity investigation (see supplementary material, Fig. Since the purpose of this study was to link porosity, instead of processing conditions, to fatigue life, scanning speed was selected as the independent variable to be systematically varied in the printing process since it offers a wide range of micro-pore variations. To this end, the laser scanning speed was varied from 750 to 2000 (mm/s) with a 250 increment, where the vendor-recommended speed was 1250 mm/s. The printed samples were then heat-treated to release residual stress The scan strategy in this experiment first used two contour scans offset from each other by 70 μm followed by the interior hatching scans The change in porosity area ratio (PAR) by different laser speeds varies from 0.05 % to 1.29 %, and the relatively higher pore density can affect the surface roughness by showing open pores on the top of the printed surface Here, the scan speed for the contour 1 and contour 2 were constant at 3000 mm/s. But hatching speed varied from 750 mm/s to 2000 mm/s. The printed samples were then shaped into fatigue bars (Fig. A micro-CT machine (North Star Imaging X7000 system) was used to characterize the pore features non-destructively. The equipment is capable of detecting pores with voxel size above 14 μm. More accurate measurements are possible, but the higher nominal resolution is coupled with a longer scanning time and yields a larger amount of data. The pore size detection based on the current resolution would be 28 ~ 42 μm. The whole gauge region was scanned, and pore features were collected. The VGSTUDIO Surface Profilometry: For each sample, an optical profilometer (Olympus LEXT OLS4100 confocal microscope) was used to measure the surface roughness. Samples with two different surface finish methods, AB and M samples, were characterized. For each roughness data point reported, it is calculated from 20 different line profiles with the error bar representing the standard deviation. Fig. where y is the height of line profile, y max is the maximum peak, y min is the minimum valley and r i is the radius of the deepest valley. The stress-controlled fatigue test per ASTM E466 was performed with an extensometer A fractography analysis was performed to characterize the fatigue failure. The fracture origins were visually examined by low magnification of a stereo microscope (Meiji Techno) under white light illumination. The detailed evaluation was performed by a field emission SEM (Magellan 400, FEI). The entire fracture surfaces were examined in this evaluation and if the fracture origins were identified, the information of the origins such as pore locations and size were documented. DONN Fig. As shown in Fig. However, the internal porosity changes when the hatching speed changes. Thus, as shown in Fig. The surface of each M sample was polished along the longitudinal axis (x-direction in Fig. In addition, in the case of Ra, Rt and Riso, the AB samples had much higher values than M samples, but the average radius of the curvatures at the lowest valleys showed the opposite trend. The reason is that a larger radius of curvature is calculated on a relatively slowly varying surface, where shallow micro-notches have larger radii of curvature. Consequently, when surface roughness indeed affects the initiation of the cracks during the fatigue tests, we should be able to see the distinguishable characteristics of both groups: having the same pore features but different surface conditions. In the case of the AB samples, the pores can be readily divided into two groups: internal and surface pores. The two groups are isolated by a depletion zone created by the contour scans (Fig. Thus, the contour 2 line gets melted twice; once by contour 2 and the other by hatch passes. Such re-melting should be the cause of the depletion zone. Fig. About 200 μm in thickness was removed for planarization for these samples, meaning that the depletion zone was removed and internal pores exposed. The exposed surface pores by the polishing process were different from the surface pores of the AB samples. The features for the M samples are displayed in Fig. Figure dominating the low-cycle fatigue (LCF) Classically, the fatigue life prediction is based on the Basquin power law which is represented by the following equation where σ is stress amplitude, N is number of cycles to failure and c and m are the fitting parameters in the Basquin's model. However, often linear-logarithmic coordinate was adopted to describe the experimental S-N data Fracture surfaces are comprised of three different zones: origin of crack initiation, crack propagation and finial overload zone These surface pores are more likely to be crack initiators. Therefore, finding the crack initiations after the fatigue failure in our study is a way to account for how closely the estimation of statistical data correlates with the actual results. In the case of the M0750 sample, five identifiable fracture origins were found, and all of them were from pores. Four of them were surface pores like Fig. According to other studies Figure Pearson correlation coefficient (PCC) can present the quantified linear correlation between two variables. In Fig. The AB samples in general show comparatively shorter fatigue life than the M samples, which should be caused by different surface conditions between the two groups of samples (Fig. For the AB samples, the laser speeds of 1000 and 1250 mm/s generally lead to better fatigue lives regardless of the applied maximum stress (Fig. However, AB samples have unique properties in terms of surface pores. For example, the surface pores, defined as those within ~80 μm from the sample's physical surface, have almost constant number of pore density and size regardless of the laser speed because the processing parameters of contour scans are fixed for all samples (Fig. We first quantify the relationships between the pore features and the log cycles to failure (logN) independently for the AB and M samples since they have very difference surface roughness. The descriptors used for M and AB samples are stress (σ), surface roughness (all four parameters: Ra, Rt, Riso, r̅ ), pore density (ρ), diameter (d ̅ ), compactness (η), sphericity (γ) and projected YZ area. Pore features for both internal and surface pores are included as independent descriptors. There are 41 LCF data points for the M samples and 35 for the AB samples, and we train the DONN using the leave-one-out cross-validation method (i.e., reserve one data for testing and use the rest data for training, which iterates through all the data) given the limited amount of data. The inputs and labels are all standardized before feeding into the DONN for training or validation. Figure It is seen that all of the prediction uncertainties are below 0.35 for the M samples (Fig. Since the major difference between the AB and M samples are their surface features, we further trained a unified DONN using all data from both sets to predict logN of all samples. We then went through the In this work, we investigated the effects of surface roughness and pore characteristics on the stress- 