Magnet-superconductor hybrid (MSH) systems represent promising platforms to host Majorana zero modes (MZMs), the elemental building blocks for fault-tolerant quantum computers. Theoretical description of such MSH structures is mostly based on simplified models, not accounting for the complexity of real materials. Here, based on density functional theory, we derive a superconducting 80-band model to study an MSH system consisting of a magnetic manganese chain on the s wave superconductor niobium. For a wide range of values of the superconducting order parameter, the system is a topological superconductor, with MZMs exhibiting non-universal spatial patterns and a drastic accumulation of spectral weight on both sides along the magnetic chain. These side feature states can be explained by an effective model which is guided by the ab initio results. Performing scanning tunneling spectroscopy experiments on the same system, we observe a spatial structure in the low-energy local density of states that is consistent with the theoretical findings. Our results open a first-principle approach to the discovery of topological superconductors. Topological superconductors are amongst the most desirable materials, as their quasiparticles at zero energy, known as Majorana zero modes (MZMs) DFT modelling. Using density functional theory (DFT) and projective Wannier functions, we study the electronic structure of Mn chains on Nb(110), and map it onto a tight-binding model to extract the orbital dependence, spin splitting and spin-orbit coupling. To this end, we construct a slab supercell for the Mn chains along the [001] direction with d Mn-Mn = 3.30 Å on Nb(110). There is little previous work on ab initio based modeling of MSH structures, see Next, we study the real-space electronic structure, and in particular that of the MZMs of the DFT-based 80band model. For short chains, it is very difficult to find localized zero-energy states due to the tiny gap size leading to a severe hybridization of MZMs (Fig. LDOS still contains sides features; all our conclusions remain, hence, unchanged. Throughout the manuscript, we use the term MZM for the low-energy or zero-energy states of the topological superconducting phase. The latter is determined by the topological invariant for both infinite and finite chains. Clearly several of the considered examples of MZM are (strongly) hybridized, and in the literature alternative names such as 'precursor of MZMs' have been introduced Majorana zero modes with side features. In order to deepen our understanding of the side features in the zero-energy LDOS, we analyze in the following a simplified model. Inspired by relevant orbitals of the 80-band DFT-based model which lead to side features (see SI section S2), we construct a one-orbital model which still has three "substrate" atoms carrying superconductivity and one magnetic atom (modeled by a Zeeman term), see Fig. The simplified model allows us to tune various parameters such as Rashba spin-orbit coupling, magnetic moment, chemical potential and superconducting pairing amplitude. We have analyzed the corresponding phase diagram and computed the fraction of the zero-energy LDOS which is localized on the side next to the magnetic chain. 40 percent of the topological region of the phase diagram Fig. When slightly increasing the gap size, these maxima disappear in the middle of the chain, but persist closer to the chain ends (an example with two such maxima at the chain ends is shown in Fig. Larger gap sizes result in even stronger localization of the MZMs [see Fig. Experiment. To test the theoretical findings presented above, we studied linear chains of Mn and Fe assembled via lateral atom manipulation techniques on a clean Nb(110) surface To study the universality of the observed side features, we also investigated the low-energy properties of a Fe 16 chain along the [001] direction. This chain is structurally identical (see upper panel in Fig. The side features of the Mn chains were previously ascribed to bands formed by hybridization of Yu-Shiba-Rusinov (YSR) states of particular orbital character of the individual Mn impurities Motivated by our analysis relating these findings with the previously discovered double-eye feature Our findings raise the important question whether MZMs with side features can be used for braiding and topological quantum computing, emphasizing the necessity to perform further theoretical and experimental work on one-dimensional MSH structures. We are using fully relativistic all electron DFT calculations based on the full potential local orbital (FPLO) basis Superconducting 80-Band Modeling The projected 40-band tight-binding model is given by including essentially all possible hopping combinations up to fifth neighbors. Hopping amplitudes t i,o;j,o ′ σσ ′ are given as an input from DFT, and c † i,o,σ creates an electron with spin σ at orbital o at site i. We add the superconducting onsite pairing term . and convert the model into an 80-band Bogoliubov-de Gennes model. As stressed before, the orbital index o only runs over the orbitals of the Nb atoms. We have calculated the topological invariant The STM experiments were performed in a home-built UHV facility operated at a base temperature of T = 320 mK Supplementary Figure We compute all coherence lengths v F /∆ gap (stemming from multiple bands) and compute the average coher-ence length. In Supplementary Fig. We give here the formal definition of the simplified model introduced in the main text, in technical detail. We then present some extra results: phase diagrams, spectra, and a discussion on coherence lengths in this model. Finally, we present a modified version of the model where we have extended the substrate around the magnetic chain. We start with the standard Shiba chain model x,↓ ) annihilate an atom of type i = 0, 1, 2, 3 on site x; i = 0 refers to the magnetic adatom, i = 1 to the substrate Nb atom in the centre, and i = 2, 3 to the Nb substrate atoms on either side of the adatoms. The Hamiltonian is H t is the hopping Hamiltonian. In the general case, hopping amplitudes t ij are defined in Supplementary Fig. with i, j ∈ [0, 1, 2, 3]. The first term describes hopping within the unit cell (thus i = j), and the second term between neighboring unit cells. H μ is the chemical potential, H α is Rashba spin-orbit coupling. In the general case, Rashba amplitudes are defined by a matrix α ij (x, x+1) = α ij . All hoppings are associated with iασ y with α being the Rashba amplitude. Because the unit cell of our 1D model is 2D, i.e., has spatial dependence in both x and y directions, the definition of Rashba spin-orbit coupling is ambiguous. We could choose iασ x in y direction, iασ y in x direction, and a combination for diagonal hoppings (2D choice). Alternatively, we could uniformly choose iασ y in all directions, and fix the sign convention of "+" for +y and "-" for -y (1D choice). For the 2D choice the Rashba part of the Hamiltonian is given by Hoppings in the x direction are associated with σ 2 , in the y direction with σ 1 , and along diagonals ±x ± y with ±iσ 1 ± iσ 2 . We compare superconducting spectra under the two different implementations of Rashba SOC (Supplementary Fig. To quantify the presence of side features, we define a simple quantity, the side feature weight (SFW), specifically for states closest to E = 0. Consider the E = 0 LDOS, We then define the side feature weight of the state |ψ , Here we sum over the spatial position x from 0 to chain length L -1 (unless otherwise specified L = 51 sites). Typically we present side feature weight as a function of the free parameters μ and J, with fixed ∆ and α. For easy reading we multiply the side feature weight by the topological index, +1 (-1) corresponding to the topologically trivial (non-trivial) phase. Negative side feature weights correspond to the topologically superconducting regime, i.e., the zero-energy state represents a MZM with side features. The side feature weight is shown in the phase diagrams of the following subsection. We present a representative phase diagram in Fig. As with the 80-band model we compute the approximate coherence length ξ ∼ v F /∆ gap (Supplementary Fig. When the gap is large the coherence length is short and the MZMs are well localised to the ends of the chain. Correspondingly, they are fixed to zero-energy (Supplementary Fig. The results summarized in Fig. The results shown in Supplementary Fig. In the main text, we show the LDOS evaluated in the plane of the chain. However, as explained in the Methods section, the height of the tip apex is controlled by stabilizing the tip at a bias voltage V stab and current I stab . To compare the theoretical LDOS to the experimental dI/dV , we follow a phenomenological description of the tunneling given in Ref. The differential conductance, dI(r, V )/dV , is a weighted sum of the LDOS, N (r i , eV ), weighted by an exponential decay, w(r), depending on the distance between the tip and site i and a decay length ξ. Similarly, the current, I(r, V ), is a weighted sum of the integrated LDOS with the same weight. In Supplementary Fig. The experimental data in the main text only show the spatial distributions of selected states close to zero energy. In Supplementary Fig. Notably, the LDOS at exactly zero energy around the two Mn chains shown in this figure is dominated by a defect-induced localized sub-gap state. The positions of the defects are marked by the green arrows in the constant-current images. At this position along the chain, a strong, near-zero energy state appears on the side of the chain. It is very likely that this state is not a property of the Mn chain itself but rather induced by the defect, which is why we chose to show the next higher energy excitation in the main text. A comparison of the datasets in Supplementary Fig. Single Mn atoms on Nb(110) have recently been found to induce pairs of spatially anisotropic multi-orbital YSR states 1D-Rashba vs. 2D-Rashba SOC