This paper presents a way to define, classify and accelerate the order of convergence of an uncountable family of fractional fixed point methods, which may be useful to continue expanding the applications of fractional operators. The proposed method to accelerate convergence is used in a fractional iterative method, and with the obtained method are solved simultaneously two nonlinear algebraic systems that depend on time-dependent parameters, and that allow obtaining the temperatures and efficiencies of a hybrid solar receiver. Finally, two uncountable families of fractional fixed point methods are presented, in which the proposed method to accelerate convergence can be implemented. A fractional derivative is an operator that generalizes the ordinary derivative, in the sense that if denotes the differential of order α, then α may be considered a parameter, with α ∈ R, such that the first derivative corresponds to the particular case α = 1. On the other hand, a fractional differential equation is an equation that involves at least one differential operator of order α, with (n -1) < α ≤ n for some positive integer n, and it is said to be a differential equation of order α if this operator is the highest order in the equation. The fractional operators have many representations, but one of their fundamental properties is that they allow retrieving the results of conventional calculus when α → n. So, considering a scalar function h : R m → R and the canonical basis of R m denoted by { êk } k≥1 , it is possible to define the following fractional operators of order α using Einstein notation Therefore, denoting by ∂ n k the partial derivative of order n applied with respect to the k-th component of the vector x, using the previous operator it is possible to define the following set of fractional operators O n x,α (h) := o α : ∃∂ n k h(x) and lim which may be considered as a generating set of sets of fractional tensor operators. For example, considering α, n ∈ R m with α = êk α k and n = êk n k , it is possible to define the following set of fractional tensor operators x,α m (h) . ( One of the most famous fixed point methods is the well-known Newton-Raphson method. However, it sometimes goes unnoticed that this method has the following problem related to finding roots of polynomials in the complex space: If it is necessary to find a complex root ξ of a polynomial using the Newton-Raphson method, with ξ ∈ C \ R, a complex initial condition x 0 must be provided, and if a suitable initial condition is selected, this will lead to a complex solution, but there is also the possibility that this may lead to a real solution. If the root obtained is real, it is necessary to change the initial condition and expect that this will lead to a complex solution, otherwise, it is necessary to change the value of the initial condition again, this process is repeated until it finally converges to a complex solution. The process described above is very similar to what happens when different values α are used in fractional operators until we find a solution that meets some established criterion. Considering the Newton-Raphson method from the perspective of fractional calculus, it is possible to consider that an order α remains fixed, in this case α = 1, and the initial conditions x 0 are varied until found a solution ξ that fulfills an established criterion. It is necessary to mention that considering a relationship between fractional calculus and the Newton-Raphson method may seem somewhat forced at first, but the latter is characterized by the fact that when it generates divergent sequences of complex numbers, it can sometimes lead to the creation of fractals Before continuing, it is necessary to mention that due to the large number of fractional operators that can exist, some sets need to be defined to fully characterize the fractional Newton-Raphson method. So, considering a function h : where [h] k : Ω ⊂ R m → R denotes the k-th component of the function h. So, it is possible to define the following set of matrices and therefore, the fractional Newton-Raphson method can be defined and classified through the following set of matrices and as a consequence, if Φ FN R denotes the iteration function of the fractional Newton-Raphson method, it is possible to obtain the following result: The change from leaving the initial condition x 0 fixed and varying the order α of the derivative, although seemingly simple, gives the fractional Newton-Raphson method the ability to partially solve the intrinsic problem associated with classical fixed point methods, which is that in general, to find N zeros of a function, N initial conditions must be provided. This is because by varying the order α of the fractional derivative, the fractional Newton-Raphson method can find N zeros of a function using a single initial condition as shown in the Figure To finish this section, it is necessary to mention that the applications of fractional operators have spread to different fields of science such as finance where • : R n → R denotes any vector norm, or equivalently Although finding the zeros of a function may seem like a simple problem, it is generally necessary to use numerical methods of the iterative type to solve it. So, considering that fractional iterative methods can find N solutions of a system using a single initial condition, this article shows an alternative way to the Aitken's method to accelerate the order of convergence of a family of fractional fixed point methods, which consists of implementing a function in the order of the fractional operators involved, with which it is possible to obtain an order of convergence at least quadratic. Let Φ : R n → R n be a function. It is possible to build a sequence {x i } ≥1 by defining the following iterative method if it is fulfilled that x i → ξ ∈ R n and if the function Φ is continuous around ξ, we obtain that the above result is the reason by which the method (10) is known as the fixed point method. Furthermore, the function Φ is called an iteration function. The following corollary allows characterizing the order of convergence of an iteration function Φ through its Jacobian matrix Φ (1) [18]: Corollary 2.1. Let Φ : R n → R n be an iteration function. If Φ defines a sequence {x i } ≥1 such that x i → ξ ∈ R n . So, Φ has an order of convergence of order (at least) p in B(ξ; δ), where One of the fundamental operators of fractional calculus is the operator Riemann-Liouville fractional integral, which is defined as follows which is a fundamental piece to build the operator Riemann-Liouville fractional derivative, which is defined as follows where n = α and a I 0 x f (x) := f (x). Applying the operator , the iteration function of a fractional iterative method may be written in general form as follows where A g,α is a matrix that depends, in at least one of its entries, on fractional operators of order α applied to some function g : R n → R n , whose particular case occurs when g = f . So, it is possible to define in a general way a fractional fixed point method as follows If it is fulfilled that x i → ξ ∈ Ω, it is possible to define the following set which may be interpreted as the set of fractional fixed point methods that define a convergent sequence {x i } i≥1 to the value ξ ∈ Ω. Considering the Corollary 2.1, as well as the Proposition 1 from the reference On the other hand, considering that depending on the nature of the function f there exist cases in which the Newton-Raphson method can present an order of convergence (at least) linear with which it is possible to define the following sets Ord 1 2 (ξ) := ord 2 (ξ) ∩ Ord 1 (ξ) and Ord 2 2 (ξ) := ord 2 (ξ) ∩ Ord 2 (ξ). ( 4.1. Acceleration in the Order of Convergence of the Set Ord 1 2 (ξ) Let f : Ω ⊂ R n → R n be a function with a point ξ ∈ Ω such that f (ξ) = 0, and denoting by Φ N R to the iteration function of the Newton-Raphson method, it is possible to define the following set of functions So, it is possible to define the following corollary: , and let Φ be a iteration function given by the equations obtaining a new matrix that may be denoted as follows and that guarantees that there exists a set It is necessary to mention that the origin of the function the following expressions , and the following particular values it is possible to define the following system of equations that corresponds to the combination of a solar photovoltaic system with a thermoelectric generator system whose deduction, as well as details about its interpretation, may be found in the reference which depends on two parameters, the direct normal irradiance (DN I) and the ambient temperature (T air ). These parameters are measured in real-time at certain times of the day However, to simplify the task of finding the solutions of the function (29), it is possible through the consecutive substitution of the variables [x] 1 , [x] 4 , [x] 5 and some algebraic simplifications, to obtain the following transcendental system whose solution allows to know the values of the variables [x] 1 , [x] 4 and [x] 5 through the following equations . (31) Using the system of equations (30), it is possible to define a function and then finding the solutions of the function (32), through the equations (31), it is possible to construct the solutions of the function (29). To solve the equation (32) and at the same time solve the equation (29), a fractional fixed point method will be used as well as its accelerated version through the function So, considering a function f : Ω ⊂ R n → R n with a point ξ ∈ Ω such that f (ξ) = 0, the Riemann-Liouville fractional derivative given by the equation where A g f ,β (x i ) is given by the following expression with g f (x) and β(α, [x] k ) functions defined as follows The fractional iterative method given by the equation ( and as a consequence Φ ∈ Ord 1 2 (ξ). So, if it is assumed that f ∈ Ord 2 N R (ξ), by the Corollary 4.1 it is possible to construct the fractional quasi-Newton method accelerated using the following matrix Before continuing, it is necessary to mention that a description of the algorithm that must be implemented when working with a fractional iterative method given by the equation ( N R (ξ), and using the following values DN I = 900, T air = 20, α = 0.89825, the following iterations are obtained by using the fractional iterative methods given by the matrices (35) and (38). ii) Table ii) Table ii) From the previous results it is observed that there is a considerable improvement in the order of convergence between the matrices (35) and (38). Therefore, it may be established that it is more efficient to solve the function (29) by implementing the fractional quasi-Newton method accelerated in the function (32). So, by providing multiple values of the parameters DN I and T air , it is possible to obtain a histogram of the efficiencies of a hybrid solar receiver analogous to the one shown in the Figure as a consequence, denoting by c an arbitrary constant, it is possible to define the following set of matrices and therefore, it is possible to define the following sets of fractional iterative methods which correspond to two uncountable families of fractional fixed point methods in which the Corollary 4.1 can be implemented. In all the examples shown, a decrease in the number of iterations necessary to converge to the solutions is observed when implementing the function i) The initial condition does not necessarily have to be close to the sought values due to the non-local nature of fractional operators The above features make fractional iterative methods an ideal numerical tool for working with systems of nonlinear algebraic equations that vary with time-dependent parameters, as is the case of the functions (29) and (32), which allows studying the behavior of temperatures and efficiencies of a hybrid solar receiver DN I = 574.319, T air = 16.832, α = 0.8996, the following iterations are obtained by using the fractional iterative methods given by the matrices (35) and (38).