We report on in situ low-temperature (4 K) scanning tunneling microscope measurements of atomic and electronic structures of the cleaved surfaces of an alkalibased kagome metal RbV3Sb5 single crystals. We find that the dominant pristine surface exhibits Rb-1×1 structure, in which a unique unidirectional √3a0 charge order is discovered. As the sample temperature slightly rises, Rb-√3×1 and Rb-√3×√3 reconstructions form due to desorption of surface Rb atoms. Our conductance mapping results demonstrate that Rb desorption not only gives rise to hole doping, but also renormalizes the electronic band structures. Surprisingly, we find a ubiquitous gap opening near the Fermi level in tunneling spectra on all the surfaces despite their large differences of hole-carrier concentration, indicating an orbital-selective band reconstruction in RbV3Sb5. Electronic correlation and topology are pivotal problems in recent studies of condensed matter physics. Kagome system Investigation of the electronic band structure is essential to reveal the underlying mechanisms of those quantum phenomena. Several ARPES groups measured the band structure of AV3Sb5 RbV3Sb5 is a layered kagome superconductor To study the temperature-dependent reconstruction of topmost Rb layer, we cleaved the samples at 77 K and at room temperature, respectively. As the cleavage temperature rises, the Rb coverage decreases due to the desorption of Rb atoms, leading to the formation of Rb-√3×1 (half coverage of Rb-1×1 plane) and Rb-√3×√3 (coverage ~ 1/3) reconstructions (Figure For the coverage of 1/2, which is commonly obtained for the cleavage at 77 K, a 2 × 2 superstructure is visible at negative bias (Figure Examining the energy dispersion of each scattering wave vector q %⃗ (Figure We systematically investigate the evolution of the structural and electronic reconstruction of Rb plane with the loss of Rb atoms in RbV3Sb5 single crystal. We unambiguously demonstrate that the Rb deficiency not only provides hole carries to the sample, but also renormalizes the electronic structures. It selectively dopes the antimony pz-band near G point and barely influences the vanadium d-orbital bands at M point. Since the desorption and reconstruction of Rb atoms are closely related to temperature, such complexity needs to be considered for the electronic structure measurements. We believe our discovery provides a reasonable explanation for the large deviation of band evolutions obtained from different ARPES groups Methods. RbV3Sb5 single crystals were grown and characterized as described in details in Ref. 