The ability to engineer nonlinear optical processes in all-dielectric nanostructures is both of fundamental interest and highly desirable for high-performance, robust, and miniaturized nonlinear optical devices. Herein, we propose a novel paradigm for the efficient tuning of second-harmonic generation (SHG) process in dielectric nanoantennas by integrating with chalcogenide phase change material. In a design with Ge2Sb2Te5 (GST) film sandwiched between the AlGaAs nanoantennas and AlOx substrate, the nonlinear SHG signal from the AlGaAs nanoantennas can be boosted via the resonantly localized field induced by the optically-induced Mie-type resonances, and further modulated by exploiting the GST amorphous-to-crystalline phase change in a non-volatile, multilevel manner. The tuning strategy originates from the modulation of resonant conditions by changes in the refractive index of GST. With a thorough examination of tuning performances for different nanoantenna radii, a maximum modulation depth as high as 540% is numerically demonstrated. This work not only reveals out the potential of GST in optical nonlinearity control, but also provides promising strategy in smart designing tunable and reconfigurable nonlinear optical devices, e.g. The recently developed nonlinear nanophotonics provides an attractive platform for the manipulation of strong light-matter interaction at the subwavelength scale, which alleviates phase matching constraints typically of the bulk and reaches remarkable efficiency by the resonantly localized field. It facilitates various nonlinear optical processes such as frequency conversion, wave mixing, and all-optical switching, with many potential applications for coherent light sources, holography, and other ultrafast miniature devices The research agenda is now shifting towards achieving tunable and reconfigurable nonlinear optical processes to develop multi-functional devices One of the most intuitive solution is to engineer the geometric parameters of designed nanostructure, the polarization and intensity of incident light, which has been demonstrated to shape the nonlinear wavefront especially the radiation pattern of harmonic generation in previous works In this work, we propose a novel paradigm for tuning the nonlinear SHG in AlGaAs nanoantennas by introducing the chalcogenide phase change material Ge 2 Sb 2 Te 5 (GST) film. GST is featured with the high refractive index contrast between its amorphous and crystalline phases across the visible and infrared spectrum, and in sharp contrast to the above-mentioned tuning strategies such as thermal tuning or utilizing liquid crystals, it affords an entirely different, non-volatile approach where the induced change maintains stable even after the re-moval of external stimuli The basic concept is schematically illustrated in Fig. To investigate the optical responses of the nonlinear dielectric nanostructure, we perform the threedimensional electromagnetic simulations with the finite element method solver of COMSOL Multiphysics. In the numerical model, the isolated AlGaAs nanoantennas shaped as nanocylinders of 300 nm height and different radii are equally spaced by 3 μm and placed on a 50nm-thick GST film, supported by the semi-infinite AlO x substrate. A x-polarized plane wave with 1550 nm central wavelength is incident from the air upper half-space, and the perfectly matched layers are imposed in both the vertical (along the z-axis) and lateral directions (along the x-and y-axis). In this design, the semiconductor Al-GaAs has been recently investigated by several groups since it possesses high transparency in a broad spectral window up to the far infrared and giant second-order nonlinear susceptibility GST is an active material with a crystallization temperature T c of 433 K and a melting temperature T m of 873 K, while the phase change in both directions can be realized within only about few tenths of nanoseconds by using external thermal stimuli such as heat, electrical, or optical pulses. For its amorphous and crystalline phases, the complex-value refractive indices in Fig. where ε a-GST and ε c-GST are the complex-value permittivity of a-GST and c-GST, respectively, which can be calculated with the refractive indices in Fig. It is noteworthy that only the semiconductor AlGaAs is considered as the harmonic source in the proposed design, because AlO x has negligible χ For a specific nonlinear nanostructure, the conversion efficiency of the harmonic generation process is primarily determined by the resonantly localized field at the fundamental wavelength. Guided by this principle, we firstly investigate the linear scattering of AlGaAs nanoantennas at the optical communication wavelength of 1550 nm. As is well-known, the position of the Mie-type resonances is highly sensitive to the aspect ratio of the nanocylinder, therefore we sweep the radius from 170 nm to 210 nm for the fixed height of 300 nm. The GST film is initially set to its amorphous phase. Fig. where S SCAT is the Poynting vector of the fundamental field, n is the unit vector normal to a surface A enclosing the nanoantennas, and I 0 is the intensity of incident light with 1 GW/cm 2 adopted in the calculations. To further characterize the linear scattering by multipolar modes excited in the nanoantennas, we perform the multipolar expansion in the Cartesian coordinates using the displacement currents induced by the incident electric field. It can be observed that the maximum scattering efficiency occurs for the radius around r = 200 nm, which results from the leading contributions of electric dipole and magnetic dipole. Figs. In the following, we extend simulations to the nonlinear region and consider the SHG process in the pro- posed nanostructure. As we have mentioned above, the nonlinear optical response of the nanoantennas at the second-harmonic wavelength is calculated using the nonlinear polarizabilities generated by the electric field at the fundamental wavelength as a source. The conversion efficiency of the SHG process is calculated as where S SH is the Poynting vector of the second-harmonic field, and other variables are consistent with those in the linear scattering. The simulated SHG efficiency spectrum in Fig. where η m represents the linear scattering efficiency η SCAT or the nonlinear SHG efficiency η SHG with different crystallization ratios m, while η 0 is the corresponding efficiency with m = 0 (a-GST). Under this definition, the results discussed in Figs. This feature also reveals the robustness of the modulation method for the geometrical parameters in terms of the nanoantenna radius here. We can observe the positive ∆η, i.e. an increase of both the scattering efficiency and nonlinear SHG efficiency for the radius smaller than 200 nm, as well as a continuous decrease of the efficiencies for the radius larger than 200 nm. These variation trends follow the shift of the Mie-type resonance at every step during the full process of GST amorphous-to-crystalline phase change. For the radius r = 200 nm, an initial tiny increment of the efficiencies is surprisingly perceived (which is unconspicuous in Figs. In addition to the modulation at the fixed fundamental wavelength, we also explore the possibility of tuning the nonlinear optical response in a broad wavelength range. With the progressive change in the optical properties of GST, Figs. 8(a) and 8(b) provide the normalized modulation depth of linear and nonlinear efficiencies at different fundamental wavelengths for the fixed nanoantenna radius r = 200 nm. As can be expected, the multilevel modulation of both the linear scattering and nonlinear SHG processes also applies to this case. The efficiencies change dramatically for different fundamental wavelengths, more specifically, the scattering efficiency and nonlinear SHG efficiency display continuous decrease with negative ∆η for the fundamental wavelength smaller than 1550 nm, and gradual increase with positive ∆η for the wavelength larger than 1550 nm. Keeping in mind that the increase in the effective refractive index of GST film from amorphous to crystalline phases brings about the larger resonant wavelength of the nanostructure, it is reasonable to conclude that for the fixed radius r = 200 nm, the Mie-type resonance and the resulting maximum efficiency yield a redshift from the fundamental wavelength of 1550 nm to 1650 nm within the considered range. By virtue of the feature, it is desirable to dynamically tune the nonlinear response of the proposed nanostructure without altering the geometry. Note that, a large modulation depth of 333% appears around second-harmonic wavelength of 825 nm with c-GST. The tuning strategy of SHG signal assisted by active material GST shows great flexibility and remarkable efficiency, offering additional degree of freedom to design the non-linear nanostructures operating at different fundamental wavelengths. In conclusion, we propose a new solution for dynamically tunable SHG process via chalcogenide phase change material GST and demonstrate it in a typical nonlinear dielectric nanostructure at the telecommunication wavelength. In the proposed design consisting of the GST film deposited between the AlGaAs nanoantennas and AlO x substrate, the optically-induced Mie-type resonance enabled by electric and magnetic dipole modes provides the resonantly localized field for enhancing the nonlinear SHG efficiency, and the GST film plays a vital role in the modulation of resonant conditions. The numerical results show that the progressive changes in optical properties of GST lead to the gradual variation in the resonant properties of the AlGaAs nanoantennas in both the linear and nonlinear regions. The maximum modulation depth in the nonlinear SHG signal reaches as high as 540% during the full process of GST amorphous-to-crystalline phase change, as a result of the maximum modulation depth of 216% in the linear scattering efficiency. With the ultrafast phase change speed, high cyclability, and excellent thermal stability of GST, the proposed tuning strategy is expected to be rapidly tunable, reversible, multi-level, and nonvolatile, opening an avenue towards engineering fast, strong, and tunable optical nonlinearity. The results are the proof-of-principle demonstrations, and the modulation principle can be extended to higher harmonic generations and translated into the nonlinear metamaterials and metadevices if assembling the isolated nanoantennas into periodic arrays. Worth mentioning at this time is the remarkable third-order nonlinearity χ (3) ∼ 10 -18 m 2 /V 2 in chalcogenide glass as recently reported 