An Integral Equation (IE) based field solver to compute the scattered fields from spatially dispersive metasurfaces is proposed and numerically confirmed using various examples involving physical unit cells. The work is a continuation of Part-1 [1], which proposed the basic methodology of representing spatially dispersive metasurface structure in the spatial frequency domain, k. By representing the angular dependence of the surface susceptibilities in k as a ratio of two polynomials, the standard Generalized Sheet Transition Conditions (GSTCs) have been extended to include the spatial derivatives of both the difference and average fields around the metasurface. These extended boundary conditions are successfully integrated here into a standard IE-GSTC solver, which leads to the new IE-GSTC-SD simulation framework presented here. The proposed IE-GSTC-SD platform is applied to various uniform metasurfaces, including a practical short conducting wire unit cell, as a representative practical example, for various cases of finitesized flat and curvilinear surfaces. In all cases, computed field distributions are successfully validated, either against the semianalytical Fourier decomposition method or the brute-force fullwave simulation of volumetric metasurfaces in the commercial Ansys FEM-HFSS simulator. Electromagnetic Metasurfaces are constructed using subwavelength resonators of diverse geometrical shapes and material characteristics, which give rise to their tailored macroscopic responses. These microscopic resonators act as engineered electric and magnetic scatterers operating on the incoming incident fields to shape the electromagnetic fields in either space or time or both Since the metasurfaces are constructed from sub-wavelength resonating particles but are typically electrically large, they are naturally multi-scale in nature. As a result, the determination of electromagnetic fields scattered off them for a given incident field is typically a computationally expensive task if performed using standard brute force commercial fullwave simulators. Consequently, surface susceptibilities, χ(ω) have recently been used as compact full-wave simulation Tom J. Smy, João G. Nizer Rahmeier, Jordan Dugan, and Shulabh Gupta are with Carleton University, Ottawa, Canada (e-mail: tjs@doe.carleton.ca). models of wide-variety of practical metasurfaces with good success The surface susceptibilities relate the average fields with the induced surface polarizations, and so far in the literature, they have been typically restricted to modeling local interactions with the surface only. Such a point-by-point interaction consequently results in angular independent surface susceptibilities, and the metasurfaces can be referred to as spatially nondispersive. This has been found to be sufficiently adequate for modeling deeply sub-wavelength resonant structures. However, typical practical metasurfaces are not always deeply subwavelength, and their unit cell periodicities may easily reach close to a wavelength in size, as, for instance, in all-dielectric Huygen's structures Very little work has been done to model spatially dispersive metasurfaces and has been typically limited to weak spatial dispersion (SD) with limited success As mentioned above, surface susceptibilities are compact zero thickness models of otherwise finite thickness volumetric metasurfaces, which are ideal alternatives to rigorously and efficiently compute scattered macroscopic fields. While several works have been reported in the literature integrating standard GSTCs into a variety of numerical platforms such as Finite Difference (FD) This work is structured as follows. Sec. II presents the extended GSTCs and develops the fields equations that describe a general spatially dispersive metasurface and present an important specialization based on a physically motivated Lorentz oscillator. Sec. III presents the integrated IE-GSTC formulation equipped with spatial dispersion, i.e., IE-GSTC-SD. This section transforms the desired fields equations into a matrix form and integrates with the IE field propagators, resulting in a system matrix formulation that must be selfconsistently solved to compute the unknown surface currents and the subsequent scattered fields. Sec. IV presents the verification of IE-GSTC-SD by comparing it with a semianalytical Fourier decomposition method applied to uniform structures excited with 2D Gaussian beams. Next, the method is used to model an example practical structure composed of an electric dipole formed using a finite-length conducting wire, which exhibits an elementary Lorentzian form of spatial dispersion (Sec. V). Fields scattered from finite-sized flat and curvilinear structures are presented and compared with bruteforce 3D full-wave simulations performed in Ansys FEM-HFSS to successfully retrieve intricate interference field patterns that are otherwise missed using spatially non-dispersive models. Finally, conclusions are presented in Sec. VI. The electromagnetic field interaction with an equivalent zero thickness metasurface model is governed by the GSTCs as given by where P and M are the temporal frequency domain electric and magnetic surface polarizations. These surface polarizations, for a spatially non-dispersive metasurfaces, following local field interactions are given by where the susceptibility tensors are 3 × 3 in size and defined by: where ab ∈ [ee, mm, me, em]. For later simplicity, but without loss of generality, let us ignore the bi-anisotropic terms and the normal polarization, so that we have, Each of the susceptibility terms present in these equations creates a contribution to the polarizations in (2); for example, χ zz ee creates a component (e.g., for a metasurface lying along y-axis and located at x = 0 excited with a TE mode, with E z , H y and H x components), where the superscript on P z z indicates this is the portion of P z generated by E z,av . The total P z would thus be, This equation represents that the electric (and analogously magnetic) surface polarization at any position of the metasurface is given by the spatial product of the susceptibility and the average fields at that position only, i.e., a local response. Alternatively, it can be seen as assuming a set of angle independent susceptibilities that only captures the field scattering behavior of spatially non-dispersive metasurface unit cells. For a spatially dispersive metasurface, the induced electric (and magnetic) surface polarizations on the surface not only depend on the local average fields but also the fields across the metasurface where * represents a spatial convolution. This relationship can be equivalently expressed in the spatial frequency domain, k y (each k y represents an obliquely propagating plane-wave), using the Fourier transform which is a simple product of the average fields and the surface susceptibilities, as opposed to convolution in space, making it a suitable choice for compact unit cell description and later numerical computation. In order to describe a general unit cell, we can represent χ zz ee (k y ) as a ratio of two polynomials to capture the angular dependence of the metasurface. Such a form incorporates possible zeros and poles of the surface susceptibilities, which effectively captures the metasurface response for the sweeping angle of incident plane-waves To express this relationship in the spatial domain and represent a spatial boundary condition across the metasurface, we utilize the GSTCs of (1). For a vertical surface with surface normal n = {1 0 0}, we note that ∆H y = jω Pz , and thus we can associate a portion of ∆H y with each portion of Pz and transform back to the spatial domain. This would give for the resulting in general form of (4) that incorporates spatial derivatives of both ∆ Hz y and Ẽz,av . The total field difference is then given by, ∆ Hy = ∆ Hx y + ∆ Hy y + ∆ Hz y Hy,av The two boundary equations ( Although the derivatives of the difference and average fields present in ( where {ω 0 , ω p , γ} are the resonant frequency, plasma frequency, and the damping coefficient, respectively, which all depend on the geometrical and electrical characteristics of the unit cell. Moreover, they also depend on the angle of incidence of the incoming plane-waves ) Using ( which upon an inverse spatial Fourier transform leads to Equation ( = 0 χ zz ee0 Ẽz,av + Taking the inverse spatial Fourier transform, As before, we use ∆ Hz y,i = jω P z z,i , then using superposition and the independence of the various polarization components, we get, defining, ∆ Hz where the 0 th order term is For each term 1 < i ≤ N L we can write an equation of the form, Which describes the surface relationship between a component of ∆ Hy and Ẽz,av . where, with α ∈ {x, y, z}, β ∈ {x, y, z} and γ is defined by n × {x, y, z} with respect to value of α. The previous section shows the surface formulation for the case of ( This form incorporates spatial derivatives of the average fields, when transformed to the space domain, and can be related to the normal components of the surface polarizations in some special cases. This extension will later allow for a very simple test to validate the IE-GSTC-SD formulation using a well characterized unit cell with constant normal surface susceptibility. By following the same procedure as used for the field differences on the left-hand side of we can generalize This generalized form can capture more complex angular dependence arising from the structure of the unit cell Our next task is to integrate the zero-thickness boundary condition of ( The IE approach, in general, requires discretized surfaces and follows the Boundary Element Method (BEM) techniques The problems addressed in this paper will be 2D scattering cases and the surfaces are curvilinear line elements, as illustrated in Fig. The surface field vector S F holds the fields present on both sides of a surface (+ or -) and will be useful in the formulation of the IE problem The GSTCs shown in (1) when formulated using matrix operators and omitting the bi-anisotropic terms for simplicity are where both N T and R T extract the tangential components of a field, but R T incorporates the rotation induced by the cross-product. The addition of the GSTCs with constant angular independent susceptibilities (i.e., spatially non-dispersive structures) to the IE formulation has been reported extensively elsewhere, and we will refer to it as the standard IE-GSTC formulation We will now develop a spatially dispersive implementation of the GSTCs within the IE framework (IE-GSTC-SD). If we assume a vertical surface at x = 0 running along the y axis, then we have, which extracts the tangential components of the field at the surface, for example We now simplify the following derivations (without losing any generality) by only retaining the primary tangential terms and have, To generalize the relationship between ∆ H and Ẽav two generalized Lorentzian Operators are introduced [X ee /L ee , X mm /L mm see and X ab ee/mm = 0 χ ab ee/mm,0 + where L ab ee/mm,i and X ab ee/mm,i are defined by ( For this simplified system, we have only one contribution to each component of ∆ H and ∆ Ẽ. For example choosing an excitation polarization of { Ẽz , Hx , Hy } for the case of a vertical surface at x = 0 we can write, L yy mm ∆ Ẽy = μ 0 X yy mm Hy,av The primary complication in the implementation of these equations is the presence of the spatial derivatives in the L and X operators defined by ( We define central difference operators for the n th segment triplet: where Ψ would be a field difference associated with a particular resonance, such as ∆ Ẽz,i , and obtain, which allows us to write, i + ξ yy mm,1,i D i + U (36a) i + ξ zz ee,1,i D i + U (36b) and i + χ zz ee,1,i D i + χ zz ee,0,i U where U = [0, 1, 0]. By applying this equation to each segment on the surface we can arrive at the surface operators, which are diagonal matrices created from the triplet operators and would operate respectively, on all of the field differences defined by, and the surface scattered fields S F and applied incident fields S i to obtain, which is the surface level equivalent of ( As with the surface equations, the integral expressions derived from Maxwell's equations that capture the propagation need to be put into a discretized form. The EM fields radiated into free-space from electric and magnetic current sources, {J, K}, can be generally expressed using an IE formulation as with r being the point of interest, r the position of the source current; and E s and H s the radiated (scattered) fields from the surface. 3 The field operators are given by: with C ∈ { J, K}. G(r, r ) represents the Green's function which, for a 2D case, is given by the Hankel function of the 2 nd kind and represents outwardly propagating radial waves. 3 We will denote scattered or radiated fields due to the surface currents by the superscript s and total fields which include both scattered and incident fields by a lack of superscript. Hence, generally E = E s + E i where E i is the incident field, for example. Using this discretization, (39) is transformed into a set of algebraic equations relating surface currents C = J K T to the scattered fields at r S , If r p = r S then this equation determines the selfpropagation from every element to every other element and we can define a surface propagation operator, and obtain, The final task is to assemble the surface (38) and propagation equations (42) to solve for the unknowns in the scattering problem. The unknowns in the scattering problem can be identified as the element currents C, the surface fields S F , and the field differences associated with the Lorentz resonators S ∆ . To create a complete system matrix, we have to introduce equations to force the unknown currents to be tangential to the surface, to sum the field differences, and link them to the propagation equations. To force the surface currents to be tangential to the surface, we introduce an operator, this would impose the condition n•C = 0 for all elements. For our simple case of a vertical surface, this implies that Jx and Ky are zero for all elements. To link the propagation equations to surface equations, we define two new operators such that, where L S is a matrix that sums the field differences associated with each resonance to form the total field differences ∆ Ẽz and ∆ Hy at every element -D is the matrix that finds the difference of the fields on the two side of the surface. This equation thus links the propagating fields S F to the differences associated with the resonances present S ∆ . These equations are finally assembled into a system matrix equation, resulting in which is square and can be solved directly to determine the unknowns. Once C is known, the propagation matrix defined in (40) can be used to compute the scattered fields in the entire or desired simulation region. IV. NUMERICAL VERIFICATION To numerically verify the IE-GSTC-SD formulation, we will use two methods using 2D Gaussian beam illumination of uniform metasurfaces. The first approach will compare a semi-analytical technique using Fourier Decomposition (FD) of the incident waves into plane wave components and then determine reflected and transmitted fields. The second method will take a specific form of SD (angular dependence) that can model an otherwise spatially non-dispersive metasurface with two constant susceptibilities -one of which operates on a normal component of the magnetic field. This second approach allows for a direct comparison between the standard IE-GSTC Let us consider a case where an incident field is specified, and we wish to determine the scattered fields from a uniform spatially dispersive metasurface. Since it is a linear problem, we can use the principle of superposition by expressing the incident field as a sum of uniform plane waves Introducing T = Ẽt / Ẽ0 and R = Ẽr / Ẽ0 , we can show that the reflection of single plane wave at an incident angle is given by, (46a) where χ yy mm and χ zz ee are functions of the incidence angles. The above equation gives the transmitted and reflected plane waves for a particular spatial component of a general incident field. These can then be integrated over all the k y components (propagating terms) of the incident field to construct the complete reflected and transmitted fields where we have decomposed the incident field into plane wave components. We can then form the reflected and transmitted waves, with sin θ = k y /k 0 . Using an inverse spatial Fourier transform, we can obtain the scattered fields at the surface, 49) This methodology can be easily implemented using discrete Fourier transforms (DFTs) and can now be used to validate the IE-GSTC-SD implementation. Fig. Consider a uniform metasurface described using tangential susceptibilities only and with unit symmetry about both xand yaxis. Assume that a single Lorentz resonator can describe it for both χ zz ee and χ xx mm , as The Lorentzian parameters are next synthesized so that the surface reflection is symmetrical with respect to the incident angle (ξ ee/mm,1 = χ ee/mm,1 = 0) and that at normal incidence we have T = 0.9j and R = j 1 -|T | 2 (arbitrarily chosen). To determine the Lorentzian parameters of (50), we can invert (46) for θ = 0 • and find the two parameters, χ zz ee (0) and χ yy mm (0). We then chose to set χ zz ee,0 = |χ zz ee (0)| and χ zz ee0 = χ zz ee (0)-χ zz ee,0 . The same procedure was used for χ yy mm . Finally, we set ξ zz ee,2 and ξ yy mm,2 , which produces resonances at specified incidence angles of 20 • and 30 • , respectively (again arbitrarily chosen). These synthesized susceptibilities of the form (50), are shown as a function of incidence angle (or alternatively vs spatial frequency k y = k 0 sin θ) in Fig. A 2D Gaussian beam (GB) is a solution of the Paraxial Helmholtz equation, with ∂/∂z = 0, so that there is no spread along the z-direction and the propagation is confined within the x -y plane only. The various field components of a 2D Gaussian beam propagating normally to the surface along x-axis can be easily shown to be: (51b) where w is the width of the beam at the waist x = 0, k 0 = ω/c is the free-space wave-number. The magnitude of the Gaussian beam with waists of w = 2λ and w = 0.75λ, respectively are also shown in Fig. The second case (shown in the bottom four plots) presents a much clearer spatial dispersion effect. The Gaussian beam now has a small waist of 0.75λ, and angular content is very obvious in the incident field shown in Fig. For a second verification of the proposed IE-GSTC-SD, method, let us consider a practical unit cell as shown in Fig. which incorporates the effect of χ xx mm . As shown in Part-1 which is of the form ( To demonstrate the importance of spatial dispersion and capability of the proposed IE-GSTC-SD framework to model angular scattering from physical unit cells, we will consider an example of a simple unit cell based on a short conducting dipole, which exhibits spatial dispersion. The basic unit cell used to form a 2D surface is shown in Fig. In Part-1 of this work, this cell was characterized using HFSS to obtain its transmission and reflection characteristics as a function of frequency ω and angle of incidence, θ or spatial frequency k y To demonstrate the basic field transformation phenomena of this surface and to allow for a detailed comparison with a commercial full-wave simulator like Ansys FEM-HFSS, a vertical surface along the y-axis, consisting of 60 units cells was formed and illuminated with a line source (f = 60 GHz) located at r s = {x s = -30, y s = 0} mm. The incident field produced by the line source is given by, where H (2) {0,1} are Hankel functions of the second kind, of orders 1 and 2, and E 0 is the peak field amplitude. The surface is simply placed in free space and the simulation set up, and the source position is shown in Fig. The basic behavior of the surface is presented in Fig. However, there is an interesting feature in the fields obtained from the HFSS simulations related to the subtle interference pattern imposed on the fields. Although this pattern is at the limit of the HFSS simulation and meshing ability to resolve, it is present and thus investigated next. The simulation in Fig. To investigate this phenomenon, we modified the BEM methodology and placed the total current present in the unit cell on a single segment at the position of the wire only. The unit cell had five surface segments across its width; therefore, on 4 of the segments, the surface currents were set to zero and the total cell current placed on the middle segment. The result of this quantization of the surface currents is shown Fig. To further investigate the match between the FEM HFSS simulation and the IE-GSTC-SD results, the fields were plotted for two vertical lines ±0.085 m removed from the surface (arbitrarily chosen but in the macroscopic region). These fields can be seen in Fig. The final two examples will involve comparing Ansys FEM-HFSS and the proposed IE-GSTC-SD simulations for more geometrically complex structures created using the simple wire unit cell. We will consider two configurations: 1) an open hexagonal-based structure formed of three sides, and 2) an open semi-circular structure. For both simulations, the incident illumination will be a plane-wave at 60 GHz. Simulations of the hexagonal-based structure are shown in Fig. The second Fig. The final set of simulations (Fig. The various fields and field components are represented as E(r, t) for the space and time domains, Ẽ(r, ω) for the temporal frequency domain, E(k, t) for the spatial frequency domain, and Ẽ(k, ω) for the spatial and temporal frequency domains. Time convention used is e jωt . To make clear how the field differences are captured, the total field difference for a single component (such as ∆ Hy) is comprised of three fundamental contributions each due to generation from an average field component as described in The incident field given by (51b) was transformed to the spatial domain and then sin θ = ky/k 0 was used to translate this into the angular domain.