To date, MXene has been discovered for its viability as alternatives to conventional saturable absorber such as carbon nanotube and graphene. The characteristics of high nonlinear saturable absorption, astounding modulation depth, flexible bandgap tunability, and high electron density near Fermi level are the fundamentals of the MXene as an excellent saturable absorber candidate. In particular, the research effort contributed to MXene in nonlinear ultrafast optics are extensively growing because MXene comprises one of the largest families in 2D nanomaterials that provides huge combination possibilities by forming a class of metal carbide or metal nitride with 2D layered structure. Herein, this review summarizes the recent development on synthesis and material characterization of the MXene, the studies on its nonlinear saturable absorption and the application of the MXene saturable absorber in near-infrared mode-locked fiber laser. Finally, some issues and challenges as well as future perspectives of this novel material are discussed. Nonlinear optics describes the interaction of light with matter. In particular, nonlinearity gives the insight for the response of the materials with respect to the amplitude of the applied electromagnetic field There are numerous SAs reported for the generation of ultrashort pulsed laser since the first demonstration of femtosecond pulse with intracavity saturable absorber dye cell, which is a flashlamp-pumped dye laser in 1974. A semiconductor saturable absorber mirror (SESAM) is the most commonly used SA technology that have become prevalent materials for the research and market for a long time. The SESAM composes of numerous layers of semiconductor materials grown via atomic layer deposition or other microfabrication technique which typically has a reflective mirror within these material layers for the free-space alignment of a fibre laser cavity Apart from the aforementioned SA materials, the MXene was firstly discovered for the demonstration of 2D Ti3C2 nanosheets, multi-layer structures and conical scrolls by Y. Gogotsi in 2011 A recent review for MXene and other 2D materials was done in terms of synthesis, optical properties and applications in ultrafast photonics by Zhang et al. MXene comprises of various chemical forms depending on the M, X and T elements in the periodic table. To date, most MXene synthesis was conducted through top-down approach, particularly on the selective etching of their MAX phases The most popular MXene Ti3C2Tx has been predominantly deployed, overwhelming other MXenes in optoelectronics applications due to its narrow bandgap and high photothermal effect The synthesis of Ti3C2Tx was prepared based on the basis of the aqueous acid etching method reported by Naguib et al. Aside from Ti-Al-C MXene, there are several works demonstrated for the preparation of Ti3C2Tx dispersion via the aqueous acid etching method. The preparation of Ti3C2Tx flakes was done through immersion of the MAX phase Ti3AlC2 with 40% HF that was stirred with 500 rpm for 20 hours at room temperature [PF6] into 100 mL of MeCN. Next, the mixed solution was poured inside a 150 mL container consisting of three aforementioned electrodes and a glass pipe. Afterwards, the mixed solution electrolyte was bubbled with argon gas for 5 minutes before use. A constant potential of 3-7 V was applied to the Ag wire and the process was performed for 5 hours. Then, the electrolytic decomposition was deployed to decompose PF6 -into F -, meanwhile the Al layer was selectively etched away from the Ti3AlC2. After the etching process, the electrolyte appears brownish and was suspended with Ti3C2Tx powder and fragments. Next, two consecutive centrifugation processes were conducted, the first 30 minutes at 3500 rpm for the separation of large particles from the electrolyte and the second 30 minutes at 7000 rpm to obtain the sediment. After that, the sediment was added into the MeCN and ultra-sonicated under N2 gas ambient condition for 10 hours. Finally, the Ti3C2Tx QD was obtained by removing the impurities of some large particles from the supernatant through further centrifugation at 7000 rpm for 30 minutes. Fig. According to Fig. The material properties of Ti3CNTx are close to Ti3C2Tx V2CTx is a V2C-based MXene with featureless absorption spectrum covering visible to near-IR region with absorption coefficient of approximately 1.22 × 10 5 cm -1 at 550 nm The research of Nb2C could be traced back to 2013 when Nb2AlC ceramic was synthesized by Naguib et al. Flame-brushing technique is a popular method in tapered fiber fabrication Apart from optical deposition method, the SA was formed by spraying the Nb2C suspension on the waist region of a tapered fiber platform with waist diameter of ~3.56 μm on a hot plate at 60 °C, the solvent will evaporate once it hits the hot plate surface D-shaped fiber is another type of microfiber which also induces evanescent interaction with the absorbing materials on its polished surface Aside from polishing the D-shaped fiber using mechanical technique as aforementioned, an etched fiber could also be fabricated by dipping the optical fiber into 30% HF acid solution for 2 hours where T(I) is the transmission coefficient, αs is the modulation depth, I is the power of input light, Isat is the saturation intensity and αns is the non-saturable loss. The three important parameters, αs, Isat, and αns could be measured from the nonlinear saturable absorption curve. An example of saturable absorption curve is presented in Fig. The implementation of SA into a laser cavity generates mode-locked fiber laser. For instance, a ring mode-locked ytterbium-doped fiber laser (YDFL) was demonstrated at a net GVD of normal dispersion, ~0.92 ps 2 Apart from fundamental pulses, harmonic mode-locking was also extensively demonstrated. The passively harmonic mode-locking is a technique to achieve higher repetition rate by n th order of the fundamental mode-locked laser pulse such that multiple pulses circulate in the laser cavity with equal spacing Next, transition between self-started mode-locking and bound-soliton mode-locking was presented using Ti3C2Tx SA by changing the pump power and adjusting the polarization controller Metallic conductors are generally poor SA In addition, the storage of MXene requires low temperature condition, such as below 5 °C to extend the lifetime In short, this review outlines the recent development of MXene SA to achieve mode-locked fiber laser in near IR region. Although MXene is relatively newer than CNT, graphene, TMD and other materials as the SA, its excellent nonlinear saturable absorption properties are very promising to behave as a viable SA candidate. Up to now, a few MXene materials have been proposed as the SA, whereas the most popular MXene SA is Ti3C2Tx. This is due to its narrow bandgap, high nonlinear absorption coefficient, astounding modulation depth as high as ~50%, and larger effective nonlinear absorption coefficient than other 2D materials. The synthesis and material characterization of Ti3C2Tx and other MXenes were then discussed. Based on the review, aqueous acid etching process is most frequently employed for the synthesis of MXene. Next, these MXene was integrated on the fiber platform as the SA. Microfiber was demonstrated in the structures of tapered fiber, D-shaped fiber or etched fiber which exhibits excellent heat dissipation mechanism and high optical damage threshold. These SA materials were then examined with the nonlinear saturable absorption characteristics using either twin-detector or Z-scan measurement systems. From these measurements, the modulation depth and saturation intensity of each SAs were deduced. Finally, these SAs were implemented into the fiber laser cavity to generate mode-locking in near IR region. A summary of the overall research articles was tabulated in Table 