The discovery of the first high critical temperature (Tc) transition metal diboride superconductor, MgB2 structure α-MoB2 under pressure with Tc up to 32 K at 100 GPa, provides new input into some unexplained aspects of electron-phonon coupling in intermetallic compounds. We establish that MoB2 is a phonon-mediated superconductor but has little in common with MgB2 (Tc=40 K at zero pressure). MoB2 is a strongly metallic, three dimensional, multi-Fermi surface material, becoming of additional interest because it displays a frequency separation of Mo and B vibrations that mirrors that of metal superhydrides with Tc approaching room temperature. This separation, which is unusual in intermetallic compounds, allows an analysis separately for Mo and B providing, amongst the other parameters essential for understanding phonon coupling, the matrix elements for scattering by the individual atoms. Strong coupling (λMo=1.48) is provided by Mo (total λ =1.67). A factor of 15 weaker coupling to each B atom is compensated by that coupling being to mean high frequency modes around 85-90 meV (maximum of 140 meV), versus 18-20 meV for Mo. As a result, B enhances Tc by 43% over the Mo-only value, to 33 K, corresponding to the experimental value. These results provide a guideline for designing higher Tc materials from a cooperation of strong coupling from heavy atoms with weakly coupled light atoms. The new high Tc paradigm discovered here highlights the need for studying and engineering larger ionic scattering matrix elements. The discovery two decades ago The remarkable example of MgB 2 prompted exploration of other diborides, especially transition metal (TM) diborides which provided the seemingly important elements: a covalent boron sublattice together with TM d bands that can provide metallic-covalent TM-boron bonding and thereby additional coupling. The theoretical (and experimental) results were disappointing: The recent discovery More detailed analysis Section II presents the formalism necessary to perform the new (but straightforward) analysis of atom-resolved material characteristics. Section III provides descriptions of the crystal structures that will be studied, followed by the computational methods used in the electronic structure, phonon spectrum and coupling, and analysis. In Sec. IV we provide the main computational results for band structure and Fermi surfaces. The results from density functional theory (DFT) and Eliashberg theory are presented and analyzed in Sec. V, including the atomspecific isotope shifts of T c . Collecting the results to learn why MoB 2 is a high temperature superconductor is done in Sec. VI. Section VII provides a summary of our results. The critical temperature T c (and other superconducting properties) in a phonon-coupled superconductor are determined by the frequency ω resolved Eliashberg spectral function α 2 F (ω) and a Coulomb repulsion parameter μ * . This latter parameter is around 0.10-0.15 in most superconductors and will not be considered here. F (ω) is the phonon density of states, and α 2 (ω) = α 2 F (ω)/F (ω) is a frequency resolved coupling strength. The conventional coupling strength λ is the ω -1 -weighted moment given by Understanding is facilitated by defining the shape function whose integral is normalized to unity. Frequency moments ω n of the spectrum, independent of the strength λ but weighted by coupling strength, are defined by with the n → 0 limit Much of the early literature addressing how to increase T c focused on increasing λ, with a seminal study by Bergmann and Rainer From the definition of α 2 F (ω) McMillan obtained for an elemental material where N ↑ (0) is single-spin The scattering strength is given by the change in crystal potential V ( r; {R}) due to the displacement of the atom at R where the large brackets indicate a double average of k, k over the Fermi surface, leaving I 2 independent of N ↑ (0). It is an atomic property, but material dependent, and the degree and character of its material dependence is one of the fundamental open questions in formulating strategies for increasing T c . Details of the formal theory of electronphonon coupling, and several aspects of implementation, can be found in the review of Giustino As mentioned, compounds present challenges in obtaining the relative importance of the various constituent atoms, because each of the quantities in Eq. ( N ↑ (0) must be divided into atomic contributions (preferably including the interstitial contribution). From these expressions one obtains the atomic I 2 j values, the one central quantity that is in most need for increasing T c and understanding its variation with respect to changes, viz. pressure. λ then is the sum of atomic contributions, and frequency moments can be obtained for each atom. The entire α 2 F (ω) function still provides λ and the full frequency moments from all atoms. Not mentioned previously is that the atom-specific isotope shifts of T c can be obtained trivially. If one atom type, say B, is changed from 10 B to 11 B, it is only necessary to scale the B frequency spectrum (i.e. the B moments) by 10/11 and reevaluate the frequency moments and then T c . For a general compound, one must replace the atomic mass(es) and recalculate the phonon spectrum and Eliashberg function. (We have neglected here an esoteric mass dependence of μ * .) The separation of atomic phonon spectra makes it simple to calculate the isotope shift for each atom, using the Allen-Dynes equation. First, the lattice stiffness M ω 2 2 for each atom does not depend on the isotope. Second, the atomic frequency moments behave in a simple way (since they are independent of other atom masses): ω q ∝ M -1/2 for all modes q, so the entire atomic spectrum shifts simply by scaling the frequency. First, the relationship between the atomic (Mo or B) moments and the net moment is obtained by writing g = g Mo + g B and normalizing each region separately, The denominator integrals over the Mo region (respectively B region) are needed to provide the correctly normalized values of ω Mo n and ω B n , which involve averages over only their own spectral region. For ω log , it is the logarithm that is averaged: With the change in an isotope from mass M to M , M ω 2 2 and electronic properties are unchanged, so λ (including each atomic contribution) remains unchanged. The isotope effect arises from how frequency moments appear in T c . We will use the Allen-Dynes equation, which is systematic and simple, but reasonably accurate and widely used. It includes the moment ω log straightforwardly in the prefactor, and ω 2 in the strong-coupling correction, and their ratio in the shape factor. When the isotope of Mo (analogously for B) is decreased by 1 amu from M to M , the Mo frequency spectrum is stretched by M/ M = ν: ω → νω. The individual moments are a function of the shape in their part of the spectrum; specifically, they are independent of the other atom and of the coupling strengths. With the new mass, the normalized shape function is G(ω/ν)/ν. The changes in the moments are immediate: The corresponding ωlog and ω2 numbers of Mo must be combined with the B moments using the expressions above, and substituted into the T c equation. The difference in T c provides the isotope shift coefficients ∆logT c /∆logM for each atom, for the discrete ∆M = 1 amu. The results are presented and discussed for α-MoB 2 in Sec. V E. For binary hydrides XH n (X is a metal atom), the various atom-specific and total quantities were obtained and applied This formalism allowed the quantitative importance for T c of H versus the metal atom. Hydrogen's dominance is, in effect, total. While the low ω vibrations of the metal provide a significant contribution to λ (typically ∼15%), it does not contribute to T c : the increase in λ is offset by the decrease in frequency moments, and sometimes the metal contribution to T c is negative. Another discovery was that the H value of I 2 H varied by a factor of five over these hydrides, all high T c examples. Also, the pressure (volume) variation was not very systematic nor particularly large, although I 2 H tended to increase with pressure whereas a simple picture involving additional screening due to increased electronic density would suggest the opposite. Various ways to explore correlations between H quantities were presented and discussed. Based on early data on H 3 S and anticipated similar cases with distinct metal and H spectra (similarly, acoustic and optical spectra), Gorkov and Kresin present expressions for T c in various regimes Pressure studies of MoB 2 have revealed two polymorphs: The experimental structural parameters and atomic distances The band structure and Fermi surfaces are studied with the full potential, all-electron code fplo The pseudopotential code quantum espresso (QE) We focus on the highest T c material -α-phase at 90 GPa -with a few results for the critical pressure P c =60 GPa of the β -α structural transition. Several results for the β-phase are presented in the Appendix. The 90 GPa band structure of α-MoB 2 , i.e. the high T c phase, is shown in Fig. A. The frequency spectrum The atom-projected phonon density of states (ph-DOS), shown in the top panel of Fig. In α 2 F (ω) the weight is divided 60-40 (Mo, B). This weight is the area A emphasized by Leavens and Carbotte The area A for each atom (Mo, B 2 ) is given, along with the other quantities that are important for superconductivity, in Table Here we provide a few ways of interpreting the relative importance for T c of the low and high frequency regions of the spectrum. In α 2 F (ω)/ω, whose integral gives λ/2, the low frequency Mo weight dominates mightily, within λ Mo /λ B2 =7.5 (see Table Boron contributes (i.e. adds to the Mo contribution) a 13% increase in λ, a 20% increase in ω log , and a much larger 83% increase in ω 2 . Recall that ω log "sets the scale" for T c (in the Allen-Dynes T c equation), while the increase in ω 2 increases the denominator κ in λ by its square. Including the B contribution fully does offset this somewhat by decreasing the mass factor in κ; because it is a compound one cannot be more quantitative, except that the increase in λ finally is only 13%. On balance, it is clear that B plays a crucial role in the resulting 43% increase in T c compared to the value for Mo alone, in spite of its seeming near irrelevance in the α 2 F (ω)/ω plot. MoB 2 is thus another example, from the high T c metal hydrides and several other viewpoints, that so far, raising T c has been very largely a matter of getting coupling at high frequency, or at least some of the coupling. For the past 50 years, the highest known EP superconductors have had λ not much larger than two, whereas T c has increased by a factor of 12 (23 K to ∼280 K). Meanwhile there has been little progress in reaching the "large λ" regime, which is typically considered to be λ > 5. The importance of increasing λ has been seriously overvalued in the quest to raise T c The spectra in Fig. The fourth (lowest) panel provides α 2 (ω), how the strength of coupling -including mass and frequency dependence in the matrix elements but independent of the phDOS -is distributed. It is strongest in the (Mo) acoustic region, being strongest in the lower third of the frequency range (the data in these curves below 6 meV is missing due to the numerical cost of handling the low phase space region near the Γ point, which is unimportant for T c anyway). In the B part of the spectrum, α 2 (ω) is largest in the lower region, slowly decreasing then leveling off. Notable is that α 2 (ω) is no different for stretching versus bending modes; in MgB 2 the bond stretches are all-important. The average of α 2 (ω) in each region is related to the electron-ion matrix elements discussed next, though not in a simple manner (note the difference in units). EP matrix elements, whose understanding is still at a primitive stage, consist of an electron-ion scattering strength I (its rms value after averaging over the FS) divided by a phonon factor (M ω 2 ) 1/2 (for elements, or for disjoint atomic modes such as in MoB 2 ). At the core is the change in self-consistent electronic potential upon small displacement of an atom, Eq. ( These can be compared with high pressure metal superhydrides, with T c in the 175-275 K range. In the hydrides Using the formalism of Sec. II.C and our calculated data, we have calculated the individual isotope shift coefficients α iso for Mo and B isotope replacements individually. In BCS theory where there is a single elemental mass, no Coulomb μ * , and no strong coupling or shape factors, this shift is 1 2 , corresponding to the dependence of the phonon energy scale on the square root of the mass. The calculations were done for μ * =0.13 as in the rest of this study. This value is just a choice as in the middle of the common 0.10-0.15 range. We repeated calculations of this section for μ * =0.10, and T c by more than 10%. Thus the choice of μ * must be considered when making absolute comparisons with (say) experiment, whereas trends will not be much affected. The values obtained are (We note that these values are changed by -0.003 and +0.003 respectively for μ * =0.10.) These values follow the general expectation: T c is mostly due to the Mo contribution to α 2 (ω), much less to the B contribution although it does boost T c . The changes, for 1 amu change in mass, in the atomic values of ω log and ω 2 respectively are about 0.5% for Mo (0.1 meV), and 5% (4.5 meV) for B, while λ and the individual atomic contributions to λ of course do not change. A point of interest pertains to the strong coupling f 1 and shape f 2 factors in the T c equation VI. WHY MoB2 AT 90 GPa IS A HTS A. Background: historical studies Except for the compressed metal hydrides, electronphonon superconductors rarely display T c above 23 K (even under pressure), with MgB 2 being the exception. (The mechanisms for metal fullerides and (Ba,K)BiO 3 remain unclear, as they may involve Coulomb contributions.) All of the atom-specific factors in λ are available, and the phonon frequency spectrum and coupling to obtain α 2 F (ω) have been calculated. This enables one to begin to make comparisons with other good superconductors, although such full detailed data is often not available from the publications. We consider Mo in the context of transition metals in the middle of the periodic table, which have dominated the high T c conventional superconductors. The conundrum of raising T c has a substantial, and informative, literature. One has a coupling strength λ that is to be increased, and a phonon energy scale -we'll use ω 2 here -to be increased. However, λ ∝ 1/ω 2 2 so increasing the frequency decreases coupling strength, as the square. Increasing λ enhances the renormalization downward of ω 2 due to EP coupling, thus decreasing M ω 2 2 and with many examples of the lattice being driven unstable as T c increases. This renormalization involves electronic screening, with few general and useful guidelines having emerged. In the expression for λ in Eq. ( Essentially all studies of I 2 have applied the Gaspari-Györffy (GG) model The separation outlined in Sec. II was first applied by Klein and Papaconstantopoulos Now we address Mo. Rocksalt MoN, predicted to be a 30 K superconductor, was calculated from GG theory to have I=3.5 eV/ Å for Mo. It was its very large N (0) that resulted in large coupling and high T c ; later it was found calculationally to be elastically unstable The value for B of 4.6 eV/ Å in MoB 2 is similarly impressive, though other factors finally result in weak B coupling, as measured by λ. This is another indication that the integrand α 2 F (ω)/ω strongly penalizes coupling at high frequency: λ has been overly emphasized in the quest for higher T c for several decades. This was the crux of the Leavens-Carbotte picture. The relative importance of Mo and B is consistent with observations from earlier in this paper: MoB 2 is well characterized as a Mo superconductor enhanced, surprisingly strongly, by some modest coupling to B high frequency modes. How Mo obtains the large value of I, viz. what is operating in the pressure response of the displacement of potential, remains the important question for further study. This seems, given that N (0) is not large, to be the attribute responsibility for 32 K superconductivity in MoB 2 . MoB 2 is one of several transition metal diborides that have been studied, hoping without success to find T c approaching or possibly exceeding that of MgB 2 . In fact, MoB 2 at ambient pressure is not superconducting. High pressure produces an onset and impressive increase of T c in the β-phase, after which a transformation to the higher symmetry α-phase (AlB 2 structure type) occurs and T c continues to rise, but more slowly. Like most other TM diborides with this AlB 2 structure, MoB 2 is a three dimensional, multiple Fermi surface metal with very strong metal 3d character. Also similarly, states at and around the Fermi level are primarily Mo 4d in character. The theoretical value of T c at 90 GPa is in excellent agreement with the experimental data. A main, and immediate, conclusion here is that MoB 2 is not only very different from MgB 2 as anticipated, it is also different from the metal hydrides with T c approaching room temperature under pressure, with analysis facilitated These results -the experimental data and theoretical analysis -encourage future studies of TM diborides at higher pressure. Some of them should display a larger value of N (0), which is a positive contributor until it promotes electronic (magnetic, structural) instability and thus return to a less favorable material. Future work should include more attention to the electron scattering amplitude I, which our analysis as been able to unravel from other calculational data. Is Mo the best element for providing a large value of I? The same separation of the phonon spectrum into atomic contributions allows simple calculations of the isotope shift of T c for each atom, without full recalculation of phonon frequencies and matrix elements. It is found, as likely expected, that the Mo isotope shift is dominant and close to the BCS value, while the B shift is minor. This separation corresponds more closely to the atomic contributions to λ than to the impact of the coupling on T c . Given that B boosts T c so effectively, it is somewhat of a puzzle why its isotope shift is so small. The analysis provided by Sec. II has revealed the source of the high T c of MoB 2 . The Fermi level density of states is ordinary, the phonon spectra as summarized in the atomic values of M ω 2 2 are not unusual. What is distinctive is the electron-displaced atom scattering factor I 2 , which is 2-3 times larger than in zero pressure compounds based on comparable transition metal atoms (V, Nb, Mo) in other compounds. The study of I is the primary, perhaps the only, factor yet to be understood for conventional superconductors The calculated behavior of the β-phase T c (P) is an item for future study. The observed increase in T c , from zero to 28 K for pressures of 0.3 GPa to 60 GPa, raises interesting questions, more so because we calculate a strongly decreasing N (0) in this same pressure range. It seems that this increase in T c must be due partially to an increase in frequency moments, but may require a strong increase in matrix elements as well. N (0) is, after all, one of the important factors in λ and it is unclear how a strong decrease in N (0) can be compensated by other factors in λ. Evidently confirmation of the observed behavior by another experimental group, preferably with somewhat different probes, is highly desirable. We acknowledge Yanpeng Qi for providing and clarifying unpublished structure information. D. A. Papaconstantopoulos provided useful comments on the manuscript. Y.Q. thanks Stony Brook Research Computing and Cyberinfrastructure, and the Institute for Advanced Computational Science at Stony Brook University for access to the innovative high-performance Ookami computing system, which was made possible by National Science Foundation grant 1927880. Y.Q. and W.E.P. have also used the computational resources on the Pittsburgh Supercomputing Center machine bridges2, supported by NSF TG-DMR 180112. K.W.L. was supported by National Research Foundation of Korea Grant No. NRF2019R1A2C1009588. W.E.P acknowledges support from U.S. National Science Foundation Grant DMR 1607139. Because superconductivity in MoB 2 is a new research area, and especially that the rise in T c in the β phase will attract more study, we provide more results on the basic electronic structure: band structure, density of states, and Fermi surfaces. In Fig. The corresponding DOSs in Fig. The structural transition occurs primarily at 60 GPa and certainly is complete at 90 GPa. The difference between β and α at 90 GPa, also shown in Fig. Figure changes in Mo-B and B-B bond lengths provided in the main text. For these relaxed structures, the variation of N (E) is regular; interestingly, E F remains at a sharp peak N (E) while the peak, and N (0), lose amplitude with increasing pressure. Lastly, Fig. TABLE I: Experimental structure parameters