Quantum Diamond Microscope (QDM) magnetic field imaging is an emerging interrogation and diagnostic technique for integrated circuits (ICs). To date, the ICs measured with a QDM were either too complex for us to predict the expected magnetic fields and benchmark the QDM performance, or were too simple to be relevant to the IC community. In this paper, we establish a 555 timer IC as a "model system" to optimize QDM measurement implementation, benchmark performance, and assess IC device functionality. To validate the magnetic field images taken with a QDM, we used a SPICE electronic circuit simulator and Finite Element Analysis (FEA) to model the magnetic fields from the 555 die for two functional states. We compare the advantages and the results of three IC-diamond measurement methods, confirm that the measured and simulated magnetic images are consistent, identify the magnetic signatures of current paths within the device, and discuss using this model system to advance QDM magnetic imaging as an IC diagnostic tool. Mapping the magnetic fields from electric current distributions in an integrated circuit (IC) is a powerful noninvasive probing technique. Magnetic fields can provide information about the IC components, layout, and materials, as well as device function, fault locations, secure information leakage, and possible malicious hardware modifications (Trojans or counterfeits) The Quantum Diamond Microscope (QDM) is emerging as a promising IC diagnostic tool In this paper, we present experimental and computational results that map and simulate, respectively, the magnetic fields from a commercial bipolar junction transistor (BJT) 555 timer IC to benchmark and gauge QDM performance (such as magnetic sensitivity and spatial resolution). The 555 is an ideal "model system" IC for QDM assessment, since it has ∼10-15 μm features that are sufficiently coarse to fully resolve, is simple enough to fully simulate, and is also among the most widely manufactured ICs We used a SPICE electronic circuit simulator (PSPICE) and multiphysics Finite Element Analysis software (COMSOL) to simulate the current densities and magnetic fields of the 555 die for two functional states. We measured the magnetic fields of these two states using a QDM, achieving micron-scale spatial resolution and few-μT magnetic sensitivity in a 1×1 μm 2 pixel after 1 s. Comparing the measured and the simulated magnetic maps, we confirmed that the QDM measured the expected magnetic field distributions, and assessed the QDM performance for three IC-diamond measurement configurations. Analyzing the measured and simulated magnetic maps, we identified key features and current paths in the magnetic maps that correspond to the operational subsystems and internal states of the IC, showing how QDM measurements can characterize the current densities and internal-state information of an IC. Finally, we discuss how our results apply to current mapping and failure analysis in other devices. In each measurement, we placed a diamond sample on the 555 die NV-side down, then placed both in a fluorescence microscope (example apparatus shown in Fig. Our magnetic imaging sensors are two single-crystal diamond samples with shallow NV surface layers. Both samples (Samples A and B) are 4×4×0.5 mm 3 electronic-grade diamond substrates with <5 ppb nitrogen density. One surface of Sample A has a 4 μm 12 C-enriched diamond layer with 20 ppm of 14 N. NV centers were then formed using electron irradiation and vacuum annealing The NV layer in Sample B was created by broadbeam 15 N ion implantation with 19 energies to form a uniform 1 μm 50 ppm nitrogen layer The 555 timer circuit was designed in 1971 using a BJT architecture, and it quickly became a best-selling IC used for a wide range of applications The 555 timer die (Fig. The oscillation frequency f and duty cycle D are determined by R ext1 , R ext2 , and C1: We chose R ext1 = 1 kΩ, R ext2 = 330 kΩ, and C1 = 47 μF to get a ∼20 s period and a 50% duty cycle, confirmed with oscilloscope measurements to demonstrate that the device was in working condition We imaged magnetic fields from the 555 die using three IC-diamond integration methods: a top approach with a large diamond over the bond wires (Fig. We affixed Sample A in the QDM setup (glued to a protruding piece of silicon carbide) with the NV layer at the microscope focal plane, and illuminated the NV layer using side illumination. We positioned the 555 die under the NV layer using a stepper-motor translation stage, measuring with decreasing standoff distances until the device stopped working properly. Using this large 4×4×0.5 mm 3 diamond sample facilitates mounting it in the microscope setup, but since it is larger than the 555 die, the standoff distance was limited by the bond wires touching the diamond surface. To prepare the 555 die for this approach, we first cut through the back of the packaging and the copper ground plane using an Allied X-Prep mill to gain access to the backside of the die. We then thinned the exposed silicon to 20-30 μm, which was the minimum thickness for which the die was still functional. The DIP pins were bent 180°, then connected to a perfboard with a mirrorflipped layout compared to the layout for Method 1. We measured the magnetic map using a 1.14×0.84×0.5 mm 3 piece of Sample B placed on the bottom side of the die (Fig. For the measurement, we used another laser-cut piece of Sample B, and again used epifluorescence illumination. The main difference in this method is that we glued the diamond to a cover slip with UV-curing transparent glue (Fig. We developed a finite element simulation of the magnetic fields from the 555 die for the output-on and output-off states to evaluate the standoff distance and spatial resolution of each measurement, and to check that the measured magnetic field maps were consistent with what is expected from simulation. . This measurement has a z fit = 71 μm standoff distance from the die surface, and the simulated magnetic field maps displayed are calculated at z = 71 μm for comparison. These measurements have a 0.3 μT noise floor in a 1×1 μm 2 pixel. The white arrows show the primary current input/output points for the device, and the circled regions show magnetic features from currents in Fig. For the output-on and output-off states, the magnetic fields generated by the 555 die depend on the current density distributions and the material characteristics of the device. The dynamics of the ∼20 s period two-state oscillator are slow enough for us to treat the output-on and output-off states independently in the static limit. The current density in the device is given by the conti-nuity equation and Ohm's law: where J is the current density in the 555, σ is the electrical conductivity of the 555 materials, and V is the electrical potential field resulting from the external circuit shown in Fig. The 555 die model consists of a conducting metal layer, a conducting doped silicon layer, and an interlayer dielectric to electrically insulate the aluminum from the doped silicon as shown in Fig. The boundary conditions for Eqn. 1 are electrically insulating with zero normal current density everywhere except for the external boundaries corresponding to the eight pins of the device. These pins are connected to an external circuit and have voltage determined by the parameters of the externally connected circuit components in Fig. We estimated the electrical conductivities (σ) and the magnetic permeabilities (μ) of the 555 internal components from available information about the device. The top metal layer was assumed to be aluminum, based on the SEM analysis in Fig. To determine the current in each transistor, we simulated the 555 device in the two-state oscillator circuit in a SPICE electronic circuit simulator (PSPICE) by combining the manufacturer's schematic with the external circuit components (Fig. We solved the governing equations using a steadystate model in COMSOL, adjusting the mesh resolution such that the solution remained constant when changing the spatial discretization parameters. A triangular mesh with a minimum element size approximately 6% of the minimum geometrical feature size was required in the neighborhood of the metal, insulator, and semiconducting layers. We coupled the Electric Currents (ec) module with the Electrical Circuit (cir) module to solve the continuity equation (Eqn. 1) for V (r). The external circuit elements in Fig. Figures Figure Figure Figure Each measurement method achieved a different standoff distance to the die, listed in Table Table I also lists each magnetic noise floor δB 111 , which is the standard deviation of the measured magnetic fields in the field of view when measuring with the 555 disconnected, after subtracting a background measurement. These δB 111 values are normalized to a 1×1 μm 2 pixel size and a 1 s experiment duration. Sample A has a better magnetic sensitivity than Sample B, due to its NV fluorescence contrast, resonance linewidth, and fluorescence intensity being better Figures the strongest magnetic field signatures come from current flowing from Vcc to R load (cyan) and as the capacitor discharges through the die to ground (magenta). In addition, we see weaker magnetic features as current flows through R02 and Q07 as part of a current mirror in the output-on state (orange) and as other components draw current seen in the output-off state (green). Although these features are coarse due to the standoff distance, these magnetic images can still be converted to surface current density maps (Fig. Using the B 111 measurements in Fig. Figure The QDM is a promising magnetic field diagnostic tool for integrated circuits that has micron-scale spatial resolution, millimeter-scale field of view area, and can operate at ambient conditions. In this paper we have appraised the performance of the QDM to measure fields from the die of a 555 timer using three measurement configurations and compared the measurement outputs to a finite element simulation. Comparing the experimental and computational outputs for the magnetic field shows good consistency, demonstrating that the QDM is capturing the expected magnetic field information available from the IC without being noticeably affected by artefacts or systematics These full-circuit simulation and measurement results establish a foundation from which to advance and optimize the state of the art of the QDM as a diagnostic tool for ICs. Continued work will explore how to classify measured magnetic maps using image analysis techniques (for example, using a structural similarity index measure or machine learning classification) to quickly identify working, faulty, and counterfeit ICs Table 