We propose a two-stage multi-objective optimization framework for full scheme solar cell structure design and characterization, cost minimization and quantum efficiency maximization. We evaluated structures of 15 different cell designs simulated by varying material types and photodiode doping strategies. At first, non-dominated sorting genetic algorithm II (NSGA-II) produced Pareto-optimal-solutions sets for respective cell designs. Then, on investigating quantum efficiencies of all cell designs produced by NSGA-II, we applied a new multi-objective optimization algorithm II (OptIA-II) to discover the Pareto fronts of select (three) best cell designs. Our designed OptIA-II algorithm improved the quantum efficiencies of all select cell designs and reduced their fabrication costs. We observed that the cell design comprising an optimally doped zinc-oxide-based transparent conductive oxide (TCO) layer and rough silver back reflector (BR) offered a quantum efficiency (Q e ) of 0.6031. Overall, this paper provides a full characterization of cell structure designs. It derives relationship between quantum efficiency, Q e of a cell with its TCO layer's doping methods and TCO and BR layer's material types. Our solar cells design characterization enables us to perform a cost-benefit analysis of solar cells usage in real-world applications. Sustainable energy demand of 21st century comes from green energy production methods like harvesting energy from nature: solar, water, and wind. Of these, solar light harvesting is pervasive and is the most agile in terms of installation. Solar cells are typically categorized as photovoltaic In our previous work We formulated "solar cell structure design problem" and its optical simulations for cells quantum efficiency improvement as a multi-objective optimization (MOO) problem Our two-stage strategy improved the baseline quantum efficiency from 0.5999 to a quantum efficiency of 0.6031, which is a 0.6845% increase from our baseline on a single solar cell quantum efficiency obtained in In summary, the main contributions and observations of this research are as follows: • We present a MOO framework for optimal thin-film solar cell structure designs. • We optimized, evaluated, and characterized 15 cell designs. • We present a new algorithm called OptIA-II for MOO of solar cells. • We show that our two-stage MOO can improve the quantum efficiency of cells and char-acterize cell designs into clusters concerning to trade-off between cells fabrication cost and cells quantum efficiency. Section 2 of this paper explains quantum efficiency of solar cell, solar cell structure and design. Related work on cells structure optimization is discussed in Section 3. Formulation of solar optimization as a MOO problem and NSGA-II and OptIA-II algorithms description are presented in Section 4. Section 5 describes simulations and experiment setup. Results are discussed in Section 6. Section 7 outlines conclusions of this work. 2 Thin-film silicon solar cells The quantum efficiency (Q e ) of a solar cell is the ratio of charge carrier produced at the external circuit of the cell (electronic device) to the number of photons received (or absorbed) by the cell. There are two ways this quantum efficiency ratio is calculated: (i) external quantum efficiency and (ii) internal quantum efficiency. External quantum efficiency is a ratio of the number of photo-generated charge carriers (i.e., electrons) picked up by the cell to the number of photons incident on the cell Internal quantum efficiency is the number of electrons (charge carriers) extracted from the cell divided by the number of photons absorbed (trapped) within the cell Õs photoactive layers (i.e., p-i-n-type photodiode absorption layers) This in-fact is thin-film solar cell structure design problem which we discussed in Section 2.3. For this, many candidate cell structures are to be evaluated for achieving maximized internal quantum efficiency. We simply call it quantum efficiency, Q e . In this work, we compute quantum efficiency, Q e of a candidate cell structure according to methods mentioned in Section 4, detail of which is available in This study works on thin-film solar cell composition shown in Fig. of cell in Fig. Glass (SiO 2 ) layer (topmost layer in Fig. Thin-film technology has made it possible to produce low-cost solar cells. This is mainly due to plasma-assisted chemical vapor deposition technology that enables the production of thin-film solar cells by growing silicon (Si) layers In-fact, growing Si layers (more generally the absorption layer) also enables the production of solar cells with a smaller thickness (of the order of μm) compared to previously possible devices (solar cells) that were thicker by 2-order magnitude. However, smaller thickness causes less absorption of light. Therefore, the effective use of light-trapping techniques has become crucial for thin-film solar efficiency. The effectiveness of light-trapping techniques relies on thin-film solar cells structure optimization. When designing and optimizing a solar cell structure, we use two light-trapping methods: lighttrapping BR layer and nano-texturing. Metals like silver (Ag) maybe used as a BR layer, while alkaline solutions like KOH or NaOH are used for nano-texturing of layer's interfaces. Alkaline solution KOH or NaOH corrodes silicon to form randomly positioned square pyramids. The depth of corrosion can be accurately tuned by controlling the temperature and time length of the corrosion process The mesoscale features optimization relies on processing time of growing Si layers, and it directly impacts fabrication cost of solar cells. Obviously, mesoscale features optimization is a monotonic function of the layer's thickness (mainly of the intrinsic layer μc-Si:i) Nano-texturing process, on the other hand, produces textured (rough) interfaces in a periodic manner to increase light absorption. The optimization of nano-texturing is essential to make a balance between shading and exposure to light Simultaneous optimization of mesoscale features and nano-scale features is a trade-off that needs to be met for efficient light-harvesting. On one hand, mesoscale features optimization is sensitive to fabrication costs. On the other hand, nano-texturing feature optimization is sensitive to light absorption capacity. Such a complex optimization problem requires an appropriate numerical approach. This, in fact, is a MOO problem where we optimize the trade-off between the effects of these two cell design features. Thin-film silicon solar cell is relied on light trapping (absorption) techniques to maximize its (internal) quantum efficiency, Q e Numerical simulation An example of genetic algorithm (GA) Their purpose was to optimize (to find) grating types related to maximum quantum efficiency, Q e . Compared to their work, our work optimizes each layer's roughness, and our purpose is to optimize photodiode intrinsic layer thickness and composition of cell related to maximum quantum efficiency, Q e . Moreover, our work aims at MOO compared to single-objective optimization mentioned in Contrary to our cell composition optimization approach, some other works in literature aimed at optimizing only a few components of cell structure using single-objective GA. For example, thin-film anti-reflection coatings optimization of solar cell is presented in In our previous work Our work depends on light trapping techniques, plasmonic effects computation, and simulation methods for cells efficiency measurement and cells structure design validation. These methods consist of three parts: (i) the computation of photon's scattering probability for cells layers tex-tured interfaces using Maxwell simulations The structure of a thin-film solar cell composition has many layers. Its cell structure optimization is, therefore, subjected to optimization of interface roughness of these layers. We formulated the cell structure optimization problem as a MOO problem (cf. Section 4.1), where layers interfaces roughness were the problem's tuneable parameters. The tuning of these parameters governs the optimization of two cost functions related to thin-film solar cells: (i) quantum efficiency maximization and (ii) intrinsic layer thickness minimization. Maximization of solar cell quantum efficiency (Q e ) where Q e is the average overall quantum efficiency of a cell in an ideal charge collection condition (i.e., 100 % collection efficiency independently collected on the frequency) calculated as the average absorption in the two intrinsic layers μc-Si:i and a-Si:i. In Eq. ( The cell structure optimization concerning intrinsic (μc-Si) layer's thickness, d μc-Si minimization is directly related to cells fabrication cost. However, solar cell optimization problem imposes a minimum and maximum thickness constraint on intrinsic (μc-Si) layers in its MOO treatment to Eq. ( Thickness (nm) Roughness (nm) modelling approach refereed in Section 2.2 for cell structure optimization and validation holds true only if the constraints in Eq. ( A multi-objective optimization (MOO) algorithm optimizes two or more objectives simultaneously as per: such that no one objective of the problem can be improved without a simultaneous detriment to at least one of the other objectives. Each f k (x) is a scalar objective, and MOO problem optimizes an objective vector F (x), where x ∈ R n is its feasible solution obtained at the final population on meeting termination criteria like max number of function evaluations. More specifically, a MOO algorithm produces a set of non-dominated solutions {x 1 , x 2 , . . . , x λ }, also known as Pareto-optimal front or Pareto-optimal solutions set A solution x i dominates other solution x j if for all objectives , where should be read as "better of." On the contrary, a solution x i is non-dominated if for at least one objective f k (x i ) f k (x j ) does not hold. A set of such non-dominated solutions is called the Pareto-optimal solutions set. The solar cell structure optimization problem optimizes the objective vector: where Q e and d μc-Si are subjected to optimization of parameters (roughness of cell structure) σ = σ 2 , . . . , σ 11 . We report three select solutions from the Pareto-front of each cell design: (i) the solution maximizing the quantum efficiency, i.e., Q e (σ) * ; (ii) the solution minimizing the thickness of the microcrystalline silicon layer (d μc-Si ), i.e., d μc-Si (σ) * ; and (iii) the solution closest to the Utopian point, i.e., U (σ) * which represents the solution that contributes highest to both objectives with respect to the reference cell mentioned in Table We used a two-stage approach to perform MOO of solar cell. In the first stage, we performed non-dominated sorting genetic algorithm-II (NSGA-II) based optimization of the objective F = (Q e (σ), d μc-Si (σ)). In the second stage, we apply our multi-objective optimizationimmunological algorithm (OptIA-II) to enhance the Pareto-front obtained in the first stage. We briefly describe NSGA-II and OptIA-II as follows. NSGA-II A fast non-dominated sorting process sorts D candidate solutions into several sets (called fronts) of non-dominated solutions: F 1 , F 2 , . . . , F s such that the front F 1 contains all the non-dominated candidate solutions of population P . This means, no one solution in F 1 is dominated by any other solutions. Considering all remaining solutions except the ones already in F 1 , it is possible to identify a new front F 2 which contains all the next non-dominated solutions of P . Subsequently, front F 3 and other fronts are sorted until no solution is left to be sorted into a front. Once solutions are sorted into several fronts, a rank is assigned to each candidate solution such that those in front F 1 have rank 1, those in front F 2 have rank 2, and those in front F 3 have rank 3. This continues until all solutions are assigned a rank. The rank of the solutions is then used as the first parameter considered when constructing the population for the next generation. The crowding distance of a candidate solution σ is the estimation of the density of solutions around it. The distance assigned to σ is the sum of its distance from the two points found on either side of it in the objective space. Crowding distance helps NSGA-II maintain diversity in the population while propagating population, P from generation to generation, by promoting the solutions with a higher distance from the other points within the same front. We designed a novel multi-objective optimization algorithm called OptIA-II. Our OptIA-II is a clonal selection algorithm Cloning operator. The cloning operator clones each candidate solution so that these clones can be modified using the other operators to explore the neighbourhood in the search space Hypermutation and hypermacromutation operators. Hypermutation and hypermacromutation operators The formal definitions of hypermutation and hypermacromutation operators are as follows: Let n be the number of genes a candidate solution σ has. Then, we have n = 10 genes of a candidate solution subjected to mutation in this work, i.e., σ = σ 2 , σ 3 , . . . , σ 11 representing layers interface roughness. For convenience, we re-index solution vector as σ = σ 1 , σ 2 , . . . , σ 10 . A threshold α is defined for each solution and used to determine whether its genes will be mutated by the hypermutation operator, i.e. it expresses the probability with which the mutation of a gene occurs. Thus, for a hypermutation potential ρ 1 , we compute α as: where F (σ) indicates normalized objective rank between [0, 1] of the candidate solution σ, where 1 is the best solution and 0 is the worse solution. Once α is defined, the expected number of genes mutated by the operator is approximately equal to α • n + 0.5 . In practice, for each gene a random variable is then drawn from a uniform distribution U(0, 1) and then compared to α, if the variable is below the threshold the hypermutation of that gene is performed as: where τ 1 , τ 2 < 1 are two parameters dependent on the population size D and defined as τ 1 = 1/ 2 √ D, τ 2 = 1/ √ 2D and r, s ∼ N (0, 1) are two variables drawn from a standard normal distribution. Algorithm 1 Hypermutation operator function Hypermutation((P clone , ρ 1 ) ) Threshold for mutation is computed r, s ∼ N (0, 1) u ∼ U(0, 1) for i = 1, . . . , n do For each gene in σ if u < α then while #try ≤ 10 do Try 10 time to achieve a feasible mutation Mutation of the gene end while end if end for P clone j = σ end forreturn P clone end function On contrary to hypermutation, in the hypermacromutation operator the threshold α to determine the genes of each candidate solution σ to be mutated, for a hypermacromutation potential ρ 2 , is computed as: Similarly to the hypermutation case, a random variable drawn for each gene i of the solution triggers the hypermacromutation if lower than α. This mutation is performed by using a convex operator which randomly selects another gene σ j for i = j and by applying the following operation: where β ∈ [0, 1] is drawn from a uniform distribution, and l and u are the lower and upper bounds defined for each gene, respectively. Hence, the operator applies a convex mutation based on the value of the gene σ i to be mutated and the value of another gene σ j that is normalized and transferred in the feasible interval of σ i . Algorithm 2 Hypermacromutation operator function Hypermacromutation((P clone , ρ 2 )) Threshold for mutation is computed Choose a random gene for the convex mutation u ∼ U(0, 1) For each gene in σ if u < α then β ∼ U(0, 1) Convex mutation is applied end if end for P clone j = σ end forreturn P clone end function A mentioned, the two mutation operators have similarities and differences; first, the definition of the probability of the mutation α involves different parameters such as the two mutation potentials ρ 1 , ρ 2 and, in the case of hypermutation, τ 1 , τ 2 that are dependent on the population size only. The other notable difference is how the mutation is performed; hypermutation is a variation of the corresponding gene based on its value and an exponential function that maintains the new value close to the original one due to the definition of τ 1 , τ 2 , having D = 100. The convex operator in the hypermacromutation makes the mutated value more likely to be far from the original gene, also depending on its normalized difference with the other randomly chosen gene in the solution. That is, hypermacromutation aims to produce a more diverse candidate solution than the original one, improving the diversity across the population, while the hypermutation keep the exploration more within the close range of the existing genes. In our case, posing ρ 1 = 1, ρ 2 = 7 makes the chance of a hypermutation of a gene more likely that a hypermacromutation. The presence of the normalized rank of solutions F (σ) in the definition of the probabilities ensures the inversely proportional law, making both mutations more likely to occur within the worst solutions of the current population. At every step of the procedures in which new genes are generated, they are maintained only if feasible as defined by the constraints of the problem and discarded otherwise. Aging operator. The aging operator eliminates old candidate solutions from the current population to introduce diversity and to avoid local minima Moreover, the best dead solutions are retained in an archive to be considered again if during a generation the number of feasible and alive solutions found after the mutations and aging goes below the size of the population. Pareto-front-selection operator. After aging operator has eliminated older solutions from the current population, a Pareto-front-selection operator is performed to assign a rank to each solution of a combined set of solutions of both current population (without aged solution) and current offspring solutions. The Pareto-front-selection operation in OptIA-II is a fast nondominated sorting of population, P , which is like fast non-dominated sorting of NSGA-II described in Section 4.2.1. OptIA-II optimization cycle. OptIA-II outlined in Algorithm 3 starts with an initial population P of D candidate solutions. Each member of the population is a candidate solution for the given optimization problem. Cloning, hypermutation, hypermacromutation, elitism, and aging operators of OptIA-II algorithm guides an initial population P = (σ 1 , . . . , σ D ) of D solution vectors through a predefined number of steps to a final population while simultaneously optimizing trade-offs of multiple objectives. In main optimization cycle of OptIA-II, the cloning operator clones (duplicates) each candidate solution D times. On these solutions, hypermutation and hypermacromutation operators are applied with respective mutation potentials ρ 1 and ρ 2 to mutate randomly chosen candidate solutions. After fitness of each solution is evaluated, an aging operator discards solutions that have reached a predefined age limit (the maximum number of steps τ that a solution can survive in the population). However, elitism preserves the best solution irrespective of its age. Finally, remaining solutions of the population are assigned rank and sorted as per Pareto-front-selection operation We present a comprehensive and exhaustive simulation strategy for solar cell optimization in this work. We performed a total of 15 different simulations in our experimental framework. These simulation cases are shown in Table Compared to our previous work • four-levels of TCO dosage-optimally doped (resistance less than 1 m Ω×cm), normally doped (resistance of the order of 1 m Ω×cm), lowly doped (resistance larger than 100 m Ω×cm), and not doped; • two types of TCO materials-zinc-oxide (ZnO) and tin-oxide (SnO2); • two varieties of BR roughness-smooth and rough surfaces; and • two types of back reflector-metals silver (Ag) and aluminium (Al). Such a comprehensive and computationally expensive setup was explored to investigate solar cells structure designs and materials that could maximize the quantum efficiency, Q e and minimize intrinsic layer thickness, d μc-Si (σ). Moreover, we hope that it will produce a full characterization of solar cell designs and associate the designs with their quantum efficiency and fabrication cost trade-off. The solar cell structure in Fig. In our two-stage optimization strategy, the first stage uses NSGA-II algorithm. NSGA-II aims at maximizing quantum efficiency and minimizing intrinsic layer thickness simultaneously. NSGA-II based optimization was performed on all 15 cell designs. The simulation results of each design's feasible solutions were collected and compared with their respective reference cells. For NSGA-II based MOO, population size was P = 100, and a maximum of 200 generation was used as the stopping criterion. We used simulated binary crossover (SBX) with crossover probability pc = 0.9. For mutation, polynomial mutation with mutation probability pm = 1/(number of decision variables) was used. The parent selection method was binary tournament selection. The second stage was the fine-tuning stage. Here, we apply our OptIA-II algorithm to the results of NSGA-II. In this stage, OptIA-II aimed at improving select best Pareto-fronts obtained using the NSGA-II algorithm. Three best designs obtained in the first stage were optimized in the second stage. For OptIA-II, the population size was the same as the Pareto-front population size of the NSGA-II algorithm. The cloning factor D was 2, the aging factor τ (maximum age) was 50 iterations, hypermutation potentiall ρ 1 was 1, hypermacromutation potential ρ 2 was 7. The stopping criteria T max was 10 4 fitness function evaluations. In our previous work Using single objective OptIA without violating constrained in Eq. ( In addition, another solar cell design "low doped ZnO and rough BR Ag" produced a Q e = 0.6 and d μc-Si = 2100 on NSGA-II-based optimization. For "optimally doped ZnO and smooth BR Ag," our previous work produced a Q e = 0.593 and d μc-Si = 2110 using single objective OptIA as its best results In this research, we use the max quantum efficiency, Q e = 0.6 obtained in A summarized result of NSGA-II based MOO of the solar cell optimization on all 15 designs is shown in Fig. Lowest cost-intensive and lowest quantum efficient cluster. The solar cell designs that are not-doped constitute this cluster. This cluster appears in the leftmost part of Fig. NSGA-II finds optimal parameters for not-doped designs that maximized quantum efficiencies of these designs with respect to their respective reference cells (cf. Figs. These three candidate solutions refer to (i) the highest quantum efficiency Q e (σ) * ; (ii) the thinnest microcrystalline silicon layer d μc-Si (σ) * ; and (iii) a point U (σ) * with the closest fitness to the Utopian point, that is, the theoretical point having the best obtained optimal values for both objectives simultaneously. The Utopian point is not practically feasible. However, the presented U (σ) * gives a good trade-off between the objectives in our simulations with respect to respective reference cell. Low cost-intensive and low quantum efficient cluster. The next cluster in Fig. High cost-intensive and high quantum efficient cluster. In the order of the performances, the design with rough BR rAg-lZnO is better than smooth doping designs, which indicates that low doping rough BR cell design provides better light-harvesting capacity than smooth BR cell design. This fact is evident from normally-doped ZnO design and SnO 2 doped design cluster (cf. Fig. After analysing lowly-doped and normally-doped clusters, it is clearly observed that the rough BR Ag among ZnO based TCO doping is a better choice than a smooth BR. Similarly, rough BR Ag gives better light-harvesting capacity than a smooth BR. In-fact, SnO 2 based TCO layer shows a higher quantum efficiency than ZnO based TCO layer in this cluster. The max quantum efficiency of rAg-SnO 2 is 0.57, which is as good as the reference cell outlined in Table Highest cost-intensive and highest quantum efficient cluster. The rightmost cluster in Fig. The quantum efficiency of this cluster varies between 0.56 (close to the reference cell) and 0.6 (≈ 5.36% more efficient than the reference cell and equal to baseline quantum efficiency Q e ). Detailed parameter values and three candidate solutions of these designs are listed in Table The quantum efficiency, Q e of smooth BR Al plus optimally doped ZnO (sAl-oZnO) design increased from Q e = 0.5946 to Q e = 0.6006, i.e., its quantum efficiency, Q e improved by 1.0091%. Also, the thickness d μc-Si of the microcrystal silicon intrinsic layer decreased from 2210 to 2208.43. Similarly, the quantum efficiency, Q e of smooth back reflector Ag plus optimally doped ZnO (sAg-oZnO) design increased from Q e = 0.5988 to Q e = 0.6028, a 0.6680% increase in Q e . Its thickness d μc-Si decreased from 2210 to 2208.24. For rough BR Ag plus optimally doped ZnO (rAg-oZnO) design, the quantum efficiency, Q e increased from Q e = 0.5990 to Q e = 0.6031. A 0.6845% increased in quantum efficiency, Q e . Its thickness, d μc-Si decreased from 2210 to 2209.67. Notice that the energy production efficiency is directly proportional to increases in the quantum efficiency Q e of a single photovoltaic solar cell. Therefore, a 0.6845% increased in quantum efficiency Q e of a single photovoltaic solar cell is a significant proportional improvement on the single solar panel that has a few such photovoltaic solar cells. Table For example, the applications such as household appliances and toys where a low-cost solar panel is required with relatively good quantum efficiency, we may use the least cost-intensive designs that have relatively good quantum efficiency. In our obtained solar cell characterization, the second most-effective design cluster shown in Fig. The design "optimally doped ZnO with Al as a (smooth) back reflector" belonging to the most efficient cluster (see Fig. A comprehensive framework was designed in this research for solar cell optimization. This framework studies 15 different solar cell structure designs. We performed simulation and optimization of cell structure interface roughness parameters to improve cells light-harvesting capacity. That is, to improve cells quantum efficiency computed using a full Maxwell simulation model. We treated solar cell design optimization problem as a multi-objective optimization (MOO) problem and optimized cells quantum efficiency against cells microcrystalline silicon intrinsic layer thickness (cells fabrication cost). Our Pareto-optimality results obtained by applying nondominated sorting algorithm-II (NSGA-II) produced a full characterization of the cell designs. From the analysis of the NSGA-II produced Pareto-fronts, we found that transparent conductive oxide (TCO) layer doping has a strong correlation with cells quantum efficiency. This means, in our experiments, a high concentration doping strategy (optimal doping with resistance less than 1 m Ω×cm) produced the most efficient cell design. We also found that the cell structure design with a rough back reflector compared to a smooth back reflector provided a higher light-harvesting capacity. This was evident from the Paretofront of cell designs for both zinc oxide (ZnO) and tin oxide (SnO 2 ) doping. Here, the rough back reflector provided a better trad-off between quantum efficiency and micro-crystal silicon layer thickness. The use of silver (Ag) as a back reflector material was clearly better than the aluminium (Al). However, high concentration doping of ZnO with Al as back reflector material offered a slightly improved quantum efficiency (0.6006) with respect to the baseline quantum efficiency (0.6). We found that ZnO as a TCO layer is more efficient than SnO 2 . In our two-stage MOO, the Pareto-fronts of three select best cell designs of NSGA-II based MOO stage were fine-tuned by our designed multi-objective optimization-immunological algorithm (OptIA-II). We observed that OptIA-II algorithm improved both costs associated with solar cell design. It maximized quantum efficiency and minimized micro-crystal silicon intrinsic layer thickness of all three select designs. The best stable solar cell design found was rough back reflector Ag plus optimally doped ZnO that produced an ≈ 0.7% improved quantum efficiency (i.e., Q e = 0.6031) with respect to the baseline quantum efficiency. hyp ← Hypermutation(P clone , ρ 1 ) P macro ← Hypermacromutation(P clone , ρ 2 ) P hyp ∪ P macro ← Fitness Evaluation F (P hyp ∪ P macro ) F eval = F eval + 2.D clone P age ← Aging(P t , P hyp ∪ P macro , τ ) P t+1 ← Pareto-Front-Selection(P age ) t = t + 1 end whilereturn P Tmax end procedure