We investigated the chemical pressure effects on structural and electronic properties of SnTe-based material using partial substitution of Sn by Ag0.5Bi0.5, which results in lattice shrinkage. For Sn1-2x(AgBi)xTe, single-phase polycrystalline samples were obtained with a wide range of x. On the basis of band calculations, we confirmed that the Sn1-2x(AgBi)xTe system is basically possessing band inversion and topologically preserved electronic states. To explore new superconducting phases related to the topological electronic states, we investigated the In-doping effects on structural and superconducting properties for x = 0.33 (AgSnBiTe3). For (AgSnBi)(1y)/3InyTe, single-phase polycrystalline samples were obtained for y = 0-0.5 by high-pressure synthesis. Superconductivity was observed for y = 0.2-0.5. For y = 0.4, the transition temperature estimated from zero-resistivity state was 2.4 K, and the specific heat investigation confirmed the emergence of bulk superconductivity. Because the presence of band inversion was theoretically predicted, and the parameters obtained from specific heat analyses were comparable to In-doped SnTe, we expect that the (AgSnBi) (1-y)/3 In y Te and other (Ag,In,Sn,Bi)Te phases are candidate systems for studying topological superconductivity. Metal tellurides (MTe) with a NaCl-type structure have been extensively studied due to their physical properties as topological materials In MTe, the M site can be alloyed flexibly. For example, single crystals (films) of (Sn,Pb)Te can by grown with a wide solution range, and the alloy system has provided a platform to study topological nature of MTe As mentioned above, the (Ag,Sn,Bi)Te system would be an important system to expand the material variety of SnTe-based compounds including new superconductors. We started this work by investigating lattice compression in Sn1-2x(AgBi)xTe, in which x corresponds to the total amount of Ag and Bi substituted for the Sn site in the SnTe structure. Polycrystalline samples of Sn 1-2x (AgBi) x Te were synthesised by a melting method. Figure For the In-doped AgSnBiTe 3 system (see Fig. In Fig. The clear jump of C el /T and decrease in C el /T at low temperatures suggest the emergence of bulk superconductivity. The superconducting jump in C el (ΔC el ) estimated with T c = 2.16 K is 1.34γT c , which is comparable to the value expected from a full-gap superconductivity based on the BCS model (ΔCel = 1.43γTc) Particularly, samples with y = 0.3 and 0.4 showed a large shielding fraction. Note that the data has not been corrected by demagnetisation effect. The observation of the largest shielding volume fraction is consistent with the bulk superconductivity confirmed in specific heat measurements. As shown in Fig. The estimated T c for y = 0.4 is lower than that for (Sn,In)Te (T c ~ 4.5 K) With increasing y, S becomes negative, and the absolute value for y > 0.1 becomes less than 10 V/K, which is a typical value of metals. In Fig. The doping phase diagram for superconductivity of (AgSnBi)(1-y)/3InyTe is compared with that for the (Sn,In)Te and (Pb,In)Te systems in the following discussion. Having looked at the phase diagrams of (Sn,In)Te and (Pb,In)Te We tried to synthesise samples with y > 0.5, but a high-purity sample was not obtained. In addition, the Bi amount for y = 0.5 deviates from the nominal value with a large error, which means that the sample with y = 0.5 also contains inhomogeneity larger than those in y < 0.5. Seeing lattice constants for In-doped samples, we find that the lattice constant is smaller than the end member of InTe with a ~ 6.175 Å For In doping, we selected AgSnBiTe 3 (x = 0.33) as a parent phase in this study. For (AgSnBi) (1- y)/3InyTe, ΔSmix becomes the highest at y = 0.3, and it decreases with further In substitution, as shown in Fig. If we could get a phase with a higher In concentration, the superconducting phase diagram would be expanded from that shown in Fig. We have synthesised polycrystalline samples of Sn1-2x(AgBi)xTe and (AgSnBi)(1-y)/3InyTe to explore a new candidate phase of topological superconductor. For Sn1-2x(AgBi)xTe, singlephase samples were obtained with a wide range of x. According to band calculations, we confirmed that the Sn1-2x(AgBi)xTe system is basically possessing band inversion and topologically preserved electronic states. To investigate the effects of In substitution, we selected x = 0.33 (AgSnBiTe3) as a parent phase. For (AgSnBi)(1-y)/3InyTe, In-doped samples were obtained for y = 0-0.5 by high-pressure synthesis, and superconductivity was observed for y = 0.2-0.5. For y = 0.4, specific heat investigation confirmed the emergence of bulk superconductivity. Although the current study is the material exploration with polycrystalline we expect that the single crystals of (Ag,In,Sn,Bi)Te are grown in the next step, and characteristics including surface states, which are expected for a topological superconductor, are experimentally examined by surfacesensitive probes like angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy. Polycrystalline samples of Sn1-2x(AgBi)xTe (x = 0.00, 0.05, 0.10, 0.15, 0.20, 0.25, 0.30, 0.33, 0.35, 0.40, 0.45) and (AgSnBi)(1-y)/3InyTe (y = 0.0, 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4, 0.5) were prepared by a melting method in an evacuated quartz tube. Powders or grains of Ag (99.9% up), Sn (99.99%), Bi (99.999%), In (99.99%), and Te (99.999%) were mixed and melted in an evacuated quartz tube at 900 o C for 10 hours, followed by furnace cooling to room temperature. For (AgSnBi)(1-y)/3InyTe, the obtained samples were powdered and annealed in a high-pressure-synthesis instrument under 2 GPa at 500 o C for 30 minutes. A cubic-anvil-type 180-ton press was used, and the sample sealed in a BN crucible was heated by carbon heater. The phase purity and the crystal structure of Sn1-2x(AgBi)xTe and (AgSnBi)(1-y)/3InyTe were examined by laboratory X-ray diffraction (XRD) by the θ-2θ method with a Cu-Kα radiation on a MiniFlex600 (RIGAKU) diffractometer equipped with a high-resolution detector D/tex Ultra. The schematic images of crystal structures were drawn by VESTA The temperature dependence of magnetic susceptibility was measured using a superconducting quantum interference devise (SQUID) on MPMS-3 (Quantum Design) after zero-field cooling (ZFC) with an applied field of 10 Oe. The temperature dependence of electrical resistivity was measured by a four-probe method with an applied DC current of 1 mA on PPMS (Quantum Design) under magnetic fields. We used Ag paste and Au wires (25 m in diameter) for the four-probe setup. The temperature dependence of specific heat was measured under 0 and 5 T by a relaxation method on PPMS. The resistivity and specific heat measurements were performed using a 3 He probe system (Quantum Design). Hall coefficient was measured by fourprobe setup on PPMS at low temperatures. Hall coefficient was estimated from the slope in the magnetic field dependence of Hall voltage. Seebeck coefficient at room temperature was measured under steady-state, where the thermo-electromotiveforce (V) and the temperature difference (T) were simultaneously measured., and the S was determined from the slope of V / T. First principles band calculations were performed using WIEN2k package 