Superconductivity in topological quantum materials is much sought after as it represents the key avenue to searching for topological superconductors, which host a full pairing gap in the bulk but Majorana bound states at the surface. To date, however, the simultaneous realization of nontrivial band topology and superconductivity in the same material under ambient conditions remains rare. In this paper, we study both superconducting and topological properties of a binary compound PtPb4 (Tc ∼ 2.7 K) that was recently reported to exhibit large Rashba splitting, inherent to the heavy 5d Pt and 6p Pb. We show that in PtPb4, the specific heat jump at Tc reaches ∆C/γTc∼1.70±0.04, larger than 1.43 expected for the weak-coupling BCS superconductors. Moreover, the measurement of quantum oscillation suggests the possibility for a topological band structure, which is further studied by density functional theory calculations. Our study may stimulate future experimental and theoretical investigations in this intriguing material. Following the advent of topological insulators (TIs), the search for topological quantum materials with diverse symmetry-enforced topological states, characterized by the nontrivial topological invariants, has attracted a flurry of research interest in both condensedmatter physics and materials science Among these topological materials, those showing superconductivity at low temperatures are particularly intriguing since they provide arguably a natural platform to realize Majorana fermions, the manipulation of which forms the basis of future topological quantum computing. Majorana fermions are exotic particles which represent their own antiparticle and can arise in some novel physical systems, e.g., in the vortex core of topological superconductors In this broad context, the binary PtPb 4 , a homologue of the Dirac nodal arc semimetal PtSn 4 , was recently reported to exhibit large Rashba splitting around the Γ point by ARPES In this article, we report the synthesis of high quality PtPb 4 single crystal and the detailed study of its transport and thermodynamic properties by means of resistivity, magnetization and heat capacity measurements. We study the superconducting properties of PtPb 4 by measuring its lower and upper critical fields and investigate the possible topological properties by the de Haas-van Alphen (dHvA) oscillations and the first-principles calculations. Large PtPb 4 single crystals up to several millimeters long were synthesized by the self-flux method Single-crystal x-ray diffraction measurements were conducted at room temperature using the Rigaku diffractometer to check the crystalline quality. The actual chemical composition of the as-grown single crystals was determined using a field-emission scanning electron microscope (Hitachi Regulus 8230) equipped with an Oxford Ultim Extreme energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS). The electrical resistivity, heat capacity and magneto-transport measurements were carried out in the Quantum Design Physical Property Measurement System(QD-PPMS), and the magnetic susceptibility was measured in the Quantum Design Magnetic Property Measurement System(QD-MPMS). We performed the electronic structure calculations using the generalized gradient approximation (GGA) shows the typical EDS result measured on an as-grown PtPb 4 single crystal. The actual chemical stoichiometry is determined to be Pt : Pb = 20.43 : 79.57, very close to the nominal composition. Fig. Fig. where the first term is the electronic term and the other two are phononic contributions. The fit yields γ n = (8.9± 0.2) mJ/mol K 2 , β = (1.56 ± 0.03) mJ/mol K 4 , and δ = (0.00144 ± 0.0008) mJ/mol K 6 . The Debye temperature Θ D is determined from the formula: where n is the number of atoms per formula unit, and R = 8.31 J/mol K -2 is the gas constant. The calculated Θ D is (184±5) K. In the inset of Fig. where ω ln is the average phonon-frequency, μ ⋆ is the Coulomb pseudopotential and has a typical value of ∼0.13. Based on ∆C/γT c value obtained above, we find λ e-p = 0.83 ± 0.04. Here both λ e-p and ∆C/γT c are slightly larger than in many BCS superconductors and are very close to the intermediately coupled superconductors (e.g., indium with T c = 3.4 K, λ e-p = 0.81) Alternatively, we can also derive λ e-p using the McMillan equation: With the Debye temperature obtained above, λ e-p is estimated to be 0.62. The lower critical field H c1 with magnetic field applied along the b-axis (i.e., perpendicular to the basal plane) was studied by examining the M -H curves measured below T c . As depicted in the inset of Fig. we estimate H c1 (0) as ∼ (20±1) Oe at T = 0 K. Using the expression μ 0 H c1 = φ0 4πλ 2 (ln λ ξ ) and the coherence length ξ derived below, the magnetic penetration depth is calculated to be λ ∼ (476.0 ± 50.0) nm. We also study the upper critical field H c2 by measuring the resistivity under various applied fields. As demonstrated in the inset of Fig. . The Hall resistivity ρ xy is displayed in Fig. Afterward, we fit both the longitudinal (σ xx ) and the transverse magnetoconductivity (σ xy ) using the twoband model as parameterized below and the fits are illustrated in Fig. Here e is the elementary charge -1.602×10 . Subsequently, we performed quantitative analysis of the oscillations using the standard Lifshitz-Kosevich(LK) formula Alternatively, the Berry phase can also be estimated from Landau's fan diagram; as shown in Fig. Fermiology of PtPb 4 was further studied by the angular dependence of dHvA. From the angle-dependent FFT spectrum (Fig. To further understand the electronic structure of PtPb 4 , we perform the density functional theory calculations. Following the discussions in Ref. In conclusion, we presented the detailed studies of the transport properties and quantum oscillations of a binary superconductor PtPb 4 that is isostructural to the NLSM PtSn 4 . The heat capacity jump at T c is slightly enhanced compared with the weak coupling BCS superconductors. The normal state magnetotransport can overall be described by the two-band model. We also investigated its possible topological characteristics by the quantum oscillations and the DFT calculations. The possible nontrivial band topology proposed in this study, along with the large Rashba splitting observed in ARPES 