Proposed special requirements exist for the rheological properties and time-varying characteristics of 3D printing cementitious materials (3DPC). In this study, high-dispersion polycarboxylate superplasticizer (HD-PC) and fluidity-retaining polycarboxylate superplasticizer (FR-PC) were used to control the rheological behaviors of 3DPC. The correlation of the time interval, the time varying characteristics of the rheological properties and the interlayer bonding strength were investigated. The results indicated that FR-PC improved the fluidity-retention ability Intelligent construction is an important development direction of the construction industry in the future. 3D printing cementitious materials (3DPC) is the core and key to realizing intelligent building manufacturing The rheological behavior and thixotropic behavior of 3DPC plays a key role in the printing process In addition, the rheological and thixotropic properties of 3DPC also affect the interlayer bonding between layers. The mixture needs good wettability and low dynamic yield stress to automatically adjust its shape under self-weight to match the rough surface of the bottom layer. Furthermore, these properties help to successfully fill and permeate the pores and cracks in the surface of the previously deposited layer, thus leading to the initial formation of mechanical interlocking between the two layers In addition, the printing time interval, as one of the critical factors in 3DPC, should be considered. Extending the printing time interval would lead to a decrease in the interlayer bonding strength. This may be attributed to the water loss occurs between the two layers As noted above, reducing the printing time interval may be a way to improve the interlayer bonding performance A more complex shape of the printed structure will increase the printing time interval In this paper, two types of PC (high-dispersion polycarboxylate superplasticizer HD-PC and fluidity-retaining polycarboxylate superplasticizer FR-PC) were prepared. Their structural characterization and adsorption behaviors were investigated to reveal the mechanism of action of PC. The rheological behaviors (i.e., static yield stress and fluidity) with different resting times were investigated to reveal the time-varying characteristics of the rheological properties. Additionally, the microstructure and interlayer bonding strength of printed structures with different types of PC (HD-PC and FR-PC) and different printing time intervals (20 s, 15 min, 30 min, 45 min and 60 min) were investigated to explore the correlation of printing time interval, time-varying characteristics of rheological properties and interlayer bonding strength. Ordinary Portland cement (OPC, Type II, 42.5 grade, Nanjing Conch Cement Co. Ltd, China) was selected as the binder. Attapulgite clay (Jiangsu Jiuchuan Nano-material Technology Co., Ltd.), exfoliated into nanoparticles (called nano clay, Nc) shaped with 135 nm average length and approximately 58 nm diameter, was selected as the thixotropic admixture The chemical structures of the HD-PC polymer and FR-PC were characterized by an FTIR (Thermo Scientific Nicolet iS5, USA) instrument. The PC solution was homogeneously mixed with KBr salt and completely dried in a vacuum oven at 80 °C. The mixture was pressed into a tablet and then scanned in transmission mode from 400 to 4000 cm -1 at a room temperature of 25 °C. The weight-average molecular weight (Mw), number-average molecular weight (Mn) and polydispersity index (PD: Mw/Mn) of the PCs were determined from gel permeation chromatography (GPC) measurements using a gel permeation chromatograph (GPC) apparatus (PL-GPC50; PL-GPC220; Waters GPC 1515). In this measurement, 0.1 mol/L Na2SO4 aqueous solution was used as the eluant at a flow rate of 0.5 mL/min. Monodispersive sodium polyethylene sulfonate was used as the standard phase of calibration. Solutions (20 mL) with different types of PC (HD-PC polymer and FR-PC polymer) and different concentrations (0.2, 0.4, 0.8, 1.2 and 1.6 g/L) were prepared. Cement (5.0 g) was mixed with the solutions by stirring for 10 min and 60 min, respectively. Then, a centrifugation instrument was used to separate these suspensions for 5 min at 4000 r/min. Then, a TOC analyzer (ET1020A Total organic Carbon, Shanghai Euro Tech Ltd, China) was used to measure the organic carbon content in the centrifuged solutions. The concentration of PCs in the centrifuged solutions could be calculated according to the TOC results. The adsorption amount of PC (A, mg/g-cement) could be calculated according to the formula below: where A is the adsorption amount of PC (mg/g-cement); C0 is the initial concentration (g/L); C is the concentration (g/L) of the centrifuged solution after adsorption; V is the solution volume (mL); m is the mass of the cement (g). The fluidity of cement pastes with HD-PC or FR-PC was determined by the mini-slump test. The mass solid/solid ratios of PC to cement (P/C) were fixed at 0.12%, and the mass ratio of water to cement in all the cement pastes was fixed at 0.29. The cement paste specimen was sealed in a container for 0, 15, 30, 45 and 60 min before the measurement. Then, the prepared fresh paste was poured into a mini-slump cone (a height of 60 mm, upper diameter of 36 mm and a bottom diameter of 60 mm) and the cone was quickly lifted up. After the paste stopped flowing, the average value of the maximum diameter and width perpendicular was recorded. The fluidity measurement was repeated 3 times for each sample, and an average of these measured values was considered to be the final fluidity value. The decrease in fluidity with time was used to evaluate the fluidity-retention of the cement paste. Two printable mixtures developed by the authors Rheological properties, with yield stress and plastic viscosity as two intrinsic physical parameters, are of great importance in describing the pumpability, extrudability and buildability of cementitious materials The thixotropic hysteresis loop method is one of the most popular methods to evaluate the thixotropy of cement mortar Fig. This protocol is used to monitor the development of static yield stress with resting time. After the fresh paste is evenly mixed via a JJ-5 planetary cement mortar mixer, it is immediately poured into a cylindrical container for rheological property testing. First, fresh paste is pre-sheared for 120 s by applying a shear rate sweep from 0 s -1 to 100 s -1 , which is mainly used to ensure the same initial conditions as other samples. Next, the mixture will rest for a short time (0 s, 150 s, 300 s, 450 s, 600 s, 750 s, 900 s, 1050 s, 2000 s and 3000 s) to build the structure. Then, a content shear rate of 0.02 s -1 is applied to break the structure build in the rest time. In this stage, the curve of shear stress vs. time is shown in Fig. A homemade laboratory level gantry 3D printer with forming space of 500 mm × 500 mm × 500 mm was used with a screw extrusion, as shown in Fig. Double-layer structures with different types of superplasticizers and different printing time intervals were prepared for the interlayer bonding strength test and X-CT test, as shown in Table The microstructure of the printed structures was determined using a Nikon metrology X-ray CT computed tomography (Nikon XTH) system supplied from Nikon Metrology Instruments. In this work, the plane porosity and fractal dimension of a 2D slice perpendicular to the stacking direction of the printed layer were used to quantitatively characterize the pore characteristics of 3D printed cement mortars. Porosity can directly reflect the compactness of the printed structures and can be obtained from the proportion of pore area in the total area of the 2D slice. where φ is the plane porosity, AV is the area of void space in the 2D slice, and AT is the total area of the 2D slice. The fractal dimension can characterize the complexity of a structure from a multiscale perspective Many calculation methods, such as box-counting dimension, triangulation and power spectrum, have been used to characterize the fractal characteristics of structures In this work, the box-counting dimension is used to evaluate the fractal characteristics of pores in 2D slices. For complex structures with autocorrelation, the box-counting dimension D b can be expressed as: where N k is the minimum number of grids that overlay the surface of the complex structure with a square grid with side length k. The box-counting dimension indicates that the number of square grids N k increases with the decrease in side length k, and the calculation algorithm of the box-counting dimension on the 2D slice is shown in Fig. The interlayer bond strength of 3D printed structure was measured by direct tensile loading test. Before the tensile loading test, the upper and lower ends of the specimen were cut and polished, and the total thickness of the specimen after polishing was approximately 20 mm. Then, the samples were bonded to the molds with high-strength epoxy glue, as shown in Fig. The FTIR spectra of HD-PC and FR-PC are reported in Fig. and 948 cm -1 correspond to the C-O-C bending vibration absorption peak, and the peak at approximately 845 cm -1 corresponds to the -CH2-bending vibration absorption peak. The FTIR results show that the molecular structures of HD-PC and FR-PC polymers contain hydroxyl, carboxyl, ether, and other functional groups. In addition, from the FTIR spectra of FR-PC, it can be found that there is a significant peak at approximately 1583 cm -1 , which may be the characteristic absorption peak of acrylate moieties, corresponding to the single bond -COO -stretching vibration The adsorption behaviors of superplasticizers on the surface of cement particles may greatly change the physical and chemical properties of the solid-liquid interface and the interaction between particles through electrostatic repulsion and steric hindrance The fluidity and its time-varying characteristics are investigated, and the results are shown in Fig. Consequently, a higher plasticizing effect and higher fluidity are observed in HD-PC at the beginning. From 0 min to 30 min, the fluidity of HD-PC decreases by 23.1%, while that of FR-PC decreases by 14.4%. From 0 min to 60 min, the fluidity of HD-PC decreases by 37.1%, while that of FR-PC decreases by 22.3%. This indicates that the fluidity-retention ability of FR-PC is higher than that of HD-PC. The ester groups of FR-PC will gradually hydrolyze into adsorbable carboxylate ions in the alkaline environment of cement pastes; thus, more carboxyl groups could be adsorbed onto the cement particles to provide a secondary dispersion effect The test results of the thixotropic hysteresis loop and static yield stress are shown in Fig. In comparison with FR-PC, the higher adsorption capacity of HD-PC would lead to a higher electrostatic repulsive force, which would result in good dispersion of cement particles and hinder the flocculation process. Proper thixotropic behavior is an essential quality to ensure the printability and buildability of cementitious materials. As shown in Fig. Fig. As reported in Table The high dispersion performance of HD-PC limits the physical flocculation of cement particles at the beginning, which results in a lower reflocculation rate (Rthix). It is worth mentioning that Rthix had the same trend as the thixotropy represented by the thixotropic hysteresis loop, which indicates that reflocculation rate may also be an indicator of appropriate thixotropic behavior for cement mortars. This was consistent with the research results of Kruger et al. The printing ink with different rheological properties may lead to various microstructures at layer-to-layer interfaces, which would significantly affect the interlayer bonding strength of printed structures. In this work, plane porosity φ is used to characterize local air-void systems of 3D printed structures, and the plane fractal dimension D b is used to describe the complexity and irregularity of air-void systems Extending the time interval will increase the surface stiffness of the substrate layer. A rough surface of the substrate layer may result in more difficulty in fusing between adjacent layers In addition, the rheological properties of fresh paste also significantly affect the microstructure of the interlayer zone. For a time interval of 20 s, the average plane porosity φ of I-L with FR-PC is 10.3% higher than that with HD-PC. This may be attributed to the higher initial fluidity of HD-PC than FR-PC. The good wettability and fluidity of the printing ink are expected to successfully fill and permeate into the pores and cracks in the surface of the previously deposited layer, which increases the compactness and reduces the average plane porosity φ of I-L. For a time interval greater than 20 s, the average plane porosity φ of I-L with HD-PC is higher than that with the FR-PC polymer. For a time interval of 15 min, the average plane porosity φ of I-L with FR-PC is 9.0% lower than that with HD-PC. For a time interval of 30 min, the average plane porosity φ of I-L with FR-PC is 15.2% lower than that with HD-PC. This may be attributed to the lower fluidity-retention ability of HD-PC than FR-PC. If the mixture with HD-PC is extruded out of the nozzle, it will lose plasticity and harden quickly, which is beneficial to the buildability, but results an increase in the stiffness difference and porosity between the two layers. Fig. The maximum plane porosity φmax and maximum plane fractal dimension D b max in the interlayer zone are therefore investigated and plotted in Fig. Furthermore, the printed structures with FR-PC always have lower values of φmax than those with HD-PC, except for the sample with a time interval of 20 s. For a time interval of 15 min, the value of φmax with FR-PC is 9.1% lower than that with HD-PC. For a time interval of 30 min, the value of φmax with FR-PC is 10.7% lower than that with HD-PC. For a time interval of 60 min, the value of φmax with FR-PC is 6.0% lower than that with HD-PC. This indicates that FR-PC has a positive effect on the fusion of two layers and reduces the maximum porosity of the interlayer zone. For a time interval of 20 s, the value of φmax with FR-PC is 10.4% higher than that with HD-PC. This may be attributed to the lower initial fluidity of FR-PC. Low fluidity reduces the filling effect and penetration behavior between adjacent layers, which will increase the porosity of the interlayer zone of printed structures. As shown in Fig. Furthermore, the printed structures with FR-PC always have higher interlayer bonding strength than those with HD-PC, except for the sample with a time interval of 20 s. For a time interval of 20 s, the interlayer bonding strength of the mixture with FR-PC is 9.8% lower than that with HD-PC. For a time interval of 15 min, the interlayer bonding strength with FR-PC is 16.0% higher than that with HD-PC. For a time interval of 30 min, the interlayer bonding strength with FR-PC is 35.1% higher than that with HD-PC. For a time interval of 60 min, the interlayer bonding strength with FR-PC is 28.2% higher than that with HD-PC. This indicates that FR-PC has a positive effect on the interlayer bonding of the printed structure, especially for long time intervals. Furthermore, by comparing the results illustrated in Fig. The potential correlation between the microstructure of the interlayer zone and interlayer bonding strength is investigated. According to the principle of minimum energy consumption of fracture mechanics, the crack propagation path always follows the surface with the weakest bonding force Furthermore, as shown in Fig. This result may be attributed to the possible errors by the image-based fractal calculation method. The 2D fractal dimensions calculated from the box-counting method truly reflect the irregularities of pore structure on the 2D images, but the fractal dimension with 2D images often underestimates the complexity of the actual 3D structure In this study, the structural characterization, adsorption behaviors and time varying characteristics of rheological properties of two types of PC (a high dispersion polycarboxylate superplasticizer HD-PC and a fluidity-retaining polycarboxylate superplasticizer FR-PC) were investigated. Furthermore, the correlation of printing time interval, time varying characteristics of rheological properties, microstructure and interlayer bonding strength was also studied. The following results are obtained: (1) FR-PC has a lower initial fluidity than HD-PC, but its fluidity-retention ability is higher than that of HD-PC because the amide monomers can gradually hydrolyze into adsorbable carboxylate ions in the alkaline environment of cement pastes. (2) The thixotropic hysteresis loop area of FR-PC is 101.9% higher than that of HD-PC. The reflocculation rate (Rthix) of FR-PC is 80.4% higher than that of HD-PC, while the structuration rate (Athix) is 29.6% lower than that of HD-PC. (3) Extending the time interval will exert a negative effect on the interlayer bonding strength of the printed structure. Extending the time interval increases the porosity of the interlayer zone and reduces the contact area and interlayer bonding strength of the printed structure. Compared with the plane porosity of the substrate layer and overlay layer, the maximum plane porosity and average plane porosity of the interlayer zone are more related to the interlayer bonding strength. (4) The FR-PC polymer has a positive effect on the interlayer bonding of the printed structure, especially for the long time intervals. For a time interval of 60 min, the interlayer bonding strength of the mixture with FR-PC is 28.2% higher than that with HD-PC. Furthermore, high fluidity-retaining FR-PC may reduce the negative effect caused by extending the time interval on the interlayer bonding. From 20 s to 30 min, the maximum plane porosity φmax in the interlayer zone with HD-PC increases by 50.0%, while that with FR-PC increases by 14.1%, the interlayer bonding strength with HD-PC decreases by 50.0 %, while that with FR-PC decreases by 14.1%. 