Recent experiments in quantum critical heavy fermion metals have pushed to the fore the question about whether antiferromagnetic fluctuations can promote both spin-singlet and spin-triplet superconductivity. Here we address the issue through non-perturbative calculations in antiferromagnetically correlated Kondo systems. We identify Kondo-destruction quantum critical points in both the SU(2) symmetric and Ising-anisotropic cluster Bose-Fermi Anderson models. The spin-singlet pairing correlations are significantly enhanced near the quantum critical point in the SU(2) case; however, with adequate but still realistic degree of Ising anisotropy, the spin-triplet pairing correlations are competitive. Our results demonstrate that spin-flip processes strengthen the spin-singlet pairing at the Kondo-destruction quantum critical points, and point towards a way for antiferromagnetic correlations to drive spin-triplet pairing. Further implications of our findings in the broader context of strongly correlated superconductivity are discussed. Quantum criticality has the potential to be a unifying theme in strongly correlated metals Heavy fermion metals represent a particularly important case study for the connection between quantum criticality and unconventional superconductivity. There are a large number -about 50 -of them which superconduct. In many cases, superconductivity develops out of a strange metal normal state, which is often associated with a QCP at the border of an antiferromagnetic (AF) order. Prototype examples are CeCu 2 Si 2 To make progress, it is necessary to start from a proper description of the quantum criticality in the normal state. It has been recognized that heavy fermion quantum criticality can go beyond the Landau description based on the slow fluctuations of a spin-density-wave (SDW) order Both of these questions can be addressed within cluster Bose-Fermi Anderson/Kondo models (BFAM/BFKM). These models involve multiple local moments coupled to each other through a Ruderman-Kittel-Kasuya-Yosida (RKKY) interaction and simultaneously to both fermionic and bosonic baths. The bosonic bath captures the dynamical magnetic fluctuations of a Kondo lattice model, and formally develops from the later through a cluster extended dynamical mean field approach (C-EDMFT) Model and solution methods: The two-impurity SU(2) BFAM Hamiltonian is The first line describes the interactions among the local degrees of freedom: d † iσ creates an electron on site i = 1, 2 with spin σ =↑, ↓, d is the onsite energy, U is the coulomb repulsion and I is the RKKY interaction between the two impurities. S α i = 1 2 μ,ν d † iμ σ α μν d iν is the spin operator and σ α μν are the Pauli matrices. The second line describes the fermionic bath and its coupling with the impurities: c † kσ creates a conduction electron with wave vector k, spin σ and energy k , which hybridizes with the local d electron through the matrix element V . The third line describes the 3-component vector bosonic bath and its coupling to the anti-ferro component of the two local moments through coupling constant g. α is the spin index and it is summed over x, y and z such that the Hamiltonian is SU(2) invariant. We will also consider the Ising-anisotropic version of the model (see below). For the fermionic bath, we consider a flat density of states ρ In addition, the impurity location r 1 and r 2 are set to be infinitely separated to avoid double counting of the RKKY interactions. The bosonic bath takes a sub-ohmic density of states specified by ρ B (ω) = p δ(ω -ω p ) = K 0 ω s e -ω/Λ Θ(ω). The prefactor ρ 0 and K 0 are determined by the normalization conditions: prior work that has dealt with various double expansions Given its "beyond-Landau" nature, we characterize the Kondo-destruction QCP with fidelity susceptibility that directly evaluates the changes of wavefunctions and detects quantum phase transition without introducing any order parameters , where H V includes all the terms in the Hamiltonian that are proportional to the hybridization strength V with g c = 0.66(2) and ν -1 = 0.31 To further characterize the QCP, we analyze the static spin susceptibility, defined as χ s (T ) = β 0 χ s (τ )dτ . As seen in Fig. Pairing susceptibilities: Within our 2-site construction we can study four different types of inter-site pairing, specified by the following pairing operators: , {σ, σ } ∈ {↑, ↓}. They are, respectively, the pairing operators in the triplet channel with m z tot = ±1, m z tot = 0 and the singlet channel with m z tot = 0, where m z tot is the z component of the total spin of the cooper pair. Accordingly we can define the dynamic and static pairing correlation functions respectively: The details of the calculational procedure is given in the Supplementary Material. We study the behavior of the pairing susceptibility following a particular cut (g 2 , I) = (2.22λ, λ) illustrated in Fig. 2-η . We observe a collapse across different temperatures, which suggests that χ (s,0) (τ ) ∼ 1/τ 2-η , with an anomalous exponent η 0.6. At the same time, we find that the pairing susceptibility in the triplet channel is strongly suppressed and does not acquire any anomalous dimension. SU(2) vs. Ising-anisotropic model For the SU(2) model, Fig. We now consider an Ising-anisotropic model. The extreme Ising-anisotropic model of Ref. 27 corresponds to having only the Ising component for both the bosonic-Kondo coupling and RKKY interaction. More realistically, we consider the model whose effective RKKY interaction is written in an anisotropic form: Here J z and J p are respectively the longitudinal and spinflip RKKY exchange interactions. The details of the model are described in the Supplementary Material. We consider the parameters such that the Ising anisotropy near the QCP has a realistic J p /J z ≈ 0.2. Fig. Discussion and Summary: Our findings shed light on the recent experiment in YbRh 2 Si 2 near its field-driven QCP By contrast, when the spin anisotropy is relatively weak, our results derived from the SU(2) symmetric cluster BFAM suggests that the spin-singlet pairing dominates. This result lays the groundwork for the understanding of the superconductivity that has been experimentally observed in a host of antiferromagnetically correlated heavy fermion metals, such as CeRhIn 5 and CeCu 2 Si 2 . Our results also shed light on other classes of strongly correlated metals. For example, UTe 2 has a strong Ising anisotropy in its spin response Going beyond the heavy-fermion context, the electronic delocalization-localization effect has been implicated by experiments in both the hole-doped cuprates To summarize, we have studied a cluster Bose-Fermi Anderson model as an effective Kondo system for beyond-Landau quantum criticality. In both the SU(2) symmetric and Ising anisotropic models, we identify Kondo-destruction quantum critical points. The spin-singlet pairing correlations are more strongly enhanced near the QCP in the SU(2) symmetric case than its Isinganisotropic counterpart. This reveals that spin-flip processes strengthen the spin-singlet pairing. In accordance with this insight, we find the S z = 0 spin-triplet pairing channel to be competitive in the realistically Isinganisotropic version of the model. The results provide a natural understanding of the recent experiments on the superconductivity near the field-driven quantum critical point of the prominent heavy fermion system YbRh 2 Si 2 , in a way that incorporates the salient quantum critical characteristics in its normal state. Finally, our findings bring out new insights pertinent to the unconventional superconductivity in a broad range of strongly correlated metals. In the continuous-time quantum Monte Carlo method, we perform a unitary transformation where Then each term in the expansion is sampled by the Metropolis-Hastings algorithm The (-1) p factor in the expression could potentially cause a sign problem. However, it is always positive in this model. Notice that the number of conduction electrons at each site is a conserved quantity, meaning that n c i = nc i . Besides, S z 1 , S z 2 , and number of bosons are all conserved quantity, such that n b 1 + n Under these conditions, p is always even and thus (-1) p = 1. To further establish the presence of a QCP between the Kondo screened phase and the LM phase, we calculate the Binder cumulant for a 3 components order parameter, U 2 = 5/2 -3 (m • m) 2 /2 m • m 2 , and correlation length ξ of staggered spin correlation function χ α s (τ ) 2 ) ξ(g, β) = β ξ β 1/ν (g -g c )/g c + A/β φ/ν . Ũ2 and ξ are universal functions, g c the critical coupling, ν the correlation length exponent. The term A/β φ/ν captures the correction to scaling from the leading irrelevant operator. By performing scaling collapse analysis, we find the optimal choices for g c and ν are g c = 0.66(1), ν -1 = 0.34(4) (from U 2 ) and g c = 0.67(1), ν -1 = 0.36(4) (from ξ). From this we estimate the actual critical value to be g c = 0.665 To measure the pairing susceptibility, we use the formula of the four-point correlation function shown in Ref. 