A contactless effective series resistance imaging method for large area perovskite solar cells that is based on photoluminescence imaging with non-uniform illumination is introduced and demonstrated experimentally. The proposed technique is applicable to partially and fully processed perovskite solar cells if laterally conductive layers are present. The capability of the proposed contactless method to detect features with high effective series resistance is validated by comparison with various contacted mode luminescence imaging techniques. The method can reliably provide information regarding the severeness of the detected series resistance through photo-excitation pattern manipulation. Application of the method to sub-cells in monolithic tandem devices, without the need for electrical contacting the terminals, appears feasible. The remarkable developments in the fabrication of high-efficiency single-junction perovskite solar cells (PSC) with power conversion efficiencies greater than 25% Camera-based electroluminescence (EL) The first adaptions of luminescence-based imaging to PSCs were in 2015 Spatially resolved Rs images are commonly extracted through two main approaches Contactless characterisation methods are generally advantageous, since they can be implemented in production with much higher measurement throughput compared to contacted methods. They also significantly reduce the risk of damaging the devices. Non-contact Rs imaging was first developed and demonstrated for silicon solar cells by Kasemann et al. Here, we present a contactless PLi method for the extraction of qualitative effective Rs images for PSCs. A flexible spatially non-uniform photo-excitation pattern is applied to create alternating illuminated and non-illuminated areas across the cell. The principle of the method implemented in this study follows that of Kasemann et al. The detected luminescence intensity in a solar cell is related to its diode voltage, V, at any operating point, through which is relevant for both PL and EL measurements. The detected position-dependent wavelength-integrated intensity is denoted as ∅ PL(EL) (x, y). Vth is the thermal voltage at the sample temperature. C(x, y) is a calibration constant that depends on the configuration of the measurement setup and on the optical properties of the sample. Note that although C(x, y) can have a voltage dependency, it is assumed to be injection-independent under the operating conditions used in this study. Assuming a simple local one-diode model, the voltage difference between the local diode voltage V(x,y) and the terminal voltage VT is related to the local series resistance Rs(x,y) via: where Vs(x,y) is the voltage drop associated with current flow across the effective series resistance associated with each specific cell location. J(x,y) is the local current density that must be quantified for quantitative measurements of Rs. By combining PL images taken with complementary illumination patterns, we can generate a PL image of the full cell that is equivalent to a PL image taken with current extraction via the terminals in a contactless mode (PL CE contactless image). Dividing this combined image by a PL image taken with full area illumination (PLOC image), using Eq. ( The voltage difference ∆V(x,y) represents the difference in the diode voltage between two operating points at each cell location, the first operating point representing VOC conditions, with no current extraction and thus with rather uniform voltage distribution across the cell, while the second operating point is under illumination and simultaneous current extraction. In the second scenario, areas with increased Rs remain at a higher local diode voltage since carrier extraction is less efficient. As a result, the value of ∆V(x,y) is larger in those areas. If the two operating points discussed above are chosen in such a way that similar excess carrier density is present in the two measurements, then this division removes, or at least reduces, prominent features that are associated with defect-mediated recombination losses. Higher contrast Rs images are obtained if the luminescence emission can be also collected from the shaded (non-illuminated) regions In this study, a DMD is employed to alternately create the illuminated/non-illuminated patterns. Taking the ratio of the combined luminescence images of the illuminated parts (the PL CE contactless images; see Figure Figure The output spectrum of the excitation source, before passing through a 675 nm shortpass filter (given in the inset of Figure In this study we used PSCs with the following device structure: FTO/c-TiO2/mp-TiO2/Cs0.05FA0.80MA0.15Pb(I0.85Br0.15)3/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au. The fabrication procedure is provided in the Supplementary Information, as well as the measured illuminated currentvoltage (J-V) curve (Figure It is noted that all luminescence images used in this study were collected immediately after the initiation of the external excitation of the solar cell, whether that being through photoexcitation or voltage biasing/current injection. This is mainly to avoid complications associated with the potential transient effects observed in PSCs, which can induce reversible and irreversible changes to the device performance A PLOC image of the PSC at ~0.75 Sun is shown in Figure The EL image of the same PSC taken at a bias voltage of 1.15 V is presented in Figure However, within the same rectangular ROI there are island-like areas in the PLOC image, indicated with arrows (and with black 'i' in the inset images) that show high PL intensity in the middle of the features with low intensities in their surroundings, yet they appear as totally low-intensity features in the relevant EL image. As will be discussed below, the middle regions of these features seem to be isolated regions with high effective Rs while the surrounding of the islands are sites with high non-radiative recombination. Distinctive areas in the EL image (marked with white circles) with lower luminescence intensities with respect to their surroundings can be identified. Interestingly, the same regions appear with high intensity relative to their surroundings in the corresponding PLOC image of Figure Another low-intensity ring-like feature in the EL image, indicated with an arrow on the lefthand side of the image, which is absent in the PLOC image, is also a possible region with high resistive losses. The most evident feature in both the PLOC and EL images of this device is the low intensity wavy stripe on the right-hand side of Figures The relatively large circular area that appears bright in both the PLOC and EL images, respectively, corresponds to the area of the aperture used for the J-V measurements, indicating an increased charge-carrier density and, thus, higher lifetime in this region after the J-V scans. This shows a strong sensitivity of PSC devices to light-induced changes, as reported previously Next, we applied the inhomogeneously-illuminated PLi approach to evaluate the high-effective Rs regions identified above. The illumination pattern -created by the DMD -divides the PSC area into three sections, alternately illuminated and non-illuminated. The total illuminated area approximately equates to the non-illuminated area. It is noteworthy that the ability to generate arbitrary illumination patterns can be readily exploited with this technique to vary the extent of current extracted from selected areas of the device. Figure The contactless EL image of the full device (generated by combining the two images acquired with partial illumination) is depicted in Figure Using Figures The high contrast associated with the low charge-carrier lifetime in the surroundings of the island-like features in the rectangular ROI (see insets of Figures Furthermore, this approach revealed some of the features, such as those exemplified with white squares in the rectangular ROI, appearing with low luminescence signal in both PLOC and contacted EL images (insets of Figures Although the proposed contactless method does not provide quantitative information about Rs, it allows identification of the severeness of the Rs features. This capability is demonstrated in this section. The inhomogeneous illumination pattern was modified such that only a small region, marked with a dashed square in Figure To verify the reliability of the contactless method, PLCE measurements were also performed in a contacted mode. In summary, we demonstrated the application of PL-based contactless Rs imaging on perovskite-based PV devices using inhomogeneous illumination. It was shown that the operating point of particular cell regions, in particular the fraction of photocurrent that is extracted during PL image acquisition, can conveniently be manipulated experimentally, via the sizes of the illuminated and non-illuminated areas, respectively. The resulting ability of this contactless technique to identify and differentiate Rs-affected regions with high and low absolute Rs was confirmed qualitatively by comparison with photoluminescence images that were acquired with simultaneous current extraction in contacted mode. The convenient and fast access to regions with high effective Rs provided by this contactless approach can be used for process optimization, in particular during the upscaling of PSCs to larger device areas. A potential future application of this method is its adaptation to fully contactless characterisation of sub-cells in monolithic tandem devices, where two critical PV parameters, Rs and iVOC can be mapped in a non-destructive PL-based contactless mode.