While grating couplers have become the de-facto standard for optical access to integrated silicon photonics platforms, their performance at visible wavelengths, in moderate index contrast platforms like silicon nitride, leaves significant room for improvement. In particular, the index contrast governs the diffraction efficiency per grating tooth and the resulting overall coupler length. In this work, we develop two approaches to address this problem: a dielectric grating that sums multiple optical modes to increase the overall output intensity, and an embedded metal grating that enhances the attainable refractive index contrast, and therefore reduces the on-chip footprint. We present experimental results that can be developed to realise compact efficient visible wavelength photonic interconnects, with a view towards cryogenic deployment for quantum photonics, where space is constrained and efficiency is critical. The majority of atom (Rb -780 nm) and atom-like (spin defects in diamond and silicon carbide) systems of interest for large-scale quantum technologies have their transition frequencies in the visible to near-infrared (IR) frequency range, above silicon's bandgap These problems are best illustrated by considering a grating coupler, a standard element in silicon photonics, but one whose performance in SiN leaves a lot to be desired. The low index contrast limits the achievable scattering efficiency per grating tooth and therefore requires long on-chip couplers that occupy a significant on-chip footprint Efficient grating couplers have significant advantages for quantum photonics, with regards to interfacing emitters located at the chip centre and avoiding routing (and excess loss) to the chip edge. Especially in cryogenic environments, as will be the case for most quantum photonics experiments, there are significant space constraints, which are relieved by being able to interface efficiently in the surface normal to the chip. Photonics also offers non-dissipative, thermally isolated wiring for classical interconnects With this in mind, in this work, we develop two different coupling approaches. First we develop a compact free space outcoupler that can funnel emission into multiple modes to be collected by a high-NA objective, with a view towards improving the out-coupling efficiency of an emitter located in an SiN waveguide. In parallel, we use an embedded metal layer to increase the index contrast (and scattering efficiency) in the SiN platform. We aim to design sub-100 μm 2 footprint components with at least -10 dB coupling power, considering typical quantum emission efficiencies Compared to the moderately efficient small diffractive couplers reported in suspended gallium arsenide membranes Under these constraints, an optimal device operating at 637 nm is found by varying the design pitch and duty cycle of the grating (Λ, D) and maximising the far-field projection of the emitted power (Poynting vector) that falls within the desired NA, T N A , using a particle swarm algorithm in a numerical finite difference time domain solver (Lumerical FDTD) Considering that an air-suspended fully-etched structure would have T ↑ = 0.5 by symmetry, our design is near optimal as the silica substrate reduces the top plane fraction. The resolution required is 300 nm, within reach of standard lithography in a foundry-compatible platform. We note related work by Zhu et al. on SiN grating couplers, to maximise 633 nm coupling into an NA = 0.65 objective This device was fabricated using single step e-beam lithography with CSAR-62 resist to obtain a high ICP etch selectivity for the 270 nm SiN film In this design, we have increased the amount of light coupled out of the device by collecting power summed from several different spatial modes, at a loss of modal purity, which also restricts the coupling efficiency obtainable into a single mode fibre. Owing to this, there is a limited overlap between a single Gaussian mode and the spatial profile of the light that couples out of the device, resulting in large scattering. At most a third of the emission would couple into a fibre, considering the intensity in a single lobe in Fig To realise efficient single-moded gratings that remain micronsized, we must consider degrees of freedom that would increase the refractive index contrast. This is to ensure that most of the light leaves in the first few grating teeth of the device. As well as the need for a small grating length, by symmetry, emission in the top plane can not be greater than emission in the bottom plane in fully etched designs, even for an infinite grating length. One way to achieve a high-contrast broken symmetry design is to use a metallic layer in combination with a dielectric. Gold is highly reflective, with a low real component and high imaginary refractive index (here modelled as n = 0.12 and k = 3.33 at λ = 637 nm Simulating the 70 nm buried gold device, we find that a pitch Λ = 320 nm maximises outcoupling T ↑ > 0.5. In contrast to the four lobes in the previous design, this emission leaves the grating design in a nearly mono-directional 20 • from the substrate. The transition to this single angle emission also acts as an effective in-coupler of single mode Gaussian beams with matched spot sizes, by time reversal symmetry. As this pitch requires tighter resolution tolerances, we opt for a linear grating for ease of process optimisation. We target a 5-μm-wide linear grating: this allows for smaller footprints than standard 12 μm telecommunications gratings, whilst coupling to a broad range of free space mode beams. The length of the grating is similar in dimension, with a low number of grating teeth. With this width, we find in Lumerical MODE that a linear taper can efficiently convert the waveguide mode with < 1 dB loss in 15 μm compared to ∼ 100μm required for silicon photonics at 1550 nm. Additionally, the device is wide enough to be tested with SM 630 fibre with a Mode Field Diameter (MFD) of 4.5 μm to decouple the free space optics performance from the devices under test. In Fig An alternative method to break symmetry is to employ a partial etch into the SiN layer. However, this results in a lower refractive index contrast to the fully etched grating. Therefore, a long grating is required for power in the waveguide mode to leave the device. As Further to this, an attractive strategy for most use cases is to modulate the duty cycle of the grating to tailor emission to fit a Gaussian output mode Following these results, we simulate the SM 630 fibre facet in FDTD, angled at 14 • in order to inject light into the device refracted through the air interface at 20 • . In Fig The grating coupler was fabricated through a lift-off process using PMMA. Gold is deposited on the patterned substrate using thermal evaporation and is lifted-off using a 10 second oxygen plasma de-scum and low power sonication in acetone. We avoid a chromium adhesion layer to reduce absorption losses and increase the scattering efficiency. Then, 270 nm of SiN is deposited on the grating using plasma enhanced chemical va- por deposition To test the device, we mount a V-groove fibre array containing 630 PM fibre (OZ Optics) with a polished facet at 14 • on a 6-axis fibre probing setup (Maple Leaf Photonics). The gratings are separated by 250 μm to match the V-groove spacing by a bend and linear waveguide section shown in The grating was designed for 637 nm, but our measurement peak is centered at 635 nm. The fibre array set angle is precise to 1 • and this is likely a cause of this discrepancy. The measured device is highly broadband with a 3 dB bandwidth of 20 nm and so operates well at the design wavelength. In Fig We note that embedded metal gratings have been considered before. Wang et al. simulated a gold grating below SiN although they did not consider the gold thickness Moving forward, the designs presented here could have useful applications in high-density addressing of quantum emitters 