The switching speed between two discrete logic stages essentially determines the performance of a traditional digital computer based on the von Neumann architecture 1,2 . Unfortunately, the heat wall has prevented the clock speed from increasing since 2004 3 . With the explosive growth of connected intelligent devices in the Internet of Things (IoT), there has been a pressing need for the real-time processing and understanding of the large volume of analogue data generated 4,5 . As a result, the difficulty in boosting the computing speed renders digital computing with a binary data representation unable to meet the increasing demand for processing analogue information that is by nature, intrinsically continuous in magnitude and time 6,7 . By utilizing a continuous data representation, with the inherent nature of physical laws valid at every instant, parallel computing can be implemented for the direct processing of analogue information in real time, without suffering from the constraints of traditional computing hardware 8,9 . Here, we propose a scalable massively parallel computing scheme by exploiting a continuous-time data representation and frequency multiplexing. This computing scheme enables the parallel reading of stored data and the one-shot operation of matrix-matrix multiplications in a memristive crossbar, which are inaccessible via previous computing technologies. Furthermore, we achieve the one-shot and demonstrate that the processing and modulation of analogue information can be simultaneously performed in memristive crossbar. Our work paves the way towards the development of intelligent edge devices that are able to process and communicate in real time. in the time domain. A typical example is the binary data representation (i.e., "1" and "0") used for computing in digital computers based on von Neumann architecture, in which the bit stream is discrete in time and amplitude. The upper bound of the processor speed in digital computers is largely set by the clock frequency, the increase of which is essentially limited by the speed of flipping logic states. Further increasing the processor speed will lead to serious overheating issues Alternative computing schemes other than digital computing are thus required for these applications In this letter, we propose and implement a scalable massively parallel computing scheme by employing a continuous-time data representation and frequency multiplexing and demonstrating its promising application in intelligent edge devices. As a demonstration, the proposed massively parallel computing allows the one-shot recognition of 16 letters in a neural network composed of two physically interconnected crossbars. Moreover, massively parallel computing and signal modulation are implemented simultaneously in the analogue domain, opening up unprecedented opportunities for intelligent edge applications. Note that signal modulation can be accomplished simultaneously with the one-shot recognition of numerous target letters in this FMC-based system, which is different from digital technologies where the signal modulation and image processing are separated. In this way, the recognition results output from the right crossbar can be directly transmitted through wireless channels (Tx_1, Tx_2... Tx_9) by using a radio frequency (RF) module. The transmitted signals can be received on a remote terminal device over different wireless channels (Rx_1, Rx_2... Rx_9), as shown in Fig. m 2 ), with the results shown in Fig. Such a wide operating frequency range enables to add more frequency components in the input continuous-time signal to increase the parallel computing capability. In conjunction with recent advance in the integration density of the memristive crossbar Pd/Ta/HfO2/Pd memristive devices were fabricated with a sandwich structure. An Al2O3 substrate was used to eliminate the parasitic capacitance. The bottom/top metal layer was deposited through a standard electron beam deposition process; a 6-nm-thick HfO2 switching layer was deposited via atomic layer deposition. The deposition of an 80-nm-thick Ta layer was realized by using a standard RF sputtering process. For devices with a feature linewidth larger than 2 μm, the electrode patterns were realized by using double-layer photoresist photolithography, followed by a lift-off process in Nmethyl pyrrolidone. For linewidths smaller than 2 μm, electron beam lithography was used to pattern the electrodes. To demonstrate massively parallel computing in the memristive crossbar array, signal generators, TIAs and an oscilloscope with a built-in frequency analyser were used. Signal generators supporting 16 channels were used as continuous-time signal sources. We employed TIAs to convert the current signals into voltage signals for the measurement; a frequency analyser was used to measure the output results from the memristive crossbar array. To demonstrate the parallel reading of the data stored in the memory crossbar, we used the individual-frequency sinusoidal voltage signal as carrier signals and applied them into different rows of the crossbar, where the conductance matrix is written randomly. The output current was converted into a voltage by the TIAs and was subsequently measured by the frequency analyser. In Read mode, multiple current peaks are present in the current-frequency spectrum output from each column of the crossbar. Based on the specific row in which a carrier signal with distinct frequency was applied, the frequency corresponding to a specific current peak can be distinguished at each column of the crossbar, in which the conductance of the selected memristor is proportional to the specific current magnitude (or peak). We used a Tektronix TTR506A vector network analyser to apply high-frequency microwave signals to the memristive devices to measure the S-parameter. The S21 parameter represents the forward transmission gain through the memristive devices. The S21 curves in Fig. To explore the full potential of massively parallel computing, we analysed the operating frequency of FMC-based massively parallel computing implemented in a memristive crossbar array. For simplicity, a memristor has been considered a programmable resistor connected in parallel with a parasitic capacitance. In the simulation, we used a differential pair of memristive devices as synaptic weight. Since the leakage current through parasitic capacitor increases with the frequency, the maximum operating frequency available for FMC-based massively parallel computing is thus limited by the capacitance variation in different memristive devices. To carry out the simulation, we used a 512×512 memristive crossbar array, in which capacitance variation follows a normal distribution with a relative standard deviation of 10% and memristor resistance varies from 1 to 10 kΩ. Within 1% error in massively parallel computing, the operating frequency was calculated versus capacitance of memristive device and shown in Fig. To reduce the power consumption in the memristor arrays and mitigate the effect of the wire resistance, high resistance states were preferred when programming the memristive crossbar. A weight change was realized by stimulating an alternative memristor in a differential pair, W=G+-G-. All memristors in both positive and negative crossbar arrays were first set into high resistive states. Based on the gradient descent algorithm, an online training process was performed. Subsequently, the expected conductance was mapped into a memristive crossbar. If ∆G (i,j)>0, then a positive pulse would be applied to increase G+, and a negative pulse would be used to decrease G-; Otherwise, a positive pulse would be applied to increase G-, and a negative pulse would be used to decrease G+. A wide-band MIMO-orthogonal frequency-division multiplexing (OFDM) communication system with Nt transmitting antennas and Nr receiving antennas was considered. The MIMO system model at the k th subcarrier is given as where y k ∈ C N r and s k ∈ Ω N t are the received and transmitted vectors at the k th subcarrier, respectively, and the constellation of each component s i is denoted by Ω. H k ∈ C N r ×N t is the channel matrix at the k th subcarrier and assumed to be perfectly known at the receiving terminal, and n k ~ CN(0, σ k 2 I N r ) is the additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) vector at the k th subcarrier. By applying information theory to the MIMO-OFDM system model, the capacity can be obtained as follows: where C is the channel capacity of the MIMO-OFDM system, B k and P k are the bandwidth and transmitting power of the kth subcarrier, respectively, and S k denotes the covariance matrix of the transmitting signal vector at the k th subcarrier. Note that the bandwidth of each subcarrier is set to be the same in a realistic OFDM system. The average channel capacity with respect to the number of transmitting/receiving antennas can be evaluated for different numbers of subcarriers. Supplementary Fig. k