We numerically investigate heating-and-cooling quenches taking place entirely in the non-ordered phase of the discrete Gross-Pitaevskii equation on a three-dimensional cubic lattice. In equilibrium, this system exhibits a U (1)-ordering phase transition at an energy density which is significantly lower than the minimum one during the quench. Yet, we observe that the post-quench relaxation is accompanied by a transient U (1) ordering, namely, the correlation length of U (1) fluctuations significantly exceeds its equilibrium pre-quench value. The longer and the stronger the heating stage of the quench, the stronger the U (1) transient ordering. We identify the origin of this ordering with the emergence of a small group of slowly relaxing lattice sites accumulating a large fraction of the total energy of the system. Our findings suggest that the transient ordering may be a robust feature of a broad class of physical systems. This premise is consistent with the growing experimental evidence of the transient U (1) order in rather dissimilar settings. Introduction. -Response of an interacting manybody system to a sudden change of external conditions, a quench, has recently become a subject of intense experimental and theoretical research In this paper, we show that, quite surprisingly, a very simple theoretical model with a single ordered phase is sufficient for observing the transient ordering. We numerically simulate the discrete Gross-Pitaevskii equation (DGPE) on a three-dimensional (3D) lattice, which exhibits an equilibrium phase transition below a certain temperature. In Fig. the high-temperature non-ordered phase on the phase diagram. Yet, we observe that the transient order, absent in equilibrium, emerges during the quench, and persists long after that. We argue that the mechanism behind the observed transient ordering involves the emergence of a small number of lattice sites with an atypically high concentration of energy. These sites are the 3D counterparts of the so-called discrete breathers that are shown to slow down thermalization in 1D DGPE chains The model. -The DGPE system on a 3D cubic lattice is a classical dynamical system describing evolution of complex variables ψ j (t) by the following equations where g is the interaction parameter, indices j and m label sites of the underlying 3D lattice, and notation NN(j) refers to all sites that are nearest-neighbors to site j. The DGPE conserves total energy E = E (kin) + E (pot) , where the kinetic energy is E (kin) =j m∈NN(j) ψ * m ψ j , and the potential energy is The norm (also called the "total number of particles") N = j n j = j |ψ j | 2 is another integral of motion associated with the invariance of Eq. (1) relative to the global "gauge transformation" ψ j → e iα ψ j . In this work, we fix g = 10 and N = V , where V is the total number of sites (V = 50×50×50). The energy density, ε = E/V -g/2, is the only parameter that is being changed in the process of quenching. Equilibrium state of DGPE system. -For sufficiently large lattice sizes and generic initial conditions the DGPE dynamics is chaotic, and exhibits ergodization that has been checked by various numerical ergodicity tests Transient ordering. -Before the quench, the system is prepared in an equilibrium state in a non-ordered phase at temperature T 0 > T c . Then, the system is subjected to a fast energy increase followed by a cooling step, which brings the energy back to its pre-quench value. This is achieved by introducing a time-dependent "gauge-invariant" term -Kψ j D j into the right-hand side of Eq. ( Our main results for various quenches starting from equilibrium at temperature T 0 = 2.3 T c are presented in Fig. cal U (1) ordering exhibits a large long-lived transient increase. We also note that the longer quenches lead to a significantly longer lifetime of the transient order than the shorter ones. The origin of the transient ordering. -Our analysis indicates that the observed transient ordering is caused by the emergence of a small number of "hot" lattice sites that have anomalously large norm |ψ j | 2 and thus carry even more anomalous local potential energy g 2 |ψ j | 4 -see the sketch in Fig. To substantiate the above explanation, we examine the histograms of local potential energies ε (pot) j = g 2 |ψ j | 4 as functions of time. These histograms in equilibrium and at two different times after a quench are presented in Fig. In order to formally divide the system into "hot" and "cold" sites: , we introduce a cutoff for the one-site potential energy ε th E/V : any site j, for which the potential energy ε , is considered hot, otherwise, it is cold. We set ε th = 100. With such a choice, the percentage of hot sites x hot for our pre-quench equilibrium state at T 0 ≈ 2.3T c is nearly zero, and so is their total potential energy E (pot) hot . The quench acts to increase both x hot and E (pot) hot . For the state represented in Fig. To demonstrate the overcooling of the cold sites, we monitor their effective temperature T eff . As "a thermometer" for the cold subsystem, we use the kinetic energy density of the cold sites obtained as ε , where E (kin) is the total kinetic energy of the lattice and E (kin) hot is the part involving the hot sites. The values of ε (kin) cold are then converted into T eff using the computed equilibrium plot of temperature as a function of ε (kin) given in Discussion and conclusions. -The DGPE on a sufficiently large lattice cluster represents a very simple model of a microcanonical thermodynamic system exhibiting a phase transition into a U (1)-ordered phase. If a time-dependent perturbation, representing external drive, is included, one can use the DGPE to study non-equilibrium dynamics near the continuous transition. The model is characterized by the following three features: (i) in equilibrium, the model has a single ordered phase; (ii) by the model's very design, post-quench dynamics is inseparable from equilibrium state properties, as both are governed by the same set of differential equations; (iii) all equilibrium and post-quench properties are controlled entirely by the energy density ε and the interaction parameter g. Points (i-iii) imply that very little room for fine-tuning is available for the DGPE. Despite that, however, the model demonstrates a robust transient ordering, which is a remarkable non-equilibrium phenomenon. In the simulations, the transient ordering manifested itself as a dramatic increase of the phase coherence length l c . This increase persists much longer than the duration of the quench; its relaxation is then remarkably sluggish [see Fig. We remark in this regard that the strength of the quench in the present investigation is significantly larger than in our closely related work The experimental context of our simulations extends to physical systems exhibiting phase transitions associated with U (1) ordering. These, in particular, include superfluid and superconducting systems, systems exhibiting density-wave orders, and also magnetically-ordered systems with easy-plane anisotropy. One can coarse-grain these systems into parts that are smaller than the expected length of the U (1) phase coherence and yet large enough to justify the classical modelling of each coarsegrained element. Each variable ψ j of our modelled lattice would then be associated with the average U (1) order within one coarse-grained element (see e.g., Ref. Several cases of the transient U (1) ordering have already been reported in the literature Our treatment of transient coherence can be compared with alternative ways of theoretical modeling of lightinduced phase coherence. We note in this regard that the long life of the superconducting response in the experiment of Ref. To conclude, we numerically studied the nonequilibrium evolution of the 3D DGPE model subjected to an energy quench. Transient U (1) ordering was consistently observed, provided that the quench was strong enough. We explain this phenomenon in terms of longliving hot breather-like lattice sites possessing anomalously large potential energies. Such non-equilibrium behavior may be an intrinsic feature of a broad class of dynamical models. Our findings may, in particular, shed light on the experimental observations of the transient ordering in superconducting and charge-density-wave systems. For vanishing disorder, "macroscopic features" of the DGPE can be described in terms of a microcanonical ensemble of all phase space states with fixed E and N . The microcanonical temperature is defined as: where S is the microcanonical entropy proportional to the logarithm of the volume of the energy shell w(E), 2V -1 2 , (S.2) the Boltzmann's constant is set to be equal to unity, k B ≡ 1. In microcanonical thermodynamics, the dimensionality of energy shell is 2V -1, however, for a thermodynamically large system the difference between 2V and 2V -1 can be neglected. The original definition of microcanonical temperature from conservative dynamics for an ergodic system reads [48-51]: where R(τ ) is a phase space trajectory and the observable is representative of the geometric curvature of the Hamiltonian on the energy shell. For the practical calculation of microcanonical temperature, we adapt a numerical recipe, developed for classical spin lattices with one integral of motion We note that ∆E = 0 due to the fact that, in general, there are exponentially more states above the energy shell than below it, which in turn reflects the fact that the entropy in Eq. (S.1) is proportional to the logarithm of the energy shell volume, and the temperature is positive. The temperature is then calculated as the time average along the phase space trajectory of Eq. (S.5), 1/T = Φ. We use Eq. (S.5) with an additional constraint due to the fixed second integral of motion, the number of particles, hence, when sampling the vicinity of a phase space point, we sample only the vicinity on the shell of a fixed number of particles, . . . N , which gives This equation acts as a practical definition of microcanonical temperature. It satisfies all properties expected of temperature, and can be implemented numerically for a DGPE system. We will use Eq. (S.6) to characterize DGPE equilibrium. The quench is performed on a DGPE system prepared in equilibrium. During the quench, the system's energy experiences quick rise and fall within a limited time interval. To allow for time variation of E, the DGPE must be modified to include a time-dependent term: where ψ * m ψ j -ψ m ψ * j ,(S.8) and K = K(t, κ) is a real-valued function. The last term in Eq. (S.7) is introduced to control the variation of E during the quench. Note that Eq. (S.7), being gauge invariant, conserves N . The structure of the pump term is complicated and does not lend itself to immediate intuitive interpretation. To appreciate it, we can calculate Ė(kin) and Ė(pot) for dynamical equations (S.7), and convince ourselves that Ė(kin) acquires additional contribution -K j D 2 j , while the expression for Ė(pot) is unaffected by the pump term. Thus, a quench described by Eq. (S.7) impacts primarily the kinetic energy. Of course, since the system allows exchange between the two types of energy, altering E (kin) ultimately changes E (pot) as well. In the main text, we argue that our conclusions about the transient ordering holds true if we pump E (pot) instead of E (kin) . Since Ė = Ė(kin) + Ė(pot) = -K j D 2 j , we conclude that the sign of K(t, κ) controls the increase/decrease of the total energy. Thus, K must be negative when the system heats, and positive during the cooling stage. We additionally demand that the energies of the system before and after the quench are identical. Function K(t, κ) compatible with these requirements is where θ(t) is the Heaviside step-function, κ is the parameter controlling the quench strength (in our simulations, κ spans the range from 0.1 to 20). We used two sets of γ's to simulate a short quench (γ 1 = 1, γ 2 = 0.3), and a longer quench (γ 1 = 0.03, γ 2 = 0.1); for both quenches γ = 0.01. The second term in Eq. (S.9) is added to guarantee that the energy after the quench is the same as before the quench. Here, is the time moment at which K(t, κ) crosses zero and changes sign, E 0 is the pre-quench energy of the system, while E(t) is the energy at time t, and E * = E(t * ). For further details one can refer to the source code published in a GitHub repository In our study, we quantify the transient ordering using the time-dependent correlation length l c = l c (t), defined via the half-width at the half-maximum (HWHM) for the spectral intensity |ψ(k)| 2 of ψ j . The practical calculation of l c starts from evaluation of the Fourier transform of ψ j according to the usual prescription subjected to quench. We see that for V = 30 × 30 × 30 and V = 50 × 50 × 50 the data is essentially insensitive to V , and at all times l c remains significantly shorter than the linear dimension of the system. This indicates that, for our purposes, the systems with V ≥ 30 × 30 × 30 are sufficiently large, and the finite-size distortions can be ignored. Let us finally comment on the relation between l c and the interaction strength g. The hot sites of equal norm would accumulate more energy for larger nonlinearity g, thus leading to a stronger cooling of the rest of the system after the quench. Therefore, one may hypothesize that larger g makes the transient ordering stronger. This intuition is indeed supported by our numerical data, see Transient ordering for different interaction strengths g. The short quench parameters are the same as in the main text, but for (a) g = 5, (b) g = 15. The data for g = 10 are presented in Fig. As explained in the main text, the transient ordering is associated with the nucleation of rare but very "hot" The mean of cos 2 (ψi, ψj) for a subset of sites and their neighbors: (a) the cold sites demonstrate a finite correlation with the neighbors for a long time, whereas (b) the hot sites quickly decouple from the environment. The simulations were done for the short quench, g = 10, V = 50 × 50 × 50. sites in the system's volume. The statistics of these hot sites is shown in Fig. As shown in the main text, the post-quench relaxation is very slow. This is a consequence of the hot sites being effectively decoupled from the rest of the system. This feature can be easily understood with the help of the following heuristic argument. When site j accumulates large norm (that is, becomes hot) the dynamics of ψ j may be effectively described by the equation i dψ j dt ≈ g|ψ j | 2 ψ j . (S.12) This expression can be obtained from Eq. ( With this in mind, let us examine the data for cos 2 (ψ i , ψ j ) plotted in Fig. S.5. Here i and j are always the nearest neighbours. When i belongs to the cold sites subset, the corresponding curves are in panel (a), while for i being hot, panel (b) should be consulted. The presented graphs demonstrate that, after the quench, the correlations between the neighbors for both the cold and hot sites transiently enhance. However, the cold sites remain correlated with their neighbors for a long time after the quench, whereas the hot sites quickly decouple from their environment and become uncorrelated, see In the main text, in order to characterize the effective temperature of the cold sites, we used the kinetic energy density of the cold sites. The ability of the kinetic energy Equilibrium kinetic energy density ε (kin) as a function of the reduced temperature T /Tc. The simulation is performed for g = 10, V = 50 × 50 × 50. We see that there is a one-to-one correspondence between the equilibrium value of ε (kin) and T . This allows us to use ε (kin) density to act as "a thermometer" is illustrated by the plot in Fig. S.6. The plot presents the equilibrium kinetic energy density versus the temperature calculated numerically. We see that the energy density grows continuously and monotonically with T , and there is a one-to-one correspondence between ε (kin) and T which can be formally expressed either as ε (kin) = ε (kin) (T ) or as T = T (ε (kin) ). This relation allows one to extract T by measuring ε (kin) , as we did in the main text. The dynamics of ε The transient ordering in small clusters requires special attention due to l c being larger than the cluster linear size. In such a situation, it is more convenient to follow the evolution of the order parameter |Ψ|(t), rather than l c . For a small system the order-parameter response to the quench is illustrated by Fig. S.8(a). It shows |Ψ|(t) and ε(t) (in the inset) for g = 10 and T 0 /T c ≈ 16. When t < 0, the equilibrium value of |Ψ| is very small, determined by finite-size effects. Once the quench is launched at t = 0, the system energy spikes, the order parameter initially drops, but quickly starts growing. It reaches the maximum value (|Ψ| ≈ 0.15 for the strongest quench) at t ∼ 20. Remarkably, the post-quench relaxation of |Ψ| to its equilibrium value is very slow. In T 0 /T c ≈ 16, κ = 20). If one sets ε th = 100, the equilibrium state at T 0 /T c ≈ 16, contains x eq hot ≈ 0.55% of hot sites, the energy accumulated there is E eq hot ≈ 685, which is approximately 17% of the total energy E = 4000. The quench acts to increase these values. For the state in Fig. S.9(b), one has x hot ≈ 1.3% and E hot ≈ 3500, which is approximately 88% of the total energy E = 4000. To characterize the transient states of the small cluster, we use the effective energy density ε eff (t) = [E(t) -E hot (t)]/ (1 -x hot ) V , plotted in the inset of Fig. S.8(b), and the effective equilibrium temperature corresponding to the energy density of cold sites T (ε eff ). When T (ε eff ) ∼ T c , the emergence of the order parameter may be expected. Indeed, if we define "effective" order parameter as follows For the longer quenches shown in Fig. In Fig. 