The oscillation of Majorana modes with near zero energy plays a very important role for ascertaining Majorana fermions. The edge states, which also have almost-zero-energy in onedimensional Su-Schrieffer-Heeger chain (SSHc), have been extensively studied for their topologically protected properties when the on-sites have dissipations induced by independent environments. We here show that common environments shared by each pair of the nearest neighbour sites in the SSHc can result in dissipative couplings between sites, and thus change topologically trivial phase to nontrivial one. The Majorana-like oscillation for the finite-size hybridizations of two non-Hermitian edge states with complex localization lengths can be induced by the dissipative coupling. The controllable topology parameter of the SSHc plays the role of the magnetic field in the nanowire for controlling Majorana oscillation. The measurement for the oscillation is proposed. Our study provides a new way to manipulate edge states and is experimentally feasible within current technology of superconducting quantum circuits. Introduction.-Majorana modes, corresponding to zero energy states, are potential candidates for topological quantum computing Zero energy states are also present in other topological systems, e.g., a one-dimensional SSHc with finite size, which has two zero energy eigenstates Recently, environmental effect on topological physics The common environment, which is explored for decoherencefree codes Considering significant progress on topological simulations using superconducting qubits We find that the common-environment-induced dissipative couplings can nontrivially change the topological phase and give rise to non-Hermitian edge states with complex localization lengths. The interaction between edge states exhibits Majorana-like oscillation. The topology-control parameter of the SSHc plays the role of the magnetic field for nanowires in controlling Majorana oscillation. The effect of different on-site complex potentials on the oscillation is analyzed. Model.-As shown in Fig. Phase transition point and dispersion relation.-The eigenvalue equations for the Hamiltonian in Eq. ( , where |Ψ R,l and |Ψ L,l are the right and left vectors of the lth eigenstate with l = 1, • • • , 2N in the biorthogonal representation We find [79] that the expectation which is determined by φ and γ i with i = 1, 2, and reduced to tA = tB for γ 1 = γ 2 = 0 corresponding to the Hermitian Hamiltonian. tA < tB corresponds to topological phase and tA > tB corresponds to topologically trivial phase when γ 1 = γ 2 = 0. If the dissipative couplings are included, as shown in Fig. That is, the environment changes the phase diagram. For example, topologically trivial phase with tA > tB in the Hermitian Hamiltonian may be changed to non-trivial one by the environment To further observe the phase transition point and dispersion relation changed by the dissipative coupling, we transform the Hamiltonian H in in Eq. ( As shown in Fig. , one of the topological invariants, is calculated as (see Ref. which agrees with the result given in Eq. ( Edge states with Majorana-like oscillation.-The real parts of the eigenvalues corresponding to Eq. ( To analyze the relation between the Majorana-like oscillation and dissipative couplings, we write hybridized states for the right vectors of edge states Similarly, the hybridized states Ψ L,± | for the left vectors of edge states can be obtained. Thus, the eigenenergies for these states are , which are simplified to Here, N T , 1/ ln |A T |, and θ T are equivalent to the length of the nanowire, the localization strength, and effective Fermi wave vector in Ref. In Fig. As shown in Fig. Topology induced interaction between two edge qubits and measurements.-As shown in Fig. Here, ). Moreover, H 1,middle = tA (â † 1 b1 + H.c.) and H N,middle = tA (â † N bN + H.c.) denote the coupling between the qubits A and B in first and last unit cells, respectively. After neglecting the effect of the independent environment on each qubit [79], we write the Lindblad operator as Lρ = 2 ρô † ô, and the coefficient τ refers to the dissipation rate of either qubit A or B through the waveguide (or cavity). In the rotating reference frame with the frequency ω, equation ( where the first two terms represent local dissipations for the first and last qubits. The third and forth terms read L middle ρ = -i( a † ) T M aρ + iρ( a † ) T M * a and Jρ = 2 a T M ρ a † , respectively. Here, we consider the vector a = ( b1 , â2 , b2 , . . . âN ), and (2N -2) × (2N -2) matrices M and M with entries M i,i = -iτ, M 2i-1,2i = M 2i,2i-1 = tB -iτ /2, M 2i,2i+1 = M 2i+1,2i = tA -iτ /2, M i,j = τ δ i,j + τ δ i,j+1 /2 + τ δ i+1,j /2. The last term L int ρ describes the coupling between edge qubits and middle qubits which includes vectors G j = ( tA -iτ /2)δ 1,j , V j = ( tA -iτ /2)δ 2N -2,j . After eliminating the 2N -2 qubits in the middle of the SSHc which has the eigenvalues As shown in Figs. Our study here can be realized by various systems, e.g., superconducting quantum circuits, in which the nearest neighbour qubit pairs are coupled to waveguides or bad cavities, acting as common environments. The qubits and their environments can reach superstrong and even ultrastrong coupling 