The van der Waals ferromagnet Cr 2 Ge 2 Te 6 (CGT) has a two-dimensional crystal structure where each layer is stacked through van der Waals force. We have investigated the nature of the ferromagnetism and the weak perpendicular magnetic anisotropy (PMA) of CGT by means of X-ray absorption spectroscopy and X-ray magnetic circular dichroism (XMCD) studies of CGT single crystals. The XMCD spectra at the Cr L 2,3 edge for different magnetic field directions were analyzed on the basis of the cluster-model multiplet calculation. The Cr valence is confirmed to be 3+ and the orbital magnetic moment is found to be nearly quenched, as expected for the high-spin 3 configuration of the Cr 3+ ion. A large (∼ 0.2 eV) trigonal crystal-field splitting of the t 2g level caused by the distortion of the CrTe 6 octahedron has been revealed, while the single-ion anisotropy (SIA) of the Cr atom is found to have a sign opposite to the observed PMA and too weak compared to the reported anisotropy energy. The present result suggests that anisotropic exchange coupling between the Cr atoms through the ligand Te 5p orbitals having strong spin-orbit coupling has to be invoked to explain the weak PMA of CGT, as in the case of the strong PMA of CrI 3 . The discovery of graphene has invoked renewed interest in the studies on two-dimensional (2D) materials including layered transition-metal chalcogenides Recently, van der Waals (vdW) ferromagnets, which have 2D crystal structures but show ferromagnetic order The magnetic anisotropy of a 2D ferromagnet arises primarily from (i) the single-ion anisotropy (SIA) of the magnetic ion and (ii) anisotropic exchange interaction between the magnetic ions in the 2D layer. The SIA of the Cr-based vdW ferromagnets is considered to be small because of the t 2g↑ 3 configuration of the Cr 3+ ion, which has no orbital degree of freedom, as discussed, e.g., by Lado and Fernández-Rossi In order to evaluate the contribution of the SIA of Cr to the magnetic anisotropy, XMCD studies at the Cr L 2,3 edge are expected to give essential information. So far Cr L 2,3 -edge XMCD has been reported for CGT Single crystals of CGT were synthesized using a flux method. High purity Cr, Ge and Te powders were mixed in a molar ratio of 2:6:36; the extra Ge and Te were used as a flux. The mixture was loaded in an alumina crucible and sealed in an evacuated quartz tube. A ball of alumina fiber was placed on top of the crucible. The quartz tube was placed in a furnace, heated to 700 • C, held for 5 hours, and then slowly cooled down to 480 • C over a period of 3 days. This was followed by centrifugation to remove the flux. X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS) and XMCD measurements at the Cr L 2,3 edge were performed at beam line BL23SU of SPring-8 and beam line BL-16A of Photon Factory at High Energy Accelerator Research Organization (KEK-PF). The measurement at SPring-8 was performed under a magnetic field of μ 0 H = 3 T parallel to the c-axis of the sample. The XAS and XMCD spectra were recorded in the total electron yield mode. Right-(σ + ) and left (σ -) circularly polarized x-rays were switched at a frequency of 1 Hz in order to eliminate time-dependent background from the obtained XMCD spectra. The sample temperature (T ) during the measurement was set to 20 K, well below the Curie temperature. The sample was cleaved in the vacuum chamber prior to the measurements to obtain fresh surfaces. Magnetic-field-direction dependence of XMCD spectra was measured at the BL-16A of KEK-PF. Polarization switching was made at a frequency of 10 Hz. Magnetic field of μ 0 H = 1 T was applied parallel and perpendicular to the c-axis. Signals were recorded in the total electron-yield mode. To investigate the electronic structure which contributes to the ferromagnetism, configurationinteraction cluster-model multiplet calculations have been conducted. [For the definition of 10Dq and Dt, see Fig. The SOC parameter of the Cr 3d orbital is taken to be 35 meV. Figure The tail of the Te M 4,5 XAS peak overlapping the Cr L 2,3 XAS spectrum has been subtracted assuming a hyperbola. Arctangent steps at the L 2 and L 3 edges have also been subtracted from the Cr L 2,3 XAS as usual. On the other hand, the XMCD signals predominantly come from the magnetic Cr atoms, and there is no need to subtract signals from the Te atoms. Figure The comparison shows that the calculation for the Cr 3+ state reproduces the experimental spectrum better than those for the Cr 2+ and Cr 4+ states. Thus, one can conclude that the Cr atom in CGT is in the 3+ state (with the high-spin t 3 2g configuration), and not in the 2+ nor 4+ state. The orbital and effective spin magnetic moments are quantitatively estimated from the XAS and XMCD spectra using the XMCD sum rules , where μ + (μ -) is an XAS spectrum taken with σ + (σ -), m orb , m spin and m T are the orbital magnetic moment, spin magnetic moment, and magnetic dipole moment, respectively, in units of Bohr magneton μ B /Cr atom. μ + (μ -) stands for the absorption coefficient for photon helicity parallel (antiparallel) to the Cr majority spin direction. n h is the number of holes in the valence shell. By applying the sum rules to the spectra in Fig. In order to study the anisotropies of the electronic and magnetic properties of CGT, XMCD measurements under different magnetic field directions have been made. Figure To evaluate the SIA of the Cr ion, the ground-state energy of the cluster is calculated using the cluster model for the different magnetic field directions. Thus we find that the energy for the in-plane magnetic field is lower than the energy for the out-of-plane magnetic field by ∼ 5 × 10 -6 eV/Cr atom, that is, the Cr atom has the easy magnetization axis in the ab-plane. This is opposite to the observed PMA of CGT and furthermore its magnitude is 1-2 orders of magnitude smaller than the experimental value of ∼ 1 -4 × 10 -5 eV/Cr atom The present result, on the other hand, agrees with the first-principles calculation by Wang et al. In spite of the large trigonal crystal field Dt ∼ 0.2 eV and the resulting anisotropy in the XMCD spectra, the calculated magnetic anisotropy energy is small because of the high-spin 2g configuration, which has no orbital degree of freedom. Therefore, we consider that effects beyond the SIA evaluated using the cluster model, where only the spin-orbit coupling of the Co 3d electrons are taken into account, may play important roles in realizing the PMA of CGT. Such effects would include anisotropic exchange coupling between Cr ions through the ligand Te 5p electrons with strong SOC, in analogy to CrI 3 . In the case of CrI 3 , which has a stronger PMA than CGT, density functional theory (DFT) calculation In addition to the SIA of Cr and anisotropic exchange between Cr discussed above, the magnetic anisotropy of the Te 5p electrons themselves may contribute to the magnetic anisotropy of CGT We have performed XAS and XMCD measurements at the Cr L 2,3 edge and subsequent cluster-model calculation on CGT to investigate the electronic structure which contributes to the ferromagnetism and magnetic anisotropy. The effective spin magnetic moment obtained using the sum rules is 2.2 μ B , consistent with previous reports, while the orbital magnetic moment is nearly zero. Subtle changes of the XMCD spectra are observed by changing the magnetic field direction, and are attributed to the distortion of the CrTe 6 octahedron from comparison with cluster-model calculation including the trigonal crystal field of the cluster elongated along the c axis. The magnetic anisotropy energy calculated using the cluster model is too small and has an opposite sign compared to experiment. This implies that the magnetic anisotropy of CGT cannot be explained by the SIA of Cr described by the cluster model, and that one has to take into account interaction between Cr atoms through Te 5p ligands which have strong SOC. The green curve shows the XMCD spectrum, which is the intensity difference between the above two XAS spectra. The blue dotted curve shows the integral of the XMCD spectrum. Magnetic field is applied perpendicular to the sample surface (H c-axis), that is, along the easy magnetization axis. 