Magic-angle twisted bilayer graphene (MtBLG) has proven to be an extremely promising new platform to realize and study a host of emergent quantum phases arising from the strong correlations in its narrow bandwidth flat band. In this regard, thermal transport phenomena like thermopower, in addition to being coveted technologically, is also sensitive to the particle-hole (PH) asymmetry, making it a crucial tool to probe the underlying electronic structure of this material. We have carried out thermopower measurements of MtBLG as a function of carrier density, temperature and magnetic field, and report the observation of an unusually large thermopower reaching up to a value as high as ∼ 100μV/K at a low temperature of 1K. Surprisingly, our observed thermopower exhibiting peak-like features in close correspondence to the resistance peaks around the integer Moire fillings, including the Dirac Point, violates the Mott formula. We show that the large thermopower peaks and their associated behaviour arise from the emergent highly PH asymmetric electronic structure due to the cascade of Dirac revivals. Furthermore, the thermopower shows an anomalous peak around the superconducting transition on the hole side and points towards the possible role of enhanced superconducting fluctuations in MtBLG. Introduction. Interactions in many body systems lead to various complex emergent quantum phenomena like superconductivity, magnetism and correlated insulating phases. Understanding these many body quantum phenomena and utilizing their various applicability remains a key focus of condensed matter research. For this reason, MtBLG is a promising material with its flat band In this context, thermopower or the Seebeck effect is a unique tool to probe the PH asymmetry of the electronic structure of MtBLG. Compared to electrical transport, it is relatively non-invasive as an open circuit voltage (∆V ) is measured across the sample in the presence of a small temperature gradient (∆T ) relative to the sample temperature. In the linear regime, using semi-classical Boltzmann transport theory and assuming energy independent scattering time, the Seebeck coefficient (S = -∆V /∆T ) can be written as S = -(k B /T e)[ (μ)g(ε)(-df /dε)dε]/[ g(ε)(-df /dε)dε], where e, T , μ, g(ε) and -df /dε are respectively the electronic charge, temperature, chemical potential, DOS and derivative of Fermi function. It can be seen that the numerator is an odd function due to the (μ) term, and thus, the sign and magnitude of S depend on nature and extent of asymmetry of the DOS around the chemical potential. As a result, S is a highly sensitive probe to study the electronic structure around the transition points of MtBLG. Moreover, MtBLG with superconducting dome around half filling analogous of high-T c cuprate superconductors is an ideal playground to study the thermopower response as it has been employed to study the superconducting fluctuations in cuprates Motivated by these, we have extensively explored the thermopower response of MtBLG and non magic-angle tBLG devices. Unlike previous works involving graphene and tBLG Set-up and device response. Figure The gate-dependent resistance (R) of MtBLG for different temperatures is shown in Fig. If the DOS is symmetric around the maxima, one would expect a sign change in S exactly at ν = ±2. However, the inherent asymmetry of the DOS, which is complex for MtBLG, of the conduction band or valence band can give rise to the sign change shifted from ν = ±2. As we decrease the temperature below 10K, the apparent asymmetry of the S (Fig. The recurring thermopower peaks (Fig. The temperature dependence of S for different integer fillings, including Dirac point, is shown in Fig. Anomalous thermopower response around the superconducting dome. As shown in Fig. Apart from the correlation between locus of the thermopower peak in the n -T plane and T c (n) over a large part of the superconducting dome, the most important clue for the possible origin of the unusual thermopower peak is obtained by applying a B ⊥ . As shown in Fig. Emergent low-energy particle-hole asymmetry and giant thermopower peaks. As already mentioned, the thermopower peaks suggest strong emergent low-energy PH asymmetry of the putative correlated states at integer fillings, at least, within the effective single-particle or Hartree-Fock descriptions of various possible symmetry broken states Discussion. Our theory qualitatively captures the thermopower peaks, but the S(n) follows an overall 'background' profile dictated by the non-interacting S 0 (n) (Fig. In summary, our experiments reveal unusual low-temperature thermopower response and anomalously large peaks in Seebeck coefficient originating from emergent highly particle-hole asymmetry in the flat band of MtBLG. In the hole side of the MtBLG flat band, close to half-filling, our measurements also reveal two interpenetrating dome-like structures, traced by peaks in the thermopower on the dopingtemperature plane. The boundary of the dome at lower temperature coincides with the line of superconducting transitions, presumably providing a rare glimpse of the enhanced superconducting fluctuations in MtBLG. Device fabrication and measurement scheme: The devices consist of hBN encapsulated twisted bilayer graphene (tBLG) on a Si/SiO 2 substrate. The typical length and width of the devices are ∼ 6μm and ∼ 2μm, respectively. The usual 'tear and stack' technique Activation gaps, band-width and superconducting transition temperature of MtBLG: The value of the resistance at the full filling (ν = ±4) continuously decreases with increasing temperature up to much higher T ∼ 100K. On the other hand, the value of the resistance at ν = 0 and 2 decreases with increasing temperature up to ∼ 10K and then increases linearly, showing metallic nature (SI-10). These observations are consistent with earlier reports for MtBLG Theory: As discussed in detail in SI-16, we compute the thermopower and resistivity as a function of filling and temperature for the model of Ref. To make the electrical contacts, we spin-coat with 495A4-950A4 PMMA bilayer. However, instead of the usual temperature of 180 o C, each PMMA layer were baked at 80 o C for 15 minutes. This low-temperature 1 baking is done to avoid thermal relaxation of the twist angle between the two graphene layers. Then the contacts, including the heater lines, are defined using standard e-beam lithography, with the dose optimized for low baking of PMMA. After developing, the contacts are etched with CHF 3 -O 2 plasma followed by thermal deposition of Cr(2nm), P d(10nm) and Au(70nm). We have kept the width of source and drain contacts on tBLG 1μm, while the heater lines ∼ 200 -300nm. The heater lines are separated by a 3μm gap from the source and drain contacts. The twist-angle θ of the MtBLG device is determined from the densities at the fullfilling ν = ±4 ( 4 electron per unit cell of the moire superlattice). The area of superlattice unit cell for a twist angle is given by A ∼ √ 3a 2 /2θ 2 , where a = 0.246nm is the lattice constant of monolayer graphene. At the full filling, the superlattice density n s is given by n s = 4/A = 8θ 2 / √ 3a 2 . Using this expression the θ is determined form the densities at ν = ±4 (Figure Marginally twisted sample: For angles below 0.90 0 , the superlattice gap at full-filling ±n s vanishes, and no single particle gap exists, although resistance peaks can be observed at ±2n s , caused by Dirac-like band crossings (SI-Fig. Large angle sample: For the larger angle sample following the expression of n s , it is evident that the superlattice density is much higher compared to the magic angle sample. Probing such higher densities requires high gate voltage applied to the SiO 2 gate which can cause a dielectric breakdown. The transport measurement, as a result, was limited to densities less than full-filling density. Therefore, to accurately determine the full-filling density, the fans appearing from the band edge has to be extrapolated to find out the density from which they emanate. From SI-Fig. The schematic of the complete measurement setup is shown in SI-Fig. Here R s corresponds to the sample resistance. SI-Fig. As shown in SI-Fig. x 0 L T(x)= T c + ∆T(x) Supplementary Figure The position x = L, corresponds to the junction of graphene and cold contact at temperature T c . Thus, at any position on the tBLG the temperature is given by T (x) = T c + ∆T (x), where ∆T (x) = ∆T (1x/L). In this scenario The total thermal noise seen by the amplifier is the sum of noise coming from all the infinitesimal parts of the tBLG. Hence, the measured noise (S V I ) is given by: where, ρ(x) corresponds to the resistivity of the TBLG. Considering homogeneous resistance i.e ρ(x) = R s /L, the eqn. 1 can be rewritten as Thus, the excess thermal noise due to temperature gradient is given by S To measure ∆T , we first measure the thermal noise by varying the heater current from zero. The excess thermal noise as described in the previous section, is determined by subtracting the zero current thermal noise from the total measured noise at any given current. SI-Fig. SI-Fig. The gain of the cold amplifier-room temperature amplifier chain described in SI. 3 is crucial for the accurate determination of ∆T . We use noise thermometry to measure the gain. For this first, we determine the resonance frequency (f r ) of the LC tank circuit at the input of the cold amplifier as the LC circuit acts as a band-pass filter and, at resonance, has unit gain. Supplementary Fig. where K B is the Boltzmann constant and A is the gain. The gain is determined from the slope of the plot as and is found to be around ∼ 1241. The SI-Fig. The temperature evolution of resistance versus ν response is shown in SI-Fig. where α = 1, . . . , 4 are the spin-valley indices, b is the moire band index, k is the momentum within the first moire Brillouin zone, A is the area of the moire unit cell, μ is the chemical potential; c † kαb and c kαb are the electron creation and annihilation operators. In the above, we have considered a local Coulomb interaction U [11], with c α (r) = (1/ √ N ) kb e ik.r c kαb the local electron annihilation operator at r and N is the number of moire unit cells. We restrict the summation over the band index b = 0, 1, 2, 3, where 1 and 2 denote the flat bands around the moire Dirac points, and we keep one dispersive band (b = 0) below and one (b = 3) above the flat bands. The dispersive bands are separated by a gap ∆ = 2W from the flat bands (see SI-Fig. kαb c kαb , where μ α are the variational parameters, and obtain the selfconsistency equations Here n α is the occupation of flavor α and g( ) = (1/N ) kb δ(kαb ) is the non-interacting DOS (per unit cell) which does not depend on the flavor index. f ( ) = 1/(e /k B T + 1) is the Fermi function at temperature T . We numerically solve the above HF self-consistency equations iteratively to obtain μ α (n α ) along with equation α n α = (ν + 4) + ν 0 for μ, where ν 0 is the full filling of the dispersive band b = 0. We have used U = 1.2W for the all the results reported below and in the main text. We have verified that our main conclusions remain valid for other values of U ∼ W . g( ) Supplementary Figure Non-interacting DOSs: For our HF calculations (Eq.3), we have implemented various different non-interacting DOSs g( ) that have been obtained and used to describe MtBLG. For the results reported in the main text (Fig. We have also used the continuum model of Ref. [13] to compute the band structure and DOS (referred to as continuum DOS with relaxation) incorporating lattice relaxation effects for twist angle θ = 1.05 • . The DOS is shown in SI-Fig. We have also implemented DOS obtained from tight-binding lattice model for MtBLG of Ref. [14] , albeit without the lattice relaxation effects, in the HF calculations. The DOS (not shown) is PH asymmetric around = 0, and has more complex arrangements of VHSs. We find the Dirac revived states to be metastable, compared to symmetry-unbroken states, for this DOS over most of the filling range. Thus we do not consider results obtained for the tight-binding DOS to compute transport coefficients. Transport coefficients: We use the following expressions for resistivity ρ and thermopower (Seebeck coefficient) S, obtained from Kubo formulae neglecting vertex corrections [15], where A( , ω) = -(1/π)Im(1/(ω + μ --iΓ 0 )) Φ( ) = (1/N A) kαb (∂ ̃ kαb /∂k x ) 2 δ( - ̃ kαb ) with m = 1, 2; A( , ω) is the spectral density and Φ( ) the transport DOS. Here Γ 0 = 0.001W is small impurity broadening put in by hand to incorporate elastic scatterings, and ̃ kαb = kαb + μ α is the HF dispersion. For our calculations we have approximated v x kαb = ∂ ̃ kαb /∂k x by a constant velocity. This makes S (Eq.5) independent of the band velocity and scales ρ (Eq.4) by a constant factor. at higher temperatures (> 100K) using Boltzmann transport equation solver and electronic structure from an exact continuum model in Ref [16]. Concomitant peaks in thermopower and resistivity: The Dirac revivals also naturally lead to peaks in resistivity (SI-Fig. Deviation of theoretically calculated thermopower from the experimental one: Apart from the large thermopower peaks, the experimentally measured thermopower (Fig. 