As transistor features shrink beyond the 2 nm node, studying and designing for atomic scale effects become essential. Being able to combine conventional CMOS with new atomic scale fabrication routes capable of creating 2D patterns of highly doped phosphorus layers with atomic precision has implications for the future of digital electronics. This work establishes the accelerated lifetime tests of such doped layers, showing that these materials survive high current (>3.0 MA/cm 2 ) and 300C for greater than 70 days and are still electrically conductive. The doped layers compare well to failures in traditional metal layers like aluminum and copper where mean time to failure at these temperatures and current densities would occur within hours. It also establishes that these materials are more stable than metal features, paving the way toward their integration with operational CMOS. evices such as FinFETs and gate all around transistors have reached diminutive sizes where key length scales span a countable number of atoms, posing new challenges. For example, effects like tunneling can be sensitive to detailed atomic arrangements, and variations in the number and position of dopants can play an outsized role. In this context, a platform that enables integration of atomically precise devices with CMOS technologies can perform an important pathfinding functionto identify future opportunities and limitations. Atomic precision advanced manufacturing (APAM) is a method to add electrically active dopants to silicon by leveraging the chemical contrast between a clean and reactive bare silicon surface, compared to a passive hydrogen terminated silicon surface. The APAM process, detailed in Fig. Initially pioneered to create atomic-scale quantum devices operating only at cryogenic temperatures However, several technical hurdles need to be overcome before APAM can be seamlessly integrated into CMOS. The first is driving the APAM fabrication thermal budget down to be compatible with standard CMOS budgets. Historically, APAM devices are created at high temperatures (>1200C) driven by the need to produce pristine silicon surfaces, but recent advances have driven the APAM fabrication temperature down toward <850C which are more compatible with CMOS fabrication Fig. The second hurdle to APAM and CMOS integration is to understand the compatibility of the delta layer with CMOS architectures at relevant operational temperature and current conditions, which is the focus of this work. Back end of line compatibility has already been demonstrated by functional devices with a high-k dielectric/metal gate stack We chose an ASTM specified electromigration test structure Two varieties of the test structure layout were fabricated and tested. One version utilized a phosphorus ion implant in p-type silicon (referred to as P devices), and the second version utilized a phosphorus delta layer (referred to as P: devices). These two versions will allow a comparison between a conventional ion implant phosphorus layer to the ultra-dense, ultra-thin APAM material. A series of both P and P: devices were prepared. The P devices' starting material was prepared by implanting a uniform phosphorus layer at 5 keV, 1e13 atoms/cm 2 dose with the implant centered around 0.03 μm deep into a wafer, which was then diced to produce implanted P device starting chips. The P: starting material was produced by an abbreviated APAM process to terminate the entire surface with phosphorus layer by skipping the hydrogen termination and patterning steps in Fig. The delta layer has a dopant concentration of 2e14 cm -2 Both types of chips then went through standard photolithography and ICP dry etch to define the mesa structure shown in dark gray regions of Fig. A zero-insertion-force (ZIF) socket was used inside the oven to allow quick device changes. Solder was completely avoided in all connections due to the high oven temperature. Instead, crimp and friction fit connectors were used where needed. A port at the rear of the oven allowed all connections to pass through. Fig. The samples were brought to 300°C and allowed to equalize before biasing the drive terminal terminals. We drove each channel at a fixed current level of 30 mA, 60 mA, and 90 mA, for the 5μm, 10μm, and 20μm respectively. Driving the wider 20μm channel at high current caused failures in the bond wires within a few hours. Assuming a 200 nm thickness for the P and P: layers, the approximate minimum current density is 3.0 MA/cm 2 for the 5μm and 10μm channel width, and 2.25 MA/cm 2 for the 20μm width. We utilized Keithley 2401 source-measure units in a constant-current mode to provide the electrical stress current for the test devices. Each unit was set up for remote control over a GPIB interface. Control and logging of the test was provided through a custom LabVIEW program which logged oven temperature, drive current, and the resulting voltage in the device under test at 30 second intervals for the duration of the test. The testers are designed to fail due to open-circuit or a percent-increase in resistance in the test line. In all tests, we ran the test features until the devices opened. When the devices begin to fail, the controllers attempt to drive the appropriate current by increasing the drive voltage up to a maximum of 20 V, at which point the device was considered open. We found that the narrower APAM P: and implanted P devices can survive the high current densities for several weeks at 300oC as shown in Fig. After cooling to room-temperature, we resistance tested each structure to confirm the failures as seen by the software. After completion of accelerated lifetime tests, room temperature electrical probing and electron microscopy indicated that degradation of the metal bond pads and metal wires rather than the doped silicon was the cause of device failure. The physical die was separated from the ceramic packages and placed on a manual probe station to determine whether an electrical path was still present between contacts. We utilized four-terminal resistance measurements to look for continuity in the test structures. Measuring an as-fabricated untested P: sample as a control, the different robustness test structures have resistances of 30 k for the 20 m width up to 90 k for the 5 m width between the bond pads of the device. The measured resistances between bond pads of different robustness testers on the same silicon die (e.g. between the bond pads of the 5 m and 20 m testers) measure >125 k indicating that the robustness structures are electrically connected through the die silicon as expected. We measured electrical continuity in all the post-failure devices, both P: and implant P samples, indicating that the failures were not in the line test structures themselves, but rather the bond wires. Across all the individual resistances of the test structures tested (3 implanted P, 3 P: delta layers) the post test resistance values varied between 45k and 220 k in seemingly arbitrary ways. These variations are likely due to the competing influence of electromigration and drift of metal species into the region below the bond pads, which improved the contacts, and simultaneous degradation of the contact pads due to oxidation and disappearing aluminum, which increased the resistance values. Similarly, contact between bond pads of different robustness testers also varied with most resistance values >100 k. We examined the failed devices using scanning electron microscopy (SEM) in a Helios G4 PFIB from Thermo Fisher Scientific. All SEM images were collected using 5 kV accelerating voltages and imaging current of 0.8 nA. Shown in Fig. After determining that failure was confined to the bond wires and that the line testers were still conductive, we modeled the high temperature current paths in both device types to confirm that the current at elevated temperatures was flowing through the P and P: instead of through the underlying silicon. A simplified cross sectional 2D model was developed for both device types to determine where current was flowing in the vertical direction is shown in Fig. It's noted that the channel in the actual devices is 800 m long. In the simulation, in order to adequately resolve the highly doped delta layer, very small mesh size was needed, so it was impractical to simulate the entire 800 m length. Instead, we chose to simulate a 2-m long device between the contacts and use the simulated current to determine a resistance for the 2-m channel. We then scaled the simulated resistance by 400 to compare with the full 800-m channel in the experiment. The measured experimental currents on these devices are on the order of 10 mA at 0.5 V bias. Without any calibration work, our scaled simulated current ranges from about 5 mA for the P implant to 30 mA for the P: SIMs at 0.5 V, which is on the same order as the measured giving us confidence our model matches physical reality. Figure This simulation work confirms that at elevated temperatures the current is confined to the phosphorus layers in all samples, indicating that our experimental conclusions that the APAM P: is more robust than the metal features in CMOS and there are no barriers to future CMOS integration are valid. In this work, we use accelerated lifetime tests of P: deltalayer APAM devices at high temperature and current and establish that these delta-layer materials are robust and compatible with CMOS and that there are no fundamental barriers related to lifetime compatibility to having APAM elements integrated into operational CMOS. We showed that the failures were not the phosphorus layers, but instead in the metal wire bond interconnects used to package the device. We verified through simulation that the current at 300C is flowing exclusively through both the P: and P implant layer, validating the experimental results. Additionally, the current densities and stressing temperatures used are well in excess of what would be seen under normal operation in CMOS. These experiments show that the APAM delta layer structures are more robust than the wire bonds used to make device contacts, clearing any lifetime issues as a barrier to the practicality of combining APAM into CMOS devices. Current ongoing work is attempting to add APAM to CMOS in a temperature compatible way to preserve both CMOS and APAM function in the final integrated device. © 2022 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. Permission from IEEE must be obtained for all other uses, including reprinting/republishing this material for advertising or promotional purposes, collecting new collected works for resale or redistribution to servers or lists, or reuse of any copyrighted component of this work in other works.