In superconductors, electrons with spin s = 1/2 form Cooper pairs whose spin structure is usually singlet (S = 0) or triplet (S = 1). When the electronic structure near the Fermi level is characterized by fermions with angular momentum j = 3/2 due to strong spin-orbit interactions, novel pairing states such as even-parity quintet (J = 2) and odd-parity septet (J = 3) states are allowed. Prime candidates for such exotic states are half-Heusler superconductors, which exhibit unconventional superconducting properties, but their pairing nature remains unsettled. Here we show that the superconductivity in the noncentrosymmetric half-Heusler LuPdBi can be consistently described by the admixture of isotropic even-parity singlet and anisotropic odd-parity septet pairing, whose ratio can be tuned by electron irradiation. From magnetotransport and penetration depth measurements, we find that carrier concentrations and impurity scattering both increase with irradiation, resulting in a nonmonotonic change of the superconducting gap structure. Our findings shed new light on our fundamental understanding of unconventional superconducting states in topological materials. Half-Heusler materials, RPtBi and RPdBi, where R is a rare-earth element, are of notable interest as they can provide a new platform for topological phenomena Recently, superconductivity has been reported in half-Heusler materials The possible on-site pairing states in the T d point group can be classified into an s-wave A 1 singlet state or d-wave E and T 2 quintet states In mixed-parity states, the amplitude of the odd-parity superconducting gap component is proportional to the antisymmetric SOI (ASOI) vector g k relevant for the superconducting pairing We use high-energy electron irradiation to tune carrier concentrations in a controlled way by introducing nonmagnetic Frenkel pairs, which are known to act as donors or acceptors that shift the chemical potential in materials with low carrier density Single crystals of LuPdBi were grown from Bi-flux using elemental constituents in a 1:1:12 atomic ratio as described in detail in Ref. We have calculated the band structure of LuPdBi using the WIEN2k implementation Electron irradiation was done by using the SIRIUS Pelletron linear accelerator operated by the Laboratoire des Solides Irradiés (LSI) at École Polytechnique, with an incident electron energy of 2.5 MeV The temperature dependence of zero-field resistivity was measured by the standard four-probe method in a 3 He refrigerator with an ac current of less than 100 μA. The electrical contacts were made on the surface by using silver paste. The magnetoresistance and Hall effect down to 2 K were measured using a Physical Property Measurement System (PPMS) from Quantum Design in magnetic fields up to 9 T. The applied ac current was 2 mA. The longitudinal resistivity was measured by the standard four-probe or van der Pauw methods, and the Hall resistivity was measured by attaching the electrical contacts to make the voltage wirings perpendicular to the current wirings. For the H c2 measurements, we used the standard four-probe method and a dilution refrigerator that can reach down to about 100 mK. The applied ac current was reduced to less than 3.16 μA to avoid Joule heating. The irradiated samples for the H c2 measurements were cut from the same crystal with the pristine crystal (#1). The temperature dependence of the change in the magnetic penetration depth ∆λ(T ) ≡ λ(T ) -λ(0) was measured down to 40 mK using a tunnel diode oscillator technique with a resonant frequency of about 13.8 MHz in a dilution refrigerator. The frequency shift was given by ∆f , where f 0 is the resonant frequency without the sample, V s and V c are the sample and coil volumes, respectively, N is the demagnetization factor, and ∆χ(T ) is the shift of the magnetic susceptibility in the SI base units. With the characteristic sample size R, χ = (λ/R)tanh(R/λ) -1, from which we can calculate the ∆λ(T ) Our ab initio calculations of the electronic structure reveal that the Γ 8 band formed by j = 3/2 fermions dominates near the Fermi energy E F [Fig. where i = x, y, z and i + 1 = y for i = x etc., and Ji are the matrix representations of the j = 3/2 angular momentum operators. This effective Hamiltonian reasonably reproduces the low-energy results of ab initio calculations (see Appendix A), confirming that the effective k-linear relation of the ASOI term is applicable. In real materials, impurities inevitably present cause a chemical potential shift [Fig. The carrier density n H and the normalized carrier mobility μ(φ)/μ(0) as a function of the electron irradiation dose φ estimated from magnetotransport measurements (see Appendix D) in pristine and electronirradiated LuPdBi samples are shown in Fig. The change in the magnetic penetration depth ∆λ(T ) normalized by the value at T c is shown in Fig. Figure Tc , as a function of reduced temperature, T /T c , in the pristine and irradiated samples. We find two characteristic features in Fig. Next, we discuss ∆λ(T ) at low temperatures, which directly reflects the superconducting gap structure. In the case of the pristine sample, ∆λ(T ) between 0.05 T c and 0.2 T c shows quasilinear T dependence, while below about 0.07 T c it deviates from the linear behavior and shows a saturation [Fig. The low-T behavior of ∆λ(T ) is significantly changed by the electron irradiation. In the 3.13 and 5.28 C/cm 2 irradiated samples, ∆λ(T ) does not show a saturation down to the lowest T , and it follows power-law T n dependence below 0.15 T c with the exponent n ≤ 2, indicative of a nodal gap structure. We have checked that this conclusion is robust against the choice of maximum fitting temperature up to about 0.20 T c , above which the powerlaw fit no longer reproduces the data. In the singletseptet model, even if one of the split FSs has a nodal gap structure, the other FS keeps a fully gapped state. Thus we fit the experimental data at low temperatures using a two-gap model given by where A and B represent the weights of the two contributions, ∆ s is the excitation gap of fully-gapped one, and the exponent n is expected between 1 and 2 for line nodes. By fixing ∆ s = 1.80 k B T c close to the BCS value, we can reproduce the experimental data up to 0. In the 8.44 C/cm 2 irradiated sample, the power-law fitting, ∆λ(T ) ∝ T n , below 0.15 T c gives an exponent of n = 2.75. For the 11.61 C/cm 2 irradiated sample, the low-temperature ∆λ(T ) shows a flat behavior, which gives a higher exponent n = 4.81 in the power-law anal- ysis. Such high-power temperature dependence is not expected from the gap with line nodes, and experimentally indistinguishable from the exponential dependence (Figs. As mentioned in the introduction, the amplitude of the p-wave septet component is proportional to k F . Consid-ering that the FSs in LuPdBi are nearly isotropic owing to the low carrier concentrations, we simply assume k av = (3π 2 n H ) 1/3 as the averaged Fermi wave number. On the other hand, impurity scattering makes the gap more isotropic and thus reduces the anisotropic septet component. Theoretical studies on the impurity effect of anisotropic superconducting gap have shown that the gap minima increase almost linearly with the impurity scattering rate 1/τ where C and D are positive constants. From the fullgap analysis for the pristine, 8.44, and 11.61 C/cm 2 irradiated samples (Figs. ues of anisotropic/isotropic gap ratio greater than unity signify the existence of line nodes, which is consistent with the experimental results. Thus, the nonmonotonic change of the superconducting gap structure with irradiation dose can be semi-quantitatively understood by the increase of Fermi-surface volume and impurity scattering. Figures Finally, we comment on other possibilities. It has been proposed To summarize, from H c2 (T ) and ∆λ(T ) measurements on the pristine and electron-irradiated samples of LuPdBi with j = 3/2 fermions, we have observed the multigap behaviors and the nonmonotonic change in the gap structure. Considering the simple FSs in LuPdBi, the multigap nature can be regarded as a signature of the strong ASOI and mixed-parity superconducting state. Furthermore, the nonmonotonic evolution of the gap structure with irradiation can be semiquantitatively explained by the simple model based on the mixed-parity state, where the size of the anisotropic p-wave septet component of the gap function is enhanced by the carrier doping, and reduced by the impurity scattering effect. These experimental results provide evidence for the exotic mixedparity singlet-septet state in LuPdBi and demonstrate that electron irradiation can tune the ratio of even-and odd-parity components and even change the nodal topology of the superconducting gap. It has been proposed that the existence or absence of gap nodes in the singlet-septet state critically affects novel phenomena, such as topological Majorana surface states The calculated band structure of LuPdBi is fitted by the least-squared method using the effective k • p Hamiltonian represented by Eq. ( Obtained crystals were characterized by powder x-ray diffraction and single-crystal x-ray diffraction using an X'pert Pro PANanalytical diffractometer with Cu-Kα radiation, and an Oxford Diffraction Xcalibur four-circle diffractometer equipped with Mo-Kα radiation, respectively. We have checked the homogeneity of our crystals by energy-dispersive x-ray (EDX) spectroscopy as shown in Fig. Figure To estimate the carrier density and mobility of the pristine and irradiated samples of LuPdBi, we perform magnetotransport measurements. The magnetic field is applied perpendicular to the current, and the longitudinal (ρ xx ) and Hall (ρ xy ) resistivity components are extracted from the symmetric and antisymmetric parts of the raw data against the magnetic field, respectively. The Hall resistivity ρ xy shows linear field dependence for all the pristine and irradiated samples, as shown in Figs. The mobility μ can be obtained from the longitudinal conductivity σ xx and resistivity ρ. ). From the σ xx (H) data, the mobility μ in a low-carrier system can be calculated through the equation, . The black dotted lines in Fig. The obtained μ values from σ xx are plotted as the green diamonds in Fig. The upper critical fields of the pristine and irradiated samples of LuPdBi are measured by the resistive transitions. The temperature dependence of the resistivity under various fields for pristine and irradiated sam- Another noticeable feature is that when we compare the H c2 data for the pristine #2, 4.60, and 11.61 C/cm 2 irradiated samples with almost identical zero-field T c values, the initial slope dH c2 /dT | Tc shows nonmonotonic dose dependence; dH c2 /dT | Tc is the steepest for the modestly irradiated (4.60 C/cm 2 ) sample. In general, impurity scattering tends to enhance the initial slope, because the effective coherence length ξ decreases as the mean free path l becomes shorter. In the present LuPdBi case, however, this simple impurity scattering effect cannot explain the nonmonotonic behavior of dH c2 /dT | Tc . Other factors that can affect the initial slope of H c2 (T ) are the Fermi velocity v F and superconducting gap size ∆ because the coherence length in the BCS limit is represented as ξ = v F /(π∆). The carrier doping effect of the electron irradiation [Fig. Finally, the mean free path l = v F τ calculated from the mobility and carrier density of the pristine and 5.28 C/cm 2 samples are nearly equal (∼ 46 nm). This can be understood by the compensation of the carrier doping effect that increases the Fermi velocity v F and the impurity scattering effect that increases the scattering rate 1/τ . The mean free path drops to ∼ 31 nm and ∼ 27 nm in the 8.44 and 11.61 C/cm 2 irradiated samples, respectively, suggesting that the impurity scattering effect dominates at these high irradiation doses. On the other hand, the coherence length estimated from the initial slope of the upper critical field has little change against irradiation (between 11 and 14 nm). This ensures the condition that the coherence length is still shorter than the mean free path. 