The coexistence of multiple quasi-degenerate orders is the hallmark of the strongly correlated materials. Experiments often reveal several spatially modulated orders in the underdoped cuprates. This has come to the forefront with the possible detection of the pair density wave states. However, microscopic calculations often struggle to stabilize such spatially modulating orders as the ground state in the strong correlation limit. This work uses the t -t -J-model with an additional nearest-neighbor repulsion to stabilize spatially oscillating charge, bond, and pairing orders in the underdoped regime. We employ the standard Gutzwiller approach while treating the inhomogeneity for the spatial orders using the self-consistent Hartree-Fock-Bogoliubov methodology. Our calculations reveal that unidirectional bond density states coexisting with charge and pairing modulations can have lower energy than the uniform superconducting state over an extensive doping range. These modulating states vanish monotonically as the modulation wavevector becomes shorter with increased dopings. The finite momentum orders give way to a vestigial nematic phase upon increasing doping which only breaks the rotational symmetry of the system. The nematic order vanishes upon further increasing doping, and only uniform superconductivity survives. The spatial features of the ground state at each doping reveal multiple wavevectors, which potentially drives the incommensuration of charge orders. Interestingly, the spatially modulating states are absent when the strong correlations criteria are relaxed, suggesting that the removal of double occupancy aids the stabilization of density wave orders. The presence of multiple broken symmetry phases and competing orders has become the new paradigm for describing correlated quantum matter featuring complex phase diagram A unique realization for intertwined orders is the vestigial or composite phase, where a higher-order component of the likely symmetry broken phase condenses although the individual components vanish The signatures of charge modulation are routinely observed at moderate hole-doped materials in all cuprate families Recently the study of the modulated orders in cuprates has gained impetus with the observations of pair density wave (PDW) state coexisting with usual d-wave superconductivity (SC) using Josephson scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) The tJ-model and its parent Hubbard model at large repulsion U are generally studied to extract the physics of spatially modulated states Using commonly accepted minimal models to describe strongly correlated quantum matters, i.e., the t -t -J model with an additional nearest-neighbor repulsion, we study the interplay of unconventional superconductivity with spatially modulated charge-ordered states in the ground state. Early investigations on such model manifest promising signatures of density wave orders We work with the standard tJ-model on a two-dimensional square lattice with all the double occupancy removed, with an additional nearest neighbor repulsion. The model is given by Here, t ij = -t if i, j are nearest neighbors and t ij = t if i, j are next nearest neighbor sites. We fix the t = 1 and t = 0.25t, and all the energy scales are in the units of t. To compare with the experimental energy scales in cuprates, one can use t ≈ 300 meV. The tJ Hamiltonian is an effective low-energy model obtained from a Schrieffer-Wolf transformation of the Hubbard model for large on-site repulsion U The local number operators for a particular spin is given by ni,σ = c † i,σ c i,σ and the local density is the expectation value of the number operator. The 'tilde' appearing on the creation (annihilation) operators at site i with spin σ =↑, ↓, c † i,σ (c i,σ ) in Eq. ( Strong on-site repulsions reduce the Hilbert space of the tJmodel by eliminating all double occupancies. The 'tilde' on operators appearing in the Eq. ( where c is the normal annihilation operator. A straightforward implementation of such a restriction is given by the Gutzwiller approximation, which transforms the strongly interacting problem to an unrestricted Hilbert space, at the expense of introducing "Gutzwiller factors", which renormalize all operators where . . . is the expectation in the restricted Hilbert space whereas . . . 0 is the expectation of operators in the unrestricted Hilbert space. The Gutzwiller factors in the absence of any magnetic orders are given by where x i = 1 -ρ i . After removing the double-occupancy, we perform the mean field decomposition of the interaction terms in Hartree, Fock and Cooper channels as given below, Note that we are not allowing for any magnetic orderings in this system by focusing on superconducting with charge and bond density wave (BDW) orders only. Therefore, we eliminate the spin-flip Fock terms from the mean-field Hamiltonian, to preserve the spin rotational symmetry. To perform the mean field analysis we closely follow Ref. Here, the sum over a = ±x, ±ŷ are the nearest neighbor vectors and b = ±(x ± ŷ) are the next neighbor vector. The other variables are given by, Next, we diagonalize the Hamiltonian using Bogoliubov-deGennes(BdG) transformation where γ † (γ) are Bogoliubov creation (annihilation) operator. The resulting eigensystem is then solved self-consistently for all the local Hartree, Fock and Bogoliubov order parameters and μ. If there are N lattice sites, then there are (5N +1) variables to be solved self-consistently. We initialize the SC pairing ∆ ij and and the bond density χ ij , and local density to be the modulating around a mean value with a desired wavevector Q = (1/λ)2π/a 0 x,. Here λ is the period of oscillations and a 0 is the lattice-spacing. We focus on the unidirectional density wave orders in this paper. The initial guess is given by ∆ 0 is the guess mean SC pairing amplitude, and ∆ Q is the initial guess for SC pairing modulation amplitude. We initialize the bond and local density similarly and use such a trail solution to achieve self-consistency. We perform further analysis on those solutions for the cases we achieve self-consistency with the desired wavevector. One can evaluate the self-consistent d-wave and extended s-wave components from the SC pairing ∆ ij by using the following definition Similar definition can be made for the d-wave and extended s-wave component for the bond density order χ ij . To extract the finite-momentum component of the charge, bond and pairing, we first calculate the Fourier components of the variation of an ordering. For example, the Fourier component for the local density, is given by Note that we remove the average density from the local density to consider only the oscillating part instead of the uniform part. The principal peak from the Fourier component gives us the modulation wavevector Q for the desired quantity. The modulation amplitude from the local density is evaluated by the strength of ρ(q) at this wavevector such that χ Q ρ ≡ ρ(Q). Similarly, we can define the other modulation amplitude by using the Fourier transform of the respective order parameters, as Here χ d are the spatially averaged component d-wave bond density. The finite-momentum component at the dominant wavevector is again defined as χ Q d ≡ χd (Q). Similar definitions are also used for the other variables. We can also track the broken rotational symmetry of the bond density and cooper pair density operators by using where the average ... is over the lattice sites. Notice that this quantity only contributes when there is a nematicity and will vanish for purely extended s-wave and d-wave component of bond or cooper pair density. In order to describe our results in the subsequent sections, our strategy is the following. First, we extract the optimal wavevector by comparing the variational ground state energy of the self-consistent BdG solutions at each doping. Subsequently, we utilize the optimal self-consistent solution to study the variation of different order parameters with doping. Finally, we also show the local features of the optimal solutions for a few dopings. Our calculations are done on a two-dimensional square lattice unit-cell of linear dimension 40a 0 to 60a 0 . The lattice size was tuned withing this range to keep the lattice commensurate with the period of modulations. We found that the selfconsistency becomes easier if we accommodate even number FIG. We begin our analysis by studying the ground state energy for different self-consistent solutions of the BdG equations. Initially, we start with a trail state with a single modulation wavevector at Q = (1/λ)2π/a 0 for the pairing amplitude, bond and charge density and try to achieve selfconsistency. For each case, we achieve self-consistent solutions for the desired wavevector; we calculate the ground state energy E GS = H MF , which is presented in Fig. We also present the estimate of the E GS for the uniform and the nematic orders (Q = 0) with the dashed lines. The nematic order breaks the C 4 -rotational symmetry of the square lattice, although it is spatially uniform. Therefore, this is the charge (and pairing) nematic state where the x and the ycomponent of the bond (and pairing) density are different(See Sec (III C 3) for details). FIG. At low-doping, the evolution of E GS has a minima at λ = 4, as seen in Fig. Finally, we note that the demise of the modulated orders with doping takes an intriguing pathway. The sharp minima at a particular wavevector at low-dopings indicate that the modulated state with the optimal Q is stable. However, around δ = 0.14 as shown in Fig. Above variational analysis identifies the modulated charge patterns in the ground state, but now we proceed to explore the strength of the corresponding spatially modulated orders. In Fig. Interestingly, over the range of doping, the finite momentum components of BDW, CDW, and PDW orders are significant for δ < 0.14 as shown in Fig. We have also presented the mean d-wave SC pairing amplitude in Fig. We also find the signatures of nematicity throughout the doping range δ < 0.16, which is indicated by the non-zero N ∆ and N χ in Fig. For the present calculation, the nematic order coexists only with uniform dSC order in the doping range δ = 0.14 -0.16. However, it also coexists with all spatially modulating orders in the doping range δ = 0.06 -0.14 as shown in Fig. In this subsection, we explore the spatial structure of the optimal solution at a few doping levels. STM experiments routinely map the spatial variation of diverse orders. Therefore, we start by concentrating on the low-doping regime where we find a unidirectional BDW, PDW, and CDW state with a periodic modulation of four lattice spacing. As mentioned before, we consider unidirectional modulated states, and therefore, the bond order only modulates along the x-direction while it is uniform along the y-direction. Interestingly, the χ ij at each site displays different x and y components as shown in Fig. Next, we extract the d-wave and the extended s-wave components of the self-consistent Fock shift using Eq.( Fig. We present the SC pairing ∆ ij on bonds in Fig. Similarly, the SC pairing amplitude is presented in Fig. Finally, for δ = 0.14, the optimal self-consistent solution supports a Q = 0 nematic state. We study the t -t -J model with additional nearestneighbor repulsion and find modulating bond density wave states coexisting with charge and pairing modulated states in the underdoped regime. The modulated states have lower energy than the uniform d-wave superconducting state in the doping range δ = 0.06 -0.14. The optimal wavevector for all the modulated quantities is commensurate with the lattice with higher harmonics of oscillations. Over the doping range δ = 0.06 -0.16, there remains a significant nematicity such that the C 4 -rotational symmetry is broken. Moreover, for δ = 0.14 -0.16, the system supports a purely nematic state without any translation symmetry breaking. Finally, beyond this doping, only a uniform d-wave superconducting order is stabilized. In the following subsections, we discuss how this work compares with other results in the literature in the context of the cuprates. We attempted to study the modulated states by relaxing the strong correlation constraint by setting the Gutzwiller factors to unity. In the past, studies have been performed for d-wave SC in the tJ model, and this procedure is known as Inhomogeneous Mean Field Theory (IMT) In the t -t -J model with additional nearest-neighbor repulsion, the optimal modulation wavevector reduces with increasing doping. For doping around δ = 0.06 -0.09 the optimal wavevector is around Q = (1/4)2π/a 0 . As the doping is increased further, the periodicity increases to 8a 0 around δ = 0.125 as shown in the inset of Fig. Additionally, in cuprates the wavevector varies from Q = 0.33 -0.2 (2π/a 0 ) leading to a periodicity of 3 -5 lattice spacing up to δ = 0.2. However, this contrasts with theoretical calculations that often predict longer modulation wavelength in the tJ-model and the associated Hubbard model at large U Aditionally, there can be another important consequnece for near-degeneracy of modulated states with different wavevectors as shown in Fig. The t -J model and its "parent" -Hubbard model with large on-site repulsion U are generally considered the minimal model for cuprate superconductors. However, the interactions are not entirely screened in realistic materials to be completely local. A residual nearest-neighbor repulsion is estimated to be one order of magnitude smaller than the on-site repulsion in cuprates The modulated orders in the t -t -J model have been studied extensively in the past Furthermore, increasing the nearest neighbor repulsion term keeping the other terms constant allows for the modulated orders to survive up to higher dopings. We have confirmed that for W = 0.75t, the spatially modulated orders remain the ground state up to δ = 0.16 whereas the ground state becomes purely nematic in δ = 0.16 -0.19. The energy difference between nematic and the uniform state remains significantly more prominent for larger W leading to unambiguous identification of the nematic regime. We observe modulations of the cooper pair density both in the extended s-wave and the d-wave channel over the doping range δ = 0.06 -0.14. A modulation of cooper pairing can be a direct consequence of the coexistence with the BDW order. On one hand, the modulation of the bond density leads to an oscillation of the local density of states which dictates the propensity for developing local SC pair and drives the modulation of the pairing. On the other hand, a more exotic pair density wave is a state of spatially oscillating Cooper pair such that the average pairing vanishes or is very small. In our analysis, the ∆ s shows a vanishingly small mean with a robust modulation amplitude over the whole doping range as presented in Fig. Recent experiments on BSSCO Our model calculation reveals that a translationally invariant nematic state stabilizes in the doping range δ = 0.14 -0.16. Note that the nematic state is a higher order component of the superconducting and bond order parameter. If the bond order χ is written as a vector then the nematic order is given by N χ = 1/2( χ † σ z χ , where σ z is the z-component of the Pauli matrix. In the nematic state the combined order parameter is finite although the χ Q x = 0 and χ Q y = 0. Consequently, nematic state breaks only a subset of the all possible symmetry that can be broken in this regime leading to a vestigial nematic state. FIG. Recently sublattice resolved electronic structure experiments in cuprates In Fig. Between the finite-Q orders and the uniform SC, there is a regime where the rotational symmetry remains broken although the translational invariance is restored. Such a state is a vestigial nematic state which breaks a a smaller subset of symmetries than the primary state of density wave orders. The series of cascading broken symmetries as the doping reduces hints at the possible entanglement between multiple orders near the highly correlated regime. The charge density waves 