Using angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES), we studied the evolution of the electronic structure of Fe 1-x Cu x Se from x = 0 to 0.10. We found that the Cu dopant introduces extra electron carriers. The hole bands near the Γ point are observed to steadily shift downward with increasing doping and completely sink down below the Fermi level (E F ) for x > 0.05. Meanwhile, the electron pocket near the M point becomes larger but loses the spectral weight near E F . We also observed that effective mass of the electron band near the M point increases with doping. Our result explains why superconductivity disappears and metal insulator transition (MIT) like behavior occurs upon Cu doping in terms of electronic structure, and provide insight into emergent magnetic fluctuation in Fe 1-x Cu x Se. Chemical substitution or doping studies have been widely conducted in correlated materials to control the electronic structure as well as physical properties. For example, it can change the chemical pressure, electron correlation, Fermi energy, carrier density. As such, investigating the chemical substitution effects can provide critical clues to understanding the underlying mechanism for various phenomena such as emergent magnetism, metal-insulator transition (MIT), spin/charge density wave, and superconductivity Numerous chemical substitution studies have been conducted for iron based superconductors (IBSs) to understand the superconductivity mechanism and the interplay between the superconductivity and emergent phenomena Investigating the Fe-site substitution may provide new opportunities for a better understanding of superconductivity and exploration of emergent phenomena. Cu doped FeSe is a suitable candidate to perform such studies, because of the recent success of high quality single crystal synthesis In this paper, we report the angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) measurements of the electronic structure of Fe 1-x Cu x Se (x = 0, 0.02, 0.03, 0.05, and 0.10). We find that the Fermi surface is strongly Cu doping dependent. The size of the hole (electron) pocket near the Γ (M) point decreases (increases) with doping. Upon the doping increased to x > 0.05, the hole bands near Γ point sink down below the Fermi level (E F ), which changes the overall Fermi surface topology. In addition, we observe the spectral weight is reduced near E F as well as an increased effective mass of the electron band near the M point. Our observation reveals for the first time the electronic structure evolution of Fe 1-x Cu x Se system in detail. It attributes the MIT behavior to electronic structure instead of merely impurity scattering. Our results may provide microscopic experimental foundation for understanding the emergent magnetic fluctuation in this doping range. High quality single crystals of Fe 1-x Cu x Se were synthesized by the chemical vapor transport method using mixture of AlCl 3 and KCl as transport agent We performed ARPES experiments to investigate the Cu doping effect on the electronic structure of Fe 1-x Cu x Se. A number of studies reported that Cu doping to IBSs may result in hole doping, but it is certainly not the case for FeSe -1 , 0.4Å -1 ). The spectral weight near E F gradually decreases as Cu is doped. In addition, effective mass of electron band is determined by a parabolic fit of the dispersion as shown in Figures Nevertheless, our experimental observations suggest that the spectra weigh loss near E F around both Γ and M points can account for the MIT in Cu doped FeSe, instead of simple impurity effect. Moreover, the enhanced correlation with Cu doping (larger effective mass) should also be considered as observed for the electron band at the M point. Emergence of a Mott insulating state in heavily Cu doped NaFeAs Moreover, previous studies reported that magnetic fluctuation exists from x = 0.04 We report results of a detailed electronic structure study on Fe 1-x Cu x Se. We observe that the size of the hole (electron) pocket near the Γ (M) point decreases (increases) with doping. With the increase of doping, we find that the hole band at the Γ point is located below E F , which changes the overall Fermi surface topology. In addition, it is found that the effective mass of the electron band at the M point increases upon Cu doping. Our observation explains, in terms of electronic structure, why the Fe 1-x Cu x Se shows a MIT behavior and may provide clues to the mechanism of the magnetic fluctuation.