The simultaneous co-existence and gate-tuneability of the superconducting (SC), magnetic and topological orders in magic angle twisted bilayer graphene (MATBG) open up entirely new possibilities for the creation of complex hybrid Josephson junctions (JJ). Here we report on the creation of gate-defined, magnetic Josephson junctions in MATBG, where the weak link is gate-tuned close to the correlated state at a moiré filling factor of ν = -2. A highly unconventional Fraunhofer pattern emerges, which is phase-shifted and asymmetric with respect to the current and magnetic field directions, and shows a pronounced magnetic hysteresis. Interestingly, our theoretical calculations of the JJ with a valley polarized ν = -2 with orbital magnetization as the weak link explain most of these unconventional features without fine tuning the parameters. While these unconventional Josephson effects persist up to the critical temperature Tc ~ 3.5K of the superconducting state, at temperatures below T < 800mK, we observed a pronounced magnetic hysteresis possibly due to further spin-polarization of the ν = -2 state. We demonstrate how the combination of magnetization and its current induced magnetization switching in the MATBG JJ allows us to realize a programmable zero field superconducting diode, which represents a major building block for a new generation of superconducting quantum electronics. Electronic coupling between materials with competing ground states can lead to the creation of exotic electronic phases. Of particular interest are hetero-junctions between superconductors, magnets and topological insulators, where especially Josephson junctions (JJ) have attracted formidable attention. Magnetic JJs allow spintronic applications through the creation of spin-filters A single, two-dimensional material which would host all of these emergent phases at once, would allow to overcome these issues. It would permit to induce gate-defined, ultra-clean homojunctions between all the different phases, and so open up a new avenue for the creation of a new generation of superconducting electronics. The recently discovered quantum phases in the flat-bands of θm~1.1° magic angle twisted bilayer graphene (MATBG) include correlated insulators (CI) Here, we demonstrate the creation of a magnetic JJ in a locally gated MATBG device, when the weak link is set close to half-filling of the hole band. The device consists of a van der Waals (vdW) hetero-structure of graphite/hBN/MATBG/hBN/graphite, as shown in Fig Metallic graphite layers are capacitively coupled to the MATBG, through an insulating hexagonal boron nitride layers (hBN) of ~ 10 nm thickness. The carrier density in the MATBG sheet n is electrostatically tuned by both top and bottom gates n = C V + C V , where (C , C ) are the respective capacitances and (V , V ) gate voltages. In the center of the device, the top graphite layer is separated by a narrow channel of length d = 150 nm, which creates a region in the MATBG that is almost not coupled to the top gate, and whose carrier density is mainly set by the back gate voltage n ~ C V . Hence, by applying different values of V and V , it is possible to locally vary the carrier concentration in the channel region, which allows to create gate-defined junctions of length dj ~ 100 nm in the MATBG, as is confirmed by electrostatic simulations and is highlighted in Fig. In order to create a JJ in the device, we control both (V , V ) to tune the n to nsc = -1.72×10 12 cm -2 , where the SC state is at optimal doping. By further changing (V , V ) following the relation ΔV = -(C /C )ΔV , n can be kept constant, while the carrier density in the junction n is continuously tuned (see SI for detailed dual-gate maps). This allows to tune the junction region from a metallic (N) to a SC and into CI state. As the length of the junction is in the order of magnitude of the coherence length of the SC dj ~ ξ ~ 100 nm (see SI), it is possible to proximitize the junction and to create a Josephson junction We further analyze the various gate-induced junctions by applying an out-of-plane magnetic field B, where Fig To understand the unconventional Josephson effect of the SC/CI/SC JJ, we first examine the Fraunhofer pattern with the parameters of Fig. It is important to note that the observed unconventional Fraunhofer patterns are highly reproducible. The question is: Which microscopic state of MATBG near ν = -2 can explain these? We show below that all the observed experimental features are consistent with the assumption that the CI is an interaction induced valley polarized state with net orbital magnetization. Specifically, we model the moiré Chern bands of twisted bilayer graphene based on an effective tight-binding model This state has been previously identified at slightly elevated magnetic fields B > 300 mT To explain the directional dependence of the critical current in Fig. The Fraunhofer pattern in low temperatures is even more intriguing. Fig. Such hysteresis of I (B) is a prominent characteristic of ferromagnetic JJs A direct consequence of the remnant magnetization and its current induced magnetization switching in the MATBG JJ, is its non-reciprocal transport. This is demonstrated in the dV /dI vs. I curves taken at B = 0, which show highly non-symmetric behavior with respect to the current direction. As can be clearly seen in Fig. To summarize -the zero-field coexistence and gate tunability of the magnetic and topological phases with superconductors in MATBG presents a remarkable opportunity to electronically hybridize these phases through engineering of complex gate induced junctions, This will lead to the creation of ever more complex quantum phases based on the MATBG platform. Also, the so created JJs can shed new light on the underlying ground states of MATBG, as the JJ probe much smaller areas than traditional transport experiments, and are extremely sensitive to magnetic fields. Device fabrication: The MATBG devices are fabricated using a cut and stack technique. All flakes were first exfoliated in a Si/SiO2 (285 nm) substrate and later picked up using a polycarbonate (PC)/polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) stamp. All the layers were picked up at a temperature of ~100oC. The graphene is initially cut with an AFM tip, to avoid strain during the pick-up process. The PC/PDMS stamp was used to pick up first the top graphite layer, the first hBN and the first graphene layer. Before picking up the second graphene layer, the stage is rotated by an angle of 1.1-1.2o. Finally, the bottom hBN and bottom graphite gates were picked up. The finalized stack is dropped on a Si/SiO2 substrate by melting the PC at 180 oC. The resulting stack is etched into a Hall bar with CHF3/O2 and a 1D contact is formed by evaporating Cr (5 nm)/Au (50 nm). The narrow channel of ~150 nm in the top gate is etched with O2. Before etching the top gate, the device was characterized at T = 35 mK to identify the pair of contacts closest to the magic angle (~°). The junction was made in between this pair of contacts. Measurements: Transport measurements were carried out in a dilution refrigerator (Bluefors SD250) with a base temperature of 20 mK. Standard low-frequency lock-in techniques (Stanford Research SR860 amplifiers) were used to measure R with an excitation current of 10 nA at a frequency of 13.11 Hz. For the dV /dI measurements the excitation current was reduced to 1 nA. The d. c. bias current was applied through a 1/100 divider and a 1 MΩ resistor before combining it with the a.c. excitation. Keithley 2400 Source-meters were used to control the gates as well as serve as the source for the DC current. The measured dV /dI signals were filtered and amplified by voltage-preamplifiers SR560 before entering the lock-in amplifiers. Twist angle extraction: The twist angle is extracted from the phase diagrams shown in Suppl. Fig. In order to gain insight on how the electrostatics of the dual gated architecture of our device works, we have performed electrostatic simulations by solving the Poisson equation with a finite difference method To study the behavior of the JJ with magnetic field, a detailed analysis of Ic at different currents and fields is performed in the main text (Fig. In a two-dimensional superconductor, the film thickness is smaller than the London penetration depth λ. In this case, the magnetic flux can penetrate into the superconductor and the spatial distribution of magnetic field is governed by the Pearl length 4 Λ = 2λ /t, where t is the film thickness. It has been previously shown In this section, we present the model Hamiltonians for this Josephson junction, which will be used to calculate the Fraunhofer patterns. The Josephson junction studied in this experiment is rather special in the sense that all parts are formed by the MATBG only. As schematically plot in Fig. To capture the bands of MATBG, we used a hexagonal lattice model where the c j = (c j ,↑ , c j ,↓ , c j ,↑ , c j ,↓ ) denotes a four-component electron annihilation operator with c j± being the annihilation operator for p ± ip orbitals, ↑/↓ representing spin up/down at a site j, and the first-nearest neighbor and the fifth-nearest neighbor (to break the emergent SU(4) symmetry) hopping terms are considered with hopping matrix T = [t , 0; 0, t ] ⊗ σ , T = [t , 0; 0, t * ] ⊗ σ , the connecting vectors δ (1) = {δ 1 , C δ 1 , C δ 1 } , δ (3) = {δ 3 , C δ 3 , C δ 3 } (see Fig. Based on the insight about the presence of the spin and orbital magnetism, we write the model Hamiltonian of this Josephson junction formed by the MATBG as: where H captures the bands of MATBG as written in Eq. ( To enable the bands to form orbital Chern bands, we added the Haldane Hamiltonian 10 : where the next-nearest connecting vectors δ ( ) = (δ 2 , C δ 2 , C δ 2 ), A and B are the sublattice indices, the complex hopping matrix T = [t e , 0; 0, t e ] ⊗ σ and m is a staggered potential. Without loss of generality, we set t = 0.2t , m = 0.1t , φ = π/2, where the bands are topological The filling difference between different regions is captured by H : with μ , μ respectively, denotes the chemical potential of the superconducting MATBG parts in the left, right part (label as L, R) of the junction, and the MATBG near half-filling in the middle part (label as M) of the junction (Fig. Finally, to capture the phase orders in different parts, we introduced a mean-field Hamiltonian H , which is written as: where Pauli matrices τ , σ operates on orbital-, spin-space, respectively, Δ , Δ and Δ denotes the order parameters of superconducting states, spin-polarized states, valley-polarized states, respectively. The first term captures the superconducting phase φ ( ) of the left (right) part of the junction. Here, we assumed the superconducting order parameter takes the conventional BCS form, which is most likely to be stabilized by the electron-phonon interaction After introducing the model Hamiltonian for the Josephson junction formed by the MATBG, we now present the detailed process for the calculation of Fraunhofer patterns. To evaluate the Fraunhofer patterns, we need to take account into the effects of external magnetic fields B on the junction, where we consider B is finite only in the middle part. This is done by replacing the hopping terms in the middle part with the Peierls substitution as: The Landau gauge fields are taken as A(r) = (0, Bx, 0), where we set x-direction to be the transverse direction of the junction. Let us insert A(r) back to Eq. ( Here, a is the lattice constant, N is the total number of hexagonal plaquettes, the flux quantum Φ = h/2e, the total flux Φ = N Ba , x̅ = (x + x )/2, Δy = y -y with j = (x , y ), j′ = (x , y ). After this Peierls substitution, we can evaluate the Josephson current using the lattice recursive Green's function method (i) obtain the edge Green's function of the superconducting MATBG in the right and left part of Josephson junction by recursively calculating: Σ , = V , G , (ω )V , , Σ , = V , G , (ω )V , . where l is the index for the recursive unit, ω = (2n + 1)πT is the Matsubara frequency with T as temperature. Here the intra-unit Green's function G (ω ) and self-energy Σ , is evaluated iteratively until G (ω ) is saturated using the intra-unit Hamiltonian H ( ) of the left and right part, the hopping Hamiltonian V , between the unit l and l + 1. Note that H ( ) and V , are Bogoliubov de Gennes (BdG) Hamiltonians defined in Nambu basis (c , c ). For example, V , = diag[V , ; V , ] with V , = -V , * . Also note the initial Green's function G (ω ) = (iω -H ( ) ) , and the superconducting phase in H and H are φ and φ , respectively. After these iterations, we can obtain the intra-unit Green's function G , (ω ) and G , (ω ), where l (l ) is the index of the first (last) unit of the middle part. (ii) obtain the intra-unit Green's function G (ω ), nearest-unit Green's function G , (ω ), where l labels a unit cell in the middle part. To obtain this, we can first perform a similar recursive calculation as step (i) for the l to l -1 and for l to l + 1 part, i.e., G (ω ) = (iω -H -Σ (ω )) , Here initial Green's function for l to l - where the current depends on the phase difference Δφ = φ -φ and in particular, being distinct from V , , the V , = diag[V , ; -V , ], i.e., there is an additional sign in the hole part, as the electron and hole carry opposite currents. More details of this method can be referred to ref. [14,15] G. Orbital Chern bands and the orbital magnetic moment. In this section, we illustrate the features of energy bands of normal states in our model Hamiltonian. The energy bands along high symmetry lines with and without valley polarization are shown in Fig. [ Another crucial feature is that the bands are topological nontrivial now, i.e. they are orbital Chern bands, due to the Haldane terms (see Eq. 3). To illustrate this, the distribution of Berry curvature in the Brillouin zone is depicted in Fig. An important consequence of the orbital Chern bands is to give rise to orbital magnetism where H(k)|u k >= E k |u k >, l, n are band indices. To see the magntude of the orbital magnetic moment of per electron for n-th band M , , we can calculate: where N is the number of k points. We found the calculated M , is about 3 μ for each moire band according to the orbital magnetic mement distribution shown in main text Fig. The magnetic field in a sample is: where H can be regarded as the applied magnetic fields, μ = 4π × 10 T⋅ m/A is the vacuum magnetic permeability, and the magnetization, including the orbital and spin part, is given by: Let us assume each electron carries γu magnetic moment, where u = eħ/2m = 9.27 × 10 J/T, and denote the electron density is ρ m . The magnetization thus is written as: Therefore, the effective B field from the magnetization is: For the twisted bilayer graphene near the magic angle, the moire pattern lattice constant is L = 14nm and the thickness is about 0.34 nm. Near the half-filling ν = -2, the electron density (in unit of m ) is: We can also use the experimental carrier density ∼ 1.72 × 10 cm , and the electron density becomes: ρ ≈ 1.72/0.34 × 10 = 5.07 × 10 . Using the estimated electron density, we obtain the shift fields due to the presence of magnetism as: B ≈ 0.4~0.6 γ mT (24) There are two moire bands and each moire band carries a orbital magnetic moment of 3μ according to the previous section so that γ~6u for the valley polarized state at ν = -2. As a result, the shifting field B is eastimated to be 2.4~3.6 mT, being consistent with the observed 2.5 mT phase shift in the Fraunhofer pattern. After adding this shifting field, the peak of Fraunhofer pattern will be moved to a finite field, as illustrated in Fig. In this section, we summarize some details for the theorectically calculated Fraunhofer patterns. To obtain the critical current as a function of Φ, i.e., Fraunhofer pattern, at each external field, we vary the phase different over 0 to 2π and obtain the largest positive and smallest negative current as I (Φ) and I (Φ). In our calculations, we set pairing gap Δ = 0.1 meV, and we tuned μ, which effectively changes the filling, and the order parameter in the middle region: Δ and Δ , which give rise to the spin and orbital magnetism. First, we set μ in the middle of the bands and did not add the valley polarization. In this case, the middle region behaves as a normal metal and the whole junction is a SC-N-SC junction. As a result, we obtained the standard Fraunhofer pattern, as shown in Fig. Next, we turn on the valley polarization Δ . As we discussed, the valley polarization has several effects: (i) As we consider the inter-valley pairing, the valley polarization would suppress the formation of the cooper pairing and reduce the supercurrent through this junction; (ii) The valley polarization will break the time-reversal symmetry and lift the valley degeneracy. Consequently, the combination of orbital Chern bands and valley polarization results in net orbital magnetism. Especially, as we showed, the orbital magnetic moment can be tens of Bohr magneton and leads a shift in Fraunhofer pattern with a shift flux Φ = B S (as illustrated in Fig. Beyond the bands level, here we also give a mean-field level discussion on how the coupling between B fields and orbital magnetization can introduce asymmetric Fraunhofer patterns in this junction. We assumed the sign of valley polarization Δ with the switch of current direction and the B fields couples with Δ as this valley polarized state carries orbital magnetic moment. We can describe this switching with a phenomenological free energy as F = aΔ + bΔ + λ sign(I)Δ -λ BΔ . As shown in the main text Fig. But regardless of different levels of interpretations, our experimental data and our calculations strongly suggest asymmetric symmetry Fraunhofer patterns indicate a net orbital magentization near ν = -2 and it can be switched by the supercurrent. To our knowledge, the orbital magnetic moment-induced asymmetric Fraunhofer pattern has not been realized so far. We thus think a more qualitative study is quite desirable and would leave this as another work. Finally, we discuss the feature of the Fraunhofer pattern in the presence of spin magnetism. As we discussed, the spin magnetism is likely to build up in the low-temperature range (T <800 mK) according to the measured Fraunhofer patterns. To show explicitly, we calculated the Fraunhofer pattern by adding a spin polarization Δ . Specifically, we inputted Δ as a hysteresis loop of B field as shown in Fig. 