Superconducting nanowires, a mature technology originally developed for quantum sensing, can be used as a target and sensor with which to search for dark matter interactions with electrons. Here we report on a 180-hour measurement of a tungsten silicide superconducting nanowire device with a mass of 4.3 nanograms. We use this to place new constraints on dark matter-electron interactions, including the strongest terrestrial constraints to date on sub-MeV (sub-eV) dark matter that interacts with electrons via scattering (absorption) processes. The identity of the dark matter (DM) in the Universe remains one of the biggest mysteries of modern physics. After decades of theoretical and experimental focus on DM at the electroweak scale, attention has recently shifted to lighter masses, with sub-GeV DM capturing the limelight from both the theoretical and experimental Realizing the full potential of superconducting detectors for DM will require additional technological developments In this work, we report on a 180-hour measurement performed with a prototype SNSPD device that we use to place new bounds on DM, including the strongest terrestrial constraints to date on dark matter with sub-MeV (or sub-eV) masses that scatters with (or is absorbed by) electrons. For the first time, we evaluate bounds using a novel theoretical framework that accounts for the many-body physics of the detector and includes an enhancement due to the thin-layer geometry. Our results represent novel constraints on DM interactions from a superconducting detector system, realizing prospects envisioned nearly a decade ago and providing a new driver for the development of quantum sensing technology. We SNSPDs operate by maintaining a bias current in a superconducting nanowire, keeping the device in the superconducting phase very near the edge of the superconducting transition. Under these conditions, any deposited energy above threshold can cause a portion of the device to undergo a transition to the normal metal phase, locally increasing the resistance of the wire. This results in a brief but significant voltage pulse that can be amplified and then read out. Typical events produce pulses with an amplitude of order 1 mV lasting for several nanoseconds for absorbed energy ranging from 0.1 meV to 10 eV. Further information on energy thresholds and calibration can be found in Ref. Scanning electron microscope (SEM) images of our prototype device are shown in Fig. The concept of our experiment is that local DM particles may interact with the electrons in an SNSPD. In this case, a DM particle may occasionally exchange sufficient energy with these electrons to overcome the threshold of the detector, producing a count in the device when no other sources are present. In order to translate rate measurements of an SNSPD device to bounds on the DMelectron interactions, for both scattering and absorption processes, it is necessary to compute the rates of these processes in the detector. For small energy and momentum transfers, electrons in the detector cannot be considered free particles, and the many-body physics of the target material becomes important. We compute the DM interaction rates using a new theoretical method recently developed by Ref. Refs. Preliminary estimates suggest that the absorption rate is subject to even larger enhancements, but the approach of Ref. The thin-layer interaction rate derived by Ref. We consider both DM scattering and absorption processes. For DM scattering, we place limits on the DMelectron scattering cross section. These hold for any spinindependent interaction that couples the DM to the electron density and place limits on the kinetic mixing parameter κ. (See Appendix A for model details.) Our new constraints are summarized in Fig. Scattering results are shown in terms of a reference , where μ eχ is the reduced mass of the DM-electron system; g e and g χ are the couplings of the mediator to the electron and DM, respectively; and α EM ≈ 1/137 is the fine structure constant. Absorption results are shown in terms of the size of the kinetic mixing κ of a dark photon-essentially its coupling to the electromagnetic current. We take the Fermi energy E F to be 7 eV in both WSi and NbN, and we take the densities to be 9.3 g/cm 3 and 8.4 g/cm 3 , respectively. The Fermi energy and density of Al are taken to be 11.7 eV and 2.7 g/cm 3 , respectively. We assume a local DM density of 0.3 GeV/cm 3 with velocities distributed according to the Standard Halo Model, i.e., with probability density We take v 0 = 220 km/s, v E = 232 km/s, and v esc = 550 km/s. The impressive reach for scattering and absorption at the smallest masses is due to the low device threshold of 0.73 eV, assisted by its low dark count rate. Future realizations of this experiment may be able to achieve substantially lower thresholds, sensitive to much lower masses. The projections for the reach of future NbN detectors assume thresholds of 248 and 124 meV, which would extend the experimental reach to DM masses of order 50-100 keV. Indeed, sensitivity at the 10 μm-wavelength scale-corresponding to a 124 meV threshold-has already been demonstrated in SNSPDs Solid curves are computed neglecting thin-layer effects, i.e., treating the detector as a bulk volume. Dashed and dotted curves show the projections including these effects: dashed curves neglect dissipation in the other layers, following Ref. The geometric effects included in this work are estimated in a simplified framework. We do not quantify the geometric effects on the absorption rate here, and in the case of scattering, additional corrections may arise from the lower layers of the geometry in Fig. We have reported on a new search for DM-electron scattering and absorption in a prototype SNSPD detector. Our results place the strongest terrestrial constraints to date on DM-electron interactions for sub-MeV (sub-eV) masses for scattering (absorption) processes. This is the first time that superconducting detectors have been used to probe unconstrained parameter space for DM scattering, a crucial milestone in the program of light DM searches that heralds significant collaboration between the DM and quantum-sensing communities. The constraints presented in this work are computed using the dielectric function formalism, accounting for the manybody physics of the detector material, and we have also accounted for geometric effects that can significantly enhance the predicted DM interaction rate. Our small-scale prototype is able to exceed previous experimental constraints thanks to the remarkably low 0.73 eV threshold of the SNSPD detector, along with its extremely low dark count rate. Future iterations of this experiment promise to reach even lower thresholds with even lower dark count rates. At present, we place constraints on DM interactions assuming that the dark counts are due to backgrounds. In the future, experimental improvements will allow the use of rate modulation An additional important challenge is to scale the prototype device to a large-scale experiment. Thus far, SNSPD devices are small: our nanogram-scale prototype is typical. Sensitivity to cross sections as small as those probed by experiments at higher DM masses will require significantly larger detectors at the gram scale and beyond. While the electron lithography techniques used to fabricate our prototype do not scale easily to larger devices, it is possible that optical lithography or other technologies would enable the production of a larger detector. Finally, future experiments will be in a position to leverage geometric enhancements to the interaction rate. Our prototype detector was designed to demonstrate the capabilities of SNSPDs for DM detection with existing technology and fabrication techniques, and such geometric enhancements were not a design consideration. However, the theoretical methods introduced by Refs. states whose kinematics are more favorable for detection. On the other hand, predicting the rate involves additional complications. In principle, to predict the DM scattering rate, one should compute transition rates between eigenstates of the material, but predicting the corresponding electronic wavefunctions is very challenging. In-medium effects can screen the DM-electron interaction, and other complicated many-body effects can modify the rate in either direction. Recent calculations account for these effects from first principles using sophisticated techniques such as density functional theory. However, the projected DM scattering rate is then subject to significant uncertainty associated with the modeling of the target material. The recently-developed loss function formalism where V (q) is the DM-electron interaction potential, e is the charge of the electron, and ω q = q • v χq 2 /(2m χ ), with v χ and m χ the DM velocity and mass, respectively. The advantage of this approach is that the dielectric function has been studied extensively in the condensed matter literature as a key determinant of materials' optical properties In Eq. (A1), the physics of the target material is separated from the physics of the DM-electron interaction, and the latter enters only through the non-relativistic interaction potential V (q). For a spin-independent interaction, the scattering rate is independent of any other details of the interaction structure: the non-relativistic interaction potential in Eq. (A1) takes the form V (q) = g χ g e /(q 2 + m 2 φ ), where g χ and g e are the couplings of the mediator to the DM and the electron, respectively; and m φ is the mediator mass, whether a scalar or a vector. The influence of the microphysical DM-electron interaction on the overall scattering rate is thus limited to the mediator mass and effective couplings. In particular, the response of the material does not depend on the nature of the interaction. With the interaction potential as above, the total event rate at fixed ω can be written in the form ) where ρ D is the detector density, ρ χ is the local DM density, f χ is the DM velocity distribution, and v(q, ω) ≡ ω/q + q/(2m χ ). This reorganization of the scattering rate calculation has clarified significant confusion in earlier literature regarding the dependence of in-medium effects on the nature of the DM-electron interaction. Ref. Moreover, since any such interaction exhibits the same material response, the response function can be measured with electromagnetic interactions in the laboratory and then applied to predict scattering rates for DMelectron interactions. Although laboratory probes couple to the charge density rather than the electron density, energy losses in this regime are generally dominated by electronic interactions, and thus the experimentallymeasured dielectric function is a very good approximation of the material response to DM scattering. The dielectric function, in turn, has been studied thoroughly in the condensed matter literature, and there are several established models that can approximate the dielectric function in different regimes of energy and momentum transfer. Thus, even in the absence of experimental data for a particular target material, it is possible to quickly and accurately predict the DM scattering rate including all in-medium effects. Studying DM scattering with the dielectric function makes it possible to classify the different types of inmedium effects in the same language used by the condensed matter community. The screening of the interaction, for instance, is identical to screening in ordinary electromagnetism: a perturbation in the charge density induces subsequent fluctuations which partially cancel the applied potential. Less trivial phenomena are also naturally accommodated in this language. In particular, typical metals exhibit a resonance at non-zero ω and small q corresponding to the excitation of plasmons The loss function is readily measured by X-ray or electron scattering in the relevant regime of energy and momentum transfers. However, to our knowledge, no data is yet available for the loss function in WSi at the relevant values of q and ω. Therefore, in this work, we compute the loss function using the well established Lindhard model where ω p = (4παn e /m e ) 1/2 is the plasma frequency, for n e the number density of electrons; k F is the Fermi momentum; v F = k F /m e is the Fermi velocity; and Q ± = q/(2k F ) ± ω/(qv F ). The Lindhard dielectric function exhibits a resonance at the plasma frequency ω p . In the form above, this resonance is present but infinitely narrow. A non-zero width is obtained under the replacement ω → ω + i/τ , where the excitation lifetime τ can be fitted to experimental data. Such a width may enhance the loss function at deposits very far from the peak of the resonance Each nanowire contains layers of Si and SiO 2 in addition to WSi. While these layers do not enter into the scattering rate of Eq. (A1), they do play a role in the thinlayer effects discussed below. The dielectric function of Si can be approximated using the Lindhard model with E F = 18.9 eV, which originates from a phenomenological fit The loss function formalism can also be used to predict absorption rates. For absorption, we consider a fiducial theory of a dark photon A μ , with field strength F μν ≡ ∂ μ A ν -∂ ν A μ , kinetically mixed with the Standard Model photon. That is, we assume a Lagrangian of the form The absorption rate per unit volume can then be written as where m χ is the DM mass and p χ is the momentum of the incoming DM particle. The kinetic mixing parameter κ is the quantity that we bound in our experiment (see Fig. 0 and with parameter values v 0 = 220 km/s, v E = 232 km/s, and v esc = 550 km/s. However, to compute the bulk interaction rate on equal footing with the thin-layer interaction rate, we modify this approach slightly. The thin-layer rate depends not only on the DM speed, but on the direction of v χ with respect to the plane of the layer. Therefore, following Ref. We use this distribution for both the bulk and thin-layer rate computations. for thin layers, the dielectric response of the detector is different from that of a bulk sample of material. In particular, the relationship between the scattering rate and the dielectric function is modified: W[ ] is replaced by a new response function V[ ]. This can significantly influence the DM interaction rate. This thin-layer response function can still be measured experimentally, but in the absence of experimental data, it is also possible to predict V[ ] given a model for the dielectric function . These effects are newly explored in Ref. [68] derives a function R[ ] such that V = 1 d Re(R), where d is the thickness of the detector layer (WSi in our prototype), and shows that the scattering rate per unit volume is exactly as given in Eq. (A1) with the replacement W → V. The response function V is determined by solving the Poisson equation subject to the appropriate boundary conditions for a perturbing source with charge density ρ = ρ 0 e i(q•x-ωt) and evaluating the timeaveraged power deposited in each layer. Schematically, one makes the ansatz φ = ψ(z)e i(q•x-ωt) , where z is the coordinate normal to the layers. Then the Poisson equation reduces to an equation for ψ(z), with the form After imposing the appropriate boundary conditions and solving for ψ, the thin-layer loss function can be written as Note that the integral in Eq. (B2) is taken over all space, and the integrand has support outside the detector layer. For a layer of thickness d q, the resonance at the plasma frequency is suppressed compared to the bulk loss function. However, the thin-layer loss function exhibits a second resonance at smaller deposits, at ω ∼ (qd/2) 1/2 ω p , in the most important kinematic regime for light DM scattering. Thus, the DM scattering rate per unit volume for a thin layer can be enhanced significantly with respect to a bulk detector. Like the loss function W, the thin-layer response function V is measurable for a particular target system. One can make a first estimate of the geometric enhancements to absorption by assuming that the relationship between absorption and scattering is preserved, i.e., that the bulk response function W in Eq. (A5) can also be replaced with the thin-layer response function V. An estimate carried out in this manner suggests that the absorption rate can be enhanced by one or two orders of magnitude in some regimes. However, Eq. (B2) is derived under the assumption that the momentum transfer q is much larger than the deposited energy ω, which is not the case for absorption. Thus, we do not show thinlayer curves in Fig. In the absence of experimental data, we use the calculation of Ref. However, in our prototype, dissipation in the other layers is in fact non-negligible. Preliminary experimental results suggest that a deposit in another layer must be above the threshold by a factor of O(100) in order to reliably trigger the SNSPD, and understanding the effective available detector volume as a function of the deposited energy requires more detailed laboratory characterization. We thus show an additional conservative benchmark (dotted curves in Fig. Loss function formalismIn the traditional approach, the DM scattering rate is computed from the microphysical scattering cross section between a DM particle and a single free electron. However, in the relevant range of energy and momentum transfers, electrons in detectors are generally not free. This is simultaneously an advantage and a difficulty for electron recoil experiments: on the one hand, DM scattering can induce transitions between electronic eigen-