An outstanding hurdle for defect spin qubits in silicon carbide (SiC) is single-shot readout-a deterministic measurement of the quantum state. Here, we demonstrate single-shot readout of single defects in SiC via spin-to-charge conversion, whereby the defect's spin state is mapped onto a long-lived charge state. With this technique, we achieve over 80% readout fidelity without preor post-selection, resulting in a high signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) that enables us to measure long spin coherence times. Combined with pulsed dynamical decoupling sequences in an isotopically purified host material, we report single-spin T2>5 s, over two orders of magnitude greater than previously reported in this system. The mapping of these coherent spin states onto single charges unlocks both single-shot readout for scalable quantum nodes and opportunities for electrical readout via integration with semiconductor devices. Solid-state defect spins hold promise for use in quantum information processing, sensing, and communication because of their unique combination of long coherence times Typically, for optically-active defects spins, single-shot readout is performed through spindependent fluorescence probed with narrow-line lasers resonant with the defect's optical cycling transitions Another avenue towards single-shot readout is spin-to-charge conversion (SCC), which maps the defect spin state onto a robust, long-lived charge state. For isolated single defect spins, SCC is an all-optical technique that has been used to achieve high-fidelity single-shot readout, but has thus far been limited to demonstrations using the NV -center in diamond The high-fidelity and single-shot readout provided by the SCC technique enable us to perform experiments that otherwise would be infeasible due to low SNR, such as when the time per experimental 'shot' becomes prohibitively long. With this advantage, we employ the SCC technique to probe the unexplored limits of the spin lifetime and coherence time for VV 0 . These times fundamentally determine the divacancy's performance in future quantum architectures by limiting metrics such as quantum memory times and sensitivity for ac sensing schemes The results presented in this work develop SiC-based systems as a promising platform for quantum technologies, where both deterministic readout of the spin state and long coherence times are necessary for heralded entanglement generation, high gate fidelities, and the development of network components such as quantum repeaters. This work also opens avenues that utilize the CMOS compatibility of SiC for the integration of electron spin-based systems in classical electrical devices that are sensitive to single charges. The neutral divacancy in 4H-SiC is a deep-level defect consisting of a carbon and silicon vacancy pair. The dangling bonds from atoms neighboring these vacancies form a spin-triplet ground state As an alternative to readout via the spin-photon interface, the divacancy hosts robust charge states Mapping of the spin state onto the charge state (SCC) via a spin-selective two-photon ionization process provides us with an avenue towards performing high-fidelity, deterministic measurement of the spin state via readout of the charge state. Here, we access the defect's excited state in a onephoton, spin-selective manner using a narrow-line laser tuned to one of the resolved optical transitions (Fig. Once we have spin-selectively mapped the spin onto the defect's charge state with the SCC step, we can then perform single-shot readout of the charge state by addressing the defect with both Ex and E1,2 resonant light and collecting PL (Fig. We first demonstrate the robustness of the divacancy charge state and our ability to perform singleshot, high-fidelity optical readout of this state. We characterize the longevity of the VV 0 charge state with a sequence consisting of a 705 nm charge initialization pulse, a variable delay, and an optical charge readout from which we extract a charge lifetime τch =6.9±0.9 s (Fig. We next demonstrate our ability to perform single-shot readout of the charge state. First, we either charge-initialize to the bright state using a long, 705 nm laser pulse or spin-agnostically initialize to the dark state using an 'ionization pulse' where both Ex and E1,2 resonant lasers and the 1151 nm ionization laser are simultaneously turned on. This preparation into either the bright or dark charge state is followed by optical charge readout. Fig. Having established our ability to perform high-fidelity single-shot readout of the charge state, we next characterize the various charge transition processes induced by the lasers used in our experiments. We first characterize the rate at which we initialize the divacancy to the neutral state with the 705 nm charge repump laser. After preparing the defect in the dark charge state, a timevarying charge initialization pulse is applied to reset the defect to the neutral, bright state. Using a charge readout, we measure the recovery rate of the bright state as a function of the 705 nm laser power (Fig. We next characterize the ionization rate solely from the resonant lasers and ionization laser, respectively, by initializing into the bright state and measuring the charge state after a variable length laser pulse. The exponentially-fit ionization rates for various powers of the resonant lasers are displayed in Fig. Finally, we characterize our ability to ionize the defect once it is in its optical excited state, which is the prerequisite for spin-dependent ionization. After charge initializing to the bright state, we spin-agnostically ionize the defect using a variable length pulse where both the Ex and E1,2 resonant lasers and the 1151 nm ionization laser are on at the same time. For these experiments, the resonant power is kept such that the defect optical transition is saturated. The decay rate of the signal from charge readout is displayed for various ionization powers in Fig. Given that we can perform high-fidelity, single-shot readout of the divacancy charge state, and that we can ionize the defect with a combination of resonant and red-detuned laser light, we can selectively map the divacancy spin state onto its charge state to achieve single-shot readout of the spin state. Specifically, after charge initialization to VV 0 and spin initialization to , we spinselectively photo-ionize the state to VV -by simultaneous excitation of the Ex optical transition ( character) while applying the 1151 nm ionization laser. The defect can be protected from this spin-selective ionization by rotating into via the application of a microwave pulse so that the laser no longer optically excites it. Thus, a spin initialized to does not undergo ionization and remains in VV 0 , forming the basis of spin contrast for the SCC process. Importantly, SCC is performed using the Ex transition due to its high cyclicity, which increases the number of times the excited state can be populated before a spin-flip occurs. Spinflips cause destruction of the spin state After SCC, we perform single-shot readout of the charge state. The charge readout signal for states prepared to and as the SCC pulse duration is swept is shown in Fig. We next characterize the end-to-end fidelity of the combined initialization, SCC, and readout process by examining the resulting single-shot photon number distribution. Fig. Importantly, we find that the simple ratio of the ionization cross section from the excited state to the stimulated emission cross section (σσ ff /σσ ss ) determines the resulting fidelity of SCC, where larger ratios are desirable. We directly calculate this metric with DFT, which indicates that the ratio is only optimal for a narrow energy window below the ZPL energy and above the energy of the first vibronic peak in the emission sideband (Fig. Having demonstrated the ability to spin-selectively ionize the defect, we take advantage of the single-shot readout afforded by the SCC technique and perform measurements that reveal the exceptionally long spin coherence time of the defect's spin state. We first perform T1 relaxation measurements using SCC readout (Fig. The dependence of coherence (T2) with pulse number (N) (Fig. The all-optical spin-to-charge conversion technique demonstrated here can be extended to other emitters where single-shot readout is needed Looking forward, use of auxiliary microwave drives Integration of SCC with the optical tuning capabilities offered by SiC devices, such as p-i-n diodes Experimental details Measurements are performed at T = 5 K in closed-cycle Montana Cryostat with a 0.85 NA nearinfrared objective. All measurements are performed at low field of around ~18 Gauss on a single hh divacancy in 4H-SiC. We use two Toptica DLC PRO lasers for narrow-line laser control of the defects. The 1151 nm ionization laser is a QPhotonics QFLD-1160-300S temperature tunable laser diode. PL is detected with a Quantum Opus superconducting nanowire single photon detector. Photon counting and time tagging experiments use a PicoQuant Picoharp 300 Time-Correlated Single Photon Counting (TCSPC) system. Spin initialization is achieved by pumping on the E1,2 transitions, while the Ex transition serves as the cycling transition for readout and spin-to-charge conversion. When performing SCC, to mitigate the effects of this non-selective ionization, we saturate the defect with resonant laser excitation to maximize the chances of desirable spinselective ionization during the SCC step before a charge conversion error occurs. Additionally, for subsequent experiments we utilize the highest possible ionization laser power of 71 mW to increase the likelihood of ionization during the SCC step. Driving of transitions between the and spin sublevels is performed using 1.357 GHz microwaves applied through Ti/Au striplines patterned on the sample surface. Microwave extinction and filtering is an important parameter to increase coherence and lifetime. We use a 800 MHz highpass filter after amplification, and switch the microwave pulses on and off with a ZASWA-2-50DR+ both before and after amplification. Further extinction is achieved utilizing the IQ modulation of the source, which also provides phase control of the microwave pulses. We use this phase control to perform the XY-8 pulse sequences for dynamical decoupling which reduces sensitivity to pulse imperfections and drift. For all spin control experiments, we use π pulses with a length of approximately 1-2 μs. We stop our experiments at pulse number N=16384 for CPMG due to compounding pulse infidelity that reduces contrast and because our measured coherence approaches the charge lifetime for this defect. In Fig. The sample consists of epitaxial 4H-SiC grown by chemical vapor deposition on a 4° off-axis ntype 4H-SiC. The layer thickness is ~90 μm, and uses isotopically purified Si and C precursor gasses as in reference 