In a water-air optical wireless communication (OWC) channel, dynamic ocean waves may significantly deflect the light beam from its original direction, thus deteriorating the communication performance. In this letter, a beam tracking system to mitigate wave-induced communication degradation is experimentally demonstrated. By employing the beam tracking on the PAM6 system, a maximum of 486% improvement (from 140 Mb/s to 820 Mb/s) in throughput is realized at a 1.2-m air distance for an average wave slope changing rate of 0.34 rad/s. For PAM4 signals, the packet loss rate reduces significantly from 75% to 11%, and a maximum throughput of 1.25 Gb/s is achieved. HE underwater exploration for ocean resource excavation and marine ecological system monitoring has intensified, leading to the proliferation of underwater vehicles and sensors Beam tracking has also been investigated for indoor OWC to direct a narrow collimated beam from the transmitter to the mobile receiver. A widely used method is using a light-emitting diode (LED) array as a tag for recognition and a camera or image sensor for target positioning. A tracking system was designed and implemented for a 50-Gb/s indoor link with a localization accuracy of 0.05° The beam tracking schemes for wave mitigation have not been investigated. The wave-induced dynamic change of light spot location at the receiver plane is rapid and random, requiring higher-speed and more accurate tracking. In When a light beam propagates through the water-air interface, the light spot position on the receiver varies with the change of the wave slope, resulting in a time-varying offset from the detector, as shown in Fig. When light passes through the water-air interface, the light refraction angle β can be calculated by the incidence angle α using Snell's law sin ( ) sin ( ), where (t)=(t). Then, the light spot displacement d induced by refraction can be derived from α, β and the height h from the water surface to the receiver: ( ) Since α and β only depend on the wave slope angle , the offset d can be expressed as a function of  for a constant h. The required tracking speed depends on the light spot drift velocity, d ′ (t), where () ′ denotes the differential operator. To capture the key wave characteristic that affects the tracking, we use the time average of the wave slope changing rate (ASCR), which is ASCR ≜ |γ ′ (t)| ̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅ . We will study the dependence of tracking performance with respect to the ASCR in the following experiment. The schematic of the beam tracking system based on microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) mirror is illustrated in Fig. When the light beam passes through the wavy water surface, it will be refracted, resulting in a light spot offset at the receiver and the CCR. After being reflected by the CCR, the light is antiparallel to the incident light with some spacing. Thus, the beam will fall on a point away from the center of the PD array at the transmitter side, and the offset serves as a feedback signal for a microcontroller unit (MCU) to control the MEMS mirror tilting angle for correction. To ensure that the light spot will fall on the center of CCR and PD array simultaneously, the PD array and the MEMS mirror are placed at an equal distance from the BS such that AB ̅̅̅̅ = BD ̅̅̅̅ , as shown in Fig. After the analog to digital converter (ADC) samples the light intensity captured by the PD array, the tracking process will be triggered if the center PD's light intensity is weaker than a threshold a, indicating that the light spot has deviated from the center. A higher threshold means the tracking system is more sensitive to the light spot offset, and the tracking process will be activated earlier. However, it may lead to unintended MEMS mirror adjustment caused by the ambient light fluctuation. Once the tracking process is triggered, the beam offset information can be deduced by locating the PD with the maximum intensity. Suppose the maximum light intensity is larger than a threshold b. Then, the MEMS mirror will keep tilting at a specific angle until the light beam is back to the centers of the PD array and the receiver PD, simultaneously. Otherwise, the light spot is assumed lost if the maximum light intensity is less than b for five consecutive measurements. The MEMS mirror will return to the initial point and wait until the PD array recaptures the light spot when the wave slope is back to near 0. Both a and b should be optimized based on the intensity of the light spot and ambient light. The experimental setup of the water-air OWC system with beam tracking is shown in Fig. The original electrical signals are generated from an arbitrary waveform generator (AWG) and amplified by an electrical amplifier (EA) of 12-dB gain. The amplified signal, combined with a direct current (DC) bias, is applied to a blue LD (Osram PL450B, 80mW). After being concentrated by a lens, the light is reflected by the MEMS mirror (Mirrorcle, A8L2.2-4600AL-TINY48.4-A/TP), with a diameter of 4.6-mm. The MEMS mirror's tilting angle is controlled by a 16-bit DAC, and the maximum angle is around ±5 degrees for both x-and y-axis. After passing through the water-air channel, the light is divided by a BS with a 50:50 splitting ratio. Half of the light is detected by a 1-GHz avalanche photodiode (APD, Hamamatsu, C5658). The other light beam is reflected by a CCR (Thorlabs, HRR201-P0) to the PD array at the transmitter side. The spacing of two adjacent PD on the PD array is 5 mm. The beam size is set around 7 mm, slightly larger than the PD separation distance to ensure at least one PD can detect the light spot. The detected signal is then recorded by a digital storage oscilloscope (DSO) for further offline digital signal processing. Two hundred packets, each contains 400K symbols, are collected for analysis under different experimental conditions. The normalized intensity of the received optical signal and the light spot displacement trace, with and without the beam tracking, are depicted in Fig. Next, we investigate the average bit error rate (BER) and packet loss rate (PLR) performance for different data rates and air-path distance with OOK and PAM4 signals, as shown in Fig. We then investigate the BER and PLR performance under different wave ASCR for OOK, PAM4, and PAM6 modulation formats. It is shown that at all ASCR, the measured BER and PLR with beam tracking are lower than that without beam tracking, confirming the effectiveness of the proposed tracking scheme. The larger the ASCR, the higher the BER and PLR. For the system without tracking, the main reason is the larger beam offset. Whereas for the system with tracking, it is mainly due to the limited tracking speed to match the larger ASCR. At last, the overall throughputs for different modulation schemes and symbol rates are estimated, as shown in Fig. In summary, we have proposed and experimentally demonstrated the first beam tracking system to mitigate the wave-induced water-air OWC performance degradation. The effects of symbol rate, modulation format, ASCR, and air-path height are investigated and compared for the OWC system with and without beam tracking. With a 1.2-m air path, the proposed scheme provides a maximum throughput improvement of 486% for PAM6 signals and achieves a maximum throughput of 1.25 Gb/s for PAM4 signals. The wave ASCR determines the required response rate of the tracking system. Albeit the tracking speed limits the performance at a larger ASCR, beam tracking still provides more than 30% reduction in PLR, showing the effectiveness of the proposed scheme in combatting the wave-induced impairment. As the nonlinear relationship between the MEMS mirror tilting angle and the light spot offset, nonlinear control may be applied to attain better beam tracking. This tracking system is also applicable for underwater wireless networks to establish a robust optical link between mobile devices. Yujie Di, Yingjie Shao, Student Member, IEEE, and Lian-Kuan Chen, Senior Member, IEEE Real-Time Wave Mitigation for Water-Air OWC Systems Via Beam Tracking