4D printing empowers 3D printed structures made of hydrogels, liquid crystals or shape memory polymers, with reversible morphing capabilities in response to an external stimulus. To apply reversible shape-change to stiff lightweight materials such as microfiber reinforced polymers, we developed a composite ink that can be printed using direct-ink-writing (DIW), and that exhibits multistability around its glass transition temperature. After curing at room temperature, the flat print thermally morphs into a predefined shape upon heating at an actuation temperature and cooling down. The sample can then reversibly snap between multiple stable shapes when heated above its glass transition temperature thanks to prestress-induced 2 multistability. The key that allows thermal morphing and prestress multistability is the microstructuring of the 3D printed composites by shear-induced alignment of reinforcing microfibers. This alignment leads to local anisotropy in thermomechanical properties and the build-up of prestresses. Furthermore, the ink composition can be tuned to generate shapedependant reversible functional properties, such as electrical conductivity. Based on finite element modelling and experimental results, the method proposed here can be used for variety of compositions and designs, for applications where stiffness, reconfigurability and shapedependent functionalities can be exploited. 3D printing (3DP) is operating a paradigm shift in the way we fabricate materials and structures One interesting aspect of 3DP is the automated design capabilities where composition and architecture can be tuned locally within a macroscopic object. Going beyond 3DP, 4D printing (4DP) adds the dimension of time and endows synthetic materials with shape-adaptability in response to external stimuli such as moisture, heat, light, or pH Successful approaches to achieving on-demand reversible bending or twisting in structures made of stiff reinforced materials exploit electrical actuation Multistable composites have been used for robotic systems After unmoulding, those internal stresses stored between the two layers were released and led to the deformation of the bilayer into a curved and bistable shell. This approach has been used to realize diverse functionalities into the material by optimizing the mixture composition and the composite microstructure. For example, using a combination of nickel flakes and aluminum oxide microplatelets coated with iron oxide, bistable shells with electrical conductivity and magnetic properties have been made Recently, reversible morphing in 3D printed specimens of high stiffness has been realized using fused deposition modeling (FDM) Adapting this strategy to thermosets and composites that have no shape memory properties would broaden the range of applications of 3D printed multifunctional stiff structures that exhibit programmable and reversible morphing. In this paper, we thus developed a composite ink system to yield a stiff epoxy reinforced by structural and functional particles, namely glass microfibers (GF), carbon nanotubes (CNTs) and carbon black (CB). This composition conferred the 3D printed parts strong mechanical properties and electrical conductivity. Direct-ink-writing (DIW), a printing method based on the extrusion of a viscous ink through a nozzle, was used for 3DP The epoxy resin system (MS casting 1000 resin and MA casting 1000 hardener) was supplied by Weicon South East Asia Pte Ltd, Singapore, the CNTs (MWCNTs, Graphistrength C100) by Arkema, France, the milled glass fibers (E-glass, average length and diameter of 80-120 μm and 12-13 μm, respectively) by Nippon Electricals, Japan, and the carbon black (Printex, XE 2-B) by Degussa Gmbh, Germany. All materials were used as received. From the supplier MSDS, the epoxy curing is recommended to be carried out at an ambient temperature of 20°C. The cured resin is said to attain 90% of its maximum strength after 6 hours and maximum strength by 36 hours. Resin, GF, CNTs and CB were first mixed using an overhead stirrer (Caframo Lab solutions) at 350 rpm for 10 min followed by 250 rpm for 5 min before being degassed in a vacuum chamber (Binder VD 53, Fischer Scientific Pte Ltd, Singapore). Before printing, the hardener was added to the mixture at a resin to hardener ratio of 100:20. To covert the wt% of CB and CNTs into vol%, a density of 2 g.cm -3 was assumed. The shear profiles of the inks were measured directly after their preparation using a rheometer (Bohlin Gemini II, Germany) with a cone-plate set-up. The inks were printed using a modified version of 3D Potterbot Micro8, from 3D Potter, USA. A fixture was printed in polylactic acid using a fused deposition printer (Prusa, USA) to receive small cartridges of 5 mL (Optimum syringe barrels 7012094, Nordson EFD) to which a printing nozzle of 0.45 mm diameter (Metcal 920125-DHUV) was screwed (see SI Figure The stiffness and coefficient of thermal expansion of the 3D printed samples were determined using dynamical mechanical analysis (Q-800, Texas Instrument). To obtain the material properties parallel and perpendicular to the printing direction, single-layered samples with dimensions of 10-20-0.45 mm 3 and 3D printed filament alignments of 0° and 90° were printed for these measurements. After curing for 48 hours, the samples were mounted onto a tensile stage. For the determination of the Young's moduli at different temperatures, the samples were first heated at selected temperatures of 25°C, 90°C, 120°C, 140°C and 160°C for 15 minutes before the stress-strain curves were recorded in isothermal conditions with a ramp force of 1 N.min -1 up to 17 N. The coefficients of thermal expansion were determined on similar samples under a heating rate of 5 °C.min -1 from room temperature to 160 °C using an optical dilatometer (TA instruments ODP 868). All tests were repeated on independent samples at least 5 times. Thermogravimetric analysis (TA Q500) and differential scanning calorimetry (TA Q200) were performed to study the samples' thermal stability and Tg. The local electrical conductivity of the composites was measured using a 2-points probe portable device (DT-9205A, NT) with a constant probe spacing d of 1 mm. At least five measurements were averaged for each point. The conductivity was calculated using σ = d R•t•l with σ the conductivity (S.mm -1 ), t the thickness of the sample, l the width of the electrode of 0.250 mm and R the measured resistance in MOhms. The colour maps were plotted using Matlab. All electrical measurements were performed at room temperature. A 4-point probe method could not be used due to the curvature of the samples, making consistent measurements with a 4-probe setup impractical. The microstructure of the printed materials was investigated using scanning electron microscopy (SEM) after gold coating (JSM-7600F, JEOL, Japan). Fiber alignment was determined by calculating the roundness of the cross-section of the glass fibers from the SEM images using ImageJ (NIH, USA) and Matlab. This roundness was calculated as , where d 1,GF and d 2,GF are the lengths of the principal axes of the glass fibers cross-sections. Similarly, the roundness of the filaments was determined using ImageJ and calculated using , with d 1 and d 2 are the principal axes of the extruded filaments. Printed bilayers were placed on a flat ceramic plate and heated in an oven from room temperature to a selected activation temperature. The samples were kept at the activation temperature for approximately 10 mins to ensure that the stresses were released. In relaxed state, the samples became flat against the ceramic plate. The heating was then switched off and the samples were left to cool back to room temperature. After cooling, the samples were imaged using a standard camera and their curvatures measured using ImageJ. The heating and cooling generated a curvature in the samples and triggered differential pre-stress and bistability as explained in Section 3.4. To observe bistability at high temperature, the samples were placed in a hot water bath at a controlled temperature of 95 °C and the change of shape between the 2 stable states was manually triggered using plastic tweezers to provide an input force. At least 3 samples of each design were fabricated and characterized for repeatability. The samples were modelled in Abaqus 2020 using linear elastic material properties and geometric nonlinear analysis. A structured mesh composed of quadrilateral S4R shell elements was used for each structure. The experimentally measured initial dimensions and material properties as measured in Section 2.4, according to the relevant temperature (See Table To obtain an ink that can be printed using DIW and that yields strong mechanical properties and electrical conductivity, we chose a composite system consisting of a liquid resin reinforced with structural and functional microfibers and nanoparticles. To solve the antagonistic requirements between extrudability that demands good flowability, and strong mechanical properties that needs a high concentration of reinforcement, we selected an epoxy system with a low viscosity of 1.3 Pa.s under elevated shear strain rates in the shear-thinning regime (see Supplementary Information (SI) Figure The optimal concentration of GF to add to the composite ink was selected based on the ink's rheological properties, namely shear-thinning and shape-retention capabilities. Increasing the volume fraction in GF from 35 to 50%, all the ink compositions exhibited shear-thinning (Figure where η is the viscosity, τ the shear stress, γ̇ the shear strain, k the flow consistency index, and τ 0 a constant The shape-retention of extruded filaments was determined by measuring their roundness O after curing (Figure alignment at the center of the filament is representative of the alignment within the entire filament. We found that concentrations in GF ≥ 50% led to the formation of aggregates, whereas concentrations ≤ 40% led to poor filament roundness and poor fiber orientations. We measured the viscoelastic properties of the ink such as the storage and loss modulus to confirm these findings (Figure The 3D printing of the composite ink was carried out on a extrusion printer able to apply extrusion speeds ranging between 35 to 60 mm.s -1 , typically higher than most common directink-writers In view of 3DP composites with morphing capabilities, we printed bilayer structures with perpendicular directions of reinforcement Thanks to the microstructure input in the 3DP bilayer, the printed composites exhibited controlled morphing after actuation at an elevated temperature above its glass transition temperature (Figure We demonstrated similar deflection in our 3DP materials by heating a flat printed [0/90] layup at increasing temperatures. The morphing capability could be directly observed through the glass door of the convection oven (see SI Figure Contrary to other morphing materials used for 3DP, the deformation does not result from intrinsic shape memory characteristics of the matrix or reorganisation of nanocrystals during phase transitions, but solely on the microstructure. Similar strategy has been applied to hydrogels but the deformation was induced by moisture and the materials exhibited weak mechanical properties 3D printing of structures with encoded shape change is referred to as 4DP, as the structures are programmed to change over the fourth dimension of time in response to an external stimulus. This basic property of programmed shape change is demonstrated in Section 3.3 via thermal morphing. However, reversible shape change is more difficult to achieve. Stiff reinforced composites such as those 3D printed here, cannot reversibly change shape, in contrast to 4D printed hydrogels or smart materials Typically, internal pre-stresses depend on the microstructure, orthotropic properties and macroscopic geometry and can be thermally induced. By cooling the structures from an elevated temperature, as shown in Section 3.3, we encode contrasting pre-stress fields in each layer. This thermal activation process at a high temperature up to 200 °C is only required to be performed once on each sample. The shape after cooling corresponds to one stable state. However, one challenge faced with reinforced epoxies is their high stiffness: although they can develop large curvatures during heating and cooling, deformation at room temperature cannot be achieved without fracture. To allow for sufficient deformability to snap between stable states, the modulus thus needs to be significantly decreased. A convenient way to realize this is by manipulating the samples around their glass transition temperature, T g . The matrix used in this paper had a T g of 55 °C. After addition of the fillers, the composite's T g raised to 70 °C (see SI Figure This improved compliance allows the structures to undergo the high strains necessary for snapthrough without fracture. Since the pre-stress was encoded using cooling from a much higher temperature, it is retained in the structure and enables the presence of multiple stable states. When cooled back below T g , the structures return to being stiff and monostable. To demonstrate the high temperature multistability as well as distributed reinforcement schemes realizable with 3DP, a cross with local [0/90] layups was modelled in FEA and 3DP (Figure However, in the experimental model and as anticipated from the symmetry of the cross, the curvatures for branches 1 and 3 were similar, but different from the branches 2 and 4. In FEA, this difference is explained by the boundary interaction between the center of the cross with the [0/0] layup and the differently oriented unsymmetric layups of the branches. In the experiment, interfilament gaps and defects are thought to be responsible for the larger morphing of branches 1 and 2. Indeed, branches 1 and 2 had visible defects between the printed filaments, whereas branches 3 and 4 showed better filament packing (see SI Figure Furthermore, reversibility between the stable states could be repeated for at least 50 cycles in our samples while maintaining the sample at the desired temperature (Figure In addition to being stiff and able to morph, the composites were also lightweight with a density of 1.8 ± 0.2 g.cm -3 and electrically conductive. The ink composition used here was indeed designed to show electrical conductivity (see discussion in SI and Figure It is therefore possible to design not only the 3D shapes, but also the local conductivity (Figure with C a constant equal to 3.55 • 10 -6 and t the percolation exponent equal to 1.232. An increase of 0.1 vol% from φ cond would thus lead to an increase of 0.24 • 10 -6 S.mm -1 and a decrease of 0.1 vol% to a decrease of 0.31• 10 -6 S.mm -1 . The composites will show thus a higher sensitivity upon stretching than compression. To confirm this, we measured the conductivity on the top of a cured 3D printed unidirectional layer bent manually at room temperature to achieve different curvatures (Figure The variation of the conductivity with the fibre alignment and the curvature could be exploited further for morphing-induced conductivity. This is an additional functionality that has potential interest for computational sensing where a material is able to sense, compute, and actuate, intrinsically. An example of a simple 3DP pressure sensor is presented in SI Movie S3. Although each branch of the cross exhibited a specific electrical conductivity according to its stable state and fiber orientation (Figure However, this could be easily circumvented if an application requires higher conductivity, by replacing the multiwall CNTs with electrically superior single-walled CNTs, or replacing part of the milled glass fibers with conductive milled carbon fibers instead. In this paper, we have shown that stiff microfibre reinforced 3D printed composites can exhibit multistability, a type of reversible morphing, independently of any shape memory properties. Indeed, we exploited the capability of direct-ink-writing to align reinforcing microfibers through shear to build local microstructures. 3D printed thin bilayers with global or local perpendicular directions of fibre alignment could morph at temperatures above the glass transition temperature of the matrix. Using microstructural designs that encode directional, mismatched pre-stress, we establish a manufacturing process yielding bistable behaviour above T g , thereby enabling reversible shape morphing between encoded states in thermoset polymers. Tuning the composition to input electrical properties, the 3D printed materials are stiff, lightweight, multistable upon heating, and with a shape-dependant electrical conductivity. The microstructuring strategy exploited in this paper recalls bio-inspired approaches to functionalize artificial materials and to combine antagonistic properties 