We analyze dynamics of the order parameter in superconductor open nanotubes under a strong transport current in an external homogeneous magnetic field using the time-dependent Ginzburg-Landau equation. Near the critical transport current, the dissipation processes are driven by vortex and phase-slip dynamics. A transition between the vortex and phase-slip regimes is found to depend on the external magnetic field only weakly if the magnetic field and/or transport current are switched on gradually. In the case of an abrupt switch-on of the magnetic field or transport current, the system can be triggered to the stable phase-slip regime within a certain window of parameters. Finally, a hysteresis effect in the current-voltage characteristics is predicted in superconductor open nanotubes. Topological objects are indestructible by smooth transformations, and thus their stability is protected by topological considerations Encircling the vortex core over an arbitrary path gives a phase change 2πn quantized by an integer winding number n ∈ Z. The concept of the phase slippage was introduced for the resistive state of the narrow quasi-1D superconductor filaments in Ref. Quantum phase slip in a 2D superconductor has been recently found through magnetotransport measurements Bose-Einstein condensate in a 3D optical lattice provides an experimental evidence for the temperature-independent dissipation If the transport current is strong enough, the energy barrier, which binds the vortexantivortex pair, can be overcome, and thermally induced resistivity should be dominant. In an external magnetic field, vortices move due to the Magnus force induced by transport current Novel superconducting nanostructured microarchitectures, e.g., open nanotubes A planar nanostructure with a region of suppressed superconductivity contains one or a few chains of vortices moving in the same direction, while in a nanotube with phase-slip, there are nucleating and annihilating vortex-antivortex pairs moving towards each other. The transition between Abrikosov-Josephson vortex and phase-slip regimes was reported in Josephson junction depending on the junction length and transport current The hysteresis effects in superconductor magnetization resulting from the surface currents, flux pinning and existence of different phases are well known In the present paper, we push forward the idea of Ref. Sec. II represents the model based on the TDGL equations. In Sec. III, the induced voltage is shown to increase mainly monotonically with j tr and B if they are switched on gradually. In Sec. IV, it is demonstrated that the abrupt transport current switch-on can cause a transition to the stable phase-slip regime, which is characterized by a higher induced voltage, than the vortex regime. In Sec. V, a similar effect for the abrupt magnetic field switch-on is found. In Sec. VI, we investigate the hysteresis effect in current-voltage characteristics due to the stability of different regimes (particularly, phase-slip and vortex regimes). Sec. VII contains discussions of the obtained results and outlines their potential application. A physical model consists of a cylinder of a small finite thickness d with a small paraxial slit (Fig. We consider further an infinitely thin cylinder D of radius R, length L with a slit of an arclength δ. The cylinder allows for a parametrization in two Cartesian coordinates: the arc-length x ∈ [δ/2, 2πRδ/2] and the length along the cylinder y ∈ [0, L]. Such a cylinder can be bent from a flat membrane with a width W = 2πRδ. The cylinder is placed in a homogeneous magnetic field B = Be z . The magnetic field component tangent to the cylinder surface does not influence superconducting dynamics, and only the normal component B n = (B • n) (with a unit vector n normal to the cylinder surface) should be taken into consideration. Following Ref. where t is time, the vector potential A describes the magnetic field normal to the cylinder surface B n n = [∇ × A], the scalar potential φ describes the electric field E = -∇φ, and the complex scalar field ψ is the order parameter. From the continuity equation of the total current density (superconducting + normal) ∇ • (j sc + j n ) = 0, the Poisson equation for the where σ is a normal conductivity. Absence of the induced magnetization in our model allows us to exclude κ from the GL and Poisson equations (and the corresponding boundary conditions) through the following transformations: x → x/κ, φ → φ/κ, B → κB. However, we will keep κ in our equations for the sake of convenience, but one should remember that all results are fair for other systems meeting the aforementioned conditions of the model applicability, which can be obtained by the above transformations. The boundary conditions for GL equation have the form where b → ∞ corresponds to an insulator, b approaches 0 for a magnetic material, and normal metals have a finite b. For our purposes, we assume that b → ∞ at free boundaries and b = 0 at the contacts The transport current density j tr is introduced through the boundary conditions on the scalar potential Integration schemes that are not gauge invariant may introduce large errors in numerical simulations. To avoid this issue, we use the link variables For the purposes of the numerical methods, the integral for the link between two points of the grid can be approximated via a middle-point value When solving the Poisson equation, we consider that the speed of light is much higher than the speed of any other processes related to the order parameter dynamics, such as the speed of instead of the middle-point value. Finally, to get the finite-difference scheme, the following rules 2 (2.9) and similar rules for y, t are used. In order to construct an explicit numerical scheme, we use approximations (2.9) and solve GL equation (2.1) with respect to the next time step where F is the right-hand side of Eq. (2.1) approximated through the link variables. The voltage between the contacts is estimated as an averaged difference of the scalar potentials starting from some time T 0 during an interval ∆T , which is much larger than any characteristic time of the quasi-periodic stationary processes in the system, such as vortex nucleation period and its time of flight through the cylinder. For the numerical calculations, we exploit the finite-difference method with a grid containing 192×384 points and a step ∆t = 0.03 ps. A set of calculations performed with a finer grid and a shorter time step guarantees that the result is stable with using the link variables. The process is considered stationary and stable, if the system demonstrates a quasi-periodic behavior (in terms of free energy, voltage and visually for patterns of |ψ|, argψ and potential) for the time much longer than the characteristic time of the processes mentioned in the previous paragraph. We solve the Poisson equation using the iterative method after each step of the numerical iteration for the order parameter. Stopping criterion for the iterative solver is the smallness of In addition, the solver performs at least 10 iterations even if the stopping criterion has already been satisfied. In order to optimize the calculations, we choose ε < 0.02 since a further increase of the precision does not change the result quantitatively. We use the previous solution for φ as a seed solution for the next time step to accelerate the calculations. The iterative method for the Poisson equation works similarly to the iterative method for the heat equation, so the residual blurs out in the numerical solution with each iteration. As a result, if the boundary conditions are changed, one should perform as many iterations as is required to spread numerical corrections from one side of the grid to the opposite one. In this case, the number of the required iterations should be of the order of the number of the grid points (∼ 200). Since this number is very big, we make use of the standard methods of the partial differential equations to simplify the problem analytically (similarly to Ref. ) The first part φ dl represents the normal non-divergent current density, and the second part φ ind can be associated with a potential induced by the superconducting current density. The sum of these terms φ = φ dl + φ ind gives the solution for the original equation with its boundary conditions. The analytical expression for the first part is and the only remaining part to be calculated numerically is φ ind . The numerical algorithm is implemented in CUDA C++ One can naïvely expect that the voltage between contacts of the cylinder grows monotonically as a function of the magnetic field and transport current density. In Ref. Those numerical experiments have been performed as follows: prepare an initial random state of the order parameter, switch on the magnetic field and after a relaxation (typically, ∼ 80 ps) switch on the transport current instantly. When the transport current is switched on, the vortex pattern that occurred in the external magnetic field undergoes changes and adapts for the new conditions. If the transport current is switched on too fast, the order parameter may suffer the impact of a high normal current density, and come up with a metastable state containing a phase slip. A metastable state means that the state satisfies equations of motion in a stationary or quasi-stationary regime, but there is another (quasi-) stationary regime with a lower energy. As we will see further, the high-voltage peaks may appear due to the relaxation of the system to a metastable state in the regime of an abrupt switch-on of the transport current. An energy barrier between the phase-slip and the vortex regimes can prevent the system to return to the vortex regime. A similar effect can be achieved when the magnetic field is switched on abruptly after the transport current has been switched on. The time of the (linear) switch-on of the transport current or magnetic field will be called the ramp time of the corresponding external parameter, and will be denoted ∆t c , ∆t f respectively. The switch-on process of B or j tr will be called ramping. The numerical experiment with a gradual switch-on of the current consists of the following steps. • S1. Initialize the system with ψ = 1 + 5 × 10 -3 (a + ib) and φ = 0, where a, b are random real numbers distributed normally as N (0, 1). • S2. Switch on the magnetic field linearly from 0 to B in 10 ps. • S3. Let the system relax in 100 ps. • S4. Switch on the transport current density linearly from 0 to j tr during ∆t c = 500 ps (for some calculations we took even longer transport current ramp time ∆t c up to 10 ns in order to achieve a better convergence to the final stationary state or to provide necessary gradualness of the ramping). Parameter values achieved at this step will be called "final". • S5. Let the system come to the final (quasi-)stationary regime during 6 to 9 ns (for some calculations up to 60 ns if the state does not converge to stationary one for a long time). The results for different relative temperatures T /T c are depicted in Fig. The first regime occurs for weak current density and/or low magnetic fields, representing a fragment of vortex lattice with clearly visible separate vortex cores in each half-cylinder (Fig. When the system exerts the regime with vortex chains inside a band of suppressed superconductivity, this band appears in a region with maximal normal magnetic field. We suggest a simple model, considering that a point of the cylinder is in a perfect superconducting state if the normal magnetic field is smaller than some characteristic value B 1 (it is a conventional parameter here). Otherwise, it conducts normal current and possesses conductivity σ. In this case, the fraction of the cylindrical surface, where the normal magnetic field is smaller than B 1 , is arccos(B 1 /B). Consequently, the induced voltage can be estimated as and the function applied to the numerical results should behave linearly as a function of B in such a regime. Generally, the plots for T /T c = 0.95, 0.952 are indeed piecewisely linear (Fig. A transition between the vortex and the phase-slip regimes does not occur when raising the magnetic field (at a constant transport current density), except for the voltage peak at under a gradually switched on transport current occurs only in a narrow window of parameters around the above-mentioned values. In order to describe the mechanism of the appearance of this peak, one can notice that the 2.5 mT magnetic field is strong enough for nucleation of vortices (which have different vorticity in two half-cylinders). On one hand, the magnetic field makes the system state with vortices arranged in the regions with a maximal magnitude of the magnetic field more preferable. On the other hand, the interaction between vortices with different vorticity makes them attract each other. We conjecture if the latter attraction is energetically dominant over the above-described arrangement, then vortices are pushed toward the line opposite to the slit and form a phase slip, which results in a voltage peak. In the vortex regime, the nucleation and denucleation of moving vortices generate voltage oscillations (typically ranging from 10 to 30 GHz). In low magnetic fields (∼ 2 mT), only several vortices are present at the same instant, what results in a lower frequency and higher amplitude of the voltage oscillations with respect to the average voltage (a larger modulation depth). For example, the system at T /T c = 0.952, j tr = 20 GA/m 2 , B = 2 mT generates a non-harmonic periodic 8.7 GHz signal oscillating with ∼ 10% modulation depth. The final state of the system may be metastable, depending on the way how the transport current is switched on. For example, the system can arrive either at the phase-slip or at the vortex regime, demonstrating a stable and (quasi-)periodic stationary process, depending on the transport current ramping. In the present section, we analyze the abrupt transport current ramping. Reduction of the transport current ramp time to ∆t c = 10 ps leads to the appearance of new peaks in the diagrams (Fig. The difference between the evolution at gradual and abrupt transport current ramping is depicted in Fig. This creates conditions for the suppression of the superconductivity in the region opposite to the cylinder slit. The region with suppressed superconductivity grows and captures the vortices from the half-cylinders. Vortex chains from both half-cylinders begin moving toward the line opposite to the cylinder slit, and finally, they come up with a vortex-antivortex chain constituting the phase slip. In the intermediate case, if the abruptness is not enough to create a phase slip, the region of the suppressed superconductivity does not grow, but rather decays into several vortex-antivortex pairs, which join the vortex chains in the corresponding half-cylinders. In this section, we demonstrate that a similar effect can be achieved if first the transport current and then the magnetic field are switched on. The calculations with gradual ramping (both magnetic field and current switch-on slope) exhibited the results similar to those discussed in Sec. III. The abrupt magnetic field ramping (magnetic field ramp time is ∆t f = 10 ps) gives rise to a transition from the vortex to the phase-slip regime (Fig. If the current is switched on first, a gradual magnetic field ramping leads to the vortex regime and an abrupt magnetic field ramping leads to the phase slip depicted in Fig. As demonstrated in the previous sections, depending on the way how the current or magnetic field are switched on, the system can arrive at different (meta)stable states for the same set of the final parameters. This means that there is an appreciable energy barrier between different regimes of superconducting dynamics. As a result, one can expect a hysteresis effect. To demonstrate the hysteresis effect, the following steps are performed: • H1. Prepare an initial random state (in the same way as in S1). • H2. Switch on the magnetic field linearly from 0 to its final value B during 10 ps and let the system relax during 100 ps. • H3. Switch on the transport current density linearly from 0 to 14 GA/m 2 during 100 ps and let the system relax during 400 ps. • H4. Increase j tr by 0.129 GA/m 2 during 100 ps and let the system relax during 400 ps. Repeat it until j tr reaches the value of 23 GA/m 2 . • H5. Repeat H4 in the opposite direction: decrease the transport current density from 23 to 14 GA/m 2 . The calculations are conducted for T /T c = 0.952 at different values of B (Fig. The hysteresis loop is wider along j tr and narrower along U for higher magnetic fields. The hysteresis loop is wider along the j tr direction and smaller along the U direction for stronger magnetic fields. As a result the hysteresis loop area has maximum at some value of the magnetic field B between 10 mT and 20 mT. The hysteresis loop area can be understood as a power of excessive dissipation attributed to the existence of the higher branch of the loop in comparison with the process if only the lower branch would exist. In addition to the hysteresis effect, which is the result of transitions between the vortex and the phase-slip regimes, we have found a small hysteresis loop (in the burgundy frame, Fig. We have shown that for the gradual switch-on of the magnetic field and/or transport current in the superconductor open nanotubes, the transition between the vortex and the phase-slip regimes depends on the magnetic field only weakly. Depending on the switch-on, the superconductor can arrive at different (meta)stable states for the same final external parameters (transport current density and magnetic field). Abrupt magnetic-field or transport-current ramping can lead to the transition to the phase-slip regime. The ramp time of the external parameters can be used to control the vortex/phase-slip transition in the nanotubes. The energy barrier between phase-slip and vortex states occurs to be higher in stronger magnetic fields. This barrier leads to the existence of the appreciable hysteresis effect in the current-voltage characteristics controlled by the magnetic field. The system state near the critical transport current density depends on the way by which the final external parameters (transport current density and magnetic field) are achieved, constituting the memory effect. Dependency on the switch-on regime and the hysteresis effect appears dynamically (due to the energy barrier between different superconducting regimes) with no contribution of the heat-related effects. Additionally, we pay attention to the importance of taking into account the realistic switchon regimes of the external parameters (e.g., transport current and external magnetic field) in numerical calculations. The numerical simulation of superconducting dynamics demonstrates the voltage peak even for the gradual evolution at T /T c = 0.952, B = 2.5 mT, j tr = 21 GA/m 2 . This peak can be observed in a narrow window of parameters around the above-mentioned values. We conjecture that it appears when the magnetic field is strong enough to begin nucleating vortices, but the current-induced attraction between vortices in two half-cylinders is still energetically more preferable, than the arrangement of vortices in the regions with a maximal magnitude of the magnetic field. Moreover, in the considered system within the region of parameters, where F /3 1.2 × 10 -3 m 2 /s Normal conductivity for a thin membrane σ = l/[3.72 × 10 -16 Ω m 2 ] 16 (μΩ m) -1