A safe lithium-sulfur battery employs a composite polymer electrolyte based on a poly(ethylene glycol) dimethyl ether (PEGDME) solid at the room temperature. The electrolyte membrane enables a stable and reversible Li-S electrochemical process already at 50 °C, with low resistance at the electrode/electrolyte interphase and fast Li + transport. The relatively low molecular weight of the PEGDME and the optimal membrane composition in terms of salts and ceramic allow a liquid-like Li-S conversion reaction by heating at moderately high temperature, still holding the solid-like polymer state of the cell. Therefore, the electrochemical reaction of the polymer Li-S cell is characterized by the typical dissolution of lithium polysulfides into the electrolyte medium during discharge and the subsequent deposition of sulfur at the electrode/electrolyte interphase during charge. On the other hand, the remarkable thermal stability of the composite polymer electrolyte (up to 300 °C) suggests a lithium-metal battery with safety content significantly higher than that using the common, flammable liquid solutions. Hence, the Li-S polymer battery delivers at 50 °C and 2 V a stable capacity approaching 700 mAh gS -1 , with steady state coulombic efficiency of 98%. These results suggest a novel, alternative approach to achieve safe, high-energy batteries with solid polymer configuration. A lithium-sulfur polymer battery delivers at 50 °C almost 700 mAh gS -1 over 90 charge/discharge cycles. The polymer electrolyte has high thermal stability and forms a stable interphase with the electrodes suitable for the Li-S conversion process at 2.2 V vs. Li + /Li. The new electrolyte formulation may enable safe, high-energy electrochemical cell. The lithium-sulfur (Li-S) cell is one of the most promising next-generation battery systems, benefiting from the multi-electron conversion process S8 + 16Li + + 16e -⇄ 8Li2S, To better evaluate the differences between the various electrolyte configurations, Figure The electrochemical response of the Li-S polymer battery employing the PEGDME_CPE is herein investigated by cyclic voltammetry (CV) and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) from 50 to 80 °C, in order to demonstrate the actual applicability and stability of this cell configuration in a wide temperature range. Figure Li + /Li when the temperature ranges from 60 to 80 °C, thereby indicating that the segmental motion of the polymer chains may assist the ionic transport through the electrolyte and at the electrode/electrolyte interphase during the conversion process. Accordingly, the polymer battery exhibits an electrochemical response approaching the liquid-like behavior as the temperature is gradually increased up to 80 °C. In this regard, further insight is given by Figure EIS measurements performed upon CV (see the Nyquist plots in Fig. The galvanostatic-cycling performance of the Li-S polymer battery at 50 °C is herein evaluated at the current rate of C/10 (1C = 1675 mA gS -1 ). These testing conditions represent an optimal choice, which might match the typical requirements of the stationary storage market. We remark that the polymer configuration would ensure enhanced thermal stability, possibly allowing a safe use in large battery packs, whilst low current rate and moderately high temperature are well compatible with load-balancing applications in smart grids. To the best of our knowledge, we demonstrated for the first time that composite polymer electrolytes using PEGDME with MW of 2000 g mol -1 as the solid solvent may be effectually applied in a Li-S battery operating at a temperature as low as 50 °C. The composite electrolyte membrane exhibited at 50 °C a Li + transference number of 0.23 and an ionic conductivity of 1×10 -4 S cm -1 , while the PEObased benchmark electrolyte displayed similar t + values (0.22) at 80 °C and considerably lower ionic conductivity (2×10 -6 S cm -1 ) at 50 °C. The composite polymer electrolyte (CPE) was prepared by mixing polyethylene glycol dimethyl ether (PEGDME2000, CH3O(C2H4O)nCH3, average MW of 2000 g mol A control liquid electrolyte (LE) was synthetized by dissolving LiTFSI (1 mol kgsolvent -1 ) and LiNO3 (1 mol kgsolvent -1 ) in a solution of 1,3-dioxolane (DOL, anhydrous, containing ca. 75 ppm of butylated hydroxytoluene, i.e., BHT, as inhibitor, 99.8%, Sigma-Aldrich) and 1,2-dimethoxyethane (DME, anhydrous, inhibitor-free, 99.5%, Sigma-Aldrich) in the 1:1 weight ratio. Prior to use, both DOL and DME were dried by molecular sieves (3 Å, rod, size 1/16 in., Honeywell Fluka) until a water content below 10 ppm was obtained as measured by 899 Karl Fischer Coulometer, Metrohm, whilst LiTFSI and LiNO3 were dried under vacuum for 2 days at 110 °C as above mentioned. This LE is herein indicated as DOL:DME_LE. The sulfur-carbon composite was prepared as described previously, CR2032 coin-type cells (MTI Corp.) were assembled in an argon-filled glovebox (MBraun, H2O and O2 content below 1 ppm) and studied by using various electrochemical techniques. The electrolyte lithium transference number (t + ) was evaluated according to the Bruce-Vincent-Evans method, The ionic conductivity of the electrolytes was extracted from EIS data, which were collected by crystallinity and enhance the ionic conductivity of the PEGDME_CPE; each cycle had a duration of 24 h (i.e., 12 h for each heating and cooling step). CV tests and 15 μL mgS -1 for galvanostatic cycling, as previously reported. SEM images of a PEGDME_CPE membrane on a S:SPC 70:30 w/w electrode recovered after the CV measurement in the Li cell were collected using a Zeiss EVO 40 microscope with a LaB6 thermionic source. TGA was carried out under a N2 atmosphere and employing a heating rate of 5 °C min -1 in the 25 -800 °C temperature range, through a Mettler-Toledo TGA 2 instrument. Several samples were investigated by TGA: (i) PEGDME2000 powder, (ii) PEGDME_CPE membrane and (iii, iv) PEGDME_CPE on a S:SPC 70:30 w/w electrode in pristine condition and after CV. The samples were transferred very quickly from the glovebox to the SEM and TGA chambers for measurements, in order to avoid excessive exposure to the atmosphere and limit moisture absorption. Table Table 