Organic photodetectors (OPDs) possess bright prospects in applications of medical imaging and wearable electronics due to the advantages such as low cost, good biocompatibility, and good flexibility. Photomultiplication OPDs (PM-OPDs) enabled by the trap-assisted carrier tunneling injection effect exhibit external quantum efficiencies far greater than unity, thus the acquired responsivities are extremely high. However, the reported PM-OPDs with high responsivity performances are all accompanied by high dark currents due to the introduction of carrier traps, which inevitably results in inferior detectivities. In this work, we modify a P3HT:PCBM donor-rich PM-OPD by introducing an atomically thin Al2O3 interfacial layer through the ALD technique, obtaining a high responsivity of 8294 A/W and high detectivity of 6.76×10 14 Jones, simultaneously, both of which are among the highest reported for bulk heterojunction PM-OPDs. Ascribed to the introduction of the atomically thin Al2O3 layer, the metal-insulator-semiconductor (MIS) tunneling junction is formed, which brings forward a suppressed dark current along with an increased amounts of holes tunneling under forward bias. Meanwhile, the weak light detection limit of the modified PM-OPD within the linear response range reaches the level of nW/cm 2 . Based on the proposed PM-OPD, a proof-of-concept image sensor with 26×26 pixels is demonstrated, which can respond to both ultraviolet light and visible light. The PM-OPD based sensor arrays can find broad applications for medical imaging, wearable electronics, etc. Organic photodetectors (OPDs) have attracted enormous attentions in the areas of medical imaging, wearable electronics, and so on, due to their benefits such as low-cost solution processability, good biocompatibility, good flexibility, light weight, and rich material choices However, the realization of high-responsivity in PM-OPDs by introducing more carrier traps, inevitably lead to the increase of current under dark, which deteriorates the device detectivity as well as its weak light detection capability Herein, we propose a universal approach to minimize the dark current while maintaining the responsivity of PM-OPDs, that is by inserting an atomically thin Al2O3 layer between the anode and the hole transport layer. With the help of the Al2O3 interfacial layer between ITO/PEDOT:PSS and donor-rich P3HT:PC71BM blend, a series of attractive merits take place due to the formation of a metal-insulatorsemiconductor (MIS) tunneling junction. On one hand, the forward biased current under dark can be suppressed by around 6 orders under 8 V bias, facilitating the improvement of detectivity and weak light detection ability. On the other hand, it enables the accumulation of electrons at the side of P3HT:PC71BM close to the anode. As a result, more incident photons can be absorbed, with respect to the situation when the electron accumulation takes place at the opposite side, i.e., the side adjacent to cathode. Therefore, the amount of trapped photo-generated electrons can be elevated, bringing forward the injected holes being substantially multiplied and the forward biased responsivity being significantly improved. Overall, the proposed donor-rich P3HT:PC71BM PM-OPD possesses an external quantum efficiency, responsivity and detectivity of 3.27×10 6 %, 8294 A/W, and 6.76×10 A donor-rich PM-OPD based on the P3HT:PC71BM blend (D:A ratio of 100:1) with a simple configuration of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/Blend/Al was studied as the control. This kind of donor-rich PM-OPD was firstly developed in 2015 by Zhang's group In order to improve the photodetection performance, the PM-OPD device in the configuration of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/Al2O3/Blend/Al is proposed, with the schematic diagram and detailed energy levels as shown in Fig. With the help of the MIS tunneling junction, the EQE and responsivity are improved over a broadband wavelength range from 320 nm to 680 nm, as displayed in Fig. To understand the mechanism of the dark current inhibition, the analysis on the energy band diagrams of the proposed MIS based PM-OPD when unbiased or biased are carried out, as displayed in Figs. For comparison, the PM-OPDs with a polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA) insulating film inserted at the PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM interface were also fabricated with the schematic diagram and detailed energy levels as shown in Fig. Next, the working mechanisms of the proposed MIS based PM-OPD under illumination are analyzed, with its energy band diagrams being displayed in Figs. Since the dark current of the PM-OPD has been reduced significantly by the incorporation of the MIS tunneling junction, it is expected that both the LDR and the weak light detection ability are also improved. LDR is derived from the difference of the highest and the lowest detectable illumination power densities (Phigh -Plow) within the linear response range. Figs. It is noticed that the LDR of the MIS based PM-OPD under 8 V is a bit smaller than that under -8 V, and there is an obvious turning point (Pturning = 64 nW/cm 2 , equal to Plow) in the LDR plot under 8 V. Below the turning point, although the proposed PM-OPD can still sense light with apparent signal contrasts, the curve of the photocurrent density versus illumination power intensity deviates from the linear response range. If the applied voltage increases to 19 V, the turning point Pturning can be reduced by more than one order, from 64 nW/cm 2 to 2.5 nW/cm 2 , as shown in Fig. The existence of the turning point in the LDR plot of the MIS based PM-OPD device implies that the current injection behavior experiences a transformation when the illumination power density enters the LDR range. It is known from Fig. At last, the proposed method of forming a MIS tunneling junction with the help of an atomically thin Al2O3 interfacial layer is universal for improving the performances of other polymer OPD devices. An instance was demonstrated for the device in the configuration of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/Blend/Al with the blend made of PTB7:PCBM (100:1). It is mentioned that the PTB7:PCBM (100:1) blend cannot induce the photo multiplication effect. As can be seen in Fig. In summary, we have reported a high-responsivity, high-detectivity PM-OPD by incorporating an atomically thin Al2O3 interfacial layer between the hole transport layer PEDOT:PSS and the donor-rich blend. Ascribed to the introduction of the atomically thin Al2O3 layer through the ALD technique, the MIS tunneling junction has been built up. As result, a suppressed dark current along with an increased amount of holes tunneling under forward bias have been simultaneously achieved. It has been demonstrated the proposed PM-OPD exhibited an EQE, responsivity, and detectivity of 3.27×10 6 %, 8294 A/W, and 6.76×10 Table Year The indium tin oxide (ITO)-coated glass substrates were sequentially cleaned in solution of detergent, deionized water, acetone, and isopropanol for 15 minutes in each round. Then, the cleaned ITO substrates were dried by air and subjected to the surface plasma treatment for 5 min to increase the work function of ITO surface. The PEDOT: PSS solution (purchased from Shanghai Han Feng Chemical Co., Ltd, CleviosTM PVP AI 4083) was spin-coated on the cleaned ITO substrate at 5000 rpm for 30 s, and then annealed at 120 °C for 15 min in the air. In the following, the PEDOT:PSS coated ITO substrates were transferred to the atomic layer deposition (ALD) integrated glove box to prepare the Al2O3 layer with different thicknesses of 0.2 nm,0.4 nm, 0.6 nm, 0.8 nm, and 1 nm. The Al2O3 thin films were deposited at 150 °C using alternating exposures of Al(CH3)3 and H2O vapor in an ALD system. Polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA) was dissolved in ethyl acetate solvent to prepare 0.6 mg/mL solution, and then spin-coated on the surface of PEDOT:PSS or Al2O3. P3HT (Organtec Material Inc., the molecular weight and regularity are 5000 g/mol and 91%, respectively), PTB7 and PC71BM (1-Material, Corporation) were respectively dissolved in o-dichlorobenzene (o-DCB) solvent to prepare 40 mg/mL solution. The P3HT:PC71BM (PTB7:PCBM) solution was then prepared by mixing the P3HT (PTB7) and PC71BM solutions at a weight ratio of 100:1 and spin-coated onto the Al2O3 (PEDOT:SS or PMMA) layer at 1200 rpm for 30 s in the glove box (Jiangsu Lebo Science Instrument Co., Ltd.). The wet active layers were quickly annealed at 80 °C for 20 s, resulting in a 270 nm thick active layer. Finally, 100 nm Al cathode was thermally evaporated on the active layers in a high vacuum Dark and light current density versus voltage (J-V) characteristic curves of the PM-OPDs were measured by a programmable source meter (Keithley 2400). The EQE spectra of the PM-OPDs were measured under monochromatic light from a xenon lamp (Zolix, Gloria-X150A) coupled with a monochromator (Zolix, 0mni-λ 3005), with spectral power density in the μW/cm 2 level over the investigated wavelength range. The linear dynamic range (LDR) were measured by a programmable source meter (Keithley 2400) under a 532 nm continuous laser (Cnilaser, MGL-F-532) at different light intensities. The imaging was measured by a semiconductor analyzer (Agilent, B1500) under different wavelength LED (Thorlabs) with an intensity of 1.27 mW/cm 2 . Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) of the PM-OPDs were measured by an electrochemical workstation (Jiangsu Donghua Analytical Instruments Co., Ltd., DH700). Transient responses of the detectors were tested by a semiconductor analyzer (Agilent, B1500) with 532 nm laser (Cnilaser, MGL-F-532) controlled by a signal generator to produce pulsed light signals. Light intensities were measured by an optical power meter (Thorlabs, PM100A). The thicknesses of different functional layers were measured by a profiler (Bruker, Dektak XT). The optical image of the organic image sensor was characterized using an optical microscope (Nikon, LV-150). The external quantum efficiency and responsivity values of the PM-OPDs can be calculated according to the number of collected charges and the number of incident photons, as expressed by Equation (1-2) Iph is the photogenerated current (the measured current under light (IL) minus the dark current (Id)), e is the absolute value of the charge of the electron, h is the Planck constant, and ν is the frequency of incident light, hν is photon energy, and Pin is the incident light power intensity. The shot noise and thermal noise of PM-OPD can be calculated using the following equation: where B is the bandwidth, k is Boltzmann constant, T is absolute temperature, and Rsh is shunt resistance. If the total noise current dominated by the shot noise, the detectivity of the PM-OPDs can be calculated by shot noise as an approximation according to the following equation The linear dynamic range of the devices are calculated by the following Equation: where Pmax and Pmin are the maximum and minimum incident light intensities of the photocurrent density versus light intensity curve which lie within the linear response range. The response time of the PM-OPDs reflect the response speed of the detector to receive incident light radiation, which is generally defined as the time for the photocurrent to rise from 10% to 90% of the highest value (fall from 90% to 10% of the highest value) during the on and off cycles of light illumination. The sum of the rise time and the falling time is counted as the response time of the photodetector. In the sensing section, in order to reconstruct the optical pattern projected on the PM-OPD image matrix, we converted the photocurrent values to grayscale between 0 and 255 using the following conversion formula: where Imeas is the measured photocurrent, which is the between the light current of each pixel and the minimum light current among all pixels. The IΔ is the difference between the maximum and minimum light current among all pixels under different wavelength LED illumination. The theoretical method, two-dimensional (2D) Finite Element Method (FEM) was used to investigate the optical properties of the PM-OPD in this paper. All simulations were carried out assuming a periodic boundary along the z axis, which is normal to the film plane. Perfectly matched layer (PML) boundaries were applied at two planes perpendicular to the z axis, one lied in the glass and the other was in the air region next to the Al electrode. Light was illuminated from the ITO glass side. The wavelength dependent refractive indices and extinction coefficients of the P3HT:PC70BM (100:1) layer were taken by the ellipsometer (Wuhan Eoptics Technology Co., Ltd, SE-VM). The refractive indices and extinction coefficients of other materials used in this work are extracted from literatures 