Moiré superlattices in twisted bilayer graphene (TBG) and its derived structures can host exotic correlated quantum phenomena because the narrow moiré flat minibands in those systems effectively enhance the electronelectron interaction. Correlated phenomena are also observed in 2H-transitional metal dichalcogenides moiré superlattices. However, the number of moiré systems that have been explored in experiments are still very limited. Here we theoretically investigate a series of two-dimensional (2D) twisted bilayer hexagonal materials (TBHMs) beyond TBG at fixed angles of 7.34 • and 67.34 • with 22 2D van der Waals (vdW) layered materials that are commonly studied in experiments. First-principles calculations are employed to systemically study the moiré minibands in these systems. We find that flat bands with narrow bandwidth generally exist in these systems. Some of the systems such as twisted bilayer In 2 Se 3 , InSe, GaSe, GaS and PtS 2 even host ultra-flat bands with bandwidth less than 20 meV even for such large angles, which make them especially appealing for further experimental investigations. We further analysis the characters of moiré flat bands and provides guidance for further exploration of 2D moiré superlattices that could host strong electron correlations. Moiré superlattice (MSL) is a special type of 2D layered material, generated by stacking 2D vdW materials with a small lattice mismatch or with a twist angle, including graphene, hexagonal boron nitride (hBN), transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs), various 2D magnets and superconductors Recent breakthroughs on the discovery of correlated insulator states and superconductivity in TBG Following the success of TBG, a number of new moiré flatband systems beyond TBG are explored, from the homobilayers, heterobilayers to multilayers configurations, including trilayer Graphene/hBN Except for the typical materials of graphene-based and TMDs, the twisted bilayer black phosphorus The highly tunable correlation and superconductivity properties of MSLs also make them appealing for future technology applications. A couple of the early attempts were made by Jarillo-Herrero et al. and Rickhaus et al., who made use of the gate-tunable correlated and superconductivity phase of magic angel TBG to fabricate Josephson junctions in singlecrystal nanostructures The studies of the MSLs have provided powerful venue to explore the correlated physics and unconventional superconductivity The present calculations are done within density functional theory (DFT) using the Vienna ab initio software package (VASP) For a wide variety of 2D materials, we concentrate on 22 types that are relatively easy to be synthesized and manipulated in experiments to construct twisted bilayer moiré superlattices. The composition and crystal structures for the corresponding bulk materials are shown in Fig. We calculate the band structures of the 22 MSLs at the PBE+TS level with and without SOC. The results are summarized in Table For the flat bands at the VBM (CBM), the bandwidth ranges from 0.9 The existence of flat bands in these MSLs indicates the kinetic energy scale of the electron states in these bands is significantly quenched and the electron-electron interaction and correlation may become important. To further evaluate the correlation effects, we estimate the on-site coulomb repulsion energy U in these system as e 2 /(4πεε 0 a), where e is electron charge, ε 0 is the vacuum permittivity, ε is relative permittivity and a is the effective linear dimension of each site (here we take the length scale of the moiré pattern). Though a combination of relative permittivity ε from the data of other literature and the lattice parameter of the moiré unite cell a, we estimate U and the values are depicted in Table To better understand the formation of flat bands in 2D MSLs, we further analysis the characters of the flat bands. To this end, we conduct the calculation of the projected band structures and the results are shown in Figs. S1-S22 in the SI and the major orbital components for the states in the flat bands are summarized in Table We take the twisted Bi 2 Se 3 at 7.34 • (Fig. Next, we look at those systems that host flat bands with extremely small bandwidths even at a relatively large twist angle. Here, we investigate twisted bilayer In 2 Se 3 and GaSe at 67.34 • as two typical examples. As shown in Figs. Twisted bilayer PtS 2 is also an interest system. Different from the systems discussed above, although untwisted prinstine bilayer PtS 2 does not has a flat band plateau at the band edges, its twisted form at 7.34 • also host a ultra-flat band with a bandwidth of 15 meV in the calculation without SOC as shown Fig. Finally, we discuss the flat bands occurred at the CBM. Generally it is much harder to form flat bands at the CBM. Nevertheless, we found a few exceptions, such as twisted bilayer GaS, 1T-ZrS 2 , HfS 2 and SnS 2 . The band structures of twisted bilayer 1T-HfS 2 and GaS at 7.34 • without including SOC effect are shown in Figs. To summarize, we report a systematic investigation of band structures to explore flat bands in a series of 2D TBHMs with van der Waals beyond TBG using first-principles methods. Two configurations of moiré superlattice sharing supercells with the same size at twisted angles of 7.34 • and 67.34 • are considered. Our calculations show that the twisted compounds of Bi 2 Se 3 , In 2 Se 3 , Sb 2 Te 3 , Bi 2 Te 3 , GaS, GaSe, InSe, PtS 2 , PtSe 2 , arsenene and antimonene host flat bands at the VBM with the small bandwidths (less than 100 meV). Meanwhile, flat bands also emerge at the CBM for the twisted bilayer materials of GaS, HfS 2 , HfSe 2 , ZrS 2 , SnS 2 and SnSe 2 . Those systems that host flat bands at relatively large twist angles generally have the following characters: (1) The states at the band edges are mainly contributed by the outermost atoms of the layered materials and from those atomic orbitals where the charge density extends towards the stacking interface, such as p z and d z 2 orbitals; (2) the band curvatures at around the band edges are relatively large or even relatively flat band plateaus appearing at the band edge in the Brillouin zone of the primitive cell. Then, by estimating the Hubbard interaction U, we find that the twisted compounds of Bi 2 Se 3 , In 2 Se 3 , GaS, GaSe, InSe and PtS 2 exhibit large Hubbard U over bandwidth W ratios, indicating electron correlation may be relatively strong in those systems. Note that our study is limited to the systems with relatively large twist angles. When the twist angle further decreases and the system size becomes larger, flat bands may also appear in other systems, although for those systems the bands at the band edges are still quite dispersive at the angles we studied here. Nevertheless, the ultra-flat band systems we discuss here provide ideal candidates for the study of strong correlation effects at large twist angles. Finally, we discuss the characters of systems that host flat bands at large angles and provide a guideline for future exploration of novel 2D MSLs that host flat bands and potential strong electron correlations. This work is supported by the Key-Area Research and Development Program of Guangdong Province of China (Grants No.2020B0101340001). The computational resource is provided by the Platform for Data-Driven Computational Materials Discovery of the Songshan Lake laboratory.