Based on the London equation, we use a rotor-free vector potential A, and current measurements by a SQUID, to determine the superconducting Pearl length Λ, and coherence length ξ, of ultra-thin, ring shaped, MoSi films, as a function of thickness d and temperature T . We find that ξ is a function of d with a jump at ξ ∼ d ∼ 5nm. At base temperature the superconducting stiffness, defined by 1/λ 2 = 1/(Λd), is an increasing function of Tc. Similar behavior, known as the Uemura plot, exist in bulk layered superconductors, but with doping as an implicit parameter. We also provide the critical exponents of Λ(T ). In ultra-thin superconducting (SC) films, SC properties often deviate from their bulk counterparts 1-3 . Upon decreasing the SC thickness d, there is a suppression of the critical temperature T c , the critical magnetic field H c , and the critical current density j c . The entire SC phase diagram shrinks in all experimental dimensions but does not necessarily disappear Nevertheless, surface super-current density J and the vector potential are well defined even for a 2D superconductor. Therefore, the gauge-invariant London equation is given by where A is the total vector potential, Λ is the Pearl length 5 , Φ 0 is the SC flux quanta, and ψ and φ are the magnitude and phase of the SC order parameter respectively. For a SC of thickness d λ, the Pearl length is given by 1/Λ = d/λ 2 0 = μ 0 ψ 2 0 e * 2 d/m * , where e * and m * are the carriers charge and mass respectively, and ψ 0 is the equilibrium value of the order parameter in the absence of fields. Equation 1 has a range of validity; e.g. φ cannot change by more than 2π over inter-atomic distance. Therefore, J is limited by J c set by the distance ξ over which φ changes by 2π in a particular material. Interesting questions regarding thin superconductors are how does ξ depend on d, and what is the relation between the 2D and 3D stiffness 1/Λ and 1/λ 2 , and T c . These questions have been addressed previously by A.C. methods only To address these questions experimentally we use a Stiffnessometer. Details and drawings of the apparatus can be found in Ref. with boundary conditions A sc (0, z) = A sc (∞, z) = 0. In this equation r and Λ are measured in units of R pl , ψ(r) is normalized to 1 at it's maximum, J ≡ Φ/Φ 0 is the normalized excitation coil flux, and the integer m is defined via the relations ∇φ = m θ/r. When cooling a superconductor at zero A below T c , φ is uniform (m = 0) to minimize the kinetic energy. Since m is quantized, φ remains uniform upon slightly increasing J. This relation holds until J reaches a critical value J c where ψ is destroyed at least along a path on which flux lines can flow out of the sample, and φ can change. ψ is controlled by the second Ginzburg-Landau equation Outside of the SC ψ = 0, and the boundary conditions inside the SC are ψ r (r in , 0) = ψ r (r out , 0) = ψ z (r, ±d/2) = 0. Therefore, J c , is determined by the coherence length ξ. Thus, a measurement of A sc versus J provides information on both Λ and ξ simultaneously. We have implemented the Stiffnessometer in a QD-MPMS3 magnetometer and its 3 He insert. For the standard operation, the EC is 60 mm long, copper, doublelayered coil with an external diameter of 0.8 mm and a total of 1940 windings. In the The finite coil and gradiometer's geometry yields a unique SQUID voltage output as demonstrated in Fig. Fig. In Fig. It is interesting to follow V ratio at the lowest temper- ature as a function of d since this might predict what would the signal be had we have been able to grow a single unit cell. This is shown in Fig. The SQUID is measuring flux through the gradiometer, which for a point like sample is determined by the magnetic dipole moment. Since this flux is proportional to the vector potential produced by the element passing through the gradiometer, the measured voltages ∆V sc and ∆V ec are proportional to A sc (R pl , 0) and A ec (R pl , 0) respectively. Therefore, The proportionality constant G can be found numerically based on the gradiometer parameters found numerically that G ≈ 2.9. The experimental value is reported below. The analysis of our data is done by solving Eqs. 2 and 3, for the Stiffnessometer setup, in two relatively simple limits: (I) J → 0, namely currents in the superconductor are weak and ψ = 1 everywhere, and (II) J → J c meaning ψ = 0 in most of the superconductor. Experimentally, limit (I) means I I c and limit (II) is I → I c . In practice, in limit (I), we solve numerically for a range of Λ's Laplace's equation ∇ 2 A = 0 in a box 0 < z, r < L, where L is the box length. The ring is located at the box edge z = 0, r in < r < r out , hence the boundary conditions (obtained from the magnetic field jumps) are: J was absorbed into the normalization of A. We solve these equations using finite-elements method with FreeFem + + and Comsol -5.3a softwares for comparison. From the numerical solutions we obtain A(R pl , 0) for different values of Λ as shown in the inset of Fig. -1 in Fig. Data analysis in limit (II) relies on the current density FIG. A single power law does not fit the entire data set. In the region where the determination of Λ is done with a current lower than jc, marked by the orange dashed line, the power is γ = 1.50 ± 0.05 in the SC being strongest in the inner radius of the ring 8 . Therefore, destruction of the order parameter starts there and propagate to the outer radius as J increases. We assume that cylindrical symmetry is respected and no vortices enter the sample since no external field is applied, and since ∆V sc is proportional to the current nearly up to I c as it should be without vortices. This assumption requires experimental verification. Nevertheless, under these assumptions we expect the critical current I c to show up when ψ → 0 in the entire SC. This allows one to linearize Eq. 3 and to approximate A by the coil's vector potential. In this case, The existence of solution which decays rather than blow up at small r requires A ec ≤ 1/ξ. This leads to a critical flux where Φ c = μ 0 nπR 2 ec I c , n is the coil's windings density, and R ec is its radius. Eq. 7 and its corrections are discussed in detail in App. A. A second analysis strategy in limit (II) is to estimate at which current does the linearity between the signal and applied current breaks. An estimate of this current, for a narrow ring, gives a factor of √ 3 correction in Eq. 7, which is not noticeable on a log scale. A full analysis of limit (II) will be given elsewhere. Using Eq. 7 we extract ξ as shown in Fig. Comparing our results with different measurements of thin films such as δ -NbN 9 or MoGe In Fig. We also found in this work that ξ is a function of d with a jump when d ∼ ξ, and that a Stiffnessometer might be sensitive enough to measure the Pearl and coherence lengths of single atomic layer superconductor. )) and minimizing leads to n = 0. Therefore, an eigenmode with minimal eigenvalue of this expression must satisfy ψ z ≡ 0 everywhere. This is consistent with the boundary conditions at z = ±d/2. The z-independence imply in particular that the shape of the minimal eigenmode does not depend on the width d. The equation for an eigenmode with eigenvalue c of the functional (A1) is a Bessel equation -ξ 2 ψ (r) -ξ 2 r ψ (r) + J 2 ξ 2 r 2 -1 ψ(r) = cψ(r) (A2) We shall continue under the assumption that ξ/r 1. If we think of the functional in Eq (A1) as corresponding to a 1D radial Schrodinger equation, then the expression (ξ 2 J 2 /r 2 -1) which multiplies ψ(r) 2 can be interpreted as the corresponding potential energy. Appearance of a negative eigenvalue requires this potential energy to become negative at least somewhere. It therefore follows that we must have J 0 < r out /ξ. If J 0 < r in /ξ the potential is negative everywhere and substituting ψ(r) ≡ 1 gives F < 0. Therefore, J 0 > r in /ξ and hence that J 0 = O(ξ -1 ). In the case ξ r we expect however J 0 to be dominated by r out and being practically independent of r in because upon reducing J the SC forms first at the outer rim of the ring 8 . This suggests that J 0 = r t /ξ for some r in < r t < r out which is much closer to r out than to r in (i.e. r out -r t r out -r in ). The potential energy then changes sign precisely at r = r t being negative only over [r t , r out ]. The corresponding eigenmode must therefore be decaying fast outside this interval. One can therefore approximate the potential in