The transition metal pnictide CrAs exhibits superconductivity in the vicinity of an helimagnetic phase, where it has been found that the propagation vector is parallel to the c axis and the magnetic moments lie in the ab plane. Here we use ab initio calculations to study the magnetic interactions in the material. Mapping onto an Heisenberg Hamiltonian, we calculate the magnetic exchanges by using LDA+U calculations and we unveil the origin of the magnetic frustration. Finally, we reproduce the double helix magnetic order with a propagation vector Q = (0, 0, 0.456) and we obtain the magnetic transition temperature TN through Monte-Carlo simulations of the specific heat. Due to the limitations of the use of the Heisenberg Hamiltonian for itinerant magnetic systems, the theoretical TN underestimated the experimental value of the pure CrAs. However, our results are in good agreement with those found for the alloy CrAs0.5Sb0.5 belonging to the same space group, showing that our result can describe this material class. In recent years an increasing interest has been devoted to transition metal pnictides The material class with Pnma phase (space group number 62) presents nonsymmorphic symmetries that are responsible for additional degeneracies of the bands In CrAs the magnetic, structural and electronic properties are intimately related, as made evident by the fact that the magnetic transition is accompanied by discontinuous changes of the lattice parameters 3 . These effects have been analyzed via ab initio studies 7 and model Hamiltonian investigations The non-collinear magnetic states can originate from the Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction or from magnetic frustrations. Several examples of the latter are present in transition metal compounds In this paper, we improve the theoretical description of the double helix configuration in CrAs presented in Ref. 37, calculating the magnetic couplings via the ab initio DFT+U method mapped onto an Heisenberg model. We unveil the origin of the magnetic frustration that originates the double helix, reliably simulating the related helical magnetic order. The validity of our approach has been tested evaluating the specific heat and the transition temperature T N through the Monte-Carlo method. We show that, although the system is metallic, a simple Heisenberg model allows to capture fundamental properties such as the frustration between magnetic exchanges of different nature and the double helical structure. The paper is organized as follows: in the next section we report the computational details, in the third section the results and in the last section the conclusions. We have performed Density Functional Theory calculations by using the VASP package In the evaluation of the magnetic exchanges of CrAs, we found that not all the magnetic configurations converge in the case of collinear magnetism. However, the inclusion of the spin-orbit coupling favored the convergence, allowing to determine a set of magnetic configurations sufficient to obtain the relevant exchange couplings needed to describe the double helix magnetic order. In this section, we first present the calculation of the magnetic couplings and then we analyze the double-helix magnetic order in CrAs, evaluating in particular the specific heat by use of MonteCarlo simulations. CrAs belongs to the family of transition-metal pnictides sharing the general formula AB (A = transition metal, B = P, As, Sb). It exhibits either a hexagonal NiAs-type (B81) structure or an orthorhombic MnP-type (B31) structure. In the latter case, the unit-cell lattice parameters are a= 5.649 Å, b = 3.463 Å and c = 6.2084 Å. The Cr atoms are situated in the center of the CrAs 6 octahedra, surrounded by six nearest-neighbour arsenic atoms, as shown in Fig. The band structure of CrAs obtained in LDA 7 is characterized by a bandwidth of 3.5 eV. We can compare this value with the one of the t 2g bands in strongly correlated Cr-based systems, equal to 2.5 eV considering the first-neighbours exchange couplings, denoted as J a , J b , J c1 and J c2 , the in-plane secondneighbour coupling J SN p , and the second-neighbour couplings along c J SN c1 and J SN c2 , as shown in Fig. where E 1 is a trivial constant energy and the other quantities are the magnetic exchanges shown in Fig. The quantity E 2 is a trivial constant energy too, but its value is different from E 1 . To estimate J c1 +J c2 , we have doubled the unit cell along the c-axis considering two unit cells with G-type magnetic order, again coupled ferromagnetically and antiferromagnetically, respectively. We define their energies as E GF M c and E GAF M c , and we have the following equations: The quantity E 3 is again a trivial constant energy, different from E 1 and E 2 . Solving the previous equations, we have mapped the ab initio results onto a Heisenberg model Using the UppASD (Uppsala Atomistic Spin Dynamics) package From Fig. From the LDA+U values obtained for the exchange couplings, we have evaluated the specific heat in order to make an estimate of the transition temperature T N . The results are shown in Fig. We have evaluated the magnetic exchanges of the pressure-induced superconductor chromium arsenide CrAs via ab initio LDA+U calculations, then mapping the energy of the magnetic configuration onto a Heisenberg Hamiltonian. The best agreement with the experimental results is obtained for a Coulomb repulsion U = 1 eV, this providing evidence that the system is a moderately correlated compound. This finding is consistent with the fact that the band structure is well reproduced by density functional theory calculations and that the value of the magnetic moment obtained for small U agrees with the experimental one Nonetheless, we notice that our ab initio approach allows to qualitatively reproduce the magnetic exchange couplings and the double helix structure with a propagation vector Q = (0, 0, 0.456). We expect that a further improvement of our results can be obtained by including in the approach presented here the dynamical effects related to the behavior of the chromium 3d electrons as well as the Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction. In particular, the latter may prove to be relevant due to the role played by the spin-orbit coupling in the arsenic atoms located between two chromium ones.