We have investigated the steady-sate valley polarization and valley coherence of encapsulated MoS2 monolayer as a function of the temperature and the power density with a continuous wave laser excitation. Both valley polarization and coherence exhibit a non-monotonic dependence on sample temperature, attaining a local maximum at T ≈ 40 K. This has been recently attributed to a motional narrowing effect: an enhancement of the valley relaxation time occurs when the scattering rate increases. At a fixed temperature of T = 6 K, a two-fold increase of the steady-state valley polarization is achieved by increasing the laser excitation power, which we attribute to a local heating induced by the energy relaxation of photoexcited excitons outside the light cone and to an increase in the exciton-exciton scattering rate. In contrast, in the same power range only a moderate enhancement of valley coherence is observed. Further increasing the excitation power leads to a small reduction of valley polarization but a dramatic loss of valley coherence. Supported by spatial imaging of the excitonic luminescence and polarization, we attribute this behaviour to the detrimental role of exciton-exciton interactions on the pure dephasing rate. Introduction.-Atomically-thin layers of transition metal dichalcogenides (TMD) such as MX 2 (M=Mo, W; X=S, Se, Te) have emerged as promising 2D semiconductors for applications in valley/spintronics Samples and Experimental Set-up.-Encapsulated MoS 2 monolayers such as the one shown in Fig. Results and Discussion.-Fig. Figure This non-monotonic temperature-dependence was attributed by Wu et al. to a scattering-induced enhancement of valley polarization, relevant when the latter is limited by the long-range electron-hole exchange interaction, in the so-called Maialle-Silve-Sham (MSS) mechanism Indeed, this interaction is equivalent to an effective magnetic field around which the valley pseudospin precesses with a Larmor frequency Ω( k), where k is the exciton's center-of-mass momentum. Thermally-activated momentum scattering supresses valley pseudospin relaxation whenever the momentum relaxation time τ c becomes much shorter than the pseudospin precession time Ω -1 , similar to the D'yakonov-Perel spin-relaxation mechanism in non-centrosymmetric semiconductors where K 0 is the modified Bessel function of the second kind and σ = 0.3 μm. This fit is shown by a red line in Fig. where k B is Boltzmann's constant (here we have assumed that Einstein's relation is valid even for such a shortlived species). This is at least 18 times smaller than the observed effective diffusion length of L ≈ 0.5 μm at T = 6 K. Moreover, it has been predicted that exciton transport should be anisotropic under linear excitation It is found that L decreases from 0.55 μm at T = 6 K down to 0.45 μm at T = 30 K. An increase of the scattering rate with temperature can indeed reduce the distance over which hot excitons can travel before energy relaxation. Another key result which is consistent with our interpretation of the PL profiles is the spatial-dependence of the degree of circular (or linear) polarization of the PL. As shown in Fig. Wu and co-workers We study another mechanism of valley polarization enhancement: increasing the excitation laser power. Figure The result is shown in Fig. We now focus on the spatial evolution of the valley polarization and coherence when increasing the laser power. The normalized radial profiles of the exciton luminescence for selected excitation powers are shown in Fig. In summary, this work brings new elements for the understanding of the different mechanisms that may influence the dynamics of valley polarization and valley coherence in TMD monolayers. We have shown that, in addition to increasing the sample temperature or the resident carrier density, valley polarization can be enhanced by increasing the photogenerated exciton density up to ∼ 10 10 cm -2 . Further increase of the excitation density, together with the significant increase of the local temperature, compensate (and eventually dominate) this enhancement of valley polarization. Valley coherence is shown to be only moderately enhanced, before dropping quickly as a function of the exciton density. This illustrates the detrimental effect of exciton-exciton interactions for the preservation of coherent superposition of valley excitons.