We study the superfluid behavior of ultracold atomic Fermi gases with a short range attractive interaction in a two-dimensional optical lattice (2DOL) using a pairing fluctuation theory, within the context of BCS-BEC crossover. We find that the mixing of lattice and continuum dimensions leads to exotic phenomena. For relatively large lattice constant d and small hopping integral t, the superfluid transition temperature Tc exhibits a remarkable reentrant behavior as a function of the interaction strength, and leads to a pair density wave ground state, where Tc vanishes, for a range of intermediate coupling strength. In the unitary and BCS regimes, the nature of the in-plane and overall pairing changes from particle-like to hole-like, with an unexpected nonmonotonic dependence of the chemical potential on the pairing strength. The BEC asymptotic behaviors exhibit distinct power law dependencies on the interaction strength compared to cases of pure 3D lattice, 3D continuum, and 1DOL. These predictions can be tested in future experiments. Ultracold Fermi gases have become a powerful platform for investigating condensed matter physics over the past decade, due to their multiple experimentally tunable control parameters Two dimensional optical lattices (2DOL) have also been studied theoretically In this paper, we investigate the superfluid behavior of a balanced two-component Fermi gas in a 2DOL. We find a much stronger effect of lattice-continuum mixing than in the 1DOL case, besides the wide spread pseudogap phenomena It is known that the superfluid phase in Fermi gases in 3D optical lattices has yet not been accessible experimentally, due to the difficulty of deep cooling. On the contrary, superfluidity in 1D or 2D optical lattices have been realized long ago, e.g., in the early phase separation observation To focus on the effects of lattice-continuum mixing, we shall focus on the 2DOL without the complication of population imbalance. Under the one-band tight-binding approximation for the lattice dimensions in the xy plane, the dispersion of noninteracting atoms is given by Following our recent studies Note that a big difference between 2DOL and 1DOL as well as 3D continuum is that U c = 0 in the contact potential limit for the latter two cases. As a consequence, 1/k F a as defined via the Lippman-Schwinger equation is upper bounded in the present case. Thus 2DOL is closer to the 3D lattice case in this sense. In comparison with the pure 3D lattice case, however, the momentum distribution will spread to large k z (in the BEC case or for small t and large d), leading to a quasi-1D momentum space, with the kinetic energy distributed mainly along the k z direction. For 3D lattice, which has a finite momentum space defined by the first Brillouin zone (BZ), there is a finite filling factor for a given fermion density. However, the overall filling factor is zero for 2DOL. Nevertheless, as we show below, one can tune t and d such that the effective filling factor within the two lattice dimensions varies between 0 and 1. With the modified atomic dispersion ξ k for 2DOL, we follow the pairing fluctuation theory previously developed for the pseudogap physics in the cuprates exists both above and below T c . Here G 0 and G are the non-interacting and full Green's functions, respectively, ∆ sc the order parameter and , where ω n (Ω l ) is the odd (even) Matsubara frequency, following the notations of Ref. We now recapitulate the main result of this theory. In the superfluid phase, one can define the pseudogap via ∆ 2 pg = -Q t pg (Q), so that the total gap ∆ is given by pg , which leads to the self energy Σ(K) ≈ -∆ 2 G 0 (-K), and the BCS form of the full Green's function Then we have the number equation, where f (x) is the Fermi distribution function. At T ≤ T c , the Thouless criteria for pairing instability, U -1 + χ(0) = 0, leads to the gap equation, To evaluate the pseudogap, one can Taylor expand t -1 pg (Q) on the real frequency axis, after analytical continuation, , and μ p = 0 at T ≤ T c . Here B = 1/2M , with M being the effective pair mass in the z direction, and t B the effective pair hopping integral in the xy plane. We stress that the a 1 term serves as a small quantitative correction in the BEC regime, where a 1 T c a 0 . Then this T -matrix expansion leads to the pseudogap equation where b(x) is the Bose distribution function and Ωq = [ a 2 0 + 4a 1 a 0 Ω q -a 0 ]/2a 1 is the pair dispersion, which reduces to Ωq = Ω q when a 1 T c /a 0 1, e.g., in the BEC regime. In this case, one can see that the pair density is roughly given by n p = a 0 ∆ 2 Equations ( F /2m, as for the 3D continuum with the same density n and atomic mass m. The asymptotic behavior at T c in the BEC limit can be solved analytically, with μ → -∞, so that f The leading order quadratic dependence of μ on U is related to the quasi-one dimensionality caused by the restricted momentum space for (k x ,k y ) within the first BZ. This should be contrasted to the 3D lattice case, for which μ ∼ U in the BEC limit This ∆ ∼ |μ| 3/4 ∼ |U | 3/2 scaling behavior should be contrasted to ∆ ∼ μ ∼ |U | for 3D lattice, ∆ ∼ |μ| 1/2 for 1DOL (quasi-2D system) For the effective pair mass in the continuum dimension and the effective pair hopping integral in the lattice dimensions, one can easily obtain , and which yields in the BEC regime via the pseudogap equation ( using the lowest order expansion, Li -2 1/2 (1 -z) ≈ z/π for z → 0. This indicates that T c scales inversely proportional to U in the deep BEC regime, similar to the 3D lattice case. Shown in the inset of Fig. To demonstrate the effect of varying d and t, we plot in Fig. Remarkably, we can see that T c exhibits a reentrant behavior for large d and small t. This is illustrated more clearly as an example in the inset of Fig. In Fig. . becomes a supersolid. Note that Ωq becomes gapped when a 0 < 0, which reduces the pseudogap. Next, we show in Fig. Finally, we show in Fig. In summary, we study the superfluid transition of a Fermi gas in a 2DOL in the context of BCS-BEC crossover, and pay close attention to the exotic effect of lattice-continuum mixing. We find that, for relatively large d and small t in a 2DOL, a PDW ground state emerges and T c vanishes at intermediate pairing strength. In the BCS and unitary regimes, the nature of the in-plane and overall pairing may change from particlelike to hole-like, with a negative coefficient a 0 < 0, and the chemical potential μ may first increase with increasing pairing strength. In the BEC regime, T c ≈ √ 6ntd 4 m |U | -1 , with μ ∼ -U 2 and pairing gap ∆ ∼ |μ| 3/4 ∼ |U | 3/2 . These asymptotic scaling behaviors are qualitatively distinct from their counterpart in the 1DOL, 3D continuum or 3D lattice cases. Our theoretical predictions can be tested in future experiments.