The BLEMAB European project (BLast furnace stack density Estimation through online Muon ABsorption measurements), evolution of the previous Mu-Blast European project, is designed to investigate in detail the capability of muon radiography techniques applied to the imaging of a blast furnace's inner zone. In particular, the geometry and size of the so called "cohesive zone", i.e. the spatial zone where the slowly downward moving material begins to soften and melt, that plays an important role in the performance of the blast furnace itself. Thanks to the high penetration power of the natural cosmic ray muon radiation, muon transmission radiography represents an appropriate non-invasive methodology for imaging large high-density structures such as blast furnaces, whose linear size can be up to a few tens of meters. A state-of-the-art muon tracking system, whose design profits from the long experience of our collaboration in this field, is currently under development and will be installed in 2022 at a blast furnace on the ArcelorMittal site in Bremen (Germany) for many months. Collected data will be exploited to monitor temporal variations of the average density distribution inside the furnace. Muon radiography results will also be compared with measurements obtained through an enhanced multipoint probe and standard blast furnace models. Based on the usage of the natural muon flux continuously produced by high energy cosmic rays in the Earth's atmosphere (see for example The next two paragraphs provide an introduction to the muon transmission radiography technique and to the BLEMAB project, the purpose of which is mainly the validation of the muon imaging methodology in an important industrial context. Like electrons, muons are charged elementary particles belonging to the lepton family, a type of particle that can interact through all types of forces except the hadronic force. Muons are continuously produced in the upper layer of the Earth's atmosphere due to the collisions of very high-energy cosmic rays with atmospheric gas. Due to their high energies and their large mass, about 200 times that of the electron, atmospheric muons can reach the earth's surface and penetrate up to hundreds of meters of rock, depending on their energy. The basic idea of muon radiography is to exploit the natural atmospheric muon flux to perform radiographic studies of large massive structures, thus reproducing in a very similar way what is usually done with x-rays in the usual radiographs. The most direct result of a muon radiograph is the measurement of the directional transmission of the muons, that is, the fraction of incoming muons that is able to cross the thickness of the material encountered along one direction. Transmission can be experimentally estimated by comparing the muon flux measured downstream of the target under examination with the flux measured upstream in the same direction. The interpretation of the measured transmission requires a comparison with simulations that takes into account the geometry of the volume under examination, the characteristics of the muon flux and the other information available on the material structures placed in the acceptance of the experimental apparatus used for the measurement. Many simulations, algebraic formulas and experimental measurements can be found in the literature describing muon flux at ground level, but often these are not sufficient to fully describe the energy and angular ranges required for muon radiography applications. Atmospheric muon flux has important dependencies both on energy and direction. The INFN-UNIFI team in Florence measured muon energy and angular spectra at ground level in the momentum range from 0.1 to 130 GeV/c and in the zenith angle range from 0 • up to 80 • using the ADAMO detector The comparison of the measured two-dimensional angular distribution of muon transmission with realistic software simulations allows reconstructing the two-dimensional average angular density distribution of the target, as resulting from the measuring position. Combining multiple measurements performed from different viewpoints, information on the three-dimensional density distribution can be derived. Detailed reviews about muon imaging and the relative instrumentation can be found in The main aim of the BLEMAB project is to test the capability of muon transmission radiography technique in internal volume imaging of blast furnaces and to establish a non-invasive investigation methodology for online monitoring of internal density variations of such structures. An important test of the performance of this imaging technique concerns the ability to measure the shape, position and thickness of the so-called "cohesive zone", the place in the blast furnace where the iron-containing raw material begins to melt. The knowledge of the processes that take place inside the blast furnaces and the maximization of the extension of the cohesive zone are crucial points for improving the productivity of these plants and therefore of great interest for steel companies. Until now, this type of study has been based only on direct measurements, such as the tracking of radioisotopes injected from the top of the blast furnace or the use of vertical probes with conductive cables connected to conventional instrumentation, such as vertical multi-point probes (MPVP), which provide essential information about the state of the internal volume Muon imaging has been proposed in the past for blast furnace imaging, as described in Section 2 introduces the software simulation framework used for a preliminary simulation and a new framework based on the GEANT4 package, already available but still under development for further improvements, that will be used to realize the full simulations using the most realistic models of the AM's blast furnaces. Some details of the prototype detector under development for the BLEMAB project are presented in section 3, together with preliminary results obtained from a test of a small prototype tracking plane implementing the BLEMAB concepts. Software simulations are required essentially for two main purposes: • first, to provide preliminary estimates of the expected muon rate, in such a way to define the minimum size of the apparatus to have a statistically relevant measurement in time intervals of the order of 24 h; • later, to perform as precise as possible comparisons with real measurements, allowing to convert the two-dimensional muon transmission maps in average density maps. Two different kind of implementations are considered for the BLEMAB project: a simplified custom one, which is used for all preliminary or quick evaluations, and a full GEANT4 based simulation for more realistic evaluations and final comparison with results. Results obtained using the former one are shown in paragraph 2.1, while a short introduction to the latter one is presented in paragraph 2.2. The main evaluations concerning the feasibility of the experiment have been finalized thanks to a simulation tool already available to the team and successfully used for previous studies related to measurements carried out at the Temperino mine in Campiglia Marittima, near Livorno (Italy) For the BLEMAB application a 45 • tilt of the detector pointing direction with respect to the vertical direction is assumed for pointing the blast furnace's cohesive zone; in this configuration a total muon rate of approximately 40 Hz is expected with a single BLEMAB detector. The sketch on the left in figure In this simulation a 2 • bin size is chosen both for elevation and zenith angles. The presence of the blast furnace in front of the muon detection system can be identified as an elongated angular region in the central part of the distributions, where the number of detected muons is significantly suppressed. In each bin two to three hundred muon tracks are expected after a data taking of about 24 h in the angular region where the cohesive zone is located, allowing a measurement of muon distribution with statistical fluctuations below 10 % with such an angular resolution. Yet more precise information can be obtained integrating muon events over larger angular regions. Statistical fluctuations at percent level in half day are expected when observing a 10 • × 10 • region in the direction of the cohesive zone. Figure A more detailed simulation has been developed, which implements an accurate representation of the geometry and material composition of the blast furnace where the measurement will be carried out. The new simulation is based on the GEANT4 software package and on a recently developed atmospheric muon software generator Figure In this simulation 24 identical detectors, 80 cm × 80 cm × 80 cm are placed all around the blast furnace, 8 m far from the wall and some meters below the tuyere, the large toroidal pipe surrounding the structure, used to blow hot air inside the blast furnace. The multiple detection systems allow increasing the ratio between the number of events entering the detector's acceptance and the total number of simulated muon events, which can be generated from a cylindrical surface surrounding the blast furnace. Results from this complete simulation, which takes into account a detailed description of physics interactions of muons inside materials, will be used for more careful evaluations and for comparisons with the experimental measured distributions. The application of the muon transmission radiography survey method requires the installation of a muon tracking system downstream of the volume of interest. For the BLEMAB project two independent muon trackers will be realized in order to have the possibility of installing them a) both in the same blast furnace, for a stereoscopic view of the structure, or b) in two different blast furnaces at the same time, to allow the comparative study of different structures, or c) one in front of a blast furnace and the other in an open space for a reference measurement. Each of these trackers is made of three independent 80 cm×80 cm tracking modules measuring two coordinates of muon impact points along two orthogonal axes (XY). The tracking modules are based on the same technology used for the MURAVES Each XY tracking module is composed of two stacked tracking planes each of which consists of 64 scintillator bars, 80 cm long, with triangular section. The orientation of bars in the two planes are orthogonal to each other. The scintillator material chosen for the BLEMAB detectors is a good quality fast organic polystyrene based plastic, characterized by large bulk attenuation length, large light yield and small Each tracking module is readout by means of four custom DAQ slave boards housing a EASIROC1B 32 channels front-end chip and an ASIC to control the front-end circuitry and the transmission of data to a central custom DAQ master board implementing the trigger logic and data collection from up to 16 slave boards. A Raspberry PI miniaturized computer, connected to the master DAQ board, is used to setup the whole electronic chain, receive the data packet from the master DAQ board and write it to a physical support. A network access to the detector will be available at the AM blast furnace to allow online detector control and a synchronization of data to a remote server. A single muon tracker, an assembly of three XY tracking modules, will be enclosed in an light aluminum box and fixed on a custom mounting which allows to modify the detector pointing direction. The whole measuring system will be housed inside a large metal frame, completely covered by metal panels, to protect the apparatus from possible blows, splashes of liquids and corrosive vapors. Some technical drawings are shown in figure Because the blast furnace's environment is usually characterized by quite high temperatures, a cooling system based on a water chiller will be housed inside the same protection frame and the cooling line will be put in contact with the detector's box, in order not to exceed the maximum working temperature of the optical sensors. A first partial prototype of the tracking plane has been produced to estimate the detection efficiency and spatial resolution that is possible to obtain in the BLEMAB detector configuration. This prototype is limited to 5 scintillator bars, assembled as shown in figure For this test we have used a LeCroy HDO6054 digital oscilloscope as DAQ system. The scintillator assembly has been enclosed in a protective aluminum box, used also as a darkening cover. Each bar is read by two 4 mm × 4 mm SiPM optical sensors whose signals are summed together. A study of the dependence of detection efficiency on the impact coordinate of muons