The discovery and precise manipulation of atomic-size conductive ferroelectric domain defects, such as geometrically confined walls, offer new opportunities for a wide range of prospective electronic devices, and the so-called walltronics is emerging consequently. Here we demonstrate the highly stable and fatigue-resistant nonvolatile ferroelectric memory device based on deterministic creation and erasure of conductive domain wall geometrically confined inside a topological domain structure. By introducing a pair of delicately designed co-axial electrodes onto the epitaxial BiFeO3 film, one can easily create quadrant center topological polar domain structure. More importantly, a reversible switching of such center topological domain structure between the convergent state with highly conductive confined wall and the divergent state with insulating confined wall can be realized, hence resulting in an apparent resistance change with a large On/Off ratio > 10 4 and a technically preferred readout current (up to 40 nA). Owing to the topological robustness of the center domain structure, the device exhibits the excellent restoration repeatability over 10 6 cycles and a long retention over 12 days (> 10 6 s). This work demonstrates a good example for implementing the exotic polar topologies in high-performance nanoscale devices, and would spur more interest in exploring the rich emerging applications of these exotic topological states. Ferroelectric domain walls, a sort of tunable atomic sharp homo-interfaces, have attracted widespread attention as an arena for exploring a wide range of emerging physical properties (e.g. enhanced conductivity, giant photo-voltages, and magnetoresistance) as well as immense application potentials Recent studies did show some prototypes of domain-wall electronic devices (e.g. memories) based on the nonvolatile creation and erasure of CDWs and the nondestructive current readout In recent years, there has been a fast development in discovering novel complex polar topological objects (e.g. flux-closure, vortex, center states) that content conductive domain walls, likely offering new opportunities for deterministic manipulation of the domain wall conductions on the other hand Although the reported topological protected conducting channels confined in ferroelectric nanoislands show promising potentials for high performance memories, it is still rather challenging to develop practical solid-state devices with patterned electrodes based on these small nanoislands. Therefore, an extensive application of these spatially confined and controllable topological states and conducting channels for realistic operation becomes an issue. Specifically, the long-term stability and high restoration repeatability in such devices are yet to be demonstrated, and in fact many proposed conceptual devices in this category face such obstacles to be practically utilized. On the other hand, a major but much lessaddressed technical issue is the low readout current level of such nanoisland-based devices. Surprisingly, for many cases, such current is usually rather small (~1 nA), which is insufficient to drive a high-speed readout circuit according to the Johnson-Nyquist limit One of the best strategies, if applicable, would be to fabricate the devices directly from the well-prepared thin films, allowing integration with advanced microelectronic technologies. For example, one may design a set of electrode-patterned units within which a topologically protected central domain with a well-defined conductive channel can be developed, exhibiting the long-term stability, good restoration repeatability, and relatively large readout current. Here, we demonstrate such a prototype domain-wall memory unit based on highly conductive and confined quadrant center topological domain states. These structures are generated via a delicately designed co-planer electrode geometry by means of simple microfabrication methods from the well-prepared BFO thin films, as presented in the Methods section. The asgenerated center-type domains can be easily created and reversibly switched between the divergent state that contains poorly conductive 71°tail-to-tail CDW (T-T CDW) and the convergent state that contains highly conductive 71°head-to-head CDW (H-H CDW). Such a memory unit demonstrates well repeatable resistive switching behavior with high On/Off ratio (10 4 ), and in particular the head-to-head polarization configuration is well preserved without interruption throughout the whole H-H CDW, leading to large readout current up to 40 nA, a highly preferred value for reliable reading operation. Furthermore, owing to the topological protection of both the T-T and H-H CDWs, the device exhibits the long retention (up to 10 6 s under test) and high endurance (up to 2×10 6 cycles, the longest testing time), providing a new pathway towards high-performance topologically protected domain wall memories that are easily scaled-down and integrated. The epitaxial BFO thin films are deposited on the (001)-oriented SrTiO3 (STO) substrates using pulsed laser deposition (PLD), and all the as-gown BFO films exhibit a mosaic domain structure, which is a pre-requisite and will be further utilized for creating quadrant center domains containing conductive DW (details of the preparation given in Methods). The rhombohedral BFO phase and its epitaxy are demonstrated by the X-ray diffraction (XRD) plus the reciprocal space mapping (RSM) (see Supplementary Figure . 1). To fabricate the device, an Au layer is deposited on the BFO film surface via thermal evaporation circularly shaped using the atomic force microscope (AFM) tip via the so-called AFM lithography to scrap the Au film in the central region. Thus, an array of circularly exposed BFO regions surrounded respectively by the circular Au electrodes is developed (seen in Figure To determine the local domain structure of the circularly exposed region, the vector piezoresponse force microscopy (PFM) is conducted upon the sample rotation of 0°and 90°( in fact at many angles) with respect to a reference axis, following previous method It is also interesting to see that an electric biasing can simultaneously switch the vertical polarization of the exposed BFO region, as reflected by the contrast change in vertical PFM phase image (see the third row in Fig. Subsequently, the local electric current profile can be mapped using the C-AFM mode under a sampling bias of 2.5 V. For the initial state with mosaic domain pattern, the exposed BFO surface exhibits very low conductive current (< 1 pA, close to the noise level), in contrast to the highly conductive current obtained on the electrode region (see Fig. Conversely, for the center-divergent domain triggered by -6.0 V bias voltage, the crossshaped current pattern disappears in the corresponding C-AFM map, as the T-T CDW shows very low conductivity that is comparable to domain interior. The reversible switching between the different domain wall conduction states shows very good repeatability, which is also likely the consequence of the topological protection property. This observation conforms well with previous observation of conductive center domain state in BFO nanoislands Based on the distinguished conductance switching between the convergent and divergent center states, one can propose a prototype of nonvolatile domain-wall memory device, and its configuration and operation can be given schematically in Figure . 2a. It is noted that the C-AFM tip is fixed at the center of exposed BFO region and serves as a central electrode, and the bias voltage is applied on the surrounding circular Au electrode. The characteristic of such DW memory is analogous to a highly repeatable resistive switching behavior, which can be well demonstrated by a quasi-static current-voltage (I-V) measurement at a sweeping bias range within ± 7 V for 1,000 switching cycles. As shown in Figure . 2b, all the I-V curves exhibit rather symmetric hysteretic behavior. One can see that once the bias voltage increases to ~4.5 V, the readout current suddenly jumps from a low level (<1 pA) to a rather high level (~40 nA), and then increases linearly with further increasing bias. The sudden jump in the conductive current synchronizes well with the formation of highly conductive centerconvergent state, consistent with the observation shown in Figure . 1c. The onset voltages (set and reset voltages) coincide with the coercive voltages shown in Supplementary Figure After the formation of center-convergent state with H-H CDWs, the conductive current increases linearly likely due to the metallic nature of the H-H CDW, as confirmed by the temperature-dependent C-AFM measurement mentioned above. The as-such created metallic channel can maintain its conductivity as the bias sweeps towards negative voltage, suggesting its non-volatility. It is also noted in the low bias range (within ± 2 V), the current level becomes very small and the I-V curve no longer follows the linear behavior probably due to the presence of an interfacial insulating gap or wedge domain state close to electrodes Such interfacial insulating state is also analogous to a bipolar selector for the resistance random access memory cell, which is promising for suppressing the unwanted sneak current paths in a crossbar-array integrated electroresistance memory Besides, the resistance switching behavior as illustrated from the I-V curve gives rise to a large On/Off ratio of more than four orders in magnitude at a relatively low readout voltage (2.5 V). The nonvolatile data readout is also indicated by performing minor I-V curves at sweeping bias range of ±3.0 V, indicating a large On/Off resistance ratio over 10 4 (see Figure . 2c). More interestingly, the device exhibits highly repeatable I-V characteristics. One can see that the hysteretic I-V curves follow almost the same trace of the first cycle after 1,000 cycles. From the cycling data (see Figure . 2a), we can extract the relative distribution of readout current (Log(I)) for both LRS and HRS recorded at a reading bias of 2.5V, as well as those of set and reset voltages, as shown Figure . 2d. It is seen that all the above four parameters exhibit very narrow distribution range, confirming the ultrahigh repeatability for data restoration of the device. This also well exemplified the high repeatability for the conduction state switching of CDWs confined in center topological domains, indicating the important role of the topological protection effect, an advantageous feature for the high-performance nonvolatile memory with nondestructive current readout. Furthermore, the effect of lateral dimension of devices on the resistive switching properties is also examined, as shown in Supplementary Figure . 7. Similar resistive switching behavior (i.e. I-V curves) can be observed for different characteristic dimensions (i.e. the diameters of the exposed BFO regions) ranging from 200 nm to 500 nm, as reflected by the sharp resistance change that corresponds to the switching between convergent and divergent center states (see Figure implying the huge potential of such device for developing ultrahigh density memory while maintaining their good device switching characteristics. To further understand the memory performance of the as-generated device, we examine the memory switching window, retention, endurance, and fast switching dynamics of a randomly selected device, as shown in Figure . 3. Repeated testing of other devices shows the similar consequence while quantitative difference may exist. The memory switching hysteresis for this selected device can be found in Figure . 3a, and the data are collected using a sequence of electric pulses, and the resulting conductive states are readout under a fixed Vr of 2.5 V. The readout current loop exhibits a rather square hysteresis with abrupt jumps at around ±4.5 V, showing a well-established memory window that is analogous to its corresponding piezoresponse hysteresis loop. Besides, the stability of the memory device is further confirmed by the retention testing, as shown in Figure . 3b, and the data show very stable conductive states for both the LRS and HRS over long retention duration up to 10 6 s (i.e.12 days, the longest testing time of this work and much longer duration is expectable). The high stability is further verified by a high temperature retention test, which demonstrates that topological domain structures and the corresponding resistance states can maintain rather good stability at a temperature of 150°C for 10 4 seconds except some slight variations in HRS (see Figure . To provide a more comprehensive understanding of the memory performance, it is essential to understand the switching dynamic behaviors of the conduction states. Figure V is used to read out the different resistance states (see Methods). One can see that along with the resistance state switches from HRS to LRS, an abrupt jump of readout current occurs at a characteristic time (t0), which cannot not conform the typical Kolmogorov-Avrami-Ishibashi (KAI) relation Moreover, the ability of controlled writing and erasing operation in a 3×3 device array is demonstrated in Figure . 4a. It is seen that the exposed BFO regions in all the devices show uniform low conductivity at the initial state, which can also be considered as HRS. After applying a bias voltage of +6 V on eight selected devices (except one for reference), one can clearly see that the cross-shaped current patterns appear in the selected BFO regions in the C-AFM image, reflecting the formation of center-convergent domains and LRS. After that, five of the written memory units framed by the black dashed line are erased by applying a bias of - Electrical characterization. The I-V curves were measured using a precise current meter (Keithley 6430) in voltage-sweep mode, which was connected to the conductive AFM tip that was fixed on the center of the exposed BFO region serving as a stationary electrode. The memory performance tests were conducted via C-AFM mode, wherein a sequence of electric pulses with triangularly variational amplitudes were applied on the Au layer to trigger the domain switching with a pulse width of 5 ms. Immediately after each pulse, the conduction state was read by using a fixed read voltage (Vr) of 2.5 V. For the endurance testing, we applied reversible electric pulses (with square pulse width of 100 μs, and maximum voltage 6.0 V) for up to 2×10 6 switching cycles. To determine the resistive switching time, we applied square electric pulses (Vs) for varying durations by using a pulse generator (Agilent 33250A), and then record the conduction state by a precision current meter (Keithley 6430) at a read bias of 2.5V after each pulse, and the switching time was determined as the pulse duration during which the resistive change from HRS to LRS is completed. It is also noted that, to access the small device, both the pulse generator and precision current meter were connected with the conductive AFM tip. their corresponding domain wall conduction states: vector PFM images and corresponding inplane polarization vector maps, as well as CAFM maps for both center convergent (c) and divergent states (d), which are obtained after applying tip biases of +6 V and -6 V, respectively. To construct the in-plane vector maps, lateral PFM amplitude (L-Amp) and phase (L-Pha) were recorded for sample rotation at 0 o and 90 o . To gain further insight into the conduction mechanism of H-H CDWs, we conducted a temperature-dependent C-AFM measurement. As shown in Fig. The currents can be fully restored to the initial values when the sample is cooled back to 25 °C, indicating the good stability of the topological domain structure against high temperature. From the temperature-dependent C-AFM images, we extracted the current profiles shown in Fig. We examined the effect of characteristic dimension of device (i.e. diameter of the exposed BFO region) on the read-out current. As shown in Fig. We examined the fatigue properties of the device via resistance switching testing with switching cycles up to 10 6 (Fig. The ability of independent addressing is demonstrated by individually achieving controllable conductive manipulation of single device in a 3×3 array. Nine BFO disks with uniform diameter of 350 nm were fabricated by the AFM lithography and each of them can be array. Both 0°and 90°PFM phase images of written data bits in a 3×3 units array, after being subjected to -6.0 V and +6.0 V tip voltages. To prove the conceptual device structure toward practical application, we fabricated an array of devices connected by word lines by using electron beam lithography (EBL) technique (see Fig. 