A femtosecond laser pulse is able to switch the magnetic state of a 3d-4f ferrimagnetic material on a picosecond time scale. Devices based on this all-optical switching (AOS) mechanism are competitive candidates for ultrafast memory applications. However, a large portion of the light energy is lost by reflection from the metal thin film as well as transmission to the substrate. In this paper, we explore the use of dielectric coatings to increase the light absorption by the magnetic metal layer based on the principle of constructive interference. We experimentally show that the switching energy oscillates with the dielectric layer thickness following the light interference profile as obtained from theoretical calculations. Furthermore, the switching threshold fluence can be reduced by at least 80% to 0.6 mJ/cm 2 using two dielectric SiO 2 layers sandwiching the metal stack, which scales to 15 fJ of incident energy for a cell size of 50 2 nm 2 . All-optical switching (AOS) of magnetization by a femtosecond (fs) laser pulse 1 , discovered in 2007, is found to be the fastest way known-to-date to switch the magnetic state of spintronic materials 2 . It is almost a thousand times faster than switching based on spin transfer torque (STT) and spin orbit torque (SOT) Such a magnetic switching process was found notably in the 3d-4f ferrimagnetic material systems, such as GdFeCo alloys 1, In current work on AOS in Co/Gd, the light absorption is far from efficient, as a significant portion of the incident light energy is lost by reflection from the metal surface and transmission to the substrate. Such losses not only offset the advantages of AOS, but also impose potential danger to other established components in the photonic/electronic network. In order to eliminate the losses from transmission and reflection, we propose to use dielectric coatings, which can tune the phase of light interacting with the metal thin film satisfying the condition of constructive interference, thus to optimize the light absorption by the metallic thin film. In this report, we used SiO 2 as dielectric layers both on top and at the bottom of the Co/Gd bilayer to theoretically and experimentally demonstrate the application of this concept to AOS. We show that the threshold fluence of AOS can be lowered significantly with the help of adding a bottom and top dielectric layer. The threshold fluence oscillates with respect to the layer thickness, which corresponds to the light interference behaviour as obtained from simulations. Our result shows that by sandwiching the metal layer with two rather standard (SiO 2 ) dielectric layers with a thickness of quarterwavelength, the threshold fluence can be reduced by more than 80% as compared to an uncoated metal layer. Previous studies have revealed that AOS by a single linearly-polarized fs laser pulse is a heat driven process In order to derive generic guidelines, we discuss the effect of adding dielectric layers to enhance the light absorption in (magnetic) metal thin film. The dielectric layers allow for multiple interactions (as a result of multiple reflections) of light with the metal film by introducing an extra interface. The optimum absorption occurs when the phase difference between each consecutive reflection to be (an odd number of) π, thus the thickness of the dielectric need to be an odd multiple of a quarter of the wavelength of the incoming light. Here, we adopted an analytical approach based on the transfer matrix method We proceeded by performing a calculation of light absorption in a specific metallic Co/Gd layer stack using λ = 700 nm, where the refractive index of each layer was taken from Palik et al. In this paper, we experimentally studied the influence of SiO 2 on the threshold fluence of AOS in Co/Gd following our calculation shown in Fig. The magnetic Co/Gd bilayer stacks measured in this study were deposited using DC magnetron sputtering in a chamber with a base pressure of 5 × 10 -9 mBar. The Co/Gd exhibits perpendicular magnetic anisotropy with 100% remanence due to the induced anisotropy at the Pt/Co interface. The magnetic properties of Co/Gd are described in Ref. To determine the AOS threshold fluence, we adopted the method used by Lalieu et al. We begin with discussing the effect of the SiO 2 bottom layer. In Fig. We proceed by adding an extra SiO 2 layer on top. The measurement results from Si/t-SiO 2 /Co/Gd/s-SiO 2 (x) in Fig. Finally, to mitigate the non-idealities incurred by s-SiO 2 and the influence of its fabrication process on Co/Gd for the discussion of a top dielectric layer, we present the measurement result for Si/t-SiO 2 (100)/Co/Gd/c-SiO 2 (100). Here the top layer is deposited by ICP-CVD instead, which is shown as the blue curve in Fig. In addition, this ultra low value corresponds to a total energy consumption of 15 fJ for a device with a dimension of 50 × 50 nm 2 . We claim this value is the lowest threshold fluence reported so far for AOS Our results show that the energy efficiency of AOS can be tuned with enhanced light absorption. This approach can be further extended by using multilayer dielectric stacks such as Bragg mirrors sandwiching Co/Gd with constituent dielectric materials with a higher contrast in the dielectric constant, which would lead to almost total light absorption. Additionally, we propose that the full sheet coverage of the dielectric coating can be extended to patterned structures so that the heat can be selectively deposited. Such an approach could be useful for all-optical skyrmion creation by AOS and topological phase transitions In conclusion, we have theoretically analyzed the potential of applying dielectric coatings sandwiching an optically switchable magnetic layer to enhance the light absorption and thereby optimize AOS. We used the concept of light interference enabled by SiO 2 dielectric coatings to reduce the threshold fluence of AOS in Co/Gd. We experimentally verified the effect by observing interference induced oscillations of the threshold fluence with respect to the SiO 2 thickness, which matches well with our calculation. In particular, we achieved more than 80% of energy reduction by sandwiching the metal stack with two dielectric layers achieving an ultralow value of 0.6 mJ/cm 2 . C. D. Stanciu, F. Hansteen, A. V. Kimel, A. Kirilyuk, A. Tsukamoto, A. Itoh, and T. Rasing, "All-optical magnetic recording with circularly polarized light," Physical Review Letters 99, 047601-(2007).