Individual atomic defects in 2D materials impact their macroscopic functionality. Correlating the interplay is challenging, however, intelligent hyperspectral scanning tunneling spectroscopy (STS) mapping provides a feasible solution to this technically difficult and time consuming problem. Here, dense spectroscopic volume is collected autonomously via Gaussian process regression, where convolutional neural networks are used in tandem for spectral identification. Acquired data enable defect segmentation, and a workflow is provided for machine-driven decision making during experimentation with capability for user customization. We provide a means towards autonomous experimentation for the benefit of both enhanced reproducibility and user-accessibility. Hyperspectral investigations on WS 2 sulfur vacancy sites are explored, which is combined with local density of states confirmation on the Au{111} herringbone reconstruction. Chalcogen vacancies, pristine WS 2 , Au face-centered cubic, and Au hexagonal close packed regions are examined and detected by machine learning methods to demonstrate the potential of artificial intelligence for hyperspectral STS mapping. Two-dimensional (2D) material systems are one of the most sought after solid-state and thin-film structures due to the enormous phase space of functionality, which is driven by atomic-and nano-scale defects that can be advantageously manipulated for single-photon emission, strain engineering, Moiré physics, stacking, and transport. Since the inception of scanning tunneling spectroscopy (STS), which measures current-voltage (I/V) characteristics, the vast majority of experiments are performed using single pixel spectroscopy, where routes for data collection tend to be geometrically positioned along a line or grid during point acquisition. The first harmonic, within an atomically resolved area, can be measured over a defined voltage range, with lock-in techniques, that corresponds to a convolution of the tip and surface LDOS (dI/dV). Assuming the tip remains constant then the data collected are from the sample alone, Transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs), such as WS 2 , have gained substantial interest for pointdefect control, One technical challenge of STM/STS is the difficulty of the technique to acquire reproducible, artifact-free tunneling, especially in heterogeneous samples. Acquisition times are governed by multiple hyperparameters, such as voltage range, step size, and dwell time, where spectral collection that is both highly resolved energetically and spatially is confounded by a variety of factors, which can be very time intensive. In conventional STM/STS, point LDOS exploits the full energetic range of interest with high resolution, and a subsequent dI/dV map can then be collected at a specified energy level for high spatial resolution at the cost of greater experimental broadening. Current imaging tunneling spectroscopy (CITS) consists of scanning the tip in x 1 -and x 2 -directions within a predefined grid and collecting a high-resolution spectrum at each pixel and can thus visualize spectroscopic nuances spatially, such as band-bending across defective states, that may otherwise be missed. We propose to make use of Gaussian process (GP) regression for hyperspectral data collection, Given some initial input, a Gaussian prior probability density function is learned and then conditioned on data, providing a posterior mean and variance within the model domain, which can be used to make autonomous decisions about optimal point measurements. This and other learning approaches have shown to be useful for hyperspectral image reconstruction, An autonomous hyperspectral STM/STS experiment can be initialized over any substrate that is either conducting or semi-conducting. Spatial parameters and tip offsets in both the x 1 -and x 2 -direction are defined by an input image (as defined by point locations x 1 and x 2 with y signal) that is further used in cross-correlation feature tracking (see Supplementary Notes 1-4). At each point defined by the GP, the bias is ramped over a certain voltage range while the tip is held at constant height. Each spectra can then be identified by a 1D-CNN, where class probabilities are computed, and the sum of dI/dV signal intensity is input into the GP for mean and objective function calculation. As the experiment progresses, a proposed measurement is given to the instrument to collect a point at the uncertainty maximum. A workflow summary of an autonomous experiment is presented in Figure The true power of this methodology is evident when sufficient orbital information (specific for the V S deep in-gap state within WS 2 ) and surface structure details (over Au f cc and Au hcp ) can be obtained in well under 100 collected data points (close to 1% of the data compared to a CITS grid measurement) that is verified against ground truth data (see Supplementary Figures A GP model can be defined for a given dataset, D = {x i , y i }, where the regression model assumes y(x) = f (x) + ε(x), where x are the positions in some input or parameter space, y is the associated noisy function evaluation, and ε(x) represents the noise term. The variance-covariance matrix Σ of the prior Gaussian probability distribution is defined via kernel functions k(x i , x j ; φ ), where φ is a set of hyperparameters that are found by maximizing the marginal log-likelihood of the data (earlier referred to as learning). The Matérn kernel is commonly used to match physical processes and is combined with an anisotropic kernel definition to control the level of differentiability in each direction of the input space. Here experimental data is collected by exploration, where points are suggested to improve the Gaussian process via point selection at uncertainty maxima. The full energy range, which is defined by the accessible voltage range over a given sample that can represent a measurable band gap at both the valence band maximum and conduction band minimum or the range where representative surface states lie (as is the case for W S 2 and Au, respectively), can be measured at each point, and indeed we can zoom into any voltage range to visualize orbital information and are able to obtain an optimized hyperspectral map with high resolution both spatially and energetically. In order to evaluate the performance with different user-defined acquisition functions, which either combine posterior mean and variance functions or make use of enabled information-theoretical entities, we perform hyperspectral oversampling on WS 2 . After an extended and feasibly-obtainable experiment over ∼ 30 hours, sufficient data points are collected and we can interpolate over 128×128 pixel grid from acquired data, which is autonomously driven with n = 866 collected data points and shown in Supplementary Figure When the sufficient data is collected, we can further successfully identify V S compared to pristine WS 2 and distinguish Au f cc versus Au hcp with a trained 1D-CNN using an 80/20 train/test split ratio on 1482 individually and separately acquired scanning tunneling spectra, consisting of 424 Au f cc , 709 Au hcp , 158 V S , and 191 W S 2 spectra (Figure CNN architectures have shown application towards identifying tip state on H:Si(100), Experiments are performed at liquid helium temperatures and in ultrahigh vacuum to minimize any drift during an experimental run. A number of drift correction techniques have been explored, which take advantage of machine vision techniques, feature tracking, atom-tracking, image pairs, or thermal drift correction methodologies, to list some of the approaches within the literature. A method for autonomous experimentation is presented that makes use of both GPs and a 1D-CNN for spectral identification, which enables point defect fingerprinting across a wide variety of materials and surfaces. Image segmentation can be subsequently executed after spectral classification. As experiments can be performed without time-intensive input from the operator and at a lower spatial density, high resolution STM/STS can be performed in an autonomous fashion allowing for less redundant information over a given area of interest. Additionally, as neural network algorithms tend to require a large amount of data, the GP can be operated in exploration mode for an increased number of observations to contribute towards statistically significant measurements and ML training on, e.g., an uninvestigated system of interest with spectroscopic signatures not readily available in the literature. The methods presented make use of spectroscopically variant features within a material, where a user can collect data directed by uncertainty quantification or any preferred acquisition function, and use classification to determine tip quality or train on a defined number of classes. We expect that the open source software package can find application across the scanning probe field and greatly increase experimental efficiency, where the library can be easily extended to any system accessible with STM/STS. Where previous reports have used either spatial features, decreased pixel density in spectral space, or some combination for segmentation and CITS measurements with an STM, we unambiguously identify defects and surface-state based on high resolution spectral features that leverage the power of Gaussian processes combined with a CNN architecture for prediction. This hyperspectral STS mapping measurement technique that combines CITS with AI/ML enables full characterization of heterogeneous sample surfaces, ensuring that no local spectral features are missed, even by a non-experienced user. All measurements were performed with a Createc GmbH scanning probe microscope operating under ultrahigh vacuum (pressure < 2x10 -10 mbar) at liquid helium temperatures (T < 6 K). Either etched tungsten or platinum iridium tips were used during acquisition. Tip apexes were further shaped by indentations onto a gold substrate. STM images are taken in constant-current mode with a bias applied to the sample. STS measurements were recorded using a lock-in amplifier with a resonance frequency of 683 Hz and a modulation amplitude of 5 mV. Monolayer islands of WS 2 were grown on graphene/SiC substrates with an ambient pressure CVD approach. A graphene/SiC substrate with 10 mg of WO 3 powder on top was placed at the center of a quartz tube, and 400 mg of sulfur powder was placed upstream. The furnace was heated to 900 • C and the sulfur powder was heated to 250 • C using a heating belt during synthesis. A carrier gas for process throughput was used (Ar gas at 100 sccm) and the growth time was 60 min. The CVD grown W S 2 /MLG/SiC was annealed in vacuo at 600 • C for 30 minutes to induce sulfur vacancies. The acquisition software provided leverages the integration of Python and LabVIEW, and makes use of the Nanonis programming interface. The GP was implemented using gpCAM, which is a library for autonomous experimentation by M. M. Noack. The GP model prior and posterior can be used in the definition of the acquisition function. where with , and x 0 is the point of interest. The acquisition function can now be defined as and directly provide where the next measurement point will be taken during an autonomous experiment. The simplest example of the acquisition function is the exploration method given as where the posterior variance maximum is the next point of acquisition. The general definition of the acquisition function also allows for Bayesian optimization such as using the upper confidence bound (UCB) method given as and information theory methods such as the Shannon-information gain defined by which can be further fine-tuned to find regions of interest, e.g. using a reference spectrum or image feature. A cost function can also be included, which defines the cost of a given measurement itself and the cost of moving within a defined parameter space. Here we compare results from using the diagonal of the variance-covariance matrix, UCB, and using the Shannon-information gain (SIG). Additionally, we also compare results from a dense 128×128 grid, an equally spaced 12×12 grid, and purely randomly derived locations. Drift within scanning probe microscopy techniques can be solved through a variety of methods either during the experiment or data manipulation post acquisition. Piezocreep and thermal drift are the two largest contributors to drift, where piezocreep is a nonlinear effect that can be minimized through correcting for the desired tip position to the actual tip location. However, as the piezos move or scan, some amount of thermal drift is expected. A number of image analysis methodologies that make use of features within a raster-scan image have shown efficacy in tracking drift between multiple images. Metrics from our proposed model are shown below, where we look at receiver operator characteristics to determine model performance between positive and negative classes, the confusion matrix to view sensitivity, specificity, the false negative rate, and the false positive rate, and the precision recall curve that depicts the true positive rate and the positive predictive value. In all three metrics, the chosen model performs optimally on the data provided against four classes of spectroscopic data. We compare two models with matching hyperparameters, as detailed in https://github.com/jthomas03/gpSTS, that only differ in the number of epochs that the neural network is trained. At 6 epochs, off-diagonal elements, which represent a type i (false positive) or type ii (false negative) error, within the confusion matrix are minimized. A GP experiment can be started over a given region with some initialization parameters, which is provided by the user in the form of a n×n image containing information for pixel size, experimental boundary conditions, and location. Additional information, such as file locations, experiment name, imaging parameters for drift tracking, voltage range and stepsize, and any high-level neural network hyperparameters are input into the configuration file in gpSTS. An example file is shown below. nanonis_config = { "Nanonis_Settings": { "File": "gpSTSinit", "ExperimentName": "Test Out", "Version": "0.0.1", "ImageStart": "test_img001.sxm", "FolderLocation": "\\gpSTS\\src\\", "DataLocation": "\\gpSTS\\src\\data\\", "Channel": "Z", "ImDirection": "forward", "SpectralRange": [-1,1], "NumSpectralPoints": 1200, "Center_Point": [174,34], "Search_Window": 40, "Feature_Window": 20, "ScanCurrent": 30e-12, "SpecCurrent": 200e-12, "STSbias": "Bias calc (V)", "STSsignal": "Current (A)" }, "Neural_Network": { "TrainingPath": "\\gpSTS\\src\\train\\", "EpochNumber": 2, "ClassNumber": 4, "LearningRate": 0.001, "BatchSizeTrain": 5, "BatchSizeVal": 1, Pristine WS 2 , V S , Au hcp , and Au f cc training spectra are all optimized within the first 6 epochs, where the model reaches > 95% accuracy on Au f cc validation data after 5 epochs and 100% accuracy for remaining classes. Overall test performance reaches 100% accuracy after 6 epochs, which is the model chosen for classification (see Supplementary Figures