Neutron imaging is one of the most powerful tools for nondestructive inspection owing to the unique characteristics of neutron beams, such as high permeability for many heavy metals, high sensitivity for certain light elements, and isotope selectivity owing to a specific nuclear reaction between an isotope and neutrons. In this study, we employed a superconducting detector, current-biased kinetic-inductance detector (CB-KID) for neutron imaging using a pulsed neutron source. We employed the delay-line method, and high spatial resolution imaging with only four reading channels was achieved. We also performed wavelength-resolved neutron imaging by the time-of-flight method for the pulsed neutron source. We obtained the neutron transmission images of a Gd-Al alloy sample, inside which single crystals of GdAl3 were grown, using the delay-line CB-KID. Single crystals were well imaged, in both shapes and distributions, throughout the Al-Gd alloy. We identified Gd nuclei via neutron transmissions that exhibited characteristic suppression above the neutron wavelength of 0.03 nm. In addition, the 155 Gd resonance dip, a dip structure of the transmission caused by the nuclear reaction between an isotope and neutrons, was observed even when the number of events was summed over a limited area of 15 × 12μm 2 . Gd selective imaging was performed using the resonance dip of 155 Gd, and it showed clear Gd distribution even with a limited neutron wavelength range of 1 pm. Superconducting detectors are used in several fields owing to their high sensitivity. Transition edge sensors (TES) In our previous study, we developed a current-biased kinetic-inductance detector (CB-KID) as a superconducting neutron detector The device structure of CB-KID is similar to that of SNSPD: superconducting meanderlines are stacked on the superconducting ground plane, and DC bias current is passed through them. However, the amplitudes of the bias current in the two methods are different. Bias current of CB-KID is usually a few percentage of the critical current, whereas that of SNSPD is close to the critical current. CB-KID detects a transient change in the density of the Cooper pair induced by dissipative irradiation through the transient change in kinetic inductance. Therefore, the detection signal of CB-KID is proportional to the time derivative of the kinetic inductance, in contrast with MKID, which detects a change in the whole kinetic inductance. The main advantage of the delay-line CB-KID is that it has both high spatial and temporal resolution; thus, the energy dependence of neutron transmission can be observed with high spatial resolution using pulsed neutron sources. Some isotopes have significant peaks in the energy dependence of the neutron total cross sections resulting from the resonance structure in the cross sections of the neutron-induced reaction In this study, we employed a delay-line CB-KID to perform neutron transmission imaging for a Gd-Al alloy sample containing GdAl 3 single crystals. Single crystals of GdAl 3 were observed with the spatial resolution of at least 27.7 and 23.4 μm for the x and y directions, respectively. We represent a clear resonance dip of 155 Gd even on a limited area of 15 × 12μm 2 and Gd selective NRTI result. The delay-line CB-KID was fabricated on a SiO 2 /Si substrate. It has stacking layers of a superconducting Nb ground plane, X and Y superconducting Nb meanderlines, and a 10 B neutron conversion layer as shown in Fig. We obtained the penetration depth λ s ∼ 115 nm and the kinetic inductance of the meanderline L k ∼ 56 μH at 7.9 K with the two-fluid model, where we take a superconducting transition temperature T c = 8.5 K and the penetration depth of Nb meanderlines λ s = 60 nm at 4.2K. The nuclear reaction between 10 B atoms and incident neutrons at the neutron conversion layer creates charged particles, including ( 7 Li ions and α-particles). One of the particles could hit both the X and Y superconducting meanderlines, and thus, a transient reduction of n s occurs locally at the hot spot. According to the particle and heavy ion transport code system (PHITS) simulations, the energy deposition by 7 Li-ions is comparable to that by α-particles A local transient reduction of n s induces a transient change in local kinetic inductance. When a DC bias current I b is passed through the meanderlines, a pair of voltage pulses are generated at the hot spot, and each pulse propagates toward both ends of the meanderline as an electromagnetic wave. A voltage V across the hot spot is expressed as where L is inductance; L k is kinetic inductance; ∆l and S are the hot-spot length and cross-sectional area of the superconducting wire, respectively; and m s and q s are the effective mass and electric charge of the Cooper pair, respectively. Meanderlines with the ground plane are regarded as superconducting microstriplines, and thus, they can transmit highfrequency waves with lower attenuation even for the 151 m-length traveling If we assume events occurs at t 0 , it is determined by or These t 0 should be the same if the signal quartet originated from the same event. This coincidence check act as a good criterion to distinguish the correct quartets from the bundle of signals. In other word, the delay-line CB-KID has a multihit tolerance. The structure and principle of the detector are described in detail in GdAl 3 is an antiferromagnet with the Néel temperature of 18 K The delay-line CB-KID was cooled to 7.9 K with Gd-Al alloy sample using a Gifford-McMahon (GM) refrigerator in which the cold head is suspended by silicone rubber feet for vibration isolation. A test sample was pasted on an Al plate using an epoxy adhesive, which was placed at a distance of 0.8 mm from the detector. The temperature of the detector was modulated using a temperature controller (Model 44 by Cryogenic Control Systems Inc.). The vacuum can and constituent parts of the sample holder were made using Al alloy, and the alloy is almost transparent to neutron beams. The signals from four channels were amplified by an ultralow-noise differential amplifier (SA-430 F5 by NF Corporation), and the negative signals (Ch1 and Ch3) were inverted. Therefore, the Kalliope-DC readout circuit, a 1 ns-sampling multichannel (16 Ch × 2) time-to-digital converter Neutron-imaging experiments were performed using pulsed neutrons at BL10 of the Material and Life Science experimental Facility (MLF), J-PARC The main advantage of a CB-KID is the wide operating range. It can operate in a wide bias current range and a wide temperature range within the superconducting phase. Variation of the operating temperature of the detector with the median of the signal intensities V m at I b = 100 μA with a beam power of 307 kW is shown in Fig. Figure Reduction of v x and v y at higher operating temperatures A zoomed image of Fig. Figure 