A three-wall piston-cylinder type high pressure cell for muon-spin rotation/relaxation experiments was designed, manufactured, tested and commissioned. The outer cylinder of the cell body is made from MP35N and the middle and the inner cylinders are made from NiCrAl nonmagnetic alloys. The mechanical design and performance of the pressure cell are evaluated and optimised using finite-element analysis. The outcomes of the experimental testing closely match the modelling results. The high-pressure cell is shown to reach pressures of up to 3.3 GPa at ambient temperature, corresponding to 3.0 GPa at low temperatures, without irreversible damage. Pressure, together with magnetic field and temperature, is an important thermodynamic physical parameter. The pressure tuning allows to establish phase diagrams, study transitions between different phases, identify critical points, and, sometimes, create new materials with different physical properties compared to their ambient pressure variants. One of the most prominent example reached in high-pressure physics so far, is the discovery of a room temperature superconductivity in hydrate systems at ultrahigh pressures approaching p ∼ 200 GPa In general, the 'working horses' of high-pressure research experiments become the piston-cylinder type of pressure cells. Such cells, on the one hand, may reach moderately high pressures (up to 4.6 GPa at ambient temperature, Ref. In order to maximize pressure in piston-cylinder cells, the methods of 'thick-walled cylinder', 'wound cylinder', 'compound cylinder' and 'autofrettage' are invented A thick-walled cylinder subject to internal pressure will experience higher compressive tangential (hoop) stress in the inner surface than the outer surface. This means very thick cylinders can only hold a pressure up to half the material yield stress In the wound cylinder technique a strong, highly tensioned belt around a cylinder produces a compressive stress on the core, thus improving the hoop stress distribution across the pressurised cylinder's wall Compound cylinders are a pre-stressing technique that builds up compressive tangential stress to counteract stress generated through internal pressurisation Autofrettage is a cylinder pre-stressing technique that applies controlled internal pressure large enough to produce plastic deformation, Fig. In this work we have combined the two last techniques, namely the 'compound cylinder' and the 'autofrettage', in order to produce three-wall pressure cells, i.e. cells consisting of the one outer and the two inner cylinders. The main reason for considering the three-wall design, in comparison with the typically used single-or double-wall geometry, is that the maximum reachable pressure in the three-wall assembly is expected to be 20% higher compared to the double-wall cells and almost double compared to the single-wall cells (see Sec. 2). An additional use of the 'autofrettage' was expected to strengthen the inner channel of the pressure cell. Two three-wall pressure cells were built and tested. In both cells, the inner and the two outer cylinders we made out of MP35N and NiCrAl nonmagnetic alloys, respectively. The pressure in the first cell was increased to the maximum value within the single loading cycle. The failure of the cell, occurred at a maximum pressure p max 3.8 GPa, and was accompanied with the increased plastic deformation of the most inner cylinder. The second cell has obeyed three frettage cycles, with the maximum pressure reached p max 3.6 GPa. This cell was able to maintain pressure 3.3 GPa at a room temperature and 3.0 GPa at liquid He temperature. The mechanical design and performance of the three-wall pressure cells were further evaluated using finite-element analysis (FEA). In the two identical three-walled piston-cylinder high pressure cell designs, the elastic and plastic deformations were modelled using FEA to find the cell expansion during pressurisation and the resulting plastic deformation at the bore. The simulation and experimental results were very similar. The equivalent stress in each cell at its yield point was also simulated and found to correlate well with the experimental data. The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 compares maximum pressures reachable in the single-, double-, and three-wall compound cylinder geometry. Section 3 describes the three-wall pressure cell construction, tests of the thread assembly, and details of the finite element analysis procedure. The autofrettage process and the friction inside the cell are discussed in Sec. 4. Comparison of FEA model simulations and experimental results are made in Sec. 5. Section 6 describes the effect of pressure on the superconducting transition temperature and the thermodynamic critical field of elemental Indium. Conclusions follow in Section 7. Based on Lamé equations (see e.g. Refs. and Single-wall cylinder Double-wall cylinder Three-wall cylinder Here σ Y is the yield strength, a and b are the inner and the outer diameters of the cylinder assembly, c is the diameter of the inner cylinder in the double-wall geometry, and c 1 and c 2 are the diameters of the first and the second inner cylinders in the three-wall construction (see Fig. Note that Eqs. 1, 2, 3 and 4 assume that all cylinders are made of materials with similar yield strengths: For the pressure cell with a = 6 mm and b = 24 mm, which are typical dimensions for the cells used in muon-spin rotation/relaxation experiments This suggests that the three-wall assembly allows to almost double the maximum pressure compared to the single-wall design and reaches 20% higher values in comparison to the double-wall geometry. 3. The construction of the pressure cell and details of the finite element analysis procedure The schematic view of a three-wall piston-cylinder pressure cell is presented in Figs. The pressure cell consists of three cylindrical pieces. The outer MP35N cylinder [Fig. The mechanical drawing of the assembled three-wall pressure cell is shown in Fig. Following the assembly drawing presented in Fig. The maximum holding force for the case (i) could be estimated as: 1.98 GPa In order to prove these simulations, an additional mechanical test was performed. The 200 kN compressing force was applied to the top fixation bolt screwed by 10 mm inside the pressure cell body. No visible damage was detected on both, the pressure cell body and the fixation bolt, after releasing the force down to zero. The cell was modelled using ANSYS Workbench, Ref. The model was set up as shown in Fig. The autofrettage process is used to increase the maximum reachable pressure value. The physical processes leading to improved mechanical properties of the pressure cell bore are briefly discussed in the introductory part (see Sec. 1) and presented in Fig. Mechanically, the autofrettage procedure consists of two steps. At step one, the pressure inside the cell increases until the plastic deformations become detectable. At step two, the applied pressure is released to a certain low value in order to reduce stresses accumulated inside the cell. The steps 'one' and 'two' are then repeated several times. Due to mechanical hardening of the pressure cell channel, each subsequent pressure application cycle increases the plastic deformation onset point. By finishing the autofrettage procedure, the pressure as high as the pressure corresponding to the appearance of plastic deformations in the last autofrettage cycle might be applied Figure The force F a , applied by means of the external press to the piston, could be converted into a pressure using: Here S bore is the bore area. To ensure the pressure cell does not leak, a good sealing system is needed. The tight seal required for the piston-cylinder type of pressure cells can lead to a large amount of friction due to the piston sliding past the cell wall during pressurisation/depressurisation Before the applied force acts to pressurise the cell, frictional forces must be overcome. Therefore, the true pressure in the cell (p t ) is less than the applied pressure during cell loading (p t < F a /S bore ) and greater during unloading (p t > F a /S bore ). Consequently, the width of the hysteresis curve corresponds to twice the frictional force (2F f ) of the sealing system. The true pressure inside the cell could be found, therefore, as: with F f equals half the width of the hysteresis curve [ 2.5 kN, see Fig. Experimental pressure cell data allows for verification of the ANSYS FEA model through comparison of the simulation and experimental results. Figure It is necessary to model both the plastic and elastic deformation in ANSYS within the pressure cell wall. True stress-strain considers the actual area of the test specimen, providing more accurate material properties during plastic deformation. The engineering stress-strain curves for NiCrAl and MP35N, Refs. Here σ e /σ T and e / T are the engineering/true stress and strain, respectively. The material bilinear isotropic hardening properties for the ANSYS model were found from the tangent modulus of the plastic deformation region of the true stress-strain curves and were 22 GPa and 40 GPa for NiCrAl and MP35N, respectively. From Figure The plastic deformation was also calculated at the bore after the autofrettage process was complete and the cell was unloaded. The effect of loading and unloading cycles are not significant on the total bore deformation due to strain hardening when material yield strength is exceeded. Therefore, the analysis is simplified by finding the plastic strain at maximum pressure of 3.62 GPa [see Fig. It should noted here that the plastic deformation at the bore and the total radial deformation are conservative compared to experimental results. However, the FEA and 1.98 GPa, Ref. the experiment for both radial expansion and bore deformation show close correlation, proving the validity of the ANSYS model. Cell #1 did not undergo autofrettage and was pressurised to failure, which occurred in the inner NiCrAl cylinder. Cell #2 underwent autofrettage and was not pressurised to failure. The onset of plastic deformations for the cell #1 and #2 are presented in Fig. with σ r and σ t being the radial and the tangential stress, respectively. From Table Following Figure The main difference occurs for the inner NiCrAl cylinders, where the maximum equivalent stress is 2.4 GPa in the cell #1, which is 0.3 GPa larger than in the cell #2 at around 2.1 GPa. The higher cell yielding pressure in the cell #1 is, therefore, due to its stronger inner NiCrAl cylinder in the cell wall. This means that the main source of plastic deformation is at the inner cylinder, which continues to increase with pressure. This was confirmed through material hardness tests, where the inner NiCrAl cylinder used in the cell #1 had a higher hardness value compared to the cell #2. Accounting for friction, the cell #1 was found to fail at an applied load of 74.5 kN, as shown in Fig. the inner cylinder has a maximum equivalent stress of an almost 4.5 GPa, which is more than double NiCrAl yield strength. The equivalent stress in the inner cylinder propagates above NiCrAl yield strength until approximately 2 mm before the outer cylinder radius. The stress propagation in the inner cylinder will, therefore, allow very little room for the remaining material below yield to contain the high stresses, leading to the failure of the cell. 6. Scientific example: superconductivity of elemental Indium under pressure By closing the cell #2, the pressure inside the cell was determined by measuring the superconducting transition temperature of Indium. Note, that this was the same Indium sample as used for performing the autofrettage cycles (see Sec. 4.1). The cell was closed at 3.3 GPa by tightening the top bolt and pushing the piston 0.2 mm further down [see Fig. The superconducting transition of In sample was determined by using the ac susceptibiltiy setup described in Ref. where T c (0) 3.40 K is the transition temperature of Indium at p = 0. The value of T c (In) = 2.374 K was found, which corresponds to p 2.98 GPa (see Fig. The muon-spin rotation/relaxation (μSR) experiments were performed at the μE1 beamline by using GPD μSR spectrometer (Paul Scherrer Institute, PSI Villigen, Switzerland) The raw TF-μSR data obtained at T = 0.25 K and B ex = 16.1, 14.3, and 12.5 mT are shown in Fig. To summarize, a three-wall piston-cylinder type hybrid pressure cell was successfully designed, produced and commissioned. The cell is made out of NiCrAl and MP35N nonmagnetic alloys with the design and dimensions specifically adapted for muon-spin rotation/relaxation measurements. For two identical three-wall piston-cylinder high pressure cell designs, the elastic and plastic deformations were modelled using FEA to find the cell expansion during pressurisation and the resulting plastic deformation at the bore. The simulation and experimental results were very similar, where the simulation results were conservative in both cases by only 0.01 mm for cell expansion and between 0.01-0.02 mm for bore diametral plastic deformation. The equivalent stress in each cell at its yield point was also simulated and was found to correlate well with experimental data. The present design of the three-wall piston-cylinder pressure cell with an outer MP35N sleeve and two inner NiCrAl cylinders allows safely reach pressures up to 3.3 GPa at room temperature ( 3.0 GPa at low temperatures) without irreversible plastic deformation of the pressure cell walls. Test μSR experiments were performed on the elemental Indium sample.