A linear combination of spherically symmetric heat sources is shown to provide optimal stationary thermal distribution in magnetic hyperthermia. Furthermore, such spatial location of heat sources produces suitable temperature distribution in biological medium even for assemblies of magnetic nanoparticles with a moderate value of specific absorption rate (SAR), of the order of 100 -150 W/g. We also demonstrate the advantage of using assemblies of magnetic nanocapsules consisting of metallic iron nanoparticles covered with non magnetic shells of sufficient thickness in magnetic hyperthermia. Based on numerical simulation we optimize the size and geometric structure of biocompatible capsules in order to minimize the influence of strong magneto-dipole interaction between closely spaced nanoparticles. It is shown that assembly of capsules can provide sufficiently high SAR values of the order of 250 -400 W/g at moderate amplitudes H 0 ꞏ= 50 -100 Oe and frequencies f = 100 -200 kHz of alternating magnetic field, being appropriate for application in clinics. Magnetic hyperthermia is a new promising tool for cancer treatment For successful planning of therapeutic effects in magnetic hyperthermia, it is imperative to obtain a preliminary estimation of the stationary temperature distribution within a tumor and its vicinity. Proper planning of the heat sources power and their spatial distribution should ensure that the temperature in the entire tumor volume is within the therapeutic window 42 -45°C, the overheating of healthy tissues surrounding the tumor being avoided. To calculate the stationary temperature distribution in an isotropic biological medium a spherically symmetric solution of the heat equation It is worth mentioning that although the spherical thermal model To overcome the above problems, in a number of works Consider a homogeneous biological medium with an average thermal conductivity k s , where permanent heat sources with a density n(x,y,z) are distributed. A stationary temperature distribution in the medium is described by the heat equation As a boundary condition to this equation, one can assume a constant temperature on a certain surface S located far enough from the positions of the heat sources, , where T 0 = 36.6 C is the normal temperature of a human body. First, let us consider the simplest case of a spherically symmetric distribution of heat sources ; (2) where q 0 is the SAR of the assembly (W/g), C m is the concentration of magnetic nanoparticles (g/cm 3 ) uniformly distributed in a spherical region of radius R m , R 0 is the outer radius of the domain under consideration. Under the assumption that the temperature distribution approaches a constant value at the domain boundary, , the solution of Eqs. (1), (2) for the temperature increment T = T(r) -T 0 has the form [14-17] Using Eq. (3) it is easy to show that in the case R m << R 0 the temperature distribution only weakly depends on the external radius R 0 of the domain under consideration. The SAR of the assembly is determined by the magnetic and geometric properties of the nanoparticles Let us fix the typical values q 0 = 100 W/g and k s = 0.49 W(mK) -1 , and consider the dependence of the temperature distribution on the parameters R m and C m that can be selected by a researcher. In magnetic hyperthermia typical values of the nanoparticle concentration are given by C m = 5 -30 mg/cm 3 , whereas the characteristic radii of tumors in laboratory animals are within the range R t = 0.1 -0.8 cm Consider now the case of a relatively large heating region R m = 0.4 cm for various values of C m  20 mg/cm 3 . As Fig. This illustrative example shows that one of the problems in magnetic hyperthermia is the formation of an optimal temperature distribution for the treatment of tumors of irregular shape or sufficiently large sizes, R t > 0.4 -0.5 cm. It has been shown in the previous section that the spherically symmetric model, Eq. (3), is not sufficiently flexible for use in planning the temperature distribution in magnetic hyperthermia. However, there is an interesting possibility of covering a large tumor of complex shape with thermal fields from several quasispherical heat sources. It is easy to see that due to the linearity of Eq. (  , the solution of Eq. ( Moreover, if the external boundary of region S is located far enough from the domain of heat sources, then the boundary condition, In the presence of several heat sources, a sufficient number of fitting parameters appear in the problem, such as the centers i   of location of heat sources, their radii R m,i , as well as the concentration of magnetic nanoparticles in various sources, C m,i . As a result, it becomes possible to design an optimal stationary temperature distribution inside and around a tumor of a complex shape. As an example, consider a tumor of irregular shape located near the center of a cube with an edge of 1 cm. Fig. Fortunately, the calculations show that satisfactory results on modeling the thermal field in a tumor can be obtained with a appropriate distribution of heat sources of the same thermal power. In this case, the number of fitting parameters in the optimization problem decreases significantly. Namely, it is sufficient to select a spatial period of the heat source location and a thermal power of an individual source. As an example, Fig. We have already noted in the introduction the difficulties that arise in magnetic hyperthermia if one uses assemblies consisting of individual superparamagnetic nanoparticles. Actually, in a biological environment an uncontrolled agglomeration of nanoparticles usually occurs. In addition, nanoparticles often remove from a tumor with blood flows. A serious problem is a rapid destruction of individual nanoparticles in the body under the influence of an aggressive media, etc. It seems that at least some of these problems can be overcome if small optimized capsules of magnetic nanoparticles are used as heat sources. In this case the particles will be better protected from the aggressive influence of the biological media. Besides, the effect of MD interaction on SAR could be minimized with a proper capsule design. In the literature There are arguments Based on these considerations, we have optimized the structure of small capsules of iron nanoparticles to be used in magnetic hyperthermia. The details of the numerical simulation are given in Refs. Fig. Of course, SAR of an assembly of capsules usually decreases Fig. , where is the volume of a particle and 6 is the volume of a capsule, respectively. In the calculations performed the volume fraction was maintained approximately constant   0.02, which is close to its maximal possible value for particles covered with the non-magnetic shells of the given thickness t Sh = 20 nm. Evidently, in random capsules constructed in this way, the distance between the centers of magnetic nuclei cannot be less than d sep = D + 2t Sh . This leads to a significant decrease in the characteristic energy of MD interaction in capsule volume. It is interesting to note that the maximum of SAR in Fig. Let us estimate the heating ability of magnetic capsules designed using metallic iron nanoparticles. As we mentioned above, to generate typical thermal distribution in biological media shown in Fig. It is interesting to note that in the remarkable paper Important results were also obtained Note, in this regard, that the SAR calculations shown in Fig. An important issue in planning magnetic hyperthermia is the control of the temperature distribution in a tumor and healthy tissues surrounding it. During a successful medical procedure it is necessary to maintain a temperature in the range of 42 -45°C in the entire tumor volume, which may have a rather complex shape. Furthermore, the heating of healthy tissues surrounding the tumor above 42°C should be avoided for the duration of the hyperthermia session that is about 20-30 minutes. In this paper it is proposed to use a linear combination of spherically symmetric heat sources when planning the optimal temperature field in magnetic hyperthermia. This is especially important if the tumor has a large size or complex shape. In this approach a sufficiently large number of fitting parameters appears in the problem, namely, the number of sources, the position of their centers, the thermal power and sizes of individual sources, etc. In this paper it is shown that using suitable arrangement of identical heat sources in some cases it is possible to obtain a temperature distribution close to optimal. We have also shown that with an optimal distribution of heat sources in the biological environment, heat sources with moderate SAR values of the order of 100 -150 W/g can be used to perform successful medical thermal treatment. Further, important problems in magnetic hyperthermia are the agglomeration of magnetic nanoparticles in tissue, the removal of the nanoparticles from a tumor by means of a blood flow, and the rapid destruction of magnetic nanoparticles in an aggressive biological environment. All these processes lead to a significant decrease of the heating power of magnetic nanoparticles in the biological medium over time and make the heat effect on the tumor inefficient. In a number of works 