Two-dimensional honeycomb crystals have inspired intense research interest for their novel properties and great potential in electronics and optoelectronics. Here, through molecular beam epitaxy on SrTiO3(001), we report successful epitaxial growth of metal-rich chalcogenide Fe2Te, a honeycomb-structured film that has no direct bulk analogue, under Te-limited growth conditions. The structural morphology and electronic properties of Fe2Te are explored with scanning tunneling microscopy and angle resolved photoemission spectroscopy, which reveal electronic bands cross the Fermi level and nearly-flat bands. Moreover, we find a weak interfacial interaction between Fe2Te and the underlying substrates, paving a newly developed alternative avenue for honeycomb-based electronic devices. Following the advent of graphene Alternatively, honeycomb lattice compounds of two or more elements have been becoming increasingly popular as promising candidates for tunable Dirac cones. They, for example, include transition metal chalcogenides (TMCs) that commonly crystallize into the layered structure Our experiments were conducted on a commercial ultrahigh vacuum (UHV) STM apparatus (Unisoku), connected to a molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) chamber for in-situ sample growth. The base pressure is better than 1.0 × 10 -10 Torr. The Nb-doped SrTiO3(001) substrates were firstly degassed at 600oC, and subsequently annealed at 1250°Cunder UHV for 20 minutes to get the clean and flat surface. Epitaxial films of metal-rich Fe2Te were obtained by coevaporating high-purity Fe (99.9999%) and Te (99.9999%) from standard Knudsen cells. All STM measurements were carried out at 4.7 K using sharp polycrystalline PtIr tips, which were firstly cleaned by electron beam bombardment in MBE and appropriately calibrated on Ag/Si(111) films. All STM topographic images were acquired in a constant-current mode with the bias V applied to the sample. Tunneling spectra were measured using a standard lock-in technique with a small bias modulation of 10 meV at 919 Hz. After the STM measurements, the samples were transferred to vacuum-interconnected X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) chambers for further analysis of their composition and electronic structure. The ARPES measurements were performed at 78 K with a photo energy of 21.2 eV, while elemental sensitive XPS measurements in a PHI5000 system equipped with a monochromatic Al-Kɑ radiation of 1486.7 eV. All XPS spectra were calibrated using the C 1s peak at 284.6 eV and analyzed via a CasaXPS software. We started with the epitaxial growth of FeTe thin films under Te-rich growth condition, with the temperatures of Fe-cell (TFe) and Te-cell (TTe) set to 1040°C and 230°C, respectively. This leads to a Te/Fe flux ratio of about 10. With increasing substrate temperature Tsub, a structural transition from tetragonal β-FeTe to hexagonal α-FeTe phases is revealed around 300°C. This differs from its sister compound FeSe As the TTe is significantly lowered to 200°C and the MBE epitaxial growth becomes to be Telimited (i.e. the Te/Fe flux ratio is lower than unity), we surprisingly discover a completely new phase of Fe-Te binary compound with a honeycomb lattice, as illustrated in Figs. Note that the honeycomb-structured Fe-Te is not limited to monolayer films and can be stabilized to multilayers. By optimizing the Tsub ranging from 280°C to 370°C, the metal-rich Fe-Te films almost cover the whole surface of SrTiO3 substrate [Fig. We then performed in-situ elemental-sensitive XPS experiments to precisely determine the stoichiometry of epitaxial honeycomb films. For comparison, similar XPS spectra have been collected on the β-FeTe epitaxial film as well. Figure , although only a tiny difference occurs for the Fe-2p XPS peaks in the two compounds [Fig. Having identified the chemical composition of the honeycomb films as metal-rich Fe2Te (abbreviated hereafter as h-Fe2Te), we study its electronic structure by combining real space STM and reciprocal space ARPES techniques. Irrespective of the variation of film thickness, the h-Fe2Te samples are all characteristic of finite or metallic-like electronic density of states (DOS) near EF, as confirmed by in-situ scanning tunneling spectroscopy in Fig. Provided that the in-plane lattice constant (∼ 11.5 Å) of h-Fe2Te happens to be three times as large as that (∼ 3.82 Å) of α-FeTe, one might argue a fragility of α-FeTe induced by surface reconstruction for the metal-rich h-Fe2Te. However, this is not true, because a simultaneous imaging of the α-FeTe and h-Fe2Te lattices reveals that the crystal directions of h-Fe2Te run at approximately 30 o to, rather than along those of α-FeTe [Fig. In summary, we have used MBE to successfully prepare metal-rich Fe2Te thin films with honeycomb lattice under Te-limited growth conditions. In-situ STM and ARPES measurements combine to reveal electron-like bands cross EF and nearly-flat bands below EF. An inspection of the epitaxial relationship demonstrates a weak interfacial interaction between the epitaxial Fe2Te overlayer and underlying substrates. This finding, as well as the sizable unit cell of honeycomb lattice, might serve a novel platform for exploring the honeycomb lattice-based electronic applications, although further investigation is needed to pin down the crystal structure of honeycomb Fe2Te. 