We give a brief review of the Mott-Kondo scenario and its consequence in the recently-discovered infinite-layer nickelate superconductors. We argue that the parent state is a self-doped Mott insulator and propose an effective t-J-K model to account for its low-energy properties. At small doping, the model describes a low carrier density Kondo system with incoherent Kondo scattering at finite temperatures, in good agreement with experimental observation of the logarithmic temperature dependence of electric resistivity. Upon increasing Sr doping, the model predicts a breakdown of the Kondo effect, which provides a potential explanation of the non-Fermi liquid behavior of the electric resistivity with a power law scaling over a wide range of the temperature. Unconventional superconductivity is shown to undergo a transition from nodeless (d + is)-wave to nodal d-wave near the critical doping due to competition of the Kondo and Heisenberg superexchange interactions. The presence of different pairing symmetry may be supported by recent tunneling measurements. Recent discovery of superconductivity (SC) in infinitelayer Sr-doped NdNiO 2 films 1 and subsequently in hole doped LaNiO 2 and PrNiO 2 films 2-5 has stimulated intensive interest in condensed matter community. Despite of many theoretical and experimental efforts, there are still debates on its electronic structures and pairing mechanism In undoped cuprates, Cu 2+ ions contain 9 electrons with partially occupied 3d x 2 -y 2 orbitals. The oxygen 2p orbitals are higher in energy than the Cu 3d x 2 -y 2 lower Hubbard band. Thus, cuprates belong to the so-called charge-transfer insulator. A superexchange interaction between localized Cu 3d x 2 -y 2 spins is mediated by oxygen ions and causes an antiferromagnetic (AF) ground state. Upon chemical doping, holes may be introduced on the oxygen sites in the CuO 2 planes However, there are clear evidences since the beginning suggesting that these two systems are different. Instead of a Mott insulator with AF long-range order like in cuprates, NdNiO 2 displays metallic behavior at high temperatures with a resistivity upturn below about 70 K, showing no sign of any magnetic long-range order in the whole measured temperature range Interestingly, the Kondo hybridization does not appear significant at first glance in band structure calculations The above differences have an immediate impact on candidate pairing mechanism of the superconductivity. At critical doping, the t-J-K model predicted possible SC transition from a gapped (d + is)-wave state to a gapless d-wave pairing state due to the competition of Kondo and superexchange interactions In this paper, we briefly summarize the consequences of the Mott-Kondo scenario based on the extended t-J-K model for nickelate superconductors To introduce the effective t-J-K model for describing the low-energy physics of nickelates, we start from a background lattice of Ni 1+ 3d x 2 -y 2 localized spins with a small number of self-doped holes and Nd-5d conduction electrons where the first term comes from the hopping of holes, the second term describes the spin lattice, and the third term gives the Kondo interaction. For simplicity, we consider a minimal model with Ni-3d whose ground state is a Mott insulator with AF longrange orders. The self-doping effect is supported by first-principles band structure calculations The hybridization between Ni 3d x 2 -y 2 spins and conduction electrons gives the additional Kondo term: where k is the dispersion of conduction electrons projected on the square lattice of the Ni 1+ ions, and τ α (α = x, y, z) are the spin-1/2 Pauli matrices. Only a single conduction band is considered for simplicity. In reality, the pockets should be three dimensional. For a low carrier density system, the average number of conduction electrons is small, i.e. n c = N -1 s jσ c † jσ c jσ 1. The presence of magnetic impurities may be at first glance ascribed to the Nd 4f moments. However, the Nd 3+ ion contains three f electrons forming a localized spin-3/2 moment, which acts more like a classical spin as in manganites and therefore disfavors spin-flip scattering as the quantum spin-1/2 moment. Their energy level is also far away from the Fermi energy, so it is reasonable to ignore the Nd 4f electrons. For parent compounds, self-doping also introduces an equal number of Ni 3d x 2 -y 2 holes on the spin lattice. The hopping of holes on the lattice of Ni 3d x 2 -y 2 spins can be described as interactions, where d iσ and d † iσ are the annihilation and creation operators of the Ni 3d x 2 -y 2 electrons, respectively, t ij is the hopping integral between site i and j, and P G is the Gutzwiller operator to project out doubly occupancy of local Ni 3d x 2 -y 2 orbital. As in cuprates, the holes' motion is strongly renormalized due to the onsite Coulomb repulsion U . Quite generally, the effective t-J-K model can be replaced by the one-band Hubbard model plus a hybridization term with additional conduction electrons: The model may also be viewed as a periodic Anderson model with dispersive d bands. It allows for a better treatment of charge fluctuations of the Ni 3d x 2 -y 2 orbitals, in particular for large Sr doping or small Coulomb interaction. In this work, we only consider the minimal t-J-K model and show that it can already capture some main physics of the nickelates. As is in heavy fermion systems, the t-J-K model contains two competing energy scales that support different ground states. The Heisenberg superexchange J favors an antiferromagnetic long-range order, while the Kondo coupling K tends to screen the local spins and form a nonmagnetic ground state. In nickelates, due to the large charge transfer energy between O-2p and Ni-3d x 2 -y 2 orbitals, J is expected to be smaller that that (about 100 meV) in cuprates. Raman scattering measurements confirmed this expectation and estimated J ≈ 25 meV in bulk NdNiO 2 We may propose a global phase diagram starting from an antiferromagnetic ground state. The self-doping introduces equal numbers of conduction electrons and holes. The conduction electrons tend to form Kondo singlets with local spins due to the large K. Both tend to suppress the long-range AF order and causes a paramagnetic ground state. But because of the small number of conduction electrons, local spins cannot be fully Kondo screened to become delocalized. Thus, instead of a heavy fermion metal, we are actually dealing with a low carrier density Kondo system at low temperatures. Due to insufficient Kondo screening, the resistivity exhibits insulating-like behavior (upturn) because of incoherent Kondo scattering, which is typical for low carrier density Kondo systems and has been observed previously in CeNi 2-δ (As 1-x P x ) 2 As shown in the phase diagram, the paramagnetic region (KS) is responsible for undoped or low doped nickelates. In this case, we have a small number (n c ) of conduction electrons per Ni-site and n c +p empty nickel sites (holons) on the NiO 2 plane, where p is the hole doping ratio. In the large K limit and at zero temperature, conduction electrons form Kondo singlets or doublons with local Ni spins. We may then derive an effective lowenergy Hamiltonian in terms of doublons, holons, and localized spins, to describe a doped Mott metallic state with Kondo singlets. A cartoon picture is given in Fig. For this, we first introduce the pseudofermion representation for the spin-1/2 local moments: where f jσ is a fermionic operator for the spinon on site j. The Ni 3d x 2 -y 2 electron operator is given by d jσ = h † j f jσ with a local constraint, h † j h j + σ f † jσ f jσ = 1, if we ignore double occupancy. Here h † j is a bosonic operator creating a holon on site j. The doublon operators for the on-site Kondo spin singlet and triplets may be defined as The Kondo term then becomes Resistivity (mΩ cm) which describes the doublon formation on each site, namely, the Kondo singlet or triplet pair formed by one conduction electron with a localized spinon. We see that the triplet pair costs a higher energy of K. Similarly, there may also exist three-particle states with one localized spinon and two conduction electrons on the same site, e † jσ = f † jσ c † j↑ c † j↓ , or one-particle states with one unpaired spinon only, f jσ = 1 -n c j f jσ . Following Refs. where the spin operators are Here only the nearest-neighbor hopping parameters t and t c are considered for simplicity. For large but finite K, apart from some complicated interactions, an additional term should also be included which describes the doublon condensation. This effective Hamiltonian describes the ground state of nickelates at zero or low doping. It is similar to the usual t-J model for cuprates An alternative explanation for the resistivity upturn is weak localization, where disordered holes in the NiO 2 plane may also give rise to a logarithmic correction. However, this explanation is not supported by the corresponding correction to the Hall coefficient and magnetoresistance. Experimentally, superconductivity was first observed to emerge and have an onset temperature of 14.9 K in 20% Sr doped NdNiO 2 thin films deposited on SrTiO 3 substrates 1 . From the t-J-K model, one may naively expect that sufficiently large doping may deplete conduction electrons and increase the number of holons, driving the system to an effective t-J model resembling that in cuprates. As a result, d-wave superconductivity may arise due to the superexchange interaction between Ni 3d x 2 -y 2 electrons. However, this is not the whole truth. With increasing Sr doping, the ordinary Hall coefficient at high temperatures becomes smaller in magnitude but remains negative even in Nd 0.8 Sr 0.2 NiO 2 1 , which cannot be explained by a single carrier model but rather indi- cates a cancellation of electron and hole contributions. Thus, conduction electrons should still be present even at 20% Sr doping. It is thus anticipated that superconductivity in nickelates may be affected by the presence of conduction electrons and their Kondo hybridization with Ni 3d x 2 -y 2 electrons. The pairing symmetry can be studied by using the renormalized mean-field theory (RMFT) For all doping, we find a dominant d-wave pairing symmetry for large t c /K or small K. But for low doping and moderate t c /K, we obtain a (d + is)-wave pairing state that breaks the time-reversal symmetry. This is different from the conventional picture based purely on the t-J model for cuprates, where the Heisenberg superexchange interaction favors d-wave pairing Details of RMFT calculations are explained as follows The resulting mean-field Hamiltonian has a simple bilinear form in the momentum space, where we have introduced the Nambu spinors ) and defined the matrix elements Here α denotes the vectors of the nearest-neighbor lattice sites and δ stands for those of the next-nearest-neighbor sites. μ 1 and μ 2 are chemical potentials fixing the numbers of the constrained electrons d iσ and conduction electrons c iσ , respectively. The above mean-field Hamiltonian can be diagonalized using the Bogoliubov transformation, The ground state is given by the vacuum of the Bogoliubov quasiparticles {α † kσ , β † kσ }, which in turn yields the self-consistent equations for the mean-field order parameters. We will not go into more details here, but only mention that the mean-field self-consistent equations can be solved numerically and yield two dominant pairing We see a clear transition from the mixed (d + is)-wave SC to the pure d-wave SC. Antiferromagnetic spin fluctuations have been observed in bulk Nd 1-x Sr x NiO 2 by NMR Recent single particle tunneling experiment 56 on superconducting nickelate thin films have also observed two distinct types of spectra: a V-shape feature with a gap maximum of 3.9 meV, a U-shape feature with a gap of about 2.35 meV, and some spectra with mixed contributions of these two components. If we attribute their different observations to different hole concentrations due to possible surface effect, the two types of spectra may correspond exactly to the two pairing states in our theory. In this sense, the scanning tunneling spectra have provided a supportive evidence for our theoretical prediction of multiple superconducting phases. Of course, the (d + is)-wave pairing might not exist in real materials if the Kondo coupling K is too weak or t c /K is too large. In that case, as is seen in Fig. As shown in Fig. As a matter of fact, experiment has indeed observed quantum critical behavior in the normal state above T c . A tentative fit of the resistivity in superconducting nick- elate thin films has yielded power-law scaling with temperature, namely ρ ∼ T α , with α = 1.1 -1.3 over a wide range We have introduced the picture of self-doped Mott insulator to describe the recently discovered nickelate superconductors. The self-doping effect has been generally accepted by the community and distinguishes nickelates from cuprates. We further propose a Mott-Kondo scenario and an extended t-J-K model based on transport measurements and electronic structure calculations. Our model bridges the usual Kondo lattice model for heavy fermions and the t-J model for cuprates, but shows unique features that can only be understood as an interplay of both physics. Our theory provides a natural explanation of the resistivity upturn in undoped nickelates at low temperatures, and our calculations based on the t-J-K model predict an exotic (d + is)-wave superconductivity that breaks the time reversal symmetry and a possible transition of the pairing symmetry at critical doping, around which the normal state exhibits non-Fermi liquid behavior above T c . This implies that nickelate superconductors are a novel class of unconventional superconductors. Thus, exploration of new physics based on our theory will be an interesting direction for future investigations. Currently there still exist different opinions on the effect of Sr doping. Some argued that holes may occupy other Ni 3d orbitals and the Hund coupling may favor a high spin state (S = 1). This scenario seems inconsistent with joint analyses of XAS and RIXS experiments 