During the last decade, valence change memory (VCM) has been extensively studied due to its promising features, such as a high endurance and fast switching times. The information is stored in a high resistive state (logcial '0', HRS) and a low resistive state (logcial '1', LRS). It can also be operated in two different writing schemes, namely a unipolar switching mode (LRS and HRS are written at the same voltage polarity) and a bipolar switching mode (LRS and HRS are written at opposite voltage polarities). VCM, however, still suffers from a large variability during writing operations and also faults occur, which are not yet fully understood and, therefore, require a better understanding of the underlying fault mechanisms. In this study, a new intrinsic failure mechanism is identified, which prohibits RESET times (transition from LRS to HRS) faster than 400 ps and possibly also limits the endurance. We demonstrate this RESET speed limitation by measuring the RESET kinetics of two valence change memory devices (namely Pt/TaOx/Ta and Pt/ZrOx/Ta) in the time regime from 50 ns to 50 ps, corresponding to the fastest writing time reported for VCM. Faster RESET times were achieved by increasing the applied pulse voltage. Above a voltage threshold it was, however, no longer possible to reset both types of devices. Instead a unipolar SET (transition from HRS to LRS) event occurred, preventing faster RESET times. The occurrence of the unipolar SET is attributed to an oxygen exchange at the interface to the Pt electrode, which can be suppressed by introducing an oxygen blocking layer at this interface, which also allowed for 50 ps fast RESET times. Among other emerging memory technologies, valence change memory (VCM) can not only be used as binary storage class memory, but also to perform in-memory calculations or to realize neuromorphic applications For the binary switching mode, a high endurance of up to 10 12 cycles Recently, we have shown that 50 ps fast SET times can be achieved for TaO x -and ZrO x -based VCM devices In this study, we propose a different failure mechanism limiting the RESET kinetics in the sub-nanosecond regime: For this purpose, we focus on the RESET kinetics in the regime from 50 ns to 50 ps and show that they are intrinsically limited by the presence of a unipolar switching mode This unipolar switching mode has already been observed for TaO x - The kinetics of this unipolar SET are also investigated in the time regime from 250 ps to 50 ps. We demonstrate that this unipolar SET event can be conducted within 50 ps. From the RESET and unipolar SET kinetics, we derive voltage programming windows, from which the intrinsic RESET speed limitation can be derived. Finally, we suppressed the oxygen exchange at the Pt electrodes with a 1.0 nm thin Al 2 O 3 layer, which also allowed for 50 ps fast RESET times for both devices, which is -to our knowledge -the fastest reported RESET time of redox based random access memories (ReRAMs). The RESET and unipolar SET kinetics measurements were conducted on a Pt/TaO x /Ta and a Pt/ZrO x /Ta device. Both devices have a size of 2 × 2 μm 2 and were also used in The experimental setup is sketched in Fig. To achieve proper impedance matching, both devices were integrated into coplanar waveguide (CPW) structures, consisting of three parallel stripes (ground-signal-ground, GSG). These CPW structures have gained more attention in recent years, as they can be used to realize radio frequency (RF) switches with memristive devices The measurement procedure to determine the RESET kinetics on the timescale from 50 ns to 400 ps is depicted in Fig. Two exemplary current responses to the applied voltage pulse are shown Fig. A similar definition was used in our previous publications In case of the current response of the TaO x -based device in Fig. To decrease the influence of the pulse generator's rise time, the RESET kinetic measurements in the range from 250 ps to 50 ps were conducted with a faster pulse generator, having a rise time of only ≈ 35 ps. The measurement cycle is sketched in Fig. An exemplary measurement on the TaO x -based device at a voltage of 1.6 V is shown in Fig. The measurement procedure to determine the unipolar SET kinetics is depicted in Fig. This measurement procedure was repeated at different amplitudes (from 1.6 V to 5.0 V) for the TaO x -and ZrO x -based devices. The median values are plotted in Fig. The resulting unipolar SET times are shown in Fig. Although fast switching times are usually considered as promising feature, our interpretation of the fast unipolar SET time is that it should be considered as failure mechanism. At higher voltage amplitudes, the unipolar SET occurs faster than the RESET and, thereby, prohibits fast bipolar switching in both directions. This RESET speed limitation is illustrated in the following with RESET programming windows. These windows were estimated with the results from the RESET and the unipolar SET kinetics. As mentioned in the introduction, the unipolar switching mode observed in ReRAM devices, has less promising attributes with regards to endurance and switching power compared to the bipolar switching mode. The results from the RESET kinetics (Fig. From Fig. 1. Lowering the RESET voltage 2. Suppressing the unipolar switching mode Torrezan et al. achieved 120 ps fast RESET times with a TaO x -based device Suppressing the unipolar SET or mitigating its impact on the bipolar RESET kinetics requires a better understanding of the underlying physical processes. The abrupt nature of the unipolar SET results from a thermal runaway (similar to the bipolar SET) To test if an oxygen exchange also occurs during the unipolar SET between the oxide and the active Pt electrode, we introduced a 1.0 nm thick Al 2 O 3 layer between the active Pt electrodes and the oxides, resulting in a Pt(30 nm)/Al 2 O 3 (1.0 nm)/TaO x (5 nm)/Ta(20 nm) and a Pt(30 nm)/Al 2 O 3 (1.0 nm)/ZrO x (5 nm)/Ta(20 nm) stack (referred to as Al 2 O 3 /TaO x and Al 2 O 3 /ZrO x device, respectively). We tested to reset both devices with 50 ps pulses. The measurement cycle is similar to the one from Fig. The results for R PRE and R POST of the Al The devices did, however, also remain in the LRS sometimes, indicating that the 1.0 nm thick Al 2 O 3 layer might only partially prohibit the oxygen exchange at the Pt active electrode and the remaining oxygen exchange might prohibit successful RESET operations. A similar observation was made by Zhang et al., who have placed an Al 2 O 3 layer at the active electrode of a TiO x -based device to suppress the oxygen exchange at the active interface In this study, we have demonstrated that the RESET kinetics of VCM-based devices are intrinsically limited by the coexistance of a unipolar switching mode. Therefore, the RESET kinetics of a TaO x and a ZrO x -based device were investigated in the regime from 50 ns to 50 ps. RESET times down to 480 ps could be achieved by increasing the voltage amplitude of the RESET pulse. At higher amplitudes, a unipolar SET event was triggered which prohibits faster RESET times and rather decreases the devices' resistances. The unipolar SET kinetics were subsequently measured, showing that the unipolar SET can occur within 50 ps. We attribute the unipolar SET event to a thermal runaway, which followed by an oxygen exchange between the oxide and the active Pt electrode. This oxygen exchange could be partially suppressed by introducing a 1.0 nm thick Al 2 O 3 layer between the oxide and the active electrode. With these devices 50 ps fast RESET operations could be repeated, but only stochastically. We also show, with the data from previous publications, that the occurrence of the unipolar SET limits the endurance of both devices. As the unipolar switching mode has less promising attributes than the bipolar switching mode, the unipolar SET needs to be treated as failure mechanism and further strategies should be developed to suppress its occurrence. Device fabrication and structure: As substrate served a Si-wafer (ρ > 10 kΩcm). The top of the wafer was oxidized resulting in a 430 nm thick SiO 2 layer. All deposition steps were conducted by means of RF magnetron sputtering. The 2 × 2 μm 2 devices were structured with optical lithography. More details on the device fabrication can be found in Electrical characterization: The experimental setup is sketched in Fig. The current response of the TaO x -based device to a 4 ns pulse with an amplitude of 1.8 V is shown in Fig. The measurement procedure to test the devices' endurance is sketched in Fig. The amplitude was reduced compared to the measurement in the main text to reduce the stress onto the devices. To reduce the measurement duration, the sweep rate was also accelerated from 0.5 V/s to 2.5 V/s. The devices were then driven into the LRS with a positive voltage pulse. For the TaO x -based device, the pulse width was chosen to 70 ps and the pulse amplitude to 5.0 V. For the ZrO x -based device, the pulse width was chosen to 50 ps and the pulse amplitude to 7.1 V. The devices' resistances were read at a voltage of 0.5 V, before R PRE and after R POST the pulse's application. The results are shown in Fig. This is the effective pulse voltage seen by the device. The pulses emitted by the pulse generator only have half the amplitude. As the 50 Ω transmission line is terminated with a high ohmic VCM device (even the resistance of the LRS is much larger than 50 Ω), the voltage at the device effectively doubles. This is due to the overlap of incoming pulse and the reflected pulse at the VCM device (see also supplementary section S.1 or The measurement cycles of the ZrOx-based device at a voltage of 1.6 V were repeated 20 times to achieve a smooth line of R Post /R PRE . For a successful RESET operation the ratio of R POST /R PRE should be greater than 3 The exact numbers are listed in TableS1of the supplementary information.