Optical frequency combs have become a very powerful tool in metrology and beyond thanks to their ability to link radio frequencies with optical frequencies via a process known as self-referencing. Typical self-referencing is accomplished in two steps: the generation of an octave-spanning supercontinuum spectrum and the frequency-doubling of one part of that spectrum. Traditionally, these two steps have been performed by two separate optical components. With the advent of photonic integrated circuits, the combination of these two steps has become possible in a single small and monolithic chip. One photonic integrated circuit platform very well suited for on-chip self-referencing is lithium niobate on insulatora platform characterised by high second and third order nonlinearities. Here we show that combining a lithium niobate on insulator waveguide with a silicon photodiode results in a very compact and direct low-noise path towards self-referencing of mode-locked lasers. Using digital servo electronics the resulting frequency comb is fully stabilized. Its high degree of stability is verified with an independent out-of-loop measurement and is quantified to be 6.8 mHz. Furthermore, we show that the spectrum generated inside the lithium niobate waveguide remains stable over many hours. Lithium niobate on insulator (LNOI) has gained a lot of momentum in recent years as a platform for photonic integrated circuits (PICs) One application where LNOI PICs have been demonstrated a large potential for a reduction in size, cost and complexity is the self-referencing of frequency combs Additionally, two advantages arise when using PICs for applications relying on nonlinear frequency conversion: first, compared to optical fibers, the required pulse energies for achieving coherent octave-spanning spectra are relatively low, in the range of several tens of picojoules, due to the tight light confinement in the PICs' waveguides and the often high intrinsic optical nonlinearities of the waveguide materials. Second, the effectiveness of the nonlinear processes is increased by waveguide dispersion engineering, allowing a careful control over the dispersion curves and obtaining a desired result suitable for a given application. This has been demonstrated over the last years for several different PIC platforms In this article, we address the suitability of LNOI PICs for long-term operation and the metrological stability of the laser lock. We show that a millimeter-sized LNOI PIC combined with a standard silicon PIN photodiode and fully digital servo electronics allows for an extremely simple yet very stable operation of a self-referenced and fully locked frequency comb. To prove the actual metrological stability of the system, we build an out-of-loop setup as an independent fibre-based f-2f interferometer, which demonstrates a millihertz-level stability. In addition, we investigate the stability of the optical supercontinuum spectra generated inside the LNOI waveguides. The shape of the optical spectrum does not show any significant changes over many hours of continuous operation and power variations in the spectrum stay well below 25%. The LNOI PICs with the nonlinear waveguides used in this study are fabricated at CSEM's micro-fabrication facility. The waveguide fabrication technology is based on commercially available LNOI 6-inch wafers (from NanoLN). The thin film layer stack consists of a 600 nm thick mono-crystalline x-cut lithium niobate layer on top of a 4.7 μm buried thermal oxide layer. The waveguides are patterned in hydrogen silsesquioxane (HSQ) using electron beam lithography and are etched 400 nm into the LNOI layer using an optimized Ar+ ion milling recipe For the experimental implementation of the laser selfreferencing we use a LNOI waveguide whose nominal width is 1300 nm. Propagating ∼ 140 pJ optical pulses centred around 1555 nm through the waveguide results in a more than octave-spanning optical spectrum, as shown in Fig. The setup, presented in Fig. The second part of the laser light (several mW, amplified up to 70 mW in a fiber amplifier) is used for the outof-loop (OOL) measurement of the f ceo stability by using a standard f-2f interferometer employing a highly nonlinear fibre (HNLF) to generate an octave-spanning supercontinuum and a bulk periodically-poled lithium nio- bate crystal (PPLN) for second harmonic generation. A dichroic mirror (DM) transmitting the part of the light below 1200 nm is placed in front of the OOL photodiode in order to avoid saturation. Finally, the resulting OOL f ceo signal is amplified, filtered and monitored on a second ESA and a second frequency counter. For a long-term operation it is essential that the optical power coupled to the waveguide stays constant. In our work the input fibre is actively stabilised in two axes by locking the DC signal of the IL PD to its maximum. This is achieved by slowly modulating the two axes describing the plane parallel to the chip facet with the use of piezo actuators and implementing a digital lock-in scheme with a second FPGA. The scheme of the laser lock is shown in Fig. Once set up and with the initial adjustments done, the FPGA-based logic for the full stabilization runs entirely on the FPGA board and is independent of any remote computer or network connections. The adjustment of the PI parameters is performed through a web interface and the error and correction signals are streamed through the local network to be monitored and recorded on a remote computer using a GNU Radio Companion 40 digital oscilloscope and spectrum analyser interface. A very stable hydrogen maser system supplies the 10 MHz RF reference signal to all RF instruments in the experiment, including the FPGA board. showcases the f ceo beatnotes for both the IL (left, violet trace) and OOL (right, teal trace) systems. The beatnotes are characterised by a high signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) of 56 dB and 45 dB for the IL and OOL, respectively, at a resolution bandwidth (RBW) of 30 kHz. Once the laser is fully locked using the IL signal from the LNOI waveguide, both the IL and OOL f ceo were recorded without dead time or gaps by two frequency counters (Keysight 53230A) in order to verify the stability of the laser lock. Figure In Fig. In addition, the stability of the optical spectrum was determined over an extended period of time. In order to record the optical spectra, the light at the output of the LNOI waveguide is coupled into a 100 μm multimode optical fibre to be recorded by an optical spectrum analyser (OSA). The data was recorded every 30 seconds for 72 hours. The evolution of the optical spectrum over time is shown in Fig. The main limitation of the current system lies in the input coupling losses to the waveguide. The lensed fibreto-chip interface is a convenient however not an ideal solution for coupling the light to the waveguide. As the size and shape of the modes are not perfectly matched, high losses on the input facet are observed. The measured coupling losses of approximately 6.2 dB per facet to the waveguides with an air top cladding could be substantially improved by adding a silicon dioxide top cladding at the coupling region and designing on chip couplers acting as mode converters. Using such an approach, impressive results of only 0.5 dB loss per facet have already been achieved with the LNOI platform In the current setup, the input fibre position is actively stabilised in order to provide a constant coupling to the waveguide by compensating for any mechanical, temperature and pressure related perturbations. From the perspective of stability and a lower complexity in particular for future applications it would be preferential to fix the input fibre using an appropriate packaging technology. The use of a single FPGA with a flexible lock architecture for the stabilization of f rep and f ceo simplifies the setup substantially and provides a possibility to implement an orthogonal stabilisation The present setup is characterised by high stability results that show at least one order of magnitude improvement on the standard deviation of the IL f ceo as compared to other published works focused on direct on-chip selfreferencing One well-known drawback of lithium niobate is a reported relatively high sensitivity towards the photo-refractive effect While our experiments rely on a mode-locked laser as a frequency comb source, the results could also pave the way for efficient self-referencing of Kerr frequency combs in the future. In this case, the broadband spectrum can be generated directly on the PIC from a continuous wave laser We have demonstrated a compact and stable RFto-optical link employing lithium niobate on insulator waveguides. Owing to the high χ 