Circular dichroism and helical dichroism are intriguing chiroptical phenomena with broad applications in optical sensing and imaging. Here, we generalize one of the phenomena-helical dichroism-to acoustics. We show that a one-dimensional lattice of chiral resonators with loss can induce differential absorption of helical sounds (i.e. acoustic vortices) carrying opposite orbital angular momentum (OAM). This acoustic helical dichroism strongly depends on the rotation symmetry of the chiral resonators. A breaking of the C4 rotation symmetry can induce coupling between the opposite chiral dipole modes of the resonators. This leads to OAM bandgaps and non-Hermitian exceptional points near the Brillouin-zone center and boundaries, which together give rise to significantly enhanced helical dichroism. The underlying physics can be well captured by an effective Hamiltonian that quantitatively reproduces the complex band structures. The acoustic helical dichroism can find important applications in acoustic OAM manipulations and chiral sound-matter interactions. Chiroptical effects induced by the interaction of light with chiral structures have attracted considerable interest due to broad applications in physics, chemistry, and biology Despite the extensive study of CD and HD effects in optics, the exploration of their counterparts in acoustics has not been reported yet. Sound propagating in air/fluids is a longitudinal wave carrying no intrinsic spin angular momentum We organize the paper as following. In the Section II, we describe the 1D lattice of chiral resonators and the properties of its band structure and eigenmodes. In Section III, we discuss the acoustic HD effect in two types of the lossy lattice with C 4 and C 2 symmetry, respectively, where the symmetry is determined by the loss region. The physics for the HD effect are illustrated in Section IV using an effective Hamiltonian that can reproduce the band structures of the C 4 and C 2 systems. To further verify our theory, in Section V, we consider another type of lattice with C 2 symmetry determined by the unit cell's geometry. We draw the conclusion in Section VI. We consider a 1D periodical structure along z direction with the unit cell shown in Figure . 1(a). The unit cell consists of a right-handed chiral resonator (filled with air) with eight tubes that introduce coupling between nearby unit cells. We assume hard boundary conditions at all solid-air interfaces. Figure We conducted full-wave simulations of the periodic structure and computed its band structures by using a finite-element package COMSOL Multiphysics To demonstrate the phenomenon of acoustic HD, we consider the 1D lattice consisting of 10 unit cells shown in Fig. We first consider the case with homogenous loss introduced into the chiral resonators, as shown by the inset in Figure To understand whether the weak HD is attributed to the small loss parameter α = 0.01, we calculated the absorption at the frequency of 1.8 kHz while varying the value of α, and the results are shown in Fig. We now consider the lattice with inhomogeneous loss introduced into the chiral resonators, as shown by the inset in Fig. To understand the underlying physics of the acoustic HD, we study the complex band structures of the 1D lattice with damping. We first consider the lossy lattice with C 4 symmetry corresponding to the case of Fig. To understand the weak HD in Fig. We now consider the lossy lattice with C 2 rotation symmetry shown in Fig. Figure We now employ effective Hamiltonians to obtain a better understanding of the physics associated with the EPs with complex eigenvalues: where ω 0 is the eigen frequency of the chiral dipole modes at k = 0 (corresponding to the degeneracy), v R and v I are the real and imaginary parts of the group velocity, k is the wavevector, and γ denotes the loss. As for the C 2 system, the effective Hamiltonian is with complex eigenvalues: where ±a/2 describes the gap induced by the symmetry breaking and γ 1,2 denotes the loss of opposite chiral dipole modes at k = 0. Here, γ 1 = γ 2 due to the inhomogeneous loss added to the chiral resonator. We apply Eqs. ( In the C 2 lattice system in Fig. In optical systems, strong HD can appear even if the materials of chiral structures contain homogenous loss. This is because the chiral structures break inversion symmetry and the induced optical fields are in general different for incident helical lights carrying opposite OAM. Since the absorption strongly depends on the distribution of the fields, HD naturally appears in such chiral structures. Our results in this paper uncover a nontrivial counterpart of optical HD in acoustics. In contrast to the optical HD, the acoustic HD can be very weak in chiral structures with homogeneous material loss. Without the coupling between the opposite chiral dipoles induced in the structures, the absorption of incident helical sounds with opposite OAM is similar. To enhance the HD, one can induce the coupling between opposite chiral dipoles by breaking the C 4 rotation symmetry. In our system, this symmetry breaking is realized by selectively adding material loss to the chiral resonators or engineering the resonators' geometry. The first approach is also benefited from the interesting physics of non-Hermitian EPs, where the bifurcation of complex band structures in the symmetry-breaking phase can also enhance the acoustic HD. We emphasize that although a periodic lattice of the chiral resonators is considered in this study, the acoustic HD can also happen to a single chiral resonator, except that the differential absorption will be smaller. We have applied complex band structures and effective Hamiltonians in k space to explain the observed phenomena. For a single chiral resonator, such explanations are not applicable since the resonator represents an open scattering system. In this case, a microscopic picture based on multipole expansions may be employed to understand its absorption properties, and the associated physics remains to be explored. Experimental demonstration of the proposed acoustic HD is possible. The chiral resonators can be fabricated by using 3D printing and then assembled into a 1D lattice. Loss can be introduced into the lattice by adding absorbing materials (e.g. foams) into the chiral resonators. The incident helical sounds can be generated by using four speakers that couple to the four tubes of the resonator. The absorption can be determined from the measured transmission and reflection of the structure. In conclusion, we proposed a chiral lattice structure that can selectively absorb helical sounds with opposite OAM. The phenomenon represents the acoustic counterpart of optical HD effect. We have shown that this acoustic HD strongly depends on the rotation symmetry of the lattice. The structure with C 2 symmetry can give rise to a much larger HD compared to the structure with C 4 symmetry. This enhancement is attributed to the OAM gaps and non-Hermitian EPs induced by the coupling of opposite chiral dipole modes of the resonators. The results pave the way for further investigations of chiral sound-matter interactions in artificial structures and metamaterials. The proposed structures can also find important applications in manipulations of acoustic OAM.