The lowest-energy excitations of superconductors do not carry an electric charge, as their wave function is equally electron-like and hole-like. This fundamental property is not easy to study in electrical measurements that rely on the charge to generate an observable signal. The ability of a quantum dot to act as a charge filter enables us to solve this problem and measure the quasiparticle charge in superconducting-semiconducting hybrid nanowire heterostructures. We report measurements on a three-terminal circuit, in which an injection lead excites a non-equilibrium quasiparticle distribution in the hybrid system, and the electron or hole component of the resulting quasiparticles is detected using a quantum dot as a tunable charge and energy filter. The results verify the chargeless nature of the quasiparticles at the gap edge and reveal the complete relaxation of injected charge and energy in a proximitized nanowire, resolving open questions in previous three-terminal experiments. The elementary excitations in superconductors (SC) are Bogoliubov quasiparticles (QPs), i.e., the superposition of an electron excitation with amplitude u(E) and a hole excitation with amplitude v(E), where E is the energy of the excitation. The electron and hole components are energy-dependent and are given by |u(E) , where ∆ SC is the superconducting energy gap, and the QP energy obeys E > ∆ SC . The charge of the excitation, given by q(E) = e |v(E)| 2 -|u(E)| 2 , varies between -e (electron-like) when the excitation energy is far above the Fermi energy and +e (hole-like) when it is far below. In the vicinity of the gap, E ≈ ∆ SC , the QPs consist of nearly equal superpositions of electron and hole parts as |u(E)| ≈ |v(E)| ≈ 1/ √ 2. Therefore, their charge approaches zero The discussion so far considered intrinsic superconductors where the energy gap and the electron-hole correlations are generated by an internal pairing mechanism, such as electron-phonon coupling. Similar effects are also found in SC-proximitized semiconducting (SM) systems, where electron-hole correlations are induced by the proximity effect instead. Here, similar to the formation of Andreev bound states (ABSs) in a confined system, Andreev reflection (AR) on the SM-SC interface pairs states above and below the Fermi surface in the SM to create a superconducting-like band structure with an induced gap ∆ ind . Its relative size ∆ ind /∆ SC , being between 0 and 1, is directly related to the coupling strength between the SC and SM Nonlocal transport is a typical experimental tool to study non-equilibrium modes and their relaxation. Such a setup utilizes two tunnel junctions: an injector and a detector. The injector junction injects particles into the system under study, exciting one or more non-equilibrium modes. The detector junction is usually unbiased and measures the response of the system at some distance from the injection point. Electron transport is well-suited to measure the charge non-equilibrium mode Nonlocal conductance (NLC) can also serve to measure the sign of the charge of ABSs In this work, we study NLC in a hybrid SC heterostructure. Gate-defined QDs separating the ohmic leads from the hybrid segment are used as charge and energy filters. We detect independently the electron and hole components of the QP wavefunction, observing charge neutrality of the excitations at the superconducting gap edge. Applying a magnetic field that closes the induced gap shows that the charge-to-energy conversion is independent of the presence of an induced spectral gap and only requires Andreev reflection at the SM-SC interface. Finally, using QDs to inject and detect QPs, we demonstrate complete relaxation of the detected QPs into the lowest excited states. Figure To measure the generated non-equilibrium distribution, we attach another lead on the right, separated by a semiconducting junction. A conventional tunnel junction supports bi-directional currents, where electrons tunnel to unoccupied states above E F and holes tunnel to occupied states below it. When both charge carriers are present, such as in a SC, the current is proportional to the charge of the QP, q The sample was fabricated using the same methods described in Ref First, we characterize the QD defined using the three finger gates in the right junction. Figure The circuit used to measure the nonlocal conductance G RL ≡ dI R /dV L is sketched in Figure Consider the feature marked by "I" in Figure The NLC is also predominantly anti-symmetric with respect to the applied voltage bias. This can be understood by considering the current-rectifying behavior of the QD at a fixed occupancy. When μ dot > 0, only the flow of electrons from the S to the N lead is allowed, regardless of the charge of the injected particles. The current passing through the dot is thus always positive, forcing the conductance (dI/dV ) to flip its sign when the bias changes polarity. Similarly, when the dot is placed at μ dot < 0 to allow only holes to flow, the current is always negative, and the rest follows suit. Anti-symmetric NLC is also a prevalent feature in conventional tunnel junction measurements without any QD We note that the amplitudes of the G RL peaks are higher when the ground state contains N + 1 electrons than when it contains N electrons [Fig. b. The few-electron QD discussed above proves to be an effective charge filter, able to detect separately the electron and hole components of the QP wavefunction. How-ever, the presence of spin degeneracy modifies the tunneling rates of electrons and holes and complicates direct comparison between u and v. To overcome this, we turn our attention to Device B, which has a larger QD whose orbital level spacing is too small to be observed. Here, since multiple orbital levels contribute to tunneling across, rendering dot and the spin degeneracy negligible, the tunneling rates for electrons and holes are nearly equal. Figure The NLC oscillates as a function of V dot when applying V L = ±∆ ind /e = ±250 μV [Fig. In Figure The three-terminal setup we employ allows us to measure the induced gap independently from possible localized ABSs in the vicinity of the junction. The topological phase transition predicted to take place in this system would manifest as the closing and re-opening of the induced gap in response to the application of a magnetic field or a change in the chemical potential at a finite magnetic field In a conventional superconductor, the presence of chargeless excitations and the existence of an energy gap are correlated (except for a small region in the phase space characterized by gapless superconductivity A commonly observed feature in the three-terminal setup we study is the presence of significant NLC when applying a bias greater than the gap of the parent SC, |eV | > ∆ SC Next, we show the simultaneously measured currents through the injector dot (I inj ) and the detector dot (I det ) as a function of the injection filter energy μ inj [Fig. The nonlocal current depends strongly on both μ inj and μ det [Fig. Summing up our observations of charge and energy relaxation above, the emerging microscopic picture of nonlocal charge transport in three-terminal nanowire devices thus consists of four (possibly simultaneous) processes. First, a charge is injected at some given energy into the nanowire. Second, some of the injected electrons/holes are drained to the ground via the superconducting lead and the remaining relax to the lowest available state at the induced gap edge. Third, through Andreev reflection, the charged electrons are converted to chargeless Bogoliubov QPs. Finally, the QPs diffuse toward the other exit lead, where they are projected onto a charge polarity determined by the receiving junction. In contrast to the QP continuum investigated here, previous works have examined NLC produced by transport through discrete sub-gap Andreev bound states in similar N-S-N hybrid devices where T ee ij and T eh ij are the energy-dependent transmission amplitudes from an electron in lead i to an electron or a hole in lead j = i In conclusion, by measuring the nonlocal conductance in a three-terminal device with well controlled QDs at the ends, we can detect the electron and hole components of non-equilibrium quasiparticle wavefunctions. Our results reveal a population of fully charge-relaxed neutral BCS excitations at the gap edge in a proximitized nanowire under nonlocal charge injection. We further show that the conversion of injected charge to correlated electronhole excitations does not require an induced gap. By injecting particles at specific energies, we observe the inelastic decay of injected charges to the lowest excited states, the gap edge. We show that the combined effect of charge neutral excitation and a tunnel barrier with energy selectivity leads to a current-rectifying effect. These results allow us to understand the ubiquitous antisymmetry of the nonlocal conductance observed in previous reports The results observed here are in very good agreement with the results obtained by Denisov et al. Here the vertical co-tunneling lines at V bias = ±250 μV are absent. e. Comparison of the detected current's dependence on injecting energy when using QDs in panels c and d as injectors, i.e., with and without the presence of co-tunneling. Both curves exhibit the same qualitative features: a strong peak when injecting at the gap edge followed by a smoother rise as the injecting energy becomes higher. f. Detector current dependence on the detector energy using the QD in panel d as the receiver instead of the injector to characterize the inelastic tunneling through this QD. As discussed in Figure -0. Iinj is independent of μ det , ruling out coherent processes such as crossed Andreev reflection or elastic co-tunneling as significant contributors to the transport.