In graphene based materials, the energy storage capacity is usually improved by rich porous structures with extremely high surface area. By utilizing surface corrugations, this work shows an alternative strategy to activate graphene materials for large capacitance. We demonstrate how to simply fabricate such activated graphene and how these surface structures helped to realize considerable specific capacitance (e.g., electrode capacitance of ~340 F g -1 at 5 mV s -1 and device capacitance of ~ 343 F g -1 at 1.7 A g -1 ) and power performance (e.g., power density of 50 and 2500 W kg -1 at the energy density of ~10.7 and 1.53 Wh kg -1 , respectively) in aqueous system, which are comparable to and even better than those of highly activated graphene materials with ultra-high surface area. This work demonstrates a new path to enhance the capacity of carbonbased materials, which could be developed and combined with other systems for various improved energy storage applications. As one of the key clean energy technologies, the electrochemical capacitor (ECs, supercapacitor, mainly based on carbon materials) performs fast and stable energy storage kinetics, but has the critical shortage of low energy density (capacitance) In general, the capacitance of ECs is mainly contributed by electrochemical double-layer (EDL) ion adsorption at Helmholtz layer, which is decided by the surface area and electrolyte dielectric constant The graphene was activated from the graphene oxide (GO) film with a fast thermal expansion technique (Figure Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) was performed with a Nova 600 NanoSEM scanning electron microscope. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and aberration corrected scanning TEM (AC-STEM) images were characterized with JEOL JEM-2010 (200 kV) and JEOL ARM 200F (80 kV), respectively. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was performed on a Thermo Fisher Nexsa System. An ion beam etch was applied before the characterization, while the C1s was calibrated as 284.6 eV as a standard. Raman spectra were recorded by the Horiba LabRAM HR Evolution at 633 nm. During Raman characterizations, the beam power was controlled suitably to exclude the effect from thermal reduction of graphene based materials. N 2 and CO 2 adsorption/desorption isotherms were recorded with BSD-PS2 via Beishide Instrument Technology (Beijing) Co., Ltd. Contact angle was recorded with a micro-camera by dropping water on pressed graphene materials. In three-electrode system, electrochemical measurements were conducted in 6M KOH with graphite rod and Hg/HgO (filled with 1M KOH) as counter and reference electrodes, respectively. The working electrode was fabricated by casting graphene powder (~1.5 mg) between nickel foams (1×1 cm). In two-electrode system, 6M KOH and 1M Li-PF6 were used as aqueous and organic electrolytes, respectively. In aqueous ECs, the electrode was made by sandwiching graphene powder (~0.8 mg for each electrode, note: the graphene power was too light and highly loosed, therefore only 0.8 mg graphene was used in the electrode fabrication) between nickel foam plates (diameter of 12 mm), and pressing (10 MPa) additional layers of nickel foam at both sides to prevent the leakage of graphene powder (Figure In this fabrication, the thickness of GO film was highly crucial towards efficient activation of graphene sheets. As shown in Figure The reported activations of graphene materials are varied from each other, which mainly involved the generation of rich porous structure (e.g., activated by the reaction with KOH, the use of template and multiple thermal annealing) Next, we focus on a-G-375, as an example, to show the structural information of activated graphene materials. The a-G-375 was highly loosened and light (~ 40 mg in Figure More surface structures of a-G-375 were characterized by nitrogen adsorption/desorption at 77.3 K. The isotherm (Figure The capacitive contribution at different scan rates of a-G-375 (g), rGO-control-1 (h) and rGO-control-2 (i). Note: above electrochemical measurements were performed in 6M KOH with three-electrode technique. For the calculation of capacitive fraction, scan rates of 5, 10, 20, 40 and 60 mV s -1 were investigated. CV curves with higher scan rate were excluded in this calculation. Although the BET surface area of a-G-375 was not high enough, it still exhibited large capacitance in 6 M KOH electrolyte. Compared to other a-G-x, the a-G-375 has the highest electrode capacitance of ~340 F g -1 at 5 mV s -1 (roughly equals to 1.7 A g -1 , Figure To investigate the capacitive and diffusion controlled (pseudo-capacitive) contributors of a-G-375, two control samples were also fabricated (rGO-control-1 and rGO-control-2) for comparison. Graphene sheets in these control samples were all fully exfoliated as that showed in TEM images (Figure The few O-containing groups (see XPS in Figure As we know, the energy storage capacitance at the EDL (C EDL ) can be calculated as where C, ɛ, A, and d are the capacitance, electrolyte dielectric constant, solvent accessible surface area (SASA), and the separation between electrolyte ions and surface of electrode materials, respectively. The total capacitance of electrode (C tot ) is determined by the quantum capacitance (C q ) and liquid electrolyte as follows where the C Dielec is the dielectric screening of electrode. Furthermore, the C q is the intrinsic property of electrode material related to the electronic structure via the following equation where S, V, D, ɛ F , and e are the surface area, applied voltage, DOS, Fermi level, and electron charge, respectively. Therefore, the SASA, distance between electrolyte ions and surface of electrode materials, and DOS at the Fermi level are considered highly crucial in improving the electrode capacitance in electrolytes. To understand how the corrugation improves energy storage capacity through the change of above three factors, density functional theory (DFT) calculations were performed by using the Vienna ab initio Simulation Package (VASP). Cutoff energy of plane-wave basis was set to 500 eV to treat the electron-ion interactions in projected augmented wave pseudopotential method. The Brillouin Zone was sampled with a 1×7×1 k-point grid and converging tolerance of 0.01 eV/Å for residual force during geometry relaxation, while it was sampled with a 1×9×1 k-point grid and converging tolerance of 10 -6 eV for energy during electron structure analysis. In order to prevent the interaction of periodic images, a vacuum space in the z-direction was set to 20 Å. The van der Waals (vdW) interactions were described by the semi-empirical DFT-D2 method. The corrugation ratio R was defined as R/100 = (L 0 -L)/L 0 , in which L 0 is the lattice constant of plane graphene and L for corrugated graphene, respectively. The wave length in crumples was measured as ~0.4-1.8 nm (Figure shows different optimized graphene with R = 0, 5.1, 10.6, 15.9, 21.4, 26.8. In these structures, the nearest six C ring to adsorb ions (e.g., Li + or K + ), including two different sits of carbon atoms (C1 and C2), keeps in the same plane and has no significant contributions to the corrugation. The nearest corrugated carbon atom was labeled as C3 in Figure In summary, we have prepared corrugated graphene by a rapid thermal expansion method. Asprepared graphene displays a BET surface area of ~340 m 2 g -1 . In energy storage applications, it delivered a high special capacitance of ~340 F g-1 at 5 mV s -1 in aqueous three-electrode systems and ~343 F g -1 at 1.7 A g -1 in aqueous symmetric supercapacitor. In addition, a maximum energy density of 10.7 Wh kg -1 at power density of 50 W kg -1 was reached in aqueous electrochemical capacitor. Both the capacitance and power performance are comparable to and even better than that of high activated graphene materials with super-high BET surface area (e.g., 3100 m 2 g -1 ) and similar O-content. Our studies suggested that the considerable energy storage performance was attributed to the corrugation structures. These corrugations enhanced the DOS at the Fermi level of the graphene material, which shorten the distance to the adsorbed ions, elevated the binding ability, enhanced the quantum capacitance, and improved the contacting area for ion adsorptions. Alternative to the ultra-high BET surface area and rich porous structures, this study gives a different way to activate graphene materials for improved energy storage applications. Supplemental Information can be found online at https://doi.org/xxxxxx. Additional information of Figure Compared to other samples (a-G-375, a-G-375-600 and a-G-375-800, Figure 