Earlier reports demonstrated that ternary organic solar cells (OSC) made of donor polymers (D) blended with different mixtures of fullerene acceptors (A:A) performed very similarly. This finding is surprising, as the corresponding fullerene LUMO levels are slightly different, which might result in decisive differences in the charge transfer step. We investigate ternary OSC (D:A:A) made of the donor polymer P3HT with stoichiometric mixtures of different fullerene derivatives, PC60BM:PC70BM and PC70BM:IC60BA, respectively. Using quantitative electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) we can distinguish between positive and negative polarons, localized on the specific molecules. We found that after the initial charge transfer step, the electrons are re-distributed over two nearby acceptors in agreement with their stoichiometry and their relative LUMO energy difference. Remarkably, the measured ∆LUMO differences in fullerene mixtures are reduced by an order of magnitude compared to that of the pristine materials, i.e., below 1 meV for PC60BM:PC70BM and (20 ± 5) meV for PC70BM:IC60BA. Furthermore, we found that this reduced ∆LUMO explains the shift in open circuit voltage for D:A:A organic solar cells. We attribute these findings to hybridization, leading to an effective fullerene LUMO. Consequently, multi-acceptor blends are indeed a viable option for photodetectors and solar cells, as they combine the best electron acceptor and light absorbing properties. Organic photovoltaic (OPV) cells employing fullerene derivatives as acceptors (A) have high potential for direct sun to electricity conversion with reported power conversion efficiencies above 11 %. To get an overview of the involved energetics, we compare the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) and lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) levels of the fullerene derivatives PC60BM, PC70BM and IC60BA in Figure Materials: The polymer P3HT (poly(3-hexylthiophene)) was purchased from Aldrich. The low-band-gap donor-acceptor copolymers PCDTBT (a poly(2,7-carbazole) derivative) and PTB7 (consisting of thieno [3,4-b]thiophene and benzodithiophene monomers) were purchased from 1-material. The fullerene-derivatives are from Solenne BV. Known impurities are <0.1 % C60 and C70, while higher fullerenes (such as C84), are excluded to be possible impurities (≪0.1 %). Overall purity of fullerene-derivatives (PC70BM, PC60BM, IC60BA) is >99 %. Sample Preparation took place inside a nitrogen glovebox to avoid exposure to oxygen. The materials were dissolved in chlorobenzene with a concentration of 20 mg/ml and stirred overnight. Polymer and fullerene solutions were mixed in the desired blend ratio. P3HT was blended with equal amounts of fullerenes (1:1), while PCDTBT and PTB7 were blended with fullerenes in ratios of 1:4 and 1:1.5, respectively, as these are approximately the best mixing ratios considering solar cell performance. The fullerenes' stoichiometric weight ratio X was varied from X = 100 (pure PC70BM) to X = 0 (pure PC60BM or IC60BA). 0.2 ml portions of the solutions were poured into EPR tubes, vacuum-dried for one hour and sealed under ≈10 mbar helium atmosphere. EPR Spectroscopy: We used a modified X-Band spectrometer (Bruker E300). Samples were placed in a resonant cavity (Bruker ER4104OR) with optical access and a continuous flow helium cryostat insert (Oxford ESR 900). Illumination was provided by a 532 nm laser arriving on the sample with 20 mW. First derivative EPR spectra were recorded with lock-in detection, referenced by a magnetic field modulation amplitude of 0.05 mT. The g-factor was calibrated for each measurement with the help of a NMR Gaussmeter (Bruker ER035M) and a microwave frequency counter (EIP 28b). For each temperature, the microwave power was tuned to avoid signal distortions due to saturation effects. Solar Cell Production was done by first spin coating a 40 nm thick layer of PEDOT:PSS (poly(3,4ethylenedioxythiophene):poly-(styrenesulfonate), Heraeus Clevios AL4083) on top of a glass substrate covered with patterned 150 nm thick indium tin oxide (ITO) electrodes. This layer was thermally annealed for 10 minutes at 130°C. The 100 nm active layer was spin coated inside a nitrogen glove box followed by thermal annealing (10 minutes at 130°C). A calcium (3 nm) / aluminum (120 nm) cathode was deposited in an evaporation chamber (pressure <10 -6 mbar). A shadow mask results in an active area of 3 mm 2 . J-V characteristics were measured with a SMU (Keithley) under simulated AM1.5G illumination. Figure For P3HT:PC70BM:IC60BA JSC increases from 9 mA/cm 2 to 13 mA/cm 2 for 0 -100 weight-% of PC70BM. In contrast to the previous case, VOC decreases tremendously by 220 mV from 820 mV to 600 mV upon increasing the PC70BM content from 0% to 100%. The PC70BM LUMO lies around 170 -210 meV lower in energy than the IC60BA LUMO as depicted in Figure Before we can use EPR to analyse the distribution of charge carriers between the donor and acceptor molecules and quantify their contributions, we have to identify the exact spectral signatures involved and perform control experiments to ensure that the extracted charge carrier densities are not distorted by the choice of experimental conditions. Figure EPR spectra were recorded at temperatures of 100 K and below to achieve sufficient signalto-noise ratio, needed to perform a quantitative analysis of the respective fullerene contributions. Overall EPR signal intensities were roughly the same for the changing blend ratios at each temperature. One might have expected additional charge carrier trapping at low temperatures, because of a larger number of deep traps in PC70BM relative to PC60BM. Additionally, we tested for a possible dependence of the EPR spectra on the excitation wavelength. Since the fullerene derivatives have different absorption spectra, they absorb different amounts of the incident light in a solar cell. This leads to photoinduced hole transfer from fullerene acceptors to the polymer donor. This in turn would yield an uneven photogenerated electron density. We used a halogen bulb and a LED as white light sources and a 532 nm laser at various illumination intensities. Additionally, in order to check for the effect of morphology, illumination dependent EPR spectra of the PCBM-based blends were recorded before and after thermal annealing (10 min at 130°C). The resulting spectra differ in overall signal intensity, but they are perfectly congruent after normalization. Hence, neither the morphology, nor illumination intensity or wavelength have any effect on the distribution of electrons between the fullerene acceptors. Furthermore, we would like to point out that the shown EPR spectra reflect steady state populations after charge transfer and relaxation of the charge carriers in the blend films. Taking this all into account, we assume that the distribution of electrons between involved fullerene derivatives depends solely on their energetics and respective stoichiometry. Having established that EPR is a suitable method to detect and distinguish spectroscopic signatures of anions and cations in ternary solar cell blends, we use this approach in the following to determine the electron distribution between different fullerenes. To quantify the electron distribution between fullerene derivatives, we prepared two sample series of P3HT blended with stoichiometric fullerene mixing ratios. Figure EPR signal (a.u.) Figure Next, to estimate the energetic ∆LUMO difference for an electron being localized on either fullerene, we approximate the electron populations (N60, N70) by a two-level system separated by an energy gap ∆LUMO. The population of such a system can be described by a Boltzmann distribution: Here, T is the temperature and kB the Boltzmann constant. The fraction X/(1-X) corresponds to the statistical weight of the two energy levels, given by the stoichiometric fullerene weight ratio X. In order to verify the energy resolution, exemplary Boltzmann distributions are added to Figure Now we compare the two estimated ∆LUMO values from the EPR analysis with the respective shifts in VOC as shown in Figure Motivated to understand the correlations between the energetics of acceptor (A) molecules and the efficiency of electron transfer processes from photoexcited donors (D) and their impact on the open circuit voltage (VOC) of ternary solar cells (D:A:A), we investigated combinations of three different donor polymers blended with three different fullerenes as a function of the fullerene stoichiometry. Using quantitative electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR), we were able to identify and distinguish spectroscopic signatures of light-induced polymer cations and fullerene anions in the ternary blends. Careful analysis of the EPR spectra yielded the relative distribution of electrons between the respective fullerene acceptors. We found that this distribution is not only governed by the stoichiometry, but also by the effective LUMO difference of the studied fullerene-derivatives. Within a two-level model and assuming Boltzmann distribution, we estimated the LUMO difference to be in the order of (20 ± 5) meV for PC70BM:IC60BA and less than 1 meV for PC70BM:PC60BM acceptor blends, i.e., a tenth of the LUMO difference reported for separately measured pristine materials. Remarkably, the same Boltzmann distribution scaled to the VOC data can fully reproduce the observed dependence of VOC on the fullerene stoichiometry in ternary solar cells. This shows that mixed (or unpurified) C60-and C70-based fullerene derivatives, despite their differences when studied separately, can be described by an effective LUMO level in a mixed phase, e.g., due to the delocalization of an electron wave function over two molecules.