Flax fibre reinforced composites are becoming popular in the automotive and civil industries due to their environmentally friendly nature in terms of production and recycling and for their good specific strength. Textile structures undergo transverse compaction during composite manufacturing which changes the fabric thickness and ultimately fibre volume fraction of composites. Here, different flax fibre structures were investigated for compaction behaviour during composite forming to study the thickness changes of these fabrics under pressures between 1 and 10 bars. A range of composite manufacturing processes including vacuum infusion, autoclave curing and resin transfer moulding were utilised. These fabrics were studied in single and multi-layer states, in dry and wet states, under different loading cycles and in different orientations of the fabric plies (0 0 /0 0 and 0 0 /90 0 ). Nesting of the layers has been calculated for single plies and for multi-layer stacks of dry fabrics. It was observed that under transverse compression, the structure of the preform plays a vital role in determining the thickness of the preform. The compressibility pattern of these various structures was also dissimilar for single layer and multi-layer stack which was attributed to the different nesting behaviours of these flax fibre structures. Flax fibre is looming large for use in structural composite components, mostly because of its superior mechanical properties within the domain of natural fibres A number of different techniques for the manufacturing of advanced polymer composites such as vacuum Infusion (VI), autoclave curing, resin transfer moulding (RTM) etc. are popular In published literature, the compaction behaviour of glass and carbon fabrics is widely described Four types of fabric have been used in this research namely Hopsack (plain woven hopsack fabric), UD (unidirectional warp knitted fabric made from twistless wrapspun yarn), T170 (nonwoven tape of 170 mm width), and GVT (nonwoven tape covered with a glass fibre veil). Details of the materials used in this study are given in Table The graph in Figure The greatest reduction in thickness in response to increase in pressure was observed in the range up to 100 kPa, which is representative of vacuum infusion. While there was less reduction in thickness of all the structures beyond that pressure, the initial thickness of the GVT fabric was highest and T170 was the lowest. Initial thickness can be mainly attributed to the areal density. The sequence of the areal density of the Circular metal plates Fabric specimens, from low to high, is: T170<UD<Hopsack<GVT, as shown in Table . Recording of the thickness for Figure The thickness reduction percentage of the T170 is greater than that of the UD or Hopsack structures but lower than that of the GVT. The higher value for T170 (35%) compared with those of Hopsack and UD (31% and 32%, respectively) can be attributed to the individualisation of the technical fibres and the reduced nesting of the T170. Nesting factors are discussed in detail in sections 3.2 and 3.3. From the thickness-pressure curves of both the single layer and the multi-layer stacks, it can be extrapolated that nonwoven structures demonstrate a higher percentage of thickness reduction in comparison with woven structures. Therefore, in order to obtain a composite panel of a specific thickness, a composite structure will require more nonwoven flax fabric layers than when using woven flax fabric layers. The nesting of layers in a multi-layer stack changes the thickness and hence the fibre volume fraction of the textile preform. The nesting factor can be calculated by employing equation 1. Where, NF is the nesting factor, T avg is the average layer thickness in a multi-layer stack and T s is the thickness of the single layer. In this work, the single and multi-layer fabric thicknesses were calculated from the mechanical test results of these fabrics and the nesting factors were calculated by applying equation 1. Table Nesting is a normal phenomenon that occurs during the compaction of multiple layers of fabric, especially for woven fabrics. The yarn in a 2D or 3D woven fabric follows an undulating path which leaves some gaps between successive parallel layers and between successive layers normal to each other (warp and weft fabrics) when in a stack. During composite manufacturing, the fabric plies come into contact under pressure. For the vacuum assisted resin infusion process, the pressure happens to be around 1 bar (100 KPa). For autoclave processing, the applied pressure could reach 9 bars or more pressures, the warp (or weft) yarn of one ply tends to set into the gaps between the two adjacent warp yarns of the ply above or beneath. A simple demonstration with two plies of dry hopsack fabric sandwiched between two microscope slides with a nominal pressure applied by a pair of binder clips is shown in Figure Nevertheless, exceptions to this case can also sometimes occur. Eventually, not all the peaks and troughs of one layer can be adjusted into the undulations of the adjacent layers. As a result, each layer contributes a greater thickness in an arrangement of a multi-layer stack compared with that of the sole thickness of a single layer The probability of having a nesting factor higher than 1 (one), explained by Pearce and Summerscales (1995), describes the woven fabric compaction behaviour. Interestingly, in this research, the nesting factor has been calculated as higher than 1 for the nonwoven tapes (T170), and also for the nonwoven tapes with glass veils (GVT). Cross-sectional SEM images may help to explain this behaviour. Figure From studies of flax fibre morphology, it is known that a technical flax fibre is an assembly of multiple elementary fibres. These elementary fibres are embedded within an amorphous matrix of pectin and hemicellulose, overlapping each other to some extent A similar action (disintegration of technical fibre bundles) is likely to occur when the nonwoven tape experiences the compressive load exerted by the steel plates of the Instron machine. Figure Another particular event can be attributed to the GVT during compaction, that is, the crushing of the glass veils. When a single layer is subjected to compaction between steel plates, the plates crush the surface veils on both sides. But, for a multi-layer stack, the glass veils of the middle layers are not exposed to the steel plates, hence, they remain relatively undamaged, residing as middle layers. Again, when a multi-layer assembly is stacked with the same fabric, the middle layers experience frictional forces against each other. This frictional force is greater than the frictional force experienced by a single layer fabric against polished steel plates. The cohesive forces between the fibre surfaces of two adjacent layers may act to lock the fibres. Hence, the fibres of one layer cannot settle into the gaps among the fibres from the adjacent layers. The ultimate average thickness per layer calculated from the multi-layer stack may thus be slightly higher than the thickness of an isolated single layer. This phenomenon is shown in Figure During natural fibre composite manufacture, dry fabric is infused with resin which affects the fabric thickness and changes the fibre volume fraction of the preform as reported by various researchers Another pertinent observation is that, unlike the micro-architecture of glass or carbon fibres, flax fibres contain a lumen, running along the length of the elementary fibres. The role of the lumen inside the flax plant is to assist water transportation for the plants It is known that the fibre volume fraction of a composite is directly proportional to its constituent fabric plies. Figure During composite manufacturing, plies are place at 0 0 orientation or 0/90 0 or at 0/45 0 depending on the end use of the composites. In this work, different flax fabric architectures have been studied by placing the plies at 0 0 and 0/90 0 to study the effect of ply orientation on thickness reduction and on the fibre volume fraction of the preform. The effect of differing ply orientations on GVT, T170 and UD fabrics are graphed in Figure The crimping of this 90° ply restricts the nesting of the 0° fibres into gaps of the next 0° layer. Also, the 0° fibres can easily nest onto the tow gaps (for fabric) or onto the fibre gaps (for nonwoven tapes; T170 or GVT). In the GVT structure, the restrictions are worsened as a very thin layer of glass veil, attached to both planes of a layer, also hinders the nesting process. The need to achieve a high fibre volume fraction for flax fibre composites in different applications makes it necessary to study different compaction methods which can enhance the fibre volume fraction of the composite materials by reducing the preform thickness during forming. It is important to utilise a higher fibre volume fraction for natural fibre composites compared to glass and carbon fibre composites; the reason is that when natural fibre composites are presented as environmentally friendly materials, a high fibre volume fraction maximises the ratio of bio-based material to polymeric material Different numbers of layers for the different structures were used to maintain similar fibre volume fractions for each of the composite stacks [shown in the next phase of this current study 1st compression 2nd Compression 3rd Compression The nesting factor has been calculated for the all the four structures examined during the course of this research and a description has been given in section 3.2. A lower nesting factor indicates more concentrated nesting, which in turn implies that the fibre volume fraction of composites made from that stack of plies will be greater. For a stack of fabric plies, more intense nesting of the reinforcement ensures that the overall stack thickness is reduced, and hence the volume of the composite diminishes without changing the volume of the constituent fibres. So, a higher fibre volume fraction can be achieved with higher nesting. Therefore, the overall volume of the gaps between the yarns is greater in Figure Three methods namely: theoretical calculations for composite laminate, dry preform and ImageJ analysis have been employed in this study to determine fibre volume fraction. The results from these three methods are summarised in Figure Cross-sectional images of flax-based composites were initially captured using scanning electron microscopy (SEM). Each image was then analysed by using an analytical tool known as 'ImageJ'. Using ImageJ, each cross-sectional image was analysed by applying a binary thresholding tool. In thresholding, the greyscale images obtained from SEM were reduced to binary images by introducing an optimal threshold. During thresholding, pixels from the image that represented a specific object were extracted. Thresholding generates a binary image in which the foreground regions are indicated by one single intensity and the background regions appears as different, contrasting intensities. After binary thresholding of each image, the fibres in the foreground were converted into black and the other elements of the picture, such as resin and lumen were converted into white, as demonstrated in Figure To estimate fibre volume fraction using a theoretical approach, firstly, the areal density of each different fabric structure was measured. Then the weight of each composite test coupon (cut according to standard) was measured using a precision weighing machine. Subsequently, all the three dimensions of the test coupon were measured by using a digital micrometer. The volume of fibres in different structures was calculated by the following expression: Volume of fibre, V f = mass of flax × % of flax in the fabric density of fibre + mass of polyester × % of polyester in the fabric density of polyester Table The fibre volume fraction of dry preform samples was calculated by the following expression: layers and multi-layer stacks, and followed typical pressure-thickness curves. The thickness reduction of hopsack and unidirectional fabrics was greater in multi-layer stacks, which was attributed to nesting of the layers. The thickness reduction of T170 (nonwoven tape) and GVT (veiled) structures was greater in the single layers compared to the multi-layer stacks, which was attributed to the higher deformation of the single layers between the low friction polished steel compression plates and the absence of nesting in the multi-layer stacks. As a result, nesting factors were greater than 1 for the nonwoven tapes, which can be attributed to the higher frictional forces amongst the fibres in adjacent layers in a multi-layer stack. Other than frictional force, crushing of technical fibre bundles into smaller clusters of fibres has been observed as a reason for the generation of nesting factors higher than 1. More pronounced thickness reduction was also observed for wet fabrics compared to dry fabric compaction, which was due to reduction in the frictional forces between the fibres, as water acts as a source of lubrication on the fibre surfaces. Ply orientation also affected the thickness reduction. Repeated compaction of the flax fabrics resulted in greater degrees of thickness reduction though the effect of repetitive compaction decreased as the number of cycles increased. The smallest thickness reduction in the 3 rd cycle was due to the permanent deformation of the fibres. Further study is required to quantify the crushing of technical fibres by compressive loading, which is potentially beneficial for the composites' mechanical properties.