Development of highly sensitive, portable and low-cost sensors for the evaluation of ethanol content in liquid is particularly important in several process monitoring, from food to pharmaceutical industry. In this respect, here we report on the design, fabrication and performances of two simple electrical devices, namely interdigitated (ID) electrodes and complementary double split ring resonator (CDSRR), for the detection of ethanol in water though impedance and perturbation resonance methods, respectively. Both sensors resulted to be efficient for detection of low amount of ethanol in water, in particular EIS gives possibility to perform broadband evaluation of ethanol concentration in solution, and the employment of resonant cavities allows to achieve very low limit of detection of 0.2v/v%. Portable and low-cost sensors for the detection of chemicals in liquid are finding an ever growing demand in many application fields, such as in food industry In this contest, development of sensors for the evaluation of ethanol content in liquid is particularly important for process monitoring in distilleries and breweries, in the manufacture of drugs, plastics, lacquers, polishes, plasticizers and cosmetics Current methods for detection of ethanol in liquids are based on indirect calculation of ethanol content or direct determination, respectively by oscillating density meters Alternative methods for ethanol detection are based on employment of sensitive hydrogels, whose swelling-shrinking state after contact with ethanol can be interrogated for example by pressure sensor, quartz crystal microbalance or optically, leading to discern ethanol concentration variation of 10% Here, we propose and compare the performances of two simple electrical devices, namely interdigitated (ID) electrodes and complementary double split ring resonator (CDSRR), for detecting ethanol presence in water though spectroscopic measurements, in particular through impedance and perturbation resonance methods, respectively. The electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) device employed for ethanol evaluation concentration is composed by a sensing module with interdigitated electrodes and an array of resin 3D printed chambers, which separate each sensing area (Figure The impedance measurements were carried out at room temperature employing an Agilent E4980A precision LCR meter and a home-made software written in Labview (GM-Multiscan) for the data acquisition. An AC-driving voltage of 100 mV was applied over the frequency range from 100 Hz to 1 MHz. The electrical connections between the EIS chip and the LCR meter were performed fabricating dedicated pads on the EIS chip with a specific pitch to match a commercial connector integrated on a printed circuit board (PCB) (Figure The device exploited for the detection of ethanol concentration in water is a one-port complementary double split ring resonator (CDSRR), realized in a Cu disc of 27 mm diameter and 15 m height, connected to a right-angle SMA through a metallized plate (the feedline) of dimensions 4 mm × 6 mm, as shown in Figure The resonator is composed by two concentric rings with mean radii r and r of 4.7 mm and 5.8 mm respectively, width of 0.8 mm and separated by a coupling gap c of 0.3 mm. Each ring shows a 100 m slit (g = g ), which lies on the axis joining the centre of the resonator with the signal via. The built-up board is constituted by top and bottom copper layers of 12-18 m, and a substrate of Improved-FR4 (IS400), which is 1 mm thicker and with permittivity ε ranging from 4.43 to 4.51 for frequencies comprised among 500 MHz to 20 GHz and loss tangent δ of 0.0149÷0.0189 in same spectrum. For the ethanol sensing application, the resonator was then covered by a polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) disk of 4.2 mm height and 35 mm in diameter, in which a hole of 5.5 mm in diameter was practiced to discover the sensing area. The PDMS disc was attached to the device by applying a thin layer of liquid PDMS and placing the system in the oven for 30 minutes at 70°C. In such a way, a well with a total capacity of 100 l was realized. The whole CDSRR device is shown in Figure The sensing experiments were carried out directly connecting the device to a Keysight E5061B ENA Vector Network Analyzer by means of SMA connectors to measure the module of scattering parameter S11, thus eliminating distortion effects due to the presence of cables. In these conditions, the resonator shows the first resonance peak at 1.094 GHz, with amplitude of -16.37 dBm, indicating a quality factor Q ~ 100 (empty sensor). To evaluate how the electric field is distributed in proximity of CDSRR and to test the performances of the projected ring before the fabrication, Comsol © Multiphysics 5.3a (RF module) was employed to simulate the reflection spectrum. Therefore, we first designed the CAD of the whole device as reported in Figure In Figure where Q is expressed in SHz -n , ω = 2πf is the angular frequency, 0 < n < 1, which corresponds to an ideal capacitor when n = 1 and to an ideal resistor when n = 0, j is the imaginary unit. To give an idea on how the selected circuit describes our experimental data, we reported in Figure We evaluated the limit of detection (LOD) of the sensor by dividing the Q and R uncertainties (calculated considering the average of residuals from the linear fits) with the sensitivity, represented by the slope of the linear fits of the two parameters considered. Specifically, we linear fitted Q over the whole percentage variation of ethanol founding a LOD of 2.5% EtOH, while the resistance variation was linear fitted from 0% to 30% EtOH estimating a LOD of 0.7% EtOH. The CDSRR sensor was tested for the detection of EtOH in liquid phase by depositing in the PDMS well a 100 l droplet of ethanol-DI water solution. The concentration of ethanol in water was varied from 0% to 100%. As for EIS sensor, after each measurement, the solution was removed, the well was washed with demineralized water and dried with nitrogen flow, bringing the system to its initial conditions, with a maximum frequency shift and a maximum amplitude variation of less than 0.2%. The reflection signals module S11 from loaded device are reported in Figure In this paper we show the detection of ethanol in water at very low percentage v/v by exploiting two different devices, namely EIS sensor and CDSRR. For each measurement layout, two quantities were investigated: EIS led to evaluate resistance R and the Q parameter related respectively to the electrical conductivity and dielectric properties of the investigated solution, while perturbation of ring resonator gave access to working eigenfrequency shift and quality factor variation. Both the devices and related methods resulted efficient to the detection of low amount of ethanol in water, however while EIS gives possibility to perform broadband evaluation of ethanol concentration in solution, the employment of resonant cavities allows to achieve very low LOD, laying the groundwork for a new generation of ultrasensitive sensors.