The emergence of high transition temperature (Tc) superconductivity in bulk FeSe under pressure is associated with the tuning of nematicity and magnetism. However, sorting out the relative contributions from magnetic and nematic fluctuations to the enhancement of Tc remains challenging. Here, we design and conduct a series of high-pressure experiments on FeSe thin flakes. We find that, as the thickness decreases, the nematic phase boundary on temperature-pressure phase diagrams remains robust while the magnetic order is significantly weakened. A local maximum of Tc is observed outside the nematic phase region, not far from the extrapolated nematic endpoint in all samples. However, the maximum Tc value is reduced associated with the weakening of magnetism. No high-Tc phase is observed in the thinnest sample. Our results strongly suggest that nematic fluctuations alone can only have a limited effect while magnetic fluctuations are pivotal on the enhancement of Tc in FeSe. Unconventional superconductors including high-T c cuprates, heavy-fermion systems, and iron-based superconductors (IBS) share common features in the intimate relations with magnetic, structural, and electronic orders FeSe, as another prominent member of IBS, has drawn intensive attention In addition to pressure and chemical substitution, the superconductivity in FeSe can also be tuned by sample thickness Here, we report our high-pressure investigation of superconducting, nematic, and magnetic phase transitions in FeSe with thicknesses ranging from 140 nm to 5 μm using the concept of a "device-integrated diamond anvil cell technique" we developed (see Methods). Thin flakes of FeSe are first isolated from high-quality single crystals and then they are transferred onto the diamond anvils pre-patterned with electrodes. The diamond anvil integrated with thin FeSe devices (see Fig. Figure Figure Figure Next we turn to the investigation of the pressureinduced SDW phase. Since the 5 μm and 3 μm thick samples exhibit similar behaviors under pressure, we choose the data in 3 μm thick sample for a detailed discus- sion. At 17.9 kbar, an additional anomaly manifested as a pronounced upturn is observed in R(T ) at 19.1 K (blue arrow). As pressure increases, this anomaly grad-ually shifts to higher temperatures. At p 38 kbar, the anomaly becomes a downward kink. The evolution of this R(T ) anomaly under pressure agrees well with the assignments of the SDW phase transition in R(T ) reported previously in bulk FeSe, FeSe 1-x S x series and FeSe 1-x Te x series under pressure In 2.3 μm thick sample, a pronounced upturn is also observed in R(T ) at 18 kbar. At 24.4 kbar, and 27.6 kbar, sharp superconducting transitions are observed, while no anomaly corresponding to the SDW phase transition is observed. Inspired by the results on bulk FeSe at 60 kbar, in which the anomaly associated with the SDW phase transition emerges when the superconductivity is suppressed by the high magnetic fields In 510 nm, 280 nm and 140 nm thick samples, the pressure evolution of the SDW phase shows a drastically different behaviour compared with the few-micrometer thick samples. At ∼20 kbar, additional upturn can be observed in R(T ) at zero field (see Fig. Finally, we turn to the pressure evolution of T c in thin FeSe. In all samples measured, T c first experiences an enhancement at low pressures (p <∼ 15 kbar), and then it is suppressed when approaching the critical pressure of the nematic phase transition (p ≈ 20 kbar). The situation is more complex away from the nematic phase. For the group of thicker samples, namely 5 μm, 3 μm, and 2.3 μm thick samples, T c is enhanced initially with the accompanying enhancement of T m , and T c reaches 27.0 K at 35.1 kbar for 5 μm thick sample, 23.7 K at 33.6 kbar for 3 μm thick sample, and 28.2 K at 38.5 kbar for 2.3 μm thick sample. At higher pressure, T m continues to increase and saturates, while T c begins to drop. In the thinner group, namely the 510 nm, 280 nm, and 140 nm thick samples, T c only experiences a slight increase after leaving the nematic phase. In the 510 nm thick sample, T c reaches 12.6 K at 41.1 kbar, similar to the peak value of T c when the nematic phase is present. At 48.7 kbar, no zero resistance is observed down to 2 K. In 280 nm and 140 nm thick samples, T c values measured are less than 7 K, below the maximum T c values achieved in the nematic phase. Considering the SDW phase is fragile in the thinner group, the suppression of T c can be naturally associated with the weakening of the magnetism. In contrast to the thickness dependence of physical properties in many 2D materials Why is a robust SDW phase crucial for realizing high-T c superconductivity in FeSe? In superconductors driven FIG. To explore this hypothesis further, we examine the zero-field R(T ) between max{T m , T s } and 100 K in detail. We find that our R(T ) data can be described by R = R 0 + CT α . Special care has been taken to eliminate the potential error introduced by thermal lag (see Supporting Information S4). Figure Nematic fluctuations, which are expected to be significantly enhanced near the endpoint of the nematic phase, may also promote superconductivity, as suggested by both experimental and theoretical investigations In summary, using thickness reduction and high pressure as tuning knobs, we systematically investigate the evolution of superconductivity, nematicity, and magnetism in thin FeSe with thicknesses ranging from 5 μm to 140 nm. We find that, as the thickness is reduced, the nematic phase boundary remains robust on T -p phase diagrams, while the magnetically ordered phase shrinks significantly. Meanwhile, in all samples measured, a local maximum of T c is observed outside the nematic phase region, not far from the extrapolated nematic endpoint, suggesting that the nematic quantum fluctuations can enhance superconductivity. However, associated with the weakening of magnetism, the superconductivity is also weakened. The pressure-induced high-T c superconductivity no longer exists in our thinner samples, where magnetism is fragile. Our observations strongly suggest that nematic quantum fluctuations alone can only have a limited promotion of T c , while magnetic fluctuations are pivotal for the stabilization of high-T c superconductivity. Crystal growths. High-quality single crystals of FeSe were grown by chemical vapor transport with a eutectic KCl-AlCl 3 mixture as the transport agent Device integrated diamond anvil cell. The diamond anvil cells used were equipped with two low side angle diamond anvils (Type IIas) with a culet diameter of 800 μm and a bevel of 1000 μm. Stainless steel gaskets with a 10 μm thick insulation layer were prepared following the method in Ref. Magneto-electrical resistance measurements were carried out in a Physical Property Measurement System by Quantum Design with a base temperature of 1.8 K and fields up to 14 T. The Supporting Information is available. 