Defect engineering is applied to hybrid (CH3NH3)PbI3 organic-inorganic perovskites. These materials have become one of the most promising low-cost alternatives to traditional semiconductors in the field of photovoltaics and light emitting devices. We use here Helium ion irradiation at low energy as a tool for the controlled introduction of point defects in both single crystals and polycrystalline thin films. The irradiation defects modify the opto-electronic properties as probed using photoluminescence spectroscopy from 10K to room-temperature. Contrary to usual semiconductors, we observe a very good resilience of the PL properties with irradiation, even associated to an enhancement of the optical emission at low temperature. We discuss these results in relation with the tetragonal to orthorhombic low-temperature phase transition below T=160 K. A comparison between spectra from single crystals and polycrystalline films, both with and without irradiation defects, allow a better understanding of the light emission mechanisms in both kinds of samples. We thereby evidence radiation hardness of these materials and the specificity of defects and their impact over light emission properties. In materials science, as seen in particular in semiconductor physics, it is crucial to work on the relationship between the structural, electronic and optical properties. We are considering here more specifically issues in hybrid perovskite materials. Can we understand better these semiconductor materials' properties like light emission with the help of defects engineering? The firstly used material in the high-performing perovskites solar cells is methylammonium lead triiodide (CH3NH3PbI3) which has a tetragonal structure at room temperature (now replaced by triple cations perovskite solar cells). This material undergoes two structural phase transitions as a function of temperature : from orthorhombic to tetragonal at 160 K, and from tetragonal to cubic at about 330 K, showing important impact on charge carrier dynamics and photoluminescent properties. At first, for the materials' synthesis one needs to obtain the methylammonium iodide (CH3NH3)I (called MAI hereafter) which is further used as a precursor in the synthesis of the MAPI samples. The MAI was synthesized by adding dropwise 10,5 mL of hydriodic acid HI (57 % in water, stabilized, Sigma Aldrich) to 20 mL of methylamine CH3NH2 (2 M solution in ethanol, Sigma Aldrich) at 0°C for 2 hours. The solvent was then evaporated at 60°C under vacuum using a rotary evaporator. The powder was subsequently washed several times with diethyl ether and dried overnight at 60°C. In order to increase purity, the yellowish MAI powder was finally recrystallized in a mix of ethanol and diethyl ether. For thin films synthesis, 159 mg of freshly made MAI and 461 mg of lead Iodide PbI2 were dissolved in 1 mL of N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF). Quartz substrates (Neyco) were cleaned with acetone and ethanol, then treated with a 10 %wt solution of KOH in ethanol in an ultrasonic bath for 15 minute each. The slides were then rinsed with distilled water and dried with pressured air. MAPbI3 thin films were obtained by spin coating the precursor solution at 2000 rpm for 15 seconds. The films were then annealed at 90°C for 20 minutes in air, allowing solvent evaporation as well as thin films crystallization. According to SEM characterizations the average grain size is expected to be about or less than 1 μm. Absorption spectroscopy measurements give an approximate thickness of 400 nm for the obtained polycrystalline thin films. For single crystals synthesis, 636 mg of MAI and 1844 mg of lead Iodide PbI2 were dissolved in 4 mL of DMF (1:1 molar ratio) in a small Teflon capped vial. The vial was then placed in an oil bath at 105°C. Single crystals of MAPbI3 start to appear at the bottom of the vial after a couple of hours. They were recovered, dried and washed with diethyl ether several times. The typical size of the single crystals is about 3 mm. The Helium ion irradiation was performed using the IRMA implanter at CSNSM laboratory. The photoluminescence was measured in reflection geometry at 45° using an argon laser (λ=488nm) at a power of 10 mW as an excitation source, and a spectrometer TRIAX320 from Horiba-JY equipped with a R928 photomultiplier (Hamamatsu) detector. For these measurements the samples were glued with silver paste in an optical closed-cycle cryostat from ARS Instruments equipped with two quartz windows. The time-resolved PL was measured using the Fluoromax equipment (Horiba Jobin-Yvon) based on TCSPC technique with an excitation from a nano-LED at 482 nm pulsed at 100 kHz (full time-range 6 μs). According to the SRIM simulation program, the mean projected range for the Helium ions in MAPI is 275 nm at 30 keV, and the maximum implanted concentration at the highest fluence (1E16 cm -2 ) is about 0,5 at.%. The photoluminescence from MAPI polycrystalline thin films at room temperature is represented in Figure As was already noticed, one of the key of MAPI success are its excellent opto-electronic properties even in the presence of defects. When we compare now the polycrystalline thin film spectrum with the irradiated single crystal in Figure At this fluence, a high relative increase of BE2 is seen, leading to a major spectrum contribution. Also the BE1 contribution is shifted to higher energy at 1.631 eV. The high energy tail of the spectrum overpass the known band-gap energy at this temperature (1.64 eV), related to an important broadening of the BE2 component for this ion irradiation fluence, as evidenced from the spectral decomposition in Figure At this high fluence, we also form clusters of point defects that act as non radiative recombination centers as the integrated intensity of the spectrum is decreased by about 40% as compared to the reference MAPI polycrystalline sample. We now consider the temperature evolution of the PL spectra between the reference thin film and the irradiated sample at 1E15 cm -2 from 10K to 150K as represented in Figure Using Helium ion irradiation and photoluminescence spectroscopy at varying temperature, we could show that the methylammonium lead iodide samples, both in single crystals and polycrystalline thin films, present high radiation hardness as they still present light emission up to the highest irradiation fluences used in this work (2E16 He + cm -2 ). We estimated that they can withstand about 10 5 times the atomic displacements needed to quench the PL in crystalline silicon. The nature of defects giving rise to radiative recombinations and light emission was discussed. The mechanisms are very similar in single crystals and polycrystalline thin films where grain boundaries and intrinsic defects give rise to the same spectra than irradiation defects in single crystals. Ion irradiation defects are also shown to enhance light emission in the low-temperature orthorhombic phase as seen in the dependence of the total PL integrated intensity. This effect, much pronounced in thin films, was related to quantum confinement within tetragonal inclusions that may still be present in the orthorhombic phase at low-temperature (T<160 K). Another effect of the ion irradiation directly observable is the smoothing out of the emission from the less tightly bound exciton (BE1), and a strong reinforcement of the BE2 component that we tentatively attributed to Iodine interstitials when considering theoretical calculations. Finally, this work sheds some light on defects and their influence over opto-electronic properties in methylammonium lead iodide, opening new possibilities for the use of defects engineering as well as doping through ion implantation. 