With the increase in demand of electrical energy storage devices such as batteries and supercapacitors, considerable effort is being put to increase the efficiency and applications of current technology while keeping it sustainable. Keeping this in mind we have persued the preparation and charatization of waste biomass derived carbon powders as supercapacitor/battery electrodes. Additionally, we have evaluated the performance of such carbons in the presence of an external magnetic field as we expect the graphene like structures to possess intrinsic magnetic nature. Here, we report the valorization of bougainvillea flower petals and detritus into graphenic carbon and explore a novel electrical double layer supercapacitor device that uses Zn +2 ions for internal charge transport and is able to show increased performance upon application of an external magnetic field. Supercapacitors are energy storage devices with high power and energy density. They are generally categorized into two broad classes: EDLCs and pseudocapacitors. Pseudocapacitors store charge by fast-faradaic reactions at the surface or at a depth of a few atomic layers of the electrode active material. Porous carbons are versatile materials being applied in large number of applications such as water treatment The interaction between graphene, nano-graphene and other similar carbon structures with magnetic ions has been an interesting research topic which has been well studied by a number of groups and offers applications in diverse fields such as material separation and biomedical sensors. Bougainvillea petals and detritus were collected from Jawaharlal Nehru University campus, New Delhi, The activating agent ZnCl 2 (95% purity) was procured from Merck (India). Screen printed 3-electrode cells (glassy carbon working electrode with 3 mm dia., Ag/AgCl reference electrode, glassy carbon counter electrode) were procured from Aritech Chemazone, India. Activated carbon was prepared from bougainvilleal flower petals by following the standard procedure described elsewhere and concisely shown in Fig. Thereafter, the furnace was allowed to cool down naturally while maintaining the flow of argon The resultant black mass was washed with dilute hydrochloric acid to remove residual Zn +2 ions (in the case of x = 2) and then washed thoroughly with hot doubled distilled water by vacuum filtration until the pH of the filtrate reached the value of 7. The resulting mass was again dried in a vacuum oven at ~110 °C overnight to get the final (activated) carbon powder. Transmission electron microscope (TEM) images were recorded on a JEOL JEM-2100F instrument (Japan), set at a potential difference of 20 kV. The XRD measurements were performed on an x-ray diffractometer (Rigaku Miniflex600, Japan) using Cu-Kα radiation with a wavelength of 1.54 Å and 2Θ varying from 10 to 60 at a scan rate of 2 min -1 . Fourier-transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopic studies were performed using a Perkin Elmer Frontier (UK) instrument in the wave number range from 450 to 4000 cm -1 . The spectra were recorded by averaging 32 scans per sample with an optical resolution of 1 cm -1 . A suspension of the active material (carbon) powder is prepared in ethanol (1 mg carbon for 1 ml ethanol) by ultrasonication for 30 min. 20 μL aliqouts of this suspension are then drop coated on the working electrode of the screen printed cell and kept for drying at room temperature for 30 min. This three-electrode cell is immersed inside a vial and 1 M ZnCl 2 (aq.) electrolyte filled in the vial such as to completely submerge the working, reference and counter electrodes of the cell. The three electrode cell is then used for electrochemical measurements in the absence/presence of magnetic field applied by a permanent magnet placed right next to the vial. A value of 1000 G was measured at the spot where the working electrode is placed using a gaussmeter. All measurements were performed at room temperature and ambient pressure. EIS, and CV studies have been carried out to characterize the carbon materials. EIS was performed from 10 5 to 10 -2 Hz at a signal level of 10 mV. EIS and CV were performed using the same electrochemical work-station (CHI660E, CH Instruments, USA). Due to the difference in the biological composition of the bougainvillae petal and detritus material (detritus contains dried leaves along with dried petals) we expect difference in the micro/nano-structure of the resulting carbon powders. Fig. The presence of excess sp 3 (as well as sp 2 ) C-H bonds is also verified by comparing the infrared spectra of BVPGC, a-BVPGC, and BVDGC and a-BVDGC (Fig. To get an idea about the type of magnetic field strengths we should analyse our sample with one must note that the typical values of magnetic field strength in electric motors is of order of 1T (10,000 G). And the magnetic field near the Earth's poles is about 60 mT (0.6 G) and near the equator is 30 ∼ mT (300 G). The comparative CV plots for the four carbon electrodes are shown in Fig. The conclusions from the analysis of the CV plots can also be confirmed by the analysis of the a.c. impedance data. For this, the frequency dependent real and imaginary impedance have been plotted (Fig. The R ct is placed in series with W o , a open Warburg element, representing the diffusion controlled ion motion through the highly inhomogenous microstructure between the micro/nano-sized spaces between the graphene nanostructures and represented by the equation: The value of α (for CPE) varies between 0 and 1, and C α represents an ideal capacitor for α = 1. For α < 1, CPE is representative of a non-homogenous system with a wide distribution of time constants and has a frequency-independent phase angle different from 90°. 