Exotic superconductivity is formed by unconventional electron pairing and exhibits various unique properties that cannot be explained by the basic theory. The Fulde-Ferrell-Larkin-Ovchinnikov (FFLO) state is known as an exotic superconducting state in that the electron pairs have a finite center-of-mass momentum leading to a spatially modulated pattern of superconductivity. The spatial modulation endows the FFLO state with emergent anisotropy. However, the anisotropy has never been experimentally verified despite numerous efforts over the years. Here, we report detection of anisotropic acoustic responses depending on the sound propagation direction appearing above the Pauli limit. This anisotropy reveals that the twodimensional FFLO state has a center-of-mass momentum parallel to the nesting vector on the Fermi surface. The present findings will facilitate our understanding of not only superconductivity in solids but also exotic pairings of various particles. As theorized by Bardeen, Cooper, and Schrieffer (BCS), superconductivity occurs when itinerant electrons form pairs, so-called Cooper pairs, via an attractive force. Although many superconducting properties are well described by BCS theory, long-standing studies have found various superconductors beyond the BCS framework and many intriguing open questions. One of the exotic unconventional superconducting states, the Fulde-Ferrell-Larkin-Ovchinnikov (FFLO) state, was independently theorized by For ordinary superconductivity, in which spins in paired electrons are antiparallel to each other, a magnetic field destabilizes the superconductivity through the orbital effect and the Zeeman effect. In most superconductors, superconductivity is suppressed by the orbital effect caused by the Lorentz force on vortices, which mainly determines the upper critical field Hc2. However, when the orbital effect is quenched, the Zeeman effect governs Hc2. In this case, the ordinary spin-singlet superconducting state is destroyed at the field where the Zeeman splitting energy reaches the superconducting energy gap Δ, known as the Pauli paramagnetic limit HP. In contrast, the FFLO state is stable even above HP due to a gain in spin polarization energy of the nonzero q. This finite q adds a term, cos(qr), to the order parameter of the superconductivity Δ. The modified gap function Δcos The organic superconductor κ-(BEDT-TTF)2Cu(NCS)2 (BEDT-TTF is an abbreviation of bis(ethyleneditio)tetrathiafulvalene) is known as the prime candidate for exhibiting the FFLO state and has been examined by various measurements When a magnetic field is parallel to the conducting plane, emergence of FFLO pairing is highly expected in κ-(BEDT-TTF)2Cu(NCS)2 because of the large Maki parameter, relatively long mean-free path Employing multidirectional ultrasound propagation, we examine the plausible FFLO state of κ-(BEDT-TTF)2Cu(NCS)2 and establish that this state certainly exhibits an anisotropic response, which is a hallmark of the FFLO state. To discuss the anisotropy in the FFLO state, we arranged two pairs of transducers, generating and detecting longitudinal ultrasonic waves, on all sides of a cuboid-shaped single crystal, as shown in Fig. Since the FFLO state appears at low temperatures when the orbital effect is sufficiently suppressed, in Fig. Since these two anomalies finally merge into one sharp anomaly at θ=1.2°, the FFLO state is completely suppressed by this slight tilt. This result is perfectly consistent with the report that the FFLO state at 2.0 K only exists for θ<1.2° In Fig. However, this model cannot reproduce Hc2 at 2.1 K because of the emergence of the FFLO state. The Hc2 determined by the resistivity (see Supplementary Materials) at 1.6 K also exhibits similar behavior, as shown by the pink triangles (right axis) in Fig. Apart from the phase diagram, examination in further detail of the pinning effect enhanced in the FFLO state is interesting. In Fig. Since the anisotropy appears only in the reported field-temperature region of the FFLO state, the present results demonstrate that the emergent anisotropy originates from the formation of the FFLO state. Given an additional periodicity of the spatial modulation, it seems natural that the stiffness of the lattice in the direction across that modulation pattern should increase. Thus, sound velocity measures the stiffness of crystal lattice. Namely, the q vector is oriented along the b-axis, perpendicular to the field direction in the present setup. Nevertheless, how this manifests as a change in Δv/v must be discussed. The most likely possibility is flux pinning because vortices have a strong influence on elastic properties in the superconducting state Nevertheless, we should take into account other effects leading to the lattice hardening because the coupling between sound waves and Josephson-vortex lattice has not been well studied yet. For example, the change in the electron-lattice coupling and/or the local density of states related to the Andreev bound states may also modify the elastic properties. The present results certainly demonstrate the fact that the FFLO state yields the emergent anisotropy with the q vector along the b-axis; however, the detailed mechanism should be clarified by further measurements in the future. Next, we need to consider the question of why the orientation of the q vector is mainly along the baxis, perpendicular to the field direction in the present configuration. Note, here, that the effect of the spin-orbit interaction on the FFLO state in the present salt is negligible because the organic salt is composed of light elements. In the case of ideal isotropic 3D superconductors, the q vector always points in the field direction Namely, the FFLO state in the anisotropic 2D superconductor is expected to show Ising-type behavior. Indeed, theoretical studies The present multidirectional ultrasound measurements demonstrate the emergent anisotropy of the FFLO state induced by the spatial modulation of the order parameter. Since κ-(BEDT-TTF)2Cu(NCS)2 is a 2D clean superconductor, the FFLO state shows Ising anisotropy originating from the anisotropic Fermi surface. Further studies of other FFLO candidates with various features, such as 3D and slight dirtiness, will facilitate a deeper understanding of the FFLO state. b Spatial modulation of order parameter D(r) in the FFLO state (dashed curve). The normal state (blue) appears at nodes of the superconducting order parameter Dcos(qr). H FFLO (this work) H c2 (C p H FFLO (C p H FFLO (NMR H FFLO (TDO 