The real-time, in-line analysis of light polarization is critical in optical communication networks, which suffers from the complex systems with numerous bulky opto-electro-mechanical elements tandemly arranged along optical path. Here, we propose a fiber-integrated polarimeter with nano-thickness by vertically stacking three two-dimensional (2D) materials based photodetection units. We demonstrate a self-power-calibrated, ultrafast, unambiguous detection of linear (LP) and circular polarized (CP) light according to the symmetry broken induced linear photogalvanic effects (LPGE) and circular photogalvanic effects (CPGE) in black phosphorous (BP) units, which are twistedly stacked to substitute traditional mechanical rotation of polarizers. As a demonstration, we achieve Hadamard single-pixel polarimetric imaging by the polarimeter to recognize the polarization distributions, showing potential in high-speed polarization-division-multiplexed imaging and realtime polarized endoscopy. This work provides a new strategy for next-generation ultracompact optical and optoelectronic systems, and guides a way for developing high-resolution arrayed devices with multifunctional pixels. Polarization, as one of the fundamental characteristics in optical communication, imaging, navigation, sensing, and almost all optics-related fields To solve the problem, several polarization-sensitive photodetectors have been investigated using natural anisotropic two-dimensional (2D) materials with low crystal symmetry, including black phosphorus (BP), ReX2 (X = S, Se), and MX (M = Sn, Ge; X = S, Se) In this work, we demonstrate a nano-thick polarimeter by vertically stacking three photodetection units based on atomthin 2D materials onto an optical fiber endface. We choose an isotropic Bi2Se3 as the calibrate unit to monitor the illumination power, which is polarization insensitive to vertical incident light and has narrow bandgap of 0.3 eV 21 . Two anisotropic BP units are twistedly stacked above for precise polarized photosensing, which have layer-dependent direct bandgap (changes from 0.3 eV for bulk crystal to 2.0 eV for monolayer), high mobility and anisotropic optoelectronic properties Design concept. The designed fiber-integrated polarimeter is schematically shown in Fig. Photosensing performance of the device. The excellent photosensing ability of a material is critical for highperformance polarized photodetection. The narrow bandgap of Bi2Se3 and BP leads to strong photoresponses to infrared illumination. At first, we investigate the photodetection performance of the isotropic Bi2Se3 unit in Supplementary Fig. In addition, response time (τ) and polarization ratio (PR, defined as the ratio of maximum and minimum polarizationdependent photoresponse To further illustrate the self-driven effect, Fig. Self-driven polarization analysis of the polarimeter. As discussed above, with the help of Bi2Se3 power calibration unit, the polarization of light can be detected by measuring the photocurrent generated by BP unit. However, due to the overlap of the polarized photocurrent value within a period of polarization state change, a single BP unit cannot fully distinguish all polarization states. Therefore, we first demonstrate the LP light discernment of the polarimeter with two twisted BP units, as shown in Fig. In addition to the LP light detection, we also demonstrated the CP photoresponses of the polarimeter. Due to the broken of inversion symmetry of a material, the illumination of circularly polarized light onto the material results in a helicity-dependent photocurrent, which is called CPGE. Figure (a Ib + b) 2 + (c Ib + d It + e) 2 = 1, where a-e are constants related to the sine equations of b-BP and t-BP (see supplementary information for details). Figure Single-pixel infrared polarimetric imaging. As discussed above, the proposed device has a strong polarization distinguishing ability with ~1 MHz detection bandwidth, which is promising for real-time polarimetric infrared imaging. Single-pixel imaging (SPI) is a computational imaging method that needs only a single-pixel detector instead of a pixelated array detector, showing the advantages of fast speed, high signal-to-noise ratio, and low cost Here, we used Hadamard single-pixel imaging (HSI) technique, which has good noise robustness and imaging quality Optical fibers are widely used in endoscopic imaging because of their small size and flexibility. Our fiber-integrated polarimeter shows the ability to directly extract polarization information at a ~1 MHz rate, free from extra polarization modulation and analysis devices, showing the potential to realize miniaturized, low-cost, and real-time polarimetric endoscopic imaging through raster scanning and single-pixel imaging. In addition, this device configuration also shows great potential for fabricating dense detector arrays to realize pixelated polarimetric imaging. The traditional division-offocal-plane polarimeter structure requires at least four pixels in a group to acquire four polarization-dependent intensity components (0°, 45°, 90° and 135°) of the incident light, while for our device, a single-pixel can achieve the same results. Therefore, the proposed device shows potential for highresolution and high-speed polarimetric imaging. Integration in the direction of optical path is promising for developing ultracompact optical systems with small device volume, opening up the opportunities to simultaneously analyze or modulate multiple parameters of light. Here, by van der Waals stacking ultrathin and transparent functional units on fiber endfaces, we demonstrate a fiber-integrated polarimeter for the applications of polarization analysis and polarimetric imaging. In the stacked structure, polarization insensitive isotropic Bi2Se3 unit is used to calibrate illumination power and two twisted anisotropic BP units are used for polarized photodetection. The asymmetrically designed electrodes break the symmetry of the system and lead to LPGE and CPGE of BP. Under power calibration by Bi2Se3 unit, both the LP and CP states of incident light can be fast and unambiguously detected, according to the different polarized photoresponses generated from the twisted BP photodetectors. Furthermore, we also demonstrate single-pixel infrared polarimetric imaging by the polarimeter, showing potential for future real-time endoscopic analysis and high-speed polarimetric imaging. Notably, by stacking functional units along the optical path, a single-pixel can be functionalized while maintaining the lateral size, which is especially critical for acquiring high-resolution images while obtaining more information of light. Meanwhile, we propose a typical method to design and fabricate complex structures on optical fiber endfaces, bringing possibilities to assemble diversified integrated functional units, such as power meters Materials preparation. We used a mechanical exfoliation method to prepare BP and hBN nanoflakes, as shown in Supplementary Fig. The thickness of BP nanoflakes was measured by atomic force microscopy (AFM, Oxford, Cypher S) and TEM (FEI, Talos F200X) for ~ 40 nm. The thicker BP nanoflakes possessed a narrower bandgap, which was beneficial for infrared light harvesting and demonstrated stronger light absorption. However, the nanoflakes cannot be too thick, which would lead to a large dark current, poor performance as well as difficulties during the fabrication process. To ensure insulation between the Bi2Se3, b-BP and t-BP and avoid the degradation, few-layer hBN layers with a measured thickness of ~10 nm were capped on to these materials. We have used a CVD system to synthesize Bi2Se3 nanoplates on mica substrates. Se powders (0.20 g) (99.9%, Alfa) in a ceramic boat placed at the upstream of the quartz tube furnace (~220 °C). A mica substrate was placed cover the ceramic boat with Bi2Se3 powder (10 mg) in the center of the furnace. The quartz tube was purged with ultrahigh-purity argon (Ar) gas (99.999%) for 2 min, and then ramped up to 560 °C in 20 min and held at 560 °C for 10 min under a constant flow of Ar (30 sccm) and H2 (10 sccm). After the reaction was completed, the furnace was naturally cooled to ambient temperature, and the aimed materials grown on the mica substrate were collected for subsequent characterizations and manufactures. The Bi2Se3 nanoplates with measured thickness of ~ 60 nm, were then transferred to PDMS for the next transfer step on the optical fiber endface. EBL process on the fiber endface. To precisely fabricate the electrode structures on the optical fiber endface, we customized an optical fiber holder to allow the multi-step spin coating processes on the fiber endface. In this process, totally three layers of resist films were coated, consisting of 9% methyl methacrylate (MMA) in ethyl lactate, 6% polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA) in anisole and water-soluble polyaniline (AR-PC 5090) (Supplementary Fig. In the frequency response measurement, a signal generator (33522A, Agilent) and an electro-optic modulator (LN81S-FC, Thorlabs) were used to modulate the light, an amplifier (DLPCA-200, Femto) was used to magnify the photovoltage generated by the BP in self-driven mode, and an oscilloscope (MSOX6004A, Keysight) was used to monitor the highfrequency signal. Photocurrent mapping measurements were performed by a microscope system (alpha-300R, WITec). The polarimeter sample was fixed in the integrated microscope system, and the incident light was focused on the surface of the sample through the objective lens of the microscope and scanned in the x-y direction. The magnitudes of the device photocurrents corresponding to each x-y coordinate were recorded. Single-pixel polarimetric imaging. We used a 1550 nm laser (VFLS-1550, Connet) and DMD (DLP Discovery 3000, Vialux) to generate Hadamard basis patterns. Light was modulated by a polarizer (GCL-0510, Daheng Optics) and a half-wave plate (GCL-0604, Daheng Optics). Then, the light illuminated the target object and was collected by a fiber coupling system, and the photocurrent signals generated by the twisted BPs were collected and recorded by a source meter (Keithley SMU 2450, Tektronix). For single-pixel polarimetric imaging, Hadamard basis patterns were projected onto the target object, and the polarimetric images were reconstructed by differential HSI technique. Foundation of Jiangsu Province (Grant No. BK20180003), 333 high level talent training project of JiangSu.