Paramagnons are the collective modes that govern the spin response of nearly magnetic conductors. In some cases they mediate electron pairing leading to superconductivity. This scenario may occur in 2H-NbSe2 monolayers, that feature spin-valley coupling on account of spin-orbit interactions and their lack of inversion symmetry. Here we explore spin anisotropy of paramagnons both for non-centrosymmetric Kane-Mele-Hubbard models for 2H-NbSe2 monolayers described with a DFTderived tight-binding model. In the infinite wavelength limit we find spatially uniform paramagnons with energies around 1 meV that feature a colossal off-plane uniaxial magnetic anisotropy, with quenched transversal spin response. At finite wave vectors, longitudinal and transverse channels reverse roles: XY fluctuations dominate within a significant portion of the Brillouin zone. Our results show that 2H-NbSe2 is close to a Coulomb-driven in-plane (XY) spin density wave instability. A nearly magnetic conductor is a material on the brink of a quantum phase transition to a magnetically ordered state. The transition is controlled by the Stoner parameter, defined as the product of the atomic Coulomb repulsion U and the density of states at the Fermi energy, ρ 0 . As it happens in conventional phase transitions, fluctuations are enhanced due to proximity to the critical point. In the case of nearly ferromagnetic conductors, spin fluctuations are enhanced when ρ 0 U 1, leading to the emergence of paramagnons, prominent features in the low energy spectra, that anticipate the formation of magnon resonances at the other side of the transition. The formation of paramagnons occurs for all magnetic instabilities, either ferromagnetic, antiferromagnetici, or spin-density wave, and lead to diverging magnetic responses at specific wave-vectors that characterize the ordered phase at the other side of the transition. Interaction of paramagnons with quasiparticles lead to observable effects, such as the renormalizaton of the quasiparticle effective mass The lack of inversion symmetry leads to a momentum-dependent spin splitting of the energy bands. The splitting is large, on account of the strong SOC of the transition metal. As a result, Kramers doublets have their momenta at opposite points in the Brillouin zone (see Fig. In this paper, we study spin fluctuations in spin-valley coupled systems. From inspection of their energy bands we can expect a very anisotropic spin response. When the Fermi energy lies in the half-metallic pockets at the top of the valence band (see Fig. To study this phenomenon, we compute spin fluctuations using the Random Phase Approximation (RPA) for two types of Hamiltonians. First, we consider the Kane-Mele-Hubbard model The spin susceptibility, that governs the non-local spin response to magnetic perturbations, is given by where a, b = x, y, z label the spin channel, and η, η label the atomic orbitals inside the unit cell. In the frequency- momentum domain we have In the following we compute the spin-response in the RPA approximation, where χ 0 is the non-interacting (U = 0) spin susceptibility tensor, for which closed analytical expressions are readily obtained in terms of the single-particle states and energies. Therefore, equation (3) permits one to obtain the spin response including the effect of the interactions in the RPA where H 0 describes first and second neighbors hopping in a honeycomb lattice, H SOC is the Kane-Mele SOC where i, j denotes a sum over all pairs of second neighbors i, j, in the honeycomb lattice, and d kj ( d ik ) are the unit vectors going from site k (i) to site j (k), where k labels the common first neighbor of sites i and j If we take U = ∆ = 0 this term opens up a topological gap at the Dirac point. However, here we include a sublattice potential, ∆ 2 τ z i , where τ z i = ±1 for i = A, B. In the non-interacting limit (U = 0), the energy bands of the Hamiltonian capture the main features of TMD monolayers: a gap separates a valence and a conduction band whose extrema are at the K, K corners of the BZ zone. In the neighborhood of the K, K points the bands have large spin-splitting and Kramers partners have opposite wave vectors. In this region the bands are well described by a Dirac equation with a mass Depending on the location of the Fermi energy, the model can mimic a semiconducting TMD, such as 2H-MoS 2 , 2H-MoSe 2 , 2H-WS 2 , 2H-WSe 2 , doped with either electrons or holes and the Fermi energy close to the band extrema, or 2H-NbSe 2 , with the Fermi energy deep down closer to the conduction band's minima. We now study the spin fluctuations in these two limits as a function of the Hubbard interaction U . We focus first on the q = 0 low energy spin fluctuations, that govern the long wavelength spin response of the material. Because of the C 3 symmetry of the honeycomb lattice we have χ xx = χ yy = χ ⊥ . In the non-magnetic phase we have χ xy = χ yx = 0. Therefore, the spin response is diagonal in the spin index, with two different components for the zz (χ || ) and in-plane components. When the Fermi energy is located close to the K, K points, zero momenta spin-flip fluctuations are strictly forbidden, for energies smaller than the spinsplitting. In that limit, the Fermi surface is formed by spin-polarized pockets, with opposite polarization, at the K and K points. In contrast, low energy spin conserving fluctuations are allowed. With this in mind, the results of figure We now address the question of whether the strong anisotropy of the spin response is something specific of the states close to the K and K points, or, on the contrary, the anisotropy also occurs when the Fermi surface has spin-split bands in low symmetry regions of the Brillouin zone. For that matter, we consider now the case where the Fermi energy is located at higher in the valence band (E F corresponding to the dot-dashed line in figure We have verified that the anisotropy is driven by the combination of SOC and inversion symmetry breaking. For that matter we have computed the spin response for ∆ = 0 and t KM > 0. We find that the spin fluctuation spectra along the longitudinal and transverse directions have the same lineshape and virtually identical amplitudes. We now ask whether the same phenomenon holds true for a more realistic Hamiltonian describing 2H-NbSe 2 . First we carry out density functional theory (DFT) calculations for the 2H-NbSe 2 where l is an atomic site index, μ, ν are orbital indices, and σ, σ are spin indices. L is the orbital angular momentum operator and S is the electronic spin operator. The orbital indices μ, ν run over the p orbitals when atomic site l is occupied by a Se atom, and over the d orbitals when l is occupied by a Nb atom. The SOC intensities at Se and Nb atoms have been adjusted such that the multiorbital LCAO model with local SOC reproduces as faithfully as possible the energy bands resulting from a fully relativistic DFT calculation. We find that the best fit is given by ξ Nb = 79 meV and ξ Se = 211 meV, in line with those reported in reference 19. Explicit comparison between the LCAO and the DFT bands is given in the supplementary material. We now apply the RPA method for our multi-orbital tight-binding model. The on-site atomic Coulomb repulsion interaction is given by the Hamiltonian: where U l is taken as a free parameter in the calculations, as we have done in the case of the KM Hubbard model. When atomic site l is occupied by a Se atom we take U l = 0. μ, ν are orbital indices running over the d orbitals centered on the Nb sites, and σ 1 , σ 2 are spin indices. We find that U c = 0.9 eV marks the critical value of the instability to a ferromagnetic phase. The q = 0 spin susceptibility matrix, calculated within the RPA, using the multi-orbital DFT based TB model are shown in figure We now turn to the finite wave vector spin susceptibility in the static limit, directly related to the effective pairing interactions in spin fluctuation mediated superconductivity Direct observation of paramagnons, either q = 0 Ising paramagnons, or finite q XY paramagnons, with energy and momentum resolution is presently possible only via neutron scattering In conclusion, we have calculated the spin fluctuations of spin-valley coupled systems that describe noncentrosymmetric TMD, such as doped 2H-MoS 2 and 2H-NbSe 2 monolayers. We have used both toy model Hamiltonians, such as the Kane-Mele-Hubbard model, and DFT-based models. We have considered both q = 0 and finite q. In all cases we find a very large spin anisotropy of the spin response, driven by the interplay of SOC and lack of inversion symmetry. Remarkably, the magnetic anisotropy of paramagnons is wave-vector dependent, so that we have Ising Paramagnons for q = 0 are XY paramagnons for finite q. Our calculations reveal that 2H-NbSe 2 monolayers are closer to SDW instability with in-plane easy axis, rather than a ferromagnetic (q = 0) off-plane instability. Our findings can have profound implications for the nature of both the normal state and the superconducting phase of 2H-NbSe 2 . Further details regarding the electronic structure of monolayer 2H-NbSe2 Here we provide additional plots showing results for the DFT calculation and the associated multiorbital tightbinding model. We show in figure In figure If figure In figure * On leave from Departamento de Física Aplicada, Universidad de Alicante, 03690, Sant Vicent del Raspeig, Spain