Charge order is commonly believed to compete with superconducting order. An intertwined form of superconducting wave function, known as pair-density-wave (PDW) order, has been proposed; however, there has been no direct evidence, theoretical or experimental, that it forms the ground state of any cuprate superconductor. As a test case, we consider La2-xBaxCuO4 with x = 1/8, where charge and spin stripe orders within the CuO2 planes compete with three-dimensional superconducting order. We report measurements of the superconducting critical current perpendicular to the planes in the presence of an in-plane magnetic field. The variation of the critical current with orientation of the field is inconsistent with a theoretical prediction specific to the PDW model. It appears, instead, that the orientation dependence of the critical-current density might be determined by a minority phase of d-wave superconductivity that is present as a consequence of doped-charge inhomogeneity. In a superconductor, a collective state of paired electrons supports dissipationless transport, corresponding to current flow without resistance. For a solid with charge order, there is a static spatial modulation of the density of conduction electrons. While charge order has now been observed in most cuprate superconductors Evidence for the 2D superconductivity is illustrated in Fig. It is extremely unusual to observe 2D superconductivity within equivalent layers of a bulk crystal because one would normally expect some type of effective Josephson coupling between neighboring layers that results in three-dimensional superconducting order. To explain the apparent frustration of the interlayer Josephson coupling While the PDW proposal is consistent with experiment, its relevance remains uncertain. The PDW is a strongly-correlated state that is difficult to reconcile with the conventional theory of superconductivity Yang The rest of this article is organized as follows. After a brief description of the experimental methods, the results are presented in Sec. III. A comparison with previous results and a discussion of a new proposed interpretation are given in Sec. IV. Our conclusions appear in Sec. V. Single crystals of LBCO with x = 1/8 studied here were grown in an infrared image furnace by the floating-zone technique. They are pieces from the same cylindrical crystal used previously to characterize twodimensional fluctuating superconductivity Note that we use a and b to label the in-plane crystal axes aligned with the Cu-O bonds, which are equivalent and indistinguishable in the low-temperature-tetragonal phase Consider the ADMR results in Fig. The lack of perfect 4-fold symmetry is a consequence of the sample shape. The crystal for this measurement is longest along c, and it has unequal widths of the a and b faces, as described in the previous section. This leads to anisotropy in the demagnetization factor For comparison, we show the impact of field orientation on in-plane resistivity ρ b in Fig. To explore the critical-current density along the c axis, we have to cool to below 5 K. Figures The variation of the c-axis critical-current density, J c , with field angle is plotted in Fig. The ADMR that we observe in ρ c below 30 K has the same fourfold symmetry and orientation as that reported for stripe-ordered La 1.6-x Nd 0.4 Sr x CuO 4 with x = 0.15 To evaluate an alternative explanation of the modulation in ρ c and J c , it is necessary to take account of all possible superconducting paths in the sample. Clearly, the decrease of ρ c below ∼ 25 K is not what one would expect from an ideal system of 2D superconducting layers with a uniformly-frustrated interlayer Josephson coupling. The observed T -dependence of ρ c resembles the behavior of one-dimensional (1D) superconducting nanowires in which phase slips result in finite resistivity The fraction of the full Meissner response observed at 2 K in a field of 0.2 mT parallel to the planes is only 0.1% There have been several previous reports of local PDW order by scanning tunneling microscopy. These include detecting PDW order in the vicinity of magnetic vortex cores through interference with uniform superconductivity In conclusion, we have observed a fourfold modulation of J c as a function of the orientation of an in-plane magnetic field. The maximum J c occurs when the field is along a Cu-O bond direction, which is inconsistent with a prediction based on the idea of partial relief of the frustration of interlayer Josephson coupling due to PDW order 