In the recent years, we observe a dramatic boost of research in photonics empowered by the concepts of machine learning and artificial intelligence. The corresponding photonic systems, to which this new methodology is applied, can range from traditional optical waveguides to nanoantennas and metasurfaces, and these novel approaches underpin the fundamental principles of light-matter interaction developed for a smart design of intelligent photonic devices. Concepts and approaches of artificial intelligence and machine learning penetrate rapidly into the fundamental physics of light, and they provide effective tools for the study of the field of metaphotonics driven by opticallyinduced electric and magnetic resonances. Here, we introduce this new field with its application to metaphotonics and also present a summary of the basic concepts of machine learning with some specific examples developed and demonstrated for metasystems and metasurfaces. As demonstrated in the recent years, artificial intelligence (AI) is quickly becoming a ubiquitous concept in various physical sciences In particular, such approaches are used for inverse design, optimization, big-data processing, underpinning the rapid development of precise photonic technologies. Metaphotonics is a new and rapidly developing research direction in subwavelength photonics High-index dielectric resonators can support both electric and magnetic Mie-type resonances which can be tailored by the nanoparticle geometry. Mie-resonant silicon nanoparticles have recently received considerable attention for applications in nanophotonics and metamaterials Here, we discuss the current progress in the recently emerged fields of machine learning and artificial intelligence focusing on their applications to metaphotonics driven by optically-induced electric and magnetic resonances. More specifically, we describe how these novel ideas can be applied to study optical nanoantennas and metasurfaces and improve their functionalities. We also present a summary of the basic concepts of machine learning with some specific examples developed and demonstrated for a variety of metasystems and metasurfaces. This Perspective is organized as follows. In Sec. II we broadly discuss the basic concepts of machine learning irrespective of specific applications. We introduce the concepts of deep learning and machine learning and show how they are linked to artificial neutral networks and artificial intelligence concepts. Next, in Sec. III we summarize briefly the main ideas of metaphotonics and describe the main parameters and properties which are required usually for the optimisation. In Sec. IV we consider several examples of advanced nanoantennas and their optimisation with the help of machine learning. All Secs. V -VII discuss various aspects of functional and self-adaptive metasurfaces and their applications to sensing. Finally, Sec. VIII concludes the paper with perspectives and outlook. In this Perspective article, we focus on phenomena and applications which can be reached via AI technologies, and we do not discuss particular methods in detail. Still, here we provide a brief description of machine learning (ML) algorithms in order to outline the general ideas of those methods suitable for applications. While AI is a broad field closely connected with the development of systems mimicking intelligence, ML provides a set of data-driven algorithms for learning ability of AI Deep learning (DL) is a subclass of ML (see Fig. After the training, the ANN is able to accurately map the input to the desired output, implying that it has "learned" the necessary mapping from the given data. It should be noted that this mapping is not necessarily unique and differences in training procedure can cause a failure to converge. It is generally considered good practice to divide a dataset into training and validation sets. Due to the expressivity of high dimensional networks it is possible for over-fitting to occur which must be mitigated. Over-fitting can be monitored via the loss function applied to Machine learning (ML) is a subset of AI, these are data-driven algorithms which learn from experience and have the capacity to improve their performance over time and adapt to new data. ML algorithms are varied in their approach, however deep learning (DL) is a subset of ML solely based on layered structures referred to as artificial neural networks. The main feature of DL is the capability to efficiently process raw unstructured data and automatically determine its features while classical ML involves the processing of data in a manner predefined by a human operator. the validation set. Once the model is trained and over-fitting is mitigated the model can be said to be capable of generalising for an out of sample input. This of course assumes that the training data provided is representative of the problem that one is trying to learn. It is important to note that in general ML models are interpolative by construction, thus extrapolative intuition (not to be confused with generalisation) is still a difficult problem that is indeed difficult for human operators as well. One of the major drawbacks of ML is the amount of data needed for the training procedure, which is typically dictated by the complexity of the problem. For DL increased training data also tends to mitigate over-fitting to a certain extent and thus can be even more important. The collection of the data as well as training may take an enormous time. Hence, the use of DL is usually justified when the same task has to be solved many times for slightly different set of parameters or the task of building a feature extractor is intractable. Concerning photonics, ML was so-far incorporated mainly as a tool for forward and inverse design procedures (see Fig. To illustrate the above ideas, we consider an example of a metaphotonic system which can be designed with the help of an ANN. Let the aim be to predict a scattering spectrum for a given radius of a uniform spherical particle. In this case the input is the radius, and the output is the value of a scattering cross-section (SCS) at some particular frequency. The training set consists of pairs [radius, SCS] and the network finds the mapping between these two values, meaning that it finds a sequence of mathematical transformations which converts a given radius to a known SCS value. In this case, the transformations are not constrained to have anything in common with any physical equation, theory, or model. When the sequence is defined, the network can predict the unknown value of SCS for a radius which was not given during the training. Importantly, the reverse process is possible, and inputs can be swapped with outputs so the network will estimate parameters required for a given SCS value. No additional training procedures or any changes Structure parameters may come in a form of numerical arrays containing geometric or material parameters, or in a form of images or sets of pixels. During the learning procedure the neural network determines the appropriate mapping to account for the relation between the parameters and the responses. Then, the network is able to predict a structures response which was not present in the learning set of data -this is a forward design, which is a prediction of a physical response for a given structure. Swapping the input and output data and applying the same training procedure, the network may provide a reverse function, predicting parameters of a structure which allows achieving a given physical response, called an inverse design. of the algorithm are needed -when the connections are determined they work in both ways. Therefore, the network can be trained with the data acquired by conventional solvers and then it is capable to solve the inverse task to find parameters for a desired physical response. However, it should be mentioned that for real-world tasks the procedure may be not that straightforward and to achieve high accuracy special architectures of ANNs and algorithms should be considered. Nevertheless, accuracy of the predictions may approach unity when provided enough data, with the speed of estimation suitable to many real-time tasks making DL a promising tool for design of photonic devices. The same logic can be applied for other classes of problems, not necessary related to scattering. However, in this Perspective we describe not the algorithms themselves but some results which can be achieved with their help. Thus, below we refer to DL algorithms as black-boxes with unspecified structures and functional mappings between the physical parameters. Electromagnetic metamaterials were suggested as artificial structures composed of subwavelength elements, and initially they were driven by curiosity such as negative refraction and super-lens. Some years later, metamaterials created a paradigm for engineering electromagnetic space with the help of transformation optics. More recently, research on metamaterials evolved into the study of metasystems and metasurfaces as basic components of the so-called metadevices defined as optical devices having unique and useful functionalities realized by structuring of functional matter on the subwavelength scale Plasmonic and dielectric nanoantennas supporting resonances represent a novel type of building blocks of metamaterials for generating, manipulating, and modulating light Metasurfaces are created by artificial subwavelength elements with small thickness which provides novel capability to manipulate electromagnetic waves The concept of optical metasurfaces have been applied to demonstrate many exotic optical phenomena and various useful planar optical devices. Many of these metasurface-based applications are potentially very promising alternatives to replace conventional optical elements and devices, as they largely benefit from ultra-thin, lightweight, and ultracompact properties, provide the possibility of overcoming several limitations suffered by their traditional counterparts, and can demonstrate versatile novel functionalities. Metasurfaces were suggested for an efficient control of light-matter interaction with subwavelength resonant structures, and they have been explored widely in the recent years for creating transformational flat-optics devices. Plasmonic metastructures suffer from significant losses and show low efficiency, but all-dielectric structures can readily combine electric and magnetic Mie resonances and control efficiently optical properties such as amplitude, phase, polarization, chirality, and anisotropy Importantly, recent advances in nanofabrication technologies bring low-cost, large-area and mass productive approaches and capabilities for the development of various types of metasystems and metasurfaces, and the methods are gradually becoming mature. It is expected that flat-optics components based on dielectric metasurfaces will appear in our daily life very soon bringing complexity of optical components and novel functionalities One of the first illustrative examples for application of the ML techniques to metaphotonics is a design of nanoantennas as elementary units of metasystems meta-atoms. Engineering of a scattering response is often realized with core-shell structures via tuning of thickness and dielectric permittivity of the layers. In this case, a design of nanoantennas may be time consuming due to the overwhelming number of possible combinations of the nanoantenna parameters. Even accounting for manufacturing limitations, the number of possible materials and layer thicknesses can go far beyond thousands of values. Without advanced optimization techniques they should be iterated to fit a desired scattering spectrum, which implies a large number of calculations. In this case, the application of DL techniques can become very useful and productive. The general idea of a design procedure based on the DL approach is shown schematically in Fig. The DL procedure was further generalized to adjust not only thicknesses but also materials of a three-layered sphere via the application of neural network Implementation of ML-based numerical design techniques is not limited to spherical geometries and neural networks. Classical ML algorithm (the so-called Bayesian optimization) was applied for forward design of cylindrical metaldielectric nanoantenna in order to achieve unidirectional scattering satisfying Kerker or anti-Kerker conditions Advantages of DL-based designs over FDTD simulations of core-shell nanoantennas have been discussed in Ref. Other examples of the scattering problems that can be tackled with DL algorithms include a design of invisible objects. In particular, 5-layer particle (Ag and SiO 2 layers) was inversely designed to achieve extremely low scattering efficiency within an optical frequency spectrum Design of nanoantennas can also be used as a basis for solving other problems. As was mentioned above, to achieve reasonable accuracy, the application of DL methods requires a large amount of data. At the same time, ANNs are usually implemented for some specific systems, and a change of the system requires initiation of a new training process even if the general task remains the same. For example, a design of a scattering response of nanoparticles is completely different from the same procedure for metasurfaces though the outputs are quite similar (such as scattering spectra). This is reasonable, since these two systems are characterized by different sets of parameters, and hence there are different mappings between the input and output data. Nevertheless, it is possible to transfer knowledge gained by an ANN between completely different scenarios, referred to as transfer learning Both shape and size of single-material nanoparticles may also be a target for the inverse design procedure. For instance, DL techniques were implemented to achieve a desired spectral emission Moving from isolated nanoantennas to their arrays, we wish to mention the results of the DL-based optimization of A DL algorithm (a black box) connects physical response with parameters of a structure. For example, handdrawn scattering spectra can be processed with the black-box in order to define materials and thicknesses of the layers needed to achieve target spectra (Based on the results from Ref. halide-perovskite thin solar cells combined with a layer of core-shell metallic nanoparticles The fundamental concepts and underlying optical physics of metasurfaces have been extensively explored with the field itself now exhibiting a comprehensive framework. Currently, more advanced engineering with optimization tools is required for moving this field to specific practical applications including bending of light, metalenses, and metaholograms. A rich variety of ML methods and DL approaches has already been explored for metasurfaces aiming to optimize their required functionalities. Below, we present only a few recent examples of such efforts concentrating on particular applications and specific optical devices and functionalities. Inverse design of metasurfaces results in selecting particular shapes and materials of an isolated meta-atom as a specific element of metasurface supercell. In this case, representation of parameters plays an important role, often significantly affecting the result of the subsequent training procedure. Similar to the case of nanoantennas, the design procedure here may result in a set of geometric parameters of meta-atoms with fixed shapes. For example, such an approach was used for a metasurface with super-cells consisting of gold cross-shaped resonators (up to 25 resonators per supercell) One of the critical tasks in the development of transformative metadevices is to engineer specific properties of the light-matter interaction. As a consequence, many studies are devoted to the design and optimization of specific absorptive, scattering, and diffracting properties Starting from absorbers, there are a variety of realised design procedures resulting in the development of perfect Light-matter interaction plays an important role in our daily life providing such information about an object as its color. In general, coloration of objects may be achieved by using special pigments characterized by different absorption properties. Another approach is to employ structural colors generated via engineering of diffraction and reflection properties of an object. Apart from surface decoration, structural colors may be used for digital displays, sensing, storage of information, and many other applications Metasurfaces may also enhance the performance of solar cells. To further improve capabilities of metasystems, a novel design of silicon solar cell with an active nanopixel metasurface has been suggested One more application is laser imaging detection and ranging (LIDAR) systems approach is employed to generate ensembles of topology-optimized metasurfaces for achieving the highest deflection efficiency for a desired deflection at the telecommunication wavelengths. The demonstrated deflection angles were 45 • , 55 • , and 65 • with an absolute efficiency of 0.7 in all cases.. AI methods can also empower technologies such as near-eye displays, required for virtual and augmented reality systems as well as for vision correction. One of the promising platforms for realizing such displays is based on the application of metasurfaces A very interesting application of metasurfaces includes the development of the so-called light sails -structures for a spacecraft propulsion system relied on a force exerted due to the radiation pressure coming from the Sun or a strong laser beam Metasurfaces can be employed as a reliable and robust platform for various chemical and biological sensors To demonstrate benefits of the ML-assisted metasensor design, we consider the example of a colorimetric sensor based on all-dielectric metasurfaces. Colorimetry techniques rely on detection of color variations associated with environmental change leading to a change of refractive index. Hence, optimization of colorimetric sensors implies maximization of color difference. In Ref. Another demonstration of meta-sensor design includes the optimization of double-negative plasmonic metasurfaces for enhanced detection of DNA oligomers To illustrate how ML can be employed for classification of biomolecules, we mention the recently suggested plat- Ref. form for surface-enhanced infrared absorption spectroscopy empowered by DL algorithms In addition, melittin is introduced to perforate the lipid membranes of the liposomes leading to dual cargo release and formation of supported lipid bilayer on the surface of the sensor. Real-time measurements of reflectance spectra are used to calculate absorbance which is analyzed via a DL technique. As a result, the algorithm able to distinguish between each analyte at each point of time [see Fig. We notice that classification of a metasensor output is not necessary done via DL algorithms. Classical ML methods, such as k nearest neighbours or principal component analysis with latent Dirichlet allocation, may provide no less good results. For instance, gaseous and liquid chemicals may be recognised using plasmonic mid-infrared spectral filters with a photodetector array We notice also that ML may be used not only to design and supplement metasensors, but also to sense the presence of metamaterials per se. As an example, a DL algorithm could process electromagnetic response signals obtained with THz-band time-domain spectroscopy in order to identify metamaterial in lactose mixtures The examples described above, together with other achievements of AI-supplemented sensing, suggest the beginning of a revolutionary era of intelligent biosensors, extensively discussed in literature (see Refs. Progress in computer science enabled the development of such intriguing concepts as coding and digital (or programmable) metasurfaces A self adapting approach was implemented to realize a real-time metasurface imager Another imager was developed in Ref. Here, we also mention that a relation between AI and photonics is not one-sided. Photonic devices find broad applications for realizing optical ANNs Moving away from metadevices, it should be mentioned that the AI tools become a part of establishing control systems for lasers Recent advancements in ML and AI methods are expected to reshape some major areas of metaphotonics where metastructures and metasurfaces play important roles. As we mentioned above, to develop metasurfaces with specific properties and functionalities, novel design strategies and approaches in advanced computational techniques are required. It is expected that ML and DL will be useful for developing sophisticated smartphones, robotic systems, and self-driving cars employing the concepts of flat optics. Importantly, ML can help to discover unconventional optical designs thus advancing imaging, sensing, and other functionalities of metaphotonic devices. Many recent studies are devoted to photonic design approaches and emerging material platforms showcasing ML-assisted optimization for intelligent metasurface designs. Among emerging and future developments, we wish to mention a few examples of AI-supplemented systems, beyond the major scope of this paper but still closely related to metaphotonics. First, we wish to mention topological photonics being one of the most actively developing branches of photonics and physics in general. Realization of topological phases in physical systems opens a road towards novel robust structures protected from scattering losses and structural disorder Metasurfaces supporting high-Q optical resonances are especially promising for applications in nanophotonics, in- Band structure Incident angle -θ λ 1 cluding enhancement of light-matter interaction, high-harmonic generation, biosensing and nonlinear effects While the previous sections of this review have discussed the application of DL techniques to photonics, here we briefly discuss an emerging field, namely that of photonic devices as platforms for physical neural networks. Recently there has been increasing interest in approaches termed neuromorphic computing with photonics providing a potentially viable platform Similar to neuromorphic structures there has been development of biology-inspired systems complimented with AI technologies. As an example, the spider-eye-like antenna demonstrated in Ref. The use of DL methods is not limited to a design of nanoantennas and their optical response. It may become an extremely useful assisting tool for experimental measurements. The demonstrations in this field include characterization of orientation An additional application for DL methods lies within the realm of optimisation, specifically that of high dimensional systems. Global optimisation is a generally challenging endeavour with many problems becoming intractable with a growing number of parameters in the absence of prior knowledge of the parameter landscape. One approach that leverages the power of DL to generalise high dimensional systems is to perform an online optimisation. In this case an ML agent is put in a type of feedback loop with the agent providing predictions as to the best parameters, whilst updating its belief based on feedback from the system. This approach has been used to optimise the laser cooling sequences of cold atom traps with up to 63 individual controllable parameters While metaphotonics structures have been intensively studied in the past decade, many challenges still exist for practical and end-specific utilization. Fabrication becomes a tricky issue for many accuracy-required structures, and it also becomes harder to modulate metasurfaces. With emerging materials, new physics, and advanced nanofabrication techniques, those challenges may be bypassed. We anticipate new insights being delivered by merging the concepts from several fields exploring interdisciplinary concepts of metaphotonics and creating new types of hybrid systems governed by the concepts of flat optics and metamaterial-inspired subwavelength engineering. We expect that the future research in intelligent metaphotonics will significantly broaden the horizons of photonics and offer new perspectives for novel applications beyond our current imagination.