SrTiO3, although a wide gap insulator, has long been known to become metallic and superconducting at extremely low doping levels. This has given rise to questions concerning the coexistence or interdependence of metallicity, superconductivity, and the material's polar properties. This issue becomes especially intriguing in conjunction with the observation that filamentary metallicity can be induced by means of resistive switching at conditions well below relevant doping levels for homogeneous metallicity. In this study, we demonstrate that resistive switching can also be employed to generate superconductivity at the superconducting transition temperature of Tc ≈ 0.2 K in SrTiO3. By combining local characterization of the conductivity with theoretical analysis, we propose that the superconducting properties are associated with the electro-formation of columnar-like bundles with a diameter of 40-50 nm, consisting of metallic filaments surrounded by polar regions. We provide a theoretical model identifying the coexistence of metallic and polar regions as a prerequisite for the filamentary-like superconductivity observed. The electrical manipulation of nanoscale transport phenomena has enabled the development of resistive switching devices with enormous application potential for microelectronics, e.g., neuromorphic computing A strong agglomeration of filaments into orthogonal bands in the [100] direction was present near the cathode as can be seen as stripe-like structures, both in the etch-pits and the LC-AFM maps of Figure Close to the exit of a dislocation, whose position could be identified by analyzing the course of the atomic rows, the local conductivity reached a maximum. This behavior supports the hypothesis that the dislocation core is slightly reduced, or in our case electro-reduced by the local removal of oxygen, which is equivalent to strong local doping. Moreover, the temperature dependence of the conductivity of the selected sets of bundles measured by LC-AFM (Figure In order to shed some light on the nature of metallic filaments forming in an insulating perovskite matrix, we performed DFT calculations (for computational details see Al-Zubi et al. We investigated how these local charges influence the local, static polarizations as the formation of polar regions will be essential for superconductivity. To estimate this quantity, we employed a simple ionic model based on the formal charges and the positions of O (rO) and Sr We compare them to the polarization of a stoichiometric extended defect without VO (grey bars). As is apparent, a small electronic density (below 5 x 10 20 ) does not quench the local polarizations (of course, some reconstruction also results from the presence of the additional defect), and larger densities (position B1 and B2) can lead to some local reduction of PTi. Having induced a network of bundled-conducting nanofilaments in the surface region of STO by electro-reduction, we analyzed the superconducting properties via low-temperature conductivity measurements in a magnetic field. For comparison, we also investigated a crystal, in which a network of nanofilaments was generated by means of pure thermal annealing and thus was not as pronounced and bundled as for the electro-reduced one In the temperature regime below 0.25 K, both samples exhibit a sudden drop in the resistance, which is characteristic of superconductivity. This is shown in Figure The behavior of R/l(T) in a magnetic field for the thermally-and electro-reduced STO sample is shown in Figure In order to test which of the criteria (0.5R or 0.9R) provides more correct Hc2(T) values, the magnetic field dependence of R(T) for the electro-reduced STO sample was analyzed using two different measurement currents (0.05 mA and 0.1 mA). The results are shown in Figure For both currents, the transition to the superconducting state occurred at the same temperature, but for I = 0.1 mA, the transition was significantly broader than for I = 0.05 mA, indicating an influence from the vortex dynamics on the transition. In order to minimize this effect, the more appropriate 0.9R criterion was used to extract Hc2 and 0 from the resistance data for the electro-reduced STO sample, yielding Hc2(0) ≈ 2.2 kOe , 0 ≈ 39 nm, and Tc ≈ 0.20 K. A coherence length of ξ0 ≈ 40-50 nm is typical for conventional low-temperature bulk superconductors, such as e.g. Hg, Nb or In. Moreover, the value of 0  40 nm approximately corresponds to the diameter of the filament bundles, 40-50 nm, as obtained from the LC-AFM studies (see Figure Before discussing our model of the superconductivity of the electroformed filament bundles, we consider the conditions that are necessary to induce superconductivity in (self-) doped STO in general. Theoretically, the polarizability model As for n > nc, the superconductivity vanishes and a truly homogeneous metallic state is realized, we only concentrate on the region n < nc. The essential phonons in the STO are the lowest lying soft transverse optic and acoustic modes. Anomalies in these two branches have been shown to be signatures of the formation of local polar nano-regions , the dielectric permittivity ε0 is extracted from it, and is approximately 40 % smaller than the long wavelength limit, but still exhibits an appreciable temperature dependence, which is typical for an almost ferroelectric compound. From the calculated thermal average of the displacement-displacement correlation function, a local dipole moment has been derived that shrinks with decreasing temperature and increasing carrier concentration (Figure We have shown that the electro-reduction of STO at moderate temperatures (T < 400 oC) induces superconductivity with a Tc ≈ 0.20 K, which is significantly higher than that of thermally-reduced STO (Tc ≈ 0.09 K). The global removal of oxygen is extremely low and only limited to the cores of the dislocations, where oxygen vacancies are preferentially generated. In this way, bundled metallic filaments form along of the dislocation network, which short-circuit the dielectric matrix and induce macroscopically detectable metallic behavior. Thus, this finding explains why the very low global carrier densities observed in STO can give rise to conductivity and even superconductivity. The metallic dislocation cores exhibit similar properties to TiO nanowires, and are undoubtedly the carrier of the metallic conductivity above Tc, but cannot alone be responsible for the superconductivity. The radius of the filaments (about 2 nm) is smaller than the necessary coherence length found in TiO thin films (about 20 nm) Therefore, we assume that superconductivity is related to a collective phenomenon involving the metallic cores of dislocations and the polar nano-regions between them. As schematically illustrated in Figure a metallic filament is present, although the electrons provided by the filament lightly dope the surrounding matrix. The possibility of generating a polarization in nanoregions at such a doping level was confirmed by lattice dynamic calculations. In other words, the proximity of the metallic filaments does not eliminate the polar character of the STO matrix. We propose that the interaction of the polar regions of the STO with the d 1 and d 2 electronic states in different filaments of a bundle constitutes the pairing glue of the Cooper electrons. The determined coherence length perfectly correlates with the average radius of the bundles formed by electro-degradation. As the bundling tendency of the nanofilaments in the electro-degraded crystals is higher than in the thermally-reduced ones, their superconducting properties are also more pronounced, as evidenced by their higher Tc. A detailed description of the applied methods is provided in the supplementary information. The typical progression of the electro-reduction at a constant polarization voltage as a function of time is displayed in Figure Nevertheless, after a few minutes, the oxygen concentration in the chamber decreased to the level it had been prior to the commencement of the electro-reduction. The extremely low oxygen concentration of only 10 15 /cm 3 that accompanied the electro-reduction process was calculated assuming that the oxygen vacancies were homogeneously generated in bulk. However, the electro-reduction of SrTiO3 crystals was found to be fully inhomogeneous (see Figure Although electro-reduction can result in a decrease in the sample's original resistivity by 6-7 orders of magnitude (cf. Figure Hence, this sample was selected for the superconductivity investigation. Despite the clear indication that the low-temperature (350 °C) electro-reduction under vacuum relates to the electrically-induced de-oxidation of the core of the filaments, it may be asked whether the thermal treatment by Joule heating under vacuum conditions can also contribute to the decrease in macroscopic resistance. Through measurement, we determined that during electro-reduction with 10 mA, the increase in the sample's resistance due to Joule heating was well below 100 oC Following electro-reduction, the samples were cooled to room temperature under vacuum conditions, but their transfer from the preparation chamber to the cryostat was undertaken ex-situ. Although this transfer was performed at room temperature, the freshly-prepared sample was exposed to the ambient atmosphere. To ensure comparability, the LC-AFM analysis was also performed after exposing the sample to ambient conditions (Figure For the LC-AFM investigation, conducting Pt/Ir-coated tips (PPP-ContPt, Nanosensors, Neuchâtel, Switzerland) were used and biased with a few millivolts. The LC-AFM maps were analyzed using the WinSPM software (JEOL, Tokyo, Japan). In order to reduce the noise level of the atomically-resolved conductivity maps, only a software lowpass filter was used (without FFT transformation), noting that on all of the LC-AFM maps with atomic resolution, the distribution of atoms was visible by the naked eye. In order to ensure that true atomic resolution was acheived, the LC-AFM data were only examined when the position of atoms (in the same region) was the same for several scans. Thus far, superconductivity in stoichiometric SrTiO3 has only been explored for thermallyreduced crystals. Hence, for the analysis of the superconducting properties of electrodegraded crystals, we were obliged, per se, to compare the properties of electrodegraded crystals with thermally-prepared ones. To avoid an influence of the sample preparation process due, e.g., to different growth parameters, polishing methods and concentrations of impurities on the progression of both the reduction and electrodegradation processes, the experiments were performed on samples prepared from the same crystal. For the thermally-induced self-doping of the crystal, we chose an annealing temperature of about 800 oC and a pressure of 10 -7 mbar. In contrast to an uncontrolled reduction process, as would be caused by placing the crystals in the hot area of the furnace in the vacuum chamber and waiting until equilibrium was reached, we analyzed the progression of thermal reduction by monitoring the resistance as a function of the reduction time (Figure Electrical resistance measurements were performed for rectangular samples with dimensions of 1.0 x 3.1 x 10 mm 3 , using the physical properties measurement system (PPMS Model 7100, Quantum Design, San Diego, USA) equipped with a 14 T superconducting magnet. The fourpoint technique was used to measure the long-term resistance, R, with a suitably high level of accuracy. Current leads (silver wires with a diameter of 0.1 mm) were glued with silver epoxy to the end faces of the samples in order to obtain a homogenous current distribution in the central area where voltage leads; silver wires with diameter of 0.05 mm were glued at a distance of l ≈ 5 mm, which varied slightly for individual samples. The obtained contacts a resistance below 1 Ω for current leads and 20-50 Ω for voltage leads (~ 0.5 mm-wide silverepoxy strips) and were stable over time. For the resistance measurements, the electric transport option (ETO) was used with an AC current of 18-21 Hz frequency and amplitude of 0.05-0.2 mA. For these conditions, the resistance in the normal state was frequency-and amplitudeindependent. The resistance in the magnetic field was measured at increasing temperatures for a fixed field (magnet persistent mode) or, at increasing and decreasing fields, for fixed temperatures. The temperature was changed at a rate of 0.02 K/min, for which no significant R(T) hysteresis was observed for the up and down sweeps. We performed density functional theory calculations in the generalized gradient approximation were calculated from formal charges of +2 and -2 for Sr and O, respectively, and their relaxed positions in the Ti-centered unit cell. 45. Li, F. et al. Single-crystalline epitaxial TiO film: A metal superconductor, similar to Ti metal. Sci. Adv. 7, eabd4248 (2021).