An important building block for on-chip photonic applications is a scaled emitter. Whispering gallery mode cavities based on III-Vs on Si allow for small device footprints and lasing with low thresholds. However, multimodal emission and wavelength stability over a wider range of temperature can be challenging. Here, we explore the use of Au nanorods on InP whispering gallery mode lasers on Si for single mode emission. We show that by proper choice of the antenna size and positioning, we can suppress the side-modes of a cavity and achieve single mode emission over a wide excitation range. We establish emission trends by varying the size of the antenna and show that the far-field radiation pattern differs significantly for devices with and without antenna. Furthermore, the antenna-induced single mode emission is dominant from room temperature (300 K) down to 200 K, whereas the cavity without an antenna is multimodal and its dominant emission wavelength is highly temperature dependent. Integrated light sources show potential for a wide range of applications, from optical communication to quantum information processing to sensing. Using Si as a material platform allows to leverage established fabrication processes for passive structures. Due to its indirect bandgap, however, an alternative material is needed for active devices. Group III-V semiconductors pose a viable choice for emitters Small mode volumes and low thresholds can be achieved by various cavity types, like photonic crystal cavities Single mode emission can be achieved by supressing side-modes and breaking the symmetry of the devices: One way to achieve single mode lasing in microdisk cavities was demonstrated using suspended cavities with a proper choice of bridges manipulating the spatial symmetry While side-mode suppression and enhanced directivity were successfully demonstrated for microdisk cavities coupled with a Pt antenna without degradation of the dominant mode in terms of threshold A 225 nm thick InP layer is grown on a latticematched sacrificial InP wafer with an InGaAs etch stop layer in between using metal-organic chemical vapor deposition (MOCVD). Then, the material is bonded onto a Si wafer with a 2 μm thick SiO2 layer in between, serving as an optical insulator layer, and the donor wafer material is removed. More information on direct wafer bonding techniques can be found in All measurements are performed with a microphotoluminescence (micro-PL) setup where a ps-pulsed excitation source with emission at 750 nm and a repetition rate of 78 MHz is focused onto the device with a 100 x objective (NA = 0.6) and a spot-size of approximately 1 μm. The emitted photoluminescence is collected in reflection mode from the top of the device and the spectrum is detected by a linear array InGaAs detector. In the following, we will discuss the impact on the emission spectrum of the microdisk through the use of Au antennae with varying cross-sectional area. In some cases, the different antenna widths will be additionally color coded in the figures, in order to map them to respective cross-section areas. Fig. The light-in-light-out (LL) curve in Fig. From LL curves like the one in Fig. For the orthogonally placed antenna, the multimode behavior is similar to the bare cavity and there is no side-mode suppression effect. Only at higher excitation powers does the peak ratio deviate, potentially due to mode competition and other effects in the cavity. The low selectivity of the orthogonally placed antenna can potentially be attributed to the lower overlap of the resonant mode, polarization of the mode, and the scattering cross section of the antenna: The whispering gallery mode is expected to be at the periphery of the cavity; hence, an orthogonal placed antenna may overlap with a node of the mode or only partially if not placed accurately. For the parallely placed nanoantenna, exact positioning may be less crucial because a larger fraction of the antenna is expected to be at the position of the electric field of the resonant mode. Far-field radiation images showing first-order interference patterns were captured with an In total, 121 devices with parallelly placed antennae covering areas from 0.00605 μm 2 to 0.0194 μm 2 were measured and the following results shall be representative for general trends. Fig. To quantify this trend further, the devices were binned into quintiles ranging from the smallest (Q1) to the largest (Q5) device areas and the number of single mode devices at different powers were determined. Figure These results may be taken as an indication that there is a certain optimum in terms on antenna size: Initially, an increase in antenna size will provide improved side-mode suppression, whereas eventually this effect saturates. It is expected that several effects might impact the mode selectivity and device performance: The scattering and absorption cross sections at a certain wavelength depend on the antenna area and substrate To investigate the extent to which the antenna not only allows for side-mode suppression but also wavelength stability, we performed micro-PL measurements at various temperatures. Since the bandgap of InP is temperature-dependent, the gain emission peak shifts to lower wavelengths upon temperature decrease, leading to a change of the dominant resonant mode to the one which now has a stronger overlap with the bulk PL. In the antennacoupled case, however, the resonant wavelength stays the same down to 200 K, as it is shown in Fig. When placing a metal in close proximity to a resonant cavity, the question naturally arises whether this will lead to an increase in absorption losses and thereby an increase of the threshold for resonant emission. Fig. An assessment of the carrier dynamics would be interesting, since plasmonics can for example be used for high-speed photonics components, such as detectors and modulators In this work, we presented a systematic study on the effect of Au nanorod antennae on InP whispering gallery mode cavities. While the bare InP cavity is multimodal and the dominant resonance wavelength changes significantly with temperature, we show that in antenna-coupled devices, we can achieve single mode emission and wavelength stability over 100 K (from 200 K up to room temperature at 300 K). The antenna must be aligned properly to the optical mode, as we only observed this side-mode suppression for antennae aligned along the cavity periphery (parallel) and not angularly (orthogonal). The beneficial effect of the antennae initially increases with its relative size, until it saturates at dimensions around 0.014 μm 2 -0.017 μm 2 . The antenna reduces the relative blue shift due to the plasma dispersion effect, thereby providing for more stable emission at higher excitation powers. From the combination of these results, we can conclude that the antenna does not just impact light collection via scattering, but that the presence of the metal stabilizes the emission mode, thereby improving side-mode suppression and wavelength stability over variations in temperature and pumping powers. Furthermore, we found that the threshold of the dominant peak is increased in antenna-coupled devices which are single mode up to 6 pJ/pulse, whereas devices which have a lower side-mode suppression are more likely to have similar thresholds compared to the devices without antenna. We attribute absorption losses due to the antenna to be the cause of the higher threshold. Table We believe the findings to be relevant and portable to abroad range of nanophotonic architectures. A long-term goal would be the coupling to more complex laser architectures or exploration of antenna shapes specific to desired emission wavelengths and directions. 