Thin films of β-tungsten host superconductivity in the presence of strong spin-orbit coupling. This non-equilibrium crystalline phase of tungsten has attracted considerable attention in recent years due to its giant spin Hall effect and the potential promise of exotic superconductivity. However, more than 60 years after its discovery, superconductivity in this material is still not well understood. Using time-domain THz spectroscopy, we measure the frequency response of the complex optical conductivity of β-tungsten thin film with a Tc of 3.7 K in its superconducting state. At temperatures down to 1.6 K, we find that both the superconducting gap and the superfluid spectral weight are much smaller than that expected for a weakly coupled superconductor given the Tc. The conclusion of a small gap holds up even when accounting for possible inhomogeneities in the system, which could come from other crystalline forms of tungsten (that are not superconducting at these temperatures) or surface states on β-tungsten grains. Using detailed X-ray diffraction measurements, we preclude the possibility of significant amount of other tungsten allotropes, strongly suggesting the topological surface states of β-tungsten play the role of inhomogeneity in these films. Our observations pose a challenge and opportunity for a theory of strongly anisotropic normal metals with strong spin-orbit coupling to describe. Bulk crystalline tungsten (W) in the most stable α-W bcc form has a very low superconducting T c of 11 mK 1 . However, thin films of W can have T c 's as large as 5 K e.g. two orders of magnitude higher than the bulk. This has been attributed to the presence of a metastable A15 β phase structure that can be stabilized in thin films The study of superconductivity in β-W thin films has proven to be challenging. There have been only a few experimental and theoretical investigations In general, the α = ∆/k B T c ratio provides important insight into the physics. In a clean system, the coupling strength of superconductivity can be defined relative to α BCS , with α α BCS for a weakly coupled superconductor and α somewhat greater than α BCS for a strongly coupled superconductor. In disordered systems, pair breaking tends to decrease T c faster than it does the ∆, which increases the ratio above α BCS Here we use high precision time-domain THz spectroscopy (TDTS) to measure the low-energy complex optical conductivity of β-tungsten films as a function of temperature. We systematically study and track the superconducting gap, ∆(T ), as a function of temperature. FIG. We find that the superconducting energy gap and the superfluid density can be described phenomenologically in terms of BCS theory, however, with a small energy gap parameter. This confirms a value of α much smaller than the 1.76 than expected for a weakly coupled BCS superconductor. The conclusion of a small gap holds up even when using extant effective medium models that account for inhomogeneity in the form of normal metal inclusions. Such inclusions could come from other crystalline forms of tungsten (not superconducting at these temperatures) or surface states on β-Tungsten grains. Our observations pose a challenge and opportunity for a theory of strongly anisotropic normal metals with strong spin-orbit coupling to describe. Thin films of the β-Tungsten (A15 structure) were grown on 0.5 mm thin Si(001) with ∼ 200 nm thick thermal oxide and 0.5 mm MgO(100) substrates using sputtering in presence of N 2 :Ar gas mixture at room temperature. The Ar sputtering pressure was kept at 5 mTorr during the deposition. The fact that β-W thin films require N 2 :Ar or O 2 :Ar mixture assisted growth has made it difficult to tune the quality and T c of the superconducting film. TDTS measurements were performed in transmission geometry on thin films of varying thicknesses ranging from 70 -130 nm. The 70 nm β-W thin-films had the highest T c 's of ∼ 3.7 K. The samples on both Si and MgO substrates gave similar results (See Supplementary Material 15-20 (SM)). Both real and imaginary parts of the complex conductance, G(ν), were extracted from the c omplex transmission measured in TDTS measurements, performed down to 1.6 K Fig. To understand the superconducting state better and determine the energy gap ∆(T ), we simultaneously fit the normalized G 1 (ν) for all temperatures to the Mattis-Bardeen (MB) theory given for a weakly coupled BCS superconductor. However the extracted gap 2∆(0) = 0.15 THz (0.64 meV) or α = ∆(0)/k B T c ∼ 1 is much less than the weak coupling limit of 1.76 for a fully gapped BCS superconductor. To get further insight into the superconducting gap and confirm the Mattis-Bardeen fits, we study the temperature dependence of the superfluid spectral weight, S δ (T ), as a measure of superfluid density n s . We calculate S δ,G2 = lim ν→0 νG 2 /G n which is a measure of superfluid spectral weight determined directly from the TDTS experimental data. We can compare it to the value calculated S δ,MB for α = 1 and α BCS = 1.76 using the approximation for a fully gapped BCS superconductor given by S δ (T ) = S δ (0)∆(T ) In order to qualitatively understand the origin of the low superfluid spectral weight in comparison to the MB theory prediction, we compare the experimental data phenomenologically with the individual components of the MB response function the higher energy response above 2∆ is dominated by the photoexcitations (breaking of Cooper pairs due to photon absorption). For G 2 (ν), most of the response in our spectral range is from the superfluid with a small negative contribution coming from the thermal and photon excitations, which decrease with increasing energy. On comparing the measured conductance of β-W in Fig. One explanation for this low n s , a larger than expected response in G 1 (ν), smaller fitted gap, and anomalous sub gap absorption could be that the superconductor is inhomogeneous and that there are parts of the film which are not superconducting even at the lowest measured temperature. This would have the effect of making the apparent ∆/k B T c ratio from the MB fits smaller than 1.76. Such inhomogeneity could stem from the presence of α-W, which only becomes superconducting at much lower T. α-W can either form directly during deposition or transform from β-W due to its unstable nature For the BEMA model, we consider an inhomogeneous two component medium of normal Drude-metal and superconductor that have volume fractions f and 1 -f . Similar to the analysis above, we fit the normalized G(ν) using the MB theory for the superconducting fraction and the normalized G n (ν) = 1 for the normal fraction. Here the free parameters are f , and ∆(0). We obtain reasonable fits for G 1 (ν) with a slightly larger energy gap than in the MB homogeneous case of ∆(0) = 0.42( These fits with effective medium models show that although there can be a low frequency absorption coming from inhomogeneity, this does not completely explain the extracted small gaps in these systems. Therefore one can take this as an intrinsic feature of the superconducting state of β-W. One possibility is that the gap is strongly anisotropic in momentum space. Although gap anisotropy in s-wave superconductors is believed to largely depends on phonon spectrum anistoropy and not on Fermi surface anisotropies What is the source of these metallic regions in the film? First, we would like to discuss the possibility that the other tungsten allotrope α-W could be acting as normal metal inclusions embedded in the superconducting β-W. It is generally known that depending on the growth conditions and thickness of the thin films, tungsten grows in bcc phase, A15 phase, mixed phases or in amorphous phase (3) Taking inclusions as cylindrical particles, we set g = 1/2. The solution for the above equation is (4) We obtain the conductance by substituting, ̃ = 1 + 2i G/ν. Figure Mattis-Bardeen theory describes the complex electromagnetic response of cooper pairs. It accounts for both the thermally and photon excited quasiparticles that accounts for the total optical response in a superconductor. Fig. 