Architected cellular materials in nature such as trabecular bone and woods exhibit disordered porous structure that is neither fully random, nor perfectly ordered, and has not been systematically quantified before. We have used Voronoi cell patterning to quantify disorder for a range of biological and engineered cellular materials, using a 'disorder parameter' (δ). Ranges of disorder appear to be typical to certain plant, animal and fungi cellular materials. Using 3D printing and numerical methods, we demonstrate experimentally there is a range of 'pseudoorder' (δ=0.6 -0.8) which exhibits a >30% increase in fracture toughness (and equivalent strength) compared to fully-ordered, hexagonal honeycombs (δ=1.0) of equal density. Our results suggest 'tailored disorder' as a new design paradigm for architected materials to improve damage tolerance, and an evolutionary advantage for the pseudo-order of biological cellular materials. Porous, biological cellular materials such as wood (plant ground tissue), trabecular bone, corals, diatoms, and dentin combine complex biological functions with structural roles, such as skeletal support and impact protection As illustrated in a cross-section view of a whale vertebra (trabecular bone) (Fig Certainly, biological materials display a rich domain of design strategies for optimizing mechanical performance, e.g.: 1) the layering of bending-dominated and stretching-dominated microstructures, 2) weak interfaces, 3) functionally gradient materials, and 4) crack bridging by fibrous elements Surprisingly, the spatial disorder of biological cellular materials and its role in mechanical performance have not been analyzed or quantified previously. Herein, we have collected cross-sectional images (our own specimens and sourced from literature, Table Examples of resulting Voronoi structures with δ from 0.1 to 1.0, and the corresponding cell size distributions are shown in Fig. Remarkably, the biological materials, from trabecular bone to plant stems and fungi, generally fall into well-defined ranges of disorder (Fig. To date, there are no studies on the role that disorder plays in flaw tolerance or mechanical fracture of biogenic cellular materials, and few studies on the role of disorder in the mechanical properties of cellular materials generally. In this work, we examine what role structural disorder contributes to toughening, particularly in tensile loading and fracture conditions, and whether the disorder (pseudo-order) of biogenic cellular materials may provide evolutionary advantage in tissue repair and organism survival. We have taken advantage of digital design and fabrication to generate 2.5D cellular models with systematically increasing degrees of disorder (δ), for the same relative density and material composition. We have used high-resolution, multi-jet 3D printing to generate 2.5D honeycombs based on varying values of δ. Modern digital fabrication tools provide the opportunity to systematically control disorder. Through uniaxial mechanical testing we compare the properties of disordered honeycombs (DH) with regularity from δ= 0.1 to 0.9, with the regular hexagonal honeycomb (RHH), δ= 1.0. All throughout, relative density (ρ ) = 25%) and the number of nucleation sites (cells) are kept constant (n = 314). A CAD algorithm was built in Grasshopper (Rhinoceros 3D, USA) to convert base coordinates for each tessellation into a 3D solid (Fig. The relative effect of disorder on standard tensile properties can be seen by normalizing the DH values to those of the ordered RHH control (Fig. The stress-intensity based evolution of fracture toughness, K ' , is plotted against relative crack extension in Fig. The fracture toughness is clearly influenced by the degree of disorder. In all tests, the honeycomb materials show toughening with crack extension, visualized by the modestly rising resistance curves in Fig. Fracture toughness findings were cross-examined by a newly developed finite element (FE) model (method and rationale in SM). Figs. 4d,e display numerical results for analogous tests on 2D aluminum honeycombs with identical geometry to the experimental coupons. Remarkably, the toughness efficiency with respect to tensile strength (K ) /(σ / ρ ))) exhibits an overlapping trend over experimental data (Fig. This work demonstrates for the first time, through experiment and simulation, that spatial disorder in cellular solids itself can have dramatic effects on fracture behaviour compared to ordered, regular hexagonal honeycombs (RHH). Disorder helps to delocalize the stress at cracks, inhibits catastrophic crack propagation through path deflection (and multiple cracks), and thus increases effective fracture toughness. As shown experimentally (Fig. The measured toughness and tensile strength values demonstrate how disordered tessellations in the range of 0.6 ≤ δ ≤ 0.8 can match the strength of ordered RHHs while increasing the work of fracture, and 'survivability' through crack deflection. The disorder range around δ=0.8 in particular shows a mode I fracture toughness KQ that is 36% higher than δ=1.0 (for RHHs). For the first time, these results show that for all other parameters equal (average cell size, area fraction and relative density) there are real mechanical advantages to disorder. Time-correlated video stills (Fig. Toughening mechanisms and flaw tolerance in biological cellular materials, such as trabecular bone and dentin, have important consequences for tissue repair, and survival. After trauma, it is critical for animals to avoid catastrophic bone fracture for any chance to survive. Fig. Our results suggest that structural cellular materials should not be too highly ordered for optimal mechanical performance. However, there are examples of well-ordered cellular materials in nature. The bee honeycomb and coral examples in Fig. It seems remarkable that disorder in engineered cellular materials, such as aluminum or polymer foams, has generally been overlooked in structural design. Our work shows the disorder in commercial foams is often much higher than found in biogenic materials. As a result, we suggest that 'tailored' structural disorder should be considered as a new design parameter for cellular, architected materials, independent of cell size, connectivity and relative density. Additive manufacturing and digital design techniques for structural optimization (such as topology optimization) allow exploration of a vast new parameter and performance space for architected materials. Recently, engineered hierarchical materials have incorporated toughening mechanisms at the microscale We have quantified structural disorder in biological cellular materials, and identified limited ranges of disorder which are distinct from those found in typical engineered materials. Spatial disorder in 2D honeycomb significantly increases fracture toughness and flaw tolerance, to limit catastrophic fracture. Disordered honeycombs in the range of 0.6 ≤ δ ≤ 0.8, observed in our biological examples, show elevated fracture toughness and similar strength and stiffness compared to ordered hexagonal controls. The introduction of tailored disorder (δ=0.8) to a 2D honeycomb of identical relative density enables a capacity for strain hardening, damage delocalization and limiting catastrophic failure. Through increased fracture toughness and damage delocalization, we suggest that the pseudo-order of biological cellular materials likely offer evolutionary advantage in survivability, both in limiting fracture and enabling tissue repair. In turn, designed disorder is identified as a potent design tool for future architected materials in engineering applications.