In the ever-increasing energy demand scenario, the development of novel photovoltaic (PV) technologies is considered to be one of the key solutions to fulfil the energy request. In this context, graphene and related two-dimensional (2D) materials (GRMs), including nonlayered 2D materials and 2D perovskites, as well as their hybrid systems, are emerging as promising candidates to drive innovation in PV technologies. The mechanical, thermal, and optoelectronic properties of GRMs can be exploited in different active components of solar cells to design next-generation devices. These components include front (transparent) and back conductive electrodes, charge transporting layers, and interconnecting/ recombination layers, as well as photoactive layers. The production and processing of GRMs in the liquid phase, coupled with the ability to ''on-demand'' tune their optoelectronic properties exploiting wetchemical functionalization, enable their effective integration in advanced PV devices through scalable, reliable, and inexpensive printing/coating processes. Herein, we review the progresses in the use of solution-processed 2D materials in organic solar cells, dye-sensitized solar cells, perovskite solar cells, quantum dot solar cells, and organic-inorganic hybrid solar cells, as well as in tandem systems. We first provide a brief introduction on the properties of 2D materials and their production methods by solutionprocessing routes. Then, we discuss the functionality of 2D materials for electrodes, photoactive layer components/additives, charge transporting layers, and interconnecting layers through figures of merit, which allow the performance of solar cells to be determined and compared with the state-of-the-art values. We finally outline the roadmap for the further exploitation of solution-processed 2D materials to boost the performance of PV devices. Energy supply is one of the most pressing issues of the twentyfirst century, having a harsh impact on the global economy and society. Sebastiano Bellani is a researcher at BeDimensional S.p.A. He received his PhD from Politecnico di Milano, while working at the Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia. Here, he investigated solid/liquid interfaces in organic semiconductor water-gated organic field-effect transistors, hybrid organic-inorganic photoelectrochemical cells, and biopolymer-based devices for optical cellular stimulation. Currently, he is participating at the European Commission's Future and Emerging Technology Graphene Flagship. He has been the deputy leader of Graphene Flagship's Solar Farm Spearhead Project. His studies are focused on chemical-physical, spectroscopic, and photoelectrochemical characterizations of solution-processed two-dimensional materials and their energy-related applications including photovoltaics, (photo)electrocatalysis, and energy storage systems. Antonino Bartolotta is a researcher at the Institute for the Chemical Physical Processes of the Italian National Research Council (CNR-IPCF). He gained his degree in chemistry from the University of Messina in Italy. His scientific activity started in the field of condensed matter physics, mainly devoted to glass transition and dynamical processes in disordered systems (glasses, polymers, and vitreous ionic conductors). Currently, his research is focused in the field of nanomaterials and energy conversion and storage devices. He has been involved in several research projects, and he is the author/ co-author of many publications in international peer-reviewed journals and book chapters. Antonio Agresti is an Assistant Professor at the Department of Electronic Engineering at the University of Rome Tor Vergata since 2016. His research activity mainly involves the design, engineering, fabrication, and electrical/spectroscopic characterization of hybrid and organic solar cells; use of graphene and transition metal dichalcogenides and emerging two-dimensional materials such as MXenes for perovskite solar cells, tandem devices, large-area modules, and panels. He has authored/coauthored more than 50 publications and has participated as an invited speaker to several conferences in the renewable energy field. He is currently the deputy leader of Horizon 2020 Spearhead 5-Graphene Core 3 project. Giuseppe Calogero is a researcher at the Institute for the Chemical Physical Processes of the Italian National Research Council (CNR-IPCF), Messina, and he works in the field of energy and electron transfer processes. His research activity has mainly focused on the manufacturing, study, and characterization of dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs). He has synthetized supramolecular complexes based on polypyridine metal complexes and developed new nanostructured materials for DSSC applications, with focus on design, preparation, and processing. He has authored over 60 articles in peer-reviewed international journals. field of PV with regard to both Z (422%) This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021 (opto)electronic properties, CdTe and CIGS TFSCs reached Z exceeding 19% Fundamentally, an ideal photoactive material for SCs based on thin films has to be a direct-bandgap semiconductor with an E g in the 1.0-2.0 eV range to absorb sunlight in a wide spectrum range. Following the research effort on graphene, The production of 2D materials by solution processing The possibility to produce and process 2D materials and their heterostructures in the liquid phase represents a step forward toward the development of industrial-scale, reliable, inexpensive printing/coating processes, which can ultimately lead to a reduction in the levelized cost of energy (LCOE) of current PV technologies (less than 5 US cents kW h À1 ) As depicted in Fig. This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021 including spherical buckyballs (zero-dimensional, 0D), onedimensional (1D) carbon nanotubes (CNTs), further categorized in single-and multiwalled CNTs (SWCNTs and MWCNTs, respectively) depending on the number of graphene layers, as well as charcoal and graphite. Overall, the aforementioned properties make graphene, as well its derivatives, a distinctive material for PV applications. In fact, low R s , large SSA, and high m and T r are essential requirements to be considered in the choice of material for the various building blocks of SCs. Beyond graphene, there is a plethora of other 2D materials that range from insulators (e.g., h-BN) to semiconductors (e.g., TMDs, such as MoS 2 and WS 2 , and phosphorene), metals (e.g., TiS 2 and several group-5 TMDs, such as 2H-and 3R-TaS 2 , 2H-and 3R-NbS 2 , and 1T-VSe 2 ), and even superconductors (e.g., 2H-NbSe 2 ) and charge density wave materials (e.g., 1T and 2H-TaS 2 , 1T-and 2H-TaSe 2 , 2H-NbSe 2 , 1T-VS 2 , and 1T-VSe 2 ) at low temperatures. It is important to point out that GRM films formed by interconnected flakes are commonly proposed as functional components in several massive applications, including energy conversion and storage applications. Chem. Soc. Rev. This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021 To date, 2D nonlayered materials have been demonstrated for UV-sensitive photodetectors, reaching a responsivity of up to 3.3 A W À1 for Ga 2 O 3 , 236 400 A W À1 for a-Bi 2 O 3 , and 3.17 A W À1 for g-CuBr. 2.2.2 Two-dimensional conjugated metal-organic frameworks. Metal-organic frameworks are crystalline coordination polymers that have emerged for various applications (e.g., energy conversion and storage systems, proton conduction membranes, and sensors) owing to their ultrahigh porosity (up to 90% free volume) and large surface area (even beyond 6000 m 2 g À1 ). 2.2.3 Two-dimensional carbon nitrides. By attempting to open the zero E g of graphene to provide intrinsic semiconductivity while maintaining a graphite-like atomic crystalline structure, bottom-up approaches with C-rich and N-rich precursors were successfully reported to produce 2D carbon nitrides (C x N y ), To provide some guidelines regarding their functional role in SCs, semiconductor 2D materials can be classified depending on their (opto)electronic properties. However, for the case of solution-processed 2D materials, such properties are strongly influenced by both structural and chemical characteristics. The possibility to on-demand tune the (opto)electronic properties by structural and chemical engineering is a key feature of solutionprocessed 2D materials, making them extremely versatile for application in PV devices. As discussed in the following sections This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021 Chem. Soc. Rev. (4, 5, 6, and 7), the structure of SCs is commonly engineered by introducing proper charge transporting layers (CTLs), which efficiently and selectively extract the photogenerated charges, improving the device performances. In this context, it is common to consider p-type and n-type materials to extract holes and electrons, respectively. However, the choice of CTLs can follow more complex rationales. In fact, the charge transporting properties are determined by the entire electronic structure of the materials, as well as by their chemical reactivity with the interfaced materials. As a striking example, MoO 3 , which can also be found in the 2D form, is a typical n-type material that acts as an efficient hole transporting layer (HTL) due to its high f W . The design, development, and production of (opto)electronic devices This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021 involves (1) the dispersion of bulk crystals in a solvent; (2) the exfoliation of bulk crystals through (acoustic) cavitation or shear forces (Fig. (2) the optimization of printing parameters for the deposition of uniform 2D material films with high-quality (i.e., clean) interfaces. The understanding of ''how to use 2D materials in SCs'' is not trivial, since their versatility resulting from the immense portfolio of their (tunable) properties can lead to apparently contradictory experimental results. In fact, there exist solution-processed 2D materials that have been applied to collect either photogenerated holes or electrons, while being used as buffer layers to stabilize the interfaces between the materials comprising the SCs, or even as catalysts for the redox reactions involved at the counter electrodes (CEs) in DSSCs, or as electrically conductive materials for current collectors. This aspect is so surprising to the extent that it could even be disappointing, albeit it reveals the easiness to incorporate 2D materials in SC structures to improve their performances. Scheme 1 reports a sketch of the various functional roles of material components in SCs, as they will be detailed for each type of technology in the subsequent sections. Clearly, solutionprocessed 2D materials have been applied almost everywhere, most of them for more than one functionality. The most representative example material class, namely, ''graphene and its derivatives,'' has been used for all the functional roles identified here, indicating the importance to specify the structural, morphological, and chemical properties for each material, thereby using a ''case-by-case approach.'' In addition, this point implicitly stresses the importance of providing a full set of experimental characterizations of 2D materials when used in SCs, so that it is possible to uniquely correlate their functional role to their intrinsic attributes. Even though it is common to refer to electronic structures of 2D materials in ideal stoichiometry to explain their functional role in SCs, it is recommended to provide experimental measurements (beyond those which are used for the characterization of SCs) to confirm the absence of a relevant discrepancy compared to such ideal cases. In fact, defects, surface oxidation, chemical functionalization, and even the simple morphology of 2D materials can result in optoelectronic properties that are completely different from those of their ideally stoichiometric structures. Examples of effective characterizations are absorbance/ reflectance measurements coupled with ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy and Kelvin probe measurements to provide the first sketch of the energy-band edge positions and WF values of the materials used in the different components of SCs. Possible discrepancies should be explained by investigating the chemistry of the material surface through X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). The impact of 2D morphology on the functional role of 2D materials should be supported by proper lateral and thickness analyses through transmission electron microscopy (TEM), atomic force microscopy (AFM), and surface area measurement techniques (e.g., physisorption characterizations), while the structural properties of 2D materials can be rapidly assessed by both Raman spectroscopy and X-ray diffraction (XRD) characterizations. Electrical and photoelectrical properties, such as (photo)resistivity/ (photo)conductivity, of 2D materials could be accessed by realizing and characterizing complementary devices, such as field-effect transistors, as well as a simple four-probe method. These considerations indicate the key importance of providing reliable insights into the nanomaterials, devoted to improve the performance of entire PV systems, which must be carefully rationalized through in-depth experimental characterization. In this context, the efforts recently made to standardize the sequence of methods for characterizing the structural properties of graphene, bilayer graphene, and graphene nanoplatelets in both powder and liquid (i.e., dispersion) forms are noteworthy. The need of such a standard, namely, ISO/TS 21356-1:2021, emerged from the confusion around the terminology of ''graphene'' used to label commercially available materials. In conjunction with the international ISO/IEC terminology, the ISO/TS 80004-13:2017 standard represents a step forward to the use of (solution-processed) 2D materials with well-defined properties in both laboratory and commercial applications, including SCs. For facilitating comparison, SCs are often ranked in terms of the following FoM: where I is the electrical current given by the SC, e is the elementary charge (1.6021766208 Â 10 À19 C), P in is the power of incident light, h is the Planck constant, c is the speed of light in a vacuum, and l is the photon wavelength. (ii) Internal quantum efficiency (IQE), i.e., the fraction of absorbed photons converted in I, i.e., (iii) the overall Z, defined as the ratio between the maximum output electrical power (P max ) of the cell, and P in , i.e., where V OC is the maximum open-circuit voltage, I SC is the shortcircuit current, and FF is the fill factor. Here, This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021 where V MPP and I MPP are the voltage and current, respectively, at the maximum power point (MPPT), defined as the voltage at which d(IV)/dV = 0. Since the application of solution-processed GRMs as transparent conductive electrode (TCEs) for SCs will be examined here, the FoM determining the quality of TCEs are also reported and discussed. The quality of TCEs is mainly assessed through two crucial parameters: R s and T r , which should be o10 O & À1 and 490%, respectively. Scheme 1 Functional components of SCs and the corresponding 2D materials reported in the literature for such a role. The 2D materials listed here correspond to those reported in the subsequent sections for each type of SC technology reviewed in this work. where exponent x determines the required T r value for a specific purpose. Notably, R s depends on both charge carrier density (N d ) and m (cm 2 V À1 s À1 ), 427 as expressed by the following equation: where t is the thickness of the TCE film. In order to describe the frequency dependence of the T r losses in TCEs, In eqn (3.7), Z 0 is the vacuum impedance (377 O); 427 s opt and s dc are the optical and electrical dc conductivities (also simply referred to as s) of the material, respectively; and n sub is the refractive index of the substrate. In eqn (3.5), the relationship between T r and R s strongly depends on the ratio s dc /s op , which can be used as another FoM. The latter equation shows the direct proportionality between a vis and N d /m. This evidences that a vis can be reduced by decreasing N d and increasing m, showing a strategy commonly adopted to design effective TCEs. In addition to R s and T r , environmental stability and abrasion resistance are also decisive factors to select TCE materials. For the specific case of DSSCs, for example, the transport of charge carriers from the photoanode to CE is hindered by several resistances. Typically, R CT is often dominant among multiple charge transfer resistances. However, in large-area DSSCs, R s also significantly determines FF losses. where R, T, n, and F are the gas constant, temperature, number of electrons transferred in the elementary electrode reaction (n = 2), and Faraday constant, respectively. 442 OSCs hold remarkable potential for low-cost, flexible PVs, presenting both compatibility with R2R large-area fabrication This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021 GRMs have been used to fulfil several functions (Fig. Graphene has been largely investigated as the TCE in OSCs to replace traditional ITO electrodes. Actually, ITO is currently the most established TCE material for rigid OSCs due to its excellent conductivity (i.e., R s o 10 O & À1 for 100 nm-thick films) 495 and high T r (480%) in the visible spectrum. However, some drawbacks, including the scarcity of In, expensiveness of the sputter deposition processes, and its polycrystalline structure, makes the ITO films brittle when they are repeatedly bent or stretched, 496 nullifying their use in flexible OSCs. In addition, it is recognized that ITO elements diffuse through the photoactive layer, leading to a significant decrease in the OSC performance. However, these TCEs exhibit high surface roughness and/or large R s , which reduce the reproducibility rate of the devices. Geng et al. 516 realized graphene-based TCEs using chemically converted graphene (CCG). This was produced by the chemical reduction of GO produced in the form of dispersion without the need of dispersants. In the same framework, an efficient reduction method based on laser illumination was demonstrated by Electron acceptors. The photoactive layer of an OSC typically comprises a bicontinuous interpenetrating network of electron donor and acceptor materials at the nanometer scale, which is referred to as the BHJ. This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021 for GO-free device (Z = 0.47%)). This performance enhancement was attributed to the optimal percolation networks for electron transport through the GO flakes. Graphene nanoflakes with controlled lateral size and functionalized with EDNB (EDNB-GNFs) were demonstrated as a ternary compound acting as an efficient electron-cascade acceptor material in air-processed PCDTBT:PC 71 BM-based OSCs. The most successful application of GRMs for OSCs is in CTLs as either ETLs or HTLs. To design high-efficiency OSCs, ETL/HTL are positioned between the photoactive layer and anode/cathode, to reduce the potential barriers at both the interfaces and suppress the current leakage and/or charge recombination. HTLs. PEDOT:PSS as well as metal oxides (e.g., V 2 O 5 , VO x , MoO x , and NiO) have been widely used as HTL components in This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021 Chem. Soc. Rev. order to block electrons as well as transport holes, thus minimizing carrier recombination in OSCs. , and PTB7 as polymer donors. This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021 electron with a hole, thus directly depending on both electron and hole concentrations) compared to PEDOT:PSS-based OSCs. ETLs. For the use of GRMs as ETLs, proper functionalization routes have been used to decrease the f W values close to that of the HOMO level of fullerene acceptors, aiming to facilitate efficient electron transport from the electron acceptor to the ETL. Liu et al. first reported GRM-based ETLs based on Cs 2 CO 3functionalized GO in P3HT:PC 61 BM-based OSCs. Interconnection layers (ICLs). Tandem OSCs stack two or more single-junction sub-cells (with complementary E g values) to harvest light from the entire solar spectrum. An ICL collects electron and holes from the respective subcells, acting as a recombination site between them. Tung et al. used GO:PEDOT:PSS nanocomposite as the ICL in a tandem OSCs consisting of two identical P3HT:PC 61 BMbased sub-cells. The effort for OSC commercialization has recently seen a renaissance after the development of BHJ single-junction devices based on lowbandgap polymer donors and NFAs, 633, this achievement was attained by replacing a traditional HTL, i.e., hygroscopic PEDOT:PSS, with solution-processed WS 2 flakes. More generally, several solution-processed GRMs have been proven to combine all the key attributes required by ideal CTLs and/or buffer layers for OSCs. In particular, the energy levels of 2D materials can be tuned on demand to conceive advanced interface engineering at the device heterojunctions, enhancing the exciton dissociation, while providing optical transparency and high carrier mobilities for efficient charge transport toward the electrodes. Meanwhile, solution-processed 2D materials have tunable energy levels to act as an additive in ternary blends together with NFAs and low-bandgap polymer donors. In addition, solution-processed 2D materials have been demonstrated to regulate the morphology of the active layer, improving device Z (up to 17.3%) as well as reproducibility. Overall, we believe that the use of cost-effective solutionprocessed 2D materials as CTLs, buffer layers, and additives in OSCs, coupled with the development of low-bandgap donors and NFAs, can be the key to unlock their spread in both largescale and niche (i.e., indoor) applications. DSSCs are an intriguing alternative to the more conventional Si-based PV technology, owing to their potential low-cost production and compatibility with flexible design. This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021 Chem. Soc. Rev. the composite materials. In a recent work, a novel approach based on graphene has been used to fabricate a DSSC with an Z value of 10.4%, representing an B28% improvement compared to the reference cell based on conventional TiO 2 -based photoanodes (Z = 7.5%). 5.2.1 Graphene and graphene derivatives. In DSSCs, the CE collects the photogenerated electrons from the external circuit and catalyzes the oxidized electrolyte regeneration. Thus, in order to minimize the charge transfer overpotential, high s for charge transport and electrocatalytic activity for reducing the redox couple, as well as electrochemical stability, are fundamental requirements for CE materials. 5.2.3 Two-dimensional material-based hybrids. The hybridization of different materials is, in principle, an effective method to produce advanced CE composites with enhanced synergistic electrocatalytic activity in comparison to the single counterparts. In fact, Wen et al. developed a metal-nitride/ graphene nanohybrid (i.e., TiN-decorated N-doped graphene) to be used as a CE material for DSSCs. Chen et al. prepared GQDs through a chemical oxidation approach to dope conductive polymers (polypyrrole (PPy)) on FTO glass as the CE for DSSCs. 5.2.4 Bifacial DSSCs using 2D material-based transparent CEs. Research on transparent and cost-effective CEs is a persistent objective in the development of bifacial DSSCs. Transparent or semitransparent electrodes can be used for building-integrated photovoltaics (BIPVs) to make use of light from the interior of the building as well as the outside. The global DSSC market size was valued at USD 90.5 million in 2019 and is expected to grow at a compound annual growth rate (CAGR) of 12.4% from 2020 to 2027. During the last few years, the rapid emergence of perovskite PV technology in the global energy scenario has strongly attracted efforts from the scientific community. In detail, mesoscopic PSCs are composed of different layers. ) in the former rather than a combination of both compact and mesostructured scaffolds. ) is used as the bottom HTL, while PCBM is the typically used ETL. Despite the undoubted interest in perovskites, mainly owing to their low cost and efficiency compared to the technologies currently in the market, PSCs currently suffer from low stability, a big challenge for their market uptake. As shown in Fig. Due to the capacity to prevent leakage currents, and hence to prevent cell shunting, TiO 2 is the most established ETL for PSCs. 1083 have also been used to obtain better performing devices in terms of Z. For example, SrTiO 3 exhibits the same perovskite structure with m e and CB higher than those of TiO 2 . 1084,1085 Thus, SrTiO 3 -based PSCs showing V OC higher than 1 V have been reported. Several strategies have been reported in the literature to enhance the charge transport and extraction properties at the interface between the perovskite/ETL. These strategies include TiO 2 doping This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021 namely, 6R-TaS 2 flakes, were exfoliated and incorporated as a buffer layer in inverted PSCs to simultaneously enhance their Z, lifetime, and thermal stability. Beyond optoelectronic properties, the key factors influencing the performance of a perovskite absorber are the morphology and grain size. Moreover, the BP-doped n-i-p PSCs presented excellent photostability under prolonged light soaking, preserving 94% of the initial Z after irradiation time of 1000 h, 1137 while p-i-n PSCs have shown encouraging thermal stability, maintaining over 80% of their initial Z value after aging for 100 h at 100 1C. In terms of the intrinsic stability of perovskites, Ag NPanchored reduced graphene oxide (Ag-RGO) was used as an additive in perovskite films to suppress ion migration by improving the thermal and light stability. The attempt from Hu et al. toward stabilizing the a-phase of Cs 0.1 FA 0.9 PbI 3 perovskite by using 2D phenyl ethyl ammonium lead iodide ((PEA) 2 PbI 4 ) nanosheets as the additive deserves a separate discussion, see Table The main role of HTLs is to extract positive charges from the perovskite layer, by minimizing charge recombination losses, and to efficiently transport them at the corresponding current collector. This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021 Chem. Soc. Rev. morphology and structural properties are required, especially for low-temperature solution-processed device fabrication on flexible substrates. 1147 Moreover, because in such a configuration, sunlight comes from the p-type electrode, HTLs must be thin to prevent optical losses, while impeding short-circuiting between the conductive oxide (FTO or ITO for rigid and flexible substrates, respectively) and perovskite active layer. Li et al. demonstrated that GO can also be used as an efficient interlayer between the conductive layer and PEDOT:PSS HTL. This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021 (110) direction normal to the MoS 2 surface. Very recently, Zhang et al. replaced the MoS 2 interlayer with 2D antimonene. Solution-processed phosphorene has shown ambipolar carrier transport behavior and can be considered as a viable route for enabling great advances in PSC performance via judicious interfacial positioning of phosphorene in the cell structure. Beyond MoS 2 , both GO 1195 and functionalized GO (fGO) GRMs have been recently explored in PSCs with the aim to replace TCOs (e.g., ITO and FTO) used for the TCE in PSC architecture. In fact, ITO and FTO are difficult to fabricate via lowtemperature solution processes and exhibit poor mechanical flexibility, hindering the development of solution-processed flexible PSCs. This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021 surface wetting of Ag nanonetwork compared to PEDOT:PSS HTL were finely controlled via the reduction degree of GO flakes by means of a self-assembly approach at room temperature. Table As discussed in the introduction of Section 6, careful interface engineering between the perovskite active layer and CTL (ETL/ HTL) is pivotal to push device development and optimization. Beyond interface engineering with graphene and other GRMs, the use of a layered perovskite, namely, 2D perovskites, has recently attracted a lot of interest. Since the 2D perovskite lies on the top surface at the interface with the HTM, the interfacial charge carrier recombination is reduced, increasing Z to values higher than 20%. 1251 More recently, Jung et al. reported a double-layered halide architecture incorporating an ultrathin wide-bandgap halide stacked onto a narrow-bandgap halide light-absorbing layer. This layer effectively reduced charge recombinations at the perovskite/ P3HT interface, resulting in an Z value of around 23% and longterm operational stability. In a Si/perovskite tandem configuration, higher-energy photons are absorbed by the perovskite sub-cell, while infrared photons are transmitted through the perovskite top cell and absorbed by the Si sub-cell, covering a wide absorption spectral range defined by the E g value of Si. PSCs are an exciting PV technology aiming to enter a massive market. In fact, they can be produced through scalable and cost-effective solution-based techniques compatible with R2R and S2S manufacturing processes, 1275 while reaching outstanding Z up to certified values of Overall, 2D materials are expected to play protagonists in the optimization of perovskite-based PV technology, which could represent a game changer in the PV market for the near future. QDSCs are an attractive PV technology owing to various advantages, 1297 such as cost-effectiveness and simple device manufacturing processes. This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021 of other PV technologies. Especially in this context, solutionprocessed graphene and other 2D materials have attracted a primary interest for QDSCs. Tavakoli et al. reported an in situ solution-based process to prepare hybrid ZnO/graphene QDs (Fig. Jin et al. reported graphdiyne, which is a p-conjugated structure consisting of sp 2 -and sp-hybridized carbons in a typical 2D configuration, as a potential solution-processed hole transporter for PbS-based QDSCs, which reached an Z value of 10.64%. Organic-inorganic hybrid SCs combine organic and inorganic materials as the photoactive material. As discussed in previous reviews in the literature, This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021 formulate 2D materials in overcoming the fundamental issues exhibited by such type of SCs. Both progresses of 2D material science and hybrid SC-related technology could help for an in-depth reconsideration of 2D material-enabled hybrid SCs. Several progresses have been achieved in the use of graphene and related 2D materials (GRMs) in solution-processed PVs. Regarding TCE applications, the implementation of solutionprocessed 2D materials is still at a premature stage. In fact, solution-processed graphene-based films typically exhibit sheet resistance (R s ) values in the order of kO sq À1 (for T r Z 80%), 1411 which are significantly higher than typical benchmarks (e.g., less than kO sq À1 for ITO and FTO films). The origin of such low performance is mainly ascribed to the low lateral size of the liquid-phase exfoliated graphene flakes (typically in the order of few micrometers for high-quality graphene flakes) 2 Additive ITO/PFN/PTB7-WSe 2 -PC 71 BM/MoO 3 /Al 17.84 0.73 0.72 9.45 336 BPFNs Additive ITO/ZnO/PTB7-Th:IEICO-4F:BPNFs/MoO 3 /Ag 23.44 0.71 0.73 12.20 582 Hydrogen plasma-treated MoSe 2 Additive ITO/ZnO/PTB7-TH:PC 71 BM/MoO 3 /Al 18.69 0.78 0.70 10.2 583 Chlorine-functionalized graphdiyne Additive ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PM6:Y6/PFN-Br/Al 26.09 0.84 0.79 17.32 584 Zn-porphyrin based metal-organic framework nanosheets (Zn 2 (ZnTCPP)) Additive ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PC 61 BM: Zn 2 (ZnTCPP):BCP:Al 10.80 0.69 0.69 5.2 581 Bi 2 OS 2 nanosheets Additive ITO/ZnO/ITIC:Bi 2 2 /PBDB-T-SF:IT-4F/PFN-Br/Al 2 /PBDB-T-2F: Y6: PC 71 BM/PFN-Br/Al x HTL ITO/UV-MXene/PBDB-T:ITIC/Ca/Al 15.98 0.89 0.64 9.02 651 GO HTL ITO/GO/P3HT:PC 61 BM/GOCs/Al 10.30 0.61 0.59 3.67 636 GO-Cl HTL ITO/GO-Cl/PTB7:PC 71 BM/GO-Li/TiO x /Al 19.59 0.76 0.62 9.14 650 PEDOT:PPS-GO HTL ITO/PEDOT:PSS-GO/PM6:Y6/PDINO-G/Al 25.65 0.85 0.76 16.5 652 PEDOT:PSS:GO HTL ITO/PEDOT:PSS/SPGO/PTB7:PC 71 BM/Al 17.3 0.67 0.41 4.82 640 g-C 3 N 4 -doped PEDOT:PSS HTL ITO/g-C 3 N 4 -doped PEDOT:PSS/PM6:Y6/PFN-Br/Ag 26.71 0.84 0.73 16.38 641 a-In 2 Se 3 nanosheets HTL ITO/a-In 2 Se 3 /PBDB-T:ITIC/Ca/Al 16.2 /PBDB-T-2F:Y6:PC 71 BM/PFN-Br/Ag 2 /PBDB-T-2F:Y6:PC 71 BM/PFN-Br/Ag Chem. Soc. Rev. This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021 SC (mA cm À2 ) V OC (V) FF (À) Z (%) GO & Cs-neutralized GO (GOCs) ETL ITO/GO/P3HT:PC 61 BM/GOCs/Al This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021 Chem. Soc. Rev. Fig. 15 Schematic of the preparation of solution-processed mesoporous WO 3 thin film and its conversion to edge-oriented WS 2 thin film. Adapted from ref. 839. This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021 Chem. Soc. Rev. This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021 Chem. Soc. Rev. 2 :G/GO-Li/MAPbI 3 /spiro-OMeTAD/Au 18.16 4 -ZSO) scaffold nanofibers (2) FTO/c-ZSO/RGO-ZSO 0.7 /(FAPbI 3 )0.85 (MAPbBr 2 Interlayer at HTL/perovskite interface; interlayer at ETL/perovskite interface ITO/PEDOT:PSS/GO/MAPbI 3 /PCBM/MoS 2 :MXenes/mTiO 2 :MXenes/Mxenes/ Cs x (MA 0.17 FA 0.83 ) (1Àx) Pb(I 0.83 Br 0.17 J SC [mA cm À2 ] V OC [V] FF Z [%] 2 a