Additive manufacturing has been adopted to process nickel-titanium shape memory alloys due to its advantages of flexibility and minimal defects. The current layer-by-layer method is accompanied by a complex temperature history, which is not beneficial to the final characteristics of shape memory alloys. In this study, a continuous directed energy deposition method has been proposed to improve microstructure uniformity. The spatial characterization of nickeltitanium shape memory alloy fabricated by continuous directed energy deposition is investigated to study the temperature history, phase constituent, microstructure, and mechanical properties. The results indicate that the fabricated specimen has a monotonic temperature history, relatively uniform phase distribution and microstructure morphology, as well as high compressive strength (2982 MPa~3105 MPa) and strain (37.7%~41.1%). The reported method is expected to lay the foundation for spatial control during the printing of functional structures. Nickel-titanium (NiTi), also referred to as Nitinol, has unique properties of shape memory effect, superelasticity behavior, biomechanical compatibility, and corrosion resistance Currently, the widely adopted methods for Nitinol production are vacuum arc melting and vacuum induction melting, followed by casting, hot or cold working with annealing, and shape memory treatment Additive manufacturing (AM) technologies, such as selective laser melting (SLM), selective electron beam melting (SEBM), and directed energy deposition (DED), have recently been investigated to fabricate NiTi parts due to their low or minimum defects and design flexibility with complex geometry However, previous research on NiTi alloys rarely involved the spatial characteristics of the deposited structure, especially those manufactured by the DED method. Hamilton et al. It was found that Ni4Ti3 precipitation presented coarser morphology near the substrate, while a finer structure was observed close to the top. The digital image correlation analysis revealed that the largest transformation strain levels and diffuse strain contours occurred in the area with finer Ni4Ti3 precipitation. Hamilton et al. The continuous DED method, as shown in Fig. Ni50.93Ti49.07 at.% pre-alloyed powders with spherical morphology were used to fabricate the samples. The powder size was in the range of 20-50 μm and its chemical composition is shown in Table In the traditional DED method, a single track or thin layer is firstly created in the X-Y plane, then a subsequent track or layer is deposited on the previous one accompanied by remelting and reheating. The structure then is fabricated through this repeated layer-by-layer deposition as shown in Fig. The phase constituents were analyzed by an X-ray diffractometer (Smartlab, Rigaku, Japan). The microstructure was investigated by a high-resolution optical microscope (RH-2000, Hirox, Japan) and a scanning electron microscope (JSM 6400, JEOL, Japan). The scanning electron microscope with Energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) detector was also used to capture the chemical composition of a specific point or area. The samples for microstructure observation were first mechanically polished through SiC sandpaper (180, 400, 600, 800, and 1200 grit), and then polished using 0.5 μm diamond suspensions on synthetic cloths. The etchant was a volume mixed solvent of HF (2%), HNO3 The continuous DED method avoids the remelting of the previous layers or adjacent tracks by eliminating the intermittent steps. It is assumed that the inter-layer defects, such as inhomogeneity around the molten pool boundary, inter-layer porosity, and grain dislocation, will be alleviated. Compared to the traditional layer-by-layer method, the temperature history will become monotonous. The microstructure, phase constituent, and thermal and mechanical properties are expected to have better uniformity. The corresponding investigations on the thermal and mechanical properties then are conducted to test these hypotheses in the following parts. During the deposition, the NiTi rod grows at a rate equal to the scan speed while the laser source moves from the previous solidified area, causing further heat flux input to the subsequent deposition location. Due to the nature of continuous DED, commercial temperature measurement equipment such as infrared cameras and pyrometers cannot easily obtain temperature information inside the fabricated rod structure. Hence, a 2D finite-element (FE) model was developed in COMSOL Multiphysics software to investigate the location-dependent thermal history along the scan direction as shown in Fig. where ρ is the material density; Q ̇(x, y, z) is the external energy source introduced by the laser power input; c and k are the heat capacity and thermal conductivity, respectively. and bottom central regions were then extracted and compared to investigate the spatial variation of the structure temperature. In the simulation process, the laser power spot keeps moving upwards at a constant speed until the end of the deposition. When the laser power spot passes through the death element, it is activated and transformed into the birth element, imitating the material growth. Since only the birth elements will be considered in the calculation process, the simulated temperature histories of the three points start at different time instances in Fig. Besides, there are also some defects such as voids and pores that appear in the deposited samples as shown in Fig. that has been verified by the XRD pattern in Fig. The DSC curves of fabricated specimens from the top, middle, and bottom regions all show a broad TTs range without R phase transformation. The wide TTs range indicates the gradual and suppressed phase transformation behavior that involves complex physical or chemical mechanisms. Influenced by the high laser power energy input, the heating zone will experience a rapid melting and solidification process, which results in internal residual stress in the structure. It is reasonable to assume that the internal residual stress is one of the possible reasons for the formation of defects such as lattice dislocation and lattice distortion in the as-deposited NiTi alloys As shown in Fig. Fig. Compared with the stress-strain curves of the bottom and top regions, the curve from the middle region presents a higher compressive strength before its compression fracture and a lower fracture strain when the structure fractures. This phenomenon may be related to the increased Ti2Ni precipitation in the middle region, which has not been predicted by temperature history simulation due to the formation of precipitation always involving complex physics such as inhomogeneity of chemical composition. The Ti2Ni has been reported to have a strengthening effect on the compression strength as well as a negative effect on ductility For the as-deposited NiTi samples, the compressive stress-strain curve at room temperature presents four distinguishable stages, which are marked in Fig. This stress fluctuation indicates the Portevin-Le Chatelier (PLC) effect, which is mainly caused by the dislocation movement In this study, a continuous DED method was adopted to improve the homogeneity of microstructure and thermomechanical properties for the NiTi shape memory alloy fabrication. The spatial characterization along the build direction was investigated. The FEM simulation results indicated that the different parts of the specimen experience a monotonous temperature history and nearly equal dwell time in the precipitation range. The thermal cycles (e.g., remelting or reheating peak) occurring in the traditional layer-by-layer method are eliminated. Benefiting from this characteristic, the microstructure exhibits a relatively uniform phase distribution and a similar grain morphology in the different areas. Meanwhile, the specimens from different locations demonstrate analogous transformation behaviors and similar compressive stress-strain curves with a high level of compressive strength (2982 MPa~3105 MPa ) and strain (37.7%~41.1%). The phenomenon of location-dependent thermomechanical properties usually occurred in the traditional DED method is effectively alleviated. Due to the elimination of intermittent steps and the consistency between the heat flux and solidification directions, high-quality NiTi structures with complex geometry (especially slender features) can be obtained through this continuous DED method combining multi-axis movement. The simulation parameters are partially taken from the material sheet and partially calibrated from experiments. The laser powder absorption efficiency is determined through the weight method, while the laser power effective absorption coefficient is measured through the calorimetric method. The detailed experimental calibration procedure can be referred to The temperature history presented in Fig. LabVIEW was utilized to record and post-process the temperature measurement with a sampling frequency of 10 kHz. The actual experimental setup is shown in Figure 