It is well known that the trajectory of a light beam can curve if the medium in which the beam propagates is inhomogeneous or if the local spacetime is curved. In this paper we present a third possibility and show that a properly-prepared optical beam follows a curved trajectory even in free space where the spacetime is locally flat. By casting the problem in terms of transport of optical intensity, we show that a beam comprising a gradient in state of polarization to second order or higher (i.e., a specifically prepared vector beam) must also follow a curved trajectory. The effect is confirmed experimentally for the case of a second-order gradient in a linearly polarized vector beam. Optical beams with spatially varying polarization, i.e., "vector beams", have been found to possess useful properties that can be leveraged in application. Indeed, various methods for producing such beams have been developed For a monochromatic beam propagating in an isotropic, weakly inhomogeneous medium, the complex electric field amplitude vector is governed by where k 0 ≡ 2π/λ, λ is the wavelength of the light and n(x, y, z) is the refractive index of the medium. The beam properties in the transverse plane X ≡ {x, y} are assumed to evolve slowly with respect to changes in the direction of propagation (ẑ) so that the assumed solution takes the transverse electromagnetic (TEM) form E(x, y, z) = ρ(x, y, z) 1/2 e i(k0z+φ(x,y,z)) {cos(γ(x, y, z)), sin(γ(x, y, z)), 0} . In the model (2) we have 1) used a plane wave "phasor" representation with intensity ρ and phase φ and 2) assumed a linear, fully polarized state defined by the angle γ ≡ tan -1 ρ (y) /ρ (x) , where ρ (x) , ρ (y) are the projected intensities in the x and ŷ directions. Substituting ( where we have invoked the paraxial assumption so that the gradient and Laplacian operators may be written with respect to the transverse coordinates X. Now define the "velocity" v(x, y, z) = k -1 o ∇ X φ(x, y, z) as the change in optical path in the transverse direction per unit change in the direction of propagation (see e.g., where the notation D(•)/Dz denotes the total derivative. The first of these statements (a) is the well-known transport of intensity (TIE) equation (see e.g., Gathering the real portion of (1), defining η = (n 2 -1)/2, and again invoking the paraxial assumption yields The solution requires that the matrix entries be zero, resulting in two equations. Our focus is on the eikonal equation given by the main diagonal of (4). Absent a polarization gradient, this term is exactly the eikonal of ref. which recasts our propagating TEM beam as a transport problem. Importantly, by allowing a spatially varying polarization gradient we observe an additional "forcing" term in the eikonal governing the beam path (5c). The theory therefore predicts that through proper choice of spatial polarization distribution, one should be able to alter (bend) the path taken by the beam, even without changes in the properties of the medium (i.e., even with ∇ X η = 0). Moreover, because the polarization angle distribution is independent of z (Eqn. 5b) the effect will persist over the the entire propagation distance and, by Eqn. (5a), will preserve the total beam intensity. We now illustrate this effect experimentally. Consider the case where γ varies only in y and there are no index fluctuations. While the first component of the vector Eqn. (5c) states that the beam path will remain unchanged in x, the second component becomes Making the change to Lagrangian coordinates, the total derivative becomes an ordinary derivative and the transverse coordinates become functions of z, henceforth denoted y → y z and v z = dy z /dz (see e.g., Solving ( Defining the initial beam width -a/2 ≤ y 0 ≤ a/2 m, the largest polarization gradient we can observe is π/a rad./m. If we generate a beam with linear polarization profile γ(y 0 ) = π/2(y 0 -a) 2 /a 2 -π/8, the transverse displacement (8) at a distance z = L becomes (in meters) To test ( In this paper we have predicted an effect whereby a vector beam can self-bend in a manner that depends on the spatial distribution of the linear polarization angle. Using Lagrangian coordinates in conjunction with a "transport" formulation of optical propagation dynamics, the degree of bending can be predicted analytically as a function of propagation distance. We subsequently demonstrated the accuracy of these predictions in experiment. While the magnitude of the effect is small (scales as k -2 0 ) it is certainly measurable, particularly over long distances, and provides a non-mechanical approach to beam steering. We also predict that other states of polarization may yield still other, qualitatively different beam trajectories. More generally, a new mechanism for curving an optical beam in a locally flat spacetime may have implications in other areas of physics. For example, the effect may play a role at cosmological scales where recent evidence 