Predicting practical rates of ion transport from atomistic descriptors enables the rational design of materials, devices, and processes, which is especially critical to developing low-carbon energy technologies such as rechargeable batteries [1][2][3] . The correlated mechanisms of ionic conduction 4,5 , variation of conductivity with timescale 6-8 and confinement 9,10 , and ambiguity in the vibrational origin of translation, the attempt frequency 11,12 , call for a direct atomic probe of the most fundamental steps of ionic diffusion: ion hops. However, such hops are rare-event large-amplitude translations, and are challenging to excite and detect. Here we use single-cycle terahertz pumps to impulsively trigger ionic hopping in battery solid electrolytes. This is visualized by an induced transient birefringence enabling direct probing of anisotropy in ionic hopping on the picosecond timescale. The relaxation of the transient signal measures the decay of orientational memory, and the production of entropy in diffusion. We extend experimental results using in silico transient birefringence to identify attempt frequencies for ion hopping. Using nonlinear optical methods, we probe ion transport at its fastest limit, distinguish correlated conduction mechanisms from a true random walk at the atomic scale, and demonstrate the connection between activated transport and the thermodynamics of information. Fast-ion conduction in the solid state commands particular attention due to its importance in energy technologies, such as solid state batteries 1,2 . Linking the mechanistic features of ion conduction at the atomic level to the collective descriptors of macroscopic transport within a multi-scale model, or as measured in a device, yields opportunities to design novel processes and applications 3,9,13 . However, the links are often not well characterized in part because nanoscale ionic conductivity is dispersive and non-ergodic 6,7 . Macroscopic solid-state ionic conduction is considered a random-walk process composed of rapid translations between lattice sites. These fundamental steps of diffusion and conduction are called ion hops (Figure all memory is lost with every hop. From the standpoint of information theory By contrast, models of correlated transport allow for the macroscopic process of conduction to consist of multiple interconnected steps. Examples include memory kernels in generalized master equations Understanding correlation effects in transport remains necessary to predict practical performance of ionic conductors from the atoms up We probe orientational correlations between ionic hops using a nonlinear optical method sensitive to ionic velocities (Figure Here, the polarization P arises from coherent displacements of vibrational modes or bound dipoles Qi, plus an additional component from the history of hopping rates H: Figure The same lattice sites are depicted schematically in d-f. b. At time t0 = 0 (green) there is perfect knowledge of the state of the system. At time t1 > 0 some correlations persist. By time t2 >> 0 all correlations and memory are lost, and the full entropy of transport is produced as for a random walk (dotted line). c. Transient birefringence experiment in β-aluminas: At time t0 = 0 (green) the terahertz pump triggers ion hops along its electric field vector, as shown in d. At time t1 > 0, the subsequent hops retain a correlation with the impulse at t0: back-hopping is predominant, as shown in e, which yields a birefringence signal (c, red). The anisotropic distribution of hopping directions at t1 is probed as a contribution to the anisotropy in ionic velocities (c, pink). The pump energy fully thermalizes by time t2 when the hopping directions reach isotropy (f). We first use the fast ionic conductors β-aluminas (M1+2xAl11O17+x, where x≈0.1, and the mobile ion M + = Na + , K + , Ag + ) as model systems. In β-aluminas, ion conduction occurs over two non-equivalent lattice sites (Figure oscillatory relaxation represents a bulk material response. We analyze a thick sample of K + βalumina (Figure We use large-scale molecular dynamics simulations with a pulsed electrical field We now discuss the physical meaning of the TKE signal. The contribution of hopping to the TKE signal for any time delay scales with the hopping rate H, weighed by the hop directions relative to the pump's electric field. Hopping rates both parallel (+v||) and antiparallel (-v||) to the pump contribute positively to the TKE signal, whereas hopping orthogonal to the pump contributes negatively as ±v^ (Figure The hopping component of the TKE signal is temperature-activated, but the activation is much smaller than for low-frequency conductivity (≈45 meV in Figure Random-Walk Ion Conduction in K + β"-alumina All β-aluminas exhibit the picosecond "tail" in the TKE response, and the hopping remains correlated for longer than the TKE response is measurable Finally, we use the TKE measurements and simulations of K + β"-alumina to identify the vibrational origin of ionic hops: the attempt frequency ν0. To cause an anisotropy in hopping, a pump field must excite the vibrational modes Qi that couple directly to hopping, and trigger hopping aligned with the applied field. This must happen before thermalization, or else pump-driven heating enhances hopping rates in all directions isotropically. Having established the correspondence of the experimental TKE and simulated anisotropy of ionic hopping, we use further molecular dynamics simulations as in silico TKE at pump frequencies presently inaccessible to us experimentally. We simulate the anisotropy of hopping in K + β"alumina following a 2.5-THz pulse that overlaps with the strong infrared-active vibration of the K + ions in the conduction plane at 3.0 THz (Figure THz pulse (Figure In summary, we have used impulsive near-resonant terahertz excitation to trigger ionic hopping in solid-state ionic conductors. Picosecond transient birefringence arises from correlations in the hopping of mobile ions. Therefore we establish TKE, a nonlinear optical measurement, as a direct probe of path dependence in ionic transport In addition to probing the mechanisms of ionic conduction, the correlation effects we highlight are of importance for transport under strong driving forces, at short timescales, and in confined dimensions Thin (≤ 30 μm) samples are mounted on thin metallic pinholes of diameter 1 mm, fully covering the pinhole. The terahertz pulse transmitted through the sample is focused with a second pair of OAP mirrors and sampled with the free-standing film of an electro-optic dye and amorphous polycarbonate polymer The output of a Ti:sapphire oscillator (Coherent Micra) was amplified (Coherent RegA) at 100 kHz to ≈1 μJ and compressed to ≈50 fs FWHM (the width of the coherent artifact in OKE). The pump and probe pulses were overlapped on the sample so that probe E ^ c for single crystals, and pump ≈15 degrees off. The transmitted probe was detected using a pair of Si photodetectors in a balanced detection scheme. Frequencies of oscillatory components in the OKE signals were fit using linear prediction fitting 8 optimizing for least-squares error over the start and end points, which serve as hyperparameters. Steady-state classical MD simulations were carried out using LAMMPS An impulsive electrical field was included in the molecular dynamics simulations to mimic the experimental terahertz pulse The 2D terahertz Kerr effect measurement is a c Here, the transition dipole moment operator μ and polarizability operator a act on the equilibrium density matrix r describing the thermal population of vibrational states. The pump pulses arrive at times 0 and t'. The 800nm probe pulse at t''+t' is assumed to be short. Because we use one pump pulse, our experiment represents a line cut through the (t', t'') space corresponding to t'=0. The third-order polarization in the sample is given by the integral over pathways: P ! (t) = 9 9 dt ( dt (( E *+,-.," (t)E 012,# (t -t′′)E 012,$ (t -t ( -t′′) This formalism includes all possible excitation pathways via either bound vibrational states, virtual states (Raman), or "thermal bath" states E *+,-. (z, t) -E(z, t) ∝ ∂ ∂t @P(z, t + t′′)E *+,-. (z, t)A Models of coherently excited vibrational responses utilize an oscillatory form of the generated polarization corresponding to a bound vibrational state, including possible anharmonic potential energy surfaces The probe signal is summed across the thickness L of the sample. For mismatched group velocities between the pump and probe pulses, and for t''< L/Dvg, where Dvg is the mismatch of the group velocities of the pump and probe pulses Figure | TKE signal from 0.5-mm sapphire (0001) at 300 K. The TKE signal (blue) is fit to the sum of an instantaneous component (orange) and a long-time component that appears simultaneously. The residual is plotted in red. The rotational coherence of atmospheric nitrogen is at ≈11.4 ps with the peak pump field at ≈3 ps. The TKE signals from sapphire samples (Figure The TKE signals in β-aluminas show deviations at short time delays upon prolonged (several days) measurements (Figure The complex refractive index ñ(w) was fit to the transmission at each frequency 4n F(ω) (n F(ω) + 1) ) expKikL(n F(ω) -1)N Here, k is the wavenumber equal to w/c. This nonlinear equation was solved for ñ(w) at each frequency provided an initial guess ñ0(w); the values shown in Figure The optical conductivities of β-aluminas show features and absolute magnitudes consistent with literature spectra of melt-grown crystals 31 : ≈0.8 THz in Ag β-alumina, 2.1 THz in Na β-alumina, and several modes between 1.5, 2.0, and 2.7 THz in K β-alumina. More importantly, for all conditions and all samples the calculated refractive index and conductivity are independent of the terahertz field for the same initial ñ0 used to solve the nonlinear equation. Unlike in recent work The selective excitation of mobile-ion motions in β-aluminas is verified with simulations including the pump field. During the simulated terahertz pump pulse, the temperature of the mobile ions, computed by LAMMPS using the kinetic energy of the ions, rises rapidly (Figure The excitation of vibrational modes by the pump pulse, in addition to hopping, is verified by tracking the displacements of the center of mass of the mobile ions, projected onto the direction of the field, and referenced to the host-lattice displacement Velocities of the center-of-mass of all mobile ions (a,c,e,g), and their Fourier transforms (b,d,f,h). Dashed black lines in the Fourier transform figures are spectra of the applied pump pulses. Highlighted vibrations: 0.6 and 1.0 THz in Ag β-alumina (a,b), 1.3 and 2.0 THz in K β-alumina (c,d), 1.7 THz in Na β-alumina (e,f), and 3.0 THz in K β"-alumina (g,h). The in silico TKE of β-aluminas is dis-aggregated by the chemical environment of the mobile ions: (a) ions bound in a defect cluster, and (b) ions that are free to diffuse. The cluster consists of four mobile ions on six crystallographic lattice sites around an oxygen interstitial (ab) all mobile ions, (cd) mobile ions away from defects, i.e. "free", and (ef) mobile ions within defect clusters. The shaded areas are ±1 s.e. of the mean. The temperature-independence of the hopping anisotropy response due to cluster-bound ions complicates the interpretation of experimental TKE measurements of Na and Ag β-aluminas (Figure Supplementary Note 5: Logical and Thermodynamic Reversibility Here, we draw a brief analogy to concepts and experiments in stochastic thermodynamics. The parallels between memory, correlations, and the thermodynamics of information have been formulated in multiple frameworks, and we direct the reader to several reviews In the first case, the pump drives hopping between two lattice sites (illustrated as B ® A, Figure In the second case (Figure Assuming ideal contacts, the paths B ® A ® B and B ® A ® B' differ in the net current extractable from the pump pulse: only the latter yields a net displacement of ions and therefore current. While both pathways thermalize the pump pulse when averaged over the sample (thermodynamic irreversibility), the degree of freedom that characterizes net work (B vs B') is modified only for a fraction of the ions, with the success rate of the pathway B ® A ® B'. This parallels the incomplete erasure of a memory bit if the work input is too low The TKE experiment measures velocities, not positions, and alone does not quantify the numbers of ions that follow the two paths, only their difference. In absence of ion-permeable contacts, and with the diameter of the pump pulse (≈0.5 mm) larger than that of the probe (<0.1 mm), the long-range restoring force that eventually reverses B' to B is slow and not measurable with TKE. Therefore TKE does not directly quantify the success rate for information erasure. We rely on molecular dynamics simulations and on the β''-alumina experiment (Figure The third case (Figure As the βand β''-aluminas have been the classical model systems of solid-state ionics, a variety of high-frequency measurements of electrical Here, we seek to understand the fundamental initiation of ion transport, the attempt frequency ν0 for ionic hopping. In the random-walk framework (full entropy produced with every hop), ν0 is not an atomistic vibration, but an effective quantity with dimensions of frequency relating to the vibrational states at the saddle point of a generalized potential energy surface For a molecular dynamics simulation, we partition the trajectories of mobile ions (typically, 100 ns for steady-state simulations) into hopping events, defined as the time point when an ion migrates between crystallographic lattice sites, and the residence times between them. A residence time is defined as the period of time that an ion spends at a lattice site following a hop into that site Both vibrations are distinct from the LO phonon mode at 3.0 THz detectable by TKE (Figure We now simulate an in silico TKE experiment for Na β-alumina, at the practical stoichiometry x=0.1 and 300 K. Given two distinct mechanisms of hopping (Figure 