The interplay of superconductivity with electronic and structural instabilities on the kagome lattice provides a fertile ground for the emergence of unusual phenomena. The vanadium-based kagome metals AV3Sb5 (A = K, Rb, Cs) exhibit superconductivity on an almost ideal kagome lattice, with the superconducting transition temperature Tc forming two domes upon pressure-tuning. The first dome arises from the competition between superconductivity and a charge-density-wave, whereas the origin for the second dome remains unclear. Herein, we show that the appearance of the second superconducting dome in KV3Sb5 and RbV3Sb5 is associated with transitions from hexagonal P 6/mmm to monoclinic P 2/m structures, evidenced by splitting of structural peaks from synchrotron powder X-ray diffraction experiments and imaginary phonon frequencies in first-principles calculations. In KV3Sb5, transition to an orthorhombic P mmm structure is further observed for pressure p 20 GPa, and is correlated with the strong suppression of Tc in the second superconducting dome. Our findings indicate distortions of the crystal structure modulates superconductivity in AV3Sb5 under pressure, providing a platform to study the emergence of superconductivity in the presence of multiple structural instabilities. The tuning of quantum materials provides a key for understanding their physics and a route towards potential applications. Highly tunable physical properties often emerge in the presence of electronic or structural instabilities, as seen in strongly correlated and two-dimensional materials As a clean and powerful tool that can be utilized to tailor materials' atomic distances, and thus crystal and electronic structures, pressure is widely used to tune the properties of materials. The AV 3 Sb 5 kagome metals are highly tunable by pressure or strain Here, combining synchrotron powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) and ab initio calculations, we show that transitions from hexagonal P 6/mmm to monoclinic P 2/m structures occur in both KV 3 Sb 5 and RbV 3 Sb 5 . By comparing with resistivity measurements carried out using the same pressure medium, these structural transitions are identified to coincide with appearance of the second superconducting dome in the two compounds. In KV 3 Sb 5 , another transition into an orthorhombic P mmm structure is observed upon further increase of pressure, whose emergence is associated with a strong suppression of T c . These findings highlight the role of pressure-induced structural modulations in the complex evolution of superconductivity in AV 3 Sb 5 under pressure, and underscore the effects of structural changes on properties of layered materials under high pressure. Powder X-ray diffraction under pressure At ambient pressure, AV 3 Sb 5 forms a hexagonal P 6/mmm structure above the CDW transition temperature, with a V kagome lattice interwoven with a Sb hexagonal lattice in the same layer, further encapsulated by layers of Sb (that form honeycomb lattices) above and below. These V 3 Sb 5 slabs are well-separated by alkaline metals ions, resulting in a highly two-dimensional structure. To investigate how the crystal structure evolves under pressure and its relation to superconductivity, we carried out systematic powder XRD measurements under pressure. To facilitate a direct comparison with phase diagrams determined using resistivity XRD data for RbV While the β-phase persists to the highest measured pressure in RbV 3 Sb 5 (34.8 GPa), the split peaks merge into a single peak in KV 3 Sb 5 for p 20 GPa [Fig. To understand the nature of structural phases under pressure in RbV 3 Sb 5 and KV 3 Sb 5 , the diffraction patterns are analyzed using the Le Bail method, with representative fits shown in Fig. Evolution of the unit cell volume with pressure is summarized in Fig. The phonon spectra of RbV 3 Sb 5 and KV 3 Sb 5 are calculated from first-principles using a hexagonal P 6/mmm unit cell, with results summarized in Fig. With further increase of pressure, new imaginary phonon modes emerge around M point in both RbV 3 Sb 5 and KV 3 Sb 5 [Figs. A previous first-principles study also found a second structural instability for CsV 3 Sb 5 around 30-35 GPa, which is associated with a B 1u phonon mode, similar to the ambient pressure CDW Based on the XRD results in this work and previous resistivity measurements Appearance of the γ-phase in KV 3 Sb 5 is accompanied by a strong reduction in T c , which becomes fully suppressed above ≈ 30 GPa In the case of CsV 3 Sb 5 , resistivity measurements suggest the presence of two superconducting domes, similar to RbV 3 Sb 5 and KV 3 Sb 5 . However, powder XRD measurements at room temperature indicate a hexagonal P 6/mmm structure (α-phase) is adopted up to ≈ 40 GPa In conclusion, we systematically investigated the evolution of RbV 3 Sb 5 and KV 3 Sb 5 under pressure using powder X-ray diffraction and first-principles calculations, and uncovered a transition into a distinct structural phase upon increasing pressure. Compared against resistivity measurements obtained using the same pressure medium, we find the structural transition coincides with a minima in T c , and naturally accounts for the presence of two superconducting domes in these materials. In KV 3 Sb 5 , an additional structural phase transition is found at higher pressures, which is associated with a strong suppression of superconductivity in the second superconducting dome. These findings demonstrate an integral role for structural instabilities in the complex evolution of superconductivity under pressure in the AV 3 Sb 5 vanadium kagome metals, and suggest a potential role of the corresponding soft phonons in determining their physical properties under ambient pressure. Powder X-ray diffraction under pressure Single crystals of RbV 3 Sb 5 and KV 3 Sb 5 were grown using a self-flux method, with detailed procedures documented in Refs. Samples used in XRD measurements were obtained by crushing single crystals. Two XRD runs on RbV 3 Sb 5 were carried out, one at 80 K [Fig. 