Sr2RuO4 has been under intensive scrutiny over the past years after new NMR measurements unveiled that the superconducting state might be a spin singlet. One of the best order parameter candidates in light of these new experiments is a chiral d-wave state with dxz+idyz symmetry. This order parameter has been overlooked given the strong two-dimensional character of the normal state electronic structure Recently, a phenomenological proposal based on local interactions with a three-dimensional electronic structure showed that a chiral d-wave state can be stable in Sr2RuO4 once momentum-dependent spin-orbit coupling is properly taken into account. Here we discuss the origin of the nodes and dips in this order parameter as inherited from the normal state Hamiltonian, showing that a nodal gap can emerge out of purely local interactions and connect the presence of nodes with the superconducting fitness measure. Sr 2 RuO 4 was for long thought to be the best candidate material to host a chiral p-wave superconducting state Recently, the author and collaborators have proposed a picture with local pairing in which a chiral d-wave order parameter is stable Following the notation introduced in , where c † k,γs creates an electron with momentum k, orbital γ, and spin s, in terms of which we can write the most general single-particle Hamiltonian Here λa are Gell-Mann matrices encoding the orbital degrees of freedom (DOF), σb are Pauli matrices encoding the spin DOF ( λ0 and σ0 are unit matrices), and h ab (k) are real and even functions of momentum. In presence of spacial inversion and time-reversal symmetries, out of the 36 pairs of indexes (a, b), only 15 are symmetry allowed. These are described in detail in the supplementary material of Suh et al. For the analytical discussion below, it is useful to focus on the normal state Hamiltonian along specific planes. If we look along the XZ (Y Z) plane we find only the β and γ bands, the former composed of d xz (d yz ) and the later of d xy orbitals. This allows us to construct simpler two-orbital models along these planes, H (k) are real even functions of momentum, and both τa and σb are Pauli matrices encoding the orbital and the spin DOF, respectively (σ 0 and τ0 are identity matrices). There are, in principle, 16 pairs of indexes (a, b) but in the presence of time-reversal and inversion symmetries these are constrained to only six. The symmetry-allowed terms are listed in Table Table In analogy to the normal state Hamiltonian, we parametrize the superconducting order parameters for the three orbital model as ∆(k) = a,b d ab (k) λa ⊗ σb (iσ 2 ), with momentumdependent functions d ab (k) carrying information about its magnitude and phase. Each order parameter component is labelled by a pair of indexes [a, b] (note the different brackets used for the parametrization of the terms in the normal state Hamiltonian and for the order parameter). In the three orbital model, the proposed chiral d-wave state is dominated by In the microscopic basis this order parameter is momentum independent (or s-wave) with magnitude d 0 , antisymmetric in the orbital DOF (given the explicit form of the Gell-Mann matrices λ 5 and λ 6 ), and a spin triplet state, with the d-vector along the z-axis. Along the XZ(Y Z) plane we can write the local gap matrices as . Each order parameter component is labelled by a pair of indexes with a label concerning the plane [a, b] p , with p = {XZ, Y Z}. Here we focus on local, swave, order parameters, which should satisfy the condition imposed by fermionic anti-symmetry, ∆(k) = -∆T (-k) ⇒ ∆ = -∆T , so we consider only order parameters associated with antisymmetric matrices. These are listed in Tab. 2. The orbitally antisymmetric order parameter, when projected into the XZ (YZ) plane takes the form For this discussion, the simple 2×2 models along the planes p = {XZ, Y Z} are going to be useful so we can proceed analytically. As the matrix structures are the same for both planes, we drop the p superscript from here on. In order to determine the gap in the band basis, it is useful to look directly at the eigenvalaues of the BdG Hamiltonian: where Ĥ0 (k) is the normal-state Hamiltonian and ∆(k) = ∆ 0 τc ⊗ σd (iσ 2 ), with different gaps associated with distinct subscripts [c, d], as listed in Table where h(k) = ( h10 (k), h30 (k), h21 (k), h22 (k), h23 (k)) is a five-dimensional vector. The function Note that the normalstate eigenenergies are given by 0 , and the superconducting state is fully gapped. In case f 2 C (k) = 0, the energy spectra in the superconducting state at the momenta belonging to the normal-state Fermi surface can then be written as If we now expand for small ∆ 0 , we find for the low lying bands: and we can define the gap structure in the band basis as: This definition is in direct analogy to the single band problem with normal state dispersion (k). The dispersion in the superconducting state is E ± (k) = ± 2 (k) + ∆ 2 , so we can identify the gap at the Fermi surface by taking (k) = 0, and defining From Eq. 6, it is clear that the condition for the presence of nodes at the normal state Fermi surface is: These equations indicate that there can be nodes in the superconducting spectrum of Sr 2 RuO 4 given the nontrivial form factors originated from the normal-state Hamiltonian Ĥ0 (k), even though the gap in the orbital basis is isotropic (s-wave). Note that the fitness function F 0 C (k) appears in this context as a key parameter defining the nodes, reinforcing its importance for the understanding of the phenomenology of superconducting states in complex materials In Tab. 2 we summarise the fitness functions for each possible local order parameter labelled by 