Scholte modes that are localized between a submerged axisymmetric-structured elastic plate and surrounding fluid can undergo mode conversion via Umklapp diffraction into radiative modes; this radiative response is verified by experiments that show focussing of underwater sound across a broad range of frequencies. The diffracted beams, that form a cone, are engineered to exist at a desired spatial position, associated with an abrupt change in the patterning of the plate. These structures take the form of grooves present only on one side of the plate, yet the focussing phenomena is achieved on both sides, even as viewed from the flat surface. Several classes of surface waves exist at the interfaces between differing media that propagate along the interface and exponentially decay away from it. In elasticity, surface Rayleigh waves For the case of a patterned elastic plate submerged in a fluid there exist non-leaky acoustic surface waves that propagate in the fluid above the subwavelength structured surface Here we demonstrate that localised Scholte modes can be modified (hereby termed modified Scholte modes (MSMs)) and mode converted to free-space acoustic radiation, and focussed over a broad frequency band. Our mechanism perturbs the dispersion of Scholte modes by adding concentric groove structures to an otherwise flat plate, modifying the supported symmetric and antisymmetric Scholte modes. We achieve focussing in free-space by designing a structure comprised of two differently patterned regions, each supporting their own MSM pair, with an abrupt transition between them. At this transition point, the diffraction of the MSMs results in the radiation of beams that can form a focal spot, the position of which is frequency dependent. We achieve this focussing over a broad frequency range (∼ 50 kHz). Figure The structure of this article is as follows. In Section II we outline the Umklapp diffraction mechanism with an illustrative example of a two-dimensional structured plate composed of two different one-dimensionally periodic regions and then, in Section III, present the dispersion curves for both regions calculated using the Finite Element Method (FEM) with the commercial software COMSOL Multiphysics ® Motivated by recent devices in electromagnetism and elasticity, which leverage so-called Umklapp diffraction The Umklapp or 'flip-over' process, first hypothesised by Peierls This definition then gives rise to the familiar reducedzone scheme by translating wavevectors outwith the first BZ, effectively 'folding' the bands, by an integer multiple of reciprocal lattice vectors such that they lie within the first BZ. Despite its origins in solid state physics, not diffraction from surfaces, this (in the words of Peierls himself "rather ugly" We utilise this phenomena to, at a designed spatial position, ensure that a propagating MSM with a wavevector in the first BZ of one periodic region excites a wave with wavevector outwith the first BZ in a second periodic structure. The resulting wave then undergoes Umklapp diffraction into the surrounding fluid with focussing achieved by the axisymmetry of the structure. The general design paradigm to achieve this effect is as follows: (i) we first consider a thin, infinite elastic plate submerged in water. On one side of the plate we define a structuring that forms a 1D, infinitely periodic array of grooves, of pitch a 1 and depth d. The dispersion curves corresponding to the infinite crystal are then obtained, with this geometry being termed region 1 (R1). (ii) we then define, separately, a second infinite 1D array of grooves with a larger unit cell of pitch a 2 > a 1 , such that the reciprocal space cell of this second region (henceforth R2) is smaller than that of R1. (iii) The geometry of the second region is designed such that the supported MSM in R1 couples efficiently into R2; this requires matching the modal profiles in the regions and ensuring the dispersion curves of the two regions overlap. (iv) The two regions are then joined such that the boundary between them is abrupt (opposed to adiabatically graded e.g., Sound is diffracted at the transition point, at an angle determined by momentum conservation of the translated wavevector. We elucidate this phenomena with an example, Fig. Due to the periodicity of R2 the wavevector of the excited MSM is equivalent to that translated by a reciprocal lattice vector, leaving its parallel component k = k R1 -G 2 with G 2 = 2π/a 2 . This translated, or flipped, wavevector now lies within the isofrequency contour of the free fluid surrounding the plate, and hence couples to radiation within the bulk. The angle of the Umklapp diffracted beams is then determined from the relative orientation directions of the tangential component of the translated wavevector with that representing the sound cone. In the following section we outline the exact design for the experimental verification of this effect, and the techniques used to obtain the dispersion curves for R2, which is crucial to the operation of the device. We consider an aluminium plate, of thickness h = 15 mm, density ρ = 2660 kg m -3 and Poisson's ratio ν = 0.34 submerged in water, with density ρ f = 1000 kg m -3 and sound speed c f = 1480 ms -1 . The plate is split into the two periodic regions R1 and R2, the unit cells of which are shown in Figs. In order to calculate the dispersion curves of the lo- calised MSM in each region, the FEM is used. To extract the decaying eigensolutions, a finite unit strip, of width a 1 , is taken sufficiently long in the direction perpendicular to the periodicity such that the exponentially decaying solutions are not impacted by the boundary conditions at the top, or bottom, of the strip. Floquet-Bloch periodic conditions are applied to the side boundaries (dashed-lines in Fig. The dispersion curves of R2 within the first BZ are easily identified (inset of Fig. Several numerical schemes exist to extract the desired decaying solutions MSMs are excited with a point monopole acoustic source placed 3 mm above the centre of the patterned surface. Performing a parametric sweep in frequency then gives the fields in both the fluid and solid domains. Along the dashed-dotted lines 1-2 shown in Fig. In the band diagram for R2 (Fig. Due to the careful design of the two periodic unit cells, over a large range of frequencies (∼ 50 kHz), the dispersion curves of the two regions almost exactly overlap -see Fig. We first detail the experimental procedure before presenting results and experimental corroboration. The sample was fabricated based upon the unit-cell dimensions for regions 1 and 2 presented in Fig. The groove structures were milled using fluted-cutters with a CNC-assisted pillar drill into a circular aluminumalloy (5083) plate mounted on a rotating table to accommodate this large radius sample. The plate sample has diameter, D = 592 ± 0.1 mm and thickness, h = 15.04 ± 0.01 mm. Grooves have cavity depths, d, of 5.07 ± 0.05 mm (50 μm depth variation arises due to the flatness tolerance of the plate over the sample area). The thickness error in radial features of the surface relief profile, i.e. the pillar widths, were realised with much smaller positional tolerances of ±0.005 mm. For fabrication six 5 mm bolt holes and a 25 mm diameter, 6 mm deep recess in the plate centre were milled into the flat side of the sample (these are accounted for in the numerical simulations), the bolt holes were later used to mount the sample as shown in Fig. The alloy plate has elastic material parameters: elastic modulus E = 72.0 ± 0.2 GPa, shear modulus G = 26.4 ± 0.2 GPa, density ρ = 2660 ± 610 kg m -3 , and Poisson's ratio 0.34 ± 0.1, as reported in the literature To experimentally confirm acoustic focussing by our lens design, extensive time-gated acoustic characterisation of the fluid-field pressure distributions were made using a scanning tank facility (see Fig. The sample was characterised under two different excitation conditions, when the source was positioned on the structured side, and when the source was on the flat side of the sample. For all experiments the sample was isonified using a ball-shaped Neptune-Sonar D70 transducer mounted at the centre of the sample approximately 5 mm from the surface (on either side of the sample). The transducer was shrouded in a foam enclosure to produce a 600 mm 2 area radiating aperture to produce a more point-like monopole acoustic excitation, and excited with a pulse with a 50 kHz centre frequency. This excitation condition provides a near-field acoustic source that excites over a range of incident angles, θ i , with the associated range of in-plane wavevectors, k (= k 0 sin θ i ), required for excitation of the modified Scholte modes. To obtain pressure field maps of sound radiated from the source and plate, the signal at the detection hydrophone (Brüel & Kjaer 8103 hydrophone) was scanned in space, using an xyz scanning stage (in-house built with Aerotech controllers) to map the acoustic propagation; the voltage, V , from the detector was recorded as a function of time, t, at each position in the scan. At each spatial point, signals were averaged in time over 20 repeat pulses to improve the signal-to-noise ratio. The detector was sampled with sample rate, f s = 9.62 MHz to record the signal for 1.6 ms at each point. The resulting usable frequency range for this source-detector response function was between 26 kHz and 90 kHz. To illustrate the focussing arising from the tailored scattering of sound by the sample we present both temporal and frequency domain results. As a consequence of our time-resolved excitation and detection we can first consider the arrival of the acoustic signal in the far field. Figure The temporal evolutions display some common features; the leading edge of the pulse arrives at ≈ 0.32 ms and disperses in ±y in a manner expected when intersecting a spherical wavefront, originating at the plate center, along a chord. In all cases the pulse displays the sinusoidal 3-cycle character of the input signal. For the unstructured reference plate (Fig. For the sample (excited on the flat side), in Fig. When the sample is flipped so excitation is now on the structured side, and detection on the flat side, as in Fig. Closer inspection of the time domain signal shows that there is a significant enhancement of the voltage measured at the detector at x, y, z = 0, 0, 300 mm. The time signals for each configuration are plotted in Fig. Another way we explore this focal point is to observe the temporal evolution as a function of distance from the plate. Figure Due to the physical constraints of the tank apparatus, all scans of the radiated fields were conducted in the +z direction relative to the sample mount position, as indicated in The focussing of sound which we achieve results from the interference of diffracted beams from the transition region. The width of the beams is influenced by the number of cells in R2, and these beams spread as they travel through the free fluid. As such the size of the focal spot depends on the angle of the diffracted beams; the larger the angle the greater area of overlap of the spreading beams and hence the extension in z of the focal 'spot'. This is clearly visible when comparing, for example, Figs. Figures 9 demonstrate it is therefore possible to couple non-radiative guided array modes, such as the modified Scholte modes here, to the surrounding bulk by engineering Umklapp diffraction at a given position. In each case, as expected, the diffraction is strongest on the structured side of the plate, and in general will depend on the mo-mentum mismatch (i.e. the difference of k || in R1 and R2) and overlap in mode shape between each mode in R1 and R2. This is particularly noticeable in Fig. We have demonstrated that the Umklapp diffraction method can be used to focus underwater sound over a broad range of frequencies. We achieved this by modifying the coupled-Scholte modes between a submerged elastic plate and the surrounding fluid by patterning only one side of the device with regions consisting of periodic concentric grooves. Comparisons to bare, unstructured plates confirm that the focussing capabilities are due to the designed structuring. The coupling between these supported guided waves to radiative modes is achieved by designing the regions to consist of unit cells which support similar mode shapes and have overlapping dispersion curves. Indeed the dispersion curves and band diagrams are key to the operation of the device and have been calculated through a combination of finite element methods and numerical experimentation, and highlight the need for careful design of the two comprising unit cells. We showed in simulation and experimentally verified that focal spots, whose position are frequency dependent, exist on both sides of the device, no matter which side the source is placed on. It is therefore possible to focus sound on the flat side of the device due to the coupling and modulation of the Scholte modes. The modulation of the non-radiative Scholte modes through periodic structuring is achieved through the general theory of Umklapp diffraction. As such we envisage extension to other wave types (e.g. Lamb waves) and anticipate applications for underwater sensing through non-destructive testing and evaluation, which is particularly relevant in the petrochemical industry. Further applications arise through the acousto-fluidic control of micro-particles 