Computational meta-imagers synergize metamaterial hardware with advanced signal processing approaches such as compressed sensing. Recent advances in artificial intelligence (AI) are gradually reshaping the landscape of meta-imaging. Most recent works use AI for data analysis, but some also use it to program the physical meta-hardware. The role of "intelligence" in the measurement process and its implications for critical metrics like latency are often not immediately clear. Here, we comprehensively review the evolution of computational meta-imaging from the earliest frequency-diverse compressive systems to modern programmable intelligent meta-imagers. We introduce a clear taxonomy in terms of the flow of task-relevant information that has direct links to information theory: compressive meta-imagers indiscriminately acquire all scene information in a taskagnostic measurement process that aims at a near-isometric embedding; intelligent metaimagers highlight task-relevant information in a task-aware measurement process that is purposefully non-isometric. The measurement process of intelligent meta-imagers is thus simultaneously an analog wave processor that implements a first task-specific inference step "over-the-air". We provide explicit design tutorials for the integration of programmable meta-atoms as trainable physical weights into an intelligent end-to-end sensing pipeline. This merging of the physical world of metamaterial engineering and the digital world of AI enables the remarkable latency gains of intelligent meta-imagers. We further outline emerging opportunities for cognitive meta-imagers with reverberationenhanced resolution and we point out how the meta-imaging community can reap recent advances in the vibrant field of metamaterial wave processors to reach the holy grail of low-energy ultra-fast all-analog intelligent meta-sensors. Electromagnetic (EM) computational meta-imagers are poised to become the backbone of emerging cyber-physical systems that drive important societal developments in security, autonomous mobility, smart health care and touchless human-machine interaction. Modern meta-imagers combine the virtue of low-cost metamaterial hardware with the speed and agility needed for task-specific in situ instantaneous sensing and monitoring. Their programmability has been the key to drastic latency improvements by enabling task-aware "intelligent" measurements that pre-select useful information. In this Review, we retrace the evolution of computational meta-imagers from early frequency-diverse compressivesensing approaches to state-of-the-art programmable learned-sensing techniques. By following the flow of information through the sensing pipeline, we explain this evolution in terms of the elimination of redundant and irrelevant information at the earliest possible stage: the measurement. These developments evidence the power of merging the physical world of metamaterial engineering with the digital world of artificial intelligence (AI), and we conclude by looking forward toward all-analog cognitive meta-imagers with unprecedented resolution. Our modern society increasingly develops needs for remote probing of people's location, arming, activity, body language and even their physiological state. Ideally, this intelligent surveillance can be realized (i) remotely, (ii) without requiring the subjects to cooperate (e.g., by carrying tags), (iii) without dependence on the subjects' skin color or clothing, (iv) without dependence on scene lighting or fog, (v) without ionizing radiation, and (vi) with minimal visual privacy infringements. EM waves are predestined to fulfill these requirements. Some progress toward wireless surveillance has been achieved by exploiting the channel state information of existing WiFi infrastructure Metamaterial hardware has enabled alternative low-cost aperture architectures, referred to as "meta-imagers". These coded metamaterial apertures multiplex scene information across diverse measurement modes, offered by the metamaterial's degrees of freedom, onto a single (or few) detector(s); however, these meta-imagers rely on computationally highly expensive inverse-scattering solvers to reconstruct a scene image. To expedite the entire sensing process, on the one hand, the deployed methodologies for data analysis have been refined. In particular, the realization that the ultimate goal is almost always not a visual representation of the scene but an answer to a specific task has led to the reconstruction-free interpretation of raw measured data. On the other hand, the emergence of programmable metamaterials has recently enabled the sculpting of intelligent scene illumination modes that select, hand-in-hand with the subsequent data processing algorithm, task-relevant information. Thereby, both the number of measurements as well as the digital processing burden are simultaneously minimized, yielding a double advantage in terms of latency as well as improvements on other relevant metrics like data storage and power consumption. State-of-the-art EM meta-imagers now enable intelligent, high-fidelity, low-cost and real-time sensing and monitoring that can be adapted in situ to task and scene -in line with the requirements of the targeted applications in security, autonomous mobility, smart health care and touchless human-machine interaction. In this Review, we present a comprehensive and easy-to-follow taxonomy of influential meta-imagers that focusses on the flow of information through the sensing pipeline and offers a clear criterion to distinguish between compressive and intelligent meta-imagers. None of the four review papers 2.1 Fundamentals. Imaging and sensing can be broadly defined as the characterization of a scene based on how it scatters waves. The important steps of a conventional generic sensing pipeline are outlined in Figure where the vector N denotes detector noise The nature of the sensing matrix H depends on the choice of scene illumination patterns. Conventional imagers establish a one-to-one mapping between scene voxels and image pixels, such that the structure of H is often as simple as that of an identity matrix, implying that image reconstruction from the measured data is trivial. In these conventional approaches, the scene is scanned with diffraction-limited spots, as illustrated in Figure Important contributions from the metamaterial community in the realm of conventional imaging include ideas to enhance the image resolution, usually by capturing evanescent waves, such as the perfect lens Computational imaging Each measurement thus contains contributions from all scene voxels, weighted by the utilized mask, such that the sensing matrix H is highly complicated. Such computational "single-pixel cameras" Most natural scenes are sparse, either directly in real space or in a transform domain, or in terms of their gradients Ideally, the compression process does not distort the relative distances between any two points such that the loss of information due to the compression is minimal. Formally, this idea of a distance-preserving transformation is known as isometry in signal processing theory where a central result is the restricted isometry property Along these lines, the relevance of metamaterial engineering to the field of EM computational imaging emerges since 2013 37 : the degrees of freedom offered by metamaterial hardware can be conveniently leveraged to implement the required codedaperture masks. We provide a comprehensive overview of the diverse proposals of compressive meta-imagers in the following subsection. We carefully sort these works in terms of the utilized scene illumination strategy (which is the key factor in terms of the flow of information through the sensing pipeline) and the underlying metamaterial hardware class. Initially, computational meta-imagers relied on spectral diversity; with the advent of programmable metamaterials, they increasingly use configurational diversity instead. Toward the end of the next subsection, we will see how the metamaterial's programmability can be leveraged to synthesize scene illumination patterns. Subsection 2.2 partially overlaps with Refs. Refs. This synthesis ability prepares the ground for the subsequent section on intelligent meta-imagers. Hardware programmability is ultimately the basis for merging the physical world of metamaterial engineering with the digital world of AI in the context of computational imaging. The crucial difference between compressive and intelligent metaimagers lies in how the programmability is used. While compressive meta-imagers seek a sensing matrix that acts as isometric projection of the probed scene in order to faithfully compress all scene information, an intelligent meta-imager seeks a non-isometric projection that compresses and simultaneously distorts in a purposeful manner to facilitate answering the specific task. The physical layer thus performs "intelligent" task-specific analog signal processing in the latter but not in the former case. Note that in this Review we reserve the attribute "intelligent" for meta-imagers in which the AI impacts the physical measurement process which is not the case if AI intervenes purely for post-measurement data analysis. The generic sensing pipeline consists of three steps. First, information about the scene S is encoded on the physical layer via measurements in data D. Under the common Born approximation, this is a linear mapping via the sensing matrix H. Second, an image of the scene is reconstructed from the data on the digital layer. Third, the image is interpreted to answer the specific task that motivated the entire sensing process. A conventional imager uses diffraction-limited spots as measurement modes, such that the reconstruction step is trivial because H is an identity matrix. In contrast, a computational imager uses diverse scene illumination patterns as measurement modes, resulting in a non-trivial sensing matrix and image reconstruction. If the scene is sparse, image reconstruction can be achieved with an underdetermined sensing matrix, known as compressive imaging. The bottom left schematics are adapted with permission from Science 339, 310 (2013). Our taxonomy of compressive meta-imagers begins by asking a high-level question: what is the nature of the resulting scene illumination patterns? The most common case is that they are pseudo-random. We use the term "pseudo-random" instead of "random" on purpose because in most physical realization of random patterns some deterministic component that is not randomly stirred in different realizations remains, such that the patterns do not follow ideal random distributions (see, for instance, Refs. A Principle scene components are optimally efficient for a near-isometric embedding -and hence by definition agnostic to the specific task. Before diving into metamaterial implementations of these scene illumination strategies, we summarize in the first row of Figure Patterns. -The very first meta-imager is seen in Figure This leaky 1D waveguide constitutes a frequency-diverse meta-imager capable of generating pseudo-random illumination patterns. The amount of reasonably different pseudo-random scene illuminations that can be accessed within a given frequency interval depends on the sharpness of the meta-atoms' resonances. However, the latter cannot be increased arbitrarily, in particular because such an increase is accompanied by a decrease in energy radiated into the scene. Considerable improvements in the frequency diversity were subsequently unlocked by moving from a 1D leaky waveguide to an overmoded 3D leaky chaotic cavity The latter is shown in Figure Instead of sequentially switching through all possible transmitter-receiver combinations, the system can also be operated in a massive-MIMO mode with simultaneous, mutually orthogonal coded transmit signals So far, we have seen three examples in which the feed was inside the frequency-diverse metamaterial structure. Another approach, seen in Figure An obvious inconvenience here, in contrast to the previously outlined techniques, appears to be the lack of compactness if metasurface, horn antenna, and the distance between the two are considered. In Ref. A similar approach has also been implemented in the optical regime As last example of frequency-diverse meta-imagers, we look in Figure The first configuration-diverse programmable meta-imager In Figure Usually, they do not achieve perfectly flat singular value spectra, such that some degree of redundancy remains in subsequent measurements. Some of these works make an interesting link between compressive sensing and information theory, by interpreting the sensing matrix as MIMO channel matrix and evoking the generalized Shannon capacity Reports on perfectly orthogonal sensing matrices are rare in the compressive metaimager literature. An influential work, shown in Figure Perfectly orthogonal scene illuminations were also implemented with a programmable 3D leaky chaotic cavity Instead, the coding sequence is judiciously tailored such that the resulting sensing matrix becomes perfectly orthogonal. Here, the basis is not a well-known basis like the Hadamard basis, and upon visual inspection, the sensing matrix may appear random. However, the overlap between its columns is zero, and its singular value spectrum is perfectly flat. Therefore, using this tailored coding sequences enables one to conduct a series of compressive measurements without any redundancy. Identifying the appropriate coding sequence is non-trivial: due to the complexity of the scattering inside the chaotic cavity, no analytical forward model exists that describes the impact of the coding pattern on the scene illumination. An additional complication is that the optimal configurations of different meta-atoms are correlated due to the reverberation inside the cavity. Ref. Before closing this subsection, we note that the arguments for the benefits of orthogonal patterns over pseudo-random patterns in terms of redundancy are valid on average when many completely different scenes are imaged. For one specific scene, or one specific class of scenes, some orthogonal bases perform better than others; the basis that performs best for a given scene class are its principle scene components which we discuss next. Components. -A special case of orthogonal patterns are principle scene components. Originally pioneered in optical systems PCA can be understood as designing the sensing matrix to satisfy the restricted isometry property on the specific dataset of representative scenes A numerical study applied the idea of using principle scene components of human postures as illumination patterns to EM imaging with an array of tunable antennas Under the first Born approximation, the inverse scattering problem in computational imaging essentially requires the inversion of the sensing matrix H in order to determine an estimate of the scene: S ̃≈ H -1 D . Many standard pseudo-inversion techniques such as Tikhonov regularization 100 exist in order to perform this inversion in the presence of noise. Higher reconstruction qualities are often achieved with iterative techniques such as the Generalized Minimal RESidual method (GMRES) 101 or Two-step Iterative Shrinkage/Thresholding (TwIST) 102 , at the cost of a higher computation and data storage burden. Recently, Ref. In terms of hardware cost, it is often advantageous to rely on intensity-only measurements, especially at higher frequencies or in specific applications like bistatic space-born SAR 111 : phaseless acquisition removes the need for phase synchronization between transmitter and receiver 112 , minimizes the requirements for phase stability of the local oscillator, and limits effects of calibration errors. One solution to deal with phaseless data is to apply phase-retrieval techniques More recently, various machine learning and deep learning algorithms have been applied in computational imaging All of the compressive meta-imagers covered in the previous section illuminate the scene without taking into account the ultimate purpose of the sensing procedure. In other words, the measurements are agnostic to the task. In this section, we turn our attention to "intelligent" meta-imagers which sculpt the scene illumination in accordance with the specific sensing task. The role of AI in these systems is hence not restricted to digital data processing but actively influences the physical measurement process. We refer to a metaimager as "intelligent" if AI controls the configuration of its programmable meta-hardware such that the measurement process becomes task-aware and thus purposefully nonisometric. We thereby witness how the physical world of metamaterial engineering and the digital world of AI merge in the context of imaging and sensing. In related fields, "self-adaptive" intelligent metasurfaces have recently been studied for dynamic beam steering To begin, we cover the autonomous identification and analysis of a region-of-interest (ROI) within the scene. Next, we analyze the flow of information through the sensing pipeline and highlight the fundamental difference between compressive and intelligent meta-imagers: the latter discriminate between task-relevant and task-irrelevant information already during the measurement process. In other words, while compressive meta-imagers seek an isometric projection to faithfully compress all scene information, intelligent metaimagers process the scene information on the physical layer with respect to the specific task by purposefully distorting the distances between points in a non-isometric projection. Then, we detail how the underlying "learned sensing" strategy can be implemented in practice by covering two recent implementations from the literature. In advanced EM imaging and sensing tasks it is oftentimes helpful to identify the region of interest (ROI) within a very large scene (compared to the wavelength). On the one hand, the analysis can therefore be restricted to the ROI as opposed to the entire scene. In Ref. On the other hand, ROI identification can also be important to enable subsequent illumination of this area of particular interest in the scene for analysis with improved resolution or SNR. In the context of optical ghost imaging, in Refs. and subsequently chooses illumination patterns to analyze the ROI with higher resolution. In these examples, ROI identification and illumination pattern synthesis are performed analytically without resorting to AI tools and the ultimate goal is image reconstruction rather than answering a specific sensing task. In the context of microwave meta-imaging, in Ref. forth, a third neural network interprets the measured data from this second series of measurements, for instance, to infer details about the displayed hand gesture. In this complex sequence of sensing tasks, illustrated in Figure Another important feature in Ref. To prepare the ground for the concept of intelligent computational meta-imaging, we start by retaking the sensing pipeline from Figure and skip the image reconstruction step, as sketched in Figure A generic intelligent sensing pipeline, as seen in Figure A related idea has been well understood in the signal processing community for more than two decades. A common problem there is robust face recognition based on a digital photographic image despite variations in lighting and facial expression. To that end, the image is linearly projected into a lower-dimensional subspace. One possible projection is based on PCA: such a PCA-based projection reduces the dimensionality almost without distorting the relative distance between points, implying that unwanted variations due to lighting and facial expressions are retained. PCA projections maximize the total scatter across the entire dataset because they are unaware of which class different examples belong to. Therefore, while being optimal for data compression, PCA patterns are not optimal for discrimination between classes as needed for inference. Alternatively, the projections can be based on a Fisher's linear discriminant analysis (LDA) 144 which maximizes the distance between points belonging to different classes while minimizing the distance between points belonging to the same classes More recently, such task-specific projections have been implemented physically in optics using, for instance, digital micromirror devices, to illuminate the scene Similar approaches were subsequently studied in many works in the optical domain In general, in all these works there is no guarantee that the identified optimized physical layer is globally optimal, as in most optimization problems. However, experience with EM intelligent meta-imagers Some ideas to get closer to the global optimum have been explored in the context of nanophotonic inverse design 171 . Provably optimal coherent illumination patterns have, to date, only been identified for (i) binary decision problems 172 , or (ii) precisely estimating small (perturbative) variations in the value of one continuous parameter 173 . In the former case, it is clear from linear algebra that the optimal wavefront to discriminate between two system configurations is the first eigenstate of (ΔT) † (ΔT) , where ΔT is the difference between the transmission matrices for the two configurations to be distinguished and † denotes the conjugate transpose. In the latter case, the same approach is applied in the limit of small perturbations of one parameter θ around some fixed value θ ̅ , such that illumination with the first eigenstate of (∂ θ T) † (∂ θ T) maximizes the impact of changes in θ on the output field, as long as θ remains in the vicinity of θ ̅ . Interestingly, these operator-based approaches are valid irrespective of whether the scene is in free space or embedded in a complex scattering environment; however, whether it is possible to scale up such operator-based approaches to non-perturbative variations of many parameters remains an open question. and other fixed scatterers. The information flow then seamlessly continues on the digital layer, where the information scatters through programmable digital nodes until the final layer outputs an answer to the specific task. The hybrid end-to-end pipeline thus contains both physical and digital programmable weights that can be trained jointly. In terms of information flow, the entire pipeline can be understood as an approximation of the identify function, as seen in Figure The use of a single end-to-end pipeline implies that the physical weights are programmed in a way that considers not only a priori knowledge about the scene as in principle scene components (subsection 2.2.4) but additionally a priori knowledge about the task and potential measurement constraints. This is yet another way to understand why learned patterns outperform compressive patterns (pseudo-random, orthogonal, principal scene components), in line with the previous argument in terms of eliminating irrelevant information already during the measurement process through purposefully non-isometric projections. Wave propagation on the physical layer thus performs task-specific analog signal processing in the case of intelligent meta-imagers: relevant information is highlighted and compressed. In contrast, compressive meta-imagers merely compress all information without performing any selection of salient features. The use of learned illumination patterns does not imply any additional overhead during runtime because, similarly to all compressive illumination techniques, a fixed series of patterns is used that is determined before runtime. Similarly to the use of orthogonal patterns and principle scene components, the use of learned patterns requires a one-off preparatory step before runtime to determine these patterns. Learning an intelligent fixed sequence of illumination patterns requires the availability of sufficient labelled training data; note that identifying a series of principle scene components also requires training data albeit there is no need for labels. The need for labelled training data arises whenever AI is used, be it only for data interpretation based on compressive measurements as in Refs. To illustrate how the concept of intelligent meta-imaging can be implemented in practice, we now closely look at the two existing examples from the literature Both implementations of learned-sensing intelligent meta-imagers achieved remarkable latency improvements compared to the compressive sensing approaches from section 2. In particular, Ref. Model. -The first step toward assembling a learned-sensing pipeline, as seen in Figure In other cases, however, an analytical description of the forward model may be too cumbersome, non-differentiable or unfeasible to obtain. An example of the latter would be hardware such as the 3D leaky programmable chaotic cavities 71 from Figure Architecture. -The use of convolutional architectures is very popular Data. -The next step is to accumulate enough data to train the end-toend hybrid neural network seen in Figure For supervised learning, usually a reasonably large number of labelled examples is required. In our case, this corresponds to pairs of a scene f sc (X) and its corresponding label X. For instance, if we are interested in classifying hand gestures, f sc (X) would be a map of scene reflectivity and X would identify the corresponding hand gesture. The approach taken by Refs. Constraints. -Finally, it is time to jointly train the physical and digital weights. Many efficient algorithms for error backpropagation The so-called "temperature parameter" trick used in Ref. (ii) The so-called randomized simultaneous perturbation stochastic approximation (r-SPSA) algorithm used in Ref. (iii) A further possibility is the use of projected gradient descent 190 which treats the physical weights as continuous but projects them onto the allowed discrete values after every kth iteration. Noise. -The literature on meta-imaging usually tacitly assumes operation in the high-SNR regime where the impact of detector noise is negligible. Whereas the compressive patterns from section 2 are determined irrespective of measurement constraints, learned patterns are expected to vary with SNR. Specifically, in the very low SNR regime, one may expect different learned patterns that, for instance, highlight the subset of salient features that can be measured with a higher signal strength than others. Applications of intelligent meta-imagers in the low-SNR regime have to date not been explored but may be relevant to space applications with low photon counts 191 as well as to indoor applications recycling weak stray ambient WiFi waves (e.g., Ref. must be one of two, and it would be more efficient to then use scene illuminations that discriminate specifically between the remaining two candidates. In fact, the number of measurements itself would become flexible and the cognitive meta-imager would decide itself at what point it has collected enough information to answer the specific task with high accuracy. Incidentally, this approach is chosen by nature, for instance, in the way in which humans selectively focus their visual attention on different parts of the visual space in subsequent glimpses, and has inspired reinforcement learning methods in computer vision The conditions under which the cognitive meta-imaging framework discussed in this subsection may outperform the learned meta-imaging paradigm (Section 3) remain to be determined in future work. Cognitive meta-imaging involves feedback during runtime which implies additional overhead that could reduce or eliminate potential advantages. In contrast, the learned meta-imaging paradigm from Section 3 does not involve any additional overhead during runtime because it uses a fixed sequence of illumination patterns that were learned for the specific task beforehand in a one-off preparatory step. ICASSP 9284 (IEEE, 2020). Reverberation-Coded Apertures. Besides latency, another roadblock for current EM meta-imager applications is resolution: the wavelength of WiFi waves, for instance, is comparable to the size of a human hand whose gesture may have to be determined based on recycled WiFi waves (as in Ref. While the scene is outside of a conventional coded aperture that relies on the spectral or configurational diversity of a leaky chaotic cavity, in an RCA the scene is inside the cavity -see Figure In this spirit, the results from Ref. 212 can be understood as the successful reconstruction using a spectrally-diverse RCA of random 2D images whose smallest feature size is a sixth of the wavelength; these images were encoded into the configuration of a programmable metasurface in Ref. Looking forward, an open question is whether self-oscillatory wave fields 213 outperform linear ones for sensing with RCAs. A further challenge is the generation of sufficient training data for the neural network. Because the complicated irregular geometry of a chaotic cavity is unsuitable for simulation, a promising way forward appears to be an electronically reconfigurable test scene to rapidly acquire many examples, as in Ref. Finally, configuration-diverse RCAs as in Ref. We have previously established in section 3 that an intelligent meta-imager performs task-specific analog signal processing "over-the-air" during the measurement process. This naturally leads to the following question: Could the entire sensing pipeline, including the digital part seen in Figure Our vision of all-analog sensing pipelines hence consists in coupling the intelligent data acquisition discussed in section 3 with analog (as opposed to digital) data processing. In the context of computational meta-imaging, an analog wave processor should satisfy the following criteria to constitute a candidate technology that may replace the current digital layers seen in Figure 1. Programmability: Being able to tune the operation performed by the analog processor is essential for (i) switching dynamically between functionalities, e.g., when the meta-imager is to be deployed for a different task, (ii) adapting to environmental changes, e.g., to update the ANN in response to changes in the scene (appearance of parasitic scatterers) or measurement hardware (failure of a programmable meta-atom), and (iii) transfer learning, e.g., when the ANN is coarsely trained with synthetic data and then fine-tuned in situ. 2. Non-Linearity: Non-linear activation functions are a crucial ingredient of ANNs that enables them to tackle highly complex sensing tasks that cannot be solved with linear processing. The analog wave processor should be easy to integrate into a realistic sensing scenario; specifically, it should not require the addition of excessively bulky components. In the following, we summarize the four leading strategies in the recent context of analog metamaterial wave processors that partially meet the above requirements. On an abstract level, these four different approaches, illustrated in the four rows of Figure The first examples of metamaterial wave processors were carefully designed static metamaterial blocks with a desired linear transfer function Mesh. -Linear programmable transformations have recently successfully been implemented in guided optics using meshes of programmable Mach-Zehnder interferometers However, such microwave waveguide meshes remain to date quite bulky. Layers. -Wave propagation through a series of carefully fabricated diffractive layers, often referred to as "diffractive deep neural network", was recently shown to enable the implementation of a desired linear transformation in the terahertz domain While the compatibility of the concept with CMOS technology for operation at nearinfrared frequencies has been demonstrated for static linear systems Most recent works on cascaded diffractive layers can in fact be understood as allanalog sensing pipelines. However, they use task-agnostic instead of intelligent scene illumination, rely on bulky setups and their processing is to date limited to a linear (and in most cases static) projection. Nonetheless, linear processing is sufficient for "simple" System. -An electrically large irregularly shaped scattering enclosure randomly scrambles incident waves. However, equipped with programmable meta-atoms, its scattering properties can be judiciously tuned such that it performs a programmable linear transformation However, on the one hand, integrability can be accomplished by utilizing flat quasi-2D programmable chaotic cavities thereby endowing the physical metamaterial layer with task-awareness. Intelligent programmable meta-atoms thereby simultaneously sort and compress scene information, that is, they perform task-specific analog signal processing "over-the-air". In section 4, we looked forward to the next three major developments that we expect in the field: first, the introduction of cognitive meta-imagers that optimize their settings themselves on-the-fly; second, the integration of the deployment environment's intrinsic scattering and reverberation to achieve remote deeply sub-wavelength resolution; third, the replacement of the currently digital layers with analog metamaterial wave processors that are programmable, non-linear, integrable and operate in the native (microwave) signal domain. Another important avenue for future research relates to the fusion of intelligent meta-imaging concepts with existing wireless communication infrastructure. Thereby, the latter can be endowed with a second sensing functionality. Compared to existing wireless surveillance systems based on WiFi infrastructure where not yet available (e.g., Refs. 