Classical acoustic wave-field representations consist of volume and boundary integrals, of which the integrands contain specific combinations of Green's functions, source distributions and wave fields. Using a unified matrix-vector wave equation for different wave phenomena, these representations can be reformulated in terms of Green's matrices, source vectors and wave-field vectors. The matrix-vector formalism also allows the formulation of representations in which propagator matrices replace the Green's matrices. These propagator matrices, in turn, can be expressed in terms of Marchenko-type focusing functions. An advantage of the representations with propagator matrices and focusing functions is that the boundary integrals in these representations are limited to a single open boundary. This makes these representations a suitable basis for developing advanced inverse scattering, imaging and monitoring methods for wave fields acquired on a single boundary. (a) x 3,0 = 0 m The aim of this paper is to give a systematic treatment of different types of wave-field representation (with Green's functions, propagator matrices and Marchenko-type focusing functions), to discuss their mutual relations, and indicate some new applications. • Representations with Green's functions. A Green's function is the response of a medium to an impulsive point source. It is named after George Green, who, in a privately published essay • Representations with propagator matrices. In elastodynamic wave theory, a matrix formalism has been introduced to describe the propagation of waves in laterally invariant layered media • Representations with Marchenko-type focusing functions. Building on a 1D acoustic autofocusing method, it has been shown that the wave field inside a laterally invariant layered medium can be retrieved with the Marchenko method from the single-sided reflection response at the surface of the medium The setup of this paper is as follows. In section II we briefly review the matrix-vector wave equation for laterally varying media Traditionally, a wave-field representation is obtained by replacing one of the states in a reciprocity theorem by a Green's state. In section IV we follow this approach for the matrixvector reciprocity theorems. By replacing one of the wave-field vectors by the Green's matrix (and the source vector by a unit source matrix) we obtain wave-field representations with Green's matrices. Analogous to this, in section V we replace one of the wave-field vectors in the reciprocity theorems by the propagator matrix and thus obtain wave-field representations with propagator matrices. In section VI we discuss a mixed form, obtained by replacing one of the wave-field vectors by the Green's matrix and the other by the propagator matrix. In section VII we discuss the relation between the propagator matrix and the Marchenko-type focusing functions and use this relation to derive wave-field representations with focusing functions. We end with conclusions in section VIII. We use a unified matrix-vector wave equation as the basis for the derivations in this paper. In the space-frequency domain it has the following form with Here q(x, ω) is a space-and frequency-dependent N × 1 wave-field vector, where x denotes the Cartesian coordinate vector (x 1 , x 2 , x 3 ) (with the positive x 3 -axis pointing downward) and ω the angular frequency. The N/2 × 1 sub-vectors q 1 (x, ω) and q 2 (x, ω) contain wavefield quantities, which are specified for different wave phenomena in Table stands for the differential operator ∂/∂x 3 . Matrix A(x, ω) is an N × N operator matrix; it contains the space-and frequency-dependent anisotropic medium parameters and the horizontal differential operators ∂ 1 and ∂ 2 . Definitions of this operator matrix for different wave phenomena can be found in many of the references mentioned in the introduction. N × 1 vector d(x, ω) contains the space-and frequency-dependent source functions. A comprehensive overview of the operator matrices and source vectors for the wave phenomena considered in Table For all wave phenomena considered in Table with where O and I are N/2 × N/2 zero and identity matrices. Superscript t denotes transposition (meaning that the matrix is transposed and the operators in the matrix are also transposed, with ∂ t 1 = -∂ 1 and ∂ t 2 = -∂ 2 ), * denotes complex conjugation, and † transposition and complex conjugation. In general, the medium parameters in A are complex-valued and frequency-dependent, accounting for losses. The bar above a quantity means that this quantity is defined in the adjoint medium. Hence, if A is defined in a lossy medium, then Ā is defined in an effectual medium and vice versa As a special case we consider acoustic waves in an inhomogeneous stationary medium, with complex-valued and frequency-dependent compressibility κ(x, ω) and mass density ρ kl (x, ω). The latter is defined as a tensor, to account for effective anisotropy, for example due to fine layering at the micro scale with where i is the imaginary unit and q(x, ω) and f l (x, ω) are sources in terms of volume-injection rate density and external force density, respectively. Finally, for an isotropic medium, using θ kl = ρ -1 δ kl (with ρ the scalar mass density), we obtain for the source vector and operator matrix In the space-time domain, a Green's function is the response to an impulsive point source, with the impulse defined as δ(t). The Fourier transform of δ(t) equals 1, hence, in the spacefrequency domain the Green's function is the response to a point source with unit amplitude for all frequencies. We introduce the N × N Green's matrix G(x, x A , ω) for an unbounded, arbitrary inhomogeneous, anisotropic medium as the solution of where x A = (x 1,A , x 2,A , x 3,A ) defines the position of the point source and I is an N × N identity matrix. Here I has a size different from that in Eq. ( Also for the zero matrix O we use a single notation for differently sized matrices. Similar to operator matrix A, the Green's matrix is partitioned as Equation ( This condition implies that G is outward propagating for |x - The simplest representation involving the Green's matrix is obtained when q and G reside in the same medium throughout space and both are outward propagating for |xx A | → ∞. Whereas q(x, ω) is the response to a source distribution d(x, ω) (Eq. ( where R is the set of real numbers. This representation is a special case of more general representations with Green's matrices, derived in a more formal way in section IV. Next, we discuss the 2 × 2 acoustic Green's matrix as a special case of the N × N Green's matrix. For this situation G is partitioned as Here the first superscript (p or v) refers to the observed wave-field quantity at x (acoustic pressure or vertical component of particle velocity), whereas the second superscript (f or q) refers to the source type at x A (vertical component of force or volume injection rate). The unit of a specific element of the Green's matrix is the ratio of the units of the observed wavefield quantity at x and the source quantity at For an isotropic medium, all elements can be expressed in terms of the upper-right element, as follows Here ∂ 3,A stands for differentiation with respect to the source coordinate x 3,A . Equations ( We illustrate G p,q , decomposed into plane waves, for a horizontally layered lossless isotropic medium. To this end, we first define the spatial Fourier transform of a spaceand frequency-dependent function u(x, ω) along the horizontal coordinates with s = (s 1 , s 2 ), where s 1 and s 2 are horizontal slownesses. This transform decomposes the function u(x, ω) at a given depth level x 3 into monochromatic plane-wave components. Next, we define the inverse temporal Fourier transform, per slowness value s, as where R denotes the real part and τ is the intercept time x A = (0, 0, x 3,0 ) and setting s 2 = 0 (the field is cylindrically symmetric in the considered horizontally layered isotropic medium). We thus obtain G p,q (s 1 , x 3 , x 3,0 , τ ), which is the plane-wave response (as a function of x 3 and τ ) to a source function δ(x 3x 3,0 )δ(τ ). An example horizontally layered medium is shown in Fig. The horizontal slowness s 1 is related to the propagation angle α n in layer n via sin α n = s 1 c n , hence, in layer 1 (with c 1 = 1600 m/s) the propagation angle is α 1 = 27.2 o . In the thin layer, with c 3 = 3600 m/s, we obtain sin α 3 = 1.03, meaning that α 3 is complex-valued. This implies that the wave is evanescent in this layer. Since the layer is thin, the wave tunnels through the layer and continues with a lower amplitude as a downgoing wave in the lower half-space. For a lossless medium, a homogeneous Green's function is the superposition of a Green's function and its complex conjugate (or, in the time domain, its time-reversed version). The superposition is chosen such that the source terms of the two functions cancel each other, hence, a homogeneous Green's function obeys a wave equation without a source term Here we extend this concept for the matrix-vector wave equation for a medium with losses. Let G(x, x A , ω) be again the outward propagating solution of Eq. ( Pre-and post multiplying all terms by J and subsequently using Eq. ( Subtracting the complex conjugate of all terms in this equation from the corresponding terms in Eq. ( with Since G h (x, x A , ω) obeys a wave equation without a source term, we call it the homogeneous Green's matrix. According to Eqs. ( We introduce the N × N propagator matrix W(x, x A , ω) for an arbitrary inhomogeneous anisotropic medium as the solution of the unified matrix-vector wave equation ( Similar to operator matrix A and Green's matrix G, the propagator matrix is partitioned as Equation ( where x H,A denotes the horizontal coordinates of x A , hence, x H,A = (x 1,A , x 2,A ). Since Eq. ( The simplest representation involving the propagator matrix is obtained when q and W reside in the same medium in the region between x 3,A and x 3 and both have no sources in this region. Whereas q(x, ω) obeys no boundary conditions in this region, W(x, x A , ω) collapses to Iδ(x Hx H,A ) at depth level x 3,A (Eq. ( where ∂D A is the horizontal boundary defined as 'propagates' the field vector q from depth level x 3,A to x 3 , hence the name 'propagator matrix'. This representation is a special case of more general representations with propagator matrices, derived in a more formal way in section V. When we replace q(x A , ω) by a Green's matrix G(x A , x B , ω), with x B outside the region between x 3,A and x 3 , we obtain This is the simplest relation between the Green's matrix and the propagator matrix. It is a special case of more general representations with Green's matrices and propagator matrices, derived in a more formal way in section VI A. Alternatively, we may replace G(x, x B , ω) by the homogeneous Green's matrix G h (x, x B , ω), where x B may be located anywhere, since the homogeneous Green's function has no source at x B , hence This relation will be derived in a more formal way in section VI B. Next, we discuss the 2 × 2 acoustic propagator matrix as a special case of the N × N propagator matrix. For this situation W is partitioned as The first and second superscripts refer to the wave-field quantities at x and x A , respectively (with superscript p again standing for acoustic pressure and v for the vertical component (a) x 3,0 = 0 m < l a t e x i t s h a 1 _ b a s e 6 4 = " 6 Z w 9 m s J x 3,2 = 760 m < l a t e x i t s h a 1 _ b a s e 6 4 = " 8 i X j 8 c 7 < l a t e x i t s h a 1 _ b a s e 6 4 = " q t 0 p u g z M 6 4 6 e a E j a 5 N G d w E J I of particle velocity). The unit of a specific element of the propagator matrix is the ratio of the units of the wave-field quantities at x and x A . For example, [W p,v (x, x A , ω)] = [p]/[v] = kg s -1 m -2 . For an isotropic medium, the elements can be expressed in terms of the upper-right element, as follows Equations ( We illustrate the elements W p,p and W p,v , decomposed into plane waves, for the hori- zontally layered medium of Fig. Usually the propagator matrix is considered in the frequency domain, but to facilitate the comparison with the Green's function in Fig. x 3 = x 3,0 (the horizontal green lines in these figures) the boundary conditions for these functions are W p,p (s 1 , x 3,0 , x 3,0 , τ ) = δ(τ ) and W p,v (s 1 , x 3,0 , x 3,0 , τ ) = 0, respectively (this follows from applying the transforms of Eqs. ( Following these functions along the depth coordinate, starting at x 3 = x 3,0 , we observe an acausal upgoing wave and a causal downgoing wave until we reach the first interface. Here both events split into upgoing and downgoing waves below the interface. The waves tunnel through the high-velocity layer, split again, and continue with higher amplitudes in the next layer. This illustrates that evanescent waves may lead to unstable behaviour of the propagator matrix and should be handled with care. Note that W p,p (s 1 , x 3 , x 3,0 , τ ) and W p,v (s 1 , x 3 , x 3,0 , τ ) are symmetric and asymmetric in time, respectively. This is best seen in Figs. For an arbitrary inhomogeneous anisotropic medium, the time-domain version of boundary condition (29) reads This boundary condition has a similar form as the focusing condition for the focusing functions appearing in the multidimensional Marchenko method where the vertical slowness s 3,0 is defined as with c 0 and ρ 0 being the propagation velocity and mass density of the upper half-space x 3 ≤ x 3,0 . Due to the symmetric form of W p,p and the asymmetric form of W p,v , half of the events double in amplitude and the other half of the events cancel. The result is shown in Fig. Note that, although we interpret the focusing function here in terms of upgoing and downgoing waves, it is derived from the propagator matrix (which does not rely on up/down decomposition) and the vertical slowness s 3,0 and mass density ρ 0 of the upper half-space. Moreover, the focusing function is defined in the actual medium rather than in a truncated version of the actual medium, as is usually the case for Marchenko-type focusing functions As the basis for the derivation of the general representations with Green's matrices (section IV), propagator matrices (section V), or a combination thereof (section VI), we introduce unified matrix-vector wave-field reciprocity theorems. In general, a wave-field reciprocity theorem interrelates two wave states (sources, wave fields and medium parameters) in the same spatial domain electromagnetic which extends the theory of propagation invariants x A < l a t e x i t s h a 1 _ b a s e 6 4 = " k P A z m 5 q u q J b b 3 L h a / k z q I M 4 I j 7 c = " theorems can be derived and Here D denotes a domain enclosed by two infinite horizontal boundaries ∂D 0 and ∂D M at depth levels x 3,0 and x 3,M with outward pointing normals n 3 = -1 and n 3 = 1, respectively, see Fig. A special case is obtained when the sources, wave fields and medium parameters are identical in both states. We may then drop the subscripts A and B and Eq. ( Since 1 4 q † Kq = 1 4 (q † 1 q 2 + q † 2 q 1 ) = j (see Eq. ( A wave-field representation is obtained by replacing one of the states in a reciprocity theorem by a Green's state Before we derive wave-field representations, we first derive a symmetry property of the Green's matrix. To this end, we replace both wave-field vectors q A and q B in reciprocity theorem (40) by Green's matrices G(x, x A , ω) and G(x, x B , ω), respectively. Accordingly, we replace the source vectors d A and d B by Iδ(xx A ) and Iδ(xx B ), respectively, with x A and x B denoting the source positions, see Figure Green's matrices are defined in the same medium, hence, A A = A B . This implies that the second integral on the right-hand side of Eq. ( The Green's matrix on the left-hand side is the response to a source at x A , observed by a receiver at x B . Similarly, the Green's matrix on the right-hand side is the response to a source at x B , observed by a receiver at x A . Hence, Eq. ( Using this relation and JN = -NJ, we find for the homogeneous Green's matrix defined in Eq. ( B. Representations of the convolution type with the Green's matrix We derive a representation of the convolution type for the actual wave-field vector q(x, ω), emitted by the actual source distribution d(x, ω) in the actual medium; the operator matrix in the actual medium is defined as A(x, ω). We let state B in reciprocity theorem (40) be this actual state, hence, we drop subscript B from q B , d B and A B . For state A we choose the Green's state. Hence, we replace q A (x, ω) in reciprocity theorem where χ D (x) is the characteristic function for domain D, defined as Using the symmetry property of the Green's matrix, formulated by Eq. ( This is the unified wave-field representation of the convolution type with the Green's matrix. The left-hand side is the wave-field vector q at a specific point x A , multiplied with the characteristic function. According to the right-hand side, this field consists of a contribution from the source distribution in D (the first integral), a contribution from the wave field on the boundary of D (the second integral), and a contribution caused by the contrasts between the operator matrices in the Green's and the actual state (the third integral). Note that Eq. ( Next we consider another special case. We choose again the same medium parameters in both states, but this time we replace D by the entire half-space below ∂D 0 , which we choose to be source-free in the actual state. Assuming x A lies in the lower half-space, we thus obtain Using Eqs. ( which is the well-known acoustic Kirchhoff-Helmholtz integral. Hence, the representation of Eq. ( Note that the Green's matrix G(x A , x, ω) depends on the medium parameters of the entire half-space below ∂D 0 . In section V B we derive a relation similar to Eq. ( Finally, we replace q(x, ω) by G(x, x B , ω) in Eq. ( This expression shows that the Green's matrix can be composed from a cascade of Green's matrices, assuming a specific order of the depth levels at which the Green's sources and receivers are situated. In section V B we derive a similar relation for propagator matrices, for an arbitrary order of depth levels. Equation ( We derive a representation of the correlation type for the actual wave-field vector q(x, ω), emitted by the actual source distribution d(x, ω) in the actual medium. Similar as in section IV B, we let state B be this actual state, and state A the Green's state. Hence, making the same substitutions as in section IV B, this time in reciprocity theorem (41), using Eq. ( and This is the unified wave-field representation of the correlation type with the Green's matrix. As a special case we derive a representation for the homogeneous Green's matrix G h . To this end, for state B we choose the Green's matrix in the actual medium, hence, we replace q(x, ω) by G(x, x B , ω), and d(x, ω) by Iδ(x-x B ). For state A we replace the Green's matrix by that in the adjoint of the actual medium, hence, we replace G(x A , x, ω) by Ḡ(x A , x, ω), and A A by Ā. With this choice the contrast operator ĀA -A = Ā -A vanishes. Making these substitutions in Eq. ( This is the unified homogeneous Green's matrix representation. It finds applications in optical, acoustic and seismic holography Finally, using Eqs. ( with according to Eqs. ( We follow a similar approach as in section IV to derive wave-field representations. However, this time we replace one of the states in the reciprocity theorems by a propagator state (instead of a Green's state). Hence, this leads to wave-field representations with propagator matrices. We start with deriving symmetry properties of the propagator matrix. To this end, we replace both wave-field vectors q A and q B in reciprocity theorem (40) by propagator matrices W(x, x A , ω) and W(x, x B , ω), respectively. We define horizontal boundaries ∂D A and ∂D B , containing the points x A and x B , respectively, see Fig. Note that boundary condition (29) implies W(x, x A , ω) = Iδ(x Hx H,A ) for x at ∂D A and W(x, x B , ω) = Iδ(x Hx H,B ) for x at ∂D B . The propagators obey wave equation We derive a representation of the convolution type for the actual wave-field vector q(x, ω), emitted by the actual source distribution d(x, ω) in the actual medium; the operator matrix in the actual medium is defined as A(x, ω). We let state B in reciprocity theorem The domain enclosed by this boundary is called D A , see Fig. This is the unified wave-field representation of the convolution type with the propagator matrix. Note the analogy with the representation of the convolution type with the Green's matrix, Eq. ( We consider a special case by choosing the same medium parameters in D A in both states, and choosing D A to be source-free. We thus obtain This is the special case that was already presented in Eq. ( Note the analogy of Eq. ( Next, we consider again Eq. ( This expression shows that the propagator matrix can be composed from a cascade of propagator matrices Finally, we replace x B in Eq. ( This equation defines W(x A , x, ω) as the inverse of W(x, x A , ω) We aim to derive a representation of the correlation type for the actual wave-field vector q(x, ω), emitted by the actual source distribution d(x, ω) in the actual medium. Similar as in section V B, we let state B be this actual state. For state A we choose the adjoint propagator state. Hence, we replace q A (x, ω), A A (x, ω) and d A (x, ω) by W(x, x A , ω), ĀA (x, ω) and O, respectively. Furthermore, we replace ∂D 0 ∪ ∂D M again by ∂D 0 ∪ ∂D A . Applying these substitutions in reciprocity theorem (41), using boundary condition We follow a similar approach as in sections IV and V to derive wave-field representations. However, this time we replace one of the states in the reciprocity theorem of the convolution type by a Green's state and the other by a propagator state. This leads to wave-field representations with Green's matrices and propagator matrices. A. Single-sided Green's matrix representation In reciprocity theorem where χ D A (x) is the characteristic function for domain D A , defined similarly as χ D (x) in equation Finally, when x B (the position of the source of the Green's function) lies outside D A (i.e., above ∂D 0 or below ∂D A ), then the latter expression simplifies to This is a single-sided representation of the Green's matrix that uses the propagator matrix. This special case was already presented in Eq. ( Note the analogy of Eq. ( We follow the same procedure as in section VI A, except in state B we choose the homogeneous Green's function, hence, we replace q B (x, ω) and d B (x, ω) in reciprocity theorem When G h and W are defined in the same medium, this representation simplifies to This is a single-sided representation of the homogeneous Green's matrix that uses the propagator matrix. This special case was already presented in Eq. ( Equation ( Finally, using Eqs. ( with G p,q h (x A , x B , ω) defined in Eq. ( Redatuming is the process of moving sources and/or receivers from the acquisition boundary to positions inside the medium Let x S and x R denote source and receiver coordinates, respectively, at the acquisition boundary ∂D 0 . Then the Green's matrix G(x R , x S , ω) represents the medium's response, measured with sources and receivers at the surface, see Fig. First we discuss a method for source redatuming. We rename some variables in Eq. ( ) and transpose all matrices, which gives ary to a virtual-source position x B inside the medium, see Fig. Next, we discuss receiver redatuming. We replace x by x R in Eq. ( This expression describes redatuming of the receivers from x R at the acquisition boundary to a virtual-receiver position x A inside the medium, see Fig. Combining Eq. ( This expression redatums the actual sources and receivers from the acquisition boundary ∂D 0 to virtual sources and receivers inside the medium. Since it takes multiple scattering into account, it generalizes classical source and receiver redatuming Using these definitions and Parseval's theorem, we rewrite Eq. ( with boundary condition In the upper half-space we relate the wave-field vector q to downgoing and upgoing wave-field vectors p+ and p-, respectively, via with In Appendix A we give explicit expressions for D± 1 for the acoustic, electromagnetic and elastodynamic situation. Substitution of Eq. ( with Ỹ1 (x A , s, x 3,0 , ω) = W(x A , s, x 3,0 , ω) D1 (s). Let F1 (x A , s, x 3,0 , ω) be the upper-right N/2 × N/2 matrix of block matrix Ỹ1 (x A , s, x 3,0 , ω). According to Eqs. ( This is a generalization of the definition of the acoustic focusing function for a horizontally layered medium, defined in Eq. for x at ∂D 0 . Hence, F 1 (x A , x, t) is indeed a focusing function (with x A being a variable and x being the focal point at ∂D 0 ). To analyse the upper-left N/2 × N/2 matrix of block matrix Ỹ1 (x A , s, x 3,0 , ω), we first establish some symmetry properties. The symmetry of W follows from the Fourier transform of Eq. ( For the sub-matrices of W this implies Wαβ (x A , s, x 3,0 , ω) = J αα W * αβ (x A , -s, x 3,0 , ω)J ββ When we ignore evanescent waves at and above ∂D 0 , then D± 1 (s) is real-valued, see Appendix A. Hence, given that F1 (x A , s, x 3,0 , ω) is the upper-right N/2 × N/2 matrix of Ỹ1 (x A , s, x 3,0 , ω), we derive from Eqs. ( Using this in Eq. ( F * 1 (x A , -s, x 3,0 , ω)q + 1 (s, x 3,0 , ω)d 2 s + ω 2 4π 2 R 2 F1 (x A , s, x 3,0 , ω)q - 1 (s, x 3,0 , ω)d 2 s. Applying Parseval's theorem again, we obtain This relation has previously been derived via another route for the situations of acoustic waves (q 1 = p) and elastodynamic waves (q 1 = v) Next, we derive a representation similar to Eq. (90) for q 2 (x A , ω). To this end, we define the downgoing and upgoing parts of q2 as with Substitution of Eq. (92) into Eq. ( with Ỹ2 (x A , s, x 3,0 , ω) = W(x A , s, x 3,0 , ω) D2 (s). (95) Let F2 (x A , s, x 3,0 , ω) be the lower-right N/2 × N/2 matrix of block-matrix Ỹ2 (x A , s, x 3,0 , ω). According to Eqs. ( F2 is a focusing function, with similar focusing properties as F1 , expressed in equations To analyse the lower-left N/2 × N/2 matrix of block matrix Ỹ2 (x A , s, x 3,0 , ω), we first Once Ỹ1 is known, the propagator matrix W follows from inverting Eq. ( (101) Equations ( For the acoustic situation, using Eq. (A16), Eqs. ( Transforming this to the space-frequency domain, replacing s 3,0 by 1 ω H 1 (where H 1 is the square-root of the Helmholtz operator ω 2 /c 2 0 + ∂ α ∂ α in the homogeneous upper half-space First we derive the properties of the downgoing part of G 12 (x, x S , ω) for x at ∂D 0 . To this end, consider the inverse of Eq. ( for x 3 ≤ x 3,0 , with The upper-right N/2 × N/2 matrix ( ∆1 ) -1 transforms q2 into a downgoing field vector q+ 1 . In a similar way, this matrix transforms a unit d 2 -type source in a homogeneous half-space into the downgoing part of the Green's matrix G12 just below this source, according to lim Explicit expressions for ( ∆1 ) -1 are given in Appendix A. In Eq. (110) the source is located at (0, x 3,S ). Next, we consider G 12 (x, x S , ω) for a laterally shifted source position (x H,S , x 3,S ). Applying a spatial Fourier transform along the horizontal source coordinate x H,S , using Eq. ( for x at ∂D 0 . Substituting q 2 (x A , ω) = Γ 22 (x A , x S , ω) and q ± 2 (x, ω) = Γ ± 22 (x, x S , ω) into Eq. (99), using Eqs. ( for x 3,A ≥ x 3,0 . This is the second Marchenko-type representation. For the acoustic case, using Eqs. (A16) and (A17), Eqs. ( = -2 iωρ 0 ∂ 3,S Gp,q (x, s, x 3,S , ω) Γ22 (x, s, x 3,S , ω) = 2 Gv,q (x, s, x 3,S , ω), or, in the space-frequency domain (using Eq. ( Γ 22 (x, x S , ω) = 2G v,q (x, x S , ω). (127) known, they can be used to construct the propagator matrix. Subsequently, the propagator matrix can be used in the representations to obtain the wave field inside the medium which, in turn, can be used for example for imaging or monitoring. Unlike earlier imaging methods that use the propagator matrix, this is a data-driven approach (since the propagator matrix is retrieved from the reflection response) and hence it does not require a detailed model of the medium.