At the lowest temperatures achieved in dilution refrigerators, ruthenium oxide resistance thermometers often saturate and therefore lose their sensitivity. In an effort to extend the range of such temperature sensors, we built a thermometer which maintains sensitivity to 5 mK. A key component of this thermometer is an in situ radio frequency filter which is based on a modern rf absorption material. We show that the use of such a filter is only effective when it is encased in the same rf-tight enclosure as the ruthenium oxide sensor. Our design delivers an attenuation level that is necessary to mitigate the effects of parasitic heating of a fraction of pW present in our circuit. Furthermore, we show that the likely origin of this parasitic heating is the black body radiation present within the experimental space of the refrigerator. We found that the equilibration time of the thermometer increases rapidly as the temperature is lowered; below 5 mK this thermometer becomes impractical because of the prohibitively long equilibration times. Dilution refrigerators are widely used in the study of condensed matter, nanoelectronics, and quantum technologies. Modern instruments often cool to temperatures close to 5 mK. There is thus a need to routinely measure such low temperatures. Among the large variety of thermometers available for dilution refrigerators Resistive RuO 2 thermometers, however, are not without their own limitations. In many cases they become unusable typically below about 20 mK Parasitic rf heating plaguing RuO 2 thermometry at low temperatures is also recognized to have detrimental effect in a variety of electronic systems. Examples are single electron systems realized with metallic and semiconductor based quantum dots In this report we set out to fabricate a RuO 2 resistance thermometer based on a commercial chip that is capable of reaching temperatures as low as 5 mK. A key component of this thermometer is an in situ silver epoxy rf filter that takes advantage of several elements of modern rf filtering technology. Direct performance comparisons are made with unshielded RuO 2 resistance thermometers which are shown to saturate with temperature below 20 mK. This allows us to estimate the parasitic rf heating power picked up by our circuitry as well as determine the effective temperature of the black body radiation responsible for such heating. Lastly, we discuss the practicality of our newly designed RuO 2 resistance thermometer by analyzing how the thermal equilibration time scales with temperature. In this study we use several commonly available RuO 2 chips A more elaborately designed thermometer Th-4 is shown in Fig. We describe here the components and the assembly process for Th-4. As shown in Fig. Our measurement setup has two rf filters: the room temperature and the tail filter. The tail filter, shown in Fig. The four thermometers were calibrated against a carbon thermometer described in Ref. Calibration curves for RuO2 thermometers Th-1, Th-2, and Th-3 In Fig. FIG. Low temperature performance of Th-4 with an in situ filter In Fig. Th-3 and Th-4. These thermometers are built using RuO2 chips of identical size and nominal resistance, but Th-4 has an in situ rf filter and is sealed in an rf-tight enclosure. Dashed lines are guides for the eye. The calbration curve of Th-3 saturates below about 20 mK. In stark contrast, Th-4 maintains its sensitivity to the lowest temperatures. In the most general case, the power dissipated through a RuO 2 chip is P = I 2 R + P paras . Here I is the current excitation, I 2 R the Joule heating of this excitation, and P paras the parasitic rf heating. However, the in situ filter used in the construction of Th-4 effectively dissipates the parasitic rf heating. Thus for Th-4 the parasitic rf heating is assumed to be negligible P paras ≈ 0. The non-saturating resistance of Th-4 at the lowest temperatures, shown in Fig. The self-heating measurement also allows us to char- The mixing chamber during this measurement was held at T = 6.7 mK. The temperature reading of this thermometer starts to rise at an excitation level of about 1 fW. The dashed line is P ∝ T 4 . acterize the rf environment of the thermometers. In contrast to Th-4, Th-3 lacks the in situ rf filter and therefore, is not thermalized to the base temperature due to parasitic rf heating. We recall that the resistance of Th-3 saturates near T = 20 mK. According to the self-heating data shown in Fig. Since Th-4 thermalizes to 5 mK, its in situ filter is effective in attenuating the 0.45 pW parasitic power to below 1 fW. We therefore estimate the attenuation level required for the in situ filter in order to effectively cool our RuO 2 chip to 5 mK to be ≈ 10 log 0.45 pW/1 fW= 27 dB, or nearly a factor of 1000. Such a figure is reasonable since a filter built of similar elements had an attenuation exceeding this value in the 2 MHz to 10 GHz frequency band In order to identify the origin of the 0.45 pW parasitic power the thermometer Th-3 experiences, it is important to recognize that rf radiation may couple to this thermometer in two distinct ways. First, rf heating may originate from outside the dilution refrigerator; rf waves from our lab may travel along the measurement wires toward the RuO 2 chip. Second, rf heating may originate from inside the dilution refrigerator, as a black body radiation present in the environment of the RuO 2 chip. As seen in Fig. While the improved low temperature resistive behavior of Th-4 is evident when compared against a typical RuO 2 thermometer, such as Th-3, there remains another critical aspect for practicality purposes: the time required for the thermometer to equilibrate. It is known that the thermal response of any type of resistive thermometer is strongly temperature dependent in the millikelvin temperature range. We quantify trends in the equilibration time by analyzing the transient behavior after injecting additional power into the thermometer. A representative response is shown in Fig. To summarize, we designed a RuO 2 thick film resistor based thermometer which follows the phonon bath tem-perature down to 5 mK. We achieved such a thermalization by attenuating parasitic radio frequency waves traveling along the measurement wires using an in situ silver epoxy filter and by using an rf-tight enclosure of the RuO 2 chip, the in situ filter, and wiring connecting these elements. Furthermore, we think that the parasitic radio frequency heating originated not from the room temperature parts of our circuit but instead from the black body radiation present at the location of the thermometer. Thus, our findings highlight that rf shielding within the experimental space of both the electrical components and measurement wires is likely necessary for many devices to reach low millikelvin temperatures and below. From selfheating curves we found that the thermometer's in situ rf filter effectively dissipates the 0.45 pW of radio frequency heating power. Lastly, analysis of the self-heating transient behavior shows an undesirable rapid increase in the equilibration times with decreasing temperature. Thus, the striking improvement in sensitivity comes at a cost of increased thermal response times, seriously limiting the use of the thermometer below 5 mK.