Indium selenide compounds are promising materials for energy conversion, spintronic applications, and chemical sensing. However, it is difficult to grow stoichiometric indium selenide crystals due to the high equilibrium selenium vapor pressure and the complicated phase equilibrium system of indium selenide compounds. In this paper, we apply a novel and convenient crystal growth method, in which the saturated solution is grown by the application of a selenium vapor. In this method, selenium vapor at a pressure higher than the saturated vapor pressure is applied to molten indium, such that the selenium continuously dissolves into the indium solution until the solubility at the growth temperature is reached; then a slow cooling process results in crystallization. The selenium dose is matched to its solubility so that indium selenide compounds can be selectively grown just by controlling the temperature without the need to consider the chemical ratio in the solution. The pressure of the vapor is controlled during the whole growth process so that any deviation from a stoichiometric composition in the crystal can be controlled. Both InSe and In2Se3 were successfully grown using this method, and we have investigated the growth mechanism and found the growth window for each compound. This study presents a novel and convenient approach to fabricating transitional metal chalcogenides without deficiencies in the chalcogen element. Transition-metal monochalcogenide (TMM) materials have been attracting increasing attention owing to their favorable properties Up to now, indium selenide crystals have been usually prepared by the Bridgman technique Here, we introduce an improved method based on gradual cooling, in which the TMM crystals are grown from a supersaturated solution formed by controlling the pressure of the chalcogen vapor. This method has the following advantages compared with the existing technique. Firstly, the pressure of the chalcogen vapor is controlled during growth thus maintaining the stoichiometry. Secondly, the growth rate is relatively high compared with that in the previous study We conducted crystal growth experiments using the different growth conditions listed in Table . 1. Let us take the successful growth of InSe and In2Se3 (conditions I and II) as examples to explain the growth procedure. A schematic diagram of the growth equipment is shown in Fig. The gap between the quartz rod and the ampoule is sufficiently narrow for the pressure of the selenium vapor at the crucible (P G ) to be described by the equation given by Nishizawa The crystal growth procedure is shown in Fig. Firstly, the temperature of the crucible is rapidly raised to a temperature higher than the growth temperature of InSe (Step I). Then the temperature is maintained for 10 hours to homogenize the solution (step II). Then we increase T V to apply the specified pressure of the selenium vapor and this is maintained for 12 hours; the selenium vapor dissolves into the In solution until the solution becomes saturated at T G if the pressure of the selenium vapor is higher than the equilibrium vapor pressure of the saturated solution at T G (Step III). Finally, the crucible is gradually cooled at a rate of 1 °C/hour as shown in the inset of Fig. Crystal growth was conducted at many different pressures and temperatures, and these are listed in Table . 1. The most promising conditions for the growth of InSe and In2Se3 are conditions I and II. In Fig. The crystal phases of the as-grown crystals were confirmed by x-ray diffraction (XRD) using a that the material is single crystal In2Se3 from the bottom up to 1 cm from the bottom. As shown in Fig. The backscattered Raman spectra were taken using an NRS-5100 (JASCO Corp.) to confirm the polytypes of the as-grown samples. With excitation at 532 nm, the Raman spectra of samples grown under conditions I and II are shown in Fig. Moreover, the longitudinal optical phonon A1(LO) mode at 244 cm -1 Because of the high vapor pressure of selenium, it is considered that Bridgman-grown indium selenide compounds are always non-stoichiometric. Here we measured the stoichiometry of the as-grown samples using inductive coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS, Agilent 8800, Agilent Technologies, Ltd.). The results are shown in Table To explain these results, we propose a possible model in which the concentration of the supersaturated solution and the equilibrium vapor pressure are considered. The relationship between the concentration and the saturated vapor pressure can be described by Henry's law Here, P Se and c Se are the saturated vapor pressure and the concentration of Se, respectively. P Se at a concentration of 60 at% is given by previously published results log P Se ( Torr, c Se = 60 at%) = (8.056 ± 0.96) -4949 ± 170 T S (K) The crystal growth conditions from I to IX are marked in the figure. P G > P Se is satisfied with conditions I, II, and III, so samples with good crystallinity were obtained using these growth conditions. In contrast, with growth conditions IV, V, and IX, crystallization did not occur. Note that the solution gradually cools down from the growth temperature over a period of 40 hours. The pressure of the selenium vapor may become larger than the vapor pressure at a specific temperature during cooling, so even when the pressure of the selenium vapor was smaller than P Se , as with growth conditions VI and VIII, crystals were successfully grown. However, because there was insufficient time for the selenium to dissolve into the solution, the as-grown crystals were selenium deficient. On the other hand, P Se is a linear approximation, so with growth condition III, it is considered the chemical ratio of the as-grown crystal differs slightly from stoichiometric InSe. We have divided Fig. In this study, we introduced a novel crystal growth method for chalcogenide compounds, in which a saturated solution is produced by the application of the vapor of a chalcogen element, the pressure of which is controlled during the whole growth procedure, such that the growth temperature of this method is much lower than that of melt growth. Thus, the growth of non-stoichiometric crystals can be suppressed. Also, one can prepare the target crystal just by controlling the temperature without the need to consider the chemical composition of the solution in the crucible. We have successfully grown InSe and In2Se3 using this method. Moreover, we proposed a model to explain the growth mechanism and provide the growth windows of InSe and In2Se3. This method has the potential to be extended to the crystal growth of other transition metal chalcogenide compounds and benefit the preparation of samples for research into layered transitional metal chalcogenides. 