Orientation dependent electronic properties of wurtzite zinc oxide nanorods are characterized by aloof beam electron energy-loss spectroscopy (EELS) carried out in a scanning transmission electron microscope (STEM). The two key crystal orientation differentiating transitions specific to the in-plane (13.0 eV) and out-of-plane (11.2 eV) directions with respect to the wurtzite structure are examined by first principles density-functional theory calculations. We note some degree of orientation dependence at the onset of direct band gap transition near 3.4 eV. We demonstrate that good polarization selectivity can be achieved by placing the electron probe at different locations around the specimen with increasing impact parameter while keeping the beam-specimen orientation fixed. The observed results are qualitatively elucidated in terms of the perpendicular electric fields generated by the fast electron (60 kV) used in the microscope. The fact that good polarization selectivity can be achieved by aloof beam EELS without the requirement of sample reorientation is an attractive aspect from the characterization method point of view in the STEM-EELS community. Scanning transmission electron microscope coupled electron energy-loss spectroscopy (STEM-EELS) plays an important role in the development and characterization of nanomaterials due to its high spatial resolution in both imaging and spectroscopy. In the more straightforward intersecting beam-specimen configuration where the interaction is dominated by impact scattering, high resolution STEM-EELS is able to probe local material properties such as interface states Meanwhile, in the aloof beam (non-intersecting probespecimen) configuration where the interaction is dominated by dipole scattering, the electron beam behaves as a near-field spectroscopy probe w-ZnO nanorods were synthesized via the hydrothermal route described by Cheng and Samulski The synthesized nanorods have lengths that range from 90 to 1200 nm and widths that range from 35 to 40 nm. A typical synthesized long nanorod is shown in Fig. The STEM-EELS experiments reported here were carried out in a monochromated Nion UltraSTEM operating at 60 kV. The beam convergence and EELS collection semi-angles were set at 30 and 16 mrad, respectively. The energy resolution for the spectra is 87.2 meV according to the full-width-half-maximum of the zero-loss peak. DFT calculations were performed using the Projector Augmented Wave (PAW) method as implemented in the Vienna Ab initio Simulation Package (VASP) All the DFT calculations were carried out in a four-atom hexagonal unit cell of w-ZnO (space group: P 6 3 mc). The GGA-PBEsol optimized lattice parameters are a = b = 3.236 Å, and c = 5.223 Å. which are in good agreement with the experimental data w-ZnO is a uniaxial material of hexagonal structure and it possesses two sets of dielectric properties -one associated to the in-plane direction (a and b axes) and the other associated to the out-of-plane (c axis) direction. The oxygen 2p xy (in-plane) and 2p z (outof-plane) orbitals play an important role in governing the anisotropic electronic properties of w-ZnO. Our DFT results, presented below, as well as previous studies In conjunction with the large incident beam convergence angle, the moderate EELS collection angle (β = 16 mrad) used in the present study leads to momentum integrated EELS In addition, due to the considerable momentum transfer ( q = q r + q z ) in the intersecting scattering configuration, the transitions around 11.2, 13.0, 13.5, and 14.8 eV appear as minor humps which are partly obscured by the nearby transitions and the bulk plasmon. Moreover, the 11.2 eV hump was misinterpreted as a surface plasmon in the past To explore the polarization selectivity of the aloof beam EELS while keeping the rod orientation fixed, we acquired two sets of data points -one in the vicinity of the rod tip and the other in the vicinity of the lateralmiddle position of the rod. Each set contains spectra acquired at three different impact parameters (d) of 2, 4, and 6 nm along the directions indicated by the orange and green arrows, as shown in Fig. At small impact parameter (i.e., d = 2 nm), both the 11.2 eV and 13.0 eV transitions are visible in both sets. However, as the impact parameter increases, the 11.2 eV and 13.0 eV transitions remain significant only when the electron beam is placed near the tip and lateral-middle position of the rod, respectively. Therefore, good polarization selectivity is achieved when d = 6 nm, despite the fact that the beam-parallel electric field (⊥ to the specimen c axis) is always present. Unlike in Ref. To understand the observed aloof beam EELS results, we turn our attention to the electric fields generated by the incident electron, since the material response (induced dipole field) also scales with the external perturbation magnitude. The fast electrons (60 keV) used here can be considered as a broadband electromagnetic source and Here (x, y, z) is the observation location in the lab frame, e is the elementary charge, ω is the angular frequency, d is the impact parameter, K n is the modified Bessel function of second kind with index n, R is the Lorentz factor, and c is the speed of light in vacuum. On the other hand, we would also like to point out that the induced dipole field exerts forces on the incident electrons and wraps around the nanorod, occupying a three dimensional volume as illustrated in Ref. We now focus our attention on the field distributions in the plane perpendicular to the beam direction (Eq. 1), as this component is larger than the parallel one To visualize how the resultant field becomes more 'collimated' in the plane perpendicular to the beam direction as the impact parameter increases, we define a directionality parameter ξ = Σ(E )/Σ(E ⊥ ), where Σ(E ) and Σ(E ⊥ ) are sums over a representative sampling of points within the nanorod. Figure To aid the visual comparison of the observed aloof spectra, we scale the spectra with respect to the Bessel function and frequency parts of Eq. 1 and normalize the intensity around the band gap as the dielectric functions around the gap have similar values. As shown in Fig. In order to pin down the nature of the observed optical transitions, we employ DFT calculations as detailed in the methods section. The calculated polarization-orientation dependent imaginary dielectric function 2 (ω), which contains full details of the opticaltransition matrix elements and the interband absorption processes, is in remarkable agreement with the recorded EELS spectra for both orientations, as shown in Fig. We note that the onset of the direct band gap transition near 3.4 eV, although marked using a black arrow, is technically orientation dependent due to the splitting of the O-2p states into a subset of O-2p xy and O-2p z states at the valence band maximum (see Fig. The key orientation-dependent transitions at 11.2 and 13.0 eV are identified as Zn-3d → O-2p z near Γ and Zn-3d → O-2p xy near the boundaries of the hexagonal Brillouin zone (BZ), respectively. On the other hand, orientation-independent transitions at 9.1 and 13.5 eV are identified as Zn-3d → O-2p and O-2p → Zn-3s, respectively. Our DFT calculations reveal the presence of another orientation-independent transition at 14.8 eV, which could not be distinctly observed in the recorded EELS spectra. It appears as a minor hump, primarily due to the presence of the nearby and broad surface plasmon. This transition is attributed to the electric dipole transition from occupied Zn-3d to unoccupied O-2p and oc- cupied O-2p to unoccupied {Zn-3d, Zn-3s} states. Some of the above-mentioned transitions occur at various kpoints within the hexagonal BZ and between different sets of occupied and unoccupied bands. In Figs. Finally, we note that while localized surface plasmons (LSPs) are commonly observed in metallic nanorods roughly from 15 to 17 eV. While there must be signals contributed from LSPs related to the nanorod geometry, the LSPs in the ZnO nanorod are suppressed due to its dielectric function, and the energy range where the LSPs are expected to reside does not affect the interband transition discussion presented here. While not shown here, we also performed plasmonic simulations of a 1100 by 40 nm ZnO nanorod using MNPBEM We have characterized the electronic structures of single crystal w-ZnO nanorods by both intersecting and aloof beam configurations with a focused electron beam (α = 30 mrad) and moderate collection angle (β = 16 mrad). The key anisotropic features of w-ZnO that are specific to the in-plane and out-of-plane directions were identified by DFT calculations. It was demonstrated experimentally that when keeping the beam-to-specimen orientation fixed, good polarization selectivity can only be achieved by the aloof beam configuration, not the intersecting one. We found that the good polarization selectivity brought by the aloof beam can be explained by analyzing the perpendicular component of the electric fields (Eq. 1) generated by the fast electron used in the STEM-EELS experiments. The fact that the field directionality can be tuned by varying the impact parameter can be very useful in reducing spectral complexity and characterizing anisotropic nanomaterials such as the w-ZnO nanorods presented here. ences under award no. DE-SC0005132. S.S. acknowledges the support from the Office of Naval Research (ONR) grant N00014-21-1-2107. D.V. acknowledges the support from National Science Foundation grant DMR-1954856. We also thank N. Dellby and M. Hoffman for discussions regarding the optical configuration of the microscope. First-principles calculations were performed using the computational resources provided by the Rutgers University Parallel Computing clusters. Here we provide orbital-resolved electronic band structures marked with orientation-dependent (Fig. 