This work gives insights into processing and characterisation of bulk nanocrystalline FeCr materials. The investigated FeCr alloys, consisting of 30, 50 and 70 at.% ferromagnetic Fe and remaining anti-ferromagnetic Cr, are processed by arc melting and subsequent severe plastic deformation by high pressure torsion. The physical similarities between elemental Fe and Cr in combination with the nanocrystalline structure of the as-deformed alloys, necessitates advanced characterisation techniques for the as-deformed state: In-situ annealing synchrotron X-ray diffraction measurements as well as electron microscopy experiments are linked to magnetostrictive measurements and reveal a single phase microstructure. Surprisingly, the nanocrystalline FeCr alloys remain supersaturated solid solutions upon annealing above 500 • C, meaning a decomposition in a FeCr nanocomposite is suppressed. For the chosen annealing conditions grain growth is faster than decomposition and enhanced magnetostrictive values are found compared to materials in the as-deformed state. Tuning material properties by forming single phase alloys and varying chemical composition is often impeded by the existence of large miscibility gaps at the thermodynamic equilibrium of binary phase diagrams. Notwithstanding the difficulties in fabrication, there is a strong interest in such metastable phases created materials as they offer the opportunity to tune and enhance physical properties. For quite some time, it is known to overcome these processing limits by techniques such as vapour deposition The exchange bias features a shifted hysteresis loop, which originates from an unidirectional anisotropy created at the interface of the two types of magnetic materials. This occurs, when the ferro-antiferromagnetic phase boundary is cooled through the Néel temperature (T N ) while a magnetic field is applied Severe plastic deformation by high-pressure torsion (HPT) is a promising approach to overcome processing limitations, for above mentioned miscibility gaps of binary material systems Binary alloys consisting of nominal 30, 50 and 70 at.% Fe and 70, 50, and 30 at.% Cr, respectively, were processed by arc melting and subsequent HPT-deformation. As starting materials, conventional flakes (Fe: 99.99+% < 10 mm, Cr: 99.995% 1-25 mm, both from HMW Hauner GmbH & Co. KG) were used. All materials were stored and handled in an Ar-filled glovebox to protect the high purity materials against contamination. For arc-melting (AM/0.5 device, Edmund Buehler GmbH), a Ti-gettered high purity Ar atmosphere was used. To ensure chemical homogeneity the ingots were turned around and remelted at least five times. From arc melted ingots, cylinders with 8 mm diameter were prepared by electrical discharge machining and cut in discs with 1 mm thickness, which were subsequently deformed by HPT. A detailed description of the used HPT setup can be found in Ref. A nominal pressure of 7.5 GPa with a rotational frequency of 0.6 min -1 was used for the deformation process and 21 to 25 revolutions are applied (corresponding to a shear strain γ of ∼450 at radius r = 3 mm After deformation, the sample is cut for further investigations and all measurements were performed at a radius r 2 mm. Respective orientations are explained in detail in Reference For magnetostrictive measurements, an electromagnet (Type B-E 30, Bruker) with conical poles (diameter 176 mm), providing a constant air gap (50 mm) and a maximal field of 2.25 T, was used. Within the air gap, the sample was placed into an encapsulating sample chamber, protecting from rapid temperature changes. The magnetostriction was measured using strain gauges (HBM, 1-LY11-0.6/120) applied with glue Z70 from HBM. As a reference a piece of W, a very low magnetostrictive material is measured at the same time with a strain gauge of the same batch. According to Synchrotron high-energy X-ray diffraction (HEXRD) experiments were carried out at the beamline P21.2 at PETRA III (DESY, Hamburg, Germany). The specimens were measured in transmission mode, while the spot size was set to 200 x 200 μm 2 and a photon energy of 60 keV was used. In-situ annealing HEXRD experiments were performed using the following sequence: Heating to 520 • C, holding the temperature for 1 h and cooling. A Varex XRD 4343 flat panel detector captured diffraction patterns every 5 seconds. The experimental setup was realised by a heating microscope stage (THMS600 Linkam, Tadworth, United Kingdom), which was adapted to place the samples inside an Ar-flushed chamber to suppress the formation of oxides. The custom made chamber is designed to minimize the interaction of the beam with the furnace and allowed the diffracted beam to exit the probe chamber while the temperature was measured via a thermocouple. The temperature was calibrated by measuring a Cu sample with the same settings and comparing the changing lattice parameter during thermal expansion. For data processing, the pyFAI package The microstructures of room temperature (RT) HPT-deformed samples at r = 3 mm with different chemical compositions are shown in Figure A PREPRINT and annealed states (not shown) revealed broad peaks. They can either result from the formation of a supersaturated state or be due to the nanocrystalline state of individual Fe and Cr phases present in the as-deformed condition. Additionally, a co-existence of both configurations is conceivable. Thus, to clarify this point and to further investigate the decomposition of FeCr alloys, which are possibly in a non-equilibrium state, in-situ annealing experiments using synchrotron XRD are performed. Due to the high brilliance of the beamline Therefore, the Voigt-profiles are analysed in more detail, as it is a convolution of a Gauss and Cauchy (Lorentz) distribution. The full width half maximum (FWHM) of a single Voigt profile can be parsed into the breadths of its Cauchy and Gaussian components. Keijser et al. In principle, 3d-elements like Fe exhibit a low magnetostrictive response Assuming a perfectly isotropic material, the magnetostriction measured parallel and perpendicular to the applied magnetic field According to equation 1 the magnetostrictive behaviour of as-deformed FeCr alloys as a function of the applied magnetic field is shown in Figure gives deeper insights into the Fe based nanocrystalline alloys Nanocrystalline FeCr alloys synthesised by severe plastic deformation -a potential material for exchange bias and enhanced magnetostriction If we assume separated phases, equation 2 does not consider contributions of surface spins and grain boundaries. Nevertheless it is known, that both, surface-and bulk-magnetoelastic coupling contribute to the magnetoelastic tensor where λ s s describes the interface contribution such as surface spins to the effective saturation magnetostriction. S V is the surface to volume fraction, which can be rewritten in 3 R for spherical grains with an effective grain radius R. For the FeCr system only the third term contribute with a positive value to λ ef f s keeping in mind, that the measured λ s values for Fe 50 Cr 50 and Fe 70 Cr 30 presented in Figure Hall et al. λ ef f s results in 19 ppm, which is in excellent agreement with results on Fe 70 Cr 30 , keeping in mind that it is an HPTdeformed sample exhibiting a nanocrystalline microstructure. Furthermore, comparable results are found in the work of Bormio-Nunes et al. Nanocrystalline FeCr alloys synthesised by severe plastic deformation -a potential material for exchange bias and enhanced magnetostriction A PREPRINT During this work, we successfully produced nanocrystalline FeCr supersaturated solid solutions over a broad chemical composition and clarified that the alloys do not exhibit a two-phase structure in the nanocrystalline regime and confirmed the existence of a solid solution. Astonishingly a demixing into separated Fe and Cr phases was suppressed by a remarkable temperature stability of the solid solution up to 520 • C. As the principle aim was to decompose the microstructure into a nanocrystalline two-phase material, enabling the formation of an exchange biased material, a more complex annealing treatment and HPT-processing route has to be found, which is part of ongoing studies. Beforehand, adding substitutional elements could stabilise the microstructure even further and hinder grain growth. This could preserve the nanocrystalline structure during annealing, while a decomposition takes place. Nanocrystalline FeCr alloys consisting of Fe 30 Cr 70 , Fe 50 Cr 50 and Fe 70 Cr 30 are processed by HPT-deformation at RT. Upon annealing, the microstructure starts to coarsen between 300 • C and 500 • C, which is stronger pronounced for higher Fe contents. All materials investigated exhibit a hardening effect upon annealing with a peak between 300 • C and 400 • C followed by a softening at elevated annealing temperatures. In-situ HEXRD annealing experiments point towards a supersaturated solid solution of FeCr. However, concurrent finely dispersed Fe and Cr phases cannot be completely ruled out by microstructural investigations. Up to temperatures of 520 , respectively. After excluding a magnetostrictive contribution from interfaces, these values are explained by the formation of a supersaturated solid solution by HPT-deformation, which persists during annealing and validates findings from the synchrotron HEXRD measurements. To decompose these FeCr solid solutions and to enable exchange bias effects, more complex processing routes are necessary. The authors declare, that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships, that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. 