We study the conductance afforded by a normal-metal probe which is directly contacting the helical edge modes of a quantum spin Hall insulator (QSHI). We show a 2e 2 /h conductance peak at zero temperature in QSHI-based superconductor-ferromagnet hybrids due to the formation of a single Majorana bound state (MBS). In a corresponding Josephson junction hosting a pair of MBSs, a 4e 2 /h conductance peak is found at zero temperature. The conductance quantization is robust to changes of the relevant system parameters and, remarkably, remains unaltered with increasing the distance between probe and MBSs. In the low temperature limit, the conductance peak is robust as the probe is placed within the localization length of MBSs. Our findings can therefore provide an effective way to detect the existence of MBSs in QSHI systems. A quantum spin Hall insulator (QSHI) is a two dimensional (2D) topological insulator featuring topologically protected one dimensional (1D) edge states Another basic transport signature of helical edge states is a quantized tunneling conductance in units of e 2 /h, with e being the electron charge and h the Planck constant. Since the helical edge states of a QSHI comprise one half of a spin degenerate 1D electron gas, each edge can provide a quantized ballistic conductance of e 2 /h over several micrometers In this article, we propose to detect MBSs in the helical edge state via a normal probe terminal, such as an STM tip, coupled to the edge states (Fig. Model.-Our setup consists of a semi-infinite normal probe on the y axis and a QSHI edge lying along the x direction (Fig. T , and ψ ↑(↓) the field operators for right (left) movers. H N describes the normal probe terminal with a standard parabolic dispersion where m N , μ N , and τi=x,y,z are the effective mass, chemical potential of normal probe, and Pauli matrices in the Nambu space. Θ (y) and δ (y) are the Heaviside and delta functions, respectively, and U is the barrier parameter between the probe and the QSHI. The bare helical edge states are described by the Hamiltonian where v t is the Fermi velocity, μ N is the chemical potential measured from the Dirac point of the helical states, and σi=x,y,z are Pauli matrices in the spin space. Finally, H j describes the proximity-induced terms in the helical state with j = 1 (j = 2) corresponding to the FS (SFS) junction. Specifically, Here, M x is an exchange field from the coupling to a ferromagnetic insulator and ∆ is the proximity-induced pair potential from a conventional s-wave superconductor. For the SFS junction, L is the width of the F region and χ L,R are the macroscopic superconducting phases, with χ = χ L -χ R being their difference. The scattering wave function for the normal probe is for an incident electron with spin σ =↑ (↓) and wave function Φ ↑ = (1, 0, 0, 0) T e -iqy [Φ ↓ = (0, 1, 0, 0) T e -iqy ]. Under the wide band approximation (μ N E), the wave vector is q = √ 2m N μ N / and the spinors are B↑ = (1, 0, 0, 0) T , B↓ = (0, 1, 0, 0) T , Â↑ = (0, 0, 1, 0) T , and Â↓ = (0, 0, 0, 1) T . The normal (Andreev) reflection amplitudes are b σ σ (a σ σ ) for an incoming electron of spin σ scattered as an electron (hole) of spin σ . At the edge of QSHI x -μ 2 T / v t for M x > μ T . N i=1∼4 are normalization factors. On the S region we find Ŝ1 = (u, 0, 0, v) T e ik + x , Ŝ2 = (0, -u, v, 0) T e -ik + x , Ŝ3 = (0, -v, u, 0) T e -ik -x , and Ŝ4 = (v, 0, 0, u) ). An incident spin-σ electron from the normal probe thus has a transmitted wave function Ψ T σ (x) on the QSHI side, which is a suitable superposition of spinors Fi=1∼4 and Ŝi=1∼4 . To determine the scattering amplitudes, we match Ψ N σ and Ψ T σ at the contact using the boundary conditions The parameter Z = m N U/( 2 q) describes the barrier strength between the probe and the helical edge, while the real and dimensionless number c represents the different microscopic details between them, such as the hopping integrals in the underlying lattice model When a bias voltage V is applied to the normal probe, the conductance G at zero temperature is calculated using the formula Here, a σσ and b σσ are reflection amplitudes at E = eV . For the numerical calculations we choose v N ≈ 1.57 × 10 6 m/s and μ N ≈ 7.0 eV, corresponding to copper; v t ≈ 5.5 × 10 5 m/s and μ T ≈ 0.01 eV for HgCdTe quantum wells; and ∆ ≈ 0.1 meV, which corresponds to a proximity-induced gap from a niobium superconductor. For simplicity, we only consider the short junction for the SFS geometry, with k T L μ T /∆, and choose k T L = 2 so that the width of F is L ≈ 70 nm. We note that our main conclusions are not material dependent. We start with the FS junction [Fig. When the probe is at the FS boundary, we have shown a perfectly quantized ZBCP in the topological phase M x > μ T . However, this exact position may be challenging to reach in experiments, so we now consider the spatial dependence of the conductance as the probe moves along the QSHI edge. First, it is convenient to define two characteristic length scales: ξ F = v t /μ T inside F and ξ S = v t /∆ in S. Figure By contrast, the topological phase (M x > μ T ) shown in Fig. To further analyze this counter-intuitive result, we examine the zero-bias scattering amplitudes for x c > 0 in the topological phase with M x > μ T , namely, with ↑↑ and b ↓↓ = b ↑↑ . The spacial dependence at zero energy appears as global phase factors e ±2ik T xc , so the resulting conductance is thus quantized and independent of the position x c . This effect provides an interesting signature of the existence of MBS in a QSHI. We now connect the normal-metal terminal probe to the SFS junction. First, we place it in the middle of F and study the conductance as a function of M x and the superconducting phase difference χ in Fig. Next, we compare the spacial dependence of the probe conductance for χ = 0 [Fig. where G (ε) is the conductance at zero temperature given in Eq. ( We studied the conductance afforded by a normalmetal probe which directly contacts the helical edge modes of a quantum spin Hall insulator. We found a robust quantized zero-biased conductance peak in both FS and SFS junctions indicating the presence of Majorana bound states at each FS boundary. The conductance quantization is robust under variations of the parameters controlling the coupling between the tip and the helical edge state. Moreover, we found that the zero bias conductance quantization remains unchanged as we moved the probe along the edge, remarkably, even for distances much larger than the localization length of the Majorana states. This result can not be simply explained by the local density of states in the tunneling model 