We have observed short-lived optical birefringence in a CH3NH3PbBr3 single crystal induced by a powerful nearly single-cycle terahertz pulse. Apart from the instantaneous contribution that follows the profile of the squared pump electric field, the recorded anisotropy signal contains an exponential component decaying in ∼ 350 fs, underdamped oscillations at the frequency of ∼ 0.16 THz and an intermediate picosecond relaxation process with a Gaussian tail. We associate these three non-trivial features with, respectively, Kerr effect in the inorganic lattice, terahertz-induced transient alignment of CH3NH + 3 cations, and their coherent rotation excited by the terahertz pulse in a Raman process. Lead-halide perovskites (LHPs) have the chemical formula ABX 3 common to all perovskite compounds. Inorganic atoms B = Pb and X = Cl, Br or I form a framework of BX 6 octahedra, while A-cations are located at the centers of cages formed by the octahedra Interactions between the cations and the charge carriers cause favorable transport properties of hybrid LHPs that triggered their fast rise as unique materials for photovoltaics One of the ultrafast spectroscopic methods that were used to study cation dynamics in LHPs is the observation of the transient optical Kerr effect. This is a wellestablished tool for the investigation of molecular orientational dynamics In the present work we study the optical Kerr effect induced in a CH 3 NH 3 PbBr 3 single crystal by a powerful terahertz pulse and find signatures of collective rotational dynamics of methylammonium cations. Unlike femtosecond laser pulses, single-cycle terahertz pulses act directly on the permanent electric dipole of a polar molecule thereby exerting a torque on the latter. As a result, both the alignment and the orientation of the molecules occur, though only the former is accessible if the birefringence of the sample is probed. One more key difference is that the characteristic timescale of variation of the electric field of the terahertz pulse is ∼ 1 ps compared to ∼ 1 fs for femtosecond laser pulses. In combination with the high strength of the electric field this leads to a relatively high amplitude of induced molecular rotation during the pulse. Therefore, the detected Kerr signal can be considerably stronger in the case of terahertz excitation In our experiments we studied a 1.8 mm thick CH 3 NH 3 PbBr 3 single crystal grown from solution using the technique described in Refs. Though CH 3 NH 3 PbBr 3 crystals are relatively stable under ambient conditions, one can expect certain modification of the crystal surface and adjacent layers as a result of regular exposure to air during long repeated measurements. Several months after the experiments reported in the present work were performed, we have repeated measurements with fresh samples and observed generally similar transient signals with a certain difference that was caused naturally by a variation of the pump terahertz waveform. In order to detect the Kerr response of the crystal we used the standard pump-probe layout, in which a pump terahertz pulse excites the sample, while a temporally delayed probe pulse is used to measure the induced birefringence. All experiments were performed at room temperature and in ambient air. Nearly single-cycle terahertz pulses with a duration of ∼ 1 ps and peak electric field strength of up to ∼ 500 kV/cm were generated using the technique of optical rectification of femtosecond pulses with tilted fronts. The details of the method can be found elsewhere The optical anisotropy signal F (t) detected using pump terahertz pulses with the highest available peak electric field strength of ∼ 500 kV/cm is shown in Fig. Specific relaxation components that comprise the F (t) signal are relatively well separated in the time domain, which makes them easier to disentangle. It is possible to select three characteristic time windows. In the first one, roughly from -1.0 ps to 0.5 ps, the probe pulse overlaps with the pump terahertz pulse and the induced anisotropy is determined mainly by the electric field of the latter. The second window spans from ∼ 0.5 ps to ∼ 3 ps and contains a monotonically decaying component of the signal. The third window from ∼ 3 ps to ∼ 12 ps is occupied by weak low-frequency underdamped oscillations. Below we extract parameters of these temporal components and relate them to specific physical processes initiated in the CH 3 NH 3 PbBr 3 crystal by the pump terahertz pulse. In Figure We have additionally measured the dependence of the peak F (t) value on the peak strength of the pump electric field. The result is presented in the inset to Fig. The observed similarity of the initial part of the F (t) signal and the squared electric field waveform E 2 THz (t) implies that in our experiment the temporal resolution is maintained despite possible propagation effects. Indeed, it is reasonable to expect that group refractive indices for the pump terahertz and the 800 nm probe pulses will differ considerably. It is particularly true for solids with a rich spectrum of dipole-active phonons, like LHPs. This difference implies a corresponding large difference of group velocities of the pulses. As a result, in a sufficiently thick transparent sample the probe pulse will "scan" the pump-induced response during propagation through the former and despite the fixed pump-probe delay time the signal from a wide time window will be integrated. In this case the temporal resolution decreases, while the signal becomes distorted. This effect can be approximately visualized by performing the convolution of a well-resolved signal with a "pulse" of a rectangular shape, the duration of which depends on the values of the group refractive indices. We have performed such calculations for the measured E 2 THz (t) profile and found that for F (t) to have the observed specific shape in the interval -1.0 ps < t < 0.5 ps, the total time lag between the pump and the probe pulses should not exceed δτ ∼ 300 fs after traveling through the sample. This time can be estimated also as δτ ∼ L(n THz -n gr pr )/c, where L is the sample thickness, n THz and n gr pr are the refractive index at pump wavelength and the group refractive index at probe wavelength, respectively. While n pr can be readily found in literature Next we proceed to the analysis of the oscillations that dominate the F (t) signal from ∼ 3 ps to ∼ 12 ps. The magnified view of this region is shown in Fig. It is thus natural to suppose that the observed oscillations are caused by coherent rotational dynamics of organic CH 3 NH + 3 cations (here by "rotational dynamics" we mean rotation around the axis that is perpendicular to the C-N axis). This mechanism is essentially the impulsive stimulated rotational Raman scattering and implies that the pump terahertz pulse creates a coherent superposition of wave functions of rotational levels of CH 3 NH + 3 coupled via allowed Raman transitions. For the simplest case of linear molecules the radiation couples rotational levels, the angular momenta of which differ by ∆J = 2, which is a necessary condition for the observation of periodically modulated optical anisotropy of the excited molecular ensemble. Then the frequency of the observed oscillations of pump-induced birefringence is ν = ∆E/h = 2B(2J + 3), where J is the angular momentum of the lower-lying of the two rotational states, and B is the rotational constant in cm -1 . Similar rules can be written for rigid symmetric top molecules, but for more complex rotors the information on exact positions of rotational levels should be obtained from experiments or theoretical calculations. Interestingly, in a recent study of terahertz Kerr effect in water coherent oscillations were observed in the optical anisotropy response of the gaseous phase at elevated temperatures Unfortunately, the rotational Raman spectrum of the CH 3 NH + 3 molecular cation is not known. However, if we applied the simple linear molecule model, we could pre-dict coherent oscillations of terahertz-induced birefringence rather similar to those observed in our experiment. Taking B ≈ 0.7 cm -1 (with a reference to the somewhat similar CH 3 NH 2 molecule In the framework of this model the measured frequency of 5.5 cm -1 turns out to be very close to the mean frequency of the ν 0 and ν 1 model Raman lines and, therefore the observed oscillations can be the result of beating of these harmonics. Due to the strong damping of oscillations it is possible in principle to achieve a decent reproduction of the observed oscillatory kinetics by constructing a linear combination of the ν 0 and ν 1 modes with a certain adjustments of their phases and even with an additional smaller contribution of the next two or three modes. Associating the coherent rotational motion with a limited set of impulsively excited rotational transitions, the frequencies of which depend only on the inertial properties of the CH 3 NH + 3 molecule, allows an assumption that the decay of observed oscillations reflects the population relaxation. Then the extracted decay time τ osc = 2.1 ± 0.3 ps can be ascribed to the damping of rotations of individual CH 3 NH + 3 cations caused by their interaction with host inorganic cages. There is of course a number of important potential corrections, which can affect this simplified model considerably. Among them are a more precise definition of the rotational constant, calculation of the rotational spectrum taking into account nonzero values of the angular momentum around the molecule axis and possible rotations of the CH 3 and NH 3 groups, as well as a proper treatment of the stimulated scattering of the terahertz pulse with a broad spectrum of frequencies in the vicinity of rotational transitions. However, these refinements complicate the problem considerably and require a separate study that is beyond the scope of the present work. The part of the signal that remains after subtraction of the fitted oscillatory component is shown in Fig. This specific form of the Kerr effect decay curve (fast decrease with an adjacent "shoulder") is rather common for liquids in the case of excitation by a short femtosec- ond laser pulse For molecules in liquids the timescale of several picoseconds is typical for the diffusive rotational motion. This regime supersedes the inertial relaxation for hindered rotors that interact with their environment and as a result experience frequent changes of the phase of rotation However, we have found that a rather good model of the monotonic part of the observed Kerr signal can be constructed if we assume that the transient alignment of the CH 3 NH + 3 molecules created by the pump terahertz pulse demonstrates Gaussian relaxation. In this case temporal evolution of the orientational correlation function of the organic cations is defined by the factor e -(t/τ ) 2 assuming impulsive character of the terahertz excitation. Through the anisotropic polarizability of the molecules this behavior will be transferred to the correlation function of molecular polarizability C(t) with the corresponding contribution to the Kerr signal in the form of -dC(t)/dt ∝ te -(t/τ ) 2 Gaussian decay observed here can be an evidence of cooperative effects during orientational relaxation of CH 3 NH + 3 cations. Here it is possible to draw an analogy with glassy materials, and in particular with metal glasses, for which a compressed exponential decay of the density correlation function was observed In conclusion, we observed the optical Kerr response of a CH 3 NH 3 PbBr 3 single crystal to an intense terahertz pulse. We decomposed the signal into several distinct decay components and suggested an assignment of each component to a certain relaxation process taking into account the hybrid structure of the perovskite. The initial fast sub-picosecond decay was interpreted as the Kerr effect in the inorganic lattice of the crystal. The slower relaxation on the timescale of several picoseconds was ascribed to the rotational dynamics of organic CH 3 NH + 3 cations. It comprises a Gaussian-like decay and weak underdamped low frequency oscillations. The former can be associated with diffusive relaxation of cation alignment created by the pump electric field, while the fact that it follows the compressed exponential law can be a signature of collective glass-like dynamics. Oscillations are due to coherent rotations of individual cations induced in the process of impulsive stimulated rotational Raman scattering of the terahertz pulse. The characteristic relaxation times determined in the framework of the suggested interpretation can be used to model interactions of organic cations with inorganic lattice and with each other. Observation of the strong-field terahertz Kerr effect in CH 3 NH 3 PbBr 3 and other hybrid lead halide perovskites at lower temperatures is also of great interest, since it implies studies of nonlinear dynamics of organic cations, the motion of which is initially restricted along certain directions inside inorganic cages. Since the applied method allows visualization of rotational dynamics in real time, it can be effectively combined with dynamic or quasistatic stimuli like excitation of electrons, application of external fields or heating in order to study interaction of organic cations with charge carriers and their dynamics at phase transitions.