Understanding the kinetic selectivity of carbon nanotube growth at the scale of individual nanotubes is essential for the development of high chiral selectivity growth methods. Here we demonstrate that homodyne polarization microscopy can be used for high-throughput imaging of long individual carbon nanotubes under real growth conditions (at ambient pressure, on a substrate), and with sub-second time resolution. Our in situ observations on hundreds of individual nanotubes reveal that about half of them grow at a constant rate all along their lifetime while the other half exhibits stochastic changes in growth rates, and switches between growth, pause and shrinkage. Statistical analysis shows that the growth rate of a given nanotube essentially varies between two values, with similar average ratio (~1.7) regardless of whether the rate change is accompanied by a change in chirality. These switches indicate that the nanotube edge or the catalyst nanoparticle fluctuates between different configurations during growth. With their high carrier mobility, low capacitance and high chemical stability, carbon nanotubes (CNTs) are theoretically ideal for building highly-scaled transistors delivering large drive currents at low energy consumption Remarkable advances in the selective growth of CNTs with specific metallicity or chirality have been empirically made during the last years For CNT ensembles, experimental measurements generally display an exponential decay of the growth rate In 2018, Otsuka et al. Here we report high-throughput in situ imaging of hundreds of individual CNTs under real growth conditions (at atmospheric pressure, on a substrate) using homodyne polarization microscopy Our experimental setup, inspired by the works of Lefebvre et al. We chose iron nanoparticles with ethanol as carbon precursor, one of the most studied systems. ST-cut quartz substrates were used to grow long CNTs aligned along the [100] axis by lattice-oriented growth. We optimized the catalyst concentration to have a sufficiently low density of aligned nanotubes (as assessed by SEM and AFM) to reduce the risk of bundling. A supercontinuum white light (400-700 nm) is used to illuminate the inside of a miniaturized CVD cell using a long-distance objective. A ST-cut quartz substrate with a polished wedge (to prevent backside reflection), optical marks and catalyst stripes is used to grow long CNTs (typically 1-100 μm) parallel to its [100] axis. Two polarizers in cross configuration are used to extract the optical signal of the CNTs growing at an angle of ~ 45° with respect to the polarizers. The signal is further amplified by homodyning with the reflected field and spatially recorded with a high-speed camera. To improve the video analysis, we have developed a method of rolling-frame correction where each frame is corrected by the frame recorded at a chosen delay δ before, typically between 5 and 20 s. As shown in Fig. Of the nearly 700 individual CNTs we have observed, none showed an exponential decrease in growth rate. However, summing the kinetic curves of a large number of individual CNTs does bring a close-to-exponential decay for the average growth rate (Fig. We first focus on the cases displaying a constant growth rate, as illustrated in Fig. With the Fe/ethanol system, about half of CNTs displayed this behavior. Statistical analysis of 189 such cases evidenced that, under constant growth conditions, both growth rates and lifetimes can vary by up to a factor 30 between CNTs. As shown in Figure We now turn to the cases displaying dynamic instability, that is stochastic transitions between different growth rates, and between growth and shrinkage, which represented more than half of CNTs during our observations. We first checked that these changes were not caused by uncontrolled fluctuations of the CVD conditions: first, the temperature was well stabilized before introducing ethanol and remained stable at +/-1 °C during experiments; second, the Ar/ethanol mixture was equilibrated in a parallel line before being switched into the CVD cell; third, despite an initial increase due to ethanol decomposition, the H2O concentration remained stable until the end of the experiment. Most importantly, based on the analysis of a hundred in situ videos, the transitions occur without any correlation, spatial or temporal, between CNTs (see Movies S3-5). Most transitions in growth rate (about 75 %, i.e. 201 out of 266) occur without a change in contrast in both in situ optical imaging and ex situ SEM (Fig. (F) Distributions of the growth rate ratio rafter/rbefore with and without structure change, and for all cases. (G) Distribution of growth rates for (11,8) SWCNTs displaying a multimodal shape despite the constant chirality and growth conditions. The correlation plot of the growth rates before and after change for 266 transitions is shown in Figure To study the influence of chirality, we performed a Raman characterization on 230 individual CNTs (corresponding to a total of 350 CNT segments) displaying a rate change or not. This allowed us to assign 41 CNTs or CNT segments to (11,8) SWCNTs thanks to their appropriate position in the Kataura plot and high occurrence in our samples (Fig. Strikingly, Koyano et al. reported a similar factor of 1.7 for the growth of individual CNTs before and after an interruption with Ar/H2/H2O 24 : as shown in Fig. fit well within our larger set of data. This suggests a similar mechanism despite different experimental conditions. We finally move to CNTs displaying stochastic switches between growth and shrinkage as illustrated in Fig. From the cases displaying chirality change followed by shrinkage, it can be deduced that the shrinkage proceeds by carbon etching at the interface with the catalyst particle (Movie S6). During our experiments, etching appears to be caused by ethanol or its sub-products (e.g. H2O) since we observed that shrinkage stopped when interrupting the ethanol supply. Background traces of H2O and O2, which are commonly present during CNT growth by CVD (~10 ppm O2 and ~50 ppm H2O in our experiments), may also play a role. Despite the growth rate fluctuations, the data suggest a positive correlation between growth and etching rates (figure To assess these hypotheses, we tested nickel, which does not form stable carbides, instead of iron. We did observe rate change events with Ni (Movie S7), although with a lower frequency than with Fe, but we did not observe shrinkage events. This supports that switches between growth and shrinkage are specific to catalysts displaying different possible phases during growth, like iron. In contrast, rate changes appear as a more general behavior potentially related to configurational switches of the nanotube edge. Further experimental and theoretical investigations are needed to elucidate the origin of these instabilities. Our observations of a large number of individual CNTs under real growth conditions reveal processes more complex than described by current models. In particular, they contradict the standard assumption of a unique growth rate for a given chirality. New growth models should be built to account for the growth rate instabilities revealed by our observations. The fact that the highest selectivity values are obtained with solid-state catalysts might indicate that their actual role is to limit these fluctuations and stabilize the growth rate. understanding and control of these instabilities therefore seem paramount for the rational design of highly selective CNT growth methods. Interestingly, instabilities between growth, chirality change and shrinkage may offer opportunities of chirality selection based on a dynamic exploration of the chirality space over multiple cycles. Finally, we emphasize that in situ homodyne polarization microscopy is not limited to CNTs but can be applied to many nanostructures (0D, 1D or 2D) in different environments (vacuum, gas or liquid) as long as the nanostructures (or their edges) scatter light with sufficient efficiency and polarization change.