Developing nano-mechanical oscillators for ultrasensitive force detection is of great importance in exploring science. We report our achievement of ultrasensitive detection of the external force regarding the radio-frequency electric field by a nano-sensor made of a single trapped 40 Ca + ion under injection-locking, where squeezing is additionally applied to detection of the smallest force in the ion trap. The employed ion is confined stably in a surface electrode trap and works as a phonon laser that is very sensitive to the external disturbance. The injection-locking drove the ion's oscillation with phase synchronization, yielding the force detection with sensitivity of 347 ± 50 yN/ √ Hz. Further with 3 dB squeezing applied on the oscillation phase variance, we achieved a successful detection of the smallest force to be 86.5 ± 70.1 yN. With development of nanotechnology using atomic and molecular sensors, the physical quantities have been detected in a higher level of sensitivity than ever before due to the excellent perceived performance of the sensors In the present work, we report our ultrasensitive detection of the radio-frequency electric force at hundred yoctonewton's order of magnitude by a nano-probe made of a single trapped 40 Ca + ion. Although our detection, similar to in Our experiment of ultrasensitive force detection is carried out by an injection-locked phonon laser regarding a single trapped ion confined stably in the harmonic potential of a surface-electrode trap (SET), see Fig. ular frequencies of the SET are, respectively, ω z /2π = 186.02±0.01 kHz, ω x /2π = 680.4±0.1 kHz, and ω y /2π = 1020.3±0.5 kHz. The 40 Ca + ions, when confined stably in the potential, stay with 800 μm above the surface of the SET. The phonon laser is produced by the oscillation amplification of the single 40 Ca + ion stimulated by two 397 nm laser beams, one of which is a red-detuned beam with detuning ∆ 1 /2π = -75 MHz and the other of which is a bluedetuned beam with ∆ 2 /2π = 30 MHz. Both of the laser beams are elaborately tuned to be with the appropriate intensity ratio r = I b /I r = 0.5 (I r = 370 W/m 2 and I b = 175 W/m 2 ) in order to keep the oscillation amplification stable In our system, we may produce the phonon laser solely regarding the z-axis motional degree of freedom of the ion due to the large frequency differences in different directions. Due to the same reason, we may lock the phonon laser's oscillation frequency to ω z , i.e., the trap frequency along z axis, by applying an appropriate injection-locking signal to AE, which has no influence on other two directions. Generally speaking, when the injection frequency ω i is tuned to the locking range, the phonon laser's oscillation frequency would be fixed at ω i with a very sharp bandwidth The main operations of our experiment are controlled by the injection and/or squeezing signal processing system, as sketched in Fig. For our purpose, we have developed an approach to fast acquire the value of A by fitting the recorded photons. To this end, we assume that φ and A are constants in t m by ignoring the short-time noise. Under the irradiation of the 397-nm laser beams, the scattering rate ρ j at time t is given by Γs j /(4π) where Γ is the decay rate of P 1/2 , k j is the wave vector, ∆ j means the detuning and s j represents the saturation parameter. Due to two 397-nm laser beams with different detunings in our experiment, the total scattering rate ρ(t) = ρ 1 (t) + ρ 2 (t). To fit the experimental photon counts, we involved the noise, such as the projection noise, the laser power noise and etc, for which the Gaussian term G(t) is introduced in fitting the curve of P (t) by a convolution function, where t )] with σ t the degree of time dispersion. α and β represent the factors regarding the measurement time t m , the fluorescence collection efficiency η, the background photons and the number of unit time intervals n as well as the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) relevant to the background light. More details about the fitting can be found in Appendix. Figure The force calibration is needed prior to the force sensing due to the fact that the injection force F 0 sensed by the ion originates from a radio-frequency voltage V i on AE applied by the injection-locking signal and F 0 should be evaluated by comparing with the counterpart regarding a DC voltage on AE. For the latter, we have the static force F c = mω 2 z z with z the position deviation of the ion due to the applied DC voltage. In our experiment, we have measured z = 12 μm when the applied DC voltage is 3 V, implying the force F c = 1088.5 zN. Thus we obtained the slope ∂F c /∂V i = 362.8 yN/mV. For a harmonic oscillator, such as the trapped ion, however, the oscillation amplitude variation due to the applied radio-frequency voltage V i of the injection signal originates from the resonance absorption of the energy. But we may reasonably consider the amplitude variation to be driven by the force F 0 by assuming F 0 = F c . Since the oscillation amplitude A can be accurately measured, as discussed above, by fitting the fluorescence curve when the oscillation frequency is locked, we obtained a linear relationship between the injection voltage V i and the oscillation amplitude A, with the slope ∂A/∂V i = 362.1 nm/mV, see Fig. Squeezing is an effective way to reduce the noises in precision measurement The squeezing signal is applied on the EEs with frequency doubling and synchronizing with respect to the injection signal. So only the motion along z axis could feel the squeezing effect. Mathematically, the uncertainty of the oscillation can be expressed by the measured standard deviation of A and φ, i.e., σ X = σ A and σ Y = A 0 σ φ , where A 0 is the oscillation amplitude in the absence of noises. By ignoring the second-order terms in derivative as well as the higher-order terms of frequency, we acquired the variance of Y (t) as where σ 2 Y (0) means the variance without squeezing and g is relevant to the trapping potential modification regarding the squeezing signal (see Appendix for details). We focus on the variance of the oscillation phase below since we have only locked the oscillation phase, rather than the oscillation amplitude. Squeezing the variance of the phase requires reducing g cos(2φ), as indicated in Eq. (3), which is achieved by tuning g and φ, respectively. Fig. In our experiment, we have observed the effect of squeezing on the oscillation phase, rather than the oscillation amplitude. This is due to the fact that the squeezing is relevant to the injection-locking we applied, which fixed the phase, but not the amplitude. Compared to the frequency/phase locking, locking amplitude is more challenging in ion-trap systems. For example, the feedback-locking is in principle available to fix the oscillation amplitude, but hard to achieve using current techniques since it requires higher scattering rate and higher fluorescence collection efficiency. Nevertheless, with only frequency/phase locked, we are able to reach the lower bound in the force detection, as elucidated below. To detect the smallest force, we may reduce the injection voltage V i until the phonon laser is unlocked, which is judged by fitting the values regarding the variation of the phonon laser's oscillation amplitude with respect to the voltage. Qualitatively, we identify the phonon laser working in a critical point when the oscillation frequency is locked with success probability of 90%. This implies the failure of the force detection once the locking probability is lower than 90%. By this way, we have detected in the absence of squeezing the critical voltage of 0.3 mV, corresponding to the lower bound of the detectable force as 171.7 ± 74.3 yN, where the large uncertainty comes from the very weak locking at the critical point and can be resorted to the error bars, as marked in Fig. Note that, the smallest force detection in our method is determined by the frequency locking and squeezing. Repetition of measurement just helps reducing the detection uncertainty, but irrelevant to the lower bound. In this context, we have measured the electric noise on the electrodes for further understanding of the force detection lower bound. We found that the electric noise is approximately 2 mV. This fact explains the lower bound we have reached in our force detection, that is, the injection voltage could be sensed by the phonon laser only when larger than 15% (8%) of the total electric noise in the absence (presence) of squeezing. This indicates that, besides reducing the measurement variance, the squeezing also improves the signal detection from the electric noise, favoring the sensing of the smaller force. In this context, to further detect a smaller force, we will have to optimize our method by suppressing the electric noises. Besides, reducing the frequency drift would be another important effort in the future. We have found that the frequency ω z drifts for about 10 Hz during each measurement of 500 s. Since the locking range is really narrow, the frequency drift has the strong influence on the smallest force detection which occurs at the critical point of the frequency locking. In summary, we have demonstrated experimentally an ultrasensitive force sensor of the phonon laser of a trapped ion, where injection-locking favors high sensitivity of force detection and squeezing helps for detecting the smallest force. Our implementation worked without the prerequisite of sideband cooling, but efficiently suppressed thermal noises in the detection of the smallest force. Besides, we developed a fast approach to measure the oscillation amplitude based on counting the emitted photons. By this way, without the help of the phase Fresnel lens as employed in When the classical squeezing is on, the squeezing with frequency 2ω i would modify the original potential, meaning ψ(z)[1 + g 0 sin(2ω i t + 2φ)], where g 0 is the assumed gain and φ is the relative phase with respect to the injection signal. In this case, the trap frequency is rewritten as ω 2 s (t) = ω 2 z [1 + g 0 sin(2ω i t + 2φ)]. For convenience of calculation, we assume g 0 = gζ/ω z , where g is dimensionless and g 0, and ζ is the frictional damping. Considering two 397 nm laser beams, we have the total frictional damping ζ = ζ 1 + ζ 2 with the mathematical expression as where k j , ∆ j and s j are, respectively, the wave number, detuning and saturation parameter of the jth beam of the 397-nm laser. As the oscillation frequency of the phonon laser is locked and the squeezing is on, we have ω = ω i and then the Langevin equation is given by (A4) where the random force by thermal noise is f n (t) = f y (t) sin(ω i t)+f x (t) cos(ω i t) and the injection force is F (t) = F 0 sin(ω i t). When the oscillation frequency is locked, we have ω = ω i . Rewriting Eq. (A4) by two orthogonal components X(t) sin(ω i t) and Y (t) cos(ω i t), we obtain, where the second-order terms and 'ω i t' terms are neglected. Thus the variances of X(t) and Y (t) related to temperature are σ 2 ]. In our experiment, we just focus on Y (t), whose variance with the squeezing gain g can be written as in Eq. 3 From Eq. (A1), we have σ Y = A 0 σ φ , where σ φ is the uncertainty of the oscillation phase. Therefore, we obtain σ 2 φ (g, φ)/σ 2 φ (0) = 1/[1 -g cos(2φ)]. In the case of 0< g cos(2φ) <1, the uncertainty increases, whereas for -1< g cos(2φ) <0, the uncertainty reduces. We have observed experimentally that the best squeezing is 3 dB, which occurs in g → 1 and φ = π/2. Improving the fluorescence collection efficiency of the force sensor is an important technique to achieve higher sensitivity. In our experiment, the numerical aperture of the imaging lens set is 0.36 and the transmittance is 80%. The transfer efficiency of the photons by PMT is 23% and only 70% light goes through the beam splitter mirror. There are other factors in our system for the light loss of 12%. For the phonon laser, the TAC transfer efficiency of the PMT pulses to TTL is about 66%. Therefore, the total fluorescence collection efficiency η is about 0.25% in theoretical prediction, which basically agrees with the measurement result 0.28%. The SNR is about 2.0 and the background noise is mainly from the diffuse reflection of the two 397-nm laser beams. The efficiency is an important factor for sensitivity. With high efficiency, the total measurement time τ could be shorten, where τ can be written as the product of the single measurement time t m and the measurement repetition ε, namely τ = εt m . In our experiment, ε = 50 and t m = 10 s. Therefore, the sensitivity is given by where δA is the standard deviation of the measured oscillation amplitude. In our experiment, we have ∂A/∂F 0 = 0.9979 nm/yN and δA = 15 nm, so that the sensitivity is 347 yN/ √ Hz, which could be improved by lowering the total measurement time τ , i.e., enhancing the fluorescence collection efficiency. When the oscillation frequency ω of the phonon laser is locked to the injection frequency ω i , i.e., ω = ω i , the bandwidth of the oscillation frequency turns to be very sharp. The locking range ω m is approximately in linear proportion to the injection force F 0 and the central frequency of the locking range is exactly the secular frequency ω z Before acquiring the oscillation amplitude A and phase φ by fitting experimental data, we need to determine other parameters. The detunings of the 397-nm laser beams can be adjusted by acoustic optical modulators, and the resonant frequency is obtained by the Lorentzian curve Other three parameters α, β and σ t are obtained by the fitting. We set σ t = 0.8 μs in terms of the system's noise, and observed the oscillation amplitude 22 μm of the phonon laser. The emitted photons are theoretically 1.271×10 7 within 10 seconds, while the experimentally collected photon count N is 5.353×10 4 . Since the SNR is about 2.0, we have η to be 0.28%. Then we acquired the values of α and β by α = ηt m /n and β = N/[n(1 + SN R)], which led to the values of A and φ.