We report on the fabrication of micro-axicons made of glass by laser-assisted wet etching (LAE) and laser polishing. The employed technique, relying on an efficient direct-writing process by femtosecond laser, allows revealing high fidelity profiles while etched in a heated potassium hydroxide (KOH) solution. The remaining surface roughness is then smoothened by carbon dioxide (CO 2 ) laser polishing. Such polishing is limited to the skin of the component so that the tip is only slightly rounded, with a radius of curvature of nearly 200 μm. It is then shown with 500 μm-diameter axicons that the quasi-Bessel beam is generated closely after the tip, and features a 5.3 μm diameter maintained over a propagation distance of almost 3.5 mm. Refractive axicons, first proposed in 1954 If W 0 is the beam-waist of the incident beam, the length of the focal line, Z max , can be approximated to: Whereas the radius r B of the central lobe (first zero) of the QBB is described by r B can be then related to the full width at half maximum (FWHM) of the central lobe such as FWHM = 1.0532 × r B , which is easier to derive experimentally in the ranges where the QBB is not properly shaped. Refractive axicons are usually fabricated by diamond turning Previously, we developed a wafer-level technique based on glass-blowing from multiple siliconglass cavities to generate micro-axicons Here, the proposed LAE technique is, similarly to laser ablation, a direct writing method, but only for laser-insulating the component's surface so that it is subsequently primarily revealed by wet-etching, especially in potassium hydroxide (KOH) aqueous solution, known for anisotropic etching of silicon, rather than glass. However, etch-rate of KOH onto the laser insulated part is substantially increased, allowing glass 3-D structuration. Proposed in the early 2000s, such a technique of femtosecond laser pre-irradiation was first employed to enhance etching based on aqueous solution of Hydrofluoric (HF) acid In the case of an axicon, featuring a much higher spatial frequency in the place of its tip, the laser surface polishing should minimize surface re-shaping. In this framework, we consequently show that the surface roughness resulting from LAE is lower than for laser ablation, and then requires lighter thermal surface polishing, eventually better preserving the profile singularities of the component such as the axicon tip. This feature is particularly interesting for micro-axicons since it favors the quasi-Bessel generation in its nearest neighborhood and gives it more potential to be used, e.g., in compact lab-on-chip devices. High-fidelity micro-axicons with 500 μm diameter and apex angle of 170 • (α= 5 • ) are fabricated in fused silica through a LAE manufacturing process Here, we use 500 μm-thick 20 × 20 mm polished fused-silica samples (Corning 7980), although the system can process wafers up to 1 mm-thick and 100 mm diameter. The 3D surface of the refractive micro-optical component is raster-drawn with 1 μm line spacing along Y and located few tens of microns below the sample surface. Just before the component's surface, vertical accesses are first insulated. They are aimed to provide evenly distributed access of the etching solution through the sacrificial volume to the 3D laser-exposed surface. By doing so, the sacrificial material does not require to be entirely laser-irradiated but is eventually detached during wet etching The next step (Fig. Nevertheless, despite dense irradiation paths, the surface of the released micro-axicons shows right after etching a non-negligible roughness that avoids their qualification as optical components, at least for visible wavelengths. Therefore, an additional step concerning the polishing of the surface is required. The last fabrication step (Fig. Since fused silica is highly absorbing at 10.6 μm, the laser light is absorbed in the vicinity of the lens surface. Therefore, this absorption leads to a significant increase of the glass temperature, limited to a thin layer below the lens surface. As this thin layer temperature increases, its viscosity decreases and eventually reaches a level where the glass is soft enough for surface roughness relaxation effects to occur, which results in a smoothing effect. Indeed, multiple phenomena involving surface tension lead, at first, to the relaxation of high spatial frequencies corresponding to roughness. Since the glass heating is limited to the glass surface, the shape of the lens is rather well-preserved during this process. The surfaces of the fabricated axicons were characterized by two different systems: First, an optical profilometer based on white light interferometry (MSA 500 from Polytec, Waldbronn, Germany) was employed to determine surface topography and roughness on a 886 x 662 μm 2 area. Secondly, a mechanical stylus profilometer (Dektak XT from Brüker) was used to measure the profiles of non-polished components, whose roughness is too large for optical profilometer to collect the signal from all the surface points. Two batches of components have been fabricated, with a slightly different meshing of the laser-insulated paths. The first tested micro-axicon (MA1), from the first batch, is characterized by a coarser meshing than the second tested one (MA2), taken from the second batch. In addition, those components are compared to a precision axicon (AX125 from Thorlabs) specified at a similar angle (α = 5 • ) than the fabricated micro-axicons. The various acquired profiles are fitted with the Eq. 4 Figure The subsequent laser polishing tends to round the tip and thus increase the curvature as shown in Fig. From the difference between the shape error profile and the primary profile (dashed black line derived from Eq. 4 with a radius set at R c = 207 μm), both displayed on Fig. The waviness shown here is measured at W q = 54 nm. Hence, CO 2 laser processing leads to a significant decrease of the surface roughness, at the level of R q = 0.9 nm (Fig. As reported in Tab. 1, MA1 shows a higher fidelity around the tip (R mean c = 191 μm) than MA2 (R mean c = 228 μm) but with a larger SD (37 μm against 19 μm) revealing a more asymmetrical tip. In addition, although MA1 appears to be more asymmetric than MA2 around the tip, it is the contrary concerning their lower part as underlined earlier. Such asymmetries are not experienced with commercial AX125 axicon fabricated by standard grinding and polishing, however, the latter leads to a larger radius of curvature (R mean c = 344 μm). The surface of the AX125 is also more stretched with nearly twice lower W mean q = 34 nm than the one of MA1 (W mean q = 68 nm). In addition, the waviness is measured 25% larger for MA1 than for MA2, as it could be expected from the different meshing of exposed surfaces. Note that, as previously, the wavelength of the applied cut-off filter is set at 10 μm. Finally, the measured surface roughness of the commercial AX125 (R mean q = 0.7 nm) is close to its specification given at 0.6 nm and in the same order than the mean surface roughness of MA1 and MA2 measured at 0.9 nm and 0.8 nm, respectively. Such uncoated components are then employed to generate QBBs. Generated intensity distributions are studied with a 3D intensity point spread function (IPSF) measurement system Figure Nevertheless, as seen on the longitudinal (XZ plane) evolution of MA1 and MA2 between z = 0.75 mm and z = 4.75 mm (Fig. According to Eq. 2, the length of the focal line is influenced by the axicon angle. Taking into account the average wedge angles reported in the Tab. 1, Z max is equal to 5.92 mm, 5.66 mm and 6.44 mm for MA1, MA2 and the AX125, respectively. The higher angles of the fabricated axicons lead to shortening of their generated focal line length as it can be seen in Fig. From z = 1 mm to z ≈ 4.5 mm, the ellipticity of the central lobes of MA1 and MA2 remains reasonable (1.00 < ε < 1.15) (Fig. This paper introduces the use of LAE, a rapid prototyping method for the fabrication of microoptical components made of glass, and in particular micro-axicons employed for QBB generation in the visible range. It is shown that LAE, based on femtosecond laser pre-inscription of glass wafer, followed by wet KOH etching, allows building high fidelity refractive surfaces characterized by a reasonable roughness (R q < 100 nm). Hence, the required polishing step performed by heating the glass surface with a CO 2 laser faithfully preserves the designed shape of the component whereas decreasing the roughness until less than 1 nm RMS. Thereby, micro-axicons featuring tips with a low radius of curvature (R c < 200 μm) are fabricated, leading to the generation of QBBs closely from the component's surface (1 mm). This is particularly interesting for micro-optical components embedded in microsystems that cannot tolerate delayed beam shaping. a SD stands for standard deviation