The present study investigates the effect of different reaction times on the crystallinity, surface morphology and size of iron oxide nanoparticles. In this synthetic system, aqueous iron (III) nitrate (Fe(NO3)3•9H2O) nonahydrate, provided the iron source and triethylamine was the precipitant and alkaline agent. The as-synthesised iron oxide nanoparticles were characterised by X-ray diffraction (XRD), Rietveld analysis, Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) and Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR). Prolonged reaction times indicated the change on nanoparticle shape from elongated nanorods to finally distorted nanocubes. Analysis on the crystallinity of the iron oxide nanoparticles suggest that the samples mainly consist of two phases, which are Goethite (α-FeOOH) and Hematite (α-Fe2O3) respectively. Over the past few decades, nanoparticles are known as great additives to enhance the properties of other materials Iron oxide nanoparticles belong to a family of nanomaterials ranging from 1 to 100 nm, with unique physical and chemical properties During the last years the research interest for firefighting foams enhancement has arisen due to the significant difficulties in being able to assess the potential human health and environmental impacts of fluorinated firefighting foams, such as when In this paper we demonstrated that iron oxide NPs could be successfully synthesised via a facile hydrothermal synthetic route under mild conditions. The aim of this research is to synthesise and characterise iron oxide NPs as a candidate additive to Class A foam fire suppressants to enhance their efficiency in fire extinguishment. The iron oxide nanoparticles were characterised by X-ray diffraction (XRD), Rietveld analysis, Fourier transform-infrared spectroscopy (FT-IR) and scanning electron microscope (SEM). Chemicals. Iron (III) nitrate nonahydrate (Fe (NO3)3•9H2O) 98+% (metals basis), triethylamine, 99+%, Ethanol, Alcohol Reagent, anhydrous, denatured, ACS, 94-96% were purchased from Thermo Fisher Scientific. Deionized water was used. Synthesis of Iron Oxide Nanoparticles. Iron oxide nanoparticles were fabricated using the solvothermal technique. In a typical synthesis (e.g., Product A in Table Characterisation. The obtained samples were characterised by powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) using a Siemens D5000 diffractometer (Cu Kα1/2 radiation) operating in Bragg-Brentano geometry. The Fourier Transform Infrared (FTIR) spectra were recorded with the Thermo Scientific Nicolet is 50 FTIR spectrometer. The Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) micrographs were recorded with a ZEISS Gemini SEM 360 microscope. Preliminary structural characterisation was performed by X -Ray Diffraction (XRD). Fig. X-Ray Diffraction (XRD) was performed to understand the crystalline structure of the nanoparticles. The presence of strong and sharp peaks is attributed to the high crystalline nature of the material. According to the XRD analysis, the peaks at 2θ=21.21, 33.18, 36.75, 53.2 and 59.02o corresponds to the (101), (301), ( To investigate the effect of the reaction time on the average nanoparticle size, as the reaction time was increased from 3 to 24 h at 170 °C, the strongest peak in each XRD pattern was used for the calculation of FWHM. The average size was calculated to be 23.52, 23.49, 26.89, 29.43 nm for product A, B, C and D respectively. Table Quantitative phase analysis using the Rietveld method has been performed based on the XRD data to distinguish between the two phases. Phase identification showed for Sample A, B, C and D an amount of (Goethite 83.8 %, Hematite 16.2 %), (Goethite 85.1 %, Hematite 14.9 %), (Goethite 87.8 %, Hematite 12.2 %) and (Goethite 80.6 %, Hematite 19.4 %) respectively. For increasing reaction time, the percentage of α-Fe2O3 phase increases and the other phase decrease. The diameter, d of the iron oxide nanoparticles n is calculated using Debye-Scherrer formula given by where K is 0.89 (Scherrer's constant), λ is the wavelength of X-rays, θ B is the Bragg diffraction angle, and B is the full width at half-maximum (FWHM) of the highly intense diffraction peak. Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy (FTIR). Figure The band at 1653 cm -1 belongs to the C=N stretching. The bands 894 and 792 cm -1 which are strong sharp peaks belong to C-H bending vibration caused by the remnant triethylamine on the surface of the particles. Finally, at 600 cm -1 belong to the Fe-O bond vibration of the Fe2O3. The morphology of the iron oxide nanoparticles was observed by scanning electron microscopy (SEM). Fig. and B) 24hrs at 170°C. In the current work, iron oxide NPs were synthesised using a simple hydrothermal process. Based on the results presented herein, iron oxide nanoparticles' formation was influenced by reaction time. Higher reaction times yielded nanoparticles with larger size. Furthermore, the sizes of the nanoparticles based on the reaction time did not change at a significant point which makes the use of this method can save time and energy versus other techniques such as co-precipitation. In summary, the current study is a first step to synthesise and characterise the iron oxide nanoparticles that will be later induced later into commercial firefighting foams. Nanoparticles with a reduced size could be adsorbed at the gas-liquid interface to make the films more stable Preprint. Published version in Proceedings of the 10th International Conference on Nanostructures, Nanomaterials and Nanoengineering 2021 (ICNNN 2021).