Deep learning techniques have been increasingly applied to the natural sciences, e.g., for property prediction and optimization or material discovery. A fundamental ingredient of such approaches is the vast quantity of labelled data needed to train the model; this poses severe challenges in data-scarce settings where obtaining labels requires substantial computational or labor resources. Here, we introduce surrogate-and invariance-boosted contrastive learning (SIB-CL), a deep learning framework which incorporates three "inexpensive" and easily obtainable auxiliary information sources to overcome data scarcity. Specifically, these are: 1) abundant unlabeled data, 2) prior knowledge of symmetries or invariances and 3) surrogate data obtained at near-zero cost. We demonstrate SIB-CL's effectiveness and generality on various scientific problems, e.g., predicting the density-ofstates of 2D photonic crystals and solving the 3D time-independent Schrödinger equation. SIB-CL consistently results in orders of magnitude reduction in the number of labels needed to achieve the same network accuracies. In recent years, there has been increasing interest and rapid advances in applying data-driven approaches, in particular deep learning via neural networks, to problems in the natural sciences Recently, to alleviate the reliance on labeled data, techniques like transfer learning and self-supervised learning have emerged. Transfer learning (TL) Extending from TL, self-supervised learning (SSL) Here, we introduce Surrogate-and Invariance-boosted Contrastive Learning (SIB-CL), a deep learning framework using self-supervised and transfer learning techniques to incorporate various sources of "auxiliary information" (see Fig. We seek to train a neural network to predict desired properties (or "labels") y from input x using minimal training data. More precisely, for a target problem D t = {x i , y i } Nt i=1 consisting of N t input-label pairs, we focus on problem spaces where N t is too small to successfully train the associated network. To overcome this, we introduce two auxiliary data sets: (1) a set of zero-cost unlabeled inputs D u = {x i } Nu i=1 and (2) a surrogate data set D s = {x i , ỹi } Ns i=1 consisting of inexpensively computed labels ỹi (e.g. from approximation or semi-analytical models) with associated input xi (possibly, but not necessarily, a "simple" subset of all inputs). The quantity of each of these auxiliary data sets are assumed to far exceed the target problem, i.e. {N u , N s } N t (and, typically, N u > N s ). On the basis of these auxiliary datasets, we introduce a new framework-Surrogate and Invariance-Boosted Constrastive Learning (SIB-CL)-that significantly reduces the data requirements on D t (Fig. In the first step of the pre-training stage (Fig. where s ii = ẑi • ẑi (and ẑi = z i / z i ) denotes the cosine similarity between two normalized metric embeddings ẑi and ẑi , [i j] uses the Iverson bracket notation, i.e. evaluating to 1 if i j and 0 otherwise, and τ is a temperature hyperparameter (fixed at 0.1 here). The total loss is taken as the sum across all positive pairs in the batch. In our batch sampling of D CL , we sample one-third of each batch from D s and two-thirds from D u . Conceptually, the NT-Xent loss acts to minimize the distance between embeddings of positive pairs (numerator of Eq. ( Consequently, we obtain representations H(x i ) that respect the underlying invariances of the problem. Each epoch of contrastive learning (i.e. each full sampling of D CL ) is followed by a supervised learning step-the second step of the pre-training stage (Fig. The pre-training stage is performed for 100 -400 epochs and is followed by the fine-tuning stage (Fig. 1. Direct supervised learning (SL): randomly initialized networks H and G are trained using supervised learning on only the target dataset D t . This reflects the performance of conventional supervised learning, i.e. without exploiting auxiliary data sources. 2. Conventional transfer learning (TL): networks H and G are first pre-trained using supervised learning on the surrogate dataset D s and then subsequently fine-tuned on D t . This reflects the performance of conventional TL-boosted supervised learning, albeit on an unusually well-aligned transfer task. These baselines do not exploit prior knowledge of invariances; in order to more critically evaluate SIB-CL, we also considered augmented versions of these baselines that incorporate invariance information via a simple data augmentation approach (see SI Section S4), i.e. each input is subjected to a transformation randomly sampled from {g} each time before it is fed into the encoder network H. We abbreviate them correspondingly as SL-I and TL-I. Photonic crystals (PhC) are wavelength-scale periodicallystructured materials, whose dielectric profiles are engineered to create exotic optical properties not found in bulk materials, such as photonic band gaps and negative refractive indices, with wide-ranging applications in photonics Dataset generation. PhCs are characterised by a periodically varying permitivitty, ε(r), whose tiling makes up the PhC's structure. For simplicity, we consider 2D square lattices of periodicity a with a "two-tone" permitivtty profile, i.e. ε ∈ {ε 1 , ε 2 }, with ε i ∈ We define the DOS of 2D PhCs by with ω denoting the considered frequency, ω nk the PhC band structure, n the band index, k the momentum in the BZ, and A = a and sample over the normalized spectral range 0 ≤ ω/ω 0 ≤ 0.96. Step (i) accounts for the finite spectral width of physical measurements and regularizes logarithmic singularities associated with van Hove points; step (ii) counteracts the linear increase in average DOS that otherwise leads to a bias at higher frequencies, emphasizing instead the local spectral features of the DOS; and step (iii) ensures comparable input- The DOS spectrums were then smoothed, standardized, and the "empty-lattice" DOS were subtracted from them to derive the labels of the dataset. and output-ranges across distinct unit cells, regardless of the cell's average index. In our experiments, we use 20 000 unlabelled unit cells for contrastive learning, select a target dataset of varying sizes N t ∈ [50, 3000] for fine-tuning, and evaluate the prediction accuracy on a fixed test set containing 2000 samples. For the surrogate dataset of inexpensive data, D s , we created a simple dataset of 10 000 PhCs with centered circular inclusions of varying radii r ∈ (0, a/2] and inclusion and cladding permittivities sampled uniformly in ε i ∈ 1. Point group symmetry (G 0 ): 4mm includes the identity operation (1), 2-and 4-fold rotations (C 2 and C ± 4 ), and horizontal, vertical, and diagonal mirrors (σ h , σ v , and Formally, this is the PhCs' holosymmetric point group. ant under all continuous translations t, the pixelized unit cells are compatible only with pixel-discrete translations; i.e., we consider the (factor) group G t = {iN -1 ax + jN -1 aŷ} N-1 i, j=0 with N = 32. Additionally, the structure of the Maxwell equations endows the DOS with two non-Euclidean "scaling" invariances 1. Refractive scaling (G s ): The set of (positive) amplitude-scaling transformations of the refractive index g(s)n(r) = sn(r) define a group G s = {g(s) | s ∈ R + } and map the PhC eigenspectrum from ω nk to s -1 ω nk . Equivalently, g(s) maps DOS(ω) to sDOS(sω) and thus leaves the y-labels of Eq. ( Size scaling (G s ): Analogously, the size-scaling transformations g (s)r = sr define a group G s = {g (s) | s ∈ R + }, and also map ω nk to s -1 ω nk and DOS(ω) to sDOS(sω); i.e., also leaving the y-labels invariant. Of G s and G s , only the amplitude-scaling G s is pixelcompatible (G s can be implemented as a tiling-operation in the unit cell, which, however requires down-sampling). Accordingly, we restrict our focus to the pixel-compatible invariances of the product group G = G 0 × G t × G s and sampled its elements randomly. In practice, the sampling-frequency of each element in G is a hyperparameter of the pre-training stage (see Methods and SI Section S5). PhC DOS prediction. To assess the trained network's performance in an easily interpretable setting, we define the evaluation error metric, following Ref. where DOS ∆ = S ∆ * DOS = ω -1 0 y + DOS EL and DOS pred ∆ = ω -1 0 y pred + DOS EL are the true and predicted S ∆ -smoothened DOS, respectively, and the sums are over the spectral range 0.24 ≤ ω/ω 0 ≤ 0.96 (we omit the spectral region 0 ≤ ω/ω 0 < 0.24 during evaluation to get a more critical metric, since the DOS has no significant features there). The network architecture and training details (loss functions, hyperparameters, layers etc.) are discussed in the Methods section. The performance of SIB-CL under this error measure is evaluated in Fig. A significant reduction of prediction error is observed for SIB-CL over the baselines, especially for few fine-tuning samples: e.g., at N t = 100, SIB-CL has 4.6% error while SL (TL) has 7.6% (6.9%) error. More notably, we see a large reduction in the number of fine-tuning samples N t needed to achieve the same level of prediction error, which directly illustrates the data savings in the data-scarce problem. We obtain up to 13× (7×) savings in N t when compared to SL (TL) at a target prediction error of ∼ 5.3%. The predicted and true DOS are compared as functions of frequency in Fig. SIB-CL was also observed to outperform the invarianceaugmented baselines SL-I and TL-I (see SI Section S4), albeit by a smaller margin than the unaugmented baselines, consistent with expectations. Nevertheless, we observe a clear performance advantage of SIB-CL over TL-I, demonstrating the effectiveness and utility of the constrastive learning step in SIB-CL compared to naive augmented TL-approaches. To demonstrate that the effectiveness of SIB-CL extends beyond the DOS prediction problem, we also trained a network using SIB-CL and all baselines to predict the PhC band structure (see SI Section S2). For this task, the network labels y are ω nk /ω 0 , sampled over a 25 × 25 k-grid and over the first 6 bands, i.e., y ∈ R 6×25×25 ≥0 , while the input labels x remain unchanged. Unlike the DOS, the band structure is not invariant under the elements of G 0 , but remains invariant under translations (G t ) and refractive amplitude scaling (G s ), i.e. G = G t × G s . Also for this task, we found SIB-CL to enable significant data savings, ranging up to 60× relative to the SL baseline. As a test of the applicability of SIB-CL to higherdimensional problems, we consider predicting the ground state energies of the single-particle, time-independent Schrödinger Equation (TISE) for random three-dimensional (3D) potentials in box. This problem demonstrates a proof-of-principle application to the domain of electronic structure calculations, which is of fundamental importance to the understanding of molecules and materials across physics, chemistry, and material science. Dataset generation. The eigenstates ψ n and eigenenergies E n of a (non-relativistic) single-particle electron in a potential U(r) are the eigensolutions of the TISE: where Ĥ = T + Û is the Hamiltonian consisting of kinetic T = -1 2 ∇ 2 and potential energy Û = U(r) contributions. Here, and going forward, we work in Hartree atomic units (h.a.u.). For simplicity, we consider random potentials U(r) confined to a cubic box of side length 10 Bohr radii (a 0 ), with values in the range [0, 1] Hartree (see Methods for details). Examples of the generated potentials are shown in Fig. In the previously considered PhC DOS problem, the surrogate dataset D s was built from a particularly simple input class with exact and inexpensive labels. Here, instead, we assemble D s by including the original range of inputs x but using approx-imate labels ỹ. In particular, we populate the surrogate dataset with input-label pairs (x, ỹ), with ỹ = Ẽ0 computed from a low-resolution finite-difference 5 × 5 × 5 discretization of U(r) (Fig. To assess the impact of the choice of surrogate data, we also examine an alternative surrogate dataset, with input-label pairs (x, ỹ), derived from quantum harmonic oscillator (QHO) potentials: where Ground-state energy prediction. The ground-state energy is invariant under elements of the symmetry point group, i.e. G = G 0 in 2D. In 3D, we instead have the m3m point group, which notably has 48 elements (instead of just 8 in G 0 ). Figure The widespread adoption and exploitation of data-driven techniques, most prominently deep learning via neural networks, to scientific problems has been fundamentally limited by a relative data scarcity. That is, data is only rarely available in the quantities required to train a network to faithfully reproduce the salient features of nontrivial scientific problems; moreover, even if such data can be generated, it typically requires excessive computational effort. Here, we have introduced SIB-CL, a novel framework that overcomes these fundamental challenges by incorporating prior knowledge and auxiliary information, including problem invariances, "cheap" We use a finite-difference numerical method with Dirichlet boundary conditions to solve for the ground-state energies, E0. b) Left: Generation of the reduced resolution surrogate dataset, where the input unit cell resolution was reduced from 32 × 32 × 32 to 5 × 5 × 5 and the same numerical solver was used to obtain the approximated ground-state energy. Right: The relative numerical error of E0 obtained from the numerical solver when compared to N = 128 (which is taken to be the 'theoretical' value) shows that N = 5 (N = 32) is a good choice for the reduced (original) resolution since it gives a relatively high (low) error of 10% (0.1%). c) Network prediction error against fine-tuning dataset sizes Nt for SIB-CL and the baselines on the TISE problem. For SIB-CL, we show the best results among the two contrastive learning techniques, SimCLR problem classes, and approximate labels. With SIB-CL, the required quantities of costly, high-quality training data is substantially reduced, opening the application-space of data-driven techniques to a broader class of scientific problems. We demonstrated the versatility and generality of SIB-CL by applying it to problems in photonics and electronic structure, namely to the prediction of the DOS and band structures of 2D PhCs and the ground state energies of the TISE. Through our experiments, we demonstrated that even very simple sources of auxiliary information can yield significant data savings. For instance, the group of invariances G can be just a set of simple rotations and mirrors as in the TISE problem. Similarly, there are diverse options for constructing the surrogate dataset: here, we explored the use of simplified structures where (semi-) analytical solutions exist (e.g., circular structures of PhCs), approximate calculations of the target problem (e.g., reduced resolution computations of TISE), and even a combination of the two (e.g., approximated energies of QHO potentials in the TISE problem). Most natural science disciplines, especially physics, have deep and versatile caches of such approximate and analytical approaches which can be drawn from in the creation of suitable surrogate datasets. In the problems studied here, SIB-CL outperformed all baselines (including invariance-augmented baselines, see SI Section S4). We conjecture that SIB-CL's performance advantage stems predominantly from enforcing problem invariances via a contrastive loss, which is more effective than naive data augmentation (cf. the performance edge of SIB-CL over TL-I). To substantiate this hypothesis, we performed several ablation experiments (see SI Section S5). Firstly, when all invariance information are disregarded in SIB-CL (i.e., if the group of invariances G is reduced to the trivial identity group), we observe very similar performance to TL. This demonstrates that the constrastive stage is only effective in combination with invariance information, or, equivalently, that the utility of the contrastive stage hinges strongly on attracting nontrivial positive pairs rather than merely repelling negative pairs. Next, we explored the consequences of selectively and increasingly removing invariances from G. We found that including more invariances strictly improves SIB-CL's performance, consistent with expectations since the elements of G are true invariances of the downstream task. This is contrary to the standard self-supervised learning (SSL) paradigm which is task-agnostic, i.e., the downstream task is not known during the contrastive learning stage, and transformations may not be true invariances of the downstream problem so including more transformations can sometimes be harmful While contrastive learning has gained enormous popularity in recent years, its techniques has mainly found applications in computer vision tasks (e.g., image classification on ImageNet Our work is complementary to the growing body of work on equivariant networks for various symmetry groups Our work provides new insights on how issues of data scarcity can be overcome by leveraging sources of auxiliary information in natural science problems. The SIB-CL framework presented in this work demonstrates how such auxiliary information can be readily and generically incorporated in the network training process. Our work also provides new insights on the thus-far less-explored application of contrastive learning for regression tasks, opening up opportunities for applications in several domains dominated by regression problems, in particular, the natural sciences. PhC unit cells. We parameterize ε(r) by choosing a level set of a Fourier sum function φ, defined as a linear sum of plane waves with frequencies evenly spaced in the reciprocal space (up to some cut-off). i.e. where each n k is a 2D vector (n x , n y ) and we used 3 Fourier components per dimension, i.e. n x , n y ∈ [-1, 0, 1] (and thus the summation index k runs over 9 terms). c k is a complex coefficient, c k = re iθ with r, θ separately sampled uniformly in [0, 1). Finally, we uniformly sample a filling fraction, defined as the fraction of area in the unit cell occupied by ε 1 , in [0, 1) to determine the level set ∆ so as to obtain the permitivitty profile: This procedure produces periodic unit cells with features of uniformly varying sizes due to the uniform sampling of the filling ratio and without strongly divergent feature scales thus corresponding to fabricable designs. PhC DOS processing. With the MIT Photonic Bands (MPB) software We then computed the DOS for ω/ω 0 ∈ [0, 0.96] over 16 000 equidistantly-spaced frequency samples using the generalized Gilat-Raubenheimer (GGR) method |Ω| Ω n(r) d 2 r-and rescaling by ω 0 . Subtracting DOS EL removes a high-frequency bias during training and was found to improve overall network accuracy. 3D TISE unit cells. To generate samples of U(r), we follow the same procedure in Eqs. Our encoder network, H consists firstly of 3 to 4 convolutional neural network (CNN) layers followed by 2 fully connected (FC) layers, where the input after the CNNs was flattened before being fed into the FCs layers. The channel dimensions in the CNN layers and number of nodes in the FC layers vary for the different problems, and are listed in Table PhC DOS prediction loss functions. In step b of the pretraining stage where we trained using supervised learning loss on D s (Fig. for each sample in the batch, where y pred and y are the network prediction and the true label of that sample respectively and | • | gives the element-wise absolute value. We take the mean over the (normalized) frequency axis (ω/ω 0 ) to get a scalar for L PT . This loss function was used during pre-training (for SIB-CL and the TL baselines); its purpose is to encourage the network to learn from the surrogate dataset the general features in the DOS spectrum and underemphasize the loss at places where the DOS diverges, i.e. at the Van Hove singularities. In our experiments, we found that L PT indeed gave better prediction accuracies than the standard L1 or mean squared error (MSE) loss functions. After the pre-training step, the standard L1 loss function was used during fine-tuning on D t (Fig. PhC band structure prediction loss functions. During supervised training (for both pre-training and fine-tuning), we use the MSE loss function; for evaluation, we use a relative error measure (for easier interpretation) given by, where ω n (k) are the eigen frequencies indexed over band numbers n = 1, 2, ... fine-tuining stages of supervised training of the ground-state energy prediction problem. During evaluation, we use a simple relative error measure, where y pred is the network prediction and y = E 0 is the recorded ground-state energy, for each sample in the test set. Training hyperparameters. For training the networks in all problems, we used Adam optimizers The neural networks were implemented and trained using the PyTorch framework Another insightful ablation experiment is to retain all elements of G during pre-training, but reduce G to the trivial identity group only during fine-tuning. This experiment can be explored for SIB-CL and TL-I (but not SL-I since doing so would give exactly SL) and will tell us how effectively each method had "baked in" invariance information into the representions during the pre-training stage. We refer to these experiments as SIB-CL-rt and TL-I-rt correspondingly. From Supplementary Figure Finally, we also studied three different algorithms for performing contrastive learning on these invari-ances, which are described in detail as follows; 1. Standard: transformations from G are uniformly sampled from the sub-groups in the following order: [G t , G 0 , G s ] and applied sequentially to each input. This sampling procedure gives rise to instances which have "highly compounded" invariances; in other words, the two variations of the unit cell (or a positive pair) can look drastically different. 2. Independent: contrastive learning was performed independently for each sub-group of transformations and their losses were summed; i.e. we create a positive pair for each sub-group, compute the NT-Xent loss for each pair and sum them to get the total contrastive loss. This algorithm is slower than the rest (though it can be mitigated via parallel computing) since the number of forward passes per iteration increases according to the number of sub-groups present. However, this sampling procedure create positive instances that differ only by a single sub-group operation and hence their differences are less drastic. 3. Stochastic: Similar to standard, except there is some probability, p α , to whether each transformation sampled from G α will be applied. In our experiments, we set p α = 0.5 for all α's, (i.e. α ∈ {0, t, s}). In other words, there is a 50% chance we do not apply each transformation. These 3 algorithms are compared in Supplementary Figure Apart from the hyperparameters discussed in the Methods section of the main text, SIB-CL involves many other possible training hyperparameters which was not studied in this work. For instance, we simply alternate contrastive learning and predictor pre-training (i.e., Fig. Additionally, as suggested in Section S5, the stochastic sampling parameter for the different sub-group of invariances (i.e. p α ) can also be tuned separately (here, we set them all to 0.5 for simplicity). Tuning the frequency and strength of transformations was found to be highly important in contrastive learning in standard computer vision applications [S5; S6] and are thus often exhaustively varied during optimization x see Methods: Training Details for sampling algorithmn Since we are motivated mainly by proof-of-principle rather than concrete applications-and since we have access to a preponderance of computational resources (provided by MIT Supercloud)-we computed the surrogate labels in MPB directly, avoiding the need to implement either of the semi-analytical approaches.