Metal phosphorous trichalcogenides, MPX3, is a group of van der Waals materials with rich electronic properties and even exotic magnetic behavior. These properties can be well manipulated by pressure/strain via effective control of interlayer interaction, lattice parameters and crystal structure. Superconducting transition has been observed in compressed FePSe3. However, it is the only one superconductor reported in the large MPX3 family. Is it possible to achieve superconducting transition in other MPX3 compounds, especially in a trisulfide compound? In this work, we tentatively compressed the SnPS3 (an insulator with large band gap at ambient condition) up to 48.9 GPa, and managed to achieve the superconducting transition above 31.7 GPa with Tc ranging from ~2.2 K to ~2.8 K. The upper critical field is estimated to be ~3.03 T at 40.5 GPa. Optical absorption measurements together with Raman spectroscopy show a series of transitions under pressure, which is well consistent with the electric transport results. This work provides direct experimental evidence that SnPS3 undergoes an insulator-metal transition near 31.7 GPa. More importantly, it demonstrates that superconductivity can exist in MPS3 compounds, which not only further enriches the electronic properties of this kind of material but also paves a new avenue to explore the abundant emergence phenomena in the whole MPX3 family, and it also benefits the study of superconductor mechanism. 2 The group of metal phosphorous trichalcogenides, MPX3, is a large family of layered materials with metal cations stabilized [P2X6] 4-framework layers weakly bonding each other via van der Waals interactions Previous works demonstrated that the electronic properties of MPX3 can be tuned via chemical doping Trisulfide compounds with M = Mn, Fe, Co, and Ni are paramagnetic at high temperatures and undergo a transition to antiferromagnetic state upon cooling Under applied pressure, the crystal structure along with related band structure of a crystalline material can be finely tuned in a clean and controllable manner without introducing chemical disorder. High-pressure studies on several MPX3 materials, including FePS3, FePSe3, MnPS3, MnPSe3, NiPS3, V0.9PS3 have shown Mott metalinsulator transition (MIT) Here, we reported the pressure induced SC transition in SnPS3. This compound is a very good ferroelectric material with a band gap of ~2.3 eV However, there is no direct temperature dependent electric transport measurement to confirm such an electronic transition. By combining electric transport measurements, Raman spectroscopy, UV-VIS-NIR and infrared absorption spectroscopy, we successfully revealed the pressure effect on the electronic and structure properties of SnPS3. The low temperature transport measurement shows that SnPS3 is always a semiconductor up to 31.7 GPa, near which it starts to become a semimetal or bad metal. Such a metallization process was also confirmed by the disappearance of Raman and infrared vibration modes. Above 31.7 GPa, SnPS3 started to undergo a superconducting transition near 2.2 K, which is slightly enhanced to ~2.8 K at 48.9 GPa, the highest pressure in this work. The superconductivity is further confirmed by the magnetic field effect, and the upper critical field is estimated to be 3.03 T by fitting the Tc-H curve via the Ginzburg-Landau (G-L) equation. The optical absorption measurement tracked the trend of pressure dependent band gap, and provided a relatively systematic information on the electronic behavior of the compressed SnPS3. The observation of superconductivity in SnPS3 will arouse the passion to explore the pressure induced superconductivity in the large MPX3 family. The standard four-probe electrical resistance measurement was carried out under high pressure up to 48.9 GPa, and the experiment was conducted in a commercial cryostat from 1.7 K to 300 K by a Keithley 6221 current source and a 2182A nanovoltmeter. Two opposing anvils with 300 μm culets were placed in a BeCu alloy diamond anvil cell (DAC) to generate high pressure. A thin single crystal sample was loaded into the sample chamber in a rhenium gasket with c-BN insulating layer, and a ruby ball was loaded to serve as an internal pressure standard. The high-pressure Raman spectra were collected using a Renishaw Micro-Raman spectroscopy system equipped with a second-harmonic Nd:YAG laser (operating at 532 nm). The laser power was maintained at relatively low power level to avoid overheating the sample during measurement. In-situ high-pressure UV-VIS-NIR absorption spectroscopy was performed on a home-designed spectroscopy system (Ideaoptics, Shanghai, China) with a 405 nm laser. The high-pressure infrared experiments were performed at room temperature on a Bruker VERTEX 70v infrared spectroscopy system with HYPERION 2000 microscope. The spectra were collected in absorption mode in the range of 500-8000 cm -1 with a resolution of 4 cm -1 through a ∼50×50 μm 2 aperture. In all spectroscopy measurements, type IIa diamond anvils with low fluorescent signal were used and KBr was used as pressure medium. Pressure was determined from the shift of R1-R2 ruby fluorescence lines Electric transport experiments on SnPS3 were carried out up to 48.9 GPa. Resistancetemperature (R-T) results are presented in Fig. The SC transition completely disappears under 1.5 T within our lowest temperature limit 1.7 K. The upper critical field μ0Hc2 as a function of critical temperature Tc is plotted in Fig. Raman modes lying between 90 and 140 cm -1 represent primarily (P2S6) 4-rotations Peaks in this range are very weak at 0.05 GPa and become much stronger from 0.99 GPa, which might be addressed to the known second order phase transition in SnPS3 as mentioned above. Raman modes lying between 140 and 240 cm -1 are essentially (P2S6) 4- rocking and bending modes With increasing pressure, several transitions can be observed. From 2.51 GPa, V2 and V11 modes decay a lot. From 5.1 GPa, a small peak at 263 cm -1 (V13) appears, combining with the enhancement of mode V1, the splitting of mode V3 to V3-1 and V3-2, and the disappearance of mode V6. This structure transition corresponds to the resistance decrease of the sample near this pressure range. Above 8.55 GPa, the mode V9 is weakened a lot while modes V3-2, V13 and V11 are all enhanced. In the low-frequency range, the disappearance of mode V2 can also be observed near this pressure point. This phase transition was not reported before, but is quite clear here and can be correlated with the conductivity increase in the low-temperature range near this pressure. From 14.6 GPa, the mode V1 becomes weak and disappears at 20 GPa. From 25.2 GPa, mode V14 starts to decay and almost disappears at 30.2 GPa. Finally, all peaks disappear above 35.1 GPa, indicating possible metallization of the sample. This is consistent with previous results reported by The electronic structure has been detected by the UV-VIS-NIR optical absorption spectroscopy at ambient condition and under high pressure (Fig. Based on spectroscopy and electric transport measurements, the pressure-temperature (P-T) phase diagram of SnPS3 has been plotted and is shown in Fig. Therefore, MPX3 provides an ideal platform to study the emergent physical properties and the underlying mechanism by incorporating the high pressure, and related research is still at the early stage. In summary, the pressure-induced superconductivity in SnPS3 was investigated by combining the electric transport and spectroscopy measurements. After a series of electronic and structural transitions, superconductivity was observed above 31.7 GPa. The superconducting behavior is quite robust under pressure and the Tc slightly increases from ~2.2 K to ~2.8 K up to 48.9 GPa. The critical field is estimated to be ~3.03 T. SnPS3 should be the first sulfide compound with superconductivity confirmed by experiment in this family. This work not only provided detailed study on the electronic and structural phase transitions in SnPS3 under high pressure, but also stimulate the effort to explore pressure induced superconductivity in the large MPX3 family.