Memristors are among the most promising elements for modern microelectronics, having unique properties such as quasi-continuous change of conductance and long-term storage of resistive states. However, identifying the physical mechanisms of resistive switching and evolution of conductive filaments in such structures still remains a major challenge. In this work, aiming at a better understanding of these phenomena, we experimentally investigate an unusual effect of enhanced conductive filament stability in memristors with copper filaments under the applied voltage and present a simplified theoretical model of the effect of a quantum current through a filament on its shape. Our semi-quantitative, continuous model predicts, indeed, that for a thin filament, the "quantum pressure" exerted on its walls by the recoil of charge carriers can well compete with the surface tension and crucially affect the evolution of the filament profile at the voltages around 1 V. At lower voltages, the quantum pressure is expected to provide extra stability to the filaments supporting quantized conductance, which we also reveal experimentally using a novel methodology focusing on retention statistics. Our results indicate that the recoil effects could potentially be important for resistive switching in memristive devices with metallic filaments and that taking them into account in rational design of memristors could help achieve their better retention and plasticity characteristics. Memristors as new representatives of the microelectronics element base have been actively studied since 2008, when a manufactured TiO 2 -based device was claimed to be a physical implementation of the missing fourth circuit element type-along with the resistor, the capacitor, and the inductor Many materials allowing for RS, along with the possible RS mechanisms, have been proposed Conversely, when a negative voltage pulse is applied, these filaments may shrink in size or even rupture, leading to a decrease in conductance and switching the memristor back to its high-resistance state (HRS, or the off-state). During the switching process, individual filaments of nanometer diameter can form, in which quasi-1D ballistic transport takes place, i.e., electrons pass through them without scattering where e is the electron charge, h is the Planck's constant, and G 0 = 2e 2 /h ≈ 77.5 μS is the conductance quantum, the factor of two coming from the twofold spin degeneracy. In fact, half-integer conductance plateaus, proportional to G 0 /2 and formally corresponding to n = 0.5, 1.5, 2.5, . . . in Eq. Note that a single conductance quantum, theoretically, corresponds to one fully open conductive channel for electrons A possible relation between the stability of a conductive filament and the conductance (virtually, the filament geometry), as well as its role in the emergence of the conductance quantization effect, also appears interesting in the context of experimental observations in different types of memristors. For example, half-integer quantization is not always observed in ECM memristors, but much more often in VCM ones (see Ref. On the theoretical side of the issue, recent progress in quantum transport simulations driven by density-functional and nonequilibrium Green's function methods enables one to calculate the transmission probabilities for a given (moderate) number of filament atoms with a prescribed geometry (see, e.g., Refs. In view of the importance of the stability issue and the time evolution of different conductive filaments formed in a memristor, in this work we analyze the retention statistics of Cu/PPX/ITO memristors for different reading voltages and complement this experimental study with a theoretical discussion of a simplified continuous model of the filament shape evolution under the quantum current. Though such a model is able to provide only a semiquantitative insight into the effects taking place, it predicts quite a counterintuitive stabilization effect of the current on the filament for both current directions, which is also observed in our experiment. Interestingly, our model also predicts considerable changes in the geometries of thin filaments due to electron recoil effects-a kind of quantum counterpart of electromigration Accordingly, the paper is organized as follows. We start from a description of our experimental methodology and results on the conductance quantization in Cu/PPX/ITO memristors in Sec. II A, revealing a clear dependence of the retention on the resistive state. This experimental indication, also supported by a preliminary, semiqualitative theoretical analysis, inspires a further experimental investigation of the retention statistics (Sec. II B). The theoretical argument, along with a number of formulas it is based on, follows in Sec. II C; finally, we present an in-depth numerical analysis of the current-enhanced filament stability within our model in Sec. II D. Note, however, that the research reported did not follow such a linear trajectory from the experiment to the theory or vice versa, but rather was a synergy of the two; the order chosen in Sec. II is rather arbitrary. We have also moved several computational details and semiquantitative arguments to the Appendix to make Sec. II more readable and focused. Finally, we discuss the overall picture and the possible outlook in Sec. III. Details of the experimental techniques used to obtain and study the samples are outlined in Sec. IV. A. Performance of Cu/PPX/ITO memristors and conductance quantization in them Let us first discuss general electrophysical characteristics of the Cu/PPX/ITO memristive structures we were using in this study: a schematic representation of such a structure is presented in Fig. In general, the observed RS can be characterized as well reproducible. Furthermore, this result is consistent with our previous works on PPX-based memristors We have previously found that RS in PPX-based memristors appears to be driven by electromigration of metal ions (copper in our case) from the top electrode to the bottom one, with the formation of metallic bridges The mentioned negative feedback is an important detail in obtaining observable quantized conductance states. In fact, the very effect of conductance quantization in PPX-based memristors was detected by us unintentionally Thus, we experimentally revealed that retention statistics could contain potentially interesting information on the properties of thin filaments with several conductance quanta. This inspired us to focus on a deeper experimental analysis of the retention statistics of the corresponding resistive states-and, for this goal, to extend the preliminary experimental datasets of 10 measurements per G point-in search of nontrivial new signatures in the statistical distributions of stable states. In parallel, this triggered a preliminary theoretical analysis, which qualitatively suggested that one of such signatures could be an increased stability of thin filaments enabled by the electric current flowing through them. We will switch to the theory in Sec. II C, II D, and now we report the methodology and results of our measurements of retention statistics in memristors. As said, the retention properties of quantized conductance levels of the Cu/PPX/ITO memristors were measured in more detail. Now, for each of the six G values equal to 0.5, 1, 1.5, 2, 3, and 5 G 0 , the G(t) dependence was recorded with 20-30 measurements for each G, for 300 s in steps of 1 s. As before, the initial state of the memristor was set using the "write-verify" algorithm The obtained dependences were interpreted as follows. If the conductance of the memristor during the recording time changed within ±0.2 G 0 , such a state was considered stable. If the conductance changed more, the state was considered unstable. In the latter case, two variants were possible: smooth or abrupt changes of the conductance. On this basis, unstable states of the memristor were classified as either "drifted" (i.e., with a smooth change of G), or "jumped" (with a sharp change of G by more than 0.5 G 0 ). All the states, for which at least one conductivity jump was observed during the recording time, were considered as jumped. For example, Fig. Initially, the G(t) curves were recorded at the default reading voltage U read = +0.1 V. The measured dependences of the percentages of stable, drifted, and jumped states on G are shown in Fig. We also carried out such measurements at a lower value of the reading voltage, namely, at U read = +0.01 V: the results are shown in Fig. Observation of this unusual effect, certainly, calls for a theoretical explanation; a possible nature of the currentenhanced stability will be discussed in the next subsections. For an easier comparison, the dependences of the percentages of stable states on G for different reading voltages are also shown in Fig. Apart from what was said above, we believe that the jumped states determine the stability of the conductance level of the memristor better than the drifted states, because a jump change in conductance reflects a sharp and significant change in the geometry of the filament. Moreover, the timing of the jumps is just as important as their total number over the recording time. For example, it may turn out that most of the jumps occurred in the first 10 seconds of a G(t) measurement, or, say, in the first 100 seconds. Obviously, the first case can be regarded as a much more unstable version of the filament. Fig. In addition to the above results, we would like to note here the potential of statistical analysis of the stability of quantized conductance levels in memristors as a tool for studying the mechanism of RS in them. For example, though we previously established that RS in PPX-based memristors is driven by the ECM mechanism with a small number of conductive Cu filaments In view of the experimental signatures of the enhanced stability of the lowest-conductance states in Cu/PPX/ITO memristors and a positive effect of the reading voltage on the filament stability, here we discuss a theoretical model of the effect of a quantum current through a filament on its shape and stability. We use a simple continuous model, in which the filament is described in terms of a spatial domain D with a certain profile, the conduction electrons being confined to it and exerting pressure on its walls (Fig. where m * is the electron effective mass, = h/2π is the reduced Planck's constant, ψ(x) is the electron field operator, and σ is the surface energy per unit area of the filament lateral surface Σ lat . The first and the second terms in Ĥ describe the free conduction electrons inside the filament and the surface tension, respectively. The third term fixes the total volume V 0 of the filament via a Lagrange multiplier λ; in what follows, we will also discuss the same model without the volume constraint, which formally corresponds to setting λ = 0. We choose a simple axisymmetric filament corresponding to 0 ≤ r ≤ R(z), 0 ≤ z ≤ L in cylindrical coordinates, with the asymptotic radii R(0) = R(L) = R 0 , and an electron wave with zero angular momentum, i.e., independent of the azimuthal angle φ (see Fig. where J ν (x) are the Bessel functions of the first kind, ζ m is the mth zero of J 0 , and k m = 2m * E/ 2 -ζ 2 m /R 2 0 is the channel wavenumber. After finding the amplitude transmission and reflection matrices t m,M (E), r m,M (E), and thus the scattering wave function ψ(r, z), one can find the "quantum pressure" exerted by a flowing current I on the lateral surface of the filament (for details, see Appendix B): where the transmission probability T (M → all|E) contains a sum over all open output channels. For simplicity, in this work we will use a monochromatic approximation with E near the Fermi energy E F ; in general, one has to integrate over the energies and take a sum over all open channels (see Eq. (B8)). The quantum pressure force is accompanied by the surface tension trying to minimize the area of the surface: In our calculations, we use the value of the surface energy σ = 1.2 N/m for copper filaments from Ref. dynamics. An ab initio study is far beyond the scope of the present work; instead, our simple model, containing a small number of parameters, is easier to analyze and readily gives estimations of the effects in question. Indeed, before resorting to numerical simulations of the quantum transport, it is instructive to estimate the forces driving the evolution of a filament with a single open channel (n = 1). In the case of a perfect cylindrical geometry with radius R = const, the first channel opens for R = R min = ζ 1 2 /2m * E F ≈ 1.8 Å (see Eq. ( Though this outward pressure even turns out to dominate the surface tension forces for R = R min , a channel with R = 1.5R min ≈ 2.7 Å has a surface tension f ∼ -0.03 eV/ Å3 stabilizing the effect of a much weaker quantum pressure p ∼ 0.005 eV/ Å3 . Moreover, for R = R min but a lower voltage, the surface tension can clearly counteract the quantum pressure. In any case, it turns out that the two effects may be competing in the typical range of parameters pertaining to memristor operation. The above picture may drastically change for a channel having a "defect", e.g., in the form of a constriction (see Figs. Since a direct solution of Eq. ( Let us now discuss the effects the quantum pressure may have on the evolution of the filament profile. Leaving a full dynamical theory beyond the scope of the present study, we simply optimize the filament profile R(z) using gradient descent iterations under the action of the pressure and surface tension forces. As mentioned above, we consider two cases, with and without the volume constraint L 0 πR 2 (z)dz = V 0 , and in the first case, the iterations are performed along the constraint surface: where α > 0 is the learning rate. The results of our simulations are presented in Fig. If we lift the volume constraint, the picture changes drastically, see Fig. The filament profile optimizations in Fig. Therefore, without providing an atomistic simulation of the filament evolution within the present study, we still expect the quantum pressure to be able to contribute to stability of thin filaments at the level of tens of percent. There are also other factors that appear to be important for the evolution of atomic-scale filaments, e.g., the surface energy can, in principle, be way smaller than its macroscopic values; also, at higher voltages U 1 V, charge redistribution between copper atoms and ions should be accounted for, coupling the atomistic dynamics with electrochemical kinetics. The effect of the nontrivial distribution of the electrostatic potential was not included in our simple model either: in fact, the corresponding forces acting on the copper ions in a strong electric field may compete with the recoil effects discussed by us here. These effects are clearly to be included into the simulations in further, generalized versions of the model. Thus, strictly speaking, the recoil nature of the observed current-enhanced stability effect does not completely follow from the present model, requiring a multiscale atomistic simulation, such as the one in Ref. We have thus studied the effects of retention statistics in Cu/PPX/ITO memristors and suggested a theoretical framework for analyzing the evolution of thin filaments. On both sides of the research, we have observed a somewhat counterintuitive effect: a raised reading voltage stabilizes the resistive state. Indeed, at first glance, both due to Joule heating effects and to copper ion migration, the applied voltage is likely to destroy the filaments or make them grow. In contrast, we have observed that even a negative reading voltage U read = -0.1 V, which is meant to pull the memristor towards its off-state, helps it to maintain its on-state with a quantized conductance. Moreover, for both voltage signs, U read = ±0.1 V, the effect is especially pronounced for the lowest-conductance states of the memristor; our measurements justify its existence for these states with a 99% significance. In fact, it was an idea coming from an order-of-magnitude estimation of the recoil effects (see Sec. II C) that served as a motivation for the experimental analysis of retention statistics at different voltages, including the negative ones. Believing that this could not be just a coincidence, using both the theory and the experiment, we have further found a strong indication of the importance of the effects studied in the process of RS. In particular, we have demonstrated that at voltages typical for RS, the geometries of thin filaments become driven by the quantum pressure forces, due to the recoil of flowing charge carriers, and these forces, together with the surface tension, tend to set the transmission probability either to T = 0, or to the ballistic one, T = 1. It seems interesting then to study retention statistics under different voltages in other types of memristors, possibly matching the existence of the current-enhanced stability effect with the clearly observed quantized conductance levels in these devices. Another direction that has to be further followed is the simulation of electron recoil within an atomistic, possibly, multiscale ab initio-molecular dynamics framework. This clearly is a more challenging study, for which, however, the present work can feature as an inspiring proof of principle. On the experimental side, such research can be fuelled by our new technique of analyzing the retention statistics in different conditions of the memristor operation. Working in a "non-invasive", non-disturbing way considerably below the RS voltage, this technique is able to extract important data about the formation, evolution, and decay of conductive filaments, and, consequently, about the RS effect. We hope that this technique and the new possible mechanism of filament stability we have suggested in this work will pave the way toward a better understanding of RS and retention of resistive states in memristors and will eventually open up new opportunities of their rational design. PPX-based memristors were fabricated using the following method. The commercially purchased 20 × 20 mm 2 ITOcoated glass (the bottom electrode, with the ITO thickness around 50 nm) was used as a substrate, and the parylene-N layers (∼ 100 nm in thickness) were deposited on it by the gas-phase surface polymerization method using an SCS Labcoater PDS 2010 vacuum deposition system. PDS 2010 transforms a parylene dimer (2,2-para-cyclophane or its derivatives) into a gaseous monomer; the material polymerizes on the substrate by deposition at room temperature. The method provides a uniform polymer application on all sides of the substrate, resulting in a truly conformal coating. To improve adhesion and ensure a uniform PPX coating, the substrates were thoroughly cleaned of oils and solvents beforehand. After that, the top 0.2 × 0.5 mm 2 Cu electrodes with a thickness of ∼ 500 nm were deposited by magnetron sputtering through a shadow mask using a Torr MagSput 4G2-RF/DC deposition system. As a result, we obtained an array of single Cu/PPX/ITO memristors. Structural investigations were carried out with the transmission electron microscope Titan 80-300 (FEI, USA). The cross-sectional preparation of the memristive samples was done by the focused ion beam method on Helios 600i. Memristive characteristics of the devices were measured using a Cascade Microtech PM5 analytical probe station; the voltage pulses were supplied by a Keithley 2636B SourceMeter, programmed in LabView. All experiments were performed at room temperature. After fixing the total number of channels to m max = 10 and solving these equations, we revealed the wave function in the whole scattering domain again by virtue of Eq. (B1). The expression Namely, the normal-normal component of the stress tensor, related to the pressure, reads when evaluated on the lateral surface Σ lat with ψ = 0. To obtain the pressure, it remains to fix the normalization of the wave function so that |ψ| (B8) This result, in particular, takes the form of Eq. ( D