Absorption of angular momentum from a high intensity laser pulse can lead to the generation of strong axial magnetic fields in plasma. The effect, known as the inverse Faraday effect can generate kilo-Tesla strength, multi-picosecond, axial magnetic fields extending over hundreds of microns in underdense plasma. In this paper we explore the effect with ultra-high intensity circularly polarized Gaussian beams and linearly polarized orbital angular momentum beams comparing analytic expressions with 3D particle-in-cell simulations. We develop a model for the transverse magnetic field profiles, introduce a new model for the temporal decay, and show that while the magnetic field strength is independent of plasma density, it has a strong dependence on the laser beam waist. The inverse Faraday effect (IFE) describes the generation of axial magnetic fields when angular momentum is transferred from a laser pulse to plasma. If the pulse is circularly polarized (CP) and of relativistic intensity, the generated magnetic field strength can be on the order of 100's of Tesla, last several picoseconds, and extend over millimeter scales There are several advantages of using OAM beams in high powered lasers as opposed to CP beams: unlike CP beams that carry a maximum spin angular momentum of σ z per photon where σ z = {±1} is the spin number (σ z = 0 for linearly polarized (LP) beams), OAM beams carry an angular momentum of (σ z + ) per photon where is an azimuthal mode number that can take any integer value Recent works have looked at simulating IFE driven * longman1@llnl.gov magnetic fields from OAM beams in various configurations: OAM beams with radial and azimuthal polarization In this work, we explore the spatial, and for the first time the temporal scaling of IFE magnetic fields driven by ultra-high intensity (I 0 ≈ 10 20 Wcm -2 ) CP Gaussian and LP OAM beams. We develop new analytic models for both the spatial and temporal scales of the magnetic field and verify them with full 3D relativistic particle-incell (PIC) simulations. We demonstrate strong coupling of laser angular momentum to plasma through ponderomotive forces, resulting in axial magnetic fields in excess of 1 kT, more than 200 μm in length, and lasting several picoseconds in good agreement with the predictions of our analytic models, and previous experiments using CP Gaussian beams. A circularly polarized beam is classically defined by its polarization vector rotating about the laser propagation axis k z in either a clockwise or counter-clockwise direction. Similarly, a beam carrying a well defined OAM is typically characterized by a helical wavefront also orientated about the k z vector with the helix rotating in either a clockwise or counter-clockwise direction where w 0 is the beam waist in the focal plane, z 0 = kw 2 0 /2 is the Rayleigh range, and Z = z 0 + iz is the complex beam parameter. Taking the modulus squared of the field amplitude given in Eq. 1 for | | ≥ 1, we find the so called "donut" mode intensity profiles that are symmetric about the k z axis; the helical phase is lost in the modulus resulting in no azimuthal structure in the intensity profile The ponderomotive force acting on an electron associated with a high intensity focal spot can be given by, F p = -m e c 2 ∇ 1 + |a| 2 where a = eE/m e cω 0 is the normalized vector potential, e and m e are the electron charge and mass respectively, and c is the speed of light. In the standard case of a high-intensity Gaussian beam a finite energy maybe transferred from the laser to plasma electrons through ponderomotive scattering Recent work has analyzed the motion of free electrons in a LG beam in more detail, expanding to first and second order perturbations To model the IFE, we start with the angular momentum conservation model used in Haines Here, n e is the electron density, α abs is the laser absorption fraction per unit length, M z is the laser angular momentum density, v er , v eθ are the radial and azimuthal electron velocities respectively, and ν ei is the electronion collision frequency. E θ , B r , and B z are the plasma azimuthal electric, radial magnetic and axial magnetic fields respectively. Assuming the electrons are in steady state, ignoring the inertial and collisional terms, and using Faraday's law, we obtain the time rate of change of the axial magnetic field approximately as For an OAM mode that is either CP or LP, the angular momentum density can be given by Radial differentiation of Eq. 4 is straightforward, and if we assume a Gaussian temporal function, then the integration of Eq. 3 is trivial given g(t) 2 dt ≈ 3τ /4 where τ is the temporal full-width half maximum (FWHM). By introducing the pulse temporal function g(t), we are limiting the IFE to only be driven when the laser field is present. Though the magnetic field does not instantaneously disappear after the laser has passed, its evolution is no longer governed by the IFE, but rather the plasma dynamics which will be discussed later. Substituting Eq. 1 into Eq's. 3 and 4, assuming the laser absorption rate and electron density is constant in space and time (no ponderomotive channelling), a Gaussian temporal pulse shape, and substituting the laser power P = πI 0 w 2 0 /2 we obtain the following expression for the axial magnetic field, The direct proportionality on and σ z in Eq. 5 indicates that the axial magnetic field direction can be controlled by changing the sign of OAM helicity, or the CP handedness. The helicity of a LP OAM mode, the magnetic field direction and the corresponding electron motion is illustrated in Fig. Several transverse magnetic field profiles are plotted in Fig. The dependence of α abs on is not currently understood for any absorption mechanism. At laser intensities of Iλ 2 ≥ 10 19 Wcm -2 μm 2 and pulse duration's greater than 100 fs, we can estimate the pump depletion length in underdense plasma (n e > 0.01n c ) as L pd = n c cτ /n e where τ is the temporal FWHM Given the absorption is independent of beam intensity and beam waist, we assume the model is approximately valid for low order OAM modes. If τ 100 fs, and n e 0.01n c , we can use Eq's. 5 and 6 to estimate the peak axial magnetic field strength of the (|σ kT. The fourth power dependence on the laser beam waist indicates a strong dependence on the beam f-number and relativistic self-focusing. Eq. 7 should therefore be considered an under-estimate as the beam will self-focus beyond the diffraction limit giving rise to much stronger magnetic fields. Using Eq. 7, we can compare its prediction with the experimental results previously measured using CP Gaussian beams Circularly polarizing large diameter, high power laser beams is not trivial requiring fragile and costly optics. However, with the new generation of PW class lasers coupled with off-axis spiral phase mirrors FIG. To simulate the IFE, we use the 3D relativistic PIC code EPOCH The laser pulse is tracked with a moving window 200 μm long and 48 μm × 48 μm in the transverse directions with grid cell sizes of 50 nm × 80 nm × 80 nm respectively. We use 4 particles per cell and have open boundaries throughout. After the magnetic field has been generated and before significant laser diffraction and filamentation occurs, the moving window stops at 1 ps and the evolution of the magnetic field is observed. Simulations were run for the (σ z = 0, = 0), (σ z = 1, = 0), (σ z = 0, = 1) and (σ z = 0, = 2) laser modes, with parameters P = 65 TW, τ = 100 fs, λ = 1 μm, w 0 = 6 μm, and n e = 3 × 10 19 cm -3 . A fifth simulation with (σ z = 0, = 1), P = 50 TW, τ = 100 fs, λ = 1 μm, w 0 = 7.2 μm, and n e = 3 × 10 19 cm -3 was also run to verify the decay model. A simulation was first run for the linearly polarized Gaussian beam to verify the null magnetic field result, and also to verify the absorption model. While we do not show the simulation results in this work the null field was verified, and the absorption rate of this beam was found to be 0.43 mm -1 in excellent agreement with the predicted value of 0.435 mm -1 from Eq. 6. A second identical simulation was run but with a circularly polarized Gaussian beam (σ z = 1, = 0) that measured absorption slightly enhanced to 0.48 mm -1 . Given the peak intensity of the CP Gaussian beam is I 0 = 1.15 × 10 20 W cm -2 , the interaction with the plasma is strongly nonlinear with effects such as relativistic selffocussing, ponderomotive channeling, and filamentation strongly dominating the interaction. This can make it challenging to get clean magnetic field profiles out of the FIG. simulation, especially at later times when the boundary conditions start to have an effect on the simulation. Because of this, we examine the magnetic field at early times before these nonlinear effects have time to sufficiently grow. Fig. We find a remarkable overlap between the theory and the simulations at early times but later diverges from the theory as the laser begins to diffract, self-focus, and filament. In particular we see the peak magnetic field strength enhance beyond the vacuum theory at t = 0.93 ps due to the self-focussing. We also note the persistence of the magnetic fields after the laser pulse has passed due to the residual magnetization of the plasma. Next, simulations with LP OAM modes were run using both = 1 and = 2 modes, the results of which are given in Fig. Examining Fig. tile 4g) and h), we see the magnetic field expand radially outwards without compromising its peak strength. This surprising result could be related to the compressed electron density on axis giving rise to a higher azimuthal current, and a slow radial expansion outwards to fill the voids left by the ponderomotive force. For the = 2 simulation shown in Fig. In the current configuration the plasma is radially isotropic and the axial magnetic field length is essentially limited to the Rayleigh length of the laser. For longer magnetic fields, one could use a preformed plasma channel to guide the laser and mitigate the effects of diffraction but is not explored in the current work. Fig. At later times in Fig. The lifetimes of the magnetic fields driven by the IFE at relativistic intensities in collisionless plasmas are poorly understood. If we consider the plasma beta, (β = 2μ 0 n e k B T /B 2 ) where μ 0 is the permeability of free space, k is Boltzmann's and T is the plasma temperature, we find that for magnetic field strengths of 1000 T, electrons with energies T < 100 keV are trapped in the magnetic field, while higher energy electrons are able to escape leading to the subsequent decay of the magnetic field. To model the decay, we consider the motion of the hot electrons in helical motion with both azimuthal and radial velocity components. From Fig. The magnetic field as a function of time from a rotating cylinder of plasma can be derived from the Biot-Savart law We note that the axial length of the plasma for integration is restricted to approximately one pulse length cτ . As the plasma is collisionless, we can assume the angular momentum acquired by the electrons is in steady state, that is L z = m e v θ r 0 is constant. Solving Eq. 8 is straightforward if we perform the radial integral first yielding the result, Here, B 0 is the peak axial magnetic field at genesis. To estimate the radial velocity of the electrons we can use the gradient of the plasma pressure Here, m i and Z are the ion mass and ionization state respectively. By using the ion mass, we assume the plasma to be quasineutral which was previously shown to be approximately valid on these timescales and laser intensities There are no known analytic solutions to Eq. 11 and we opt instead to use a parabolic approximation of ψ given by, where A is an arbitrary amplitude scaling variable that is lost when we use the ∂/∂r operator. The soltuion of the ODE is elementary using the parabolic approximation. Averaging the radial velocity over all positions within a beam waist, we find Substituting our previous simulation values, we find an average radial velocity of v r ≈ 0.01c. Given this, we can use the approximation that (cτ ) 2 (v r t) 2 given the timescale of the magnetic field decay is observed to be on the order of a picosecond, allowing us to simplify Eq. 9 to Here t D = w 0 /(v er √ 2) is the decay parameter for the | | = 1 mode, and t 0 is the genesis time. The factor of 0.582 is set such that B(0) = B 0 . Combining the results of Eq. 13 and Eq. 14 allows us to derive the scaling law for the time decay parameter of the | | = 1 driven magnetic fields, where A is the atomic mass number of the plasma. While this model is not valid for | | ≥ 2, it could be suitable for also modelling the CP = 0 mode given its similarities to the | | = 1 magnetic field profile. Using our simulation values, we estimate the decay parameter as t D = 0.8 ps. Determining the decay time numerically is challenging due to the magnetic field instabilities, as well as laser self-focussing causing the magnetic field to be dynamic on axis. We therefore radially, azimuthally, and longitudinally average the magnetic field through a cylinder of radius r cyl = w 0 / √ 2 and length cτ . The longitudinal region is indicated by the dashed green bars from z = 200 -230 μm as shown in Fig. Using a nonlinear least squares fit of Eq. 14 to the data, we find a numerical decay parameter of 0.86 ps for the σ z = 0, = 1, w 0 = 6 μm mode, shown by the red dashed line in Fig. Finally for the (σ z = 1, = 0) case we find a predicted decay also of 0.8 ps, and numerically find a decay time of 0.69 ps as shown by the black dashed line. This reduced decay time could be due to the stronger self-focussing of the CP Gaussian mode as it has a higher peak intensity than the LG modes. The increased self-focussing results in a smaller beam waist, and hence a shorter decay time. Given the dependence of the decay time on the laser beam waist, one could control the magnetic field lifetime by adjusting the f-number to higher values at a cost of magnetic field strength. An optimal f-number is therefore needed to balance the magnetic field strength, axial length, and decay time to suit a given application of interest. Alternatively one could adjust the decay time of the magnetic field by changing the plasma to a heavier ion species. In summary, we have successfully demonstrated and characterized the IFE with CP Gaussian and linearly polarized OAM modes over large spatial and temporal scales. We have derived a description of OAM driven magnetic fields in underdense plasma and introduced a model for the subsequent decay of the magnetic field. Magnetic fields with strengths up to 1 kT extending upto 200 μm and persisting for several picoseconds have been demonstrated. Simulations indicate an increased absorption rate when using increased OAM mode numbers. The decay time, axial length, and magnetic field strength are all functions of the laser beam waist and can be optimized to suit an experiment as such. Plasma channel guiding of the laser pulse could extend the magnetic field over several Rayleigh lengths and would instead be limited to the pump depletion length. With the recent demonstration of high intensity OAM modes in high-power laser facilities with parameters similar to those assumed in this work, experimental verification of the magnetic fields could now be feasible 