Group IV Ge1-xSnx semiconductors hold the premise of enabling broadband silicon-integrated infrared optoelectronics due to their tunable bandgap energy and directness. Herein, we exploit these attributes along with the enhanced lattice strain relaxation in Ge/Ge0.92Sn0.08 core-shell nanowire heterostructures to implement highly responsive, room-temperature short-wave infrared nanoscale photodetectors. Atomic-level studies confirm the uniform shell composition and its higher crystallinity with respect to thin films counterparts. The demonstrated Ge/Ge0.92Sn0.08 p-type field-effect nanowire transistors exhibit superior optoelectronic properties achieving simultaneously a relatively high mobility, a high ON/OFF ratio, and a high responsivity, in addition to a broadband absorption in the short-wave infrared range. Indeed, the reduced bandgap of the Ge0.92Sn0.08 shell yields an extended cutoff wavelength of 2.1 μm, with a room-temperature responsivity reaching 2.7 A/W at 1550 nm. These results highlight the potential of Ge/Ge1-xSnx core/shell nanowires as silicon-compatible building blocks for nanoscale integrated infrared photonics. Group IV semiconductor Ge1-xSnx alloys have been at the core of the relentless course toward monolithically integrated infrared optoelectronics and photonics on silicon platforms. A promising paradigm to minimize strain in Ge1-xSnx is to grow the material as nanowires (NWs) or NW heterostructures, Back-gated single Ge/Ge0.92Sn0.08 core/shell NWs devices were fabricated after transfer on a SiO2/Si substrate by electron beam lithography (EBL), and Cr and Au were evaporated to form metal contacts. For comparison, single Ge NW devices were also fabricated following the same protocol. A representative SEM image of a Ge/Ge0.92Sn0.08 NW device is shown in Figure where g m is the transconductance, defined as ∂I ds ∂V gs . Gate capacitance C ox is estimated from the finite element method (FEM) (see Supplementary Information S2 for details), and L is the gate channel length. The estimated field-effect hole mobility of single Ge/Ge0.92Sn0.08 core/shell NW modulated by gate voltage at Vds = -0.1 V is displayed in Figure To elucidate the room-temperature optical response of single NW devices, the output curves with a floating gate acquired in dark and under a 1550 nm laser illumination were measured, as shown in Figure where P is the power density and A is the geometrical cross-section area of the NW device. In NWs, the absorption cross-section is larger than their geometrical one, Polarization-dependent photocurrent measurements under 1550 nm illumination performed on single Ge/Ge0.92Sn0.08 and Ge NW photodetectors (Figure where I  and I ⊥ are the photocurrent generated by light polarized parallel and perpendicular to the NW axis, respectively. Indeed, the experimental polarization ratio of Ge NW at a diameter of 60 nm is 0.9, which agrees with the predicted polarization ratio of 0.96 (ε Ge = 16). In a Ge/Ge0.92Sn0.08 NW at a diameter of ~240 nm, a polarization ratio ρ = 0.3 is obtained, which is ~3 times lower than the value measured in the thinner Ge NW. In principle, both Ge1-xSnx shell thickness and Ge core diameter can be precisely controlled to reduce the overall NW diameter and, if needed, further engineer ρ , which will enable device optimization for polarization-sensitive infrared light detection using Ge/ Ge1-xSnx core/shell NWs. Spectrally resolved photocurrent measurements performed on a Ge/Ge0.92Sn0.08 core/shell NW (260 nm diameter) and a Ge NW (100 nm diameter) are shown in Figure Table On the other hand, the core/shell NW geometry is a promising approach to form nanoscale semiconductors with high material quality resulting from the relaxed strain along the radial direction, which can help form heterostructures with limited defects even on latticemismatched materials. In summary, we demonstrated room-temperature Ge/Ge0.92Sn0.08 core/shell NW photodetectors with an extended cutoff wavelength of 2.1 μm. These NWs allow an enhanced relaxation of the compressive strain and a reduction of growth defects that are inherent to thin films and typically associated with a limited performance. Consequently, the grown Ge/Ge0.92Sn0.08 core/shell NWs exhibit a high crystallinity and a uniform Sn content, and single NW p-type FETs fabricated using these core/shell NWs provide a superior optoelectronic performance. A relatively high mobility (100 cm 2 V -1 s -1 in average), a high ON/OFF ratio (~10 2 ), and a high responsivity (2.7 A/W at 1550 nm) are simultaneously achieved, along with a broadband absorption in the SWIR range. Moreover, the Ge/Ge0.92Sn0.08 NW devices were also found to outperform Ge NW devices in both carrier mobility and optical response in the 1.55 μm wavelength telecommunication band, where resonance peaks can be controlled by tuning the NW diameter. These results highlight the potential of Ge/Ge1-xSnx core/shell NWs for Sicompatible integrated optoelectronics in the extended SWIR wavelength range, which is relevant to a variety of nanoscale sensing and imaging applications. Epitaxial growth. The VLS-growth of the Ge/Ge0.92Sn0.08 core/shell NWs was performed in a low-pressure CVD reactor using monogermane (GeH4) and tin tetrachloride (SnCl4) precursors and ultrapure H2 as carrier gas. First, a 2 nm-thick Au layer was deposited on a Si (111) wafer substrate, followed by HF-last cleaning process prior to loading in the CVD reactor. The Ge NWs were then grown using a two-step process, with a nucleation step at 400 °C under GeH4 supply and Ge NW growth at 330°C. Next, the GeH4 supply was removed, and the sample cooled down to 310 °C where the Ge0.92Sn0.08 shell was grown for 20 minutes using Ge/Sn ratio in the gas phase of 120. Characterization. Aberration corrected (AC) HAADF-STEM was carried out using a FEI Titan probe corrected transmission electron microscope. Electron Energy Loss Spectroscopy in STEM mode (EELS-STEM) compositional maps have been obtained in a Tecnai F20 microscope by using a GATAN QUANTUM filter. Device Fabrication and Optoelectronic Measurements. The Ge/Ge0.92Sn0.08 NWs were dropcasted onto a highly doped p-type Si substrate with a 100-nm-thick SiO2 layer. Then spin-coat methyl methacrylate (MMA) and poly (methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) on the SiO2/Si substrate contains NWs. EBL (Raith 150) was used to define the drain and source contact. And the Ebeam evaporator was used to deposit Cr/Au 20/280 nm. The room temperature optical and electrical measurements of Ge/Ge0.92Sn0.08 core/shell NW and Ge NW devices were conducted on a probe station connected with a Keithley 4200 A semiconductor analyzer. Light from 1550 nm laser diode was focused by a 10× objective lens before hit the NW devices. Using a knife edge, the diameter of the Gaussain beam spot size is measured as about 53 μm. The spectral photoresponsivity was measured with Bruker Vertex 80 Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) spectrometer connected with a Zurich Instruments lock-in amplifier which is triggered by an optical chopper. The electrical signal from the lock-in amplifier is fed into the FTIR to get the photocurrent as a function of wavelength, and the power of the NIR light source is calibrated by a reference InGaAs photodiode. Table 