Mechanofluorochromic materials are of great significance for the fabrication of innovative sensors and optoelectronics. However, efficient mechanofluorochromic materials are rarely explored due to the deficiency of existing design strategies. Here, we demonstrate the incarceration of aggregation-induced emission (AIE) materials within metal-organic framework (MOF) single crystals to construct a composite system with turn-on mechanofluorochromism. A new type of AIE@MOF material was designed: integrating a zeolitic MOF (ZIF-71) and tetraphenylethylene (TPE, a topical AIE material) to generate a TPE@ZIF-71 system with exceptional turn-on type mechanofluorochromism. Using terahertz vibrational spectroscopy, we show the unique fluorochromism emanates from the enhanced nanoconfinement effect exerted by ZIF-71 host on TPE guest under pressure and its permanent fluorescence after stress release. Compared with pure TPE, we demonstrate the nanoconfinement in AIE@MOF not only changes the TPE's turn-off type sensing behavior to a turn-on type, but boosts the original sensitivity markedly by tenfold. Significantly, because ZIF-71 prevents the spontaneous recrystallization of TPE upon unloading, this allows TPE@ZIF-71 to record the stress history. This is the first demonstration of the Guest@MOF system combining the concepts of AIE and MOF; its promising properties and potential engineering applications will stimulate new directions pertaining to luminescent stress sensors and smart optics. Mechanofluorochromic material is a new type of smart material that changes its fluorescent color when subjected to an external mechanical force stimuli. The AIE materials, contrary to ACQ materials, have zero or only weak emission when in a diluted solution state but emit strong luminescence in the aggregated state, To address these challenges and promote the engineering application of TPE, herein we propose the use of metal-organic frameworks (MOFs) as a 'host' and TPE as a 'guest' to form a TPE@MOF system. Notably, MOFs have highly porous and extended crystalline structures, giving themselves the ability to capture, isolate and stabilize other emitter molecules, including bulky fluorophores. In this work, we report how TPE can be encapsulated into the zeolitic imidazolate framework-71 (ZIF-71) single crystal through an easy-to-implement one-pot synthetic method. Compared with the weak turn-off type sensing performance of pure TPE in the < 1.5 GPa pressure range, the introduction of ZIF-71 successfully allows the obtained TPE@ZIF-71 materials to exhibit turn-on sensing and enhances the sensitivity by 10 folds. Furthermore, the ZIF-71 solves the problem of spontaneous recrystallization in TPE, enabling the retainment of mechanofluorochromic behavior after the pressure is removed. Unlike the poor processability of other guest@MOF systems, we have successfully prepared turn-on type pressure sensing fibers and membranes with industrialization potential by leveraging TPE@ZIF-71/polymer composites. To the best of our knowledge, the TPE@ZIF-71 system is the first guest@MOF system to realize the turn-on type mechanofluorochromic sensing capability. This work has paved a new pathway for practical engineering applications of AIE-based mechanofluorochromic materials. The synthesis of TPE@ZIF-71, known as the one-pot synthesis method, is straightforward: by directly mixing solutions of zinc acetate, 4,5-dichloroimidazole (dcIm), and TPE at room temperature. The full details are given in the Experimental Section. Figure To ensure that the TPE is captured by the ZIF-71 pores instead of being attached to the surface, we conducted near-field infrared nanospectroscopy characterization. This technique combines scattering-type scanning near-field optical microscopy (s-SNOM) and nano-Fourier transform infrared (nanoFTIR) spectroscopy, which can perform detailed chemical and physical analysis on the surface of the nanocrystal to determine the presence/absence of guest material on the external surface of crystals. Similarly, using Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy with attenuated total reflection (ATR-FTIR) characterization (Figure To understand the photophysical properties of the resulting composite system, we performed fluorescence spectroscopy on the TPE (pristine guest), ZIF-71 (pristine host), and TPE@ZIF-71 samples (Figure Using the time-correlated single-photon-counting (TCSPC) technique to analyze the lifetime data of TPE@ZIF-71, ZIF-71, and TPE, we further verified the assumption made above. The lifetimes (τ) of TPE@ZIF-71 and ZIF-71 shown in Figure To study the mechanofluorochromism of the TPE@ZIF-71 system, we compressed it into pellets under different pressures using a hydraulic press. Figures Then the excitation and emission spectra of these pellets were measured and analyzed (Figure shows that the TPE@ZIF-71 pellets present a larger fluorescence intensity and peak wavelength under a higher pelleting pressure. The observed trend of increasing intensity and shifting wavelength also shows a certain degree of linear relationship with the applied nominal pressure (Figure Moreover, Figure Beamline B22 MIRIAM at the Diamond Light Source (Oxfordshire, UK), more evidence was obtained to substantiate the proposed mechanism. As shown in Figure The SR-FTIR spectra therefore confirm our proposed theory that the TPE experiences a more significant mechanically-induced caging effect as the pressure increases. On the other hand, from the XRD spectra of pellets (Figure Therefore, there will be more interaction between the discrete linkers or the remaining framework, causing the excitation peak to fall and redshift. The gradual disappearance of the 565 nm LMCT peak also proves our inference. The mechanism of structural change of TPE@ZIF-71 under pressure is illustrated in Scheme 1. Through the comparison of other TPE@MOF composites, the proposed mechanofluorochromic mechanism is further validated. Meanwhile, the TPE@ZIF-71 system is also proven to have a better sensitivity than other TPE@MOF systems. Here we chose another two "stable" MOFs, UiO-67 (UiO: University of Oslo) and MIL-68(In) (MIL: Materials Institute Lavoisier), to encapsulate TPE. Figure Unlike other delicate guest@MOF systems, In summary, through a simple one-pot synthesis method, we successfully encapsulated the bulky TPE monomers as guest into the pores of the ZIF-71 host framework. The new TPE@ZIF-71 composite based on the Guest@MOF concept, for the first time, exhibits the turn-on mechanofluorochromic sensing behavior under stress. Furthermore, TPE@ZIF-71 can retain the results of the mechanofluorochromism after the pressure is removed. Utilizing farinfrared vibrational spectroscopy to probe the THz collective modes of TPE@ZIF-71, it was determined that this stress-induced response originates from the caging effect bestowed by MOF pores upon the TPE molecules, where (permanent) plastic deformation of the ZIF-71 framework constraints the intramolecular rotation and motion of TPE under stress/pressure. Compared with pure TPE and other TPE@MOF systems, the introduction of ZIF-71 not only reverses the turn-off type sensing of TPE (observed at pressure < 1.5 GPa) Synthesis of TPE@ZIF-71: 90 mL methanolic solution of 19.2 mmol 4,5-dichloroimidazole (dcIm), 10 mL tetrahydrofuran (THF) solution of 0.2 mmol tetraphenylethylene (TPE), and 90 mL methanolic solution of 4.8 mmol zinc acetate were quickly combined under stirring. After stirring for 24 hours, the sample was centrifuged at 8000 rpm for 10 minutes to remove excess reactants, and then washed 4 times (2 times with THF, 2 times with methanol). The crystals of TPE@ZIF-71 were separated from the suspension by centrifugation at 8000 rpm for 10 mins. The procedure for preparing ZIF-71 was the same, except no TPE was added. Synthesis of TPE@UiO-67: 68 mL dimethylformamide (DMF) solution of 4.8 mmol biphenyl-4,4′-dicarboxylic acid (BPDC) plus triethylamine (NEt3, 14.4 mmol) was combined with 10 mL THF solution of 0.2 mmol TPE. After the combination, 20 mL acetic acid solution of 4.8 mmol zirconium chloride was heated at 80 °C for one hour and then added into the mixture, producing a sol-like product. Subsequently, the product was heated at 120 °C for 24 hours and washed thoroughly 5 times (2 times with THF, 2 times with DMF, 1 time with methanol) to remove any excess guests adhered to the MOF surface. The nanocrystals were separated from the suspension by centrifugation at 8000 rpm for 10 mins. Synthesis of TPE@MIL-68(In): 9 mL DMF solution of 4.8 mmol benzenedicarboxylate (BDC) plus triethylamine (NEt3, 9.6 mmol) was combined with 2 mL THF solution of 0.2 mmol TPE. After the combination, 6 mL DMF solution of 4.8 mmol indium nitrate was immediately added into the mixture. Then the product was washed thoroughly 5 times (2 times with THF, 2 times with DMF, 1 time with methanol) to remove the guests adhered to the MOF surface. The nanocrystals of TPE@MIL-68(In) were separated from the suspension by centrifugation at 8000 rpm for 10 mins. Sample Preparation for Fluorescence Characterization: TPE suspension was prepared by diluting 0.1 M TPE THF solution in water (the volume ratio of water to THF was 99:1). The pellets for mechanofluorochromism study were made by using a manual hydraulic press (Specac Atlas) with a 1.2 cm diameter die under compressive forces of 1, 2, 3, and 4 tones. The solution for electrospinning was prepared by dissolving 13.7 g of polyurethane (PU) in 86.3 g of N, N-dimethylformamide (DMF), yeilding 13.7 wt.% of PU in DMF, and afterward, 100 mg of TPE@ZIF-71 powder was added into a 10 g of as-prepared solution. The mixed solution was loaded into a 5 mL glass syringe with a G-19 needle emitter (nozzle) connected and dispensed utilizing an automatic syringe pump. The infusion rate was set to 0.25 mL/h. A high voltage of 11.5 kV was applied between the nozzle and the base collector set 18 cm vertically apart. The polymer solution for doctor-blade membrane fabrication was prepared by dissolving 13.7 g HSV900 polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) powder in 86.3 g dimethylacetamide (DMA) to yield 13.7 wt.% PVDF in DMA. Then, 100 mg of TPE@ZIF-71 powder was added into the 10 g of 13.7 wt.% PVDF solution. The membranes were deposited using an automatic doctor-blade apparatus (MTI Corporation, MSK-AFA-II). The thickness was set to 0.95 mm, and the coating speed was set to 10 mm/s. The morphologies, optical phase images, and nanoFTIR results were examined using the neaSNOM instrument (neaspec GmbH) based on a tapping-mode AFM where a platinum-coated tip (cantilever resonance frequency 250 kHz, nominal tip radius ~20 nm) was illuminated by a broadband infrared laser. To suppress background contributions, the signal was modulated at the third harmonic of the tip frequency for optical phase images, and at the second harmonic for nanoFTIR absorption spectra. Each spectrum was obtained from averaging over 14 individual measurements with an integration time of 14 seconds, and subsequently normalized to the spectrum of the silicon substrate. The PXRD pattern was recorded using a Rigaku MiniFlex with a Cu Kα source (1.541 Å). Steady-state fluorescent spectra, lifetime, and QY were recorded employing the FS-5 spectrofluorometer (Edinburgh Instruments). For lifetime TCSPC measurement, a 362.5 nm laser was used and the stop condition was set to be at 10,000 counts. FTIR results were recorded by using a Nicolet iS10 FTIR spectrometer. TGA was performed using a TGA-Q50 machine (TA Instruments) equipped with a platinum sample holder under an N2 inert atmosphere at a heating rate of 10 °C/min from 30 to 800 °C. with an Attenuated Total Reflection (ATR) accessory (Bruker Optics, Germany). The mid-IR spectra were collected using a standard DLaDTGS detector. For the far-infrared spectral range below 700 cm -1 , a bolometer cooled by liquid helium was used for the detection of terahertz signals. All spectra were acquired with a resolution of 4 cm -1 and a scanner velocity of 20 kHz. Geometry optimization of the electronic ground state of TPE was performed using density functional theory (DFT) at the B3LYP/6-311G* level of theory, 