Given the many and varied roles of ions in living organisms, biocompatible organic ion sensors are a matter of considerable interest. In this work, simple, low-voltage, solid-state hygroscopic insulator field effect transistors (HIFETs) have been tested to characterise their ion-sensitive properties. Two biologically relevant salt solutions, sodium chloride (NaCl) and potassium chloride (KCl), were tested. To assess pH sensitivity, solutions of hydrochloric acid (HCl) and sodium hydroxide (NaOH) were also tested. The salts and acidic solutions caused similar, concentration-dependent changes in HIFET performance from 10 mM to 1 M, consistent with an increase in ion concentration in the hygroscopic insulator, increasing device capacitance. By contrast, basic solutions caused an overall decrease in device performance, consistent with a net removal of ions due to acid-base reactions between the insulator and the analyte. These results show that HIFETs exhibit promising sensitivity to a range of ions, and can therefore serve as platforms for future ion-selective devices. Ions play a wide variety of fundamental roles in biological systems. Ion fluxes are extensively involved in vital processes such as cellular signalling, cell volume regulation, and muscle contraction, regulated by selective ion channels and ion pumps in cell walls. In this work, we investigate the ion sensitivity of HIFETs using aqueous solutions of sodium chloride (NaCl), potassium chloride (KCl), hydrochloric acid (HCl) and sodium hydroxide (NaOH). We study the response of the HIFET drain-source current (Ids) to the deposition of these ionic solutions onto the gate electrode of the device and examine the effect on the figures of merit of the transistor. This study reveals the broad sensitivity of HIFETs to a range of ionic solutions and provides a vital foundation for future work toward optimising and functionalising ion sensitive and ion selective HIFETs. Detailed methods for HIFET fabrication are provided in previous works. The freestanding PEDOT:PSS gates were crosslinked using 1% divinyl sulfone (Sigma-Aldrich, V3700), along with additives 4-dodecylbenzenesulfonic acid (Sigma-Aldrich, 44198) and ethylene glycol (0.1% and 5.8%, respectively). The PEDOT:PSS solution was deposited into PTFE wells (8 uL per gate) and heated at 70°C for 30 minutes to dry, forming freestanding films. To test the sensitivity to different ions, 1 M solutions of NaCl, KCl, HCl and NaOH were prepared. HCl was diluted from a 32% stock solution (Ajax Finechem, AJA256). NaOH was prepared in deionized water from pellets (Chem-Supply, SA178). Additional concentrations were prepared by diluting successively with deionized water. HIFET characterisation was carried out using a Keysight B1500A semiconductor analyzer. Transient Ids sensing responses were recorded by depositing 5 μL of analyte onto the gate electrode above the channel between source and drain electrodes, while applying a constant Vg of -0.3 V and a Vds of -1 V. Forward and reverse transfer sweeps were recorded before and after deposition of the analyte. Gate voltage (Vg) was swept at an average rate of ~60 mV s -1 . Figures of merit were determined from the reverse transfer sweep. Methods for calculating figures of merit are given in previous reports. In common with previous reports, In an OTFT sensor, the analyte must interact with the device in such a way as to cause a detectable change in its electrical characteristics. The most direct means to probe the characteristics of an OTFT is to monitor the change in Ids over time, under fixed voltages. In Figure Figure The transient Ids is slow to reach a maximum, and proceeds in two stages, the first being smaller and faster. The response time is related to the initial hydration state of the device. Where the device is pre-hydrated with deionised water prior to testing, the Ids modulation is more rapid, while reaching a similar maximum (see Figure Overall, the sensitivity of HIFETs to both salts is similar, indicating that HIFETs are sensitive to both Na + and K + . Average modulations for KCl are generally slightly smaller, but the smaller response is also evident in the background signal to due to hydration. This suggests there was a difference in the initial state of hydration in both batches of devices (fabricated and tested separately), which can be expected to vary with ambient room humidity. At 10 mM and below, modulations begin to become indistinguishable from the background response due to hydration. Modulation in Ids for HCl and NaOH solutions is plotted in Figure Like the other analytes, the modulation becomes difficult to distinguish from the effect of water at 10 mM (pH 12). To gain deeper insight into the effect of ions on HIFET performance and the underlying mechanisms, changes in key figures of merit after deposition of the analyte were examined. Figure The ON/OFF ratio is the ratio of the maximum to minimum Ids recorded in the transfer curve. The maximum Ids, or the 'ON' current occurs at Vg = -1 V, while the minimum or 'OFF' current occurs around Vg = +0.8 V. In Figure Threshold voltage is strongly dependant on ion concentration (Figure From Figure Figure It is noteworthy that the figures of merit, particularly μsat×C, of HIFET sensors are highly sensitive to ion concentration, with good consistency between trials (as indicated by the small standard deviations). Unlike the modulations and β parameters extracted from the transient Ids response (Figure Key figures of merit for HIFETs before and after deposition of HCl and NaOH solutions of varied pH are shown in Figure The effect of basic, NaOH solutions, clearly exhibits a different underlying mechanism. NaOH solutions of pH 13 and 14 significantly decrease the ON/OFF ratio. An examination of the ON and OFF currents (see Figure Our results demonstrate that HIFETs, as fabricated here, are only sensitive to the extreme ends of the pH scale. At low analyte concentrations, from pH 3-12, the effect on HIFET figures of merit is not distinguishable from that of deionised water. This means that the sensitivity of HIFETs to other ions will not be significantly affected by normal background pH levels in the solution (for example, blood has pH level range of 7.35 to 7.45). Figure In our earlier study of HIFET H2O2 sensitivity, we noted an apparent relationship between the size of the Ids modulation and the initial charge density of the channel. That is, where device voltages caused an initially low charge density, the Ids modulation was larger. 19 This is not the case for ionic analytes. Instead, maximum modulations grow with increasingly negative Vg up to -0.3 V. This is consistent with the mechanism we have described. A more negative Vg ensures that an increase in capacitance will increase the doping in the channel. At -0.6 V, we observe that Ids decays rapidly over time. This behaviour was observed in the H2O2 sensitivity study. We have demonstrated HIFETs to be sensitive to a range of ionic solutions, NaCl, KCl, HCl, and NaOH, indicating a broad range of possible applications. Modulations in Ids and key figures of merit are highly dependent on concentration as well as the nature of the ionic solution (acidic or basic) and we have discussed the mechanisms of these changes. We proposed that the positive modulation in Ids for ionic solutions is due to the diffusion of the ions into the hygroscopic insulator, PVP, increasing the total capacitance of the device. The negative effect of NaOH on Ids is consistent with acid-base reactions between NaOH and the phenol groups of PVP, reducing the net ion concentration and device capacitance. Among the key figures of merit μsat×C, is more sensitive to concentration and can detect as low as 1mM concentration for KCl. In summary, HIFETs are platform devices with great potential to become effective ion sensors, by both improving sensitivity and achieving specific ion selectivity. In the future, the HIFETs can be made ion selective by incorporating ionselective membranes On the basis of the proposed ion sensing mechanism, we also suggest that decreasing the initial capacitance of the device may help to improve the sensitivity at low ion concentrations. For example, pre-treating the PVP film to reduce the initial mobile H + concentration. Further, overall device capacitance could also be modified by altering the gate electrode. We have previously observed that μsat×C is highly dependent on conductance of the electrode. 