Waals crystals arise limitless scope for designing novel combinations of physical properties via controlling the stacking order or twist angle of individual layers. Lattice orientation between stacked monolayers is significant not only for the engineering symmetry breaking but also for the study of many-body quantum phases and band topology. So far the state-of-art exfoliation approaches focusing on achievements of quality, size, yield, and scalability while lacking sufficient information on lattice orientation. Consequently, interlayer alignment is usually determined by later experiments, such as second harmonic generation spectroscopy, which increased the number of trials and errors for a designed artificial ordering and hampered the efficiency of systematic study. Herein, we report a lattice orientation distinguishable exfoliation method via gold favor epitaxy along the specific atomic step edges, meanwhile, fulfill requirements of high-quality, large-size, and high-yield of monolayers. Hexagonal-and rhombohedral-stacking configurations of bilayer transition metal dichalcogenides are built directly at once result of foreseeing the lattice orientation. Optical spectroscopy, electron diffraction, and angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy are used to study crystals quality, symmetric breaking, and band tuning, which supports the exfoliating mechanism we proposed. This strategy shows the ability for facilitates the development of ordering stacking especially for multilayers assembling in the future. Disassembling and reassembling two-dimensional (2D) materials into expected lattice configurations, give rise to intriguing quantum phases. As a consequence of stacking two layers of van der Waals (vdWs) materials, whether a lattice mismatch or twist angle existed, there is an additional periodicity, moiré superlattices Various correlated and topological phases were firstly observed in twisted bilayer graphene at the magic angle, such as, unconventional superconductivity Unlike twist bilayer graphene, there are two distinct stacking orientation in TMDs semiconductor bilayers, which are R-type stacking (also labeled AA stacking, 0° rotation between two monolayers) and H-type stacking (also labeled AB stacking, 60° or 180° rotation between two monolayers). In homobilayers, H-type bilayer stacking has inversion symmetry, while R-type stacking broken. As twisting between the layers occurred, three kinds of high-symmetry stacking orders arise from moiré superlattice have been put forward As of late, interfacial ferroelectricity has been found in R-stacked bilayer TMDs However, it is tricky to predetermine the stacking orientation during the stack-up process, as the absence distinguishing of characteristic edges (especially for metal or chalcogen atoms ended zigzag edge) via exfoliated-edge alignment and second harmonic generation (SHG) methods thus far. Previous skillful efforts for exfoliating vdWs materials into monolayer mainly focusing on crystal quality, size, yield, and scalability. Examples include solution phase exfoliation As rethinking the process of peeling off, we perceived that disassembling vdWs bulk crystals into monolayers usually overcomes the weaker interlayer attraction in the out-of-plane direction, while in the in-plane it lacks the differentiation along the specific crystal orientation. For monolayer, described points group of TMDs of 2Hphase degraded to D 3h , lower symmetry compares to D 6h of bulk. It contains a threefold C 3 rotational symmetry with a S 3 mirror-rotation symmetry, which means there are two typical orientations of armchair (AC) and zigzag (ZZ). Among ZZ orientation, there have two types of edge: metal-terminated edge and chalcogenterminated edge. In principle, these three kinds of edges should have very different adsorption energies or bond enthalpy, which will provide the possibility to peel the vdWs crystals from a specific edge. Here, we demonstrate an edge-locked mechanical exfoliation method for bulk TMDs with discernible orientation, high-quality, large-dimension, and high productivity. This method is practicable for producing a range of orientated monolayers vdWs materials, so long as their parent counterparts have the typical atomic edges. Using MoS 2 as a representative system, a pivotal start is illustrated in Fig. Au-epitaxy aligns atomic-step edges and theoretical analysis. In order to accurately control the flux of Au atoms reaching the cleaved TMDs surface and to have a sufficient surface relaxation process, we used MBE in this work (Fig. Owing to the low beam flux and ultrahigh-vacuum conditions (see "Methods"), it can be guaranteed no extra surface defects be introduced as usual evaporation methods (e.g. thermal, sputtering). Freshly cleaved bulk TMDs surface has flat terraces, which parted by atomic steps. These atomic steps, essentially, are onedimensional (1D) defects, serving as a nucleation site, which tends to adsorb or bind heteroatoms to reduce the total energy of the system In order to fully fathom the physical process of Au atom lateral epitaxy, we carried out first-principles density functional theory (DFT) calculations relating to the initial binding of Au atoms onto the atomic step edges (AC and two kinds ZZ) of MoS 2 and the subsequent alignment between Au nanocrystal grains and atomic edges. A comparison of the ε values for different step structures of the MoS 2 bilayer is presented in Fig. Moreover, the coupling between ZZ-Mo edge is energetically far greater than ZZ-S edge, which is also similar to the situation described by Yang et al. To test the impact of the established model on ε, the model was expanded, i.e. the width was expanded of AC direction, it was found that ε has almost no change in value (see Supplementary Fig. From Fig. Oriented exfoliation and monolayers optical characterization. The schematic diagram of the core procedures of mechanical exfoliation is illustrated in Fig. Substantially equal polarization SHG intensity distribution also illustrates that the strain that can cause the lattice vector change is insignificant after this peelingtransfer process. Notably, along the peeling direction, the number of layers generally presents the characteristics of the transition from monolayer to bilayer and even multilayer, which is the consequence of the 2H stacking order (the atomic edges of the adjacent terraces have different termination atoms), as pointed up in Fig. Artificial stacking and energy band tuning. These stripped monolayers provide the prerequisite for stacking orientation known in advance. Based on the judgment of orientation, mentioned before, two types of bilayer stacking ordering (H-type and R-type) are intentionally constructed, shown in Fig. Meanwhile, R-type stacking has the opposite situation, inversion symmetry breaking homobilayer has stronger SHG intensity, due to interference coherent enhanced from the individual monolayers (Fig. The large size high quality stacked bilayer allows us to obtain the electronic structure with standard angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) technique using a conventional setup with a hemispherical electron energy analyzer without microscopic capabilities. Figure In summary, we develop an orientation recognizable mechanical exfoliation method for disassembly of 2D vdWs materials. The obtained monolayers have high-quality, large-dimension, and are torn along the armchair orientation, which is verified by PL, Raman, and SHG. As be known to the orientation information in advance, the artificial stacking orderings (R-type and H-type) with different symmetry and band structures have been successfully realized without accidents, which demonstrated by SHG mapping and ARPES. This strategy is not only effective for MoS 2 , WS 2 , MoSe 2 , WSe 2 , confirmed by experiments, but also promising for other TMDs, such as Nb-, Ta-, or Ti-based TMDs, in which as long as choosing the appropriate metals meet the requirements of lateral epitaxy and damage-free etching. The clear-cut orientation of monolayers will make the research for twistronics, including moire physics or band topology in vdWs stacking, more facilitated. bulk crystals. Freshly cleaved TMDs bulk crystals (6 Carbon Technology, Shenzhen) were transferred on the cleaned silicon (Si) wafer surface by using thermal release tape (TRT) with releasing temperature of 90 °C. Previous to the gold (Au) atoms epitaxy in the main chamber of molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) system (P600, DCA Instruments, Finland), samples were transported to an ultrahighvacuum (UHV) subsystem (base pressure of 3 × 10 -9 Torr), vacuum interconnected with the main chamber, for surface cleaning under the condition of heating at 350°C for 12 hours. During the epitaxy, the K-cell contains Au (6N grade) was kept at 1260 °C to form a steady Au atom beam equivalent pressure (BEP), which is 1.4 × 10 -8 Torr, while the TMDs/Si substrate was kept at 200 °C. The temperature of the Kcell was increasing to 1280 °C for afterward Au film growth. Mechanical exfoliation. Firstly, TRT (releasing temperature 90 °C) gently pressed onto the surface of prepared Au/TMDs/Si following a peeling-off process. Under the action of the combination of adhesion from two directions, topmost layers of bulk TMDs including oriented monolayers were stripped, which attached to the Au surface. The TRT/Au/TMDs subsequently transferred onto the desired substrate. Secondly, the TRT was removed by heating at 90 °C. The Au film was dissolved by Potassium Iodide (KI) and Iodide (I 2 ) solution (35 g KI and 13 g I 2 dissolved in 100 ml deionized water). Finally, the monolayer of TMDs was further rinsed with deionized water and acetone for 5 minutes and dried by N 2 flow. Morphological and crystal structure characterization. The surface topography of bulk MoS 2 , at the initial stage of Au epitaxy, was measured by atomic force microscope (Multimode8, Bruck Instruments, Germany) and scanning electron microscope (S-4800, Hitachi Instruments, Japan). The selected area electron diffraction (SAED) of MoS 2 bilayer was measured by Field Emission Transmission Electron Microscope (TEM) (Tecnai G2 F20, FEI, American) with 200 kV accelerating voltage. Optical characterization. The optical images were obtained in a custom-built microscopy system by using a 20× objective lens. Photoluminescence (PL), Raman spectra and polarization-dependent second harmonic generation (SHG) performed at room temperature on a Laser Scanning System (ScanPro Advance, Metatest, China). The laser-focused spot is about 1 um diameter by a 100× objective lens (Olympus Corporation, Japan). The wavelength of the excitation source for PL and Raman was 532.18 nm with power of 0.1 mW. Polarization-dependent SHG was performed using a 1064 nm picosecond laser (10 ps), with two polarizers (polarizer and analyzer) equipped with a rotating half-wave plat between them. Angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy measurement. High-resolution ARPES measurements were performed with incident photon energies of 140 eV at beamline 03U of Shanghai synchrotron radiation facility (SSRF). The ARPES system is equipped with a Scienta-Omicron DA30 electron energy analyzer. During measurement, the vacuum was better than 8.0 × 10 -11 Torr and temperature was kept at around 15 K. Energy resolutions were better than 20 meV. The beam size of the synchrotron radiation is roughly under 100 micrometers. For ARPES measurement, the samples were transferred onto an Au/MgO substrate. An annealing process lower than 300 °C for 12 h was performed to clean the surfaces after loading them into a high vacuum chamber. Calculation Methods. DFT calculations were consulted by the plane-wave method as implemented in the Vienna Ab Initio Simulation Package (VASP) 