New materials based on Kagome lattices, predicted to host exotic quantum physics because they can display flat electronic bands, Dirac cones and topologically nontrivial surface states, are strongly desired. Here we report the crystal structure and superconducting properties of LaIr3Ga2, a previously unreported material that is based on a Kagome lattice of the heavy atom Ir. LaIr3Ga2 is a type II superconductor with Tc ~ 5.2 K, μ 0 H c1 (0) ~ 7.1 mT and μ 0 H c2 (0) ~ 4.7 T. The normalized heat capacity jump at the superconducting transition, (∆C/γT c ), 1.41, is within error of the value expected for a weak coupling BCS superconductor (1.43). Strong electron-electron correlation is inferred from the superconducting coherence length. Calculations show that the influence of spin orbit coupling on the electronic structure is significant, that the 5d states of the Ir in the Kagome planes are dominant near the Fermi energy (EF), that a nearly flat band is calculated to occur at about 100 meV below EF, and that two Dirac points are close to EF. This material is of interest for investigating the coupling between topological physics and superconductivity in a system with significant spin orbit coupling. Kagome lattice materials, made from corner-sharing triangles of magnetic atoms, have attracted much attention recent years. In addition to geometric magnetic frustration, the Kagome lattice structural motif can exhibit forefront quantum physics, such as the quantum spin liquid (QSL) state, Thus, here we report the novel superconductor LaIr3Ga2. This material crystallizes with the same hexagonal symmetry as AV3Sb5 and, unlike reported LaRu3Si2 which has a distorted Kagome lattice of Ru, possesses a perfect Kagome lattice made from the 5d element Ir. The new material shows superconducting behavior below Tc ~ 5.2 K, observed via by magnetization, resistivity and heat capacity measurements on arc-melted polycrystals. The superconducting parameters show a potentially stronger electron-electron interaction in LaIr3Ga2 than is reported for LaRu3Si2. Calculations are also presented to show that the electronic structure of the material is dominated by Ir 5d states that exhibit the influence of spin orbit coupling. Crystal Structure: LaIr3Ga2 crystallizes in a CeCo3B2-type structure in the space group P 6/mmm (no. 191), which is the same as some other reported 132-phases, and the recently reported 135superconductors. The temperature-dependence of the magnetic susceptibility for LaIr3Ga2 was measured under multiple magnetic fields from 1.8 K to 7 K, as shown in the main panel of Figure The diamagnetic state emerges below Tc ~ 5.2 K. The diamagnetism is rapidly suppressed by low magnetic fields and almost disappears under the field of 100 mT, indicating a small lower critical field for this material. To most accurately characterize the magnetic properties of LaIr3Ga2, a demagnetization factor (N) was calculated by the equation where b is the slope in Mfit = bH and Mfit is obtained by conducting linear fitting for the low-field region of the magnetization curve at 1.8 K in Figure We have investigated the field-dependence of the magnetization (Mv) at various temperatures between 1.8 K and 5.4 K. With increasing magnetic field, Mv rapidly decreases, with an upturn under a small magnetic field (~ 8 mT at 1.8 K, as shown in Figure where μ 0 H c1 * (0) is the lower critical field at 0 K and Tc is superconducting transition temperature. The fitted lower critical field μ 0 H c1 * (0) is 3.1 (1) mT and Tc-fit = 5.3 (1) K, within experimental error of the temperature where the diamagnetism appears (Figure Thus, the corrected lower critical field μ 0 H c1 (0) is 7.1 (2) mT. In the inset of Figure where ρ 0 is the residual resistivity due to defect scattering, A is a constant and n is an integer determined by the interaction pattern. Thus, for polycrystalline samples of LaIr3Ga2, ρ 0 is fitted to be 89.0 (4)  cm, A is 0.022 (1)  cm/K 3 and n is 2, which suggests that electron-electron interactions may dominate the resistivity between 7 K and 40 K. and are utilized for fitting higher critical field using following Ginzburg-Landau relation: where t = T/Tc and Tc is a fitting parameter (transition temperature at zero magnetic field). The fitting line from GL relation well describes the observed superconducting behavior and results in μ 0 H c2 (0) = 4.71 (4) T and Tc-fit = 5.16 (2) K. Based on BCS theory, the Pauli-limiting field for a superconductor can be described as μ 0 H c2 p (0) = 1.85 Tc, that is, μ 0 H c2 p (0) ~ 9.6 T for LaIr3Ga2, which is much larger than the experimental μ 0 H c2 (0). The Ginzburg-Landau coherence length, ξ GL can be calculated from the given relation: where Φ 0 = h/2e is the quantum flux and μ 0 H c2 (0) is as-measured-above. This makes the GL coherence length ξ GL (0) 84 Å, a zero-K GL coherence length that is very similar to that seen in heavy fermion superconductors, such as UPd2Al3 (85 Å), Moreover, the Ginzburg-Landau penetration depth at 0 K, λ GL (0), is calculated to be 2860 Å using given relation shown below with lower critical field μ 0 H c1 (0) determined previously The GL penetration depth found in LaIr3Ga2 is comparable to that previously reported to that for the noncentrosymmetric superconductor TaIr2B2 (3420 Å). is estimated as well by using the following relation yielding μ 0 H c (0) = 97 mT for LaIr3Ga2. Heat Capacity: After observation of both the Meissner effect in the magnetization and the zero resistivity, in order to fully confirm the bulk nature of the superconductivity in LaIr3Ga2, lowtemperature heat capacity measurements were performed from 2 K to 10 K under applied magnetic fields of 0 T and 8 T, as shown in Figure where γ is the Sommerfeld coefficient, corresponding to electronic contribution to C p , and β is related to the phononic contribution. However, as shown in Figure where two terms, βT 2 and ηT (1) mJ/mol/K 4 and η = 0.0082 (1) mJ/mol/K 6 . To estimate the heat capacity jump corresponding to the superconducting state, the normal state heat capacity measured under magnetic field of 8 T is subtracted from that measured under 0 T, as shown in Figure Moreover, we calculate the Debye temperature using the given relation where R is the gas constant with the value of 8.31 J/mol/K, n is the number of atoms per formula unit (n = 6 for LaIr3Ga2). Thus, Θ D is found to be 331 ( where μ * is the Coulomb pseudopotential parameter and is typically given a value of 0.13. To better interpret the properties of LaIr3Ga2, the electronic band structure, the orbital origin of its features, and the density of electronic states (DOS)) were calculated. The results of these calculations, with and without the inclusion of spin-orbit coupling (SOC) are plotted in Figure In summary, we describe the structure and superconducting characteristics of a novel material, LaIr3Ga2, obtained by using the arc melting synthetic method. The new material has a layered structure in space group P 6/mmm, with an ideal highly symmetric Kagome lattice of Ir. Polycrystals were used to characterize the superconducting properties. Superconductivity was observed below a critical temperature of ~ 5.2 K, while lower and upper critical magnetic fields at 0 K were found to be ~7.1 m T and 4.7 T, respectively. The heat capacity measurements suggest weakly coupled BCS superconductivity with a relatively high Sommerfeld constant (about 15 mJ/mole/K 2 ) and the Ginzburg-Landau coherence length, ξ GL , indicates stronger electron-electron correlation in LaIr3Ga2 than in LaRu3Si2. Electronic structure calculations of LaIr3Ga2 are consistent with the metallic behavior observed and reveal a nearly flat band ~100 meV below the Fermi energy when SOC effect is considered; two calculated Dirac points at EF are also observed while SOC is not included. This new material will be of interest for elucidating in the interactions between topologically nontrivial electronic states and superconductivity. Synthesis: LaIr3Ga2 was synthesized by the arc-melting method. Elemental La (≥99.9%, ingot, Stream Chemicals), Ir (99.99%, ~22 mesh, Alfa Aesar) and Ga (99.99999%, ingot, Alfa Aesar) were utilized as starting materials. The La was handled in an Ar-filled glovebox. Iridium powder was first pressed into a pellet and arc melted to an Ir button. This step reduced the mass loss of Ir during the full synthesis. 100-150 mg of the starting materials with a molar ratio of 1:3.03:2.5 was then arc-melted twice under a high purity, Zr-gettered, argon atmosphere, with the button flipped over between melts. The resulting air-stable material was annealed at 500 o C for 2 days, but the phase purity and homogeneity did not change compared to that of the arc-melted buttons. Small polycrystalline samples with shiny faces were used in the property measurements. Crystal Structure: Multiple small LaIr3Ga2 crystals (up to 80×80×10 m 3 ) were tested by single crystal X-ray diffraction (XRD) to determine the crystal structure of the new material. The crystal structure, consistent among all crystals, was determined using a Bruker D8 QUEST single crystal diffractometer equipped with APEX III software and Mo radiation (K= 0.71073 Å) at 300 K. The crystals were mounted on a Kapton loop protected by glycerol. Data acquisition was made via the Bruker SMART software with corrections for Lorentz and polarization effects included. A numerical absorption correction based on crystal-face-indexing was applied using XPREP. The direct method and full-matrix least-squares on F 2 procedure within the SHELXTL package were employed to solve the crystal structure. The DC magnetization was measured from 1.8 to 300 K under various applied magnetic fields using a Quantum Design Dynacool Physical Property Measurement System (PPMS), equipped with a vibrating sample magnetometer (VSM) option. The magnetic susceptibility was defined as M(emu)/H(Oe). Field-dependent magnetization data was collected at different temperatures with applied magnetic fields ranging from μ0H = -9 T to 9 T. The resistivity measurements were carried out in in the same system using the four-probe method between 1.8 K and 300 K under magnetic fields up to μ0H = 9 T. Platinum wires were attached to the samples by silver epoxy to ensure ohmic contact. Heat capacity was measured using a standard relaxation method in the PPMS. The electronic structure and electronic density of states (DOS) of LaIr3Ga2 were calculated using WIEN2k, which employs the full-potential linearized augmented plane wave method (FP-LAPW) with local orbitals implemented. 