Noise at the quantum limit over a large bandwidth is a fundamental requirement for future applications operating at millikelvin temperatures, such as the neutrino mass measurement, the next-generation x-ray observatory, the CMB measurement, the dark matter and axion detection, and the rapid high-fidelity readout of superconducting qubits. The read out sensitivity of arrays of microcalorimeter detectors, resonant axion-detectors, and qubits, is currently limited by the noise temperature and bandwidth of the cryogenic amplifiers. The DARTWARS (Detector Array Readout with Traveling Wave AmplifieRS) project has the goal of developing high-performing innovative traveling wave parametric amplifiers (TW-PAs) with a high gain, a high saturation power, and a quantum-limited or nearly quantumlimited noise. The practical development follows two different promising approaches, one based on the Josephson junctions and the other one based on the kinetic inductance of a high-resistivity superconductor. In this contribution we present the aims of the project, the adopted design solutions and preliminary results from simulations and measurements. Keywords Quantum noise, parametric amplifier, traveling wave, detector array read out, qubits read out A wide range of quantum technologies relies on the faithful detection of microwave signals at millikelvin temperatures. This includes quantum computing with superconducting In recent times, the concept of a parametric amplifier with microwaves travelling along a transmission line with embedded Josephson junctions (TWJPA) was developed in several groups The Detector Array Readout with Traveling Wave Amplifiers (DARTWARS) is a threeyear project funded by the Italian Institute for Nuclear Physics (INFN) starting from 2021 that aims to fulfil these requirements. The technical goal is to achieve a gain value around Fig. Josephson junctions based Traveling Wave Parametric Amplifiers are composed by a coplanar waveguide (CPW) embedding a chain elementary cells containing Josephson Junctions (eg. rf-SQUIDs). The nonlinear behaviour can be tuned using an external magnetic field or a DC bias that flows in the signal line, allowing it to work as a three-wave mixer To avoid power leakage into higher frequency tones the CPWs are equipped with a modified dispersion relation following two different approaches, the Resonant Phase Matching (RPM) and the Quasi-Phase Matching (QPM) techniques. RPM (figure During 2021 INRiM developed a modified version of the quantum model The physical implementation of the circuit components occurred through electromagnetic simulations performed with the software Sonnet Suite. The RPM technique needs shunt resonators with resonant frequency very close to the pump frequency, hence in the range 10-15 GHz depending on the working band, and a reduced plasma frequency, around 35 GHz. These facts require the presence of large capacitances in the resonators and shunting the Josephson junctions, that can be reached by adding an extra layer of dielectric material in the layout so as to allow the use of parallel plate capacitors. The same result can be achieved using extended 2D planar resonators and large area Josephson junctions. The former approach allows reducing the areas of the Josephson junctions at the cost of adding a layer of dielectric material. The Sonnet Suite has been used to realise the physical layout of the devices in the presence and absence of the extra dielectric layer, that has been chosen to be SiO2 and a-Si:H. The physical implementation of QPM-JTWPA does not require resonators but just a poling of the rf-SQUIDs and a reduced plasma frequency, that again can be reached by enlarging the area of the Josephson junctions. The preliminary characterization of the first TWJPA prototypes fabricated at INRiM highlighted the presence of unwanted effects ascribable to an inhomogeneity in the area of the fabricated Josephson Junctions (JJs). These first prototypes were fabricated exploiting a well-established nanofabrication technology based on electron beam lithography (EBL) on a double layer polymeric mask (bottom layer realized with the copolymer MMA(8.5)MAA EL11 and top layer realized with 950K PMMA A4, both by KayakuAM) followed by an Aluminium e-gun evaporation exploiting the Niemeyer-Dolan technique. The realization of thousands of micrometric structures, such as those present in a TWJPA architecture, in the range of time in which the lithographic system is stable and predictable requires the use of a large beam current, causing a reduction in the pattern resolution and hence the origin of a spread in the areas of the JJs. To overcome this issue, in the first half of 2021, INRiM started to fabricate new TWJPAs exploiting a two-step lithography approach. The lithography of the components with a resolution bigger than 1 μm were realized with an UV laser writer (μPG-101 from Heidelberg) exploiting a polymeric mask realized with the reverse image photoresist AZ 5214 E from Microchemicals GmbH. To reach the desired resolution for this process over large areas, up to 2" diameter, many process parameters have been tuned (spinning protocol, power of the UV laser, bake time and temperature of the mask and time of the development). The second lithography step, reserved to the features smaller than 1 μm, will be realized with EBL. This will guarantee the use of a small beam current and hence an increase in the resolution of the process. Moreover, to further reduce the JJ areas inhomogeneity due to the overlap of unpredictable rounded edges, a new design for these structures is under development. This design will exploit a new double layer mask made with LOR 20B and 950K PMMA A4, both from KayakuAM. Preliminary characterization of the lithography and development of this mask have been already performed during the first half of 2021. To realize TWJPA architectures that need the presence of a dielectric layer, during the first half of 2021 INRiM grown and characterized thin films of SiO2 and a-Si:H realized with an Inductively Coupled Plasma Chemical Vapour Deposition system (PlasmaPro 100 ICPCVD by Oxford Instruments). Several samples, realized at different substrate tempera- Fig. Traveling wave amplifiers require both momentum conservation, i.e., phase matching, and energy conservation for the pump, signal, and any idlers that are generated. For the KI-TWPA device, momentum conservation can be attained by i) dispersion engineering of the CPW with periodic loadings that create a frequency gap or by ii) an artificial transmission line, also known as a lumped-element transmission line, that uses lumped-element inductors and capacitors instead of the distributed inductances and capacitances in a conventional transmission line. The characteristic impedance of the transmission line is modified every one-sixth of a wavelength at a frequency slightly above the pump frequency f p to form a wide stopband at 3 f p . In addition, every third loading is modified in length (longer or shorter relative to the first two) to create a narrow stopband near f p . Placed just below this narrow stopband, the pump tone picks up additional phase shift to fulfill the phasematching condition, while its third harmonic is suppressed by the 3 f p stopband. As a result, exponential gain can be achieved over a broad bandwidth of more than one-half the pump frequency. CPW amplifiers, made in NbTiN, achieved 15 dB gain with a transmission line 2 m long The first aim is to tune the fabrication process in order to realize parametric amplifiers in NbTiN with a critical temperature around T c = 15 K 24 and a kinetic inductance around L k = 10 pH/square 17 . To achieve these requirements a new sputtering system based on a KS 800 C Cluster provided by Kenosistec S.r.l. is currently being commissioned and tuned at the Fondazione Bruno Kessler -Center for Materials and Microsystems (FBK-CMM). The cluster is composed of two deposition chambers and a chamber for loading and transfers. Each deposition chamber is equipped with 4 Magnetron cathodes and turbomolecular pump able to reach a base vacuum of 5 • 10 -9 mbar. The system is capable of handling 6" wafers and allows heating of substrates up to 400 • C. Deposition can be performed by reactive sputtering, by injecting Nitrogen, and by co-sputtering using two cathodes at the same time. In preliminary phases the system has been tested with deposition of Niobium (Nb) and Niobium nitride (NbN), finding a good match with the literature Most of the NbTiN film depositions have been done with the reactive sputtering technique using a target of Nb 0.66 Ti 0.34 alloy which reduces the number of parameters to optimize. All films have been deposited on oxidized Si-wafers heated up to 400 • C. In these tests the chamber pressure was kept at 3 • 10 -3 mbar with an Ar flow of 50 sccm while the N 2 flow was verified from 5 to 22.5 sccm. As shown in Fig. The first KI-TWPA prototypes are foreseen in 2022 and will be produced exploiting the optimized deposition and etching procedures developed during 2021. 