We designed and synthesized a new organic light-emitting diode (OLED) emitter, SBABz4, containing spiro-biacridine donor (D) in the core surrounded by two benzonitrile acceptors (A). The dual A-DxD-A structure is shown to provide pure-blue emission in relation to its single A-D counterpart. Time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) recorded in the broad dynamic range from solutions and solid films revealed three emission components: prompt fluorescence, phosphorescence, and efficient thermally-activated delayed fluorescence (TADF). The latter is independently proven by temperature-dependent TRPL and oxygen-quenching PL experiment. From the PL lifetimes and quantum yield, we estimated maximum external quantum efficiency of 7.1% in SBABz4-based OLEDs, and demonstrated 6.8% in a working device. Thermally activated delayed fluorescence (TADF) changed the field of organic optoelectronics since the first reports by Adachi and co-authors in 2011. Electrical injection of carriers produces singlet and triplet excitons with 1:3 branching ratio, reducing the emission probability to 25% of the entire excited population in organic semiconductors. Therefore, maximum internal electroluminescence efficiency of conventional OLED emitters does not exceed 25%, imposing a theoretical limit of 5-7.5% on EQE of the devices with 20-30% light outcoupling. Along with the triplet-triplet annihilation 9,10 and heavymetal-complex phosphorescence, The efficiency of the triplet up-conversion, which occurs via reverse intersystem crossing (RISC), increases with decreasing singlet-triplet energy splitting, ΔE !" . Alternatively, molecules with dual emissive cores were shown to be superior in performance to their single-core analogs. However, photophysics of TADF emitters with a double donor in the core, as well as the role of spiro-linkage is yet to be revealed. Herein we present a novel compact deep-blue TADF emitter with a spiro-biacridine double donor core surrounded by two benzonitrile acceptors. We determine the correlation between structure and luminescence properties of this dual A-DxD-A compound in relation to its single A-D counterpart. The spiro-bi-donor shifts the emission to the deep blue region. The blue emitter combines phosphorescence at low temperature with TADF at room temperature. We show that the emitter is applicable for OLEDs and demonstrates EQE #$% = 6.8% in a test device. We also compared photophysical properties of neat emitters with those diluted in a (bis [2-(diphenylphosphino)phenyl]ether oxide) (DPEPO) matrix to study the luminescence quenching effects and the influence of molecular environment. Figure We prepared the SBA core using a modified procedure by Ooishi et al. Currently prevailing TADF design with core-acceptor allows PLQY improvement via an increase in the number of donor units or the donor conjugation length. Figure φ "()* , and φ ..'. = φ +!, -φ "()* (Figure Here η ! and η " are portions of singlets and triplets produced via electrical injection (0.25 and 0.75, respectively). We obtained Φ 01,3.4 = 44% for SBABz4, which results in the estimation of EQE #$% = 8.8% in the devices with assumed 20% light outcoupling. The estimation exceeds the 5% limit for first generation OLEDs. A fabricated SBABz4-based device with non-optimized layer thicknesses and doping concentration showed EQE #$% = 6.8% close to the estimation (Figure Notably, delayed fluorescence in the neat film decays two orders of magnitude faster than in the host matrix (0.13 μs and 9.8 μs, respectively). We assign the increased decay rate in the neat SBABz4 film to molecular aggregation with subsequent increase of non-radiative decay rate. For the same reason, PLQY of the doped matrix is higher than this of the neat film (40% and 27%, respectively; Figure The ratio between quantum efficiencies of the prompt and delayed components φ &' φ "()* ⁄ in the films was calculated as the ratio of the areas under the corresponding curves (Table Remarkably, prompt fluorescence in the neat film outperforms TADF (φ &' φ "()* ⁄ ≈ 5.83), whereas both components equally contribute to the emission of the doped matrix (φ &' φ "()* ⁄ ≈ 1.04). Now, using the measured values for PLQY, one can extract absolute quantum efficiencies of the involved processes for thin films (Figure Temperature-dependent TRPL in combination with absolute PLQY measurements allows calculation of the energy splitting ΔE !" for the singlet and triplet levels involved in TADF process (SI, p. 20-23; Figure SBABz4:DPEPO film. This energy difference is sufficiently low (ΔE !" ~k5 T) to provide efficient TADF. ΔE !" can be further decreased via judicious variation of acceptor units. On the other hand, stronger acceptors were shown to cause red shift of emission in similar systems, 5 whereas the emission from SBABz4 is deep blue. In conclusion, we designed and synthesized a novel compact deep-blue OLED emitter, SBABz4, containing spiro-biacridine and benzonitrile units, and its monomer counterpart DMABz4. We showed that the spiro-linkage in the double-donor core of SBABz4 renders its luminescence pure-blue relative to the single-donor DMABz4, while preserving efficient TADF. Therefore, core-donor provides desirable for applications color tuning in the deep blue region, as opposed to the commonly used TADF molecular design with core-acceptor. The SBABz4 Finally, we show that SBABz4 emitter doped in the host matrix demonstrates superior photophysical properties over the neat film. Deoxygenated solutions of SBABz4 and DMABz4 in dichloromethane (DCM) with concentration 10 -5 mol L -1 were prepared in a glove box under nitrogen atmosphere. Deoxygenated solutions of SBABz4 for UV-vis absorption and luminescence measurements in different solvents (Figure Films for optical measurements were prepared in a glove box with nitrogen atmosphere. Neat SBABz4 and SBABz4:DPEPO films were processed on a 0.5x0.5 sq.-inches glass substrates without modification. The substrates were sequentially cleaned with deionized water, acetone, and isopropanol for 10 min each in an ultrasonic bath and plasma-edged for 30 s before use. Solutions of SBABz4 (or SBABz4:DPEPO with the desired weight ratio) in DCM with concentration 5 mg mL -1 were spin-coated at 3000 rpm during 1 min. After spin-coating, the substrates were annealed on a hot plate at 100°C for 10 minutes. phosphorescence is not present at room temperature, quantum efficiencies of ISC, RISC, and non-radiative triplet decay can be expressed via φ &' and φ "()* :