Chiral nanostructures offer the ability to respond to the vector nature of a light beam at the nanoscale. While naturally chiral materials offer a path towards scalability, engineered structures offer a path to wavelength tunability through geometric manipulation. Neither approach, however, allows for temporal control of chirality. Therefore, in the best of all worlds, it is crucial to realize chiral materials that possess the quality of scalability, tailored wavelength response, and dynamic control at high 1 Nature's ability to mass-produce chiral elements has inspired engineers and scientists to adopt the design concepts for preferential light-matter interactions and experimental characterization techniques by exploiting the interaction between electromagnetic radiation and sub-wavelength natural or synthetic chiral structures. Mathematically speaking, a chiral object cannot be mapped to its image by rotations and translations alone; it requires a reflection transformation across a mirror plane. Unfortunately, for most natural or synthetic media, the optical response is typically fixed after fabrication making it highly challenging to dynamically tune the chirality, While, to date, considerable effort has been expended to demonstrate nanostructures of a particular handedness, these structures require top-down, low-yield lithographic patterning. As an alternate approach in this work, a bottom-up fabrication technique for achieving nanostructure architectures based on GST with controllable three-dimensional shapes is developed. The versatility of this approach enables the facilitation and realization, at high yields, of chiral phase change nanomaterials (PCNMs) which can bolster distinct and beneficial properties relevant for selective coupling and high-speed polarization control of exotic light beams. In more detail, intrinsic chiral structure design and its implementation via glancing angle evaporative deposition of GST are introduced. Figure A bright-field micrograph imaged in transmission mode from a white light source is shown in Fig. The fabrication approach implemented here is the glancing angle deposition (GLAD) technique, which is a proven and robust method for sculpting various materials into a wide variety of exotic nanostructured columnar films 21 via electron beam evaporation. Unfortunately, there is very limited reporting on chalcogenide glass material growth via GLAD, as it presents particular challenges owing to the uncertainty of stoichiometry conservation in the evaporation of alloys. The results of an ellipsometric gradient-index fit reveal a Ge 3 Sb 1 Te 4 (herein, referred to as GST) stoichiometry on average, with an increasing Te/Ge ratio as a function of distance from the substrate. GST is highly dependent on the deposition method and chamber conditions, During the deposition the substrates is rotated at a constant angular velocity φ and the deposition rate r is fixed and monitored using a current feedback mechanism via the quartz crystal microbalance (QCM). Initially, adatoms form a non-uniform distribution of nano clusters that act as shadows for neighboring nanosites. Owing to low mobility and limited surface diffusion, GST readily forms distinct nanostructures at room temperature. According to the Structure Zone Model for extreme shadowing conditions, Transmissive Mueller Matrix spectroscopy is employed to characterize the optical activity of chiral PCNMs where the pitch P = 2R = 45 nm and the number of revolutions N = 5. The measurements are performed using a dual compensator spectroscopic ellipsometer (JA Woollam RC2) with incident angle and in-plane rotation sweep capabilities. Focusing objectives allow typical spot sizes 3-4 mm that can be reduced to 100 μm in reflection mode at 55 • . For amorphous GST, there exists a peak circular birefringence (CB) 250 nm and the largest CD amplitude is observed at 375 nm. Upon thermal annealing the chiral molecules to the crystalline state, the measured CD spectrum is enhanced and exhibits a redshift in the broad CD profile as shown in Figs. The difference in CD amplitude between numerical calculations and measurements can be interpreted as a result of the aperiodic stochastic distribution of PCNMs. Homogeneous ordered structures result in more significant transmission and reflection coefficients due to an enhancement of electromagnetic activity, but typically the resonances are wavelength invariant. To account for signal attenuation, the long-range order is relaxed by assuming periodic boundary conditions and averaging the transmission coefficient over a range of square periodicities within one standard deviation of the normally distributed nanorods, which is highlighted in Supplemental Note S4. Below 410 nm the CD begins to decrease, then exhibiting a CD reversal point near 320 nm. At longer wavelengths, the CD signal exponentially decays to near-zero CD. Next, the current density J is accessed inside the chiral PCNMs when excited by each circular eigenpolarization state. Figure In this subsection, spectral results when the AOI (angle of incidence) is tuned from normal incidence to 70 • are reported. Since the GST chiral PCNMs possess in-plane rotational symmetry, when displaced on a transparent substrate, one can arbitrarily select θ and sweep the angle of elevation defined as φ as shown in SEM in Fig. There is no noticeable spectral depolarization in the medium when φ ≥ 40 • . As shown in the previous subsection for normal incidence measurements, a strong CB peak exists at the CD crossover point. Interesting enough, optical activity, manifested in the CB and CD polar plots, remains stable up until φ = 40 • , in which the medium begins to exhibit strong linear birefringence and dichorism at longer wavelengths. The signals are relatively weak in the amorphous and crystalline states for the rotated LP basis set. Moreover, the right-handed structure exhibits a negative cotton effect. Angular resolved Mueller Matrix measurements in reflection mode were also performed to calculate the g-factor in terms of Mueller Matrix elements The chiral PCNM medium must be capped with a thin layer of material to prevent GST from evaporating during the melt-quench process to cycle between amorphous and metastable crystalline states. The capping layer, consisting of sputtered indium tin oxide (ITO), also assists with heat dissipation properties as it is reported to have a thermal conductivity of 10 W/mK, twenty times that of GST. To further improve the thermal response, the chiral medium is deposited on a transparent glass substrate featuring a second sputter layer The encapsulated samples are mounted in a custom-built optical microscopy setup featuring a 532 nm switching laser and a coaligned 632 nm read Gaussian beam of which are The dynamic range saturates near 300 nJ/cm 2 before exhibiting amorphiza-tion in the most intense region of the Gaussian beam. Overall, the PCNMs exhibits lower fluences for switching due to the reduction in volume when compared to traditional bulk thin GST demonstrations. To confirm the chiral structural preservation and tunable response, spot-by-spot crystallization and re-amorphization is employed to create a measurement area of 160 × 160 μm 2 which is sufficient for reflective Mueller Matrix measurements at a φ = 55 • incident angle. First, one region is crystallized, then a second region is crystallized, followed by reamorphous single pulses using appropriate opto-thermal pulse characteristics. Opto-thermal material lifetime measurements are also carried out, where a crystallization and amorphization programming sequence consisting of a series of 25 μs pulses followed by one 400 ns pulse as shown in Fig. In summary, intrinsically chiral nanorods consisting of phase change material GST exhibiting optical activity are fabricated, experimentally characterized, and numerically investigated. The angular resolved Mueller Matrix method measured differential absorption of left and right circularly polarized light components and circular birefringence. Additionally, endurance testing shows the stability of the platform up to 50,000 cycles of amorphization/crystallization. As discussed, the amorphous and crystalline stable phase states of GST offer a novel route for tunability due to the stark difference in the complex refractive index where selective material absorption between circular eigenpolarization states is the driving factor in this scheme. The research outlined here has led to a much better understanding of the material properties that affect the optical performance of chalcogenides and illustrates an alternative bottom-up growth approach for developing high-performance dual-mode electrooptic devices targeted for the visible regime and beyond. The results of this work could be pivotal in realizing large area, reconfigurable chalcogenide optical devices with high endurance and longer lifetimes. Chiral PCNMs are synthesized via the GLAD technique using a MDC evap4000 e-beam evaporator. The substrates are mounted 35 cm above the evaporant source at a fixed deposition angle (α) while a voltage-controlled motor enables continuous rotation at pre-selected angular speeds ranging between 2-9 revolutions per ms about the surface normal in a CW or ACW fashion. The chamber base pressure is kept around <1 μT with minimal increase in pressure during deposition. In addition, a QCM is enabled for precise control over the deposition rate. For all films, the deposition material Ge 2 Sb 2 Te 5 (99.99% pellets Plasmate-rials) is evaporated at relatively low e-beam filament currents (2-4 mA) when compared to transition metals and dielectrics, presumably due to the low vapor pressure of Te in a Te dominated glass composition. Finite-difference-time-domain (FDTD) full-wave analysis numerical solver (Lumerical, AN-SYS) is implemented to calculate the resulting transmittance, reflectance, and absorptance from left and right-handed circularly polarized light. The nanostructure array is simulated using periodic boundary conditions. Perfectly matched layer BCs is assigned to the input and output ports. Two orthogonal plane wave sources are assigned that are out of phase by ± 90 • to implement circularly polarized light excitations. Absolute and relative (transmissive dissymmetry) CD are calculated from independent calculations for LCP and RCP excitations. Reversible optical crystallization is achieved using a 532 nm diode laser that is modulated by a programmable pulse generator to produce optical pulses of varying time durations with a fixed 5 ns decay time. A coaligned continuous wave 633 nm HeNe laser is focused using a 1.3 NA objective with 100X magnification to create sub-micron spot sizes with high fluences for reversible switching experiments. The maximum input power of the 532 nm laser to the focusing objective is roughly 65 mW for an 8V input into the AOM. A 50X Mitutoyo Plan Apo infinity corrected, 0.42 numerical aperture objective is used to collect the transmitted beams and for transmissive imaging on a CCD camera from a backward propagating white light source. The sample is mounted onto a 3D piezo stage (Newport) to control the XYZ position precisely. For reliable crystallization, a slightly defocused spot is used, which ensures no damage in the center of the spot. The microstrip sample is created by spot-by-spot ablation using the 532 nm laser with high fluence to remove the ITO/chiral PCNMs/ITO layers to altogether. This maskless approach patterning approach allows for one to create an electrically isolated pixel. Highspeed probe tips are placed onto the bottom ITO layer by digging through the fragile capped nanostructured layer. A single 8V 25 μs pulse is sent through the ITO for localized heating in a 7 × 7 μm 2 . closer to the substrate because those molecues are lighter when compared with Sb and Te. Therefore, fractional molecules are more likely to evaporate first from the crucible. Figure This was found for the evaporative films for both the amorphous and crystalline case. Since optical properties of GST are known to vary depending on the deposition process, for context, we also plot the optical properties of sputtered films produced from a Ge 2 Sb 2 Te 5 target which are overlaid in solid lines. Additionally, we have plotted the dielectric constant 1 of the material as well, indicating the plasmonic region of the semiconducting chalcogenide. The results presented are consistent with previously reported optical properties for germanium-antimony-tellurium based chalcogenides. GST prepared by evaporation shows smaller refractive index and larger extinction coefficient above 410 nm. This may be attributed to the fact evaporation is known to produce porous films when compared to the densely packed films deposited by conventional sputtering. Moreover, in a porous isotropic film, light will propagate at faster velocities and experience larger scattering losses in the medium. We perform Energy Dispersive X-Ray (EDX) Spectroscopy on an isotropic thin film deposited on a Si substrate mounted at normal incidence. The resulting thin film thickness is measured on stylus surface profiler to be 475 nm. During EDX measurements the voltage is reduced to 10 kV in order to concentrate the electron beam/specimen interaction within the film at two separate locations. The spot size is increased such that the CPS > 15K while maintaining a DT < 30%. Peak identification was performed in the EDAX Genesis 2000 software which detected Ge 3 Sb 2 Te 4 where small traces of Si from the measurement was neglected. S2: E-beam evaporated GST at oblique incidence without substrate rotation (i.e. Oblique Angle Deposition (OAD)) Prior to investigating the helical geometry, we first investigate the impact on tilt angle by performing a series of depositions with varied angle. By tilting the substrate during deposition such that the incident flux of atoms is oriented at a steep angle, porous nanorod thin films grow through a shadowing effect created by the incident adatoms. It is well known that the tilt angle of the nanocolumnar structures do not equal the incident vapor flux angle. However, Nieuwenhuizen and Haanstra proposed the tangent rule where α is the vapor incident angle and β is the column inclination angle (i.e. nanorod tilt angle). This expression was shown to be valid for 0 • < α < 60 • . Later Hodgkinson et al. improved this empirical model by adding a fitting parameter based on the material under investigation. For large oblique angles he found that another empirical formula known as the cosine rule was defined as: S3: Determining the morphological structures for GLAD with continuous rotation We also perform a detailed study on the morphology of the cylindrical helix with respect the ratio between deposition rate and rotation rate of the substrate. Several samples were grown with varying substrate rotation speeds and deposition rates. The pitch and circumference exhibit a linear trend with respect to γ. It should be noted γ must be greater than nanorod d to avoid bifurcation which is labeled in grey as the mushrooming zone. The helical pitch P and helical diameter D = 2R increase linearly with respect to γ while the nanorod diameter, d remains unaffected by varying rotation rates around 15 nm. It is worth noting that the We observe a monotonic evolution in the broad CD signature near 410 nm in the amorphous state (top row) which is further enhanced in the crystalline state (bottom row). For the case where the period Λ = 40 nm, we see an attenuated CD response due to the simulation bounds not capturing the the full nanostructure with pitch P = 2R = 45 nm. Additionally, we perform a supercell simulation including 16 randomly oriented nanostructures and the spectral CD response followed the same trend. We perform a detailed mode analysis at the peak CD to further understand the chiral absorptive phenomena. The E and H field enhancements are shown for LCP and RCP in each state where again the top and bottom rows are for aGST and cGST respectively. We observe no electrical field inside the rod but E enhancement on the surface of the nanorods that exponentially decays along the direction of propagation. For all simulations, we excited the nano-moleules from the bottom. In the H field case, we observed H enhancement in the lower region of the entire volume (inside and outside the high index structure) which exponentially decays along the propagating direction. We present the full Mueller Matrix of the chiral medium with the following morphological structures: N = 5, P = 40 nm. The nanorods with diameters of 15 nm are displaced on a double sided polished Al 2 O 3 substrate. The green and gold traces are for the as-deposited amorphous state and poly-crystalline state, respectively. The results are consistent with chiral medium, in that the strongest signals are observed in the anti-diagonal elements of the Mueller Matrix. There exists some residual signal in the cGST state of the m 12 . We also note there is minimal observation of depolarization at normal incidence. For lifetime measurements a pulse programming scheme consisting of 4 crystallization pulses of 15 μs duration followed by a single high fluence 300 ns amorphousation pulse was implemented. The AOM programmed 532 nm pump laser was defocues by 3 μm for the measurements where the transmitted coaligned 633 nm was focused onto a photodetector. Each oscilloscope screen capture displays 25,000 cycles each where the yellow trace is the electrical input to the AOM and blue is the transmitted 633 nm probe measured on Si detector. 