Fermion systems with flat bands can boost superconductivity by enhancing the density of states at the Fermi level. We use quasiexact numerical methods to show that repulsive interactions between spinless fermions in a one-dimensional (1D) flat-band system, the Creutz ladder, give a finite pairing energy that increases with repulsion, though charge quasi-order (QO) remains dominant. Adding an attractive component shifts the balance in favor of superconductivity and the interplay of two flat bands further yields a remarkable enhancement of superconductivity, well outside of known paradigms for 1D fermions. Systems with flat-band dispersions have recently attracted much theoretical and experimental attention How the competition between superconducting and charge or magnetic orders plays out in flat-band systems with repulsive electron interactions is an almost unexplored area, which the present work addresses. Meanfield results have shown that superconductivity is more robust than charge orders when doping away from the flat band In this work, we focus on a concrete 1D flat-band fermion system, the Creutz ladder Setup.-We study interacting spinless fermions on the Creutz ladder, comprised of sites a j and b j in the j-th unit cell, with annihilation operators fa,j and fb,j . The Hamiltonian we focus on is -t f † b,j+1 fa,j + f † a,j+1 fb,j + H.c. +V 1 nb,j nb,j+1 + na,j na,j+1 +V 2 nb,j na,j+1 + na,j nb,j+1 , where na/b,j = f † a/b,j fa/b,j , V 1 denotes the nearest-neighbor (NN) interaction along the legs, and V 2 next-nearest-neighbor (NNN) interaction along the diagonals. We set the overall energy scale by fixing t = 1. The flat-band dispersion becomes explicit by rewriting Eq. ( In this basis, the kinetic energy terms give two flat bands at energies ± = ±2, with a gap ∆ = 4. Focusing on the lower band (upper band behaves similarly) and including interactions, we arrive at the single-band projected Hamiltonian where , and n-,j = ĉ † -,j ĉ-,j . This representation makes it explicit that in the single-band limit the physics is that of densityassisted tunneling, equivalent to tunneling of NN pairs of fermions, with a purely interaction-set amplitude t p , plus remnant short-range interactions U 1 and U 2 . In terms of interactions, we first study a purely repulsive model (PRM), where we set V 1 > 0, V 2 = 0, generating U 1 , U 2 > 0 in the single-band limit. Later, we expand our focus by adding an attractive interaction V 2 < 0, resulting in U 1 = U 2 = 0, which we name the mixed interaction model (MIM). We solve the full Hamiltonian, Eq. ( To determine the characteristics of the many-body ground states, we first show that single-particle excitations are gapped and that low-lying excitations consist of fermion pairs by computing the one-and two-particle gaps (m = 1, 2) where E 0 (N ) denotes the ground-state energy of N fermions. These gaps are computed at different L x and then extrapolated to 1/L x → 0. We also obtain important information by focusing on the lower band. Here, we study both the phase (ph) and charge-density (ch) correlation functions particularly extracting their power-law decay exponents α -,ph/ch to determine if phase or charge QO is slowest decaying and thus dominant. We also compute the singleparticle density matrix of the lower band to verify that its single-particle excitations are gapped. As a further marker of fermion pairing -nb,j na,j+1 nb,j+r na,j+1+r . Finally, for complementary information, we obtain the bipartite entanglement entropy S(l) = -Tr [ρ(l) ln ρ(l)] for 1 ≤ l < 2L x , where ρ(l) is the reduced density matrix of the first l sites Within the IP phase, we find that the strong repulsion results in a dominant charge QO in the lower band for all n ≥ 2/5 . This is quantified in Fig. To check whether the IP phase is a LL described by a conformal field theory (CFT) with central charge c = 1 Complementing the IP phase, we find for lower densities a fully or partially localized flat-band behavior that is not sensitive to the repulsive interactions. At n ≤ 1/3, we find that the many-body ground state is completely localized. We ascertain this by running ground-state searches with multiple different initial conditions, falling into three categories: (1) initially localized particles, (2) random initial matrix-product states, and (3) adiabatic transition of Hamiltonian parameters from a closed ring to the Creutz ladder. All three approaches result in different, but completely localized states with the same Wannier orbital energy E 0 = nL x -for n ≤ 1/3, while all three yield the same state for n > 2/5 [39]. This numerical finding is in agreement with the analytical observation of the projected Hamiltonian Eq. ( Finally, at n = 1/3, our numerics show a first-order transition into a coexistence regime between the flat band and the IP phases for 1/3 < n < 2/5. At these densities, placing two fermions adjacently cannot be fully avoided, and, as a consequence, it is favorable to create some itinerant pairs. At the same time, low-density patches can still exist intermittently, where both repulsive interactions and pair formation are avoided, resulting in fully localized fermions, overall yielding a mixture of IP and FB phases. MIM results.-Since we find an IP phase with dominant charge QO within the PRM, we next seek to enhance the superconducting correlations by reducing the remnant single-band interactions U 1,2 . We do this by additionally switching on an attractive interaction V 2 across the diagonals of the Creutz ladder. In particular we investigate the case where U 1,2 are tuned to zero by setting V 2 = -V 1 , which we designate as the mixed interaction model (MIM). The complete many-body phase diagram is summarized in Fig. The behavior changes drastically in a regime around V 1 ∆ /2 where we start seeing the upper flat band affecting the physics. Our DMRG numerics find the occupation of the upper band, previously reaching at most 1.3% and typically much less, now boosted to 3.5-8.5%. Most interestingly, we find for n ≤ 0.73 both a strong enhancement of the superconducting correlations and the effective physics being very different from the PLL found at lower V 1 . For example, while still decaying largely with a power law, G -,ph (r) now shows an extremely slow decay, especially at smaller densities as illustrated in Fig. To better understand the ground state in the regime around V 1 ∆ /2, we analyze the correlation function G diag (r), as illustrated in Fig. While superconducting correlations are boosted for V 1 ∆ /2 in a broad density range, we eventually find charge QO dominating for n > 0.73. In this highdensity regime the entanglement entropy approaches the Calabrese-Cardy pattern, although never quite obtaining it, pointing to significant remnants of non-LL physics. Finally, for strong interactions V 1 > ∆ /2, we find phase separation where also higher-order bound states are formed. Discussion.-Using quasiexact many-body methods, we show how flat bands give rise to fermion pairing from purely repulsive interactions, with pairing strength even increasing with repulsion. Although we find chargedensity QO ultimately dominating for pure repulsion, it would be pre-mature to conclude that 2D or 3D ar-rays formed from Creutz ladders will necessarily have a charged-ordered ground state, as weak inter-ladder coupling could help stabilize the superconducting phase. Our work also highlights the great potential of multiple flat bands to strongly stabilize superconductivity, establishing a regime beyond known paradigms for pairing in 1D systems. As Creutz ladders have been realized with neutral ultracold fermionic atoms via optical potentials ĉ † -,j ĉ-,j ĉ-,j-1 + H.c. . The solution in Ref. We compare this analytical expression with our DMRG results and plot in Fig. In Fig. 