Magic-angle twisted trilayer graphene (MATTG) recently exhibited robust superconductivity at a higher transition temperature (TC) than the bilayer version. With electric gating from both the top and bottom sides, the superconductivity was found to be closely associated to two conditions: the finite broken mirror symmetry and carrier concentrations between two to three carriers per moiré unite cell. Both conditions may be achieved by graphene-metal contacts where charge transfers and interfacial electric fields are generated to balance work function mismatch. In this study, we explore the superconductivity of MATTG when contacting a metal, through self-consistently solving the interfacial charge transfer with a highly electric-field-dependent band structure of MATTG. The predicted TC of MATTGmetal contacts forms two domes as a function of the work function difference over the interface, with a maximum over 2 K. Our work provides a constructive reference for graphene experiments and industrial applications with graphene-metal and graphenesemiconductor contacts. The recent advance of experimental control of moiré superlattices through stacking two or more layers of two-dimensional materials with twisted angles or lattice mismatch has attracted great attentions To achieve the superconductivity, the magic-angle twisted trilayer graphene (MATTG) is stacked with the middle layer twisted for q ~ 1.6 degrees The highest TC of MATTG can be achieved to exceed 2K on the hole doped side, as compared to about 1K of its bilayer version. Since the electric displacement field and carrier density are two vital aspects for the superconductivity of MATTG, another way to naturally generate such electric displacement field together with carrier transfer is by contacting the MATTG with a metal Our theoretical model consider the shift of Fermi level DEF of the MATTG when it contacts a clean and flat metal surface. When the work function of the metal is different from the MATTG, as illustrated in Fig. The Fermi level of the MATTG will be shifted, and simultaneously, an interfacial electric field is built up due to the formation of the interfacial dipole layers. Figure where We extract the density of state calculation results from reference where e is the charge of an electron. The factor 1/2 accounts for the reduced electric field within the MATTG due to the screening from the first and second graphene sheets. For instance, in a simplified estimation assuming that the charges are evenly distributed in the three layers of graphene, the displacement field in the two gaps between the three layers would be 2ne/3 and ne/3, giving an average of ne/2. The displacement field can be related to electric field with the relation E = -. # . We self-consistently solve equations ( and D(DEF). Since TC is a function of both n and D, by extracting TC values from reference If metals are contacted on both sides of the MATTG, the situation would become more complex and could enable individual tunability of the carrier density and displacement field, since charge transfer not only occurs between the metals and graphene, but there could also be charge transfer between the two metals. In a simplified model where DOS of metals are assumed to be very large, to balance the chemical potential of the two metals, a dipole layer will form on the two surfaces of the metal, sandwiching the MATTG. The electric field between the two metal surfaces is proportional to the chemical potential difference of the two metals, and therefore can be tuned independently to some extent, but controlling the work function difference of these two metals. On the other hand, to match the balanced chemical potential of the two metals, the MATTG in between would also need to change its Fermi level. In this case, the carrier density of MATTG can be tuned roughly by the average work function of the two metals. In conclusion, by self consistently solving the carrier density and displacement field in the magic angle twisted trilayer graphene given a Fermi level shift, we demonstrated that metal-MATTG contact could induce superconductivity, considering the hybridization and band width change with mirror symmetry breaking. The transferred charge between the metal and the MATTG produces an electric field on the MATTG that enables it to exhibit superconductivity features. As a function of Fermi level shift, we found two superconducting domes on both the hole and electron sides, with the highest TC surpassing 2 K. Our calculation predicts that a metal with similar but slightly (about 10 meV) higher work function than graphene would induce the highest TC. Our results not only provides useful reference for future quantum devices incorporating MATTG, but also envision innovative ways for TC modulation. between graphene and metals. Phys.Rev. B 79, 195425 (2009).