In an unconventional superconductor the interplay of scattering off impurities and Andreev processes may lead to different scattering times for electron-like and hole-like quasiparticles. Such electron-hole asymmetry appears when the impurity scattering phase shift is intermediate between the Born and unitary limits and leads to an expectation for large thermoelectric effects. Here, we examine the thermoelectric response of a d-wave superconductor connected to normal-metal reservoirs under a temperature bias using a fully self-consistent quasiclassical theory. The thermoelectrically induced quasiparticle current is cancelled by superflow in an open circuit set-up, but at the cost of a charge imbalance induced at the contacts and extending across the structure. We investigate the resulting thermopower and thermophase and their dependencies on scattering phase shift, mean free path, and interface transparency. For crystal-axis orientations such that surface-bound zero-energy Andreev states are formed, the thermoelectric effect is reduced as a result of locally reduced electronhole asymmetry. For a semiballistic superconductor with good contacts we find thermopowers of order several μV /K, suggesting a thermovoltage measurement as a promising path to investigate thermoelectricity in unconventional superconductors. The interest in thermal currents and thermoelectric effects in superconductors has been revived in recent years, partly because the response to temperature gradients in superconductors is phase coherent. In d-wave superconductors the electron-hole symmetry can be naturally broken when impurities scatter electron-like and hole-like quasiparticles differently. The paper is organized as follows. In Section II A we give the main assumptions of the model, while in Section II B we outline the quasiclassical theory. A few details of the numerical procedures are given in Section II C. The results are collected in Section III, and the final Section IV gives a summary and discussion. The model we use to study thermoelectric effects in dwave superconductors is depicted in Fig. The temperature bias across the structure results in the injection of quasiparticles from the reservoirs into the superconductor and transport in the superconducting abplane (xy-plane). The film is considered homogeneous in the perpendicular c-axis direction. In addition, the temperature difference is assumed to be applied from left to right in a homogeneous fashion in the transverse ydirection. The thermoelectric response will then also be translationally invariant in the transverse direction and FIG. we may compute the flow of heat and charge along the x-direction only. Since the charge current is zero everywhere there is no induced magnetic field and the vector potential is zero. We consider system sizes L S smaller than the inelastic scattering length in , while the elastic mean free path can take arbitrary values. As we discussed in some detail in Ref. 44, this means that the dwell time for injected non-equilibrium quasiparticles is short compared to time scales of inelastic scattering processes in the superconductor, We assume that a static temperature difference between left and right sides can be upheld. In addition, we assume that any transient response present in a real experiment during the establishment of this temperature difference has been damped out by dissipation in the reservoirs. In this case we may consider the long-time limit non-equilibrium stationary state. The steady-state nonequilibrium response of our structure to the external temperature bias is obtained by solving the time-independent quasiclassical equation of motion where [ Ǎ, B] denotes a commutator between matrices Ǎ and B. In addition to Eq.(1), the quasiclassical Green's function ǧ has to satisfy the normalization condition ǧ2 = -π 2 1. These equations were originally derived by Eilenberger In the following, we will omit the explicit reference to the dependencies on momentum direction p F , coordinate R, and energy ε if it does not lead to confusion. The spectrum is determined by the retarded (R) and advanced (A) components while the distribution function is related to the Keldysh (K) propagator. All three elements in Eq. ( while the Keldysh component is The diagonal components are propagators, while the offdiagonal anomalous propagators encode superconductivity. Particle-hole conjugation gives a relation between tilde and "non-tilde" objects. The elements of ĝR,A,K are formally matrices in spin space, but we assume a spin-degenerate system and spin singlet d-wave superconductivity. The self-energies taken into account are the mean-field superconducting order parameter as well as scalar impurities, The singlet d-wave order parameter is where iσ 2 is the singlet spin structure (σ 2 is the 2nd Pauli matrix in spin space). The d-wave orbital basis function is , where φ F is the angle between p F and the x-axis and the angle α gives the misorientation of the d-wave clover to the device main axis, see Fig. where the trace over spin projects out the singlet component, λ is the superconducting coupling constant, ε c is an energy cut-off, and N F is the density of states per spin in the normal state. The linearized gap equation can be used to eliminate the coupling constant λ and the cut-off ε c in favor of the superconducting transition temperature T c , which then becomes the natural energy scale of the theory. We assume a circular Fermi surface, in which case the Fermi surface average appearing in Eq. ( The Keldysh matrix structure of ȟmf is simple, ȟmf = ∆1 , while the Nambu structure is ∆ In equilibrium, the order parameter can be taken real, while under non-equilibrium it is complex. We may introduce the phase χ(R) of the order parameter as Its gradient gives the superfluid momentum p s (R) = 2 ∇χ(R) and is related to the presence of superflow. Assuming an average dilute impurity concentration n i , the impurity self-energy is found from the t-matrix equation in the non-crossing approximation: For scattering that is isotropic in momentum space with an s-wave scattering potential u 0 the elements of ť satisfy the equations We will express the two free parameters of this scattering model, n i and u 0 , in terms of the scattering energy Γ u and scattering phase shift δ 0 , The so-called pair-breaking energy is then given by which is also related to the normal-state mean free path The natural length scale of superconducting phenomena is the superconducting coherence length, defined as The properties of an unconventional superconductor typically depend on the ratio between mean free path and the superconducting coherence length /ξ 0 . For d-wave superconductors, scalar impurities are pair breaking and the mean free path is bounded by a critical mean free path, c ≈ 3.6ξ 0 , below which the superconducting order parameter vanishes. with an analogous expression for the advanced self-energy ĥA s . By tuning δ 0 we vary the character of scattering between the two limiting cases of the weak-scattering Born limit, δ 0 → 0, Γ u → ∞, with Γ constant, and the strongscattering unitarity limit, |δ 0 | → π/2. The first term proportional to the unit-matrix in Nambu space quantifies the amount of electron-hole asymmetry induced by the impurities. Within the quasiclassical approximation, the normal state electron-hole asymmetry due to bandstructure is neglected. In contrast, the electron-hole asymmetry in Eq. ( There is a freedom to parameterize the Keldysh Green's function ĝK (p F , R, ε) in terms of different distribution functions. As we discussed in Ref 44, one choice that is appealing when interpreting results is to use the distribution matrix f (p F , R, ε), The matrix f (p F , R, ε) itself can be written as The two components, f 1 (p F , R, ε) and f 3 (p F , R, ε), become after averaging over momentum the energy mode, f 1 (p F , R, ε) FS , and charge mode, f 3 (p F , R, ε) FS , used in literature on non-equlibrium phenomena in diffusive s-wave superconductors. Imaginary part of the Keldysh self-energy Σ K in equilibrium (dashed blue) and nonequilbrium self-consistent (solid orange) for ∆T = 0.1kBTc, T = 0.25kBTc, D = 1, Γ = 0.1π, δ0 = π/4, computed at the center of the superconductor at x = Ls/2. The quasiparticle chemical potential has the form the charge current is and the energy current reads We use j 0 = ev F N F k B T c as the unit for charge current, and j th 0 = v F N F (k B T c ) 2 as unit for energy current. In all of the above equations, N (p F , R, ε) is a normalized, momentum-resolved local density of states per spin: It is related to the total local density of states via An alternative separation of the Keldysh Green's function is obtained by splitting the distribution function into a local-equilibrium distribution function with the base temperature T , and an anomalous part h a , such that With this choice, we have ĝK = ĝle + ĝa , where the socalled anomalous part ĝa contains all the information of the non-equilibrium form of the distribution. The advantage, as we shall see below, is that quasiparticle flow due to the temperature gradient is mainly given by the anomalous part while the condensate response is mainly given by the local equilibrium term: Indeed, noting that the local equilibrium distribution in Eq. ( In a non-equilibrium situation, a local temperature is not well defined since the energy mode is modified and there is a spatially dependent electrochemical potential. But following Ref. 53, we may define a spatially dependent effective temperature. First we note that the energy mode in equilibrium is f eq 1 (ε, T ) = tanh(ε/2k B T ). From a Sommerfeld expansion one can show that In non-equilibrium we then define the local effective temperature T eff (R) as where ] is the zero-temperature local equilibrium energy mode for local potential φ(R). Furthermore, we define left-mover and right-mover averages of f 1 and f 3 in Eq. ( Here we use a partial Fermi surface average where the Heaviside step function Θ(± cos φ F ) is unity if the projection of v F on the transport axis x is positive (+) or negative (-), and zero otherwise. The half-space averaged f 1 (f 3 ) in Eq. ( We then obtain an effective temperature T eff,→ for right-movers by replacing the full Fermi-surface average in Eq. ( To solve Eq. ( with an analogous definition for the advanced functions, while the Keldysh component takes the form The parametrizing functions themselves satisfy a set of coupled transport equations. The coherence function γ satisfies a Riccati equation, while the equation for the distribution function x reads These equations for γ and x can be obtained by the tilde symmetry, Eq. ( , in terms of the reservoir temperatures including the temperature bias as well as the thermoelectrically induced chemical potential difference, see below. The parametrization of ĝK in terms of distribution functions x and x in Eq. ( For further details, we refer to Ref. 44. Determining the thermopower of the superconductor requires finding the potential difference between the two reservoirs that develops as a result of the applied temperature bias. The temperature bias leads to the injection of a nonequilibrium distribution into the superconductor. Starting from an equilibrium guess for all selfenergies we solve Eq. ( where j L(R) is the current flow between the superconductor and the left (right) reservoir and p is a numerical parameter of order unity. The iteration then converges towards j L(R) = 0. Physically, no current flows between the superconductor and the reservoirs in the steady state in an open-circuit setup. Inside the superconductor we require conservation of charge current, meaning in this case that the current everywhere is zero. This is guaranteed by solving for the self-energies and the φpotential self-consistently. The results shown here have |j(R)| < 10 -5 j 0 everywhere. Once a selfconsistent solution is obtained, we obtain the thermopower where μ L -μ R is the voltage drop across the structure and ∆T is the applied temperature bias. In Fig. also called thermophase, is formed in response to the temperature bias. Throughout the superconductor, the electron distribution has a non-equilibrium form. To quantify it we separate it into the right-moving and left-moving energy and charge modes. The energy mode close to a thermal distribution and the introduction of a local effective temperature T eff (x) is illuminating, see Fig. In Fig. Lastly, we address how interface transparency and crystal-axes misalignment affect the thermovoltage. Fig. For α = π/4 and D = 1 we see a reduction in S(T ), as compared with α = 0. This is because we inject quasiparticles into the node of the d-wave order parameter where there are a lot of states. The device is more like a normal metal, with lower thermopower. For α = π/4 and D = 0.5, there is a large density of zero-energy Andreev bound states formed at the surface. In this paper, we have studied the stationary nonlinear thermoelectric response of a d-wave superconductor connected to normal-metal reservoirs under a temperature bias. Earlier results 36 had predicted within linear response a large bulk thermoelectric effect caused by an impurity-induced electron-hole asymmetry for scattering phase shifts in between the Born and unitary limits. Using self-consistent quasiclassical theory for the stationary nonequilibrium response, we studied physical quantities such as the thermopower, the thermophase, and the nonequilibrium distribution in a device setup with normal metal leads. Aside from varying the base temperature of the setup, we examined the effects of varying interface transparency, crystal-axes misalignment, and mean free path. Our results show that the thermoelectric response of the superconductor leads to a thermovoltage between the reservoirs, with the thermopower being maximal for δ 0 ∼ π/4. For such intermediate phase shifts, a system with good contacts and a mean free path on the order of the system size has a thermopower of S ≈ 5 × 10 -2 k B /e. Taking YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7-δ (T c ≈ 90 K) as an example compound, an applied temperature difference of ∆T = 0.1T c ≈ 9 K results in a voltage drop of ∆V ≈ -40μV , a value that is experimentally easily accessible. Within our quasiclassical theory, any electron-hole asymmetry induced by bandstructure or normal state energy-dependent scattering times, are neglected. Instead the asymmetry we consider is induced in the superconducting state through impurity scattering, the interplay with Andreev processes, and the resulting impurity resonance states. There is a recent interest in the Seebeck effect in the non-superconducting state of hightemperature superconducting materials where superconductivity is suppressed by a high magnetic field. In conclusion, our results predict a measurable thermovoltage in normal-metal/d-wave superconductor hybrid structures. This suggests a voltage measurement in such structures as a promising complimentary experimental approach to the flux measurements on purely superconducting rings. Our conclusions should be valid in a broader perspective for other symmetries of the order parameter, as long as impurities lead to a large electron-hole asymmetry. Also in a conventional superconductor with an impurity band of Yu-Shiba-Russinov states at finite energies within the s-wave gap, a similarly large thermoelectric response coefficient has been predicted through a linear response calculation, 