In many processes for crystalline materials such as precipitation, heteroepitaxy, alloying, and phase transformation, lattice expansion or compression of embedded domains occurs. This can significantly alter the mechanical response of the material. Typically, these phenomena are studied macroscopically, thus neglecting the underlying microscopic structure. Here we present the prototypical case of an elastic inclusion described by a mesoscale model, namely a coarse-grained phase-field crystal model. A spatially-dependent parameter is introduced into the free energy functional to control the local spacing of the lattice structure, effectively prescribing an eigenstrain. The stress field obtained for an elastic inclusion in a 2D triangular lattice is shown to match well with the analytic solution of the Eshelby inclusion problem. The study of inclusions in crystalline materials is of great importance for many materials science and engineering applications. For instance, this applies to processes such as precipitation, phase-transformation, heteroepitaxy Continuum approaches are powerful in describing crystalline systems at the macroscale. However, they neglect details of the microscopic scales such as crystal symmetries, anisotropies, and orientation of the grains in polycrystalline materials. Methods capable of tackling the resulting effects of these microscopic details in a macroscopic description are highly demanded to obtain comprehensive descriptions. In this paper, we present the modeling of an elastic inclusion by the phase-field crystal (PFC) model The PFC model describes the crystal lattices by means of a continuous, periodic order parameter n : Ω → R, r → n(r), representing an atomic probability density and an associated conserved gradient flow with t the time parameter. The parameter q 0 sets the periodicity of n(r) and it is generally inversely proportional to the lattice spacing a 0 . B x 0 , ∆B 0 , τ , v are real parameters as in Refs. with c.c. denoting the complex conjugate, accounting for the contribution of -q j for which η -qj = η * qj being n(r) ∈ R, n 0 the average density, η j amplitudes, i the imaginary unit, and {q j } a set of reciprocal lattice vectors encoding the symmetry of the crystal. An eigenstrain with β = 1/(1 + ε * ). Notice that β = 1 corresponds to ε * = 0, while β < 1 and β > 1 correspond to positive or negative eigenstrains, respectively. Moreover, β diverges only in the unphysical limit a d → 0. No restrictions exist to consider this parameter spatially dependent, namely β(r) = 1/(1 + ε * (r)). To encode an eigenstrain ε * in the PFC model we consider then a modified energy functional featuring a slowly varying quantity β(r), The PFC model naturally accounts for elasticity where Φ ≡ 2 f s is a polynomial which takes different forms according to the considered symmetry With these choices, a 0 = 4π/ √ 3. The dynamics of η j obtained from the dynamics of n, eq. ( Minimizers of Fβ denote equilibrium configurations. A relaxed crystal, corresponding to the lattice represented by {q j } is described by real, constant amplitudes, which take some values depending on the length of the corresponding q j vectors This energy is minimized by Here we will look at φ + by restricting our analysis to t > 0 without loss of generality. Real solutions thus 2 is the solid/liquid or ordered/disordered coexistence condition. For β = 1 we recover the conditions given in From the energy in eq. ( where we have omitted the isotropic pressure term due to negligible contribution. Inserting now the amplitude ansatz from eq. ( for l, m ∈ {1, 2}, where G j is defined in eq. ( The calculation of the stress/strain field in the presence of an elastic inclusion, namely a portion of a material with an eigenstrain ε * surrounded by a relaxed medium, is known as Eshelby's inclusion problem The stress tensor in the presence of an inclusion with eigenstrain matrix ε * kl can be expressed as with C ijkl the rank-four elasticity tensor, S klpq the Eshelby tensor, ε e pq the elastic strain tensor and χ(r) an indicator/characteristic function which is 1 in the inclusion and 0 outside. The deformation leading to a change in the lattice parameter translates to a diagonal eigenstrain matrix ε * kl = ε * δ kl . The elasticity tensor for an isotropic medium is expressed as where λ and μ are material parameters (the Lamé constants). For the APFC description considered in Sect. II, using eq. ( and Poisson ratio (equal to 0.25 in the plane-strain settings In this section, we address the numerical simulation of the elastic inclusion problem within the APFC model illustrated in Sect. II and discuss the results together with the analytic solution reported in Sect. III. To deal with the continuous fields entering the (A)PFC models which varies smoothly from 0 in the matrix to 1 inside the inclusion with w a parameter controlling the extension of the smoothing region. χ w (r) is used to set the lattice spacing in the inclusion and thus the eigenstrain therein. Using eq. ( which delivers βq 0 = q 0 in the matrix, βq 0 = q d in the inclusion and provides an interpolation among these two values in between. The APFC evolution equations ( In Figure Deeper insights on this comparison and the role played by w are shown in Fig. In this work, we presented an (A)PFC formulation encoding an eigenstrain. This is achieved by acting on the quantity entering the free energy, which controls the equilibrium lattice parameter. The model has been benchmarked against the prototypical case of a mismatched inclusion, and it is found to match well with the solution of the Eshelby problem. Deviation from the classical analytical solutions may be ascribed to the considered simulation setup and the more detailed elasticity description conveyed by the APFC model. The model formulation and the example of an elastic inclusion set the ground for the coarse-grained modeling of crystalline material involving mechanical deformation not caused by external mechanical stress (namely eigenstrains n + δ in e j e m + δ jn e i e m ) + 8(3ρ 2 -2)e i e j e m e n , with r = (x 1 , x 2 ), e i (r