It was recently shown that when a drop of Glenlivet whisky evaporates, it leaves behind a uniform deposit [PRL 116, 124501 (2016)]. We utilize this fascinating finding in the fabrication of electrochemical metallization memory (ECM) cells. The top (Ag) and bottom (Co) electrodes in our structure are separated by a layer of Glenlivet whisky deposit (an insulator). Measurements show the device response is typical of ECM cells that involve threshold-type switching, pinched hysteresis loops, and a large difference between the high-and low-resistance states. The surface coating process used in our experiments simplifies the device fabrication and results in a biodegradable insulating layer, which may facilitate the recovery of recyclable materials at the end of the device's use. Introduction. -Like the three familiar circuit elements, namely resistors, inductors, and capacitors, memristors Starting with the work of Hickmott in the 1960s Undeniably, it is of value to explore other approaches to further improve memristor fabrication. In this article we combine the memristor, the newest passive electrical device, with Scotch whisky 1 . Our work was triggered by reports that well characterized thin films of whisky and related liquids Generally, the process of evaporation is quite a complex phenomenon that is influenced by a variety of factors (such as the chemical composition of the drop, substrate type and quality, and environmental conditions). When a droplet of a simple fluid evaporates, an outward radial flow develops As a model mixture, Kim et al. used Scotch whisky (Glenlivet, UK) V o l t a g e ( V ) Motivated by the aforementioned results, we introduce and study an innovated memristor structure based on a deposit of Scotch whisky. Such memristors were experimentally fabricated by us, and their properties were investigated. In particular, we have found that the memory switching characteristics of whisky deposit-based memristors are typical of ECM cells. Our work shows that a whisky deposit can serve as an alternate insulator to the typical insulators used in ECM cells. The replacement of traditional inorganic materials (such as silicon dioxide very often employed in ECM devices) with whisky deposits has a clear benefit in simplifying the fabrication process. Due to the rich physics during film formation of complex fluids, it is possible that these fluids can lead to a more green manufacturing of technology grade films and devices. The novelty of our contribution is threefold. First, we have simplified the memristor fabrication process by depositing the uniform insulating layer via evaporation of a droplet of a complex liquid. Second, we report the first electronic devices created using (directly) an alcoholic beverage. Third, we report preliminary results indicating that the memristor effect can provide electronic signatures of alcoholic beverages. The fabrication method proposed in this Letter is straightforward, and may be applied to other electronic devices. We also expect that it may have impact in education by bringing the memristor fabrication process to the labs where certain high-vacuum deposition tools are not available. Experimental details. -Fabrication. Whisky deposit-based memristors were fabricated in a clean room environment following the device structure shown schematically in Fig. A layer of cobalt (Co) with a thickness of 30 nm (the bottom electrode) was grown by an electron beam evaporator on the surface of an oxidized silicon (Si) substrate. Roughly 1 cm 2 areas on the Co surface were covered manually with Scotch whisky (Glenlivet, UK) that dried under ambient conditions. Finally, the top Ag electrodes (30 nm thickness) were generated on the deposit layer using a metal mask with openings of various shapes and sizes. A cell with a circular top electrode (with a radius of 710 μm) that demonstrated reliable switching was selected for the measurements presented in this paper. Multiple memristors fabricated by this method demonstrated similar results to the memristor presented in this paper. Figure Measurements. The setup used in this work is typical for the field of resistance switching devices. The memory cells were studied using a probe station connected to a Keysight B2911A precision source/measure unit. In a typical measurement, a triangular voltage sweep in the range of -1.5 V to 2.0 V was applied to the cell, and the resultant current flowing across the cell was measured. All measurements reported in this paper were obtained with 20 μA positive and -1 mA negative compliance currents. Results. -As in other ECM cells The I -V sweeps presented in Fig. In order to evaluate the repeatability of resistance switching, we performed 20 consecutive voltage sweep cycles and extracted R OF F and R ON from each cycle. Fig. Additionally, we investigated the stability of the ON and OFF states over time. For this purpose, the device was initialized into the ON or OFF state, and its resistance was read using low-amplitude voltage pulses at a time step of 10 seconds for 600 seconds. Fig. We speculate that along with mass spectrometry and other novel techniques, The positive threshold voltage was measured in three samples that were fabricated with a 1:0, 1:1, and 1:2 whisky to water dilution. The measured values were V th(1:0) = 1.52 V, V th(1:1) = 1.31 V, and V th(1:2) = 1.17 V. These were obtained after averaging the positive threshold voltage measured in 5 consecutive cycles. This result indicates a tendency for a decrease in the threshold voltage, V th , as dilution increases. The change in the threshold voltage can be explained by the variation of the deposit thickness (the observed dependence of V th on the whisky content, however, is non-linear). The detailed investigation of this sensing functionality is beyond the scope of the present study. Conclusion. -Scotch and other whiskys are complex liquids containing thousands of organic components This study with Scotch whisky films was partially motivated by the universal familiarity of whisky. Our discovery of memristor activity hints at new functionalities of custom designed organic films, as well as industrial scale green fabrication of electronic devices. The Marangoni effect describes mass transfer due to the gradient in surface tension