While chiral magnets, metal-based magnetic multilayers or Heusler compounds have been considered as the material workhorses in the field of skyrmionics, oxides are now emerging as promising alternatives, as they host special correlations between the spin-orbital-chargelattice degrees of freedom and/or coupled ferroic order parameters. These interactions open new possibilities for practically exploiting skyrmionics. In this article, we review the recent advances in the observation and control of topological spin textures in various oxide systems. We start with the discovery of skyrmions and related quasi-particles in bulk and heterostructure ferromagnetic oxides. Next, we emphasize the shortcomings of implementing ferromagnetic textures, which have led to the recent explorations of ferrimagnetic and antiferromagnetic oxide counterparts, with higher Curie temperatures, stray-field immunity, low Gilbert damping, ultrafast magnetic dynamics, and/or absence of skyrmion deflection. Then, we highlight the development of novel pathways to control the stability, motion and detection of topological textures using electric fields and currents. Finally, we present the outstanding challenges that need to be overcome to achieve all-electrical, non-volatile, low-power oxide skyrmionic devices. Skyrmionics is a burgeoning field in spintronics that aims to exploit real-space whirling topological magnetic textures as mobile information bits ('0' and '1') in beyond-Moore computing paradigms. Various chiral topological textures can be classified by their unique topological charge, helicity, and orientation of background spins, see Table which corresponds to the magnetization m ̂ in ferromagnetic (FM) or ferrimagnetic (FiM) systems and the Néel vector l ̂ in the antiferromagnetic (AFM) counterparts. Topological textures are stabilized by a negative DW energy, Figure To date, significant advances have been made in skyrmionics thanks to a plethora of microscopic imaging and detection techniques, which harness neutrons, photons, electrons or stray magnetic fields. This includes neutron scattering, To harness topological textures practically, it is important to develop materials that can stabilize these textures across a wide range of temperatures including room temperature, and develop all-electrical pathways to nucleate, move, read and destroy them in patterned tracks. A large family of topological textures and control mechanisms have been reported in magnetic metal-based heterostructures, or chiral magnets such as Heusler compounds, and B20 systems, (iii) Furthermore, high quality crystalline oxide films with precisely controlled interfaces/terminations, and heterostructures thereof, hosting very low defects can be fabricated via standard growth techniques. This could help flatten the pinning landscape and reduce threshold current densities required to move textures, ideal for energy-efficient control. These aspects have primed oxides to emerge as potential hosts to build electrically controlled, nonvolatile skyrmionic devices. This review is dedicated to the two overarching thrusts in the field of oxide skyrmionics -i.e., the development of materials and control mechanisms -that could help to pave the way toward practical oxide devices. The quest for magnetic textures in oxides began as early as the 1970s, in orthoferrites, La1.37Sr1.63Mn2O7 was one of the celebrated examples that hosted a dense biskyrmion lattice (Figure Over the last few decades, various layer-by-layer or step-flow oxide growth techniques have emerged which have enabled the creation of high quality interfaces for novel heterostructure design. Such capability has opened doors for stabilizing Néel-type skyrmions by engineering interfacial DMI. For instance, in ferromagnetic SrRuO3 thin films, Ru 4+ 4d t2g 4 eg 0 electronic configuration is known to endow several interesting properties, such as the minority-spin double exchange and the unquenched orbital angular momentum (L = 1)allowing large spin-orbit coupling (SOC) and perpendicular magnetic anisotropy (PMA). The partially filled t2g orbitals also form bands with various k-space Chern numbers, Subsequently, similar THE-like signals were also discovered in single-layer ultrathin SrRuO3 More recently, MFM imaging of SrRuO3/PbTiO3(001) with Fourier transform revealed a "square-lattice IC-phase" formed by two perpendicularly propagating cycloids. were discussed as the source of interfacial broken inversion symmetry. While in the latter, random stacking faults were found at the bottom CaIrO3/CaMnO3 interface of the trilayer for avoiding DMI cancellation. On the other hand, the lightly Ce 4+ -doped CaMnO3 single-layer thin film was realized as a good candidate for stabilizing magnetic bubbles by dipolar interaction, A tell-tale sign for the presence of chiral textures in FiM oxide films was initially obtained by Hall transport, where ultrathin strained samples of rare-earth garnets (Tm3Fe5O12) interfaced with a heavy-metal overlayer While textures in FM and FiM materials can be visualized and controlled readily by standard magnetic techniques, it is difficult to directly translate these approaches to AFM counterparts due to the compensation of constituent magnetic sublattices. The first problem of imaging the AFM order parameter (i.e. the Néel vector), can be tackled via synchrotron-based linear dichroic X-ray imaging, Another material of interest is the AFM oxide α-Cr2O3, which was found to exhibit THE signals near and above the Néel ordering temperature, when its thin films were interfaced with a Pt over-layer. Finally, in analogy with synthetic antiferromagnets (SAF) made of metallic multilayers using Ruderman-Kittel-Kasuya-Yosida interaction, To enable practical topological racetracks, three crucial prerequisites need to be met: (i) control over the stability landscape for texture generation/annihilation, (ii) control of texture motion, and (iii) the readout mechanism that detects topological textures. These features have to be integrated into an all-electrical platform. To this end, oxides offer several advantages not found in other materials. To precisely generate/annihilate skyrmions with low power consumption, a zero-current, magnetic-field-free, non-volatile electric field controlled magnetic landscape is highly desirable. This can be achieved either with systems possessing coupled ferroic orders, either intrinsically or via interfacial interactions. In metallic skyrmion platforms, the state-of-the-art approaches involve skyrmion nucleation via current-based spin-orbit torques Among oxide bulk crystals, Cu2OSeO3 is a celebrated compound for its multiferroic functionality. Besides housing a Bloch-type SkL, its d-p hybridization allows magnetoelectric coupling between the electric polarization and magnetic moment. These developments, harnessing the ferroelectric order in natural/artificial multiferroic oxides, have opened non-volatile pathways to tune topological stability. Next, it will be crucial to realize this electric field control over topological textures in FiM/AFM materials at room temperature. For moving topological textures, three underlying mechanisms have been identified, namely the thermal effect, spin-transfer torque (STT) and spin-orbit torque (SOT). Firstly, in thin Cu2OSeO3 plates, a local temperature imbalance was found to produce magnon current components propagating parallel and perpendicular to the temperature gradient. These magnon currents are deflected by the emergent magnetic field of the topological SkL due to spin torques, and in return the skyrmions experience a reaction force resulting in their motion. Radial thermal gradients have produced ratchet-like rotations of a laterally constricted SkL. Secondly, in the case of the biskyrmion-hosting La1.37Sr1.63Mn2O7 system, currentbased STTs generated by low JC ~10 7 A/m 2 triggered the lateral motion of SkLs. Given that a wide variety of topological textures and control pathways have already been demonstrated in oxides, the stage is now set to explore oxide skyrmionics. Imminent steps are to stabilize topological textures in FiM or AFM oxides that are coupled to a ferroelectric order, enabling non-volatile control over the topological stability landscape, at room temperature and above. This can be facilitated by careful heterostructure designing of emergent phenomena. Subsequently, it is important to harness current-based SOTs to realize ultrafast motion of textures along racetracks. Finally, incorporation of tunnel junctions to detect topological textures via TNcMR will allow scalable read out of bits. Integrating all these aspects in a single device would enable practical exploitation of oxides for low-power multifunctional skyrmionics. in the strong DMI regime above a critical threshold, to isolated metastable topological quasiparticles in the intermediate/weaker DMI regime. The latter scenario is practically more relevant as it enables these textures to serve as individually addressable bits in racetrack implementations.