We present a table-top extreme ultraviolet (XUV) beamline for measuring time-and frequencyresolved XUV excited optical luminescence (XEOL) with additional femtosecond-resolution XUV transient absorption spectroscopy functionality. XUV pulses are generated via high-harmonic generation using a near-infrared pulse in a noble gas medium, and focused to excite luminescence from a solid sample. The luminescence is collimated and guided into a streak camera, where its spectral components are temporally resolved with picosecond temporal resolution. We time-resolve XUV excited luminescence and compare the results to luminescence decays excited at longer wavelengths for three different materials : (i) sodium salicylate, an often used XUV scintillator, (ii) fluorescent labeling molecule 4-carbazole benzoic acid (CB), and (iii) a zirconium metal oxo-cluster labeled with CB, which is a photoresist candidate for extreme-ultraviolet lithography. Our results establish time-resolved XEOL as a new technique to measure transient XUV-driven phenomena in solid-state samples, and identify decay mechanisms of molecules following XUV and soft-X-ray excitation. Photoinduced elementary molecular processes take place on ultrashort time-scales ranging from attoseconds to nanoseconds. Utilization of table-top HHG-based XUV setups as excitation sources for studying XUV-driven reactions has been somewhat limited by the inherently low HHG conversion efficiency and resulting poor photon fluxes. Nevertheless, XUV-induced phenomena have been investigated, including electron-hole dynamics at a conical intersection, For this paper, we studied and time-resolved the XUV excited luminescence of the scintillator sodium salicylate (NaSal), the fluorophore 4-carbazole benzoic acid (CB), and a zirconium metal oxo-cluster photoresist which incorporates this fluorophore. This particular metal oxo-cluster has a core structure, consisting of six zirconium and four oxygen atoms plus four hydroxides, stabilized by twelve methacrylate (OMc) ligands (Zr 6 O 4 (OH) 4 (OMc) 12 or ZrOMc). A. Beamline Overview Fig. The beamline consists of four vacuum chambers. In front of the first chamber, the HHG chamber, the IR pulses are focused with a 500 mm focal length spherical mirror into a gas cell with a diameter of 500 μm and a length of 5 mm, containing a low-pressure (between 20 and 80 mbar) noble gas, initiating the HHG process. The XUV source emits broadband spectra up to 45 eV using argon (inset, Fig. The OPA/NIR-UVVis system generates pulses between 230 and 2500 nm with approximately 300 μJ per pulse at IR wavelengths to approximately 10 μJ per pulse at DUV wavelengths. These pulses are focused on the sample using a 250 mm spherical mirror to a spot size of and 153 ± 2 μm and temporally synchronized with the XUV pulses from HHG using a linear stage (M-531.DD1, PI) with long scanning range. The output of the OPA functions both as a pulse for pumpprobe experiments and as an excitation source to study carrier dynamics by photoluminescence. Samples are positioned using a four dimensional stage (Smaract), which can be moved with a precision of 10 nm and enables raster scanning if photobleaching of the fluorescence becomes an issue, as elaborated on in section IV A. The light collection beam path to the streak camera (C10910, Hamamatsu) consists of a 50 mm focal length parabolic mirror (PM1), capturing up to 6% of emitted light at a near normal angle. The luminescence is refocused using a 100 mm focal length parabolic mirror (PM2) onto the slit of a Czerny-Turner scheme-based spectrograph (SP-2300i, Princeton Instruments) mounted in front of the streak system, containing three different gratings optimized for different spectral ranges. The streak camera operates using two electronic sweep units to cover different time ranges. The slow sweep unit is synchronized with the amplifier (2 kHz) and is utilized in measurements in the range of 500 μs to 2 ns, while the synchroscan unit is synchronized with the seed laser output (84 MHz) and is used for time windows shorter than 2 ns, down to 70 ps. The time-delayed electrons are thus spatially spread out by the electric field before they hit a multi-channel plate (MCP) coupled to a phosphor screen. The signal from the phosphor screen is recorded by a complementary metal-oxide-semiconductor (CMOS) camera (ORCA-FLASH4.0, Hamamatsu). Additionally, a removable mirror combined with a 150 mm focal length lens are included with a spectrometer (Maya 2000 Pro, Ocean Optics) in the light collection beam path, as can also be seen in Fig. The XUV pulse energy E pulse at the sample position was estimated to be approximately 0.50 nJ/pulse, which is equivalent to a fluence of approximately 26 μJ/cm 2 when generating in argon. In Eq. 1 a recorded XUV spectrum, normalized to the number of integrated pulses, (E spec (eV )) is divided by the estimated total absorption (A tot (eV )) of a 100 nm aluminum filter with an estimated 8 nm aluminum oxide layer (4 nm on the front-and backsides) The XTAS setup is installed in such a manner that switching between XTAS and XEOL experiments can be done very quickly. The temporal and spectral resolutions are important in XTAS experiments, as they allow for e.g. temporal drift corrections and observing absorption features in high resolution. In order to determine the temporal and spectral resolution of XTAS, a second gas cell, with a length of 5 mm and diameter of 500 μm is moved in the focus of the pump-probe overlap using a secondary, linear stage. This gas cell is filled with argon up to a pressure of approximately 10-20 mbar, resulting in significant XUV absorption. Due to the excitation of argon auto-ionization states, several sharp lines will appear in the spectrum between 26.5 and 29 eV where XUV light is re-emitted. As the spectral bandwidths of the argon auto-ionization states have been determined with very high precision, Γ res was determined to be 44.9 ± 0.9 meV around 28 eV using the known FWHM Γ of the 5p auto-ionization state, 26.2 meV, NaSal (Fig. Two streak traces were then measured for DUV and for XUV excitation, respectively in Fig. In conclusion, we have reported on a table-top XUV beamline capable of measuring luminescence excited by visible, DUV and XUV sources in a time-and frequency resolved manner using an integrated streak camera. By measuring both a high QE scintillator, a fluorophore and a photoresist material tagged with the fluorophore we also demonstrated its versatility in measuring different types of luminescent materials. We demonstrated that the poor XUV photochemical reactivity performance of the ZrOMc-CB compared to the unsubstituted ZrOMc can be attributed to the fact that the substituted resist itself converts part of the energy to emitted photons. The addition of a high temporal resolution, IR to DUV pump/XUV probe allows for XTAS measurements to get a more complete view of molecular and electronic dynamics on a fs to ns time-scale in relevant samples and, if necessary, XEOL and XTAS measurements can be run simultaneously. This beamline can be used to study the dynamics in a wide variety of relevant solid materials including novel scintillators, 2D materials, other photoresists, solar cell materials and strongly correlated materials. The XUV excitation is reminiscent of the photoactivation and radiation damage that such materials experience in modern-day nanolithography or even in space, where solar power panels may become more prevalent due to possibly higher collection efficiencies. We expect that time-resolved XEOL will become an important tool to study charge carrier and exciton dynamics in solid-state materials excited by XUV pulses. In particular, XUV pulses typically have the shortest absorption lengths of all wavelengths which leads to a high carrier concentration in the first few nm near the surface. 