Superconductors like other solids cannot relax instantaneously from excited states to thermodynamic equilibrium. In this paper, relaxation from thermal excitations is investigated, like after absorption of radiation or, under conductor movement, release and transformation of mechanical tension to thermal energy. Relaxation proceeds within finite periods of time the length of which increases the more strongly the closer the superconductor temperature has already approached its critical value. Properties of many-particle systems (as explained, by an analogy to nuclear physics), basic thermodynamic considerations (temperature uniquely defined under solely equilibrium condition) and standard, multi-component heat transfer principles (solid conduction plus radiation in thin films) are applied as tools to prove this expectation. Energy gap, superconductor critical current density and critical temperature, as a result, are tightly related to relaxation rates and relaxation times of the superconductor electron system. By numerical simulations, an attempt is made to find a quantitative correlation of these properties in a thin film superconductor. This paper presents an attempt to correlate superconductor critical current density and critical temperature with relaxation of its electron system. Focus is on relaxation from thermally excited states. These may result from absorption of radiation or, under conductor movement, release and transformation of mechanical to thermal energy. The reported numerical investigations shall describe how long it takes a disturbed superconductor to relax to thermodynamic equilibrium. # Associate (Außerplanmäßiger) Professor Critical current density becomes zero if, under such disturbances, density of charge carriers (electron pairs) becomes too small to support zero-loss current transport. The relaxation (re-organisation) rate of the disturbed electron system might not be able to compensate decay of electron pairs to single electrons. Accordingly, critical current density should be correlated with relaxation rate and relaxation time of the electron system. The same applies to critical temperature. As will be shown, if relaxation time after a disturbance is too long, or even might diverge, critical temperature cannot uniquely be defined within reasonable experimental or simulation periods of time. The literature reports a large number of magnetic relaxation measurements to determine pinning potentials in Nb 3 Sn, in the BSCCO family and in MgB 2 /Fe superconductors. Instead, focus in the present paper is on decay of the excited electron system. Relaxation of this system becomes most interesting when, under a thermal disturbance, the superconductor has already approached very closely its superconducting to normal conducting phase transition. Superconductor stability against quench thus is an aspect of the relaxation problem. In the first, formal part of this paper, therefore, superconductor temperature excursion under a disturbance is revisited in more detail. The presented investigations do not duplicate previous papers In the second part, justification of the said, tentative correlation shall be confirmed by quantitative results. In comparison to numerous studies of magnetization, its relaxation and the pinning potentials, it appears this discussion, relaxation rate and relaxation time of the disturbed electron system, has not thoroughly been analyzed in the physical and engineering literature. This paper is a new edition of the everlasting, general question: What can we really know about superconductor properties? This paper is focused on one just one, yet strongly important aspect of this problem. For this purpose, the reported investigations are applied to a coated (2G) YBaCuO 123, thin film superconductor (Figure To provide a safe basis for investigating the said, possibly existing correlation, criteria and constraints to obtain reliable numerical results by simulation of temperature excursion in a superconductor have to be provided. Critical current density, J Crit , depends on temperature, J Crit (T,B) = J Crit (T)/[B 0 + B(t)] (1a) using J Crit (T) = J Crit0 ( 1 -T/T Crit ) n (1b) In a coil, B(t) in Eq. (1a) describes magnetic induction, like from neighbouring windings (B 0 is a constant). As far as possible, the exponent n in Eq. (1b) has to be chosen with respect to materials and current transport properties. A decision on the value of the exponent can be made if, when using Eq. (1a,b) in numerical simulations, convergence of the simulated temperature fields has been achieved. Eq. ( (4-35) of This result of the Ginzburg-Landau equation for J Crit applies to a continuum by assuming the amplitude of the order parameter is uniform in the sample; in thin films, it cannot vary over thickness. Accordingly, we find its applicability to metals and alloys in Sect. 5.6 of But the Ginzburg-Landau theory does not take into account anisotropic materials and transport properties of type II, hard superconductors and thus might not be applicable in these cases. Yet Clem et al We cannot safely apply Eq. (1b) with inclusion of an exponential damping factor, J Crit (T,B) = J Crit (T=0,B) (1 -T/T Crit ) exp(-T/T Crit ), as was suggested in The traditional Eq. (1b), without an exponential term, therefore has been applied in the present simulations, using the interval 0.5 ≤ n ≤ 2, to look for divergences, and after a variety of test calculations, we finally returned to the Ginzburg-Landau value n = 3/2. For calculation of the critical current density, J Crit (T) = J Crit0 ( 1 -T/T Crit ) n , first the difference ΔT = T -T Crit between superconductor temperature, T, and critical temperature, T Crit , has to be determined. Second, J Crit contains T Crit by the ratio T/T Crit . In both cases, for ΔT and for T/T Crit , a decision has to be made which value of T Crit has to be applied in the simulations. At first sight, this is an unexpected question, but we will show that it has strong impacts on calculated temperature excursions. As a result of the calculations, the most probable, realistic approach is to apply in T -T Crit and T/T Crit local values of both conductor temperature and of critical temperature. Instead of the standard ΔT = T -T Crit0 and ratio T/T Crit0 (using uniform T Crit0 = 92 K), we have applied ΔT(x,y,t) = T(x,y,t) -T Crit (x,y,t) J Crit [T(x,y,t)] = J Crit0 [1 -T(x,y,t)/T Crit (x,y,t)] n (2b) provided T(x,y,t) < T Crit (x,y,t)] at co-ordinates (x,y) in the conductor cross section. This differentiation is not just academic, and the temperature fields should be simulated as exact as possible. Safety in prediction of temperature excursions with time, of critical current density (and, trivially, also of stability functions and thus on onset of a quench) rely on how exact the sharp condition T ≤ T Crit can be verified, which means it relies on the uniqueness by which temperature fields, T(x,y,t) and critical temperature, T Crit (x,y,t), both as local values, can be determined. Emphasis in this paper is on "local". Under disturbances, and in particular in situations close to the superconducting/normal conducting phase transition, there is hardly a uniform distribution of temperature and of critical and transport current in the superconductor cross section or volume, compare the results reported in Non-uniformity is expected from a variety of potential, materials and physical origins. First, there are materials deficiencies resulting from materials preparation (deposition, handling, conductor winding), A statistical approach applied in the most early stage of the simulations, like the one presented in the present paper, is a better solution. Random variations of the thermal conductivity, within ± 5 per cent and first results showing their impact on centroid element temperature are described in the Appendix, Figure Simulations using non-uniform superconductor critical parameters is contrary to all traditional, numerical calculations of temperature fields under disturbances (and also to all standard stability calculations). But the most interesting question is whether critical temperature of a superconductor can uniquely be defined at all. Existence of a uniquely defined T Crit depends on the thermodynamic state of the superconductor electron system 1 . Trivially, any uncertainty of T Crit would concern the differences ΔT(x,y,t) and the ratios T(x,y,t)/T Crit (x,y,t)] when calculating J Crit [T(x,y,t)] by Eq. (2b). 1 Critical temperature like critical current density is a property of solely the electron system. It is an interesting question which temperature is measured, electron or phonon temperature, when sensors attached to a superconductor solid or thin film, or remotely by radiation detectors. It is not clear that both temperatures would be identical, compare Sect. 4.3 in Relaxation of the superconductor electron system from a disturbance is expected to follow an exponential decay law. Let ς(t) denote an excitation like a sudden temperature increase following e. g. absorption of a radiative pulse. The excitation disturbs the dynamic equilibrium between statistical but permanent, single electron (quasiparticle) generation and their recombination to electron pairs. The excitation decays proportional to exp(-t/τ), with τ the relaxation time, traditionally assumed as constant. But it is not clear that τ is really constant; the density, n S (T), of electron pairs strongly depends on temperature that in turn, under a disturbance, is a function of time, t. The point is: Relaxation cannot be completed instantaneously. Trivially, relaxation time is correlated with relaxation rates. Spontaneously, one would assume that relaxation time increases the stronger, the smaller the relaxation rate (the longer it takes the superconductor to relax to a new thermodynamic equilibrium). Regardless how relaxation rates are calculated, like in An approach how to calculate relaxation time, τ, and its dependence on temperature has been suggested by the recently reported, "microscopic stability model" In short, the model Both the direct, multi-step method described in If T Crit exists, it can be understood as being either  a rough description of a thermodynamic non-equilibrium electron state (this is a standard but only approximate interpretation), which means, from purely thermodynamic standpoints, T Crit cannot be explained as a thermodynamic temperature of uniquely defined value,  or T Crit correlates, as a thermodynamic equilibrium variable, with a corresponding, completed (which means, really existing) equilibrium electron state. The prediction from The situation is schematically described in Figure This conclusion is not in conflict with Buckel and Kleiner The authors say that "in conventional superconductors the concentration of unpaired electrons decreases exponentially with decreasing temperature, and hence the probability that an unpaired electron finds a suitable partner for recombination to form a Cooper pair also decreases." This is not in conflict with the prediction from In the present case, under increasing temperature, the number of single electrons increases (quasi-particles as thermally, not permanent, statistically initiated decay products). Starting from an original dynamic equilibrium state at a temperature, T, followed by a disturbance at this temperature, increasingly more single particles have to recombined to pairs in order to generate, by reorganisation of the total number, N Total , the new dynamic equilibrium, at the new equilibrium temperature, T'. There, again a statistical, un-displaced dynamic equilibrium between generation and recombination processes would be obtained when relaxation is completed. Conservation of energy requests T' > T; this temperature increase, from T to T', concerns all electrons (the total electron body). The increased number, N Total (T'), of electrons to be reorganised accordingly increases relaxation time (while, reversely, relaxation time decreases with decreasing temperature). It is the fractional parentage principle that causes the enormous increase of τ observed near T Crit in Figure Instead, the explanation g. escape processes and by interaction with lattice phonons. These equations do not take into account the whole electron body (N) but only the additional, injected number ΔN of particles. It is thus not the total body of electrons that has to be re-organised in this model under observation of the fractional parentage principle. The relaxation time reported in As a consequence, even if it in a warm-up experiment the temperature of the electron system might become infinitely close to the traditional T Crit , re-organisation of the corresponding, total electron state still is not completed and thus cannot be understood as a thermodynamic equilibrium. Critical temperature, as a thermodynamic equilibrium quantity, accordingly is not uniquely defined. If temperature evolution in a superconductor is not uniform, the phase transition at critical temperature can be completed neither spatial uniformly nor will this final state be attained simultaneously in the superconductor cross section or volume. The consequence to be taken from Critical temperature, if understood as a sharply defined quantity, therefore is a fiction, it remains out of sight during finite (experimental or simulated) periods of time. Rather, it is not at T Crit that simulations can be performed but in a time interval within which events and their distance from the phase transition can be studied. The conclusion from "definite" probably means "completed"). Yes, but the phase transition, here the completion of relaxation after a disturbance, takes finite, possibly diverging time. Critical temperature is the dynamic equilibrium of the electron state when no more disturbances, besides the statistical fluctuations in dynamic equilibrium, have to be compensated. Critical temperature thus may become out of sight within reasonable time scales in standard experiments or in computer simulations. This conclusion is not new physics but results from properties of manyparticle systems (an analogy to nuclear physics), basic thermodynamic considerations (temperature uniquely defined under thermodynamic equilibrium) and from standard, multi-component heat transfer principles (solid conduction plus radiation in thin films). simulations but might concern also levitation: Levitation height might not converge within reasonable periods of time to a final, equilibrium vertical co-ordinate. Even more important, but obviously inevitable under reasonably limited experimental efforts, results of standard measurements of critical current density might not reflect perfect equilibrium conditions. All results reported in the following Figures therefore are provisional in the sense that, strictly speaking, simulations can safely be performed only if a convergence limes of a series T Crit really would exist. The following relations between critical current density and relaxation time, τ, or relaxation rate, ζ, dJ Crit /dζ ~ J Crit (3b) are strongly non-linear, solutions can be found only in numerical simulations, and they can be quantified only if J Crit , τ and ζ depend on a common variable, which here is temperature. The simulated temperature excursions with time shall contribute to quantitative solutions of Eq. (3a,b). If inspected under the item "simulation time", the overall procedure yielding relaxation rates and relaxation time in dependence of (and correlated with) critical current density is schematically explained in Figure We start with simulations of transient temperature fields, T(x,y,t), developing from initial values, T(x,y,t 0 ), in a superconductor coil. The coil integrates 100 turns prepared from a coated, (2G) YBaCuO 123 thin film superconductor (Figure This start of the simulations is chosen because temperature, like magnetic field, is a thermodynamic variable that deserves primary attention, while current is not. We do not apply a multi-physics approach like H-or T/A formulations that beyond doubt are suitable for large-scale superconductor applications, see Instead, what is needed in the present paper, with respect to the said, possibly existing correlation, requests electromagnetic/thermal coupling without homogenization but with modelling the physics on microscopic scales. We have to consider, in each of the Finite Elements, the Meissner effect, weak links and viscous, thermally assisted flux flow resistivity and flux creep if the superconductor is very close to critical temperature and contact resistances between super-and normal conducting layers -how else could non-uniformity of the temperature distributions be considered. We do not apply constant temperature approximations but describe the local interplay of temperature-, field-and current-dependent variables with the transient temperature fields. Standard Finite Element codes provide multi-physics element options (like the electric field, heat transfer, structural mechanics couplings by the FE code Ansys). But it is not clear that convergence can safely be achieved if the superconducting/normal phase transition, with its complicated consequences for the other superconductor variables, would be involved in the solutions obtained from standard FE codes. Therefore, we first calculate the solution, T(x,y,t), by application of the FE code to highly differentiated, geometrical and materials boundary conditions. From this solution, all physical variables that depend on temperature are calculated. In successive load-steps, the Finite Element integration is restarted with the new variables; Bi-directional interconnection between electric/magnetic and thermal interplay is realised by this sequential procedure. The convergence problem is reduced to that of solely the temperature field, yet the procedure requires considerable computational efforts. The FE procedure for this purpose is embedded in a comprehensive, "master scheme". This scheme, a flow chart that is extended against the previously published Figure Another serious problem arises from the number of turns that can be simulated to yield high spatial and temporal resolution, without application of any continuous, spatially averaged structures. The number of simulated turns for this purpose has to be limited. In the present simulations, the procedure has been applied to only the five uppermost turns of the coil. Accordingly, a thermal boundary condition near the interface between turns 96 and 95 has to be specified appropriately. If y 96 denotes vertical position at half the thickness of the Hastelloy block, the condition T(y 96 ) Ξ 77 K (temperature of the coolant) would not be realistic because temperature of turn 95 is much larger, at least in case of a fault current. Any values T(y 96 ) > 77 K at this position could only be estimated, but estimates shall be avoided. In nodes). From these, the proper superconductor thin films in each turn occupy between 5 000 and 15 000 elements. We have compensated 2D interfacial layers (IFL) between the thin SC, Ag and MgO-films (that otherwise might be approximated with shell elements) by assuming regular, 2D thin films of very small thickness. In the total winding cross sections, film thicknesses are between 40 nm (interfacial layers) and 100 μm (stabilizer). With a width of the windings of about 6 mm, and in particular with respect to details of the previously suggested flux flow cell model Divergences like T < 77 K, or thermal run-away to extremely high temperature, were observed in only rare situations during the iteration cycles. These were located outside the proper superconductor cross section (compare Figure Control of stagnation temperature confirmed the FE mesh was correctly designed in the present simulations. Multiple repetitions of the FE calculation steps, as indicated in Figure Like in the previous papers Fricke's group in experiments performed at Wuerzburg University. Radiative transfer in thin films has been modelled as a conduction process since the films are non-transparent to mid-IR radiation roughly speaking, they proceed on just different spatial and time scales. But a local quench in many situations may well be the origin of a subsequent, total and catastrophic quench that would cover the total superconductor volume. Like in The investigations rather demonstrate potentials and also limitations of The impact of the exponent n in J Crit (x,y,t) = J Crit (x,y,t 0 ) [1 -T(x,y,t)/T Crit )] n on local (again centroid) temperature is explained by J Crit (T) = J Crit0 ( 1 -T/T Crit ) n , Eq. (1b), that can be interpreted in two ways: (1) the larger exponent, n = 1.5, decreases J Crit rather strongly while for all n < 1, J Crit increases because [1 -T(x,y,t)/T Crit )] < 1 for all T(x,y,t) below T Crit . At constant T(x,y,t), and if n = 1.5, superconductor temperature thus becomes more vulnerable to occurrence of flux flow losses. Flux flow losses (if transport current density exceeds J Crit ) then occur with increasing probability, and T(x,y,t), because of these very losses, becomes larger for n = 1.5, in comparison to n = 0.5. (2) under given J Crit (T), J Crit0 and exponent n, Eq. (1b) after elementary transformations yields for temperature, T, calculated for different J Crit (T) and exponents n, see Figure Optimistically, this is about the experimental uncertainty of a traditional T Crit measurement itself when it is obtained from transport measurements (with sharp electrical field criteria). In the inner turns, the impact is even larger than in turn 100. In conclusion from this Section, uncertainties in materials and transport properties of the superconductor cannot be neglected, not in the present simulations (and also not in any stability analysis). Simulations of superconductor transient temperature excursion have to apply  ΔT(x,y,t) = T(x,y,t) -T Crit (x,y,t), The question now is: How often will J Crit (x,y,t), T Crit (x,y,t) and B Crit2 (x,y,t) , at a given simulation time, really fall into the uncertainty intervals of Figure In Figure or from T Crit (x,y,t), solid triangles (the latter are those of Figure The calculations are performed using the anisotropy ratio, D ab /D c = 5, of the thermal diffusivity and the exponent n = 1.5 in J Crit (x,y,t) = J Crit (x,y,t=0) [1 -T(x,y,t)/T Crit )] n . When instead using n = 0.5, the results are almost identical. The results show that the statistical frequency distribution of deviations between local element temperature from critical temperature in only rare cases is below 0.01 K. In this case, differentiation would be of little importance for the present simulations since the frequency of these deviation accounts for only 0.14 percent of the total. But deviations of 0.1, 1 and 10 K at t = 4.1 ms amount to about 1.3, 12.3 and 86.3 percent, respectively. The impact exerted by δT = 1 K on the results, by its approximately 12 percent contribution, is already substantial. The investigation as before is focused on situations near the phase transition. Element temperature serves for calculation of the critical current density (Eq. 1a,b), without field dependence. The fields T(x,y,t) and J Crit (x,y,t) so far rely on solely results of the Finite Element (FE) simulations, with application of the relation J Crit (x,y,t) = J Crit (x,y,t = 0) [1 -T(x,y,t)/T Crit )] n using n = 1.5 as the exponent and Eq. (2a) for temperature difference ΔT and ratio T/T Crit in Eq. (2b). In any electrical conductor, the relationship between current density, J, and the density, n q , of involved charge carriers, by conservation of charge, is J = n q v q (5) with v the velocity of the charge carriers and q the moving electric charge. Eq. ( In superconductors, transport or screening currents all flow with critical current density, J = J Crit , at a temperature, T, The temperature fields, T(x,y,t), are mapped onto the field of critical temperatures to yield the fields J Crit (x,y,t). Density of the charge carriers, n S (T), in the superconductor YBaCuO 123 has been calculated in Figure Variations of J Crit according to Figure Coupling between J Crit with also materials properties in type I and type II superconductors simply is a matter of fact. A key to increase J Crit thus might be found not only from progress in materials development (like increase of flux pinning, reduction of weak-links) but also if a correlation (in its exact sense, see next Subsection) could be identified between relaxation rates and materials properties. Critical (and transport) current density of thin film superconductors is not, or only weakly, limited by grain boundaries, in contrast to grain structure and corresponding weak link behaviour of the BSCCO superconductor family. What then can be done, from materials transport property aspects, to accelerate relaxation rates? Correlation has to be differentiated from causality and from simple coupling. Coupling is a weak, not necessarily quantifiable relation between two or more objects, events or variables. Correlation indicates strength by which two or more of these are coupled to each other. Coupling might be statistical. If an event 1 leads to a change of the properties (or simply of coordinates) of an event 2, and if this change depends solely on the interaction of event 2 with event 1 (not by others), and if the interaction can be detected and is quantifiable (and possibly reversible like in a resonance), we speak of causality. Causality is stronger than correlation. Correlation trivially includes coupling. An indicative relation, in the strict mathematical sense, exists between conductor temperature and critical current density of a superconductor. The relation neither is surjective nor is it bijective. Increase of conductor temperature from all experience reduces critical current density, which means both variables are correlated under uni-directional causality. Causality in this case is not bijective (is not reversible). The larger the conductor temperature (the smaller the remaining difference to critical temperature), the larger are decay rates, and, based on The curves and arrows in Figure To answer the above question "causality or not?", it has to be checked whether the apparent correlations are uni-or bi-directional and can be explained from the physics behind. Can we, from the physics behind, But finite, possibly tailored decay rates, Δζ [(A/m 2 )/m -3 s -1 ) could be helpful to protect J Crit from decrease under disturbances (large dΔJ Crit /dΔζ may "heal" deficiencies). This is because the top and bottom diagrams in Figure In type I superconductors, for application of Eq. (1b) with the Ginzburg-Landau exponent n, it is the de-pairing or pair-breaking current density up to which the said correlations may be investigated (this means, as long as the kinetic energy of the super-current carriers does not exceed condensation energy to the superconducting state). In type II superconductors, it is in addition (i) the critical current density, at the transition from zero to flux flow resistance (magnetic flux quanta leaving their pinning sites) and (ii) decoupling by layers or other aggregates of non-super-conducting material between neighbouring superconductor thin films that both limit the range of applicability of Eq. (1b). No doubt, perfect crystallography and stoichiometry are the first requisites to be fulfilled (a single crystal would be an optimum sample). But when this is fulfilled, what then would be suitable to promote the rates dΔJ Crit /dΔζ? The model Smaller (than usually applied values) dn S /dt, according to the calculation steps in Figure Accordingly, size of the energy gap is correlated with dΔJ Crit /dΔζ, still from solely numerically arguments. Are the variables also causally ordered? The model (b) Contributions τ 2 = (h/2π)/ΔE(T) resulting from the uncertainty principle (h indicates Planck's constant), for the proper condensation or recombination, energy dependent event, once the particles i and j are identified in step (a) (note that this condition specifies the qualitative assumptions made in Decreasing size of the energy gap, ΔE(T), which happens under increase of temperature, increases relaxation time, roughly τ = τ 1 + τ 2 . Since relaxation time, τ, is inversely proportional to relaxation rate, ζ, decreasing ΔE(T), under increasing temperature, decreases relaxation rates. As mentioned, seen from the physics behind, the higher the temperature, provided T < T Crit , the more decay electrons have to be reorganised to pairs in a new equilibrium by the two steps (a) and (b). The larger the energy gap, the more will excitations (decay of electron pairs) be blocked, and the more is an entrance channel opened for increased zero-loss current transport. Single (decay) electrons cannot contribute, current transport by single electrons is resistive. Therefore, the larger the energy gap, at given constant temperature, the larger critical current density (red diamonds in Figure Accordingly, since the energy gap, ΔE(T), physically (arrow 2 in Figure Yet, via arrow 3, the energy gap is causally correlated with relaxation rate, and relaxation rate, via arrow 4, causally correlates with critical current density. Large relaxation rates quickly provide electron pairs to "repair" (support) critical current density. Another uni-directional, causal relation (the reverse of arrow 4, after a 180 degrees turn) is not true. In summary, arrow 4 indicates, as the final result of this paper, the causally, but uni-directionally oriented correlation between relaxation rate and critical current density. Neutron and heavy ion irradiation are well-known tools to provide effective pinning centres (tracks or point defects). Irradiation increases critical current density, causes variations of irreversibility line and variations of the value of the energy gap. The same can be achieved, again a well-known procedure, with tiny concentrations of paramagnetic impurities (however, gapless superconductivity, yet with strong pair correlations, cannot be explained by the curves in Figure Another potential concerns the relation between de-pairing critical current density, J d , and coherence length, ξ. In high temperature superconductor materials, ξ is very small. Since J d ~ 1/ξ, a correlation could exist, via J Crit ~ ΔE (at constant temperature), between also relaxation rate and coherence length. Materials development thus might perhaps be improved if these apparently existing correlations and their potentials could be exploited. Search for new superconductor materials, from the correlations listed above, with tailored energy gap could significantly increase critical current density or, reversely, allow to determine relaxation rates arising from thermal disturbances by measuring critical current density. temperature, if understood as a sharply, with zero tolerance defined quantity, accordingly is a fiction. Relaxation rates, critical current density and the energy gap of superconductors are physically correlated. In particular, arrow 4 in Figure Experiments to verify these predictions would be difficult to perform. But this is not new physics. The results reported in this paper simply reflect aspects of many-particle physics, analogies from nuclear physics and standard methods of multi-component heat transfer in superconductor thin films. Thank you for your patience. This paper results from my lectures "Applied Superconductivity" given in the Department of Physics at the Unversity of Wuerzburg., Germany. Comments and nominations of potential referees are highly welcome. Figure Impact initiated by variations ΔT Crit0 , ΔJ Crit0 and ΔB Crit20 on mean element temperature in turn 100; results are shown at the beginning of the iterations (upper diagram) and within the convergence circle (below). To demonstrate the impact, the values ΔT Crit0 and ΔJ Crit0 of Figure order to solve this problem, the plane y 96 = const in the present calculations has been defined as plane of vertical symmetry, with temperature of turn 96 reflecting temperature of turn 95 which in turn is close to temperature of turns 94 and so on. This is because all turns are tightly, by strong, solid/solid contacts, coupled to each other. Physically, deviations from symmetry can arise only close near the upper boundary of the coil with its solid/liquid contact. At this co-ordinate, temperature of turn 100 physically (with respect to thermal transport) does not reflect temperature of turn 92 while it numerically does.