The evolution of the low temperature electronic structure of the cuprate metals from the overdoped to the underdoped side has recently been addressed through Angle-Dependant Magneto-Resistance (ADMR) experiments in La1.6-xNd0.4SrxCuO4. The results show a striking difference between hole dopings p = 0.24 and p = 0.21 which lie on either side of a putative quantum critical point at intermediate p. Motivated by this, we here study the theory of ADMR in correlated layered materials, paying special attention to the role of angle dependent quasiparticle weights Z k . Such a Z k is expected to characterize a number of popular models of the cuprate materials, particularly when underdoped. Further, in the limit of weak interlayer hopping the quasiparticle weight will affect the c-axis transport measured in ADMR experiments. We show that proper inclusion of the quasiparticle weight does not support an interpretation of the data in terms of a (π, π) spin density wave ordered state, in agreement with the lack of direct evidence for such order. We show that a simple model of Fermi surface reconfiguring across a van Hove point captures many of the striking differences seen between p = 0.21 and p = 0.24. We comment on why such a model may be appropriate for interpreting the ADMR data, despite having a large Fermi surface at p = 0.21, seemingly in contradiction with other evidence for a small Fermi surafce at that doping level. The normal metallic states of the cuprate high temperature superconductors have been a continuing challenge to our understanding of these materials. On the overdoped side there is a well developed Fermi surface whose area (per copper-oxygen plane) matches the expectation from the electron density based on Luttinger's theorem Clearly it is extremely important to have direct experimental probes of the electronic structure of the pseudogap state in the low temperature limit, and to know experimentally how it evolves into the overdoped metal. An interesting class of experiments are quantum oscillations that probe Landau quantization of charged carriers in a magnetic field. When quantum oscillations are observed they give clear-cut information about the size of the Fermi surface (if it exists). Remarkably, quantum oscillations have been seen in both underdoped and overdoped cuprates and show striking differences It is fascinating to ask how these two very different behaviors evolve into each other as the doping is changed. Unfortunately, though, it has not been possible to study this evolution directly through quantum oscillation experiments. One essential difficulty is that exposing the normal state requires the use of magnetic fields large enough to suppress superconductivity. This becomes progressively harder as optimal doping is approached due to the high superconducting transition temperature. Furthermore the two cuprates mentioned above on either side of optimal doping, YBCO and Tl-2201, cannot be grown at all doping levels that span the full range from underdoped to overdoped. While there exist other members of the cuprate family that do not have such restrictions on doping, they typically are not clean enough to observe quantum oscillations. In this paper we are concerned with a class of experiments -known as angle dependent magneto-resistance (ADMR) -that seek to address this evolution without all the requirements of quantum oscillations. ADMR refers to the change in the out-of-plane resistivity when an external magnetic field is rotated away from the caxis toward the ab-plane. Unlike quantum oscillations, ADMR arises as a semi-classical effect of electron trajectories in orbits around the Fermi surface With these motivations a remarkable recent paper re-ported the evolution of ADMR in La 1.6-x Nd 0.4 Sr x CuO 4 (Nd-LSCO) at two different doping levels, p = 0.24 and p = 0.21, measured at 25K in a 45 tesla magnetic field 1 Given the importance of these measurements, it is essential to scrutinize them closely and see what we learn about the evolution of the electronic structure across the critical doping (around p = 0.23). In this paper we address several theoretical questions that are pertinent to the interpretation of ADMR in correlated layered materials, and apply the insights gained to the experiments of We firstly find theoretically that a (π, π) SDW modulated Fermi surface reconstruction, with the parameter values quoted in Returning to the general issue of Fermi surface reconstruction leading to a pseudogap, there are more exotic scenarios involving hole pockets without any long range magnetic ordering, such as in the fractionalized Fermi liquid (FL * ) [10-14] (a particular example of which is the phenomenological Yang-Rice-Zhang (YRZ) ansatz In order to offer a simpler explanation that can partly explain the ADMR data at p = 0.21, we consider instead a large Fermi surface state. While it is possible, even likely, that the metallic ground state on the underdoped side undergoes Fermi surface reconstruction to a small pocket, the experiments of In our analysis below, we take a number of simplifying limits that are relevant to the Nd-LSCO samples studied in The ADMR measurements in underdoped cuprates raise the very important question of how to properly include the effects of a non-trivial quasiparticle residue, Z k , for out of plane transport. While Z k drops out of transport within Boltzmann theory, which would also be the case for in-plane transport in the present setting, this is not the case for out-of-plane transport as introduced earlier. In the limit of a weak inter-layer hopping (compared to a characteristic intra-layer energy scale), the effects of Z k need to be incorporated in a consistent fashion. An extreme example of this is encountered, for example, when a stack of weakly coupled metals undergo a transition into a paramagnetic Mott insulator with fractionalized ('spinon') excitations Microscopically, a momentum-dependent Z k can arise due to intrinsic correlation-induced effects It is important to address the evolution of the physical picture introduced above once the strength of the inter-layer hopping is increased, e.g. by varying the ratio of t ⊥ / F , where F is the in-plane Fermi energy in the decoupled limit. Clearly, as a function of this increasing ratio, there will eventually be a crossover where the full three-dimensional Fermi surface has to be considered from the outset and the problem should not be thought of as quasi two-dimensional. In the three-dimensional limit, Z k has to drop out of Boltzmann transport in the usual fashion. However, any density-wave ordering in this limit must necessarily reconstruct the full three dimensional Fermi surface, rather than a reconstruction of the in-plane two-dimensional Fermi surface In light of some of the conceptual challenges that including a non-trivial Z k within Boltzmann theory presents, we turn to a much simpler, albeit physically unrealistic, model. The insights from this model will help us build intuition on how we may interpret various features in ADMR. They will set the stage for our calculations on more realistic models that we show capture several of the observed features in the experiments. Consider a stack of two-dimensional layers with a quadratic in-plane dispersion and hopping along the z-direction, t ⊥ φ , between neighboring planes where m * is the effective mass in-plane and a is the interlayer separation. The in-plane Fermi energy in the decoupled limit is denoted where k F is the Fermi momentum. This simplified model will allow us to gain intuition about what physics governs the presence of an upturn or downturn at low angles in ADMR and what controls the physics when the field is parallel to the layers. In particular, we will see that when the interlayer hopping averaged over the Fermi surface vanishes, it can support both a sharp downturn at low angles and an upturn at larger angles, similar to the p = 0.21 data For ω 0 τ 1, where ω 0 = eB/m * and τ is the quasiparticle lifetime, the appearance of an upturn or downturn in the ADMR curve for θ 1 (where θ is the angle between B and the c-axis) is controlled by a competition between the anisotropy of t ⊥ φ and (k F a) 2 /2. Increasing the size of the Fermi surface can turn a downturn in the interlayer resistivity to an upturn, while increasing the variation of t ⊥ φ across the Fermi surface can do the reverse by more effectively averaging the particle's velocity in the z-direction, v z , via the in-plane orbits in the limit θ → 0. Moreover, a downturn in the ADMR curve at θ 1 and ω 0 τ 1 evolves as ω 0 τ is increased, depending on the average t ⊥ φ along the Fermi surface; when t ⊥ φ = 0, this initial downturn becomes an upturn with increasing ω 0 τ , while for t ⊥ φ = 0 the downturn survives at large ω 0 τ . The lessons obtained from analyzing the simplified model reveal the complexity associated with interpreting ADMR results. Interestingly, it also suggests exploring a potential alternative explanation for the sharp change at low angles in the ADMR curves across p * of the interlayer hopping across the Fermi surface, as it is given by (2) where t z is the strength of the interlayer hopping and a is the in-plane lattice constant. The cos(k x a /2) cos(k y a /2) factor accounts for the offset in the copper oxide planes between layers of the bodycentered tetragonal structure of Nd-LSCO Consider two dimensional metallic layers oriented in the xy-plane and stacked along the z-direction. If the in-plane electron dispersion is given by (k ), where k ≡ (k x , k y ), then setting the quasiparticle residue to one, the full dispersion will be given by Here t ⊥ k is the hopping between layers and a is the interlayer separation. 2 Note that unlike the toy model proposed in Eq. 1 the dispersion in-plane is allowed to be arbitrary and the interlayer hopping is allowed to depend on the full in-plane wavevector. This dispersion will lead to a quasi-2d Fermi surface like those pictured in Figure at zero temperature 3 , where the integral is over the Fermi surface, D(k) is the density of states at k, and the integral in the exponential reflects the probability of scattering after a time t. The semi-classical orbits k(t) are governed by the Lorentz equation k = ev(k) × B and v(k) = ∇ k k . These orbits are at a constant energy and have a tangent vector perpendicular to B, as seen in Figure One can then use Eq. 4 to go from a model of the Fermi surface and the scattering rate to the angle-dependent magnetoconductance σ zz (θ , φ )/σ zz (0), for a magnetic 2 We will eventually see that if the quasiparticle residue is nontrivial then it will be necessary to renormalize t ⊥ k by a multiplicative factor Z k . 3 This is a good approximation for the experiments done in field of constant magnitude and varying direction: as displayed in Figure B. Decoupled layers approach: addressing Z k Previous work has shown that this Boltzmann transport approach, undertaken in the so-called "coherent limit" of interlayer transport, is in fact identical to the approach where layers are assumed to be weakly coupled and interlayer transport can be understood as uncorrelated tunneling events, i.e. the "incoherent limit" As mentioned, we do this via an explicit calculation using the Kubo formula in the small t ⊥ limit, shown in Appendix A. This calculation begins with uncoupled Fermi liquid layers and couples them perturbatively with a momentum dependent interlayer hopping term. The Kubo formula for interlayer conductivity is then evaluated to one loop order, or order (t ⊥ ) 2 , as shown in Figure We find that the interlayer conductivity is given to this order by: where k B = ea( z × B)/ and ÃB is the gauge invariant piece of the in-plane Fermi liquid's spectral function with a perpendicular magnetic field of B cos θ . Physically this can be interpreted as follows. As the particle hops between layers it gets a momentum kick of k B , arising from the in-plane magnetic field, as is reflected by the momentum difference between the spectral functions. The hopping t ⊥ k can be thought of as occurring between the two layers and thus it acquires only half of the momentum kick. Further the out-of-plane magnetic field will enter via the spectral function ÃB . In the semi-classical limit this out-of-plane field will induce orbits in-plane that will be reflected as oscillation in ÃB . Since Z k will enter by renormalizing ÃB this allows us to see that between the layers. However, for Z φ = Z k F (φ) , where φ is the angle around the Fermi surface, the correction from an added k B term will be of order k B • (k -1 F φ∂ φ Z φ ) ∼ k B /k F . This quantity will be small compared to the most relevant scale in the problem, the flux through the loop in Figure As discussed in our summary of results, when we use this result to properly include the quasiparticle residue in the calculation of the ADMR curve with the (π, π) reconstructed Fermi surface, we find a lack of agreement with the data at p = 0.21. In light of this it seems as if the striking experimental results from We consider a toy model with dispersion given by Eq. 1, i.e. a parabolic dispersion in plane with a mass m * and interlayer separation a. For the purpose of discussing the doping of this model we can understand it as the parabolic limit of an in-plane nearest-neighbor hopping model with hopping amplitude t = 2 /2m * a 2 . We will further take the scattering rate to be a constant Γ = 1/τ and assume that ω 0 τ = eBτ /m * 1. This toy model is chosen to be the simplest possible model which still allows for k-dependent interlayer hopping. Despite its simplicity it will allow us to understand several things about the ADMR curves seen in We turn to the specifics of the toy model to elucidate this intuition. First we take t ⊥ φ 2 to have C 4 symmetry. As seen in Figure In The complicated form of k z (t) reflects the fact that unless θ = 90 • the orbits eventually close back on themselves and k z is periodic as seen in Figure FIG. Here t ⊥ φ = t cos 2 (2φ)/2, nearly an order of magnitude larger than found in where we integrated out the initial k z dependence. Figure The calculations in Figure where the time integral has been computed exactly. It can already be seen that the dimensionless quantity controlling the peak at θ = 90 , where l is the mean free path in-plane. As discussed earlier, physically this is the flux, in units of the quantum of flux, through the loop shown in Figure We will spend more time considering low angles, θ 1. Here we will find that there is no longer a single dimensionless quantity that controls the physics. We first consider ω 0 τ small enough that all expressions in Eq. 10 can be expanded. To be more precise, decompose t ⊥ φ in terms of its harmonics, then we will consider the limits ω 0 τ k F a 1 and n max ω 0 τ 1, where n max is the largest n such that c n = 0. We then see that Eq. 10 at low angles becomes: where a total derivative of (t ⊥ φ ) 2 was discarded and ∂ 2 t ⊥ φ /∂φ 2 was integrated by parts. The C 4 symmetry of (t ⊥ φ ) 2 means that when integrated against sin 2 (φ -φ ) only the constant term will contribute, and we will see that This gives us the intuition we discussed in the summary of our main results; for very low values of ω 0 τ what controls the appearance of an upturn or a downturn at low angles represents a competition between the anisotropy of t ⊥ φ and the factor (k F a) 2 /2. However, the situation in Figure in terms of the harmonics of t ⊥ φ . We can already see the change that a larger ω 0 τ will make. The p-periodic components of t ⊥ φ with p (ω 0 τ ) -1 will make a vanishingly small contribution to σ zz (0), so as ω 0 τ is increased fewer and fewer components will contribute. This effect arises because t ⊥ φ is averaged by the in-plane orbits, with higher frequency parts of it being more effectively averaged out. Eventually the only contributing component will be the constant component, if t ⊥ φ has one, i.e. if it does not average to zero around the Fermi surface. As equation Eq. 15 reveals, a constant t ⊥ φ will always have an upturn, so this suggests that as ω 0 τ increases the anisotropy of t ⊥ φ will get less and less effective at causing a downturn and the system will always achieve an upturn at low angles if t ⊥ φ does not average to zero. We can check this intuition by going to the next order in ω 0 τ k F a sin θ where we will have and where we have assumed that ω 0 τ 1. This expression is somewhat opaque but can be simplified by considering two cases. In the first, as in Figure and there will always be an upturn in resistivity at low angles as our intuition predicted. The intuition behind the case when t ⊥ φ = 0 allows us to describe Figure The situation is dramatically different if t ⊥ φ does indeed average to zero. In this case the lowest order |c 0 | 2 terms no longer contribute. Then the lowest order nonzero term for small θ is the term |c nmin | 2 /((n min ω 0 τ cos θ ) 2 + 1) where n min is the lowest nonzero frequency component of t ⊥ φ . This will lead to an ADMR curve of the form where n min ω 0 τ = 0.25 for Figure term in the conductivity. For ω 0 τ large enough the time integral will begin to average t ⊥ to zero and the conductivity will thus be made very small. Tilting the magnetic field decreases the distance that the electrons travel inplane before scattering by a factor of cos θ and thus makes the averaging less effective. This will increase the conductivity and lead to a downturn in the ADMR curve. ) and is everywhere positive, as is displayed in the inset. The system thus has an upturn for ω0τ large enough, despite having a downturn at very low ω0τ . Note also that Eq. 18, plotted in magenta, does agree well at low angles. (b) The only change here is t ⊥ φ = sin(2φ) cos 2 (2φ), which therefore changes sign in each quadrant, as displayed in the inset. Since t ⊥ φ averages to zero we expect a downturn, which is indeed obtained. As we suggested when introducing our toy model, the fact that a change from t ⊥ φ = 0 to t ⊥ φ = 0 can change an upturn at low angles to a downturn suggests that the transition seen in This continued upturn at low angles is belied by the very anisotropic ω 0 (φ)τ φ around the Fermi surface, displayed in an inset, where for a two-dimensional Fermi surface with angle dependent k F (φ) and v F (φ) Here k F (φ) = (k F (φ) cos φ, k F (φ) sin φ) by definition. As we saw from the toy model the crucial reason for the sharp downturn appearing as ω 0 τ is increased is that t ⊥ φ is more effectively averaged by the in-plane orbits. If ω 0 (φ)τ φ is very small at the antinodes, where the change in sign of t ⊥ φ occurs, this will mean the quasiparticles do not visit areas of the Fermi surface with a different sign of t ⊥ φ in their orbits, hindering the ability of the system to average t ⊥ φ . The velocity v F (φ) can nonetheless be renormalized across p * , increasing ω 0 (φ)τ φ at the antinodes. This is shown in Figure There is still some discrepancy with the φ dependence at θ = 90 • , namely there is less broadening at θ = 90 • with respect to φ in the p = 0.21 data than in Figure warping is an effect beyond O(t ⊥2 ) in the Chambers' integral, and we can verify that the O(t ⊥2 ) approximation leads to significant broadening at θ = 90 • . Indeed, an O(t ⊥2 ) treatment of σ zz for a Fermi surface with a varying k F (φ), ω 0 (φ), τ φ within linear response (see Appendix B) is found to give where k B = ea B × z and can be thought of as the momentum kick the particle receives from the magnetic field when it hops from layer to layer. The term which means that if k F (φ) = k F and the other quantities are tuned so that has no period-4 component, then broadening of the ADMR curves with respect to φ will not take place until O((ω 0 τ k F a) 8 ) significantly lessening the broadening. However, if k F varies with φ, as in the large Fermi surface, the additional cos(φ -φ) term in the integrand will make it very difficult to push the broadening out to this order. Thus we suspect that this discrepancy of broadening at θ = 90 • might be resolved by scanning the parameter space of warping in the k z direction. We will however not pursue this here. Nevertheless, we have demonstrated that by renormalizing the Fermi velocity the downturn that is seen in the p = 0.21 data can be obtained simply by averaging over t ⊥ φ , which averages to zero on the underdoped side. This represents a simpler explanation for the crossover seen in the ADMR data in In this paper, inspired by the striking experimental results of A well-informed reader might object that our proposal ignores the body of experimental literature showing that the carrier density in Nd-LSCO drops precipitously when p decreases to 0.21 from 0.24. This is demonstrated for instance by Hall transport experiments. However we remark that the pseudogap scale in Nd-LSCO in this doping range is actually quite low (of order 50 -70K) while the ADMR experiments only go down to 25K. The drastic change of Hall number happens at much lower temperature. Thus thinking in terms of the large Fermi surface may not be unreasonable for the purposes of understanding the ADMR results, as they currently stand. Though the large Fermi surface below the critical doping cannot explain every detail of the data, such as features occurring when the magnetic field is rotated in-plane, it provides a simple explanation for this important change. Further, our detailed calculations (and importantly the inclusion of the angle-dependent Z caused by the folding of the Brillouin zone) do not support the possibility that a (π, π) modulated reconstruction reproduces the measured ADMR curve at p = 0.21. This is consistent with the lack of any independent evidence for such order at that doping and at the temperature scale of the ADMR measurement. We cannot, however, rule out more exotic scenarios with more free paramaters such as FL* or its particular case, the YRZ ansatz Another potential objection to our analysis (as well as all prior discussions) of ADMR is that we have used a quasiparticle/Boltzmann equation description while much of the data (for p = 0.24) is in a regime where the ab-plane resistivity is linear in T , and hence in the 'strange metal' regime. Indeed analysis of the same ADMR data at p = 0.24 in To conclude, let us return to the question of how the electronic Fermi surface evolves from overdoped to underdoped at T = 0 (accessed by suppressing superconductivity in a magnetic field) across a putative quantum critical point. Directly probing this through ADMR will require experiments at even lower temperatures. This is complicated by the need to tilt the field which reduces the out-of-plane component and hence the efficiency with which the superconductivity may be suppressed. Other indirect experiments such as studies of quasiparticle interference using scanning tunneling microscopy may perhaps also provide useful information. of these different scenarios we considered both reconstructing the CDW in-plane, with inclusion of Z k , and reconstructing the full three-dimensional Fermi surface. Finally, in order to be consistent with In none of these scenarios were we able to reproduce the p = 0.21 data, even to the level of Figure The angle φ for the scattering rate is measured with respect to (0, 0), with all coordinates being translated to the first Brillouin zone in order to compute it. This is done in order to be consistent with the approach taken in