Moving vortices in thin superconducting films are considered within the time-dependent London description. The dissipation due to out-of-core normal excitations for two vortices moving together turns out to have a minimum for the separation vector a parallel to the velocity and equal to am ≈ 2.2 Λ, where Λ is the Pearl length. The minimum entropy production suggests that moving vortices should have a tendency to form chains along the velocity with a period of the order am. Problems of vortex dynamics in superconductors have recently come back to the community attention because new and more accurate experimental techniques become available. Vortex velocities well above the speed of sound are now attainable along with new methods of measuring field distributions Moving vortices, pushed by the Lorentz force due to applied transport current, dissipate energy replenished by the current source. In this situation, the heat transfer should be taken into account In this work we study the dissipation W due to out-ofcore quasiparticles in thin films and find that for a pair of vortices W(a) has a minimum at a finite separation a oriented along the pair velocity v. The value of this separation is a m ≈ 2.2 Λ with the Pearl length Λ = 2λ 2 /d (λ is the penetration depth of the film material and d is the film thickness). According to the principle of minimum entropy production (or minimum dissipation) in stationary processes Within the general approach to slow relaxation processes one relates the time derivative of whatever quantity is relaxing, say Ψ, to the variational derivative of the free energy functional F(Ψ), see e.g. where χ is the proper relaxation time. The quantity of interest in our case is the vortex field distribution h(r, t) away of the vortex core where the London approach holds and the energy (magnetic+kinetic) is This yields which reduces to the common London equation in equilibrium. The relaxation constant χ is obtained by comparison with the time dependent London equation where A is the vector potential, Ψ is the order parameter, θ is the phase, φ 0 is the flux quantum, E is the electric field, and σ is the conductivity associated with normal excitations. At these distances, |Ψ| is a constant and acting on Eq. ( where r ν (t) is the position of the ν-th vortex that may depend on time t, ẑ is the direction of vortices, φ 0 is the flux quantum. The relaxation time Comparing this with Eq. ( Let the film of thickness d be in the xy plane. Integration of Eq. ( arXiv:2111.01741v1 [cond-mat.supr-con] 2 Nov 2021 Here, g is the sheet current density related to the tangential field components at the upper film face by 2πg/c = ẑ × h; Λ = 2λ 2 /d is the Pearl length. With the help of divh = 0 this equation is transformed to: As was stressed by Pearl The general form of the potential satisfying Laplace equation and vanishing at z → ∞ is that is checked by direct differentiation. Here, k = (k x , k y ), r = (x, y), and φ(k) is the two-dimensional (2D) Fourier transform of φ(r, z = 0). In the lower half-space one has to replace z → -z. As is done in For two vortices separated by a, the right-hand side of Eqs. so that we obtain for the field This field is found from quasi-stationary Maxwell equations curlE = -∂ t h/c and divE = 0 For a pair of vortices separated by a, we have We are interested in motion with constant velocity v = v x, so that we can evaluate the fields at t = 0, i.e. the factor e -ik•vt can be omitted. Then, Eqs. ( Since the pre-factor here contains v, in linear approximation in velocity the term ik • vτ in denominators can be discarded for slow motion. The dissipation power follows: We now go to dimensionless q = Λk: where where the upper limit of the divergent integral over q is taken as 1/ξ to avoid the vortex core (ξ here is the dimensionless core size). The second contribution is with φ being the azimuth of q and α is the angle between R = a/Λ and X. After substitution β = φ -α, the angular integral takes the form where J 1,2 are Bessel functions of the first kind. The integration over q can be done analytically resulting in a cumbersome combination of Bessel and Hypergeometric functions. We avoid this by doing this integration numerically. The contours of W 2 (X, Y ) = const are shown in Fig. The dimensionless parameter is small even for vortex velocities exceeding the speed of sound presently attainable Hence, the dissipation W of two vortices separated by R = (X, Y ) depends on the pair orientation relative to the velocity v and on the pair size R. The numerically evaluated dissipation W(X, Y ) is shown in Fig. The physical reason for this minimum can be traced to the magnetic structure of a single moving vortex. It was shown in Moving vortices in Pb films were studied in According to our model, the pair of moving vortices dissipates the least if it is oriented along the velocity and separated by a m ≈ 2.2 Λ. One can expect the chain of vortices to have a period of the order a m . Taking the experimental estimate of Λ we obtain a m ≈ 540 nm. In the experiment From the data where we replaced the velocity with S according to Eq. ( 