In this paper is presented a new single crystal plasticity model with yielding accounting for the tetragonal symmetry of molecular energetic crystals. This new tetragonal yield criterion has been developed using representation theorems for anisotropic tensor functions. It is defined for any type of loadings and depends on the characteristics of the tetragonal lattice (c/a ratio). It involves three independent plastic anisotropy parameters that can be expressed analytically in terms of the uniaxial yield stresses along four crystallographic directions. Illustration of the capabilities of this model is done for a pentaerythritol tetranitrate (PETN) crystal. Moreover, we present finiteelement meso-scale simulations of the response of a polymer bonded explosive for which the behavior of the constituent energetic molecular crystals is described with an elastic/plastic model with yielding governed by the new single-crystal tetragonal criterion. The simulation results provide insights into the role played by the anisotropic crystalline plasticity and interactions between crystals on the thermo-mechanical response under dynamic compression of the PETNbased polymer bonded explosive (PBX) aggregate. Molecular crystals are key components of explosive systems. In general, it is thought that explosives may ignite due to the localization of energy and its conversion into heat in small regions termed "hot spots" (e.g. see Moreover, the sensitivity to detonation depends on the structure of the molecular crystals and the crystal orientation (e.g. for PETN crystals, see data on the shock initiation sensitivity reported in The main aim of this work is to develop a yield criterion for energetic molecular crystals of tetragonal symmetry. The mathematical expression of this criterion is derived on the basis of representation theorems for tensor functions. Specifically, it is demonstrated that a quadratic yield criterion that is pressure-insensitive and fulfills the invariance requirements associated with the tetragonal structure should involve only three anisotropy parameters (Section 2). Moreover, it is shown that these anisotropy parameters depend on the lattice (c/a ratio) and can be tied directly to mechanical properties. The capabilities of the developed criterion to describe the influence of the crystal symmetry on the onset of plastic deformation under uniaxial loadings are examined in detail (Section 3). Application of the developed criterion to single crystal PETN and comparison with available data is also provided. An elastic plastic model with yielding described by this new tetragonal criterion is presented (see Section 4) and further used to model the constituent grains in a PBX aggregate. Results of meso-scale FE simulations of the response of the aggregate under dynamic compression are presented in Section 5. We conclude with a summary of the main findings. Constitutive models that account for the specific symmetries of tetragonal energetic molecular crystals (e.g. PETN crystal) do not currently exist. To develop an anisotropic yield criterion for tetragonal crystals, we make use of rigorous theorems of representation of tensor functions (see for any applied stress tensor ´ü│ and any orthogonal transformation Q belonging to the symmetry group g ( e.g. see the book of Let us denote by R ´üŽ n the proper rotation (i.e. det R ´üŽ n = 1) through an angle ´üŽ about an axis in the direction of the unit vector n. Energetic crystals belonging to the tetragonal system have the following symmetry generators: z R ´ü░ and /2 z R ´ü░ , where the z-axis is taken along the c-axis of the lattice depicted in Fig. Therefore, in order to deduce the mathematical expression of a tetragonal yield function one can use theorems of representations for tensor-valued functions fulfilling rhombic symmetries and further impose the additional constraint of invariance with respect to rotations of 2 ´ü░ about the caxis. Specifically, it has been demonstrated (e.g. see i.e. The requirement of invariance with respect to rotations of 2 ´ü░ about the z-axis, means that: Let us denote by I the second-order identity tensor ( Further, imposing the condition of pressure-insensitivity of yielding i.e. ´ÇĘ ´Çę ´ÇĘ ´Çę for any scalar p we obtain the following general result: Relative to the coordinate system Oxyz associated with the symmetry axes of the tetragonal crystal (with the z-axis along the c-axis of the tetragonal lattice, see Fig. 3. Predicted anisotropy in yielding and application of the tetragonal criterion to a PETN crystal Let us denote by Y f the yield limit under uniaxial loading along a direction f of Miller indices Figure Let us first examine the predictions for the uniaxial yield stresses along the crystallographic directions of symmetry of the lattice. If 100 Y denotes the yield stress under uniaxial loading along the where k denotes the yield limit in simple shear in the (x,y) crystallographic plane ( by symmetry, the yield limit in simple shear in the (yz) crystallographic plane is also equal to k). It is worth noting that the developed criterion automatically respects the symmetries of the tetragonal lattice and as such predicts the same yield limit under uniaxial loading along the ´üŤ ´üŁ 010 , 100 , 0 10 ´âę ´â╣ ´âę ´â╣ ´âź ´â╗ ´âź ´â╗ directions, respectively (see Eq. ( On the other hand, 001 Y , the yield stress under uniaxial loading along the c-axis (z-axis) is: Remark: Comparison between Eq.( It is worth examining the yield stresses along the diagonals of each face of the tetragonal lattice. If 110 Y denotes the yield stress under uniaxial loading along the [110] crystallographic direction, then the new yield criterion (5) predicts: If 101 Y denotes the yield stress under uniaxial loading along the [101] crystallographic direction, then according to the criterion (5): Remark: It is to be noted that the new tetragonal yield criterion predicts the same yield limit under uniaxial loading along the orientations ´üŤ ´üŁ 011 , 10 1 , 011 , which is a direct consequence of the criterion being form-invariant to the symmetries of the tetragonal structure. Another crystallographic orientation of interest is the lattice diagonal, i.e. the [111] direction. According to the yield criterion: It is also of interest to illustrate that with the developed criterion it is possible to account for the fact that the in-plane anisotropy in uniaxial yield stresses of a tetragonal crystal is dependent on the crystallographic plane considered. First, let us analyze the effect of the loading orientation on yielding in uniaxial compression in the crystallographic planes of normal <010> (see Fig. Note that for ´ü▒´ÇŻ´Ç░´Çá(i.e. the direction [001])´ÇČ´ÇáEq. ( Another crystallographic plane of interest is the plane of normal 110 ´Ç╝´Çż (see Fig. Note that for ´ü▒´ÇŻ´Ç░´Çáand ´ü▒´ÇŻ´ü░´Ç»´Ç▓´ÇČ´ÇáEq. (13) gives the predictions for the ratio between the yield stresses in the [001] and Note that if we impose that the yield surface passes through the yield point under uniaxial loading along the <100> direction, the tetragonal single crystal yield criterion is expressed as: ´üó ´üó ´üó ´üó , with ´üó being an arbitrary positive constant (see Eq. ( In summary, the anisotropy parameters involved in the new tetragonal yield criterion can be easily determined from a few uniaxial tests. It is also worth noting that the plastic anisotropy coefficients of a given tetragonal crystal depend on its lattice characteristics (ratio c/a between the lattice dimensions, see Eq. ( As an example, the proposed yield criterion for tetragonal crystals is applied to the energetic PETN crystal. Due to difficulties associated with testing energetic crystals the data available is very limited. In the following, we used the data reported in the open literature by and 1 1 a ´ÇŻ in conjunction with Eq. (15), it follows that 3 a = 5.90 , 4 a =3.57 and 5 a =6.08. The reported yield ratio 101 100 YY which has not been used for the determination of the parameters involved in the tetragonal yield criterion can serve for validation purposes. Indeed, for the set of values of anisotropy coefficients identified using Eq. ( 0.85 YY´ÇŻ reported by Figure Figure [001] [100] [110] 0.8 0 . 8 0. 8 0 .9 0 . 9 0 . 9 0.9 A constitutive model for energetic tetragonal crystals should account for the influence of the crystal structure on its thermo-mechanical behavior. To this end, an elastic/plastic modeling framework is adopted, with the plastic behavior being described with the proposed tetragonal yield criterion. The governing equations are: The Eq. ( The elastic response of tetragonal energetic crystals has been thoroughly investigated from both experimental and numerical standpoints (see review paper of The yield surface of the energetic crystal is expressed in the form: where f is the new anisotropic yield criterion developed (see Eq.( Associated plasticity can be considered (see with ´üČ the plastic multiplier and ´ü│ is the effective stress associated with the yield criterion given by Eq. ( Note that the hardening law ´ÇĘ ´Çę p Y, ´üą´üą may depend on the equivalent plastic strain p ´üą which is defined as the work-conjugate of the effective stress ´ü│ given by Eq. ( The rise in temperature due to the plastic energy dissipation is calculated as where ´üí is the Taylor-Quinney coefficient, ´ü▓ the density and C the heat capacity, while ¤â is the stress tensor and p d the plastic strain-rate tensor, calculated using the new anisotropic plastic model (see Eq. ( It is important to note that this constitutive model based on the new tetragonal yield criterion is defined for general 3-D loadings. Use of this model for the description of the behavior of energetic crystals enables the study of the influence of the crystal orientation on its response for complex loadings. To this end, this constitutive model was implemented in a finite-element (FE) framework. Specifically, a user material subroutine (UMAT) was developed and implemented in the FE software Abaqus (see . In addition to a very good accuracy, the backward Euler method was shown to be unconditionally stable with respect to the size of the strain increment. In this section, we present FE. meso-scale simulations of an energetic system consisting of energetic crystals surrounded by a polymer. The primary objective is to study the effect of the crystalline plastic anisotropy on the temperature field in the aggregate. To this end, the constituent crystals are modeled with the new constitutive model with yielding described with tetragonal single crystal criterion developed (see Eq. ( We consider an aggregate composed of 14 PETN crystals surrounded by a polymer binder subjected to dynamic uniaxial compressive loading (see Figure Sylgard 182 (´ü▓ = 1000 kg/m 3 ). Each crystal has a different shape, size and crystal orientation with respect to the loading axis, the specific orientation of each constituent crystal is given in Figure where A= 75 MPa, B=59 MPa, C = 0.08, n = 0.233 and 0 ´üą = 1. For the PETN material, the heat capacity is C=1000 J.kg -1 . K -1 and the Taylor-Quinney coefficient ´üí =0.92. The Sylgard 182 polymer binder is assumed to be linear elastic with Young modulus E = 10 MPa, and Poisson coefficient ´ü« = 0.48. As shown in Figure The PBX aggregate is subjected to a uniaxial compressive wave through the imposed velocity V applied at the upper surface. The applied velocity reaches 1000m/s at a time T = 0.1 ´üşs and is kept However, for the grain (3) which has its [001] direction aligned with the loading direction (see Figure (1) and ( between the matrix and some crystals in Figure A new anisotropic single crystal yield criterion that accounts for the specific symmetries of tetragonal crystals has been developed. This tetragonal yield criterion for energetic crystals is defined for any type of loading (fully three-dimensional stress states). It involves three independent The capabilities of this new anisotropic yield criterion to describe the effect of loading orientation on the plastic properties of tetragonal single crystals have been demonstrated. Moreover, this new yield criterion has been applied to a PETN energetic crystal, and a very good agreement between the model predictions and uniaxial compression data was obtained. It was shown that this new yield criterion can account for the strong anisotropy of this energetic crystal. Specifically, it predicts that the maximum yield stress is along the [001] direction (c-axis), the ratio between the yield stress along this direction and the While the temperature increase of any PETN crystal is mainly influenced by its relative orientation with respect to the loading direction (i.e. the anisotropic crystallinity), the interactions between the polymer matrix and the crystals may also contribute to severe local increases in temperature.