We report experimental evidence of formation of antiferromagnetic clusters well within cuprate superconductor La1.85Sr0.15CuO4 (LCu) in a composite made of LCu and ferromagnet La0.6Sr0.4CoO3 (LCo). It is found that the exchange field of LCo suppress the dynamic antiferromagnetic spin fluctuation of LCu and short range ordered superparamagnetic type antiferromagnetic (AFM) clusters are formed at the cost of superconducting volume fraction. With the help of linear and non-linear ac-susceptibility measurement we show the evidence of thermal blocking of these antiferromagnetic clusters. Further, we show that the shrank superconducting volume fractions undergo quantum size effect (QSE) and follow DeGennes-Tinkham theory on finite size effect of superconductor. These give clear indication that antiferromagnetic spin fluctuation can be a mediator of electron pairing in cuprate superconductor. One of the long lived mystery associated with high temperature cuprate superconductor is the origin of coherent electron pairing in these compounds. The magnetic state of a parent cuprate is 3D Neel antiferromagnet (AFM). After doping holes or electrons the ordered antiferromagnetic state destroys and superconducting state emerges As a result of that the hole concentration of YBCO gets modified, changing the physical property in bulk like manner unrelated to interface physics Here, we present a study on composites made of superconductor LCu and a ferromagnet La 0.6 Sr 0.4 CoO 3 (LCo) to explore the effect of exchange bias field on the hole doped cuprate superconductor. LCo is chosen as a ferromagnetic counterpart because it shows long-range ferromagnetic ordering and large magnetocrystalline anisotropy We have used Linear and nonlinear ac-susceptibility measurements to study the proximity effect induced change of the magnetic state of a superconductor in a SC/FM interface. Nonlinear susceptibilities are found to be very effective tool in determining various characteristics of a type-2 superconductor, such as to identify the onset point of irreversible flux motion, nature of flux dynamic and also very effective in determining various critical thermodynamical parameters (like critical current, critical field and critical temperature) In composite (or in heterostructure) the interplay between different electronic ground states are modulated through the extended interface effect, but in case of oxide heterostructures oxygen stoichiometry plays a big role in modifying the physical property which is unrelated to interface physics. Hence it is very important to determine the oxygen stoichiometry (which defines the spin state) of the ingredients with respect to their parent compounds for a conclusive discrimination between the phenomena related to interface effect and the phenomena associated with the degradation of oxygen stoichiometry. We have proposed a method to determine the spin state of a ferromagnet and hole concentration of a superconductor in a SC/FM composite system by using the low field magnetic ac-susceptibility technique and XRD measurement, which is already published in Ref. The parent ingredient LCu and LCo is prepared by pyrophoric method. Then the composites are prepared by solid state reaction method, preparation technique is more elaborately explained in Ref. A. Structural Characterization : XRD X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurements are performed in Bruker X-ray diffractometer from 10 0 -90 0 at an interval of 0.02 0 . FIG. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) image of composite A3 is shown in FIG. The Low field linear and nonlinear magnetic acsusceptibility measurements have been performed using a homemade ac-susceptometer, which can be operated down to 4 K from 300 K and the measurements can be done in both cooling and heating cycle with a temperature accuracy better than 1 mK. The estimated sensitivity of the setup is ∼ 10 -7 emu The magnetic property of the composite has been studied by extensive use of ac-susceptibility measurement which is capable to probes the spin dynamic at very low field. The magnetization (m) can be expanded with respect to the applied ac-field h ac (h) as χ 1 (≈ δm/δh) is linear susceptibility and χ 2 , χ 3 , χ 4 ... are nonlinear susceptibilities. These nonlinear susceptibilities contain many fruitful information but magnitude of these are much smaller (couple of order) than the linear susceptibility, therefore they are difficult to measure from normal dc magnetization measurement, but these nonlinear susceptibilities can be easily measured from high sensitive ac-susceptibility measurement Third order susceptibility (χ 3 ) is very useful tool to discriminate between various metastable states (like spin glass (SG), superparamagnet (SPM) etc.) ably The combined temperature-dependent plot of mole normalized χ R 1 (T) (the real part of first order susceptibility) of A1, A2 and A3 as well as their respective ferromagnetic constituent is shown in FIG. To cross check the statement related to the interface effect, the ratio of LCu and LCo is changed in composites A4 and A5 (as mentioned before) to vary the number of LCo grains sprinkled across LCu domain, which also changes the effective interface between LCu and LCo. The Hopkinson peak amplitude (i.e the peak in χ R 1 (T) graph just below FM T C ) for all the composites remain same, which indicates the magnetic domain size of LCo is same in all composites. Thus, the observed anomaly suppresses in similar manner as that of FIG. The mole normalized χ 3 plot of the composite A3 and the corresponding ferromagnet is shown in FIG. The interface effect is further verified by measuring the χ R 1 (T ) behavior of a composite pallet (A2) and the powder specimen of same composite; the comparative plot is shown in FIG. The gradual decrease of the diamagnetic fraction below T S(onset) while increasing the effective interface is evident from FIG. To reveal the nature of perturbed magnetic state of LCu and also the type of magnetic interaction across the interface, the higher order (i.e. second order-χ 2 and third order-χ 3 ) ac-susceptibility measurements are performed because of their uniqueness to distinguish between various magnetic state (as previously discussed). Around T S(onset) , χ R 3 shows a dip like feature (shown in the inset of FIG. where n is the number of particles per unit volume, μ is the average magnetic moment of a single magnetic entity or particle, k B is the Boltzmann's constant, and L(x) is the Langevin function. So, from Eqn. 1 the linear susceptibility can be expressed as and the third order susceptibility is represented as Therefore, Eqn. 2 and Eqn. 3 demonstrates that in the SPM region χ R 1 is positive and it follows T -1 behavior, whereas χ R 3 is negative and it follows T -3 behavior The presence of AFM type spin fluctuation in optimally doped LCu has already been found from various measurements like specific heat, neutron diffraction, Xray scattering To further emphasize on this exchange bias model the dc-field superimposed second order susceptibility (χ 2 ) measurements are performed, as the application of dc bias field tunes the amplitude of effective exchange bias field seen by the copper spins of LCu. The copper spins are at different distances from the interface hence, each spins of LCu is going to feel different amplitude of exchange force created by the cobalt spins. So, the internal spin arrangement of the antiferromagnetic clusters in LCu is not going to remain same as the previous case of h dc =0 Oe. Therefore, these change of the internal field amplitude is going to reflect on the second order susceptibility (|χ This anomalous variation of |χ 2 | with dc-field can be very nicely explained by using the exchange coupling model. The mathematical form to describe exchange coupling between two magnetic material across the interface is as follows H ex is the exchange bias field, J is the exchange integral across the FM/AFM interface per unit area, S AF M and S F M are the interface (or surface) magnetization amplitude of the antiferromagnet and the ferromagnet, respectively, t F M is the thickness of the ferromagnetic domain and M F M is the magnetization of the FM layer at a magnetic filed 'h'. At lower value of dc bias field (<50 Oe), the spins across the interface are only going to respond (i.e. S F M , as they are loosely coupled to the bulk of LCo), whereas the bulk magnetization are not going to respond at this lower value of dc-field i.e. M F M and t F M remain unchanged (because the applied field amplitude is still lower than the values of demagnetization field). Therefore, according to Eqn.4 at lower dc-field amplitude the effective H ex (Local field) on copper spins is larger in amplitude, which causes comparatively sizable misalignment between the AFM coupled copper spin, as they are at different distance from the interface. Due to this reason the increment of |χ 2 | is observed up-to a certain value of dc magnetic field (i.e. 50 Oe). On further increasing the dc-field amplitude the bulk spins start to respond, because it exceeds the amplitude of demagnetization field of LCo (i.e., M F M and t F M increases simultaneously), as a result M F M and t F M start to dominant over S F M , and hence, H ex reduces in accordance with Eqn. 4. As a result the misalignment between the copper spins reduces and decrement of |χ 2 | is observed at higher value of dc bias field. Similarly, the difference of |χ 2 |(T) values between ZFC and FCW protocol (shown in FIG. These preformed SPM type AFM clusters are also observed to affect the superconducting state of LCu. Hence, a comprehensive understanding on the evolution of superconductivity in these composites require information on the critical thermodynamic parameters such as critical field (H C2 ) and critical current density (J C ) of LCu. H C2 and J C are affected because of disorder and while the system size becomes comparable to certain characteristics length scale, like coherence length (ξ 0 ) and London penetration depth(λ l ) 1 is observed at higher temperature than A2 and A4, which clearly indicates that the strength of critical current density is highest in case of composite A3, and according to the obtained temperature values, the amplitude of critical current density of the three composites can be expressed in the following descending order i.e., J C (A3) > J C (A4) > J C (A2). Therefore, at any particular temperature below T S(onset) the amplitude of critical field required to destroy the superconductivity is also highest for the corresponding material having highest value of critical current density. The plot of H C2 against T S for A3, A2 and A4 is shown in FIG. Composite of a superconductor (LCu) and a ferromagnet (LCo) has been prepared by solid state reaction method. In ac-susceptibility measurement an anomaly is observed above T S(onset) and it has been proved as the interface effect by changing the effective interface between LCu and LCo. It is proved through the studies of the linear (χ 1 ) and nonlinear ac-susceptibilities (χ 2 , χ 3 ) that the exchange field of LCo affects the copper spins and stabilizes the short range ordered AFM state within the bulk of LCu. These observations unambiguously indicates that the dynamic AFM fluctuation can be the mediator of copper pairing in cuprate superconductor substantiated by the observation of reduction of superconducting volume fraction when the AFM fluctuations are stabilized by formation of stable short range ordered SPM type AFM phase within the bulk. Further, the superconducting volume fraction reduce to the quantum size limit and two phase separated regions are formed, one is super-paramagnetic type AFM clusters and the rest is finite size superconducting volume. Another important inference is that, the reduced superconducting volume fraction shows quantum size effect (According to DeGennes and Tinkham model), which is otherwise very difficult to achieve by preparing the nanoparticle of LCu, because of the structural limitation and degradation of oxygen stoichiometry. So these composites provide an unique path to understand the mechanism of Cooper pairing and also opens up a pathway to study the physical property of the finite size superconducting clusters of cuprate superconductors. We are thankful to Dr. Mukul Gupta and Dr.N.P lalla for XRD measurements. The microstructures of the composite materials have been studied by high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM, Thermo Scientific, Themis 300 G3, 300 kV). Fig. The STEM-HAADF image of the composite (A2) is shown in Fig. Therefore, the TEM (Transmission Electron Microscopy) images of the composite A2 and A3 strongly suggest the fact that the interface between LCu and LCo is very sharp and depicts the absence of any foreign phase across the interface of the composite. The field cool magnetic isotherm measurement of the composite A3 at 30 K is shown in FIG. The onset temperature and the peak temperature of χ I 1 decrease with increasing the amplitude of the dc bias field shown in FIG. 