We report on a systematic investigation of the longitudinal spin Seebeck effect (LSSE) in a GGG(Gd3Ga5O12)/GdIG(Gd3Fe5O12)/Pt film series exhibiting an in-plane magnetic easy axis with a compensation temperature (T Comp ) that decreases from 270 to 220 K when decreasing GdIG film thickness from 272 to 31 nm, respectively. For all the films, the LSSE signal flips its sign below T Comp . We demonstrate a universal scaling behavior of the temperature dependence of LSSE signal for our GdIG films around their respective T Comp . Additionally, we demonstrate LSSE in a 31 nm GdIG film grown on a lattice-mismatched GSGG (Gd3Sc2Ga3O12) substrate that exhibits an out-of-plane magnetic easy axis at room temperature. However, this sample reveals a spin reorientation transition where the magnetic easy axis changes its orientation to in-plane at low temperatures. We observed a clear distinction in the LSSE signal for the GSGG/GdIG(31 nm)/Pt heterostructure, relative to GGG/GdIG(31nm)/Pt showing an in-plane magnetic easy axis. Our findings underscore a strong correlation between the LSSE signal and the orientation of magnetic easy axis in compensated ferrimagnets and opens the possibility to tune LSSE through effective anisotropy. To address the global need for sustainable energy resources, thermoelectric effects, especially the longitudinal Seebeck effect, which is also recognized as the charge Seebeck effect (CSE), has been known for the past few decades as a clean and efficient way to harvest electrical energy from renewable thermal energy sources. The efficiency of a conventional CSE based thermoelectric generator is described by the thermoelectric figure of merit (FoM): κρ T, where S, κ, and ρ are the Seebeck coefficient, the thermal conductivity, and the electrical resistivity of the material, respectively. GdIG is a compensated ferrimagnetic insulator and consists of three magnetic sublattices: two antiparallelly aligned Fe 3+ sublattices and one Gd 3+ sublattice. Another extraordinary characteristic of the insulating iron garnet thin films is that the orientation of magnetic easy axis can simply be changed from in-plane (IP) to out-of-plane (OOP) just by tuning the film strain induced by the substrate. In this paper, we have performed a systematic investigation of LSSE in GGG/GdIG(t)/Pt(5nm) heterostructures with 5 different thicknesses ranging between 31 and 272 nm. All GdIG films possess an IP magnetic easy axis, and T Comp decreases with decreasing film thickness. The LSSE signal for all the heterostructures flips its sign below T Comp . Using a proposed rescaling method, we have demonstrated a "universal scaling" behavior of the temperature dependence of LSSE signal around the respective T Comp . Additionally, we have investigated LSSE in a 31 nm GdIG film grown on a lattice-mismatched GSGG substrate that exhibits an OOP magnetic easy axis at room temperature and observed a clear distinction in the magnetic field dependent LSSE signal, relative to GGG/GdIG(31nm)/Pt heterostructure exhibiting shape anisotropy-driven IP magnetic easy axis. This highlights a strong correlation between the LSSE signal and the magnetic anisotropy in compensated ferrimagnets. The Bragg (444) peaks associated with the GdIG films are visible at lower angles than the bulk reflection for films grown on GGG, indicating tensile out-of-plane strain, but at a higher angle for the films on GSGG, suggesting out-of-plane compressive strain, which is required to achieve perpendicular magnetic anisotropy (PMA). The bulk (444) reflection is marked by a dashed line. While the thinnest film shows the highest amount of strain, a gradual relaxation towards the bulk structure with increasing film thickness is observed, visible by the increasing Bragg angle in Figure Radio frequency (RF) transverse susceptibility (TS) measurements were employed to determine the temperature evolution of the effective magnetic anisotropy for both IP and OOP configurations. This TS technique can precisely detect the dynamic magnetic response of a magnetic material to a small and fixed amplitude RF magnetic field (HRF) applied transverse to a static magnetic field (HDC). at ±H K eff are associated with the contributions from the spins pointing orthogonal to the direction of H DC . In other words, for the OOP (IP) configuration, the TS scans probe the dynamics of the IP (OOP) spins. To understand the anomalous feature of H K IP (T) and, H K OOP (T) in the vicinity of T Comp , let us first recall the magnetic structure of GdIG. The compensated ferrimagnetic insulator GdIG comprises of three magnetic sublattices; namely, the tetrahedrally coordinated Fe 3+ ions located at the d-sites, octahedrally coordinated Fe 3+ ions located at the a-sites and dodecahedrally coordinated Gd 3+ ions located at the c-sites. sublattice magnetization is small and the net magnetization is dominated by the d-site Fe 3+ sublattice, where the d-site and a-site Fe 3+ sublattices are strongly exchange coupled via antiferromagnetic (AF) interaction. With reducing temperature, the c-site Gd 3+ sublattice magnetization increases drastically. At T Comp , the total magnetization of the c-site Gd 3+ sublattice and a-site Fe 3+ sublattice becomes equal in magnitude but antiparallel to the d-site Fe 3+ sublattice which makes the net magnetization zero. However, below T Comp , the combined magnetization of the c-site Gd 3+ sublattice and a-site Fe 3+ sublattice overcomes the d-site Fe 3+ sublattice magnetization and thus, the net magnetization is dominated by the Gd 3+ sublattice. Since the magnetizations of the c-site Gd 3+ sublattice and a-site Fe 3+ sublattice are oriented along the same direction but both of them are anti-parallel to the d-site Fe 3+ sublattice magnetization, the three sublattices of GdIG can be reduced to two antiparallelly oriented effective sublattices for simplicity. Thus, the GdIG system can be treated as a two sublattice problem, namely, the d-site Fe 3+ sublattice (Fe-d sublattice) and the combined c-site Gd 3+ + asite Fe 3+ sublattice (Gd-c + Fe-a sublattice). Following the approach of Sarkis et al., where θ SH Pt is the spin Hall angle of Pt and σ ⃗ ⃗ is the spin-polarization vector. ( Here, R y , L y , λ Pt , and t Pt are the resistance between the contact leads on the Pt layer, the distance between the contact leads, the spin diffusion length, and the thickness of the Pt layer, respectively. Note that the V ISHE signal becomes too small to be detectable in the temperature range 220 K ≤ T < 235 K. In Figure It is noteworthy that the temperature-driven sign reversal transition for the GSGG/GdIG(31 nm)/Pt heterostructure (with OOP easy axis) is broader than that for the GGG/GdIG(31nm)/Pt heterostructures (with IP easy axis). In fact, the GGG/GdIG(50 nm)/Pt heterostructure shows the sharpest sign reversal transition in V LSSE (T, μ 0 H sat ) , whereas the GSGG/GdIG (31 nm)/Pt heterostructure exhibits the widest sign reversal transition across T Comp . We believe that the sharpness of the sign reversal transition of the V LSSE signal of our GdIG films across T Comp is strongly correlated to the magnetic anisotropy of our GdIG films. Our results indicate that GdIG is a promising candidate for thermally induced switching devices based on LSSE wherein, by tuning the device temperature across T Comp , one can switch between positive and negative signals. The sharpness of this thermally induced switching is strongly correlated to the magnetic shape anisotropy of the GdIG film. Moreover, our 145 nm GGG/GdIG film has a rougher interface (RMS ~ 0.5 nm), a broader XRD peak and a lower saturation magnetization compared to other films (please see the Supplementary information: Figures Note that the GSGG/GdIG(31nm)/Pt heterostructure has an OOP easy axis at T = 275 K and an IP magnetic field was swept during the LSSE measurement. Thus, the elongated V ISHE (H) hysteresis loop at T = 275 K actually resembles the IP M(H) loop. On the other hand, the V ISHE (H) hysteresis loop at T = 205 K (just below T Comp ) is still elongated but shows comparatively sharper switching behaviour than at T = 275 K. However, the V ISHE (H) hysteresis loop at T = 175 K shows the sharpest switching behaviour and resembles the M(H) hysteresis loop recorded while scanning the applied magnetic field along the magnetic easy axis. We may recall that the GSGG/GdIG(31nm)/Pt heterostructure shows IP easy axis below T = 200 K which indicates that the V ISHE (H) hysteresis loop at T = 175 K actually resembles the corresponding IP M(H) loop. We also compare the V ISHE (H) hysteresis loops at T = 295 K with T = +10 K for the GSGG/GdIG(31nm)/Pt (OOP easy axis) and GGG/GdIG(31nm)/Pt (IP easy axis) heterostructures with same thickness of the GdIG film (31 nm) in Figure Clearly, a distinct behaviour in the V ISHE (H) loops is evident, while the heterostructure with OOP magnetic easy axis shows a characteristic hard axis V ISHE (H) loop, the one with IP magnetic easy axis shows sharp switching behaviour in the V ISHE (H) loop and, bears a resemblance to the corresponding IP M(H) hysteresis loop. These observations unambiguously highlight that the field dependence of the LSSE voltage is strongly susceptible to the orientation of magnetic anisotropy axis of our compensated ferrimagnetic GdIG films. Now let us correlate the temperature dependence of the LSSE signal (Figure . where, a 0 , α, and J are the lattice constant, the Gilbert damping parameter, and the strength of the Heisenberg exchange interaction between nearest neighbors, respectively. Since the magnetic field is applied along the IP direction during our LSSE measurements, B z = 0. As mentioned earlier, the net spin current across the GdIG/Pt interface is determined by the spin injection efficiency of the Gd 3+ moment dominated gapless magnon mode (α mode) and the Fe 3+ moment dominated gapped magnon mode (β mode). Here, V 0 is the proportionality constant. Equation 5 indicates that only thermally excited magnons will contribute to the magnon spin current and hence the LSSE signal which arrive at the cold end of the temperature gradient from a distance smaller than 〈ξ〉 from the GdIG/Pt interface. In other words, the saturation of the magnon spin current density at the GdIG/Pt interface and hence the saturation of LSSE voltage is achieved when the GdIG film thickness exceeds the mean propagation length of the thermally excited magnons. From the thickness dependence of V LSSE for our GGG/GdIG(t)/Pt heterostructures (please see Supplementary information: Figure In addition to the mean magnon propagation length, the frequency dependent magnon propagation length, ξ(ω), also influences the magnon accumulation at the cold side of the temperature gradient and hence the LSSE signal. Finally, let us elucidate the influence of the overall thermal resistance on the observed universal scaling behavior of the LSSE signal in our G(S)GG/GdIG/Pt heterostructures. In order to improve the thermal connectivity between the sample and hot/cold plates, cryogenic Apiezon N-grease was used. If a temperature difference T is applied between the hot and cold plates, the effective temperature difference across the GdIG film, ∆T eff , becomes much smaller than T because of the thermal resistance(s) offered by different regions during the measurement, namely, (1) the thermal grease layer between the cold plate and the Pt layer, (2) the Pt layer, (3) the GdIG/Pt interface, (4) the GdIG film, (5) the G(S)GG substrate and (6) the thermal grease layer between the G(S)GG substrate and the hot plate. Iguchi et al. However, the thermal resistance of the Pt layer as well as the GdIG/Pt interface can be neglected. In summary, we have performed a comprehensive investigation of the longitudinal spin Seebeck effect in GGG/GdIG(t)/Pt(5nm) heterostructures each of which possesses an in-plane magnetic easy axis, and the compensation temperature decreases from 270 to 220 K with decreasing film thickness from 272 to 31 nm, respectively. We found that the LSSE signal for all the heterostructures changes its sign below T Comp . Using a proposed rescaling method, we have demonstrated a "universal scaling" behavior for the temperature dependence of LSSE signal for our GdIG films around their respective compensation temperatures. Furthermore, we have investigated LSSE in a 31 nm GdIG film grown on lattice-mismatched GSGG substrate that exhibits an out-of-plane magnetic easy axis at room temperature, but the magnetic easy axis changes its orientation to in-plane at low temperatures, which has been confirmed using radio frequency transverse susceptibility measurements. We have observed a clear distinction in the LSSE signal for the GSGG/GdIG(31 nm)/Pt heterostructure, relative to GGG/GdIG(31nm)/Pt showing an in-plane magnetic easy axis. Our findings underscore a strong correlation between the LSSE signal and the orientation of magnetic easy axis in compensated ferrimagnets. The gadolinium iron garnet (GdIG) thin films were grown by pulsed laser deposition (PLD), using a KrF excimer laser with a wavelength of 248 nm and a repetition rate of 2 Hz. The GdIG target was fabricated by mixing pure Fe 2 O 3 and Gd 2 O 3 powders. The mixed powders were pressed and sintered at 1200°C for 8 h in ambient atmosphere. Afterwards the target was cleaned inside the PLD chamber with more than 10 4 pulses. The deposition conditions were calibrated to yield stoichiometric, single-crystalline thin films with smooth interfaces. The ideal film properties were achieved at elevated temperatures at 600°C, as measured by a thermocouple inside of the substrate holder, and at a deposition rate of 0.01 -0.02 nm/s, while using an oxygen background atmosphere of 0.02 mbar. GdIG thin films with thicknesses between 31 nm and 272 nm were deposited on single-crystalline (111)-oriented GGG (Gd3Ga5O12) and GSGG (Gd3Sc2Ga3O12) substrates of dimensions 5 × 5 × 0.5 mm 3 and cooled down at a rate of approximately 5 K/min. The substrates were annealed for 8 h at 1200°C in oxygen atmosphere prior to the film deposition, to ensure a high substrate surface quality with a root-mean-square roughness below 0.2 nm. For the thin film garnets, the magnetic shape anisotropy governs the direction of the magnetic easy axis, favoring an alignment in the in-plane direction. Furthermore, lattice mismatch between the insulating iron garnet film and substrate induces in-plane compressive/tensile strain which leads to a magnetoelastic anisotropy favoring an out-of-plane (OOP) alignment of the magnetic easy axis. The longitudinal spin Seebeck effect (LSSE) on the G(S)GG/GdIG/Pt heterostructures was measured within the temperature range 105 K ≤ T ≤ 295 K using a home-built set up assembled on a universal PPMS puck (see Figure Gd3Fe5O12 (GdIG) is a compensated ferrimagnetic insulator. We have demonstrated that the thermospin-voltage across the GGG/GdIG/Pt heterostructures with different GdIG thicknesses and hence, different compensation temperatures (T Comp ) fall onto a single master curve around their respective T Comp . Such universal behavior would be helpful to fabricate novel spincaloritronic devices wherein the thermospin-voltage can be switched by appropriately tailoring the operational temperature.