Proton therapy is a cancer treatment technique currently in growth worldwide. It offers advantages with respect to conventional X-ray and γ-ray radiotherapy, in particular, a better control of the dose deposition allowing to reach a higher conformity in the treatments. Therefore, it causes less damage to the surrounding healthy tissue and less secondary effects. However, in order to take full advantage of its potential, improvements in treatment planning and dose verification are required. A new prototype of proton Computed Tomography scanner is proposed to design more accurate and precise treatment plans for proton therapy. Here, results obtained from an experiment performed using a 100-MeV proton beam at the CCB facility in Krakow (Poland) are presented. Proton radiographs of PMMA samples of 50-mm thickness with spatial patterns in aluminum were taken. Their properties were studied, including reproduction of the dimensions, spatial resolution and sensitivity to different materials. They demonstrate the capabilities of the system to produce images with protons. Structures of up to 2 mm are nicely resolved and the sensitivity of the system was enough to distinguish thicknesses of 10 mm of aluminum or PMMA. This constitutes a first step to validate the device as a proton radiography scanner previous to the future tests as a proton CT scanner. P ROTON therapy is a promising cancer treatment tech- nique that is still far from being exploited to its full potential despite being already in use. Its main advantage with respect to conventional radiotherapy with X-rays or γrays is a more conformed dose deposition which can improve significantly the ratio of dose applied to the tumor with respect to the surrounding healthy tissue. Due to the properties of the slowing down process of protons in matter, they deposit most Fig. of their kinetic energy at the end of their path. This effect is shown in Fig. Currently, proton therapy treatment plans are obtained using X-ray CT images. These provide the so-called maps of Hounsfield Units (HU), defined as: which accounts for the linear attenuation coefficient of the tissue (μ tissue ). However, the proton therapy treatment plans are based on maps of a different physical quantity, the Relative Stopping Powers (RSP), implying that the HU maps have to be transformed into RSP maps. The conversion process is not straightforward and induces large uncertainties that, depending on the tissue, can cause uncertainties in proton ranges as large as 5 % in the abdomen and 11 % in the head, see Ref. In this framework, research and development activities are on-going to construct a prototype of pCT scanner. As the first stage in this process, two experiments have been performed, one at the Centro de MicroAnálisis de Materiales (CMAM) in Madrid with proton beams of 10 MeV and, recently, an experiment with proton beams in the energy range of 90-120 MeV. The details of the former experiment can be seen in Ref. The experiment was performed at Cyclotron Centre Bronowice (CCB) facility belonging to the Institute of Nuclear Physics PAN in Krakow (Poland). The IBA Proteus C235 cyclotron of the facility produced a 230-MeV proton beam that was degraded to the energy of interest (90-120 MeV) with an energy spread of 0.6%. The beam spot size was of approximately 5-mm radius, and the beam intensity was between 500 pA -1 nA depending on the beam energy. The beam impinged on a 25-μm thick titanium target placed at the end of the beam line kept under vacuum. The Coulomb scattering occurring in the target reduced the initial beam intensity as a function of the scattering angle. The experimental setup shown in Fig. Three different samples were used during the experiment, which are shown in Fig. The energy calibrations of the detectors of the experimental setup were performed with proton beams of 95, 100, and 120 MeV energy and the sample with the uniform insert as shown Fig. in the left image of Fig. A procedure of data filtering was followed to guarantee the proper identification of protons and the removal of electronic noise and background signals. First, at each DSSD detector, only events where a simultaneous signal was collected at both sides, one of a front strip (vertical) and one from a back (horizontal) strip with similar deposited energy were accepted as good events corresponding to a proton traversing the detector. In this way, the pixel hit in the DSSD was identified by the crossing of both triggered strips. A procedure to recover data from three strips of the DSSD2 detector, which were not collecting charge, was performed. It was based on the lower amplitude signal collected in the neighboring strips of those not working properly. Thanks to the different amount of charge collected, those events could be identified and assigned to the neighboring not-working strip. In these cases, the value of energy deposited was taken from the coincident strip of the other side (front or back, depending on the case) that was working in a proper way. Finally, the coincidence condition between the three detectors with certain energy restrictions were imposed to guarantee that the proton hit both the tracking and residual-energy detectors. The radiograph was obtained at the central plane of the sample. Due to the symmetrical distance of the two tracking detectors with respect to that central plane, the X,Y coordinates at the image plane were determined by simply averaging the X and Y coordinates at both detector planes: (x 1 ,y 1 ) in DSSD1 and (x 2 ,y 2 ) in DSSD2. In this way, the trajectory of the proton was assumed to be a straight line between the pixel hit in both detectors. The pixelation available at each detector plane is the one provided by the tracking detectors, which is a total of 256 pixels organized in a mesh of 16 × 16 strips of 3 × 3 mm 2 each. If no further data treatment was performed, the maximum granularity of the image formed would be 32 × 32 pixels resulting from the averaging of the coordinates of both detectors pixels. In order to generate images with higher granularity, the following procedure was applied. The impact position at each detector pixel was chosen randomly by generating a uniform random number in both X and Y axes. In this way, the counts assigned to each pixel were uniformly distributed along the full pixel area. The image has a surface of 48 x 48 mm 2 , given by the frontal area of the DSSDs, which was divided in 128 × 128 pixels. For each traversing proton, the coordinates at the image plane were calculated as the average of those at each DSSD detector, (x av ,y av )=((x 1 +x 2 )/2,(y 1 +y 2 )/2). At this point of the image, the total energy deposited in the three detectors was accumulated. The total accumulated energy at each pixel for all the detected protons was divided by the number of protons counted on that pixel to obtain the final image. In this way, an image of average energy deposited per proton was obtained. That image is called the proton radiograph from this device. IV. DISCUSSION The procedure previously described was used to obtain the radiographs of the three samples studied. The results obtained for the two samples with aluminum spatial patterns are presented in the following. The measurement with the uniform sample was only used for the calibration of the detectors. The image shown in Fig. In order to better understand the properties of the image, an energy histogram was generated. The value of accumulated energy stored at each pixel was used to fill the energy histogram. The histogram is filled with one count per pixel, that is 128 × 128 = 16384 counts in the full spectrum. The result is shown in Fig. it can be said that 100-MeV protons traversing 40-mm of PMMA, corresponding to the "Air" region, are losing about 53 MeV (100-47.1 MeV) and those traversing 50-mm of PMMA, corresponding to the "PMMA" region, are losing almost 66 MeV (100-34.3 MeV). The obtained images were converted to greyscale to be analysed using the ImageJ software [6]. One-dimensional profiles were extracted from the image by selecting a region of interest (ROI). If the region contains several rows or columns of pixels, the profile shows the average values in the selected region. Fig. The dimensions were estimated by fitting the profiles to generalized Gaussian functions to obtain the best possible fit to the shape of the line profile. The general expression for a generalized Gaussian function, also known as super-Gaussian, is given in Eq. 2, where a linear background has been added. The parameters a 0 and a 1 describe the linear background, a 2 is the standard deviation, σ, of the function, a 3 describes the total area of the function above the linear background considered, a 4 is the centroid (central position) and the a 5 parameter is the super-Gaussian order. The last parameter was conveniently modified for each region to be fitted. In general, larger order indicates a more extended flat-top region in the shape of the function. x -a 4 a 2 a5 (2) From the fitted function, the Full Width at Half-Maximum (FWHM) and at Tenth-Maximum (FWTM) were determined. The dimensions indicated in Fig. A sample containing a regular spatial pattern of holes and slits made on a 10-mm-thick aluminum piece, which is shown in Fig. In order to see more details of the sample, five regions of interest (ROIs) were selected which are shown in Fig. Those of ≈3 mm are seen next with lower contrast but well resolved, and, finally, the three slits of 2 mm are also resolved with even lower contrast. This profile shows us that the spatial resolution of the system is better than 2 mm. For the row of 2-mm diameter shown in green, the contrast is lower, but the structure of four holes can still be observed and resolved. On the contrary, the profile for 1-mm holes shown in magenta, does not show a clear pattern with seven minima as expected. In conclusion, the spatial resolution of the radiographs is better than 2 mm but not reaching 1 mm. The performance of a proton Computed Tomography scanner is under study. As a first stage, tests of the device to perform proton radiographs have been performed. An experiment carried out at Cyclotron Centre Bronowice facility in Krakow (Poland) using proton beams in the energy range from 90 to 120 MeV is presented here. A proton radiography scanner formed by two DSSD detectors for proton tracking and a scintillator array for residual-energy determination was used. Energy calibrations of the detectors were performed using proton beams of 95, 100, and 120 MeV and detailed Monte Carlo simulations of the experimental setup. Different samples made of PMMA and spatial patterns made from aluminum inserted in the PMMA matrix were studied. The images acquired for a cross pattern sample and a regular spatial pattern sample have been studied. The dimensions of the cross pattern were determined from the image using fits to super-Gaussian functions and, in general, they reproduce the dimensions of the actual piece under study. In addition, the energy histogram showed three peaks located at well differentiated energies The results presented here constitute the first step to validate the system as a proton radiography scanner. The next steps will be to improve the algorithm of image reconstruction, specially on how the counts at each pixel are distributed within the pixel area, and to perform the data analysis of tomography scans performed by taking several proton radiographs at different rotation angles of the sample. The images will be used to perform the tomographic reconstruction of the object. Further tests of the device as a proton Computed Tomography scanner will be performed.