Fiber-reinforced soft biological tissues are typically modeled as hyperelastic, anisotropic, and nearly incompressible materials. To enforce incompressibility a multiplicative split of the deformation gradient into a volumetric and an isochoric part is a very common approach. However, due to the high stiffness of anisotropic materials in the preferred directions, the finite element analysis of such problems often suffers from severe locking effects and numerical instabilities. In this paper, we present novel methods to overcome locking phenomena for anisotropic materials using stabilized P1-P1 elements. We introduce different stabilization techniques and demonstrate the high robustness and computational efficiency of the chosen methods. In several benchmark problems we compare the approach to standard linear elements and show the accuracy and versatility of the methods to simulate anisotropic, nearly and fully incompressible materials. We are convinced that this numerical framework offers the possibility to accelerate accurate simulations of biological tissues, enabling patient-specfic parameterization studies, which require numerous forward simulations. Computer models of biological tissues, e.g., the simulation of vessel mechanics or cardiac electro-mechanics (EM), aid in understanding the biomechanical function of the organs and show promise to be a powerful tool for predicting therapeutic responses. Advanced applications include the simulation of growth and remodeling processes occurring in the failing heart or arteries In-silico models of cardiac tissue and vessel walls are typically based on the theory of hyperelasticity and properties of soft tissues include a nonlinear relationship between stress and strain with large deformations and a nearly-incompressible, anisotropic materials Typically, the modeling of (nearly) incompressible elastic materials involves a split of the deformation gradient into a volumetric and an isochoric part To some degree locking problems in anisotropic hyperelasticity for these simple elements can be reduced by using augmented Lagrangian methods A more sophisticated approach -also allowing the modeling of fully incompressible materials -is the reformulation of the underlying equations into a saddle point problem by introducing the hydrostatic pressure p as an additional unknown to the system. Here, from mathematical theory, approximation pairs for u and p have to fulfill the Ladyzhenskaya-Babuŝka-Brezzi (LBB) or inf-sup conditions A computationally more favorable choice are equal order pairs with a stabilization, widely used for linear and isotropic elasticity As our results suggest, a very promising and efficient stabilization approach for nearly incompressible, anisotropic elasticity problems is a variant of the MINI element A big advantage of both stabilization techniques is that they do not rely on artificial stabilization parameters that may influence the numerical solution. We illustrate in different benchmarks that the same setting can be used for a large variety of tissue mechanics problems allowing for a one-for-all approach. By comparing to literature we show that our methods are suitable to compute accurate strain and stress fields and outperform existing contributions in terms of efficiency. The paper is outlined as follows: in Section 2 we recall the mathematical background of modeling anisotropic, nearly incompressible elasticity and introduce the theoretical framework of our stabilization techniques. Subsequently, Section 3 documents three benchmarks problems to show the applicability of the stabilized P1-P1 elements in different scenarios. For each benchmark we give a detailed problem description and discuss results and computational efficiency by comparing to the literature and analyzing strong-scaling properties. To show the usefulness of the presented methods to clinically relevant problems, we present a 3D EM model of the heart that is coupled to a 0D model of blood flow. This constitutes the most complete model of cardiac EM in the literature to date as all components, i.e., electrophysiology, cellular dynamics, active stress, passive tissue mechanics, pre-and afterload, are based on physiological, state-of-the-art models from the literature. Finally, Section 4 concludes the paper with a brief summary and all required equations to implement the methods in a software framework are given in the Appendix. Let Ω 0 ⊂ R 3 denote the reference configuration and let Ω t ⊂ R 3 denote the current configuration of the domain of interest. Assume that the boundary of Ω 0 is decomposed into ∂Ω 0 = Γ D,0 ∪ Γ N,0 with |Γ D,0 | > 0. Here, Γ D,0 describes the Dirichlet part of the boundary and Γ N,0 describes the Neumann part of the boundary, respectively. Further, let N be the unit outward normal on ∂Ω 0 . The nonlinear mapping φ : X ∈ Ω 0 → x ∈ Ω t , defined by φ := X + u(X, t), with displacement u, maps points in the reference configuration to points in the current configuration. Following standard notation, we introduce the deformation gradient F , the Jacobian J, and the left Cauchy-Green tensor C as Here, Grad(•) denotes the gradient with respect to the reference coordinates X ∈ Ω 0 . The displacement field u is sought as infimizer of the functional over all admissible fields u with u = g D on Γ D,0 , where, Ψ denotes the strain energy function; ρ 0 denotes the material density in reference configuration; f denotes a volumetric body force; g D denotes a given boundary displacement; and h denotes a given follower surface traction defined as with giving external load p ext > 0. For ease of presentation it is assumed that ρ 0 is constant and f , and g D do not depend on u. Existence of infimizers is, under suitable assumptions, guaranteed by the pioneering works of Ball, see In this study, we consider nearly incompressible materials, meaning that J ≈ 1. A possibility to model this behavior was originally proposed by Here, F vol describes the volumetric change while F describes the isochoric change. By setting F vol := J The function U (J) will be used in the form where κ denotes the bulk modulus. In the literature many different choices for the functions Θ(J) are proposed, see e.g To guarantee well-definedness, we assume that with H 1 0 (Ω 0 ) being the standard Sobolev space of square integrable functions having a square integrable gradient, and Q = L 2 (Ω 0 ). For a more in-depth discussion we refer to R inc (u, p; q) = 0, for all (v, q) ∈ V 0 × Q. Here, where Components of the second Piola-Kirchhoff stress tensor are computed as S isc := J -2 3 Dev(S), S := ∂Ψ(C) ∂C S vol := π(J)C -1 , π(J) := JΘ (J). When modeling electrically active tissue, we consider an additive decomposition of the isochoric part of the stress tensor. The total stress tensor is now given by the additive decomposition To simulate the effect of the circulatory system, these equations are coupled to a 0D lumped model as in R inc (u, p; q) = 0, for all (v, q) ∈ V 0 × Q, and i = 1, . . . , n CAV . Here, the variations read as where with Γ CAV,i,0 denoting the closed surface of the i th cavity in reference configuration. The expression for cavity volume V CAV,i follows from applying Nanson's formula to the definition of cavity volume in the current configuration For a more detailed account on the coupling of nonlinear elastic equations with 0D lumped parameter models we refer to For the subsequent discretization we need the consistent linearization of ( where p ext Γ N,0 using the following abbreviations and C isc given in (C.2). For the deviation of term In the case of an attached circulatory system we obtain the following linearized system, find (∆u, ∆p, ∆p CAV ) such that where and d k defined as in (A.3). The term Here we provide a summary of the finite element discretization used in the subsequent results. The framework builds upon methods previously introduced for isotropic, passive mechanics in Let T h be a finite element partitioning of Ω consisting of tetrahedral and/or isoparametric hexahedral finite elements. We assume standard regularity assumptions for all (v h , q h ) ∈ V h,0 × Q h . The discrete spaces V h,0 and Q h are defined as and additionally we introduce The pressure projection stabilization was originally introduced for solving Stokes problems where the projection operator Π h is defined elementwise as In contrast to One of the earliest strategies in constructing a stable finite element pairing for discrete saddle-point problems arising from Stokes Equations is the MINI-Element, dating back to the works of Brezzi et al, see for example where (ξ 0 , ξ 1 , ξ 2 ) ∈ K see also For the hexahedral reference element K = [-1, 1] 3 we define Classical results Arterial and myocardial tissue as modeled in Section 3 is considered as a non-linear, hyperelastic, nearly incompressible, and anisotropic material with a layered organization of fibers. To model this behaviour in our benchmark problems we used strain energy functions of the form (3); namely, the transverseley isotropic constitutive law by Guccione et al. with a > 0 kPa a scaling parameter, a i fiber directions, and Q a function in terms of scalar strain components. Further, we compared the standard formulation of a separated Fung-type exponential model with the formulation using an unsplit deformation gradient for the anisotropic contribution introduced in Biomechanical applications often require highly resolved meshes and thus efficient and massively parallel solution algorithms for the linearized system of equations become an important factor to deal with the resulting computational load. Extending our previous implementations for cardiac EM In all of the following benchmark problems our goal was to study the performance and accuracy of different finite element discretizations, namely i) Q1/P1-P0-AS : discretization with piecewise linear displacements and piecewise constant pressure using the strain energy function Simulation setup. First, we show the applicability of our proposed methods to a benchmark problem from Gültekin et al. and invariants and analogously with Ψ aniso (C, f 0 , s 0 ) for the WAS formulation, Ψ WAS , Results. A comparison of the radial, σ rr , the circumferential, σ θθ , and the axial, σ zz , components of the Cauchy stress tensor is shown in Figure Figure Numerical performance. Computational times for the simulation using different element types are given in Figure For the fine grid strong scaling was obtained up to 1024 cores on Archer2 (https://www.archer2.ac. uk/), see Figure Due to a higher number of linear iterations and higher matrix assembly times, simulations with hexahedral meshes were more expensive compared to simulations with tetrahedral grids. However, as also observed, e.g., by Chamberland et al. Simulation setup. To verify our EM setup we repeated the inflation and active contraction benchmark from Land et al. Constitutive parameters were a = 2 kPa, b f = 8, b t = 2, and b fs = 4. In the benchmark paper the material is considered to be fully incompressible, hence, we chose 1/κ = 0 for the saddle-point formulation (Projection, MINI). For the penalty formulation (P1-P0 elements) we chose κ = 1000 kPa which was the best trade-off between convergence of the solver for all three levels in Table As the material law above does not allow for a WAS formulation we repeated the benchmark using a separated Fung-type exponential model as in Equation with invariants such that contributions of compressed fibers are excluded, and the interaction-invariant Analogously, we used the constitutive equation above with Ψ aniso (C, f 0 , s 0 , n 0 ) for the WAS formulation. Material parameters were taken from Results. For the transversely isotropic law In contrast to that, for the orthotropic Holzapfel-Ogden material, we see in Figure Simulation setup. Finally, we show the applicability of our method to an advanced model of computational cardiac EM. Here, a 3D model of bi-ventricular EM is coupled to the physiologically comprehensive 0D CircAdapt model representing atrial mechanics and closed-loop circulation. In the present paper, the myocardium of the ventricles was modeled as a nonlinear hyperelastic, (nearly) incompressible and orthotropic material as in Equation with modified unimodular fourth-invariants to support dispersion of fibers and standard invariants Analogously, we used the constitutive equation above with Ψ aniso (C, f 0 , s 0 ) for the WAS formulation. A reaction-eikonal model where S a is the scalar valued active stress generated in the cardiac myocytes and κ f is the same dispersion parameter as above. For the time integration of Cauchy's equation of motion we used a variant of the generalized-α integrator Bi-ventricular finite element models. The bi-ventricular geometry was created according to Boundary conditions. Boundary conditions on the epicardium were modeled using spatially varying normal Robin boundary conditions To eliminate potential differences in stress/strain due to parameterization we fitted parameters to achieve similar pressure-volume (PV) loops and a similar end-diastolic PV relationship (EDPVR) for all element types. First, initial passive material parameters above were fitted to the empiric description of the EDPVR by Klotz et al. Active stress parameters were fitted using locking-free elements to reach a target peak pressure of 105 mmHg in the LV. Using the same active stress parameters, the simulations with P1-P0 elements resulted in slightly higher peak pressure, 109.2 mmHg, see Figure See Table Results. First, simulation results in Figure To get to a converged solution of the closed-loop 3D-0D system we simulated 30 heart beats for each finite element setting: 18 init beats with 1 Newton step corresponding to a semi-implicit (linearly-implicit) discretization method See Figure In contrast to pressure, volume, and flow traces, stresses show a very different pattern when comparing locking-free to simple P1-P0 elements, see Figure Numerical performance. Computational times for the simulation using different element types are given in Table In total, for a full simulation with loading, 18 initialization beats with 1 Newton step, 10 initialization beats with 2 Newton steps, and 2 final beats with a fully converging Newton method the computational costs were around 3.5 h for P1-P0 elements, 13 h for projection stabilized elements, and 17.5 h for MINI elements, see Table Adapted active stress parameters for P1-P0 elements on 32 cores using P1-P0 elements and 7.15 minutes using locking-free projection stabilized elements. Total computational times on the desktop machine for 30 beats were 94.6 minutes for P1-P0 and 264.4 minutes for projection stabilized elements. In Figure Discussion. In this benchmark, we show the most complete model of cardiac EM that is currently available: i) Cardiac electrophysiology was modeled by a reaction-Eikonal model which predicts potential fields with high fidelity even on coarser grids All computational models of cardiac EM presented in the literature so far, e.g., While stress fields differ vastly the PV loops computed with locking-free and simple P1-P0 elements are very similar; at least if active and passive tissue parameters are fitted independently for each element type. In particular, passive parameters fitted to the Klotz curve using P1-P0 elements correspond to a softer material. Here, the fitting compensates locking effects to a certain degree. On the other hand, the reference peak tension parameter (T • ref ) had to be slightly reduced to reach the same target value as projection stabilized and MINI elements. In this case, the softer passive material and the higher compressibility of the tissue using the penalty term in the P1-P0 formulation are most likely the reasons for higher active stress generation. With these adaptations, PV traces for the different element types are almost identical, see Figure High resolution EM models require efficient numerical solvers to limit the computational cost that results from a high number of degrees of freedom to capture anatomical details as well as a high number of time steps. Strong scaling characteristics of our EM framework was reported in detail previously Using the advanced approach presented in this paper, the time needed for the passive filling of the biventricular model of the heart is very low. For the projection stabilized element loading times are less than half a minute on 128 cores@2.25Ghz of Archer2 (Table Computational cost for one heart beat -using grids with a comparable number of elements and nodes but, in general, P1-P0 elements -range from 1.8 to 24 hours in previous studies Limitations. First, we set an arbitrary number of 30 heart beats which was more than enough to reach a limit cycle in all experiments. However, an automatic stopping criterion could be used that stops the simulation after reaching the limit cycle. Simulation times could be further reduced by accelerated the convergence to a limit cycle using data-driven 0D emulators Second, the parameterization of the model has room for improvement. Passive parameters were fitted to the empiric Klotz curve using end-diastolic volume and pressure and active stress was fitted using a target peak pressure value. Other model components such as the reaction-Eikonal model and CircAdapt were not parameterized and we were using default values from the literature. The personalization of the complete model to patient-specific data is not within the scope of this contribution, however, the computational efficiency of the model is of crucial importance for parameter identification studies that often require a large number of forward simulations. Third, no independent validation of the model is performed. This could be done by comparing displacements or strains predicted by the model to observations from cine MRI or 3D tagged MRI data, see, e.g., Finally, locking-free formulations as presented in this paper require the solution of a block system, which in turn necessitates suitable preconditioning for computational efficiency. This is not a trivial task, however, preconditioners used for simulations in this paper are publicly available through the open-source software framework PETSc. In this study, we introduced stabilization techniques that accelerate simulations of anisotropic materials, in particular, nearly and fully incompressible fiber-reinforced solids such as arterial wall or myocardial tissue. A MINI element formulation and a simple and computationally efficient technique based on a local pressure projection were presented. Both methods were applied for the first time for simulations of anisotropic materials and showed to be an excellent choice when the use of higher order or Taylor-Hood elements is not desired. This is the case, e.g., for detailed, high-resolution problem domains that results in a high number of degrees of freedom. We showed that both approaches are very versatile and can be applied to stationary and transient problems as well as hexahedral and tetrahedral grids without modifications. It is worth noting that all required implementations are purely on the element level, thus, facilitating an inclusion in existing finite element codes. Furthermore, solvers and preconditioners used to solve the linearized block system of equations are available through the open-source software package PETSc We showed the robustness and accuracy of the chosen approaches in two benchmark problems from the literature: first, a thick-walled cylindrical tube representing arterial tissue and second, an ellipsoid representing LV myocardial tissue. Additionally, in a third application of the stabilization approaches, we presented a complex 3D-0D model of the ventricles. This constitutes the first computational EM model of the heart where all components are captured by physiological, state-of-the-art models. We could show that for the first time accurate and physiological cardiovascular simulations are feasible within a clinically tractable time frame. Computational efficiency of the methods is unprecedented in the literature and the framework shows excellent strong scaling on desktop and HPC architectures. The high versatility of the one-fits-all approach allows the simulation of nearly and fully incompressible fiber-reinforced materials in many different scenarios. Overall, this offers the possibility to perform accurate simulations of biological tissues in clinically tractable time frames, also enabling parameterization studies where numerous forward simulations have to be carried out to personalize models to patient data. The interior degrees of freedom can be statically condensed. On element level this leads to the static condensed system K B C D where The individual element matrices/vectors A, A Γ , R, and R Γ can be assembled into a global stiffness matrix through loops over volume elements and surface elements respectively. In the case of an attached circulatory system a static condensation can be performed in an analogous way Static condensation of all interior degrees of freedom leads to 