The emergence of superconductivity in unconventional superconductors usually accompanies the normal-state phases of pseudogap, strange metal and Fermi liquid. It indicates these phases are strongly related to the superconducting state and should be dominated by yet unclear mechanism of superconductivity. Here, we propose a microscopic theory that, according to the coupling between localized and extended states, the pairing electrons which leap on and off a localized state result in superconducting instability. Two distinguishable pairing gaps are observed in these states, one dominates the superconducting temperature and another the temperature of a coherent pair confined at localized area. The pairing correlation between these states results in four phases. Their characteristics are manifested in universal Planckian-like resistivity and unusual carrier distribution, as observed in recent experiments. One-Sentence Summary: Mechanism for cuprate superconductivity shows two pairing gaps, Planckian-like resistivity, and unusual carrier distribution. Since the discovery of high critical-temperature (Tc) superconductors in 1986, the physical mechanism of superconductivity is still a mystery. The superconductivity is always accompanied by several normal-state phases, such as antiferromagnetism (AM), pseudogap (PG), strange metal (SM), Fermi fluid (FL), and charge density wave (CDW), increasing the understanding complexity and difficulty In this paper, we present a microscopic theory for cuprate superconductors based on the coupling between localized and extended (itinerant) states (CLES) in Nd-impurity system. In electron representation, the process of creating an itinerant Cooper pair above Fermi surface from annihilating a bound pair (Fig. Which hints that the multiple-impurity Anderson model is more suitable for characterizing the cuprate planes. Accordingly, we propose a microscopic theory that was starting from the Anderson model with Nd impurities. After canonical transformation to its Hamiltonian Where ĉk s and d ̂is are the annihilated fermionic operators for extended and localized electrons with the momentum k of spin s and the localized site i of spin s, respectively. a ̂k = ĉ-k↓ ĉk ↑ and b ̂i = d ̂i↓ d ̂i↑ are their annihilated boson-like pairing operators. The first two terms with coupling strength J in H ̂2 represent the processes of pairing electrons which leap on and off a localized state. The third term is the on-site Hubbard interaction. The conventional pairing interaction with strength  is appended in the last term. The details of following derivations and numerical calculations can be found in Supplementary Materials. Instability. ⎯ To study the instability of the system for the region 0 < μ < ε L + U where E 0 = Ω + ε̅ + ε L + U, E 1 = Ω -ε L + ε̅ -U, ε̅ has a value μ 2 ⁄ for a slowly varying density of states D 0 , and  is the chemical potential. For J = 0, this equation is exactly the form in BCS theory The binding energy at the region 0 < μ < ε L + U 2 ⁄ (Fig. where ω c -μ+√χ 2 +(ω c -μ) 2 | for γ = J or λ . These results can also be derived from the linearized equations of motion detailed in Supplementary Materials. The elementary excitations of localized and extended electrons are Bogoliubov quasiparticles. The excitation energy of creating a k ↑ (or i ↑) quasiparticle is Notably, the minimum energy of extended quasiparticle occurs at ε k = μ. Thus, the energy gaps for localized and extended quasiparticles are Γ D+ -Γ D-= 2E D and Γ k+ -Γ k-= 2χ, respectively. For |ε L + U 2 ⁄ -μ| ≫ k B T, the critical temperatures follow the BCS-like ratio of the energy gap to its corresponding temperature ) + D 0 λ, and T i (E G ) denotes T c (χ) or T * (E D ). The calculated Tc and T * (Fig. where σ 0 = 4e To response this question, let's recall the requirements of pairing instability in the theory, including (i) well localized states, (ii) small D 0 N d ⁄ ratio or high impurity density, (iii) weak hopping interaction, (iv) high Hubbard potential, (v) high coupling strength J, and (vi) wide bandwidth. However, there are two conflicting issues among them: (i) the low D 0 N d ⁄ ratio and high CLES coupling imply a high wavefunction overlap between nearest-neighbor impurities, which results in the formation of impurity band, losing its locality, and reducing the Hubbard potential. The emergence of BCS superconductivity in degenerately doped semiconductors is a representative example ⁄ . The dynamical quantities α p,k and β k are derived from applying the equations of motion ( iħ d dt ⟨GS|O ̂|ψ⟩ = ⟨GS|[O ̂ , H ̂red ]|ψ⟩) to the operators O ̂= d ̂ls̅ † ĉk s † a ̂p and O ̂= d ̂ls̅ † ĉk s † b ̂j, respectively. ħ is the reduced Planck constant. Letting J p = J and ε k = ε̅ (an average kinetic energy) for simplicity, we obtain the familiar discriminant of pairing instability