Electrical properties of point defects in 4H-SiC have been studied extensively, but those related to carbon interstitials (C i ) have remained surprisingly elusive until now. Indeed, when introduced via ion irradiation or implantation, signatures related to C i observed by deep level transient spectroscopy (DLTS) tend to overlap with those of other primary defects, making the direct identification of C i -related levels difficult. Recent literature has suggested to assign the so-called M center, often found in as-irradiated 4H-SiC, to charge state transitions of the C i defect in different configurations. In this work, we have introduced excess carbon into low-doped n-type 150 μm thick 4H-SiC epilayers by thermal annealing, with a pyrolyzed carbon cap on the sample surface acting as a carbon source. Because the layers exhibited initially low concentrations of carbon vacancies ([V C ] = 10 11 cm -3 ), this enabled us to study the case of complete V C annihilation, and formation of defects due to excess carbon, i.e. carbon interstitials C i and their higher-order complexes. We report on the occurrence of several new levels upon C injection which are likely C i -related. Their properties are different from those found for the M center, which points towards a different structural identity of the detected levels. This suggests the existence of a rich variety of C i -related defects. The study will also help generating new insights into the microscopic process of V C annihilation during carbon injection processes. Point defects in the 4H polytype of silicon carbide (4H-SiC) exhibit great technological potential in novel quantum technologies; on the other hand, such defects can have detrimental effects on power device operation. Specifically, the silicon vacancy (V Si ) and related complexes can be functionalized for single-photon emission and coherent spin manipulation DLTS spectra of as-grown n-type 4H-SiC commonly exhibit the ever-present Z 1/2 and EH 6/7 levels, which were assigned to the (0/2-) and the deeper-lying (2+/+/0) charge transition levels of the carbon vacancy, respectively C i was predicted to be electrically active early on The involvement of C i has been discussed extensively in the context of V C control. The V C is perennially present in state of the art 4H-SiC epitaxial layers In this study, we monitor the thermally induced introduction of excess carbon into 4H-SiC epi-layers in the near absence of vacancy-related defects. Excess carbon is introduced into high-purity and low-doped n-type 4H-SiC by thermal annealing using a pyrolyzed carbon cap on the sample surface acting as a C source. The low concentration of other defects prior to and during annealing enables the separation of interstitial-and vacancy-related defect levels. Additionally, the interaction between V C and C i is discussed where we report on several levels appearing upon C injection, with a structural identity of the detected levels that appears to be different from that of the M center. The studied 4H-SiC samples consisted of 150 μm thick epilayers doped with N (n ≈ 2 × 10 14 cm -3 as determined by capacitance-voltage measurements) on highlydoped c-oriented 2" substrates, purchased from Ascatron AB, Sweden. The samples were laser-cut into pieces of 7 mm × 7 mm, cleaned using the full standard RCA procedure, and then coated with photoresist (type AR-U 4030) on the sample front and backside in several spin-coating cycles (total resist thickness ≈ 5 μm). The coated samples were then heat-treated in an RTP fur-nace at a temperature of 900 °C for 10 min in vacuum (p = 5 × 10 -5 mbar) during which the photoresist was graphitized. The C-capped samples were then annealed in a tube furnace under Ar atmosphere at 1250 °C for 1.5 h, 2.5 h or 6.6 h. It should be noted that after the high-temperature anneals, the C cap on the samples had been almost completely dissolved, and the samples' surfaces had been oxidized to form SiO 2 (as determined using energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy). We attribute this to the presence of residual oxygen during the annealing process, likely due to continued outgassing of the furnace tube. It is unknown how long into the annealing the C-caps were still intact to provide a source of C. However, thermal oxidation of SiC is another common procedure to inject C into the epilayer; therefore, we believe this to be negligible for the interpretation of this experiment. After annealing, the samples were RCA-cleaned and 150 nm thick Ni Schottky diodes were deposited on the epilayer using e-beam evaporation through a shadow mask (diode area 7.85 × 10 -3 cm 2 ). Silver paste was used as a back contact to the conductive substrate. We note that the oxidation of the epilayer surface during the annealing did not lead to a significant surface roughening, nor to a degradation of the Schottky diode quality. The electrical characterization (CV) was carried out using a Boonton-7200 high-precision capacitance meter and an Agilent 81110A pulse generator (for DLTS measurements). The DLTS measurements were performed in a temperature range between 20 K and 300 K, where cooling was achieved with a closed-cycle He refrigerator. In Fig. A characteristic behavior of the M center is its bistability with respect to annealing at moderate temperatures (up to 200 °C) with and without applied bias Concentration versus depth profiles for the traps E 0.38 , E 0.59 , and E 0.7 were recorded by varying the voltage pulse height, from V p = 0.5 V to 20 V, using a reverse bias of -20 V, and at a fixed temperature. The λ correction was taken into account. The resulting trap concentration profiles are displayed in Fig. where c 0 is the concentration of E 0.38 at x = 0, D is the diffusion constant, and t ann the annealing time. From these fits to the concentration profiles obtained from DLTS for t = 1.5 h, 2.5 h, and 6.6 h, D and c 0 were determined and are given in Table with D 0 being the pre-exponential factor, usually D 0 ≈ 10 -3 cm 2 s -1 for atomic hops, and E i the injection barrier. An estimate of E i can be given based on Eq. 2, and the values are also given in Table The depth profiles of E 0.59 and E 0.7 appear to be flatter than that of E 0.38 , but retain a slight downward slope towards the sample bulk. The low concentrations and high noise levels prevent a reliable extraction of formation barriers for the two deeper levels (the detection limit for defects under the conditions of the experiment is approximately 5 × 10 10 cm -3 ). We observe that although E 0.59 and E 0.7 also appear to be coming in from the surface they are likely of a different origin than E 0.38 . Importantly, the depth profiles in Fig. In Fig. E 0.59 and E 0.7 do not exhibit a monotonous variation of concentration with C injection time; however, their occurrence only after the annealing experiment, and the possible slight increase of their concentration profile towards the sample's surface (see Fig. Unfortunately, the authors of Ref. Overall, it is challenging to make assignments of the observed trap signatures to structural defects at this point. However, it can be noted that carbon injection, in the near absence of V C , leads to the formation of several new defect levels related to C excess, and that there are at least two physically differing defect structures involved: a less stable one, increasing in concentration as more carbon is injected, possibly hinting at a mono-interstitial as its structural origin, and a more stable one that seems to possess a more complicated formation and annealing behavior, which may be due to a larger carbon complex. Annihilation of V C by carbon injection therefore seems to be a rather complicated process, involving the migration of C in the form of several defect species. It must also be stated that the absence of the M center in this work demonstrates that excess carbon forms a larger variety of interstitial-related defects previously thought. Using a carbon cap on the surface of n-type 4H-SiC epilayers, we have injected excess carbon by thermal annealing. Because the initial concentrations of carbon vacancies V C was low, the C injection lead to (1) the complete annihilation of V C , and (2) the formation of new C excess-related defects. A set of three defect levels becomes visible in low-temperature DLTS spectra, with activation energies of 0.38 eV, 0.59 eV and 0.7 eV. Depth profiles of the trap levels show that they originate from C injection (the defect concentration increases towards the epilayer surface), and the activation energy associated with the evolution of the depth profiles matches the migration energy for carbon diffusion previously calculated by ab initio methods. The dissimilar behavior of the traps with longer injection duration as well as their starkly differing thermal stability points towards a different defect structures behind the signatures, albeit likely related to carbon interstitials in all cases. An identification of either of the defects with the M center, which has previously been attributed to the mono-interstitial C i , does not appear justified. However, the ON0a and ON0b defects found in thermally oxidized material, and possibly originating from the carbon split di-interstitial (C sp ) 2 , match the levels at E C -0.59 eV and E C -0.7 eV well. Generally, this work emphasizes the complexity of the V C annihilation process via supply of excess carbon, which seems to take place through a variety of channels. FIG. 3. Concentration profiles of the E 0.38 , E 0.59 and E 0.7 levels, determined by DLTS profiling. Profiles of [E 0.38 ] are shown for all annealing times. Profiles of [E 0.59 ] and [E 0.7 ] are shown only for the 6.6 h anneal. Fits to the E 0.38 profiles according to Eq. 1 are shown in gray.