Broadband super-resolution imaging is important in optical field. To achieve super-resolution imaging, various lenses from superlens to solid immersion lens have been designed and fabricated in recent years. However, the imaging is unsatisfactory due to low work efficiency and narrow band. In this work, we propose a solid immersion square Maxwell's fish-eye lens which realizes broadband (7-16GHz) achromatic super-resolution imaging with full width at half maximum around 0.2λ based on transformation optics at microwave frequencies. In addition, a super-resolution information transmission channel is also designed to realize long-distance multi-source super-resolution information transmission based on the superresolution lens. With the development of 3D printing technology, the solid immersion Maxwell's fish-eye lens is expected to be fabricated in high frequency band. Microscopy is a significant tool for research about life science and natural science. The resolution of conventional lens system is constrained above onehalf wavelength, due to the diffraction limit that evanescent waves carrying tiny information of an object decay in the far-filed. Many efforts have been made to overcome the diffraction limit, one important step is the proposed perfect lens in 2000 Utilizing alternative metal and dielectric materials, one-dimensional hyperlens However, for superlens and hyperlens, it is difficult to push forward to applications and relative experimental works were rarely reported in recent years due to the challenge of fabrication and the big loss from plasmonic resonance mechanism and impedance mismatching between the object and lens. On the other hand, utilizing total internal reflection (TIR) happening at the interface to excite evanescent waves, solid immersion lens (SIL) widely through the application of high refractiveindex (RI) solid material and specific geometric optical design Recently, absolute instruments with a gradient RI (GRIN) profile Significantly, combining the solid immersion mechanism with geometrical perfect imaging of MFEL, a solid immersion MFEL as a near-field super-resolution lens In this work, we utilize a power tool transformation optics Let us recall a MFEL with a GRIN distribution that can realize perfect imaging. Assuming a MFEL located in virtual space (w space), it RI distribution can be expressed as follows where w r is the distance from the center of the lens. R is the radius of the lens, 0 2n denotes the RI at the center of MFEL, and 0 n represents the ambient RI. Fig. Although super-resolution imaging can be achieved through solid immersion MFEL, its application scope is limited due to the curved boundary of the lens, leading to distortion of the imaging. To extend the application prospects of the solid immersion MFELs, the curved edge of the MFEL is considered to be changed into a straight edge according to the theory of conformal mapping. Such design of a solid immersion square MFEL is obtained based on the solid immersion circular MFEL by utilizing a SC mapping ( ) ( ) where () sn m  represents the Jacobian elliptic function with the modulus of the ellipse m and  is the gamma function. According to Eq. ( To analysis the influence of the TIR mechanism for super-resolution effect in the solid immersion square MFEL, the value 0 n is artificially changed from 1 to 3.1 at an interval of 0.7 to explore the relationship between the value of 0 n and the imaging effect of the square MFEL as shown in Figs. From the above analysis, it is found that the solid immersion square MFEL can achieve superresolution imaging at most frequencies. However, the super-resolution imaging is invalid at other specific frequencies due to the destruction from stable whispering gallery mode (WGM) To Supplement 1: Optimimal design of square Maxwell's fisheye lens In this section, we will propose a new quasisquare Maxwell's fish-eye lens (MFEL) design to solve the problem that the resolution of an original square MFEL is affected by whispering gallery mode (WGM) resonance, which is easily generated due to the four corners. To optimize the design and improve the resolution of solid immersion MFEL, the circular MFEL is transformed into quasi-square MFEL by a method of SC mapping, as shown in Fig. 