We demonstrate fully crystalline, single-mode ultrahigh quality factor integrated microresonators comprising epitaxially grown Si0.86Ge0.14 waveguide cores with silicon claddings. These waveguides support resonances with internal Q > 10 8 for both polarization modes, a nearly order-of-magnitude improvement over that seen in prior integrated Si photonics platforms. The maximum Q is 1. 71 ± 0. 06 × 10 8 for the transverse magnetic (TM) polarization mode, corresponding to a loss of 0. 39 ± 0. 02 dB/m. Together with silicon's strong Kerr nonlinearity and low losses in the optical, microwave and acoustic regimes, our results could lead to the Si1-xGex/Si architecture unlocking important new avenues for Kerr frequency combs, optomechanics, and quantum transduction. Whispering gallery mode resonators, which use continuously curved loops to guide electromagnetic waves by total internal reflection, have been extensively studied for more than half a century due to their ability to support very high quality (Q) factors. The highest Q resonators have been fabricated with macroscopic machining techniques, such as manually polishing Si The many benefits of integrated optical resonators, including their capability of forming more complicated optical circuits and their compatibility with proximate electrodes, has led to their use in many applications Our fully monocrystalline and epitaxial waveguide platform comprises a low mole-fraction silicon-germanium core that is fully clad by silicon. Optical losses due to pinned surfaces resulting in free carrier and/or defect state absorption are eliminated by extending the single-crystalline region throughout the region occupied by the optical mode. Furthermore, scattering losses are minimized by the low index contrast of our SixGe1-x waveguide relative to its Si cladding (an order of magnitude lower than that of Si relative to SiO2). Although SixGe1-x waveguides have attracted attention for linear and nonlinear applications wavelengths was reported to be 65 dB/m in Si0.9Ge0.1 waveguides Our waveguides are defined in epitaxial Si0.86Ge0.14 layers grown on high resistivity Cz-Si wafers. An important performance parameter is the Si0.86Ge0.14 thickness. If it is too thin, radiation loss will affect the performance. On the other hand, when Si0.86Ge0.14 is grown beyond the Matthews-Blakeslee critical thickness Characterization is carried out using the setup shown in Fig. The radiation loss model plotted in Fig. The birefringence between TE and TM polarizations in our system is inferred from the differing free-spectral ranges (FSR) shown in figure A previous study of the polarization dependent refractive index for pseudomorphic SixGe1-x waveguides grown on Si also observed an anisotropy between the out-of-plane and inplane indices For Si0.86Ge0.14 studied in this work, the index difference is experimentally determined from quadratic fits to the polarization dependent FSRs. Taking the difference of the quadratic fits, allows us to establish the birefringence in terms of the ratio of effective group indices, n -(//,*, / n -(//,*+ (see Fig. As can be seen in One of the main features of the radiation loss regime is the extreme sensitivity of Q to material and design parameters. For instance, in our regime, the calculated radiation-limited Q improves by three orders of magnitude by doubling R from 4.8 mm to 9.6 mm. Alternatively, increasing the Si0.86Ge0.14 thickness from 500 nm to 600 nm would result in an order of magnitude lower radiative loss in the C-band. We have demonstrated an ultrahigh quality factor onchip silicon-germanium microresonator system with unprecedented low loss rates. It uses a novel fully crystalline design based on the low refractive index contrast between Si and Si0.86Ge0.14 to minimize interface scattering losses. Relative to the prior state-of-the-art in silicon ring resonators The SixGe1-x system is also particularly well suited to build microwave-optical transducers for quantum state transfer For each measurement, the photodetector background level is also measured and subtracted from the trace, which is then normalized. The resonance peaks of the frequency reference are located and used to transform the data into frequency domain. It is then converted into phase domain using the known ring radius and effective refractive index. The equations above for T 23456-3 and T >45= are fitted using a trust-region-reflective nonlinear least-squares solver, to simultaneously minimize the residuals of both functions. An example of the fitted data is shown in Fig. A refractive index contrast between Si0.86Ge0.14 and Si of 1.31% for the TE mode is determined from the radiation loss fit on the L-band data in figure In order to determine the birefringence of the Si0.86Ge0.14, the ratio of effective group indices, n -(//,*, /δn -(//,*+ , was determined experimentally (Fig. The Si0.86Ge0.14 films utilized in this paper were grown to be as thick as possible, while remaining pseudomorphic. Specifically, we aimed to increase the layer thickness until the point where plastic relaxation begins to occur but does not yet lead to a significant reduction in the layer strain. Beyond this point, relaxation of the Si0.86Ge0.14 leads to reduction in the refractive index and thus reduced confinement of the optical mode. Before growth commences it is necessary to prepare the Si surface by removing the native oxide layer (typically several nm in thickness). This is accomplished by an in-situ H2 bake at 1050 °C. This leads to the reduction of the oxide layer, resulting in a clean Si surface ready for epitaxy. The chamber temperature is then reduced to approximately 650 °C, for Si0.86Ge0.14 growth. During growth, when the Si0.86Ge0.14 becomes sufficiently thick, the stress induced by the lattice mismatch between Si and Si0.86Ge0.14 can lead to dislocation propagation. These dislocations move through the crystal along the <111> planes, which relieves some of the layer strain. On (100) wafers, this appears as surface cross-hatching where the density of the lines and magnitude of the topography increases as the layer thickness increases. The nucleation of dislocations tends to originate from defects at the Si/ Si0.86Ge0.14 growth interface, predominantly at the edge of the wafer. Therefore, the density of cross-hatching will tend to be largest at the edge and to decrease towards the center. They can be easily identified by highlighting with a defect selective etch chemistry, such as Secco ((K2Cr2O7-H2O)/HF). This approach is shown in Fig. Although the cross-hatching line density may be high near the wafer edge, this is not a concern for our process as the waveguide etch effectively isolates these defective regions from more pristine areas closer to the center. So, in optimizing our growth conditions we focus on the center region of the wafer in order to maximize the Si0.86Ge0.14 thickness.