We numerically show that a vortex pinning occurs in superconducting quasicrystal without impurities and defects. This vortex pinning is intrinsic since the superconducting order parameter in quasicrystal is always inhomogeneous due to the lack of the translational symmetry. We propose that experiments influenced by vortex pinning effects can detect the atomic-scale inhomogeneous superconducting order parameter in quasicrystals. We develop a numerical method to solve the Bogoliubov-de Gennes equations and gap equations in large systems, which is based on the localized-Krylov subspace and a sparse modeling technique. Two two-dimensional quasicrystals, the Penrose and Amman-Beenker tiling, are considered. Quasicrystal has no translational symmetry. Recently, Kamiya et al. found that a superconducting phase appears in Al-Zn-Mg quasicrystalline alloys The detection of the inhomogeneous phenomena in superconducting quasicrystals in experiments is one of the most important evidence of the existence of exotic superconductivity in quasicrystals. However, there is no experiment that can directly detect a superconducting order parameter in real space. Some theoretical papers found that the local density of states (LDOS), which can be observed by the scanning tunneling microscopy/spectroscopy (STM/STS), has only weak spatial dependence of the spectral gap A vortex in superconductors can be directly observed by STS/STS or SQUID experiments. A vortex has been used to study superconducting properties, since bound states around a vortex reflect the information of the superconducting order parameter and the electronic structure. For example, a vortex in NbSe 2 has a six-fold star-shaped LDOS originating from a six-fold anisotropic superconducting pairing symmetry With the use of a vortex in superconducting quasicrystals, we propose that the inhomogeneous superconducting state in quasicrystal can be detected. We focus on the fact that the energy level of the minimum vortex bound states depends on how the superconducting order parameter is suppressed around a vortex since a region where the order parameter becomes small around a vortex can be regarded as a region inside a quantum well for quasi-particles. In general, the energy level becomes small if the size of the suppressed region is large (i.e. inside a large quantum well). In addition, the size of the suppressed region depends on the amplitude of the superconducting order parameter. Therefore, since the amplitude of the order parameter changes in superconducting quasicrystal in real space, the energy level of the vortex bound states should depend on the position of the vortex. In this paper, we show an intrinsic vortex pinning due to a strong inhomogeneous superconducting order parameter in superconducting quasicrystal, which can be detected experimentally. A vortex moves to find a position where the free energy becomes minimum. In other words, vortices are pinned even if there is no impurity or defect. To make this statement general, we consider two kinds of superconducting quasicrystals, superconducting tight-binding models with Penrose and Ammann-Beenker (AB) tiling. A new numerical technique is proposed for solving the Bogoliubov-de Gennes equations in a large inhomogeneous tight-binding model, which is based on the localized-Krylov subspace and sparse modeling techniques We consider the tight-binding Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) Hamiltonian on the Penrose and Ammann-Beenker tiling given as where c † iσ creates the electron with spin σ at site i and μ denotes the chemical potential. t ij is the transfer integral which connects a bond on the tiling. We consider that the intensity of the hopping is uniform t ij = t on bonds. For simplicity, we consider on-site s-wave superconductivity. We use the unit system with = k B = 1. One can diagonalize H to solve the BdG equations expressed as where the 2N × 2N Hamiltonian matrix Ĥ is defined as Here [ ĤN ] ij = -t ij -μδ ij and N is the number of the lattice sites. The s-wave superconducting order parameter is defined as where U is the onsite pairing interaction. In Eq. ( We introduce the dual-grid method to construct models for quasicrystals We adopt the so-called dual-grid method to generate the quasicrystals. It is known that a D-dimensional quasicrystal can be obtained by the projection of a particularly cut slice of the M -dimensional euclidian hyperlattice onto a D-dimensional plane. As shown in Figs. To consider superconducting quasicrystals, we have to solve the BdG equations (2) in real space with solving the gap equation Eq. ( where the solutions x(i, ω n ) are obtained by solving the following linear equations: Here, ω n ≡ πT (2n + 1) denotes the Fermion Matsubara frequency and 2N -component unit-vectors e(i) and h(j) The detail is shown in Appendix B. Let us introduce the Localized-Krylov subspace RSCG (LK-RSCG). Equation ( is localized in real space. The computational complexity of the matrix-vector products in the RSCG method O(N ) is replaced with O(k d ). Here, d is a spatial dimension In addition, to reduce the computational complexity, we introduce the recently-developed sparse-modeling (SpM) approach for a Green's function With the use of the intermediate representation (IR) basis, the matrix element of the Green's function is written as where U l (iω n ) is a basis function of the IR basis and N IR is a number of the basis functions(See, Appendix B 2). Here, G ij is the element of the matrix-valued Green's function The superconducting mean-fields are given as Although the size of N IR depends on a cutoff parameter in the IR basis, N IR is small around 10-100. With the use of the RSCG method and IR basis, we can calculate Eq. ( We solve the gap equations self-consistently in the Penrose and Ammann-Beenker quasicrystals. We consider the temperature T = 10 -3 t and the cutoff frequency ω max = 10t, where the number of the IR basis N IR is 104. Superconductivity without vortices on the Penrose and Ammann-Beenker tiling has been studied by several groups, respectively The first is a non-uniform distribution of the superconducting order parameter. Even if the onsite pairing interaction does not depend on a position in real space, the su-perconducting order parameter defined by Eq. ( The second is that many thermodynamic properties in superconducting quasicrystal are almost indistinguishable from ones in conventional BCS superconductors. Araújo and Andrade found no evidence of superconductivity islands although the superconducting order parameter is inhomogeneous in Ammann-Beenker quasicrystal and they concluded that quasicrystals are prone to display conventional BCS-like superconductivity 8 . Takemori et al. calculated the local density of states, specific heat, I-V characteristics in Penrose quasicrystal It is difficult to detect the inhomonogeneous phenomena in experiments of superconducting quasicrystals without magnetic fields. Therefore, we need a vortex as a source of the quasiparticle excitation. Let us consider systems with a vortex. We study superconductivity in Penrose and Ammann-Beenker quasicrystals in the type II limit (the magnetic penetration depth λ → ∞). As the initial state, we locate a vortex at a center in each system. After solving gap equations self-consistently, a vortex moves to find the position where the free energy becomes minimum. We show results about both Penrose and Amman-Beenker lattices in this section. The unit of the order parameter is the hopping amplitude t. We consider four patterns of Penrose lattice, which are determined by the following γ, respectively: γ T D = (-0.4, -0.13, 2.4, 0.89, - We consider the chemical potential μ = -t and the onsite pairing interaction U = -2t. After solving gap equations self-consistently, a vortex is not located at the center as shown in Fig. Vortex bound states in superconductors have rich information about a superconducting order parameter. We calculate the low-energy eigenvalues of the BdG Hamiltonian in four systems, originating from the bound states around a vortex core. As shown in Fig. The size of the vortex core in superconducting Penrose lattice looks small in Fig. We should point out that the energy of the lowest vortex bound states is much larger than the bound energy in the system created by the inflation-deflation method in our previous paper We consider the Ammann-Beenker quasicrystal to confirm whether an intrinsic vortex pinning occurs in another quasicrystal structures. We consider two patterns of AB lattice, which are determined by the following γ, respectively: γ T B = (-0.21, 0.29, 0.98, - In the system without a vortex in our parameter set, the mean value of the superconducting order parameter is 0.26593t. The basic property of the superconducting Ammann-Beenker quasicrystal is similar to the Penrose one. We note that there is a paper discussing the system without a vortex 8 . For systems with a vortex, we initially put a vortex at a center and solve the gap equations. After solving gap equations self-consistently, a vortex is not located at the center as shown in Fig. We found that the intrinsic vortex pinning occurs in superconducting quasicrystals. In the mean-field level, solving the gap equation ( Since the temperature is very low (T = 10 -3 t), Ω is expressed as which is equivalent to the internal energy. Here θ(x) is the Heaviside step function. The first term in Eq. ( The second term is usually small since the system satisfies the relation Here, E 0 is the absolute minimum of the eigenvalues in the system without vortex. Equation (19) shows that lower energy bound state less contributes the internal energy. In our previous paper Penrose lattice has eight types of vertices with nomenclature of de Bruijn 9,10,17 . In our parameter set of the Penrose superconductors, as shown in Fig. Vortex lattice structure becomes unique in superconducting quasicrystal, although we do not confirm that a vortex is always pinned at S5 vertex in all parameter region of the Penrose superconducting tight-binding model. The important point is that the amplitude of the superconducting order parameter depends on the local lattice structure of the quasicrystals without magnetic fields. Our calculation suggests that the site that has relatively smaller gap amplitude can be pinning site. Since the vortex suppresses the superconducting order parameter around a center of the vortex, it might be better to make the amount of the suppression small in terms of the total minimization of the thermodynamic potential. We should note that the vortex lattice structure is determined not only by the pinning site distributions, but also by the interaction between vortices If STM/STS or SQUID measurements can observe a vortex pinning in clean quasicrystals, this becomes evidence of the inhomogeneous superconductivity in quasicrystals. Other experiments influenced by a pinning effect also become tools to detect this inhomogeneity of superconductivity. For example, the critical current should depend on the pinning effect We consider clean and perfect quasicrystals in this paper. There can be kinds of extrinsic pinning such as voids and twins in realistic materials. In addition, in quasicrystals, there can be so-called phason strain, which is a characteristic dislocation in quasicrystal We showed that an intrinsic vortex pinning due to the inhomogeneous superconducting order parameter occurs in superconducting quasicrystals. We confirmed that the intrinsic vortex pinning occurs in systems with several vortices in both Penrose and AB quasicrystals. We proposed the new method to solve the BdG equations on large tight-binding models, which is based on the localized-Krylov subspace and the sparse modeling technique. If STM/STS or SQUID measurements can observe a vortex pinning in clean quasicrystals, this becomes evidence of the inhomogeneous superconductivity in quasicrystals. The sampling points ω k are obtained by the open-source software irbasis ] lk e(i) T x(i, ω k ). Although the size of N IR depends on a cutoff parameter in the IR basis, N IR is small around 10-100. With the use of the RSCG method and IR basis, we can calculate Eq. ( 