Quantum critical fluctuations may prove to play an instrumental role in the formation of unconventional superconductivity. Here, we show that the characteristic scaling of a marginal Fermi liquid is present in inelastic light scattering data of an Fe-based superconductor tuned through a quantum critical point (QCP) by chemical substitution or doping. From the doping dependence of the imaginary time dynamics we are able to distinguish regions dominated by quantum critical behavior from those having classical critical responses. This dichotomy reveals a connection between the marginal Fermi liquid behavior and quantum criticality. In particular, the overlap between regions of high superconducting transition temperatures and quantum critical scaling suggests a contribution from quantum fluctuations to the formation of superconductivity. Close to quantum critical points (QCPs) where a second order thermal phase transition is suppressed to absolute zero systems are highly susceptible to small perturbations. The high susceptibility gives rise to various instabilities in materials exhibiting unconventional superconductivity. Although the vanishing temperature at the QCP renders direct experiments impossible, the related critical fluctuations One of the consequences is the deviation from the Landau-Fermi liquid picture observed in many materials such as the cuprates, the Fe-based compounds or the heavy fermion systems Characteristic for systems with a QCP is the presence of a quantum critical region at temperatures above a cross-over temperature T * (x) ∼ |x -x c | νz (where ν and z are the correlation length and dynamical critical exponents, respectively, the tuning parameter x, realized in our context by chemical substitution of the metal site, and critical doping x c ). Since this broad region of the phase diagram manifests the behavior of the single quantum critical point at x = x c , T = 0, Frerot et al. Due to the tunability by doping and the purity of the crystals, we have opted to use as a testbed the compound Ba(Fe 1-x Co x ) 2 As 2 , one of the most studied Fe-based superconductors, to investigate this lens. Ba(Fe 1-x Co x ) 2 As 2 exhibits a rich phase diagram Earlier studies, investigating the low frequency Raman response of Ba(Fe 1-x Co x ) 2 As 2 The underdoped compound [Fig. Temperature and doping dependence of the Raman response. Depicted is the Raman response function Rχ B1g (Ω, T ) in B1g symmetry (1-Fe unit cell) at selected doping concentrations x and temperatures T where Ω = ωi -ωs stands for the difference of the incident and scattered photon energy ωi and ωs, respectively. Tc refers to the superconducting transition temperature. a For the underdoped compound with x = 0.052, the low-frequency pile-up attributable to classical critical fluctuations exhibits a maximum above the nematic transition and decreases towards Tc. b Close to optimal doping with x = 0.059 the low frequency response increases monotonically on cooling towards Tc. c For a sample with x xc, The temperature dependence is weak at all frequencies. To examine the possibility of quantum critical scaling, we have computed β Λ(β/2) from each of our measured spectra, with the results shown in Fig. The dashed horizontal line is a guide to the eye indicating the value of β Λ in the regime of Ω/T scaling. Outside this quantum critical regime, where the response does not scale as Ω/T , the quantity β Λ(β/2) from this constant. The shaded regions show the crossover temperatures T * UD and T * OD for x < x c and x > x c , respectively, from Ω/T scaling to regions where other dynamics govern the low frequency response. T * UD,OD (x) exhibits a systematic doping dependence, with a global minimum at x = 0.073. To further illustrate this point, T * UD,OD (x) is plotted along with the relevant phase transitions of Ba(Fe 1-x Co x ) 2 As 2 in Fig. Underdoped region: For x < x c Ba(Fe 1-x Co x ) 2 As 2 has an SDW ground state below T SDW , and fluctuations in the temperature range T SDW < T < T * UD . Above T * the Ω/T scaling characteristic for a marginal Fermi liquid is recovered. Moving closer to x c , the magnetic and nematic phases become unstable as signified by the decreasing transition temperatures. In the picture of quantum criticality, this results from a continously increasing superposition of entangled states which manifests itself as a divergence of the coherence length of the quantum fluctuations directly at the QCP. Simultaneously, the region of marginal Fermi liquid behavior with Ω/T scaling begins to persist over wider ranges of temperature with T * UD falling more rapidly after superconductivity sets in. Overdoped region: On the overdoped side for x > x c , the crossover line re-emerges from the superconducting dome and continues to rise as a function of doping, with a significantly smaller slope than for x < x c . In the absence of a competing magnetic ground state, the quantum fluctuations may support superconductivity over a wider region of doping concentrations. The endpoints of the dashed lines coincide with the region of optimal doping x c consistent with a scenario in which quantum fluctuations increasingly destroy the long range order of the ground state for x < x c at tem- peratures T > 0. Thus, T c is high where the quantum fluctuations dominate the normal state, and low where "classical" dynamics take over. Therefore the quantum fluctuations appear to have a twofold effect: on the classically ordered side below x c , the competing magnetic ground state is destabilised. On the overdoped side, the quantum fluctuations protect superconductivity at least partially from increasing disorder. This scenario is consistent with quantum criticality being a driving force behind the superconducting state in Ba(Fe 1-x Co x ) 2 As 2 . In the experimental work presented here, we have determined the crossover temperature T * separating the high temperature quantum critical behavior from the (effectively) classical behavior at low temperatures. To this end, we have introduced a metric to identify the quantum critical regime in terms of the imaginary time response function, Λ(τ ), which can be inferred directly and unambiguously from experimental inelastic light scattering (Raman) data (see Methods IV B and Lederer et al. As a final remark, we wish to comment on the scaling behavior deduced from our data: From equation (S12) in Supplementary Note 2.4, β Λ(β/2) should vary as T y where y = γ/νz. This implies y ∼ 0 to be in line with a conventional scaling analysis presented in Supplementary Note 2, and thus one would have to appeal to an extreme value of one or more of these exponents. In this case the most natural choice would be z = ∞, corresponding to the phenomenology of local quantum criticality We tracked the B 1g Raman response of Ba(Fe 1-x Co x ) 2 As 2 as a function of doping x. x is tuned from x < x c through a quantum critical point far into the overdoped regime of the phase diagram. From the data we calculated the temperature dependence of the imaginary time ordered correlation function Λ(τ ) at τ = β/2 and extracted cross-over temperatures T * (x) above which Ω/T scaling prevails. These temperatures define the boundaries of the quantum critical fan corroborating the existence of a QCP around optimal doping. Thereby we show that the determination of the imaginary time dynamics from spectroscopic data is a straightforward way to reveal the effects of quantum criticality in the normal state of Ba(Fe 1-x Co x ) 2 As 2 . The most important distinction is drawn between this analysis and any type of Kramers-Kronig analysis where an upper limit needs to be set. Here, the integral is naturally cut off at k B T by an exponential factor. The analysis is not limited to inelastic light scattering, but can be applied to a wide range of experimental probes as already outlined in Lederer et al. We performed inelastic light scattering experiments with the samples (for characterization, see Supplementary Note 3) attached to the cold finger of a 4 He flow cryostat. Polarized photons having a wavelength of 577 nm (Coherent GENESIS MX-SLM577-500) hit the sample at an angle of incidence of 68 • . The polarized scattered photons were collected along the surface normal of the sample and focused on the entrance slit of a double monochromator. The photons transmitted at the selected energy were recorded with a CCD detector. The number of photons per second is proportional to the Van-Hove function S(q ≈ 0, Ω) = 1/π[1 + n(Ω, T )]χ (Ω, T ) where n(Ω, T ) is the Bose factor and χ is the imaginary part of Raman response function which is displayed in Fig. Following a method proposed in Lederer et al. with the imaginary time τ ∈ (0, β) and the inverse temperature β = 1/T where k B = 1 along the lines of Lederer et al. which has the same universal properties as the static susceptibility χ (Ω = 0, T ) in the sense that the two quantities have identical scaling with temperature on cooling to both classical and quantum critical points A key property of β Λ(β/2) is that it has a power-law dependence on temperature if χ obeys Ω/T scaling, and in particular is independent of temperature if χ (Ω, T ) is of marginal Fermi liquid form One significant virtue of β Λ(β/2) in comparison to χ (Ω = 0) is that it can be unambiguously computed from the measured Raman spectra. Since the measured χ (in this and other studies) fails to fall off at high frequency, the Kramers-Kronig integral relating χ to χ does not converge, and therefore requires a manual cutoff procedure. By contrast, the denominator in Eq. 2 grows exponentially for frequencies Ω T , rendering the integral convergent so long as the range of frequencies probed extends to several times the temperature. For reasons of clarity, we plot the results for 5.2 % Co content above T nem in panel a and below T nem in panel b of Fig. Fig. In the main text, we have identified quantum critical scaling in the vicinity of optimal doping using the imaginary time correlation function Λ(β/2). More precisely, we have analyzed the temperature dependence of β Λ(β/2) to extract, for each doping value, a crossover temperature, T * , below which this function begins to deviate from the constant behavior indicative of a marginal Fermi liquid. Another, more traditional approach is to analyze the real frequency data directly using energy and intensity scaling. In this section we describe this method and its theoretical background, and apply it to the experimental data presented in Fig. Let us consider a system with a quantum tuning parameter x (such as doping) that is near a quantum critical point at x = x c , and let us assume that the system obeys scaling. At each value of x, there is a characteristic energy scale T * , which will vanish as x approaches x c . Approaching from the ordered side of the phase diagram, T * will be (proportional to) the critical temperature, while on the disordered side it will represent a crossover. In both cases, T * should vanish with critical exponent νz, where ν is the correlation length critical exponent and z is the dynamical critical exponent, but this is not relevant to the current discussion. From here on, we will assume that T, T * , and the frequencies (Ω) at which we probe the system are much less than "UV" scales such as the bandwidth and Fermi energy, so that we are in the low energy regime where quantum criticality can be observed. Within this regime there are two asymptotic limits of temperature. When T T * , the relevant quantum fluctuations (for instance phonons near a structural transition, or paramagnons near a magnetic transition) have energies much greater than the temperature and are thus frozen out. Therefore, these quantum fluctuations produce only quantitative changes to the properties of the system, in comparison to its behavior far from the QCP. As such, this part of the phase diagram is sometimes called the renormalized classical regime. By contrast, when T T * , the quantum fluctuations are effectively gapless and therefore produce their most spectacular consequences, such as divergences of thermodynamic quantities with cooling. This is the quantum critical regime, typically having a "fan" shape, as shown in Fig. We will discuss these regimes separately below, but first describe the highly constrained form of response functions that we obtain throughout the full range of (small) T and T * under the assumption of quantum critical scaling. Let χ(Ω) be a response function that diverges with characteristic exponent y at the QCP (if χ is the order parameter susceptibility, this exponent is γ/νz, where γ is the susceptibility critical exponent), and write χ = χ 0 + χ s , where χ 0 is the analytic (smooth) part of the response and χ s is the singular part. If the quantum critical point obeys scaling, then χ s has the form where we have suppressed the x dependence of T * for compactness. In this expression, F is a scaling function, which is identical for transitions within a given universality class. Except for the characteristic divergence as Ω -y , the variable Ω and the parameters T and T * appear only as the dimensionless, scaled combinations shown in Eq. S4. We could write a variety of equivalent expressions involving different scaled variables (for instance, T /T * instead of Ω/T * ). An example would be , with G a different universal scaling function. We have chosen the form above for convenience. The limits of F when its arguments go to zero and infinity correspond to the various asymptotic regimes of the phase diagram and of the dynamical response. We can approach the QCP from the side, with T = 0 and T * > 0, or from the side, with T > 0 and T * = 0. The former case corresponds to the so-called renormalized classical regime, and the latter to the quantum critical regime. In the renormalized classical regime, the first argument of F is infinite, and the response obeys Ω/T * scaling: Where the subscript "h" is for "horizontal." More precisely: So, for a given value of T * , the spectra at T T * depend only on Ω. In the quantum critical regime, the second argument of F is infinite, so the response obeys Ω/T scaling: , where (S8) and the subscript "v" is for "vertical." More precisely: So, for a given value of T * , spectra for T T * depend only on the scale-invariant combination Ω/T . The expressions above suggest a method to estimate the scaling exponent y as well as the crossover temperature T * . By Eq. S10 above, χ s • |Ω| y is a function only of Ω/T for the high temperature data. Therefore, to the extent that the total response χ = χ 0 + χ s is dominated by the singular part χ s , the spectra for T T * and T T * can be distinguished as follows. First, plot χ • Ω y versus Ω/T for several values of y, and choose the value of y that yields the best collapse of the high temperature spectra. Specializing to this optimal value of y, the spectrum measured at the crossover temperature T * will form a separatrix between the collapsing and non-collapsing spectra. This procedure is shown in Fig. Unfortunately, choosing the best value of y and identifying this separatrix for experimental data must involve some arbitrarily chosen qualitative and/or quantitative criteria, which makes the data collapse procedure somewhat ad hoc. This is in addition to the challenges posed by the regular part χ 0 . We illustrate the data collapse method using experimental data in Fig. Here we prove two claims mentioned in the text: The first is that β Λ(β/2) has the same singular temperature dependence as the static susceptibility upon on cooling towards a quantum critical point exhibiting Ω/T scaling. To first look at the singularity of χ as T → 0 with T * = 0, write its singular part as in Eq. S9: At nonzero temperature, the static susceptibility must be finite, so the divergence of the factor |Ω| -y at low frequencies must be compensated by the asymptotic behavior of f v . In particular, cancelling the divergence requires f v (u) ∼ u y as u → 0, so that the static susceptibility diverges with temperature as Now let us substitute Eq. S9 into the expression for β Λ(β/2): where Λs is the singular part of Λ. Now we rewrite the integral in terms of the scaled variable x = Ω/T , so that Ω = xT : The integral is now independent of T and is some order 1 number dependent on the scaling function f v . Therefore, as promised, χ (Ω = 0) and β Λ(β/2) have the same T -y divergence upon cooling towards the QCP. The second statement in the text is that β Λ(β/2) generically vanishes as T → 0. By generically we mean that the response function is analytic in frequency, i.e. non-critical. In this case, we can expand χ as a convergent Taylor series in Ω: where a n are real coefficients, and only odd powers of Ω are included because χ is odd in frequency. Substitute this into the expression for β Λ(β/2): x 2n+1 And each of the α n are convergent because of the exponential cutoff. Accordingly, β Λ(β/2) can be written as a series in odd powers of T , and therefore vanishes as T → 0. The only way this can fail to occur is if the response diverges sufficiently rapidly at low frequencies. The samples were cleaved ex-situ prior to mounting the sample holder into the cryostat. Characterization with a superconducting quantum interference device (SQUID) was performed after completion of the Raman measurements. The results are presented in Fig. Supplementary table 