Relativistic gravitational anomalies lead to anomalous transport coefficients that can be activated at finite temperature in hydrodynamic and condensed matter systems with gapless, linearly dispersing fermions. One is the chiral vortical effect (CVE), an anomalous chiral current along the system's rotation axis, expressed in terms of a gravimagnetic field in a rotating frame and a mixed gravitational anomaly. Another one arises in the presence of hydrodynamically independent frame fields (and spin-connection) and leads to the thermal chiral torsional effect (CTE). We discuss the relation of CVE, CTE and gravitational anomalies for relativistic fermions from the perspective of non-zero torsion and the Nieh-Yan anomaly. The DC transport coefficient induced by the two gravitational anomalies are found to be closely related and equal. At level of linear response, their difference is demarcated whether or not torsion is non-zero and the existence of non-metric degrees of freedom in the hydrodynamic constitutive relations (with sources). In particular, the relativistic anomaly from torsion is well defined, since instead of a removable ultraviolet (UV) divergent term, the (usually IR) chemical potential or temperature scales enter. This is closely related to the CVE from the 4th order R 2 -gravitational anomaly and its appearance already in linear response. At the same time, the torsional anomaly is 2nd order in gradients and directly contributes in linear response for CTE, implying also the same for CVE. We clarify this and the hydrodynamic relations leading to the torsional contribution when the currents depend on the frame fields and connection instead of the metric. As an example where the two anomalies are sourced independently, we consider chiral p + ip Weyl superfluids and superconductors at finite temperature. At low-energies in the linear approximation, the system is effectively relativistic along a special anisotropy axis. The hydrodynamics is governed by two velocities, normal velocity vn and superfluid velocity vs. The existence of the two thermal anomalies in the condensate follows from the normal component rotation and the dependence of the momentum density on the superfluid velocity (order parameter). In the CVE the chiral current is produced by the solid body rotation of the normal component with (angular) velocity vn = Ω × r. In the CTE, a chiral current is produced by the vorticity of the superfluid velocity ∇ × vs, which in the low-energy quasirelativistic effective theory plays the role of gravitational torsion from the order parameter. In thermal equilibrium, ∇ × vs = 2Ω on average and the two gravitational anomaly currents cancel each other. This is an example of the Bloch theorem for axial currents, prohibiting finite current in equilibrium, now satisfied as the cancellation of two gravitational anomalies with independent sources: gravimagnetic rotation field and effective condensate torsion from vs. Although the latter represents physically the superfluid vorticity, similar to the CVE, in the low-energy quasirelativistic theory it arises from effective torsion for the normal component chiral fermions. Consequences and implications of field theoretic quantum anomalies The quantum field theoretic anomalies are in four dimensions defined by triangle diagrams with gauge and gravitational vertices and in the low-energy hydrodynamic regime lead to the chiral magnetic (CME) and chiral vortical effects (CVE) at non-zero chemical potential and temperature A physically transparent way to find such transport coefficients is the requirement of positive entropy current in the presence of anomalous sources, in accordance with the second law of thermodynamics In a more recent development, there has been renewed interest in the field theoretic and hydrodynamic anomalies with non-zero torsion (and relatedly, so-called pseudo gauge fields) in systems with independent frame fields and connection, in contrast to the metric. Several authors have considered non-zero torsional transport coefficients, given some assumptions beyond standard relativistic field theory and/or finite chemical potential and temperature Notwithstanding, both the relativistic and nonrelativistic torsional anomalies can appear with the (usually) infrared (IR) temperature scale or chemical potentials, similarly to the gravitational contribution to the CVE and we focus here on these terms. Moreover, such a finite temperature (chemical potential) term can be "universal" as it rest on the anomaly related quantum statistical properties, with the same caveats as the hydrodynamic CVE (CME). In this paper we discuss the chiral torsional effect (CTE) from the perspective of the analogy and similarity with CVE in relativistic systems with chiral fermions. We find that the coefficient is nonzero and directly related to that of the CVE (at the level of linear response), and, in accordance with the previous results found with e.g. the simple Landau level approach to chiral torsional anomalies. In particular, recent papers Although a relativistic system (or gravity The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II we review the CVE and chiral anomaly. In Sec. III we discuss the gravitational anomaly perspective of CVE and CTE. Sec. IV presents the Kubo formula argument for CTE and its relation to CVE. Sec. V discusses the cancellation of CVE and CTE in rotating chiral p + ip Weyl condensates. Conclusions and Outlook end the paper with an Appendix containing geometric formulas. To set the notation and introduce the anomalous currents, we consider the low-energy, effective hydrodynamic theory relativistic Dirac fermions in a chemical potential of a low-energy hydrodynamic fluid, Here u μ is a local velocity field for a fluid element in its rest frame, u μ u μ = 1, a generalized chemical potential in the low-energy effective hydrodynamical theory. As is obvious, u μ enters similarly as a U(1) gauge field, Relativistically, the u μ couples to μJ μ with units of (energy-)momentum. The fermions are massless and cannot equilibrate with the low-energy fluid velocity u μ : The presence of the low-energy background fluid u μ singles out a preferred frame. Similarly, one can introduce an axial chemical potential μ 5 γ 5 velocity field μ 5 u 5μ γ 5 . For now, we set μ = μ 5 = μ χ /2 and focus on single right-handed fermion χ = +1 with a global (and local) U (1). Calculating the anomalous current of (1), loosely via the implied substitution qA μ → qA μ + μu μ , we arrive to The gauge-invariant cross terms give the CME, e.g. in the simplest case when u μ = (1, 0, 0, 0). Setting A μ = 0, we obtain the chiral vortical effect (at T = 0 and to lowest order in μ) where c χ = +1 is the coefficient of the chiral U(1) anomaly for right-handed fermions. On the other hand, we can consider gravitational action of Dirac fermions, understood as an effective action in the hydrodynamic regime around a near-equilibrium background with sources, where g μν = e a μ e b ν η ab in terms of the tetrad, e μ a the inverse and ω μab γ ab , γ ab = i 4 [γ a , γ b ], is the spin-connection in the spin 1/2 ⊕ 1/2 Weyl-representation. We consider two cases here: when S eff = S grav [g μν ] depends only on the metric g μν and when S eff = S grav [e a , ωμ ] depends on e a μ and ωμ independently. To compare with S grav with S hydro , we set g μν = η μν + h μν , where h μν is small perturbation, and -u i = h ti is a small velocity. In terms of tetrads/vierbein g μν = η ab e a μ e b ν , The torsion free spin-connection corresponding to this variation is collected in the Appendix. With nonzero torsion, the connection is different. In terms of variations 99 where are the tetrad energy-momentum and (intrinsic) spin currents. The K a μb = (ω -ω) a μb is the contorsion tensor, ωμ the Christoffel connection fully determined by e a μ and S μν a = where T μν = 1 2 (e μ a T aν + e ν a T aμ ) is the symmetric energymomentum tensor and δg μν = e aμ δe ν a + e aν δe μ a the symmetric variation. We have assumed that the Lorentzanomaly vanishes and T a μ can be made symmetric, see Sec. VI for discussions. The hydrodynamic effective action S grav contains only gravitational (geometric) fields. Now, to the lowest order in the absence of torsion, the mixed chiral-gravitational anomaly is given as For single right-handed chiral fermion with global U(1), d χ = 1. This leads to the chiral vortical effect: The chiral vortical effect and mixed gravitational anomaly have the same coefficient, which follows from free theory and holographic examples, see e.g. Ref. There is also the chiral torsional effect (CTE) Here t χ = d χ = 1 for a right-handed fermion, as is discussed below. In linear response, 48 ǫ kij T 0 ij . The connection to CVE follows in the simplest terms via the identification u μ = u a e a μ = e 0 μ , where u a = (1, 0, 0, 0). Whence the CVE becomes Relativistically u μ u μ = u a u a = 1 and in the fluid rest frame u a = (1, 0, 0, 0). We note that non-relativistically, one usually fixes the time-like one form u a = (1, 0, 0, 0) as the Newtonian clock form, whereas the velocity u a = (1, u) is independent with spatial vorticity ∇ × u. Building on the earlier and recent work, let us present the Kubo formula for the CVE and derive from thereon its version with non-zero torsion. The CVE current is where σ V χ is the chiral vortical conductivity. For applications, we are interested in the axial current J 5 = χ χJ χ = J + -J -. Since u λ = h tλ = (1, u i ), its Kubo formula reads (no sum over m) where δS = d 4 x √ -gT tλ h tλ . This is evaluated as This correllator was computed in , where we defined the torsional conductivity σ T (aμ) = lim k→0 iǫ ijm (k m ) -1 [J i χ , T aμ ] ω=0 . This follows directly from We make no distinction between the indices, as in linear response e μ a = δ μ a , g μν = η μν , and When torsion vanishes, we should use T 0j corresponding to the metric variation δg μν = h μν , while for non-zero torsion we should use T μ a and δe a μ . We now focus explicitly on the latter case with torsion. The vacuum subtracted, finite result for of both static correlators involving T 0j and T jt turns out to be identical From the definitions of T a μ and T ν b , evaluated on the background (6) with non-trivial e 0 μ , this translates to where 24 . We note that precisely the same distribution integral for σ T (aμ) as in (19) was found utilizing the Landau level approach is the gravitational anomaly coefficient for N f fermions with T A the generators of a global symmetry G. For a pair of U(1) χ Weyl fermions with opposite chirality χ = ±1, we recover the axial In linear response around flat spacetime, the chiral vortical and torsional responses are simply related with distinction only in the chosen hydrodynamic degrees of freedom (metric vs. tetrad and connection). Nevertheless, the non-zero quantities σ T (aμ) in the correlation function of the Kubo formula show explicitly that on torsional backgrounds, the NY form contributes to the current with the same DC coefficient. If torsion vanishes and T a μ is symmetric, the CVE formula is recovered. This is equivalent to that only T μν and the metric g μν enter the response or more generally the hydrodynamic constitutive relations with sources. In contrast, on torsional backgrounds, T μ a and e a μ are the appropriate (hydrodynamic) variables and sources. This completes our review of the Kubo formula with (and without) torsion. Next we discuss the connection of these results to the arguments of The above Kubo formula can be used to compute the response to torsion. Following 76 , let us do non-zero variations of torsion in two independent ways: i) First varying the connection, holding the spin-connection fixed and then ii) keeping the spin-connection fixed, varying only the tetrad. This variations correspond to the independent variables corresponding to the first two torsionful variations in (7). Throughout, we will keep all other sources absent, so that the current is zero only if torsion does not contribute. i) In this case δω is the only non-zero variation. Since the tetrad is fixed, the spin-connection is then exclusively (con)torsional and contributes only through an axial term from totatally antisymmetric torsion. In more detail, the NY form is given as δ(e a ∧ T a ) = e a ∧ δT a = e a ∧ ω a b ∧ e b , with δω contributing as effective δA 5 , see e.g. In particular, for space like antisymmetric torsion, from terms with δA T 5t , where the superscript reminds that this axial field originates from variation of (con)torsion not a gauge field or chemical potential. The result is that torsion contributes to the current ⋆J 5 = σ T e a ∧ T a with the coefficient: where the last line defines the one form dual of the three form e a ∧ T a , equal to e m ∧ T m in linear response. The current is exclusively from the torsional NY term. It vanishes if torsion is zero. With the relations ( equal to (19), now with space-like torsion. In contradistinction with Eqs. ( was not included in coefficients c T ⊥ in Eq. 21 of arises solely from torsion in the absence of other sources. See also Of course, the fact that variation of δμ 5 ∼ δA t 5 is related to torsion follows from (22) and this is the reason that the transport coefficient σ 5 with chiral anomaly U(1) contribution arises. This was merely due to a convenient way to compute the response: The background variation of J t 5 for δA t 5 ∼ μ 5 with gauge fields is physically distinct from the (con)torsionful variation δω a b ∼ δT a . In the former, the background has no torsion, just a source of A 5 , and, in the latter non-zero torsion is the only non-vanishing source. In particular, there is no vorticity du = 0, since δu a = δe a = 0. From the computation of CVE, the relation of the two responses is correct at the level of the linear response. The gravitational anomaly term ∝ T 2 is "explained" by the contorsionful spin-connection δ ω. When both μ, μ 5 is non-zero, the hydrodynamics for a consistent (gauge invariant) theory need to be solved in addition, but the problematic vectorlike terms are distinct from those above. ii) Now the second independent linear response variation with torsion. Here we take the one-form e 0 = e 0 μ dx μ . In general, e a (or e a ) are varied with everything else fixed ; in particular ωμ = 0 and constant u a = (1, 0, 0, 0). These conditions set δT 0 = de 0 = 0. Now u = u a e a = u 0 e 0 . Then, following Again, one should assign this term exclusively to the background vierbein; it is linear in torsion and variation δu changes as function of δe 0 i only. This is the result originally by Khaidukov and Zubkov The above variation ii) is essentially the same argument about the connection of CVE to torsional current as the direct evaluation of the Kubo formula in (19) with non-trivial e 0 . Combining the results i) and ii), we obtain the Kubo formula result (19). On the other hand, if the take the variation of the metric in terms of u μ = h tμ to linear order, it is impossible to maintain independently at the same time δ ωμ = 0 and δe a μ = 0 (δu a = 0) or vice versa, although the variations are related in linear response. Note that it is possible to consider the transformation to the rotating frame via the non-homogenous coordinate shift δΓ λ μρ Let us now discuss CVE and CTE in terms of a system where we believe both anomalies can be sourced independently: non-relativistic, chiral p + ip paired condensate with Weyl quasiparticles at gap nodes. We note that while superficially both originate anomaly terms from either normal component or condensate vorticity, the arguments we presented above are of course independent of this property. For more discussion, see Sec. VI. We derive the low-energy theory for the normal component Bogoliubov fermions and the superfluid in a rotating vessel Galilean transformations are x → x + vt. The superfluid free energy transforms as under small transformations v. Here for the chiral pwave ∆ = ∆ 0 ( m + i n) and l = m × n. The total mass current g = g s + g n transforms as g → g + ρv, leading to ρ n = ρ1ρ s . The quasiparticles are governed by [i∂ t -H BdG (k)]ψ with the Bogoliubov-de Gennes Hamiltonian where ǫ(k) is the normal state dispersion counted from the Fermi k F and the brackets {a, b} = ab + ba preserve hermiticity with (weakly) coordinate dependent parameters. We assume equal spin-pairing and suppress spin indices. At the nodes E ±kF l = 0 are two Majorana-Weyl nodes (with spin degeneracy). The quasiparticles are momentum eigenstates transforming under Galilean boost as, More generally, the normal state fermions transforms Ψ(x, t) → e imv•x Ψ(x + vt, t), to lowest order in v, so the Bogoliubov fermions transform as ψ(x, t) → e im(v•x-μt)τ 0 ψ(xvt, t). We generalize this to slowlyvarying ∆(x, t) and local transformations μ, v in the gradient expansion, leading to the linearized i∂ t -H BdG close to k F l as where we redefined ψ → e -1/2 ψ and ωμ . The (torsionful) BdG spinconnection is a Galilean boost connection with respect to the Newtonian time, which for the BdG quasiparticles acquires the form of a relativistic spin-1/2 connection in the 12-plane. This spin-connection coincides with the combined p + ip gauge symmetry U(1) L3-N/2 In summary, the (inverse) tetrads from ( where c ⊥ = ∆ 0 /k F and c = v F . Inverting this, we obtain There is the preferred (superfluid)frame where the normal component quasiparticles are at rest v n = 0, i.e. v = -v s . The metric is secondary, and determines the shape of the linear Weyl dispersion (30). In rotating chiral Wey superfluid/superconductor (e.g. This produces the normal component CVE current J 5 ∝ Ω from the CVE 102 , via the Greens function identity where k 0 is the frequency, Σ 3 the spin-1/2 rotation matrix along l and we have specialized to Ω = Ω 3 l, so that the system is effectively relativistic to linear order in k. On the other hand, from the BdG Hamiltonian to the linear order in v s , following where the terms l • v s = 0 for the assumed vortex lattice configuration, see the discussion below in Sec. VI. Note that this term is subleading in gradients compared to The combination of two gravitational anomalies gives CTE + CVE: In the equilibrium state in the rotating cryostat, the vortex lattice has spatially averaged vorticity ∇ × v s = 2Ω, which corresponds to v s = v n = Ω × r in equilibrium. That is why in the thermodynamic equilibrium the two anomalies cancel each other, J 5 = 0. The local currents exist in the vortex lattice, ∇ × v s -∇ × v s = 0. But the total current along the rotation axis is zero. This demonstrates that a thermal version of the Bloch theorem 103 , i.e. the absence of particle current in equilibrium, is applicable to the chiral vortical current (see e.g. Ref. By extending the hydrodynamic chiral gravitational responses to non-zero torsion we computed the linear response Kubo formula with torsion and clarified the torsionful hydrodynamic variations, u μ , g μν vs. e a μ , ω a μb . We identify a simple reason why the CVE contributes at linear order with the gravitational T 2 term: it is directly related to the mixed torsional graviational anomaly with coefficient t χ = d χ . This complements the earlier arguments with thermodynamic variations and background sources formulated in terms of T, μ, u i , g μν utilizing the mixed gravitational R 2 anomaly but without torsion. In particular, recent work on anomalous (non-)relativistic transport with vierbeins The relation of the CTE and CVE is reminiscent of the gravitional anomalies in general: for example, it is known that the non-conservation of the energy-momentum tensor is not independent of the Lorentz anomaly (i.e. antisymmetric T ab ) and that the anomaly can be shuffled from one to the other, as well as written in several equivalent forms We discussed the two anomalies in the example of non-relativistic chiral Weyl superfluids and superconductors, which in the low-energy approximation have chiral (Majorana-)Weyl fermions on anisotropic are Newton-Cartan geometries. Along the anisotropy direction and linear approximation, the geometry is effectively relativistic and the relativistic CVE and CTE results can be applied. The CVE is induced by the rotating normal component, whereas the torsionful tetrad arises from the superfluid component with v s . While CTE here superficially originates from condensate vorticity, we note that, by Mermin-Ho relations, v s is related in hydrodynamics to the order parameter frame fields e a i = { m, n, l}, of which only the l is a well-posed hydrodynamic variable in addition to, μ, T, ρ s , ρ n , v s , v n (spin is neglected). The perpendicular m, n-components contribute to v s and represent gauge degrees of freedom in terms of the combined orbital-phase symmetry of the superfluid (superconductor) In real rotating chiral superfluid 3 He-A, the vortex lattice is created by quenching the critical rotation velocity whereby many different vortex lattices form quasiequilibrium thermal states, with barriers exceeding 5 order of magnitudes compared to T . It is therefore expected that the anomaly can be "transferred" between the l-vector, v s and v n components of the superfluid and this choice is not gauge independent. It would be interesting to study this non-relativistic problem from the geometrical perspective. There is no particular hydrodynamical reason to restrict to low angular velocities, temperatures (compared to T c ), chemical potentials, where relativistically, to higher orders 41,56 with R the scalar curvature in the plane perpendicular to Ω. Even better, the higher-order terms should be worked out in detail in terms of the full non-relativistic geometry and compared to the low-energy (relativistic) results and the regime of validity of the chiral transport with Weyl fermions, including torsion In addition to twisting, the corresponding bias for dislocations could be the real geometry/gravitational field, in the absence of rotation 106 . Nevertheless, see 