We consider a Josephson junction with F 1 F 2 F 3 ferromagnetic trilayers in the ballistic regime, where the magnetization in each ferromagnet F i (i = 1, 2, 3), can have arbitrary orientations and magnetization strengths. The trilayers are sandwiched between two s-wave superconductors with a macroscopic phase difference ∆φ. With our generalised theoretical and numerical techniques, we are able to study the planar spatial profiles and ∆φdependencies of the charge supercurrents, spin supercurrents, spin torques, and density of states for complex systems that are finite in two dimensions. A broad range of magnetization strengths of the central F 2 layer are considered, from an unpolarized normal metal (N) to a half-metallic phase, supporting only one spin species. Our results reveal that when the magnetization configuration in F 1 F 2 F 3 has three orthogonal components, a supercurrent can flow at ∆φ = 0, and a strong second harmonic in the current-phase relation appears. Remarkably, upon increasing the magnetization strength in the central ferromagnet layer up to the half-metallic limit, the self-biased current and second harmonic component become dramatically enhanced, and the critical supercurrent reaches its maximum value. The higher harmonics in the current-phase relations can be controlled by the relative magnetization orientations, with negligible current damping compared to the corresponding F 1 N F 3 counterparts. Additionally, for a broad range of exchange field strengths in the central ferromagnet F 2 , the ground state of the system can be tuned to an arbitrary phase difference φ 0 , e.g., by rotating the magnetization in the outer ferromagnet F 3 . For intermediate exchange field strengths in F 2 , a φ 0 state can arise that creates a superconducting diode effect, whereby ∆φ can be tuned to create a one-way dissipationless current flow. The spatial maps of the spin currents and effective magnetic moments reveal a long-ranged spin torque in the halfmetallic phase. Moreover, the density of states studies demonstrate the emergence of zero energy peaks for the mutually orthogonal magnetization configurations, which is strongest in the half-metallic phase. Our results suggest that this simple trilayer Josephson junction can be an excellent candidate for producing experimentally accessible signatures for long-ranged self-biased supercurrents, and supercurrent diode-effects. The competition of ferromagnetic and superconducting orders in hybrid junction systems has been the focus of extensive research over the past decades. When constructing devices that consist of superconductor (S) and ferromagnet (F) elements, the F 1 SF 2 and SF 1 F 2 spin valves are some of the simplest configurations with externally controlled system properties. Such platforms have been extensively studied experimentally and theoretically The presence of magnetization inhomogeneity and spinorbit coupling can result in long-ranged spin-triplet superconducting correlations The Josephson effect is traditionally understood to be the supercurrent that is generated when there is a difference between the macroscopic phases of two S banks that are separated by an intrinsically non-superconducting region. Once a supercurrent is established, its flow depends on the geometrical parameters, phase differences, and material properties of the system. In a conventional ferromagnetic Josephson junction, the ground state energy can switch between specific superconducting phase differences, typically ∆φ = 0 and π, due to the dominant first harmonic in the current-phase relation: sin ∆φ The supercurrent J(∆φ) in spin-polarized Josephson junctions can be controlled by a variety of mechanisms, including through magnetization rotations, and incorporating different types of magnets with mismatched exchange-field strengths. For trilayer ferromagnetic Josephson junctions, including those that contain half-metallic layers, and where only two of the exchange field vectors are orthogonal, the supercurrent direction can be altered by changing the relative magnetization orientation The main aim of this paper is therefore to present an extensive investigation of the influence of the many relevant physical parameters on the spin and charge transport in SF 1 F 2 F 3 S ferromagnetic Josephson configurations. We will use for these purposes a tailor made numerical method that allows for the exact solutions of the relevant microscopic equations for Josephson strictures that are finite in two-dimensions. To systematically explore a broad range of systems and determine experimentally relevant parameter sets resulting in a tunable φ 0 state and supercurrent flow, the magnetization in one of the ferromagnet layers will have its magnitude continuously increased up to the half-metallic phase, and several key orientations will be investigated. To further understand the quantum size-effects inherent to structures constrained in two-dimensions, a variety of structure lengths and widths will be studied (see Fig. We shall explore the whole of the parameter range that accounts for the effects that finite sample size, relative magnetizations (magnitude and orientation), and macroscopic phase differences have on the singlet and triplet pair amplitudes, magnetic moments, and local density of states (DOS). We will identify the ground state with phase difference φ 0 that is tunable by changes to the magnetization orientation of the outer ferromagnet. For intermediate exchange field strengths in the central F layer, we find the emergence of a φ 0 state with a one-way supercurrent flow, i.e., a superconducting diode effect. Further increases of the magnetization strength in the F 2 layer enhances the supercurrent so that the critical supercurrent reaches a maximum at the half-metallic phase. This magnetization increase induces 0-π transitions and controls the induction of higher harmonics in the current-phase-relation. When the magnetization in the F layers has mutually orthogonal components, a spontaneous supercurrent flows through the system, which is strongest when the F 2 layer hosts a halfmetal. The spatial maps of the spin currents and magnetic moments reveals a long-ranged magnetic moment and equalspin triplet correlations, propagating from the F 1 layer into the right superconducting region. The spatial profiles of the DOS reveals that when the trilayer junction region has mutually orthogonal magnetizations, robust zero energy peaks appear in the middle of the outer ferromagnets in the trilayers, with the largest peaks appearing at the interfaces between the central and outer ferromagnets. Similar to the critical supercurrent, the zero energy peaks are largest when the F 2 layer is a halfmetal. The paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II, we summarize the generalized BdG approach and present expressions for the charge current, spin current, superconducting correlations, and magnetic moment. In Sec. III, the numerical results and findings shall be presented. Finally, in Sec. IV we provide a brief summary of the main results. We first present the Hamiltonian, BdG formalism, the associated field operators, and Fourier expansion method in Sec. II A. In Sec. II B, the spin-singlet and spin-triplet correlations are given in terms of BdG transformations. The definitions and derivations of magnetic moment, DOS, charge current, and spin current and spin torque are presented in Secs. II C, II D, II E, and II F, respectively. We now briefly summarize the BdG approach used to describe our spatially inhomogeneous nanostructure. We consider a Josephson configuration that is finite in the y-z plane, and infinite in the x direction [see Fig. where s and s are spin indices, and ∆(r) is the pair potential, given by, Here we have assumed an s-wave on-site potential with attractive interaction: V(r-r ) = V s (r)δ(r-r ), with V s (r) the interaction strength, which is nonzero only for energies less than a characteristic "Debye" energy, ω D , and nonzero only within the superconductor regions. The single-particle Hamiltonian H 0 for our finite-sized system in the two directions y and z [see Fig. in which μ is the Fermi energy, and U(y, z) is the spinindependent scattering potential. The exchange field h ≡ (h x , h y , h z ) describes the magnetic exchange interaction, and σ ≡ (σ x , σ y , σ z ) are Pauli matrices. To diagonalize H eff , the field operators ψ s and ψ † s are expanded by means of the Bogoliubov transformation: where u ns , v ns represent the quasiparticle amplitudes, and γ n , γ † n are the Bogoliubov creation and annihilation operators, respectively. The transformations in Eq. ( which leads to the spin-dependent Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) equations as, The pair potential ∆(y, z) in Eq. ( where i = 1, 2, 3 denotes the ferromagnetic region shown in Fig. where σ =↑, ↓. Further details on this method can be found in Appendix A As discussed in Introduction, when strong ferromagnetic layers, such as half-metals, are part of a Josephson junction, the spin-triplet Cooper pairs can play an important role in both the thermodynamic and transport properties of the system where the subscript 0 corresponds to m s = 0, and the subscripts 1 and 2 refer to the m s = ±1 projections on the spin quantization axis As mentioned earlier, the pair potential gives valuable information regarding the superconducting correlations within the superconductors only, as it vanishes outside of those regions where V s (r) = 0. To reveal the fullest details of the spin singlet correlations throughout the entire system, which includes proximity effects between layers, we evaluate the pair amplitude from Eq. ( where the sum is cut off for states with energies that exceed ω D . Here the identity 1 -2 f (ε) = tanh(ε/2T ) has been used ( f is the Fermi function), along with the expectation values: , and γ n γ m = 0. To express the spin triplet correlations [Eqs. Using the conditions in Eq. ( where the sums are over all energy values, and ζ n (t) ≡ cos( n t)i sin( n t) tanh( n /2T ). It can be more insightful to find the triplet correlations projected along the local spin axis Thus, e.g., considering the principle axes, we have for along and finally, along the quantization z axis (θ = 90 • , φ = 0 • ), all spin triplet components are unchanged: The spin singlet pair amplitude f 3 is always invariant under spin rotations. In our structures spin transport is influenced by the leakage of magnetic moment out of the F layers and into the superconductors. This can be characterized by the local magnetic moment m(r), where η(r) is the spin density operator, and μ B the Bohr magneton. Again, by using the generalized Bogoliubov transformation, each component of m can be written in terms of the quasiparticle and quasihole wavefunctions: The proximity-induced electronic density of states (DOS) can reveal signatures of the energy gap and localized Andreev bound states. One important experimental quantity involves tunneling spectroscopy experiments which can probe the local single particle spectra encompassing the proximityinduced DOS. The total DOS, N(y, z, ε) is the sum N ↑ (y, z, ε)+ N ↓ (y, z, ε), involving the spin-resolved local DOS N σ (y, z, ε): where The sum above is over the quasiparticle amplitudes and eigenenergies n . Thus, the DOS calculated in Eq. ( For the system shown in Fig. The continuity equation for the charge supercurrent density J in the ferromagnetic junction region is written where each component J i (i = y, z) is given by, For the trilayer in the steady state, i.e., ∂ t ρ(r) = 0, we have numerically verified ∇• J = 0 when calculating current-phase-relations. We now extend the above considerations to spin transport. As in the case of the charge density, the Heisenberg picture is utilized to determine the time evolution of the spin density, η(r, t), , where η is given in Eq. ( where S is the spin current tensor. This fundamental conservation law balances the spin current gradients and the spin torque τ. The expression for the spin-current, S, is found from taking the commutator above Eq. ( where the tensor components S αβ represents spin current with spin β flowing along the α direction in real-space. We can now expand each spin component of the spin current in terms of the quasiparticle amplitudes to obtain: The introduction of spatial inhomogeneity in magnetization texture or inversion-breaking spin-orbit coupling result in a net spin current imbalance that is finite even in the absence of a Josephson current. When the junctions are in static equilibrium and there is no charge current, the spin-current does not necessarily vanish because any inhomogeneous magnetization leads to a nonzero spin torque that generates a net spin current. The results of our systematic investigations are presented below in terms of convenient dimensionless quantities. Our choices are as follows: all length scales, including the spatial coordinates Y = k F y, Z = k F z, and widths D Fi ≡ k F d Fi (i = 1, 2, 3) are normalized by the Fermi wave-vector, k F . For the superconducting correlation length ξ we choose the value k F ξ 0 = 50, and the computational region occupied by the S electrodes corresponds to a width of k F d S = 150 (see Appendices A, B, and C for numerical details). The outer ferromagnet layers must be thin to effectively generate the spin-triplet correlations In describing inhomogeneous superconductivity in multilayer SF 1 F 2 F 3 S Josephson structures, it is insightful to examine the spatial properties of the singlet correlations. Thus we present in Fig. Having established the existence of strong zero energy peaks for the half-metallic junction with each of the exchange fields of the three magnets orthogonal to one another, we now examine the local DOS at zero energy for other orientation angles and magnitudes of the exchange field. In the top row of Fig. Turning now to the electronic spectra, we present in Fig. Based on the findings of the DOS and energy spectra, it is clear that the exchange field in the central ferromagnet plays a crucial role in the formation of zero-energy modes and the existence of a spontaneous supercurrent. From the quasiparticle energy diagrams discussed above [Fig. When analyzing the CPR of finite-sized Josephson junctions, and determining the ground state of the system, it is useful to study the free energy, F , which is comprised of two terms: F ≡ F J + F ∆ . Here we define F ∆ = dydz|∆(y, z)| 2 /g, For the cases considered in this paper, where ∂F ∆ /∂∆φ is small, we found that the contribution from F J is sufficient to determine the ground state of the system. In Fig. Next, the effects of rotating the magnetization on the supercurrent are investigated, and we address the effectiveness of exchange-field rotations in controlling charge flow, including on/off switching of the supercurrent. Controlling the magne- tization rotation can be achieved experimentally via, e.g., the application of external magnetic fields Next, we investigate how other orientations of the exchange field vectors affect the zero-phase supercurrent response. In Fig. The CPR and free energy diagrams are illustrated in Fig. We now explore the spin currents that arise when there is a zero phase difference between the superconducting electrodes and a finite supercurrent. The anomalous supercurrent that is generated can become spin-polarized when passing through the ferromagnetic trilayer. In Figs. In discussing spin transport quantities, we expect that the presence of an anomalous supercurrent and proximity effects due to the exchange interactions, will lead to a spin torque transfer and a corresponding leakage of magnetism. The interaction of the spin current with the magnetization is also relevant for memory technologies, where the storage of information depends on the relative orientation of the magnetizations. In Fig. The spatial behavior of the spin currents discussed in relation to Fig. In Figs. 12(a) and 12(b), the outer free magnetization angle is set to φ 3 = 0 • (the xyz configuration) so that an anomalous supercurrent is generated. In Fig. It is observed that the STT is most pronounced near these boundaries, peaking antisymmetrically on each side. This behavior is consistent with the spin currents shown in Fig. Motivated by recent advances and interest in making use of half-metallic materials (supporting one spin species) in superconducting hybrid structures, we have studied the spatial mappings and superconducting phase dependency of the charge supercurrents, spin supercurrents, spin torques, and density of states in ballistic SF 1 F 2 F 3 S Josephson configurations where the magnetizations in the F layers can have arbitrary directions and strengths. To this end, we have generalized a wavefunction approach, incorporating efficient computational techniques for optimizing the diagonalization of large-size matrices in a parallel computing environment. This allows our method to properly account for realistic three-dimensional systems, including planar SF 1 F 2 F 3 S hybrids where the system is confined in two dimensions, and the third dimension is considered to be infinite. Interestingly, the charge supercurrent as a function of magnetization strength in the F 2 layer shows that the critical supercurrent reaches its maximum value at high values close to the half-metallic phase so that it becomes only slightly different from its F 1 N F 3 counterparts. In a situation where the magnetization in the three F layers are mutually orthogonal (the "xyz" configuration), we find that a self-biased spontaneous supercurrent exists, which is largest when the F 2 layer is a half-metal. We study the behavior of the spontaneous supercurrent for various magnetization orientations in the F layers and determine the most favorable configurations. We find that for intermediate exchange field strengths of the central ferromagnet layer, a superconducting diode effect emerges, whereby a unidrectional dissipationless current can flow by appropriately tuning the phase gradient between the outer superconductor electrodes. The DOS studies illustrate robust zero energy peaks in the xyz configuration that disappears when there is no three orthogonal magnetization components in the system. The zero energy peaks are spatially located in the F 1 and F 3 layers and become largest when F 3 is a half-metal. Further studies on the spatial distributions of other important physical quantities demonstrate an extremely longranged magnetic moment and spin currents extending from one superconductor in the SF 1 F 2 F 3 S system to the other. This long-ranged behavior and anomalous supercurrent flow generated spin torques controllable by rotations of the magnetization in the outer ferromagnet. Apart from the results obtained for the specific SF 1 F 2 F 3 S system in the half-metallic regime, this generalized approach can be further expanded to systems with spin-orbit coupling, various types of impurities, and an external magnetic field. Unlike the limitations that the quasiclassical method demands, our approach can cover systems far beyond the quasiclassical approximations and properly account for band curvatures and arbitrary ratios among the energy scales, such as the exchange field and chemical potential, found in many types of systems. where the matrix A is given by, The energy ε ⊥ corresponds to the kinetic energy of the quasiparticles that are moving transverse to the longitudinal x direction. This parameter is effectively a good quantum number and when performing the sum over states for a given physical quantity, a fixed number n ε ⊥ of these transverse states must be included. During each step of the solution process, and for the final calculations, the eigenvectors and eigenenergies for n ε ⊥ matrices need to be calculated. Each of these n ε ⊥ matrices are distributed in a block cyclic manner onto a subset of the available MPI ranks called a processor grid (PG). Due to the construction of the problem, the matrix A can be split into 16 equally sized sections, each containing one or many PGs, depending on the n row × n col form of a PG for a given problem. A diagram representing this distributed memory process is shown in Fig. For communication, MPI ranks are grouped into four communicators, which are graphically represented in Fig. The growth of the memory requirements is shown in Fig. 