Quantum-dot light-emitting diodes (QD-LEDs) promise a new generation of efficient, low-cost, large-area and flexible electroluminescent devices. However, the inferior performance of green and blue QD-LEDs is hindering the commercialization of QD-LEDs in display and solidstate lighting. Here, we demonstrate best-performing green and blue QD-LEDs with ~100% conversion of the injected charge carriers into emissive excitons. Key to this success is eliminating electron leakage at the organic/inorganic interface by using hole-transport polymers with low electron affinity and reduced energetic disorder. Our devices exhibit record-high peak external quantum efficiencies (28.7% for green, 21.9% for blue), exceptionally high efficiencies in wide ranges of luminance, and unprecedented stability (T95 lifetime: 580,000 h for green, 4,400 h for blue). The overall performance surpasses previously reported solution-processed green and blue LEDs. Main Text: LEDs using solution-processable emitters, such as colloidal QDs We investigate the discrepancies of efficiency losses in red, green, and blue-colored QD-LEDs with Cd-based QDs as emitters. Red (CdSe/CdZnSe/ZnS) core/shell/shell QDs, green (CdSe/CdZnSe/ZnS) core/shell/shell QDs, and blue (CdZnSe/ZnS) core/shell QDs with similar diameters (~10 nm) and surface ligands (Fig. Spectral characterizations indicate the occurrence of electron leakage into the HTLs in the green and blue QD-LEDs. The red QD-LED shows pure QD emission according to the EL spectra measured at a current density of 100 mA cm -2 or the voltage corresponding to the peak EQE (Fig. It is of interest to understand the underlying mechanism that enables the interfacial electron leakage between the QDs and the HTLs. A glance at the energy-level diagram at the QD/HTL interface (Fig. We carry out mixed quantum-classical simulations of the electron-transfer dynamics in onedimensional (1D), two-dimensional (2D), and three-dimensional (3D) interfacial models (Fig. Our theoretical investigation suggests a unique mechanism for electron transfer at the QD/HTL interface (Fig. The electron-leakage probability was simulated with different sets of parameters. The results (Fig. These findings motivate us to propose a new design principle for the QD/HTL interface to boost the performance of green and blue QD-LEDs. As shown in Fig. Our new principle requires the molecular structure of HTLs to simultaneously possess rigid backbones and limited conjugation. Accordingly, we employ a co-polymer of poly[(9,9dioctylfluorenyl-2,7-diyl)-alt-(9-(2-ethylhexyl)-carbazole-3,6-diyl)] (PF8Cz). Compared with the benchmark HTL of TFB (Fig. The desired electronic properties of PF8Cz (Fig. We evaluate the electron-blocking properties of HTLs by analyzing band-bending characteristics of the HTL films deposited onto low-work-function substrates of Sm, which results from the spontaneous electron transfer from Sm to HTLs. TFB films on Sm show pronounced band bending while the surface work functions of the PF8Cz films on Sm are almost constant (Fig. Finally, we show that by using PF8Cz as the HTL, substantial improvements in EL performance are achieved in both green and blue QD-LEDs. The green and blue devices exhibit sub-bandgap turn-on voltages (Fig. We highlight that long operational lifetimes are achieved in the PF8Cz-based green and blue QD-LEDs. The T95 lifetime of a green device is determined to be 71 h at an initial luminance (L0) of 11,220 cd m -2 (Fig. Comparative studies were conducted on a random copolymer with the backbone consisting of 2,7fluorene and 3,6-carbazole (denoted as R-PF8Cz), in which additional energetic disorder is introduced by the random variations in the electronic structures of the conjugation units. The results (Fig. In summary, we have identified a major efficiency-loss channel in green and blue QD-LEDs, i.e., the electron transfer from QDs to HTLs, which is greatly enhanced by the energetic disorder of polymeric HTLs and geometric factors of the interfacial materials. Accordingly, we offer a new design principle of employing HTLs with a shallower LUMO level and reduced energetic disorder to eliminate electron leakage. The advances in fundamental understanding close the long-existing EL-PL efficiency gap for green and blue QD-LEDs, resulting in ~100% conversion of the injected charge carriers into emissive excitons. Our devices demonstrate exceptionally high efficiencies in wide ranges of luminance and record-long operational lifetimes, representing the best-performing solution-processed green and blue LEDs. The results promise the realization of full-color QD-LEDs for next-generation display and lighting technologies. Future efforts on molecular design and synthetic strategies of the carbazole-based polymers could enhance the conductivity and electrochemical stability of the HTLs 