We have introduced a Coulomb correlated normal state to study the superconducting pairing within a Fermi liquid(FL)-like background in a 3-dimensional system. The role of the Coulomb correlation has been actively incorporated by means of the Gutzwiller projection scheme, in the presence of phonon mediated attractive electron-electron(AEE) interaction throughout the entire regime of its applicability. We variationally modulate the Coulomb correlation strength from the weak to the strong regime in our calculational procedure. The main highlight of our results is the appearance of a '2-gap-like' structure in the superconducting phase, arising out of the two-body interacting matrix elements, calculated in the presence of the active Coulomb correlation. We have made use of the 'two-square well model' potential to evaluate the superconducting pairing gaps at zero temperature. Our Calculational scheme has been applied to a simple cubic lattice system for a physical realization. All the consequences are elaborated and discussed. Superconductivity is one of the most mysterious physical phenomena discovered in the last century. Even today, it is a challenge to prepare a stable room temperature superconducting (RTSC) system. Meanwhile, in the last year, Dias et.al. had found a superconducting state at a temperature of 287.8K in a pressure driven carbonaceous sulfur hydride system where, the P BCS and P G are the BCS pairing operator and the Gutzwiller projection operator respectively. The operator P BCS is acting on the Gutzwiller projected out state from the FS ground state(ψ F S ). The CFS state is defined by making use of the Gutzwiller projection operator as where, the Gutzwiller projection operator is defined as where, l is the site index and n lσ is the occupation number operator at that site with spin states σ = {↑, ↓}. The projection operator P G is preventing the electrons to sit on the same site and this double occupancy is variationally prevented through a parameter α (where, 0 α 1). The FS ground state is defined as where, c + i,σ (c i,σ ) is the fermion creation (annihilation) operator on the i-th site with spin state σ = {↑, ↓}. The FS is thus defined by pairwise selection of electrons with opposite momenta and spin states. Therefore, the CFS state is defined as On operating the BCS pairing operator on the CFS state, the CBCS state is defined as where, u k and v k are the Bogoliubov coefficients and they follow the conditions for every momentum state k, as The CBCS state is not normalized yet, but the normalized state will be taken into account for all the analytical consequences. Meanwhile, an appendix (Appendix-A) with a calculation for the normalization constant is added with this manuscript at the end, as stated before. In one of our previous works on the interplaying aspects of pairing correlation and the Coulomb correlation in a phonon mediated superconductor, we have made use of the reduced zero temperature BCS Hamiltonian where, ε ij = ε 0 -2t(cosk x a+cosk y a+cosk z a) is the single particle tight binding(TB) energy dispersion for 3D simple cubic lattice, considering nearest neighbour hopping only It may be worthwhile remarking here that several superconductors like Sn -T e, Sn -Sb, T e -Au, Au x Sb 1-x-y T e y possess simple cubic structures both in the normal and superconducting phases The first term within the above Hamiltonian, is representing the paired particle hopping energy, whereas is the two-body interacting potential. The quantity V kk is the matrix element used in the BCS formalism to connect two different paired momentum states k and k . Beforehand, we do not choose any specific form of the potential; however for our interacting system it is clear that both attractive and the repulsive nature of interactions will appear. The ground state energy expression can be evaluated by combining Eqs. On evaluating the ground state energy in the CBCS state, we find where, the first term corresponds to the particle-pair energy as measured in the CBCS ground state and the second one represents the interacting matrix elements for the interacting potential. The matrix element P k,k which in general connects two different paired momentum states k and k , replaces bare two-body matrix element as prescribed in the usual BCS formalism. The expression for P k,k in our case can be cast in the following form: where, Ṽk,k and Ũk,k are the two body interaction terms, appearing with the coefficients which are respectively even and odd functions of α (see Appendix-B ). The first term in the above equation(Eq.( The 'superconducting-gap' function is now defined as where, V ij is the pairing amplitude which connects two lattice sites i and j and for simplicity, we consider the nearest neighbour coupling only. The expectation value in the above equation (Eq.( On evaluating the paired operator expectation value and rearranging the odd and even powers of α in the local order parameter, we define two distinct 'gaps' as follows The physical origin of these two gaps entirely depends on how the double occupancy is being prevented while calculating the pairing amplitude. The even power (here 0 and 2) of α only contributes when the pair operator picks up the electrons pair wise either from the ideal non-interacting FS ground state or from the double occupancy excluded CFS state. However, the contribution of the odd power of α enters in the same calculation while the pair operator acts simultaneously on the ideal FS part as well as the Coulomb correlated FS part. So, that calculation of odd α part, there is a mixing between ideal FS and partially double occupancy excluded CFS state. The pairing for the first case (see Eq.( The interplaying aspect of the Coulomb correlation and the phonon driven AEE interaction in this pairing mechanism is actively carried out variationally by following extremization with respect to both the Bogoliubov coefficients as well as the Gutzwiller parameter(α). For the time being, we take a parametric substitution of the Bogoliubov coefficients u k and v k as On incorporating above transformation, the ground state energy and the 'pairing-gaps' become Hence, the total ground state energy W and two gaps ∆ 1 and ∆ 2 all three appear as a function of θ k and α. Therefore, the minimization condition with respect to both the Bogoliubov coefficients and the Gutzwiller parameter runs as follows On solving these two simultaneous equations we obtain ) where, A = 1 -2α + 2α 2 . From the above equation, one can get the analytical expressions of the coefficients u k and v k and making use of them therefore one can obtain the quasi-particle energy. After carrying it out, we find that the quasi-particle energy is consistent with that of the BCS theory at zero correlation. Further, the energy gap at k = 0 increases with the rise in α value. Again, utilizing Eq.( These two equations are the self-consistent gap equations for ∆ 1 and ∆ 2 in which ∆ 1 (∆ 2 ) corresponds to the pairing amplitudes in the momentum state k whereas ∆ 1 (∆ 2 ) is that for the momentum state k . To set up these two equations, an assumption has been taken about the smallness of the amplitude of the gaps in comparison to the single particle energy, i.e. ∆i ε 1(i = 1, 2). Meanwhile, the effect of Coulomb correlation is now well established through the Gutzwiller parameter(α) in above two self-consistent gap equations(Eq.( We herewith follow the multi square-well prescription as proposed by Ginzburg and Kirzhnits to get the pairing gaps The superconducting gap functions as in Eq.( V > 0. An important assumption, we took here is that with the case of isotropic pairing (s-wave) on the Fermi surface, ∆ 1 ∆ 1 with ω c E F where, Ω(ε k ) is the single spin electronic density of states(DOS) per unit volume(see fig: The DOS for SC lattice from the TB dispersion relation is evaluated by using the elliptic integral of the first kind as shown in fig: The integral on the right hand side of Eq.( (26) where, the attractive coupling constant λ is the product of Ω 0 and V is defined as the dimensionless quantity as usual, i.e. λ = V Ω 0 . The superconducting pairing gap, ∆ 1 is plotted against α for two different hopping amplitudes t = 0.25eV (fig: In fig: The second pairing gap function as in Eq.( where, ε F is the Fermi energy. Again, we consider the case of isotropic pairing (s-wave) on the Fermi surface and we assume that ∆ 2 ∆ 2 . The pairing gap ∆ 2 can now be evaluated by integrating out the right hand side of Eq.( However, the integration for the ∆ 2 is not that simple because of its very large frequency regime. However, the DOS for SC lattice shows a flat region around the Fermi level but beyond two singularity points it varies with single particle energy(see fig: Here, in fig: The above features may be understood as follows:-At lower values of α, a sizeable fraction of doubly occupied sites are allowed and therefore Cooper pairs can survive in the 2-well scenario; thereby leading to a finite magnitude of ∆ 2 with a weightage transfer from ∆ 1 to ∆ 2 as well, causing the growth of ∆ 2 with α. However, as α increases further to attain larger values, the doubly occupied sites get mostly eliminated leading to a fall of ∆ 2 . Figura 6: Variation of ∆ 1 and ∆ 2 with α for t = 0.25 superconducting pairing. However, our two-well model is quite different from our previous work in which we have studied the effect of the Coulomb correlation on paired state For the earlier case, the parental state is a non-interacting ideal FS ground state, and pairing fermions are pair wise picked up from the uncorrelated FS state. The effect of the Coulomb correlation on the phonon mediated superconducting paired state is then studied on the BCS ground state. However, for the current scenario, the FS ground state of the normal phase itself is Coulomb correlated and the boson mediated superconducting pairing is then studied through the BCS pairing operator. The Coulomb correlation is therefore implemented in the parental normal state and the superconducting pairing then takes place in this correlated background. It is to be noted that both of the variational approaches discussed here and in ref. For the present case, we have variationally treated both the pairing correlation as well as the Coulomb correlation to set up the gap-equations and then the square wells are defined by following Ginzburg-Kirzhnits's prescription In the meantime, ∆ 1 validates its physical appearance only within the effective attractive well whereas ∆ 2 is found within the potential well as in Eq. Apêndice A: Normalization of CBCS state Normalization of the CBCS state is carried out here with some major steps as The orthogonality criterion of the state eliminates most of the off-diagonal terms and it is obvious that only those terms with equal number of fermion creation and annihilation operators will contribute with a non-zero value to the normalization. Hence, the contributing terms are where, r f g = r f -r g and r f g = r f -r g . This calculation is carried out for the momentum state k = k and using the properties of Kronecker delta function we arrange the contributing terms as a coefficient of the power of α as : In a compact form this normalization constant Apêndice B: Ground state energy Total ground state energy is calculated as The variational state and the Hamiltonian are as defined in the main text(see Eq.( Herewith, we arrange the coefficients of the power of the Gutzwiller parameter; α as : while evaluating the ground state energy we find that ε k = ij ε ij e ik.rij , with r ij = r i -r j ; and the connecting matrix elements are Here, Ṽkk and Ũkk are looking similar but they connect the momentum states from two different regimes. We follow the Overhauser formalism to define those regimes Apêndice C: Superconducting pairing gaps The superconducting-pairing gap function corresponding to the CBCS state is calculated as follows : Our system is a simple cubic lattice and for simplicity, we consider the nearest neighbour pairing only. On evaluating the pair-operator expectation value on the CBCS state we have, In this calculation, those terms containing upto α 2 will contribute and the terms with higher powers in α will be eliminated because of the Pauli's exclusion principle. Moreover, on rearranging the contributing terms we find that: For α 0 term : where, the upper cutoff of the k is k c ; k c corresponds to the maximum accessible momentum state above the Fermi sea in terms of Debye energy of the system(i.e. ω c ). The phonon mediated superconducting pairing is taken into account through the s-wave channel in the 2-square well scenario. The attractive pairing interaction takes place very close regime to the Fermi surface. Evaluating the pairing amplitude, we find that all the contributions coming from the even power in α s (i.e. 0 and 2) belong to the attractive pairing interaction. Therefore, the product over k and k for that calculation is running for all those momentum states which are close to the Fermi surface, i.e. δk = |k F -k c |. For a given a momentum state k 1 = k 1 ∼ k F , and i = f ; j = g one can obtain the first term in the left hand side of the above equation(Eq.(C2)) and later on adding the same for all other momentum states close to the Fermi surface, we get the summed up result as in the right side of the above equation. In a similar way, the contribution of α 2 term : The contribution of α 1 term : This odd α contributing term appears as follows where, for a given momentum state from the ket state k, V ij e i(k .ri-k.rj ) (C7) here, the highest accessible momentum state for k is k max , which can correspond to an energy state up to ∼ 2ε F . In this case, those momentum states that enter into the pairing amplitude calculation are simultaneously coming from both the ideal non-interacting FS state as well as the CFS state. The CFS state still carries a weightage of allowed doubly occupied sites but to access all those states we have to consider a wide range of k values starting from the deep inside the Fermi sea (k = 0) to well above the Fermi surface (∼ 2k F ) as well. Earlier, we had also followed this criterion to define the repulsive potential well for the Ũkk (see Eq.( Therefore, the two gaps are now defined as