We demonstrate impedance-matched low-loss transmission lines with a signal wavelength more than 150 times smaller than the free space wavelength using superconducting nanowires on high permittivity substrates. A niobium nitride thin film is patterned in a coplanar waveguide (CPW) transmission line geometry on a bilayer substrate consisting of 100 nm of epitaxial strontium titanate on high-resitivity silicon. The use of strontium titanate on silicon enables wafer-scale fabrication and maximizes process compatibility. It also makes it possible to realize a 50 Ω characteristic impedance across a wide range of CPW widths, from the nanoscale to the macroscale. We fabricated and characterized an approximately 50 Ω CPW device with two half-wave stub resonators. Comparing the measured transmission coefficient to numerical simulations, we determine that the strontium titanate film has a dielectric constant of 1.1 × 10 3 and a loss tangent of not more than 0.009. To facilitate the design of distributed microwave devices based on this type of material system, we describe an analytical model of the CPW properties that gives good agreement with both measurements and simulations. Cryogenic microwave circuitry has garnered increased interest in recent years, driven in part by the field of quantum computing based on superconducting circuits. Superconducting nanowires made from low carrier density materials can have a kinetic inductance that is two or more orders of magnitude larger than their magnetic inductance. Advances in materials science have allowed the synthesis of ceramic materials belonging to the class of perovskites with extremely high relative permittivities. One such material, strontium titanate (SrTiO 3 , abbreviated as STO), is a quantum paraelectric with an indirect bandgap of 3.25 eV. Previous work described CPW resonators made from the high-temperature superconductor YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7-x on substrates consisting of an STO film on bulk LaAlO 3 . To demonstrate the potential for extreme wavelength compression using our material system, we fabricated the coplanar waveguide (CPW) double resonator device shown in figure The substrate consists of 100 nm of epitaxial (001) STO grown via molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) on a 370 μm thick high-resistivity (001) Si (ρ > 1 kΩcm). The initiation of the heteroepitaxial growth of STO on Si is key to obtaining a crystalline STO film A ≈ 15 nm thick NbN film The transmission coefficient |S 21 | 2 = 10 log 10 (P out /P in ) of this device measured at a bath temperature T = 1.5 K is shown in figure Also shown in figure where h is Planck's constant, ∆ is the superconducting energy gap, and k B is Boltzmann's constant. The values of the STO dielectric constant and loss tangent are adjusted in the simulation to achieve the best agreement with the data. This leads to a dielectric constant of 1.1 × 10 3 . The corresponding characteristic impedance of the resonator CPW is 66 Ω, close to the target value of 50 Ω. The CPW gap size could be reduced to bring the impedance closer to the target value. While the STO permittivity is lower than values reported for bulk single crystals, it is comparable to previously reported values for thin-film STO, The demonstrated loss tangent is sufficiently low for many types of microwave devices but can likely be improved. We believe that the losses may be dominated by finite resistivity of the STO arising from oxygen vacancies. In future work, we plan to investigate further optimization of the STO growth to minimize its conductivity and maximize its permittivity. We also plan to investigate the dependence of the dielectric constant and loss tangent on temperature and electric field. When performing electromagnetic device simulations, generally one wants to ensure that the simulation mesh is sufficiently small such that further reduction in the mesh size does not change the simulation results. For this material system, we found that satisfying this condition required a considerably smaller mesh size in the vicinity of the CPW gap than is needed for conventional materials. (Further details are provided in the Supplementary Material.) As a result of the fine mesh size, the simulation time and memory requirement become considerable; the simulation results shown in figure Such a long simulation time poses challenges for iterative device design and optimization. In order to facilitate more rapid device design, we developed an analytical model for CPW transmission lines using this material system. This analytical model uses the established conformal mapping approach for CPW transmission lines made from conventional materials The total inductance per unit length L is the sum of the magnetic inductance per unit length L M and the kinetic inductance per unit length L K . Considering only magnetic inductance, v P = c/ √ ε e f f where c is the speed of light in free space and ε e f f is the effective dielectric constant (calculated as described in the Supplementary Material), and hence L M can be found from: For a superconductor with thickness d < 2λ L , where λ L is the London penetration depth, the distribution of the current across the width of the wire is no longer governed by λ L but rather by the Pearl length Λ P = 2λ 2 L /d. This is the case for our samples. When the center conductor width 2s Λ P , the current distribution in the center conductor is approximately uniform and the kinetic inductance per unit length L K is, to a good approximation, equal to the sheet kinetic inductance divided by 2s. The sheet kinetic inductance L K,sq is found as described previously, with a value of 21.5 pH per square in the low temperature (T T C ) limit. λ L can then be calculated from where μ 0 is the permeability of free space. This yields λ L = 507 nm and Λ P = 34.2 μm. A procedure for calculating L K for all center conductor widths was developed by Clem. where with k = s/(s + g) where 2s is the CPW center conductor width and g is the gap width between the center conductor and ground. The parameter p is calculated as described in Clem p ≈ 1 -0.67Λ P /s for Λ P s This approach to calculating L K gives results that are very close to L K = L K,sq /(2s) when Λ P s. Using this analytical approach with the sample parameters summarized in Table Devices that combine high kinetic inductance superconducting thin films and high permittivity substrates enable the creation of impedance-matched microwave devices in which the signal wavelength and velocity can be reduced by more than two orders of magnitude, as demonstrated by the CPW double-resonator device described in this paper. This extreme wavelength compression facilitates the on-chip integration of many types of distributed microwave devices that would be prohibitively large using conventional material systems, expanding the possibilities for scaling up cryogenic microwave systems. See the supplementary material for additional details on the STO growth, the experimental setup for device characterization, numerical simulations, and the analytical model. The SrTiO 3 (STO) film was grown by molecular-beam epitaxy (MBE) on an (001) oriented extremely low-doped silicon (Si) substrate (3" diameter, n-type (phosphorous), resistivity > 1 kΩcm). The Si substrate was first cleaned under an ultraviolet ozone cleaner for ≈ 20 minutes before loading into the MBE chamber. The initiation of the heteroepitaxial growth of STO on Si is key to obtaining crystalline STO. During each deposition step discussed below, the substrate was continuously rotated. The strontium and titanium fluxes were precisely matched (to within 0.3%) at ≈ 1 × 10 13 atoms/cm 2 s. This was achieved by first using a quartz crystal microbalance to obtain source fluxes accurate to within 5% followed by a calibration film grown just prior to the actual film where feedback provided by RHEED patterns was used to fine tune the strontium and titanium fluxes. Specifically, the characteristic surface reconstructions in RHEED due to excess strontium or excess titanium were monitored and the strontium and titanium fluxes were adjusted to avoid these reconstructions. A schematic of the experimental setup for the measurement of the double-resonator device is shown in figure with and The use of the tanh function in equation S6 reflects the fact that the bottom dielectric layer is backed by a conductor; if it were not backed by a conductor, tanh would be replaced with sinh as in equation S5. We note that, when s becomes much larger than the STO thickness h 2 , the parameter k 2 approaches zero and the parameter k 2 approaches 1. Most computational software packages default to storing numerical values using machine precision, which can cause k 2 to become rounded to zero and k 2 to become rounded to 1, neglecting the contribution of the STO layer. To prevent this rounding issue and ensure accurate results, it is important that the values of k 2 and k 2 are stored with sufficient precision such that the difference between their actual values and 0 and 1, respectively, is preserved in the calculation. The total inductance per unit length L is the sum of the magnetic inductance per unit length L M and the kinetic inductance per unit length L K . Considering only magnetic inductance, v P = c/ √ ε e f f where c is the speed of light in free space, and hence L M can be found from: The kinetic inductance per unit length L K is then calculated as described in the main text, resulting in a total inductance per unit length L = L K + L M . Assuming losses are sufficiently small, the characteristic impedance of the CPW is then Z 0 = L C and the phase velocity is . Device simulations were performed using the AXIEM solver in AWR Microwave Office version 15. This solver applies a mesh to the surface of all the conductors in the device geometry. In general, one wants the mesh size to be fine enough such that reducing the mesh size does not change the simulation results. The mesh size is not directly specified by the user but is determined by the software based on a combination of the specified grid size, the conductor geometry, the maximum simulation frequency, and the settings for the mesh density and decimation of each conductor. As the mesh size decreases, the simulation time increases, creating a trade-off between accuracy and time. For our coplanar waveguide (CPW) geometry, we found that this trade-off could be optimized by dividing the grounds into two regions. One region, within a distance of approximately 15g from the CPW gap, with g the gap width, was set to a mesh density of high and the remaining ground region was set to a mesh density of low. The CPW center conductor was also set to a mesh density of high. As an example of the effect of the mesh size on the simulation results, we show in figure To illustrate the significant reduction in device footprint enabled by this material platform, we also designed, fabricated, and measured a similar double resonator device using a copper-clad FR4 circuit board. The FR4 has a nominal dielectric constant of 4.47. The circuit board device was designed in a CPW geometry with a uniform 1.0 mm center conductor width and a 0.12 mm gap width, which yields a characteristic impedance of approximately 50 Ω. The device was patterned To avoid unwanted slotline modes, wirebonds were used to create air bridges between the grounds on either side of each resonator where the resonator connects to the main CPW. An image of the circuit board device is shown in figure R. J. Schoelkopf and S. M. Girvin, Nature 451, 664-669 (2008).