The emergent two-dimensional (2D) ferromagnetic materials with unique magnetic properties have endowed great potential for next-generation spintronic devices with extraordinary merits of high flexibility, easy controllability, and high heretointegrability, which is expected to promote the development of Moore's Law continuously. However, it is extremely challenging to realize magnetic switching with ultra-low power consumption at room temperature. Here, we demonstrate the roomtemperature spin-orbit torque (SOT) driven magnetization switching in a well-epitaxial all-van der Waals (vdW) heterostructure. The topological insulator Bi2Te3 not only helps to elevate the Curie temperature of Fe3GeTe2 (FGT) through interfacial exchange coupling but also works as a spin current source allowing to switch FGT at a low current density of ~2.2×10 6 A/cm 2 . A large SOT efficiency of ~0.7 is measured at room temperature, and the thickness of FGT is further adjusted to reduce the influence of the thermal contribution on the second-harmonic signal. Furthermore, the temperature and thickness-dependent SOT efficiency prove that the large SOT in our system mainly originates from the nontrivial origin of topological materials. Our experiment has enabled an all-vdW SOT structure and lays a solid foundation for the implementation of room-temperature all-vdW spintronic devices in the future. Spin-transfer torque To date, great efforts have been devoted to exploring new principles and materials for realizing high-performance SOT devices The recently-discovered vdW 2D ferromagnetic materials could contribute to an atomic flat surface and maintain the magnetic property at 2D limit thickness, which would satisfy such demand. The early Mermin-Wagner-Hohenberg (MWH) theorem predicted that thermal fluctuations in a 2D magnetic system However, these devices only work at low temperatures (< 200 K) and the challenge is from lacking room-temperature 2D ferromagnetic materials. Furthermore, much higher SOT efficiency could be envisaged through constructing the all-vdW heterostructure, which can provide a clean interface and thus support high interfacial spin transparency. Therefore, there is an urgent need to design all-vdW heterostructures to achieve energy-efficient SOT switching that can operate at room temperature for future 2D spintronic applications. Here, we realize SOT-driven magnetic switching in the all-vdW MBE-grown Bi2Te3/FGT heterostructure at room temperature. The SOT-induced magnetization switching is achieved with a critical switching current density of 2.2×10 Our results provide a paradigm for the construction of all-vdW SOT devices at room temperature and promote the development of 2D ferromagnets for practical applications. In this work, we deposited thin films on a (0001) sapphire substrate by MBE, combined with the reflection high-energy electron diffraction (RHEED) to in-situ monitor the surface structure of the film during the preparation, and analyzed the surface morphology by atomic force microscopy (AFM). When preparing the wafer-scale all-vdW heterostructure, it is very critical to maintaining the surface flatness of the bottom layer to ensure the optimal lattice matching and compatibility of the two layers. Therefore, after growing topological insulators on (0001) sapphire substrates, the growth temperature needs to be slowly increased in the growth chamber to maintain a Te-rich environment, which will ensure an excellent single crystallinity of the heterostructure. To better understand the sample quality, RHEED was in-situ rotated during the growth process to check the in-plane crystallinity. During the rotation, RHEED stripes changed regularly and coherently, which could exclude the presence of multidomain. To prevent its degradation, we covered the top surface of FGT with a protective layer. Micrometer-sized Hall-bar devices were fabricated by the standard photolithography combined with ion beam etching. The schematic of the device and the measurement setup are shown in Fig. The right inset in Fig. Figure Here, Bi2Te3(8)/FGT(3) was taken as the research object for SOT switching, where the number in parentheses denotes layer thickness in the unit of nm. Figure To demonstrate the SOT switching in the Bi2Te3/FGT heterostructure, a series of in-plane magnetic fields were applied with a 10-ms pulse current along the Hall bar to obtain a deterministic switch polarity. The role of applying an in-plane magnetic field is to overcome the domain wall chirality caused by the Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction (DMI) and thus to realize the deterministic magnetization switching Our explanation for this case is that the magnetic interactions of FGT are not sufficient to fight against the thermal fluctuations, resulting in a decrease of M Here, the critical switching current density (Jsw) that is defined as the sign change in RH is gradually reduced at the higher magnetic field. The deterministic switching happens in the large field and current region, while both up and down magnetization states are possible in the middle of the panel with a small field and current region. Additionally, the switching current decreases with increasing temperature, which is attributed to the simultaneous decrease in Ms as already proved in Fig. To quantitatively evaluate the SOT efficiency, we use the harmonic Hall measurement to characterize the effective field of SOT, which could provide a solid understanding of each SOT torque, as well as its influencing factors. We apply a small sinusoidal current (Ja.c.) to the channel of the device and then generates a SOT in the ferromagnetic layer, which will be decomposed into two mutually orthogonal vector components: damping-like torque τ DL ~m × (σ × m) and field-like torque τ FL ~σ × m where Hk is the magnetic anisotropy field, which is smaller than Hx. HDL and HFL are the damping-like effective field (∝ m × σ) and field-like effective field (∝ σ), respectively. Rp and RA are the planar Hall resistance and anomalous Hall resistance, respectively. Roffset is the resistance offset. RANE is the transverse resistance contributed by the anomalous Nernst effect and other spin-related thermoelectric effects and R xy(sat_min) are defined as the maximum and minimum values of second-harmonic Hall resistance under a saturated magnetic field Nevertheless, we could differentiate the ANE and the SOT-induced second-harmonic Hall resistance through their magnetic field dependence. The right inset of Fig. Relying on the above analysis, we extract HDL and display the dependence of HDL on corresponding Ja.c. at 200 K, as shown in Fig. ( where e and ħ are the electron charge and reduced Plank constant respectively, t represents the ferromagnetic layer thickness. Accordingly, the value of the ξDL is determined to be ~5.3 in Bi2Te3(8)/FGT(3) structure at 200 K. To eliminate the influence of thermal contribution caused by the ANE of FGT on the SOT efficiency, we adjusted the thickness of FGT to manipulate the shunting current in the Bi2Te3 for lowering the thermal gradient in the Bi2Te3/FGT heterostructure To verify the conjecture and understand the related mechanism in our sample, we give a systematic discussion about the temperature dependence of ξDL. Unlike traditional heavy metals, TI exhibits a topologically-protected non-trivial surface state, which is composed of a single massless Dirac fermion with two spin-splitting bands on the surface. When the time-reversal symmetry is broken, the surface state will open a gap. The bulk Hamiltonian projected onto the surface state is described as where υ is the velocity of the surface state and k is the Dirac electron momentum. When the Jwrite is applied to TI, the spin of the Dirac electron is locked, and the movement of the Fermi surface in the kspace will produce controllable spin polarization. Another important origin of SOT is the spin Hall effect (SHE) of the bulk state, the phenomenon of which utilizes the bulk SOC in TI to convert nonpolarized write current into the spin current. Due to the asymmetric scattering of conductive electrons, the spin-up and spin-down are deflected in opposite directions, forming a transverse spin current. Figure For the chirality of SOT, the relationship between the Jspin and the Jwrite can be expressed by the following formula where θSH is the spin Hall angle, σ is the polarization of the spin and its direction is orthogonal to the direction of the Jwrite. For non-ferromagnetic materials that provide spin currents, the spin direction of the top surface and the bottom surface is opposite and its chirality is defined by the sign of θSH. Compared with our results, the SOT switching in FGT/Pt heterostructures shows the same chirality, further accurately confirming our conclusion For clarity, we summarize the switching write current density and its realized maximum temperature of several representative heterostructures for comprehensively understanding the SOT feature in the Bi2Te3/FGT heterostructure, and the results are presented in Table In such a case, the ξDL is related to the internal θSH of TI and the interfacial spin transparency Tint The interfacial spin transparency could be mainly determined by the mechanisms of spin backflow and spin memory loss, which could be characterized by the effective spin-mixing conductance and the spin conductance of the non-ferromagnetic layer To summarize, wafer-scale vdW Bi2Te3/FGT heterostructure prepared by MBE has successfully realized room-temperature ferromagnetism and current-driven SOT switching. A series of electrical transport measurements display that the SOT induced by the TI can realize the magnetization switching at room temperature. The harmonic Hall measurements reveal that the SOT efficiency was as high as ~0.7 at room temperature, and this value could be further increased to ~2.69 with decreasing TI thickness. Together with the temperature-dependent measurement, the high charge-to-spin conversion efficiency may be mainly attributed to the improved interfacial spin transparency and nontrivial origin of topological materials from all-vdW Bi2Te3/FGT structure. The realization of room-temperature ferromagnetism and SOT switching together in Bi2Te3/FGT heterostructure points to a superior approach for the development of all-vdW heterostructures, and lays the foundation for implementation of room-temperature 2D vdW spintronic devices in the future. 