We study inhomogeneous Cooper pairs distribution and localization effects in tree-like networks of superconducting islands coupled via Josephson weak links. Using a generalized Feynman's approach, reminiscent of the Bose-Hubbard model, we demonstrate that the Cooper pairs fraction which localizes on a specific network's island is limited by the network topology and, if present, by the repulsive interaction. These findings contribute to clarify the interplay between confinement effects induced by the network's topology and interaction and shed some light on recent experiments dealing with networks of Josephson junctions. The discovery of superconductivity 1 and its theoretical explanation We will focus on tree-like structures which appear to be an ideal platform to study localization phenomena induced by the network topology. Differently from arbitrary graphs, two nodes (vertices) of a tree-like network are connected by a unique path, so that interference effects have a limited influence on the particles wavefunction. Moreover, the absence of loops limits unintentional inductive couplings and thus it is a desirable condition for the experimental implementation using Josephson junctions' networks. The work is organized as follows. In Sec. II we review the Feynman's model of a Josephson junction. Its generalization obtained by the Bose-Hubbard model is presented in Sec. III. The resulting model is a non-linear Schrödinger equation whose ground state solution allows to study the interplay between repulsive interaction and network connectivity. Selected applications of the theory are discussed both in the presence (Sec. V) or in the absence (Sec. IV) of repulsive interaction. Conclusions are given in Sec. VI, while technical details are presented in Appendix A, B and C. In his famous lecture 37 , Feynman proposed a simple model of Josephson junction where the dot notation indicates the time derivative. The constant K describes the weak coupling of the two sides of the junction and depends on the characteristics of the tunnel barrier. The presence of an external circuit is implicitly assumed. It induces a difference between the ground state energies of the two condensates, so that E 1 -E 2 = qV represents such difference written in terms of the absolute vale of the Cooper pair charge q = 2e and the voltage drop across the junction V . The macroscopic wavefunctions of the Cooper pairs condensates can be written in the form where ρ α and θ α represent the Cooper pairs density and the phase factor pertaining to the electrode labelled by α, respectively. Using the exponential representation of the macroscopic wavefunctions in Eq.( The dynamics of the phase difference φ is easily deduced by using Equations ( Due to the action of the external circuit, tunneling phenomena across the junction do not change the Cooper pairs densities ρ 1 and ρ 2 , so that one can assume ρ 1 = ρ 2 = ρ 0 , being ρ 0 the time-independent particles density of the isolated electrodes. The implementation of the latter conditions is problematic within the Feynman's model and, to be consistent, one has to assume ρ 1 = ρ 0 -δρ and ρ 2 = ρ 0 + δρ with δρ/ρ 0 ≪ 1. Under these assumptions and after a first-order expansion in δρ, Eq. ( which represents the correct current-phase relation of the Josephson junction. Under the same assumptions, Eq.( the latter showing a deviation from the strict voltagefrequency relation: The deviation, consisting in a cosine term in the righthand side of Eq. ( We are interested in studying the Cooper pairs distribution in tree-like networks of superconducting islands. Cooper pairs are composite particles obeying hard-core bosonic algebra, being the deformed bosonic algebra reminiscent of the fermionic nature of the paired electrons. Treating the Cooper pairs as genuine bosons, which is certainly an approximate picture, we can study the treelike systems mentioned above by means of the Bose-Hubbard model. This approximate picture is not too crude. For instance, quantum critical phenomena in granular superconductors have been investigated by modeling the Cooper pairs as a quantum fluid of charged bosons [42]. Similarly, quantum phase transitions of Josephson junctions arrays are often described by adopting a short-range Bose-Hubbard model [26,43-45], being the latter equivalent, under appropriate conditions, to the second quantization Hamiltonian of a Josephson junctions array [43]. Second quantization Hamiltonian of the Bose-Hubbard model describing a tree-like system is written as where ǫ i is a site-dependent energy, K > 0 is a coupling constant, U > 0 is the strength of the repulsive interaction and n i = b † i b i is the number operator of the lattice site i written in terms of bosonic creation and annihilation operators. The islands connectivity is defined by the adjacency matrix of elements A ij . Adjacency matrix is real and symmetric with vanishing diagonal elements (A ii = 0). Islands labelled by the site index i and j are linked if A ij = 1, while they are disconnected if A ij = 0. Using Heisenberg equation of motion and bosonic com- Under macroscopic occupation of the islands (i.e. , the annihilation operator b k in Eq. ( is obtained. Equation (11) preserves the total number of particles and thus the macroscopic wavefunction of the condensate can be normalized to the total number of Cooper pairs N T according to the relation Interestingly, Feynman's model given in Eq. ( A. Searching for the ground state of the system: general procedure The ground state of the system can be obtained by considering the ansatz When the trial wavefunction is substituted in Eq. ( A close inspection to Eqs. ( Before treating the general case, it is quite instructive considering the U = 0 case for which we have to solve an ordinary eigenvalues problem. In this case, the problem is described by a pure hopping Hamiltonian H = -KA which, in real space, is a real and symmetric matrix proportional to the adjacency matrix A via the constant -K. Thus, the hopping Hamiltonian and the adjacency matrix are simultaneously diagonalizable and share a common set of eigenvectors. The eigenproblem of the adjacency matrix is written as The eigenvector C M of the adjacency matrix with greatest eigenvalue λ M also corresponds to the unique ground state of the system in view of the relation The spectral graph theory (Perron-Frobenius theorem) prescribes that the components of C M are all positive, while λ M is bounded from above by the maximum degree of the graph [50]. Moreover, there are no other positive eigenvectors of the adjacency matrix (except positive multiples of C M ) so that the theorem also implies the unicity of the bosonic ground state. Once C M is known, it provides information about the particles distribution. These arguments show the close connection between graph theory and the ground state properties of the bosonic system. The inclusion of a finite repulsive interaction modifies the aforementioned picture and the nonlinear problem has to be solved numerically. Numerical procedure is conveniently implemented by introducing eigenvectors normalized to 1 instead of the total number of Cooper pairs N T . Thus, we set with ξ = N T U/K a small, but finite, perturbation of the linear problem. As before, the greatest eigenvalue of the nonlinear problem in Eq. ( complemented by the self-consistency condition The solution is iteratively determined according to the following steps. The matrix V kj is computed by using the eigenstate with the greatest eigenvalue (EGE) of the noninteracting problem (ξ = 0). Thus, eigenvectors and eigenvalues of A + V are determined. The EGE is used to recompute A + V . After diagonalization of the latter operator, a new estimate of the EGE is obtained and the procedure can be iterated. The algorithm ends when the self-consistency condition |V kj + ξδ kj B 2 j | < ε is reached with accuracy ε. The procedure typically presents fast convergence with accuracy very close to the machine precision (∼ 10 -12 in dimensionless units). Once the convergence has been reached, the solution of the nonlinear problem in Eq. ( In this section, we present selected applications of the theory for which analytical solutions are available. In this way, the particles distribution can be studied avoiding numerical diagonalization of the adjacency matrix. In view of their pedagogical value, fully worked examples are reported. In the following we will explain in detail the problem of the Cooper pairs distribution on a linear chain (Fig. Using showing the presence of cosine terms which, as anticipated in Sec. II, are crucial for a correct description of the isolated system. When a stationary state of the closed system is considered, the number of particles residing on a single island does not change in time ( Ṅn = 0). This requirement can be obtained by setting θ n = θ(t), with θ(t) = ω a time-independent constant. Accordingly, using the notation λ = ω/K and C n = √ N n , we obtain the difference equation: complemented by the boundary conditions C 0 = C N +1 = 0. The difference equation in Eq. ( ∝ sin(k m n) with k m = mπ/(N + 1). However, sign-changing solutions are not admissible and thus, after normalization, we get: with associated eigenvalue λ = 2 cos(k 1 ). C showing the tendency to populate preferentially the central region of the system. This tendency originates from the fact that highly connected islands are preferentially occupied with respect to network's sites with connectivity deficiency (e.g., the system's boundaries). The aforementioned statement can be verified in simple cases since Eq. ( The wavefunction of N T Cooper pairs confined to move on a linear chain with a side-coupled site (Fig. where n ≥ 1 is a labeling of the generic network site belonging to the branch α ∈ {a, b}, while the additional relation ψ (α) 0 = ψ 0 plays the role of a boundary condition. Using the exponential notation ψ -1 = N -1 exp(iθ), n exp(iθ) in Equations ( where we have introduced the notation and λ = ω/K. Numerical diagonalization of the problem shows that the EGE presents exponential localization. The latter statement can be easily proven by using the following ansatz: being χ, A 0 and ρ < 1 parameters to be determined. Using the ansatz in Eqs. ( Equations ( while A 0 is fixed by imposing the wavefunction normalization condition: Using the aforementioned results and assuming N ≫ 1, the particles fraction allocated in the network sites labelled by n = 0 and n = -1 is obtained: Moreover, the particles occupation along the α branch is easily obtained by using the relation N (α) n = N 0 ρ 2n . One of the main conclusions of this section is that particles manifest the tendency to localize exponentially around the system's island presenting the maximum connectivity. Exponential localization can be further characterized by introducing the localization length being the latter solution of the equation ρ 2n = exp(-n/L). Using Eq. ( Star-like networks belong to a special class of tree-like structures (loop-free graphs) in which a central island is connected to several branches. In these systems, the degree of the central site is typically much higher than the degree of any other network's site and acts as localization center for particles. Apart from intrinsic motivations, star-like topology may describe parts of a more complex network and this observation further motivates the interest in studying these systems. The wavefunction of N T Cooper pairs confined to move on a star-like network with p branches (Fig. with n ≥ 1 and j ∈ {1, ..., p}. Using exponential notation, i.e. ψ 0 = A 0 exp(iθ) and ψ n exp(iθ), along with the notation A 0 = √ N 0 and A n , we get the following relations: with the boundary condition A (j) 0 = A 0 . Numerical diagonalization of the problem shows that the EGE presents exponential localization. The latter statement can be easily proven by using the ansatz A (j) n = A 0 ρ n with ρ < 1 and n ≥ 1. After the substitution in Equations ( which admit the following solutions: A 0 is fixed by imposing the normalization condition: Using the aforementioned results and assuming N ≫ 1, the particles fraction allocated in the network site labelled by n = 0 is obtained: Interestingly, taking the limit p → ∞ one observes N 0 → N T /2. Moreover, the particles occupation along the j-th branch is easily obtained by using the relation N (j) n = N 0 ρ 2n . The exponential localization of the particles distribution allows to use Eq. ( while the parameter v introduced at the end of Sec. IV B takes the value: When Equations ( Cooper pairs wavefunction is expected to present the same profile exhibited by the superconducting order parameter. This expectation is indeed confirmed and we have found that the wavefunction of particles confined on a three-legs star-like network closely follows the superconducting order parameter profile derived in Ref. [35] in close vicinity of the critical temperature. Following Ref. [35], the order parameter profile deviates from a pure exponential when the temperature is lowered further. This deviation has no direct correspondence with the bosonic wavefunction since temperature is not included in the present treatment. Despite the latter observation, within the Ginzburg-Landau approach proposed in Ref. [35], a temperature lowering promotes a relevant influence of the nonlinear terms affecting the order parameter equations. As will be clearly explained in Sec. V C, a similar role is here played by the repulsive interaction, whose influence increases with the dimensionless parameter ξ, which is proportional to the bosons number N T . Thus a full agreement between the distinct approaches implies that the parameter N T has to be interpreted as the average Cooper pairs number, being the latter a temperaturedependent quantity; it is vanishing above the normalsuperconductor transition temperature, while it increases when the system is progressively cooled below the critical temperature. According to Ref. [35], the order parameter localization characterizes the nucleation of the superconductivity in close vicinity of the critical temperature, while a spreading of the superconductivity to the whole system is observed when the temperature is lowered further. The mentioned behavior suggests that exponential localization of Cooper pairs characterizes the first insurgence of the superconductivity in star-like networks, while the initial localization is not able to drive the system towards a global insulating phase. A flower-like network 52 (Fig. where ) is related to the central island, while ψ j = N j exp(iθ j ) (j ∈ {1, ..., M }) are related to the M lateral sites. Using exponential representation, Equations ( By imposing the stationary condition θ c = θ j = θ(t) with θ(t) = ω, we get Ṅc = Ṅj = 0 along with the additional relations: The above equations are easily solved so that, also considering the normalization condition, we get the islands' occupation: Moreover, λ = √ M so that the ground state energy is given by μ 0 = -Kλ. Thus, we have demonstrated that the fraction of particles belonging to the central island does not depend on the number M of lateral sites. The inclusion of repulsive interaction in the model produces in general non-trivial changes to the particles distribution on the network. However, there exist analytically solvable network models which can be used to validate the numerical procedure described in Sec. III A. These models are presented in Sec. V A and V B. Once the iterative procedure has been validated, it is used to study the interacting star-like network model (Sec. V C), which is not analytically solvable. Hereafter, we study a flower-like network obtained by linking a central island with M lateral sites, so that N = M + 1 represents the total number of islands. Under the assumption of non-vanishing repulsive interaction (i.e., U > 0), the wavefunction of particles constrained to a flower-like network is obtained by solving the following equations: where ψ c is related to the central island, while ψ j (j ∈ {1, ..., M }) are related to the M lateral sites. Equations ( along with the normalization condition Using the ansatz with the condition θ = ω in Equations ( with λ = ω/K and u = U/K. The non-linear problem written in Eq. ( with ξ = uN T . Once the solution of the quartic equation in Eq. ( In particular, the non-interacting case (see Equations ( FIG. The model can be solved either by direct solution of Eq. (67) or by using the iterative procedure presented in Sec. III A. The outcome of the model is presented in Fig. as long as the interaction parameter ξ is sufficiently small. Equation (71) provides an excellent approximation of the curve shown in Fig. Hereafter, we focus on a star-like network in which the effect of the repulsive interaction between particles manifests only at the central island, while it is negligible elsewhere. This condition can be experimentally realized by considering a central island with reduced volume compared to that of the other network's islands. Thus, the wavefunction of N T Cooper pairs confined to move on a star-like network with p branches and repulsive interaction at the central island obeys the following equations: with n ≥ 1 and j ∈ {1, ..., p}. Using the notation ψ 0 = A 0 exp(iθ) ≡ √ N 0 exp(iθ) and ψ n exp(iθ), we get the following relations: with u = U/K and the boundary condition A (77) A 0 can be written in terms of ρ by using the normalization condition. Accordingly, also assuming N ≫ 1, we obtain: while ρ obeys the quartic equation: with ξ = uN T and ρ < 1. A close inspection of Eq. ( Once the quartic equation has been solved, the occupation of the central island can be computed according to the relation: while the occupation of islands belonging to a generic branch is given by N (j) n = N 0 ρ 2n . The model can be solved either by direct solution of Eq. (79) or by using the iterative procedure presented in Sec. III A. The outcome of the model is presented in Fig. provides an excellent approximation of the curve shown in Fig. The wavefunction of N T Cooper pairs confined to move on a star-like network with p branches and repulsive interaction obeys the following equations: with n ≥ 1 and j ∈ {1, ..., p}. Within the same notation used in Sec. V B, we get the following relations: with u = U/K and the boundary condition A (j) 0 = A 0 . Solution of the non-linear problem cannot be obtained by using the ansatz A (j) n = A 0 ρ n and thus we have to use the numerical procedure described in Sec. III A. In the following, we focus on the interacting star-like network obtained by linking a central site with three branches (p = 3), each of which made of the connection of 25 islands. Thus, N = 76 represents the total number of islands. The particles distribution of the system with interaction parameter ξ = 1.2 is shown in Figure We have presented a generalized Feynman's model to describe the inhomogeneous Cooper pairs distribution in tree-like networks of weakly-coupled superconducting islands. The theory allows the description of the interplay between particles interaction and network connectivity in graph-like artificial structures also evidencing interesting connections with the spectral graph theory. In these systems, the network connectivity defines effective potentials which are able to induce particles localization. Indeed, network's islands with higher connectivity act as localization centers, while the repulsive interaction works in the opposite way. Using a number of representative examples, it has been demonstrated that the particles fraction localized at a given system's site depends on the network's topology and, as expected, it is lowered by the repulsive interaction. In particular, we have demonstrated that the Cooper pairs fraction localized at the central site of a non-interacting flower-like network or at the center of a star-like network cannot exceed fifty percent of the total particles number N T , irrespectively of any other detail. Moreover, the inclusion of repulsive interaction in star-like networks leads to depopulation of the central site and induces non-exponential localization phenomena. Cooper pairs wavefunction is expected to present the same profile exhibited by the superconducting order parameter in view of the close connection between the aforementioned quantities. This expectation is indeed confirmed and we have found that the wavefunction of particles confined on a three-legs star-like network closely follows the superconducting order parameter profile derived in Ref. [35]. These findings suggest interesting analogies between disordered superconducting systems and tree-like networks of weakly-coupled superconducting islands. In both the mentioned systems localization phenomena are accompanied by an enhancement of the critical temperature of the superconducting transition, being the latter property appealing for possible technological applications. Furthermore, since both Josephson arrays and opti-FIG. cal lattices are experimental realizations of the Bose-Hubbard model, we expect that atomtronics [53] platforms can be also used to test the localization phenomena reported in this work.