Free-space optical communication is becoming a mature technology that has been demonstrated in space a number of times in the last few years. The Japanese National Institute of Information and Communications Technology (NICT) has carried out some of the most-significant in-orbit demonstrations over the last three decades. However, this technology has not reached a wide commercial adoption yet. For this reason, NICT is currently working towards the development of a miniaturized laser-communication terminal that can be installed in very-small satellites, while also compatible with a variety of other different platforms, meeting a wide span of bandwidth requirements. The strategy adopted in this design has been to create a versatile lasercom terminal that can operate in multiple scenarios and platforms without the need of extensive customization. This manuscript describes the current efforts in NICT towards the development of this terminal, and it shows the prototype that has been already developed for the preliminary tests, which are described as well. These tests will include the performance verification using drones first with the goal of installing the prototype on High-Altitude Platform Systems (HAPS) to carry out communication links between HAPS and ground, and later with the Geostationary (GEO) orbit, covering this way a wide range of operating conditions. For these tests, in the former case the counter terminal is a simple transmitter in the case of the drone, and a transportable ground station in the case of the HAPS; and in the latter case the counter terminal is the GEO satellite ETS-IX, foreseen to be launched by NICT in 2023. Free-space optical communications is a well-known solution with the potential to provide the massive bandwidth of optical-fiber technology, but without the requirements for physical cabling, allowing to greatly enhance the capabilities of wireless terminals. Specifically, space laser communications (lasercom) is becoming a mature technology and it has been demonstrated in orbit numerous times in the last few years Despite the many successful demonstrations that space lasercom has shown during these last decades in almost all imaginable scenarios and platforms, this technology has not reached a wide commercial adoption yet. At the same time, the communication requirements of wireless terminals have not stopped to increase, and mobile networks based on 5G (and beyond) will become one of the biggest business of the modern world as well as an enormous technical challenge to support billions of humans, things, vehicles, robots, etc. generating an unprecedented amount of data. In this context, lasercom is destined to play a key role. Therefore, closing the gap between research and application has become a must, and practical lasercom systems must be developed and deployed in real scenarios as soon as possible. With this goal in mind, NICT has started developing a series of versatile lasercom terminals that can fit a variety of scenarios and platforms to cover the needs of different use cases, always related to high-speed communications where RF cannot be easily adopted. Fig. The first scenario shows an ultra-high speed bidirectional feeder link between a High-Altitude Platform System (HAPS) and a ground station to provide network access to a big number of users on the ground, generally based on RF connections (see Fig. The third scenario includes LEO satellites, which is another platform that has been experiencing and will continue to experience an increasing demand, especially due to the lower cost of developing small satellites and CubeSats, as well as the launch cost. In particular, LEO constellation is a scheme that has re-emerged as a key part of the future communication networks as well as Earth-observation space infrastructure, with hundreds of satellites already in orbit as part of some existing constellation, and thousands of satellites planned to be launched in the coming years. Finally, the fourth scenario includes drones, which form another platform gaining popularity with big potential in a number of applications. For the two latter scenarios, a simplified version of the lasercom terminal is currently being designed and developed. In order to support the scenarios shown in the previous section, which covers a wide variety of concepts of operations as well as platforms with different requirements, a miniaturized lasercom terminal was conceived. The original specifications were chosen to meet the requirements of the most-challenging scenario and platform, namely, a LEO-to-GEO intersatellite link when the terminal is embarked in a CubeSat. The first conceptual design of this terminal, Fig. Since the CubeSat form factor imposes the limitation of 10-cm cubes when designing the payload structure, the biggest practical telescope ́s aperture that can be integrated in a CubeSat is a 10-cm diameter, but considering the structural support and physical implementation, a miniaturized telescope with an effective aperture of 9-cm was designed and developed with the minimum possible distance between primary and secondary mirror (Fig. The 9-cm telescope is one of the most-advanced parts of the lasercom terminal at the time of writing this manuscript, and it is currently being tested for space qualification. Specifically, the wavefront error is being measured with a Fizeau interferometer during different stages of the thermal cycling to guarantee the required optical quality. The measured data shows a wavefront error of λ/19 RMS at 1550 nm and a total transmission of 93%, including all the elements of the telescope, i.e. primary mirror, secondary mirror, folded mirror, and collimator lens (see Fig. Another key component of a space lasercom terminal is the optical amplifier, which is necessary to achieve the required high transmitted power to close the link. The highest optical power that was determined to be feasible to achieve within the constrained volume of a CubeSat was 2 W. Based on this requirement, a miniaturized (95×95×25 mm) space-grade 2-stages Erbium-Doped Fiber Amplifier (EDFA) was designed and developed to be compatible with the CubeSat format factor (Fig. This paper presents the first prototype of NICT's miniaturized lasercom terminal for space applications, which design was done with the goal of having the potential to fit a variety of different scenarios and platforms while offering full high-speed bidirectionalcommunication capabilities up to long distances. The Fig. The final version of this manuscript is published in the proceedings of the