Reflecting light to a pre-determined non-specular direction is an important ability of metasurfaces, which is the basis for a wide range of applications (e.g., beam steering/splitting and imaging). However, anomalous reflection with 100% efficiency has not been achieved at optical frequencies in conventional metasurfaces, due to losses and/or insufficient nonlocal control of light waves. Here, we propose a new type of all-dielectric quasi-three-dimensional subwavelength structures, consisting of multilayer films and specifically designed meta-gratings, to achieve perfect anomalous reflections at optical frequencies. A complex multiple scattering process was stimulated by effectively coupling different Bloch waves and propagating waves in the proposed meta-system, thus offering the whole meta-system the desired nonlocal control on light waves required to achieve perfect anomalous reflections. Two perfect anomalous reflectors were designed to reflect normally incident 1550 nm light to the 40°and 75°directions with absolute efficiencies higher than 99%, and were subsequently fabricated and experimentally demonstrated to exhibit efficiencies 98% and 88%, respectively. Our results pave the way towards realizing optical meta-devices with desired high efficiencies in realistic applications. Metasurfaces, ultra-thin metamaterials composed of planar microstructures with tailored optical responses, have gained much attention for their potential for controlling the amplitudes, phases, and polarizations of light waves Recently, optical metasurfaces/meta-devices have attracted increasing attention Perfect anomalous reflectors at optical frequencies are extremely desired because they are the basis for highly efficient manipulations of complex optical waves and fields Pioneering works on anomalous deflection have been carried out by engineering the phase gradient along metasurfaces, known as the generalized Snell's law However, while the reflection-type gradient metasurfaces proposed in Ref. [29] can exhibit very high working efficiencies in the microwave region, the efficiencies of optical metasurfaces thus designed drop significantly, especially for large bending angles. Many studies have focused on how to improve the efficiency of anomalous reflection for large bending angles, from the aspects of mechanism, configuration and optimization Other approaches that do not involve "gain & loss" materials were subsequently proposed, which typically take surface waves or evanescent waves into consideration, making the metasurface exhibit the desired effective nonlocal responses yielding similar effects as those of the "gain & loss" metasurfaces Moreover, although many dielectric metasurfaces have been achieved in the optical domain, they typically suffer from transmission losses and do not necessarily exhibit the desired strong nonlocal responses. Therefore, achieving perfect anomalous reflections at optical frequencies is still a challenging task for nanophotonic community. Here, we propose an all-dielectric quasi-three-dimensional subwavelength structure (Q3D-SWS), composed of a purposely designed multilayer film and a dielectric meta-grating separated by a dielectric spacer, to achieve the desired perfect anomalous reflection at optical frequencies. These all-dielectric systems are not only free from absorption losses but also eliminate all transmission losses using the multilayer high-reflection films. Moreover, multiple scattering of light inside the Q3D-SWS can be controlled by altering both the reflection phases and propagation phases of light through fine-tuning the multilayer structure and adjusting the spacer thickness. Therefore, optimizing these structural parameters can help us find a perfect-efficiency anomalous reflector, which exhibit the desired nonlocal control ability on light waves assisted by the specifically "designed" multiple-scattering processes. As a proof of concept, we design two perfect-efficiency all-dielectric meta-reflectors working at 1550 nm that can reflect normally incident light to the 40°a nd 75°directions, and fabricate out the samples and experimentally demonstrate their anomalous reflections with absolute efficiencies 98% and 88%, respectively. According to Huygens' principle, far-field outgoing waves are dependent on the secondary sources located in the near field. Therefore, we can tailor the reflection of a metasurface by purposely designing the field distributions (energy-flow distribution, the z component of the Poynting vector) generated on a plane right above the metasurface However, since the reflection phase cannot increase to infinity, usually a super-periodicity has to be introduced so that the meta-reflector is actually a grating composed of identical super-cells exhibiting linearly varying phase distribution covering a 2π range. In general, the system is designed to allow only three reflection channels alive (i.e., the specular reflection and two first-order diffraction channels, see Fig. which can be further simplified to ,=0 as shown in Fig. We find that the energy-flow distribution contains two terms. While the first-order oscillation term is originated from the interference between the 0 th and ±1 st channels, the second term, however, comes from the interference between -1 st and +1 st channels. To realize the desired perfect anomalous reflection as shown in the bottom part of Fig. and 1 = +1 , making the actual energy-flow distribution taking the form of Detailed derivations of Eqs. ( Equation (2) contains profound physics and useful guidance for us to design appropriate meta-reflections. We note that such a meta-reflector does not conserve energy at a local point x (evidenced by the in-balance of input and out-going energy-flow at any local x point), but rather conserves the total energy within a whole super-cell since 0 = 0 . Previously, Alu et al. proposed that this requirement can be realized in a system composed of gain-lossy materials, which imposed difficulties in realistic device fabrications, especially at optical frequencies. Here, we look for passive non-absorbing systems that can satisfy Eq. ( where z=-z0 is the bottom plane of system. Equation ( All-dielectric metasurfaces are free of absorption loss, but they typically suffer from transmission losses and/or are insufficient to provide the desired lateral energy transfer to realize perfect anomalous reflection The lateral energy transfer is reinforced by the multiple scattering process, which can be described by = 0 + , ' ' ' 0 , where 0 , ' and 0 denote the scattering coefficients of light through the upper-layer metasurface ( 0 represents the n th reflection coefficient as a 0 th -order plane wave is incident from air; ' and 0 represent the transmission coefficients as a plane wave is incident from the spacer region or from the air region, respectively) and ' are the Green's function elements describing how the 0 th -order incoming wave finally changes to the n th -order out-going wave aided by all multiple-scattering processes inside the spacer. ' strongly depend on the properties of the multilayer films and the spacer, and are responsible for the complicated multiple scatterings inside the meta-system. A simple expectation is that light wave scattered to the desired direction can be possibly enhanced significantly if an interference can be formed with appropriate phase accumulated for the corresponding optical path. We now quantify the above physical argument, starting from finding simplified expressions of S P and S B exhibiting clear physical meanings. Retaining only the 0 thand 1 st -order propagating waves inside the spacer and assuming that the multilayer film can perfectly reflect all these modes (with different reflection phases), we find the following (approximate) formula for S P : which can be further simplified to a first-order cosine-form lateral energy transfer that has the same form as that of the desired energy-flow distribution, = 1 + 1 + , with O representing all high-order contributions. Here, α denotes the amplitude of lateral energy transfer S P and ρ denotes the abbreviation of oscillation form. Detailed derivation of Eq. ( Moreover, φ0 and φ1 also indirectly affect the lateral energy transfer contributed by Bloch waves S B , since field distribution inside the spacer can impact the field distribution inside the metasurface according to the boundary conditions. An important observation is that S B is composed of only first-order and second-order cosine functions, derived as because high-order Bloch waves cancel each other and do not contribute to the lateral energy transfer at positions deep inside the dielectric metasurface (details given in SI 2). We have now established the relationships between four light phases φ0, φ1, φs,0 and φs,1 and two lateral energy transfer functions S P and S B . We note that the two reflection phases φ0 and φ1 are predominantly dictated by the multilayer structure, while the two propagation phases φs,0 and φs,1 are solely determined by the spacer thickness. Therefore, given a top-layer meta-structure, one can always efficiently control the two lateral transfer functions S P and S B via varying the spacer thickness and fine-tuning the multilayer structure. Further, we note that varying the spacer thickness can simultaneously modify φs,0 and φs,1, being highly undesired for our optimization aiming to enhance the anomalous-reflection channel and suppress the normal-reflection channel. Therefore, here we choose to fix the spacer thickness (and thus fix φs,0 and φs,1 accordingly) and only fine-tune the multilayer structure to change φ0 and φ1 independently in our optimizations, in order to regulate the actual energy-flow distribution S a =S P +S B at will, finally achieving the desired perfect anomalous reflection. Specifically, we optimize the thicknesses of four upper layers of the multilayer film to efficiently change the two reflection phases φ0 and φ1, but well maintain the perfect-reflection properties of the whole structure since the remaining part of the multilayer structure is still a well-defined photonic Bragg mirror. We first design a perfect anomalous reflector working at 1550 nm wavelength, that can reflect normally-incident TM light to 40°off-normal direction. Considering that the phase requirement of 40°perfect anomalous reflection is still approximately linear, six Si gradient gratings with widths ranging from small to large were first selected. Then, the thickness of the spacer was determined to be 280 nm (other larger values are also feasible); moreover, the effect of evanescent waves was suppressed well, and only propagating waves were allowed to contribute to the lateral energy transfer in the spacer. Multilayer films were then preliminarily selected to totally reflect the 0 th -and 1 st -order propagating waves in the spacer that are scattered by the gradient gratings. Phase responses φ0 and φ1 were then scanned to control the oscillations of S P and S B of each order and then to regulate the actual energy-flow distribution S a : The purpose was to minimize the second-order energy-flow oscillation and to match the first-order energy-flow oscillation with the desired form. According to the diffraction formula, it is easy to determine that the 0 th -and When proper parameters such as (173°, 170°) for φ0 and φ1 are selected, the distributions of the second-and first-order oscillations are as shown in Fig. Fig. In the actual design process, considering the fabrication constraints, four unit elements with a period of 400 nm were adopted, and the thickness of the spacer was set as 372 nm. We show the anomalous reflection efficiency versus the three parameters under the condition of 100% reflectance in Fig. Finally, the same process was used to fabricate the sample. Fig. The reflex response of the meta-system can be designed by controlling the lateral energy transfer, which comes from the propagation wave and Bloch wave in our proposed Q3D-SWS. We mainly discussed how to regulate the lateral energy transfer by sweeping the phase responses φ0 and φ1 realized by multilayer films. This proposed strategy is straightforward, non-optimized and effective. Furthermore, the parameters The glass substrate is first cleaned by ultrasonic cleaning. The Si/SiO2 multilayer films, SiO2 spacer, and Si film are coated using a magnetron sputtering deposition system NSC-15 from Optorun. The power was set as 10 kW and kept constant in the deposition process. The chamber was pumped down to a base pressure of 1.0×10 -3 Pa and the work pressure was 6.0×10 -1 Pa. The deposition temperature was room temperature. The current and voltage were automatically regulated. In the process, Si was the only starting material and injected O2 to generate SiO2. The deposition rates under the above condition were 0.25 nm/s and 0.63 nm/s for Si and SiO2, respectively. After deposition, we used TEM and spectral inversion technology to confirm the thicknesses of the multilayer films, and carried out the correction on preparation process and metasurface parameters. Then, the substrate is spin-coated with a positive electron-beam resist (AR6200.09) at a speed of 4000 r.p.m. for 40 seconds and baked at 150 °C on the hotplate for 2 minutes. The final thickness is about 200 nm. The sample is then exposed through electron-beam lithography with 100-kV acceleration voltage. The exposed resist is developed in standard developing liquid. Reactive ion etching (RIE) is performed using C4F8 and SF6 at 45 and 20 sccm, respectively, at a pressure of 10 mT. RIE power was set to 13 W and Inductively Coupled Plasma power to 400 W. The resist mask was removed by the oxygen plasma. The angle-resolved spectrum system in micro-region (ARM) from Ideaoptics Inc. 41 is employed to verify the spectral property of the 40°anomalous reflection sample. The measurement realizes angle resolution by focusing the reflective beam in the Fourier plane of the lens. The measurement system is not suitable for a 75°-anomalous reflection sample because the measurement system equipped with a microscope objective whose numerical aperture is 0.87 only guarantees a collection angle of 60°. Therefore, the R1, angle-resolved spectrum system, ideaoptics, China is employed to characterize the 75°anomalous reflection sample. The measurement realizes angle resolution by mechanical rotating of the receiver. In the test, the intensity of incident light was detected via the sample with high-reflective films. Then the intensities of +1 st , -1 st , and 0 th order light were detected for all wavelength at once to obtain the anomalous reflection efficiency. The measurements were carried in a darkroom to improve the signal-to-noise ratio.