Mechanical metamaterials are periodic lattice structures with complex unit cell architectures that can achieve extraordinary mechanical properties beyond the capability of bulk materials. A new class of metamaterials is proposed, whose mechanical properties rely on deformation-induced transitions in nodal-topology by formation of internal self-contact. The universal nature of the principle presented, is demonstrated for tension, compression, shear and torsion. In particular, it is shown that by frustration of soft deformation modes, large highly non-linear stiffening effects can be generated. Tunable non-linear elasticity can be exploited to design materials mimicking the complex mechanical response of biological tissue. Biological tissues, like skin In this study, we draw inspiration from stiffness-tuning by contact-formation and significantly expand the capabilities of the state-of-the-art by achieving changes in nodal-topology under arbitrary loading conditions. This is demonstrated for tension, compression, shear and torsion. Further, the fundamental mechanism of the stiffening, the change in nodal-topology, i.e. the connectivity between the real-space elements, is examined. To maximize the effect of the connectivity reconfiguration on the elastic non-linearity, the metamaterials are designed to switch from a soft -kinematically indeterminate initial state to a rigid -determinate state when deformed. Soft inextensional modes of deformation in kinematically indeterminate frameworks allow for large reconfigurations by rotation or bending in joints without inducing tension or compressing in the beams. These soft modes are employed to design the displacement trajectory of nodes connecting beams. Upon deformation inter-nodal contact is formed. For the given loading condition, the nodes in contact mutually constrain the displacement of their counterpart, which causes frustration of the soft deformation mode. Further deformation requires changes in the beam length (rigid, stretch-dominated deformation) instead of rotations in joints (soft, bending dominated deformation). Consequently, the contact-pairs, can be regarded as one single node for the given loading conditions and the effective connectivity, i.e. the nodal-topology of the framework is altered, resulting in a drastic, discontinuous increase in elastic modulus. The proposed concept, illustrated in Fig. Numerical simulations of the mechanical metamaterials were performed using the solid mechanics module in COMSOL Multiphysics ® v. 5.6 Specimens for experimental characterization were fabricated by Spectroplast AG, Switzerland using stereolithography (SLA) 3D printing of silicone (TrueSil A60). In this study the base material was chosen to be a silicone polymer. The advantage of silicone is its large purely elastic stains and small hysteresis and creep. The SLA 3D printing allows the fabrication of fine features with high resolution and good tolerances. Generally, our metamaterials can be fabricated from various materials. The condition for a reversible change in topology is that the maximum local strain remains in the elastic regime of the constitutive material. According to the numerical simulations, the maximum local strain at contact is in the same order than the effective strain applied, i.e. between 0.1% and 10%. Hence, also metals and polymers with a reduced elastic regime can be used. At the small scale that may also apply to semiconductors and ceramics. In the tensile state, one soft mode exists, which is not exited when tensile load in the y-direction is applied. This results in a rigid deformation mode. (c) The framework arising from compression exhibits three inextensional modes. When the framework is compressed in the y-direction, the inner beams are loaded in compression, leading to a rigid deformation behavior. Compression and tensile tests were performed on an Instron ElectroPuls E3000 universal testing machine equipped with a 250 N Dynacell load cell, using a strain rate of 5% min -1 . 3D-printed adapters (fused filament fabrication of PA6) were glued to the top and bottom surface of the specimen to enable gripping. The exact geometry of the tested specimens can be found in the Supplementary Information. 3 Results To predict the switch from a soft, to a rigid deformation mode in our metamaterials, we employ an extension of Maxwell's mechanical stability theory of frameworks We examine the mechanical response of the metamaterials undergoing connectivity transitions by finite element modelling. All three unit cells show a drastic increase in effective modulus (Fig. To experimentally validate our concept, we compare the mechanical response of a 3D-printed silicone specimen to the numerical simulations (Fig. The ratio r serves two purposes. First, it allows comparison of the stiffening in different metamaterials and design variable combinations. Second, it can be used as an indicator for a transition in deformation mode. If r 1, load-carrying internal contacts were established and the connectivity has effectively changed. The three types of unit cells presented, can be assembled into periodic metamaterials. In the following the metamaterial of the tension / compression unit cell will be further characterized. Tessellations of the shear and torsion unit cells into metamaterials can be found in the Supplementary Information. The change in the nodal-topology can be described by means of the one-dimensional Betti number. Betti numbers are mathematical measures to distinguish topological phases To determine the fundamental limits of our metamaterial, we explore the design space for the specific example of a metamaterial under tension and compression (Fig. Different cellular solids can be compared in a double logarithmic plot of the relative modulus against the relative density (Ashby graph), in which they typically show a linear scaling More complex mechanical responses can be accessed by combining unit cells with different geometries into one metamaterial. As it was shown in Fig. In this work, we have introduced and characterized a new class of metamaterials, which rely on deformationinduced topological transitions in kinematically indeterminate frameworks, providing a new pathway to design materials with highly non-linear mechanical properties. This general concept can be applied to arbitrary loading conditions, and a wide range of constituent materials. While the presented unit cells are all created by rational design, a recent study introduced a mathematical approach to design infinitesimal or finite motion in kinematically indeterminate mechanical systems of joints connected by freely rotating rods The presented concept inherits the limitation that beams undergo small bending deformations, when deformed in the initial state. Consequently, the assumption of perfectly straight beams loaded in pure tension and compression, is not fulfilled completely. This is especially relevant if large nodal displacements are required to form internal contact. This issue can be mitigated by localizing the deformation using hinges The stress and strain at which the topological transition takes place, as well as the magnitude of the stiffening can be tuned over almost two orders of magnitude by the unit cell design, as shown by a comprehensive numerical study of the design space. The presented principle of universal topology-induced stiffening significantly extends the capabilities of the existing metamaterials Our approach of generating highly tunable non-linear strain-stiffening can be used to design metamaterials emulating the non-linear elasticity of biological tissues 