Applying the strong pinning formalism to the mixed state of a type II superconductor, we study the effect of thermal fluctuations (or creep) on the penetration of an ac magnetic field as quantified by the so-called Campbell length λC. Within strong pinning theory, vortices get pinned by individual defects, with the jumps in the pinning energy (∆epin) and force (∆fpin) between bistable pinned and free states quantifying the pinning process. We find that the evolution of the Campbell length λC(t) as a function of time t is the result of two competing effects, the change in the force jumps ∆fpin(t) and a change in the trapping area Strap(t) of vortices; the latter describes the area around the defect where a nearby vortex gets and remains trapped. Contrary to naive expectation, we find that during the decay of the critical state in a zero-field cooled (ZFC) experiment, the Campbell length λC(t) is usually nonmonotonic, first decreasing with time t and then increasing for long waiting times. Field cooled (FC) experiments exhibit hysteretic effects in λC; relaxation then turns out to be predominantly monotonic, but its magnitude and direction depends on the specific phase of the cooling-heating cycle. Furthermore, when approaching equilibrium, the Campbell length relaxes to a finite value, different from the persistent current which vanishes at long waiting times t, e.g., above the irreversibility line. Finally, measuring the Campbell length λC(t) for different states, zero-field cooled, field cooled, and relaxed, as a function of different waiting times t and temperatures T , allows to 'spectroscopyse' the pinning potential of the defects. The phenomenological properties of type II superconductors subject to a magnetic field B are determined by vortices, linear topological defects that guide the field through the material in terms of quantized fluxes 1 Φ 0 = hc/2e. The interaction of these flux tubes with material defects has a decisive impact on the material's properties, as it determines the amount of current density that the superconductor can transport free of dissipation. This phenomenon, known under the name of vortex pinning 2 , has been studied extensively, both in theory and experiment, as one important facet of vortex matter physics The penetration of an ac magnetic field into the mixed state of a superconductor has been first analyzed by When including thermal fluctuations in the calculation of the pinning force density F pin , different jumps ∆e pin (t) in the pinning energy become relevant that depend on the time t evolution of the vortex state due to creep. While this relaxational time dependence leads to the decay of the persistent current density j(t), the corresponding velocity dependence leads to a rounding In the present paper, we determine the Campbell length λ C (t) including the effect of thermal fluctuations. We determine the relevant jumps ∆f pin (t) in the pinning force which depend on the time t during which the original, e.g., critical, state has relaxed due to creep. For this ZFC situation, we find that the evolution of the Campbell length λ C (t) is the result of two competing effects, the change in the force jumps ∆f pin (t) and, furthermore, an increase in the trapping area S trap (t) of vortices; the latter describes the area around the defect where a nearby vortex gets and remains trapped, see Fig. Relaxation also appears for the case of field cooled states, as these drop out of equilibrium upon changing temperature and relax when the cooling or heating process is interrupted. In a FC experiment, the Campbell penetration exhibits hysteretic phenomena in a cooling-heating cycle. The relaxation of the Campbell length λ C then depends on the type of pinning and the location within the hysteresis loop. At intermediate and large pinning, we find three different phases, one where λ C monotonously decreases with time, one where it monotonously increases towards equilibrium, and a third phase where relaxation is slow due to large creep barriers; at marginally strong pinning, we find λ C mainly decreasing in time. Several of these findings have been observed in experiments In the following, we first recapitulate relevant aspects of the strong pinning theory and of creep (Secs. II and III that focuses on transport) and then proceed with the calculation of the Campbell penetration depth λ C in the presence of thermal fluctuations, see Sec. IV. We first focus on the critical (or zero-field cooled, ZFC) state in Secs. IV A and IV B and then extend the analysis to the case of field cooling (FC) in Secs. IV C and IV D. Section V summarizes and concludes our work. A complete derivation of strong pinning theory starting from an elastic description of the vortex lattice (we assume a lattice directed along z with a lattice constant a 0 determined by the induction B = Φ 0 /a 2 0 ) that is interacting with a random assembly of defects of density n p has been given in several papers; here, we make use of the discussion and notation in Refs. 8, 12, 15, and 20, see also Refs. 21-23 for numerical work on strong pinning. It turns out, that in the low density limit n p a 0 ξ 2 κ 1, where ξ denotes the coherence length 1. Vortex-and trapping geometries under strong pinning conditions; note the different meaning of vertical axes referring to the vortices (z) and the trapping area (y), respectively. Shown are vortex configurations u(z) (black solid lines) on approaching the defect head-on (on the x-axis) near the bistable interval [-x-, x+]. Four stages are highlighted, the (weakly deformed) free state before pinning at x < -x-, pinned on the left at -x-< x < 0, pinned on the right at 0 < x < x+, both strongly deformed, and free at x > x+ after depinning. Note the asymmetry in the pinning (at -x-) and depinning (at x+) processes. In the ZFC state, the trapping area Strap extends over t ⊥ = 2x-along the transverse direction y and over x-+ x+ in the longitudinal one. The total trapping area (with unit branch occupation in the absence of thermal fluctuations) is the sum of the blue and red regions enclosed by the black solid line in the figure. At equilibrium, the branch occupation is radially symmetric with jumps at R = x0, where x0 denotes the branch crossing point, see Fig. and κ is the Labusch parameter, see Eq. (4) below, this complex many-body problem can be reduced to an effective single-vortex-single-pin problem. The latter involves an individual flux line with an effective elasticity C ≈ νε(a 2 0 /λ) c 66 c 44 (0) ∼ εε 0 /a 0 that accounts for the presence of other vortices. Here, ε 0 = (Φ 0 /4πλ L ) 2 is the vortex line energy, λ L denotes the London penetration depth, ε < 1 is the anisotropy parameter for a uniaxial material Below, we will consider a potential of general form whenever possible and focus on Lorentzian-shaped defect potentials e p (R) in order to arrive at numerically accurate results; results for non-Lorentzian shaped potentials remain qualitatively the same. The generic setup involves a vortex line driven along x with asymptotic position R v (z → ±∞) = R ∞ that impacts on the defect located, say, at the origin. The simplest geometry is that of a head-on collision with R ∞ = (x, 0) and increasing x for an impact from the left; given the rotational symmetry of the defect potential e p (R), the geometry for the collision at a finite impact parameter y, R ∞ = (x, y) follows straightforwardly. Assuming a head-on collision to begin with, the geometry simplifies considerably and involves the asymptotic vortex position x and the deformation u(z) of the vortex, see Fig. The energy (or Hamiltonian) of this setup involves elastic and pinning energies and is given by Minimizing this energy with respect to r at fixed asymptotic position x, we find the vortex tip position r(x) by solving the nonlinear problem see Fig. for the appearance of a local maximum in e pin (x, r), see Fig. (with f p (r m ) = 0 providing the maximal force derivative at r m ) that determines the Labusch criterion for strong pinning. Defining the force scale f p ≡ e p /ξ and estimating the force derivative or curvature f p = -e p ∼ f p /ξ produces a Labusch parameter κ ∼ e p / Cξ 2 , hence, strong pinning is realized for either large pinning energy e p or small effective elasticity C. For the Lorentzian potential, we obtain a maximal force derivative f p (r m ) = e p /4ξ 2 at r m = √ 2 ξ and hence κ = e p /4 Cξ 2 . The tip positions for the pinned (rp(x), open black triangle) and free (r f (x), open red circle) branches increase with x, while the unstable one (rus(x), black cross) decreases. Within the (symmetric) bistable regions [-x + , -x -] and [x -, x + ] opening up at κ > 1, the force-balance equation Eq. ( A vortex approaching the defect from the left gets trapped by the pin at -x -and is dragged towards the pinning center. Upon leaving the defect, the vortex gets strongly deformed, see Fig. with its multiple branches i = f, p, us shown in Fig. where we have used the force-balance equation ( The energy e pin (x) and force f pin (x) experienced by the vortex are shown in Fig. The extent of the bistable interval [x -, x + ] is easily found in the very strong pinning limit with κ 1: With reference to Fig. The lower boundary x -is conveniently obtained from the condition f p [r f (x -)] = C. For large κ, we have r f (x -) ξ residing in the tail of the pinning potential; assuming a defect potential decaying as e p (R) ∼ -2e p (ξ/R) n , we obtain Inserting this result back into Eq. ( For a Lorentzian potential, we have f p,max = (3/2) 3/2 e p /4ξ and r p (x + ) ≈ 2/3 ξ and hence The lower boundary x -relates to r f (x -) via x -≈ (4/3)r f (x -) and with r f (x -) ≈ 2(3κ) 1/4 ξ, we obtain The marginally strong pinning case κ 1 can be quantitatively described via an expansion of the pinning force f p (r) around the inflection point r m defined through f p (r m ) = 0 and using the Labusch parameter in the form We use κ -1 1 as our small parameter and set κ ≈ 1 otherwise (however, beware of additional corrections in κ -1 through κ ≈ 1 + (κ -1)). For a Lorentzian potential, the shape parameter γ assumes the value γ = 3/8. The cubic expansion ( The tip locations Multi-valued pinning energy landscape e i pin (x), with i = p, f, us corresponding to the pinned (orange), free (blue), and unstable (dotted) branches for κ = 10. The vortex coordinate x is expressed in units of ξ. The bistability extends over the intervals |x| ∈ [x-, x+] where the different branches coexist; pinned and unpinned vortex branches cut at the branch crossing point x = x0. (b) Total energy epin(x; r) versus vortex tip position r for a fixed vortex position x = x (dashed vertical line in (a)). The points r f (red dot), rp (black triangle), and rus (black cross) mark the free, pinned, and unstable solutions of the force-balance equation (2). The barriers Up and U dp stabilize the free and pinned states against thermal fluctuations; they coincide in size at the branch crossing point x0. The maximal pinning force density Fpin = Fc is realized for a maximally asymmetric pinned-branch occupation pc(-x-< x < x+) = 1; for the symmetric equilibrium occupation peq(-x0 < x < x0) = 1 the pinning force vanishes. Shown in the figure is the pinned-branch occupation at finite temperatures T (thick colored lines) where thermal fluctuations allow for early pinning at -x jp -< -x-and early depinning at x jp + < x+. The corresponding (total) energy jump ∆e jp pin = ∆e jp + + ∆e jp -(vertical black solid lines) determining the pinning force density Fpin(T ) is reduced with respect to its critical value (with jumps at -x-and x+). (c) Pinning force f i pin (x) corresponding to pinned (orange), free (blue), and unstable (dotted) states. The sum of force jumps ∆fpin = ∆f jp -+ ∆f jp + (vertical black solid lines) determines the Campbell length λC. (d) The inset shows a zoom of the pinning force f f pin near -x-that contributes to λC with a steep square-root change in the force jump in the presence of creep, see discussion in Sec. IV B 1. at (de)pinning are defined by the conditions f p [r f (x -)] = f p [r p (x + )] = C, see Fig. Inserting this result into the force-balance equation (2) and using (13), we find the boundaries of the bistable region with The pair x m and r m of asymptotic and tip positions depends on the details of the potential; while r m derives solely from the shape e p (R) and thus does not depend on the elasticity C, x m as given by ( and Besides the tip positions r p (x + ) and r f (x -) at (de)pinning, we also need the tip positions r f (x + ) and r p (x -) that are not associated with a special point on the free and pinned branches. They are obtained by solving the force-balance equation (2) at x ± = x m ± δx max using the expansion (13) with the ansatz r f (x + ) = r m +μδr max and r p (x -) = r mμδr max ; the resulting equation for μ, μ + 2/3μ 3 /3 = 0, (20) is solved by μ = -1 (→ the result (15) obtained before) and μ = 2, hence with δr max given in (15). At very strong pinning, the bistable region is arranged asymmetrically around the branch crossing point x 0 , see Fig. as follows from the force-balance equation x 0r f (x 0 ) = -f p [r f (x 0 )]/ C (dropping the force term f p [r f (x 0 )]) and Fig. For the Lorentzian potential, we find x 0 ≈ 2 √ 2κξ. When strong pinning is marginal, κ-1 1, the branch crossing point x 0 coincides with x m . Its location depends on the detailed shape of the potential; for a Lorentzian, we have (see Eq. ( 3. Activation barrier U0 Finally, we briefly discuss the barriers for thermal activation between bistable branches, specifically, the barrier scale U 0 at the branch crossing point. The latter is given by and therefore depends on the unstable and pinned/free tip position at x 0 . At large κ 1, the vortex free and pinned vortex tip positions are given in (22). We find the unstable solution r us by using the asymptotic decay f p (R) ≈ -2n f p (ξ/R) n+1 and dropping the term r us (x 0 ) against x 0 in the force-balance equation ( for a Lorentzian potential, r us (x 0 ) ≈ 2(κ/2) 1/6 ξ; indeed, the ratio r us (x 0 )/x 0 ≈ (1/4κ) 1/3 1 is parametrically small at large κ. The barrier scale U 0 then evaluates to with small corrections ∝ 1/κ n/2(n+1) . In the marginally strong pinning case, we find the tip positions r = r m + δr by solving the force-balance equation ( Making use of these results in the definition (25) for U 0 and expanding e pin (x 0 , r f = r m + √ 3 δr max ) to fourth order in δr max , we find that where the last equation applies to the Lorentzian shaped potential. In deriving (29), we have used the expansion (13) as well as the force balance equation (2) to convert the elastic energy C(r mx 0 )δr max to a pinning energy f p (r m )δr max . One of the central features of superconductivity is dissipation-free transport. We briefly discuss the results of strong pinning theory for critical current densities j c and the effect of thermal fluctuations resulting in a slowly decaying 'persistent' current. The transport properties of a type II superconducting material is determined by the vortex dynamics as described by the (macroscopic) force-balance equation a non-linear equation for the mean vortex velocity v, with η = BH c2 /ρ n c 2 the Bardeen-Stephen viscosity Averaging the pinning force f pin over x and y with the vortex population described by the critical branch occupation p c (R), we obtain the critical pinning force density F c (we exploit the anti-symmetry of f pin (R)) with the energy difference ∆e fp pin (R) = e f pin (R)e p pin (R) and e x the unit vector along x; the y-component of the pinning force density vanishes due to the antisymmetry in f pin,y . Following convention, we have included a minus sign in the definition of F c . The branch-occupation p c (R) restricts the integral to the trapping area shown in Fig. where we have defined the transverse trapping length t ⊥ = 2x -. The result (32) for the pinning force density shows that all vortices hitting the left-side semi-circle of diameter t ⊥ get pinned, see Fig. We obtain the critical current density j c from the force balance (30) by setting v = 0 and choosing the maximal pinning force density F c associated with the most asymmetric branch occupation p c (R), with ∆e pin = ∆e fp pin | -x-+ ∆e pf pin | x+ the sum of (positive) jumps in the pinning energy e pin (x) and t ⊥ = 2x -. Note that strong pinning does not necessarily imply a large critical current density j c , as our approximation of independent pins requires a small density n p . Starting with a non-equilibrium initial state at time t = 0, thermal fluctuations (or creep) drive the system towards equilibrium. To fix ideas, we start from a critical or ZFC state (and a head-on collision) characterized by the critical pinned-branch occupation p c (x) = Θ(x + x -) -Θ(xx + ) and let it decay through creep; the extension of the result to the 2D situation is straightforward. The presence of thermal fluctuations then increases the probabilities for pinning near -x -and depinning near x + , that leads to a reduction of the pinning force density F pin < F c . We account for such thermal hops of vortices into and out of the pin through proper calculation of the thermal pinned-branch occupation probability p th (x; t, T ) via solution of the rate equation where U dp (x) = e us pin (x)e p pin (x), denote the barriers for pinning and depinning (cf. Eq. ( The renormalized jump positions -x jp -(t, T ) and x jp + (t, T ) are determined by the relations 15 with the diffusion time τ 0 = πj c d 2 /2cv th B (d is the sample dimension) and t 0 to be determined self-consistently 15 from t 0 = τ 0 T /(j c |∂ j U |). Equation (36) tells us, that thermal fluctuations driven by the temperature T can overcome (de)pinning barriers U p(dp) of size T ln(t/t 0 ) after a waiting time t. As a result, waiting a time t at temperature T , the pinned-branch occupation probability changes from p c (x) ≈ 0 to p th (x) ≈ 1 at all positions x within the intervall [-x jp -(t), -x -] and drops from p c (x) ≈ 1 to p th (x) ≈ 0 for x ∈ [x jp + (t), x + ], thereby reducing the asymmetry of the critical occupation probability p c (x). The waiting time t then determines the shape of the pinned-branch occupation probability p th (x; t, T ): at short times, thermal relaxation is weak and p th (x; t, T ) remains close to p c (x). On the other hand, for finite T and long waiting times t t eq ≡ t 0 exp(U 0 /T ), with U 0 = U p (x 0 ) = U dp (x 0 ) the barrier at the branch cutting point x 0 , see Fig. Generalizing from the head-on collision to a finiteimpact geometry is straightforward; evaluating the pinning force density Eq. ( that depends on the temperature T and the waiting time t. The premature pinning and depinning processes at -x jp -and x jp + modify the trapping length t jp ⊥ = 2x jp -> t ⊥ and reduce the (sum of) jumps in the pinning energy, . For times t t 0 , the pinning force density (37) takes the analytical form 15 with the dimensionless creep parameter T The exponent 2/3 derives from the vanishing of barriers on approaching the boundaries of the bistable region, U dp,p (x) ∝ |xx ± | 3/2 , with the value 3/2 universal for a smooth pinning potential e p (R); higher-order terms relevant away from the edges x ± produce the corrections ∝ T 4/3 in (38). The coefficient g(κ) subsumes all dependencies on the Labusch parameter κ and has been calculated in Ref. 15; it involves the competing effects of an increasing trapping length t jp ⊥ and a decreasing jump in the total pinning energy ∆e jp pin . As the latter is the dominating one for not too strong pinning parameters below κ ∼ 10 2 , the pinning force density F pin (t, T ) usually decreases under the influence of creep. The relative importance of these two effects will be modified in the analysis of the Campbell penetration depth below, where the role of ∆e jp pin is replaced by ∆f jp pin . Inserting the result (38) back into the force-balance equation (30), we immediately obtain the persistent current density: in a typical relaxation experiment (i.e., after a short initial waiting time), we can neglect the dissipative term ηv in Eq. (30) and we arrive at the persistent current density in the form The result (40) is valid for times t t eq . For large times beyond t eq , we go over to the TAFF region (thermally assisted flux flow The above scenario applies to the strong pinning paradigm where barriers saturate in the limit of vanishing currents, j → 0. In reality, correlations between different pinning centers are expected to become relevant at very small drives j, implying growing barriers and glassy response instead. Below, we will study the influence of creep on the linear response under a small external ac magnetic field, that is, again a typical relaxation experiment involving the waiting time t determining the evolution of the vortex state. It will be interesting to see that creep affects the persistent current and the ac penetration depth very differently, with j(t, T ) vanishing at long times while λ C (t, T ) remains finite. Probing the superconductor with a small ac field δB = h ac exp(-iωt) B 0 on top of the (large) dc external field B 0 provides us with valuable information on the pinning landscape. Rather than telling about the jumps ∆e pin in the energy landscape when measuring j c , the Campbell penetration depth λ C informs us about the force landscape, specifically, the jumps ∆f pin , see Fig. Solving the force-balance equation (30) for the displacement field U (X, t) (we denote coarse grained quantities averaging over many vortices with capital letters, see Ref. 29) assuming a phenomenological Ansatz 11 for the pinning force density F pin = F 0 -αU , one finds that the ac field penetrates the superconductor over a distance given by λ 2 At the low frequencies typical of such penetration experiments, we can drop the dissipative contribution ∝ ηω and obtain the phenomenological result due to Campbell 11 . In the following, we discuss the Campbell penetration physics within the strong pinning paradigm, first for the zero-field cooled (ZFC) or critical state and subsequently for the field cooled (FC) situation, including also hysteretic effects appearing upon cycling the temperature up and down in the experiment. A. Campbell penetration depth λC in ZFC state Within our quantitative strong pinning theory, the action of the ac field on the zero-field cooled state is to reshuffle vortices at the boundaries -x -and x + , producing a restoring force density proportional to the displacement U of the vortices. We compute the change in the pinning force density δF pin (U) by subtracting from (31) the expression with the displaced branch occupation p c (R -U), With U directed along x, the scalar product in the last line of ( with the polar angle φ restricted to angles π/2 < φ < 3π/2 on the left circular segment of the trapping boundary and -φ + < φ < φ + with φ + = arcsin(x -/x + ) on the right one. Inserting the expression (43) into (42) and writing ∆f pf pin (R) ≡ -∆f (R) e R (with ∆f (R) the modulus of ∆f pf pin (R)) directed along the radial coordinate, the change in the pinning force density can be evaluated as with the effective angle θ + = 2(φ + + sin φ + cos φ + ). The expression (44) is originally calculated for a left-shift U < 0 of the vortex critical state; after a short initialization period In the large κ limit, x + x -, see Eqs. ( with the force jumps ∆f pf pin = f p pin (-x -)-f f pin (-x -) > 0 and ∆f fp pin = f f pin (x + )f p pin (x + ) > 0, where we have returned to the original notation for the two jumps at -x -and x + for convenience (i.e., the difference ∆f fp pin is equal to the modulus ∆f (x + ) in Eq. ( In the opposite limit of marginally strong pinning with κ -1 1, x - x 0 x + and the trapping region acquires an approximately circular geometry. The angle φ + can be expanded as φ + ≈ π/2δφ + /2, with δφ + π/2, allowing to approximate the effective angle θ + as The bistable region is symmetric around x 0 , see Eq. ( where we have again returned to the original notation for the jump at x + , ∆f fp pin (x The above results differ from those in Ref. 12 in the more accurate handling of the geometry in the trapping boundary, leading to the appearance of θ + and factors π/4. The derivation (44) applies to the critical state-the corresponding result for other vortex states is obtained by the proper replacement p c (R) → p(R). E.g., for the equilibrium distribution p eq (R) with a radially symmetric jump at R ≈ x 0 , the result reads Note that, at κ-1 1, the jump ∆f fp pin (x 0 ) = f f pin (x 0 )f p pin (x 0 ) at x 0 is larger (by a factor 2/ √ 3) than the jumps ∆f fp pin at x + or ∆f pf pin at x -. Physically, the expressions (45) -(48) describe the average curvature in the pinning landscape that, upon integration, is given by the sum of jumps in the pinning force f pin . This should be compared with the average pinning force in Eq. ( B. Creep effects on λC in ZFC state At finite temperatures, the analysis of the vortex system's linear response proceeds in a manner analogous to the one above ignoring thermal fluctuations, with the following modifications: i) the oscillations in the vortex lattice induced by the small ac field now reshuffle those vortex lines close to the thermal jump points at -x jp and x jp + , implying that the relevant jumps in force are ∆f pf, jp pin and ii) the trapping area involves the renomalized jump locations x jp ± , producing the thermally renormalized angles φ jp + = arcsin x jp -/x jp + and θ jp + = 2(φ jp + + sin φ jp + cos φ jp + ). After a short initialization period, that is not relevant for the present discussion, the field penetration is determined by the effective curvature with the thermally enhanced trapping length t jp ⊥ = 2x jp -. In the marginally strong pinning limit, we have κ-1 1 and x jp x 0 x jp + , leading to a saturation of the effective angle θ jp + → π. In this regime, relaxation behaves symmetrically on both sides of the bistable region with ∆f pf,jp pin ≈ ∆f fp,jp pin , see Eq. ( A numerical evaluation of the Campbell curvature α sp (t, T ), Eqs. ( Following Eq. ( with small asymptotic shifts δx ± > 0. Furthermore, we begin our discussion with a study of the very strong pinning regime, where the bistable interval [x -, x + ] is well separated from the defect potential, as x -∼ κ 1/(n+2) ξ and x + ∼ κξ are both much larger than ξ, see Eqs. ( Next, we focus on the total force jump ∆f jp pin = (π/4)∆f pf,jp pin + ∆f fp,jp pin . It is convenient to determine the difference in force jumps between the shifted and original jump positions ±x jp ± and ±x ± in the form ) and i = p, f, as well as corresponding expressions at -x jp -. Above, we have introduced the ratio between the semi-circular and rectangular areas appearing in the trapping geometry of Fig. With r p (x) < ξ and x ∈ [x -, x + ] ξ, we find that f p pin (x) ≈ -Cx and follows from the shifts δx ± . For the calculation of the curvature term δf f pin (-x jp -), see Fig. with Note that r f (x) increases with x, see Fig. leaving us with the task to find the shifts δx + and δr f-in the asymptotic and free tip positions, the terms ±ρ Cδx - from Eqs. (57) and (58) cancelling out. Next, we determine the shift δr f-in the tip position by expanding the microscopic force balance Eq. ( scales with the square root of the asymptotic shift δx -. The corresponding result for At large κ, we can evaluate this expression within the tail of the defect potential; assuming, as before, an algebraic decay e p (R) ≈ 2e p (ξ/R) n , we find that |f p [r f (x -)]| ≈ C(n + 2)/r f (x -) and relating r f (x -) to x -via Eq. ( Approximating the force jump ∆f pin ≈ C(x we arrive at a compact result for the scaled Campbell curvature at large κ, Here, the linear terms ∝ δx -/x -and ∝ δx + /x + are universal, while the square-root-or curvature term ∝ δx -/x -depends on the shape of the defect potential, with the numerical prefactor describing a potential with an algebraic tail decaying as 1/R n . The result (63) involves several competing elements: The first factor with a linear correction δx -/x -is due to the enhanced trapping distance and always leads to an increase in the Campbell curvature α sp (t, T ). On the other hand, the second factor originating from the renormalized force jump contributes with competing terms: While the positive term ∝ δx -/x -arising from the curvature in f f pin at -x -, see Fig. Going beyond small values of δx -, the result (63) has to be modified, since the square root approximation for δr f-∝ x -δx -breaks down. This is easily seen when considering Fig. , where we have used the force balance equation (56) as well as the result (10) for r f (x -) and x -. The result (63) then is replaced by at large δx - x -/2(n + 1). Note that, while δx -is parametrically small in κ as compared to δx + , this is not the case for the ratios δx -/x -and δx + /x + , since pinning and depinning appear on very different scales x -and x + , respectively. Next, we wish to evaluate the expressions ( For a Lorentzian potential, we have the more precise results f p [r p (x + )] ≈ (3/2) 7/2 e p /4ξ 3 and δr p+ ≈ ( √ 2/κ)(2/3) 5/2 x + δx + . Expanding the pinning/depinning barriers U p and U dp away from -x -and x + , we find the barriers (in compact notation) where the second derivative f p has to be evaluated at r f (-x -) (r p (x + )) for the pinning barrier U p (the depinning barrier U dp ). Focusing on a Lorentzian potential, we arrive at with contributions from e pin δr ∝ C δx δr and e pin ∝ C δr 3 . After a waiting time t, thermal fluctuations at temperature T can overcome barriers of size T ln(t/t 0 ), rendering smaller barriers ineffective. Making use of Eq. (36) as well as the creep parameter T defined in (39), we obtain the final results for the thermal shifts Returning back to the evaluation of the Campbell curvature (63), we find the renormalized trapping length (with the numericals appertaining to a Lorentzian potential) where we have used that t ⊥ = 2x -≈ (16/3)(3κ) 1/4 ξ in the last expression. Combining Eqs. ( These results then provide us with an expression for the (scaled) Campbell curvature in the large-κ -small-time limit where we have used that ∆f pin ≈ C(ρ x -+ x + ) ≈ (3/2) 3/2 κξ C, keeping only the leading term in κ. Equation (72) expresses the generic large-κ result (63) in terms of the creep parameter T (t, T ) with the numericals describing the situation for a Lorentzian pinning potential. Going beyond small values of T , we have to use Eq. (64); the condition δx - x -/6 then translates to a creep parameter √ 3T > (2/3) 3 /κ 1/2 . Evaluating (64) using the thermal shifts δx ± in (69), we find the result for larger values of T to take the slightly modified form, In the above result, we have accounted for the improved normalization ∆f pin ≈ Cx + (1 + ρ x -/x + ) = Cx + ν that includes the subdominant term ρ x -/x + for better precision, ν = 1+ρ (4/3κ 1/3 ) 9/4 ; it is this result that compares well with the numerical result shown in Fig. expressing the change in the total force jump by the shifts in tip positions δr alone. The expressions (61) for the shift in the vortex tip positions δr p+ and δr f-involve the second derivative f p ≈ (e p /ξ 3 ) γ (κ -1) at the edges x ± (obtained with the help of the expansion Eq. ( symmetric at r p (x + ) and r f (x -). Besides the shift δr p+ associated with the edge of the bistability region, we also need the free tip position near x + , that is not associated with a special point on the free branch. It is obtained by evaluating the force-balance equation (2) on the free branch close to with the tip position r f (x + ) given in (21). Solving Eq. (77) with the help of the expansion (13), we find the (symmetric) tip shifts expressed through δx + , independent of γ. Finally, we derive the asymptotic shifts δx ± using the expansion for the pinning/depinning barriers (66) and find δx ± /ξ ≈ (e p /4 Cξ 2 )[4γ(κ-1)] 1/6 (3T ) 2/3 . This result simplifies considerably when focusing on the Lorentzian potential, where δx ± /ξ ≈ [3(κ -1)/2] 1/6 (3T ) 2/3 . The renormalized total force jump is obtained by inserting the above tip shifts into Eqs. (74) and we obtain the shift in the force jumps ∆f fp, jp pin -∆f fp pin ≈ Cξ (2/3) 1/6 (3T ) 1/3 (κ-1) 1/6 (79) where we have focused on the Lorentzian potential, the generalization to an arbitrary potential being straightforward once the shape parameter γ is known. To find the total force jump ∆f fp pin = C[r f (x + )r p (x + )] in the absence of fluctuations, we need the free and pinned vortex tip positons at the edge x + , see Eqs. (15) and (21), that lead us to the result The trapping scale x 0 in Eq. ( Note that the last (negative) term is just the square of the second (positive) contribution. Let us discuss the results (72), (73), and (81) and compare them with the numerical findings, with all of these shown in Fig. The barriers U 0 at the branch crossing point x 0 have been derived both for strong and marginal pinning in Sec. II, see Eqs. (27) and (29). We then find our analysis to be valid for values of the creep variable T inside the ranges resulting in very different relaxation ranges for the two situations. Fig. At very strong pinning κ 1, again, the increase in the trapping area and the curvature term in the force jump jointly produce an increase in the Campbell curvature at small values of the creep parameter. In this rise, the curvature term is the dominant one only at very small values T < (π/4) 3 [(4/3) 27/4 / √ 3] κ -11/4 . The curvature term goes over into the linear correction ∝ δx -/x -at T ≈ [(2/3) 3 / √ 3] κ -1/2 , but this crossover is hidden by the dominant increase in the trapping area. The increasing Campbell curvature implies a decreasing Campbell length λ C ∝ 1/ √ α sp . At larger values of T , the competition is among the two ∝ T 2/3 terms in Eq. ( , where we have focused on the leading order in κ only. This saturates at large κ at a value T ≈ 0.2, i.e., within the relevant time range 0 < T < 1 found in (82). With decreasing κ the correction in the trapping factor diminishes and at κ ∼ 10 the negative term in the force correction drives the initial slope of the inverted parabola negative, resulting in a monotonically decreasing Campbell curvature. However, we should not trust the large κ result Eq. ( The above results can be compared with different experimental findings: The increasing curvature α sp that we find at small times produces a decreasing-in-time In Fig. On a timescale t → t eq = t 0 exp(U 0 /T ), the jumps x jp ± shift close to x 0 and the branch occupation p th (R) approaches the radially symmetric equilibrium distribution p eq (R) with a jump at R ≈ x 0 . For marginally strong pinning with κ -1 1, the maximal barrier U 0 is small and the relaxation to equilibrium happens rapidly. The bistable region is narrow, with x ± and x 0 given in Sec. II, Eqs. ( In the very strong pinning limit κ 1, equilibrium is only slowly approached and the bistable region starts out broad and asymmetric, leading to stark changes in the trapping geometry and in the total force jump as the branch occupation relaxes. Our analysis then has to be adapted to cope with this different situation. We start by evaluating the asymptotic equilibrium value α 0 , and then study how this is approached as x jp ± → x 0 . We simplify our previous result for α 0 at equilibrium, Eq. ( The branch cutting point x 0 has been determined in Sec. II, Eq. ( that depends only on the defect density n p and depth e p . Quite remarkably, while the persistent current density vanishes upon approaching equilibrium, the Campbell curvature and penetration depth remain finite. This is in agreement with the experimental findings in Ref. 18, where a finite Campbell length was observed above the irreversibility line in a BiSCCO sample. On approaching equilibrium, the thermal jumps reside close to x 0 and we can write x jp ± = x 0 ± δx 0± with small corrections δx 0± > 0. Using the general result Eq. (50) for the Campbell curvature with θ jp + ≈ π, see Eq. ( With f f pin (x) ≈ 0 and f p pin (x) ≈ -Cx in the vicinity of x 0 , we find the changes in the force jump away from x 0 For long times t → t eq , the relevant creep barriers (35) are to be evaluated close to the equilibrium value U 0 , justifying the expansions with the total derivatives assuming the simple form as all derivatives ∂ x r f (x) and ∂ x r us (x) cancel due to Eq. (56); indeed, both barriers decrease when going away from equilibrium. Combining the above relations, we can express the change in the force jumps ∆f dp,jp pin and ∆f pf,jp pin in terms of the barrier difference to find ∆f fp,jp pin (t, T ) -∆f fp pin (x 0 ) ≈ - Combining Eq. ( Inserting the results for the force jumps and jump points into Eq. ( where we have used the form (48) for α 0 with ∆f fp pin (x 0 ) ≈ 2 C(2κ) 1/2 ξ and x 0 ≈ 2 √ 2κ ξ. Again, we find a competition between the trapping length and the force jump that act the same way as before, with the opposite signs compensated by evaluating T eq away from the longest time t eq = t 0 exp(U 0 /T ). The result is shown in the large κ panel of Fig. Note that the Campbell response requires sufficiently small frequencies as well: Following the derivation of Eq. ( The FC state is characterized by a homogeneous distribution of the magnetic field inside the sample and hence is associated with a vanishing current-and pinning-force density. Correspondingly, at κ > 1, the branch occupation p FC (R) is rotationally symmetric assuming a value p FC ≈ 1 in a disk with radius x jp ∈ [x -, x + ] centered around the defect (we note that in Ref. 12, the trapping area for λ C was handled the same way as for j c ; it was described by the transverse trapping length t ⊥ = 2x -∼ 2ξ and its circular geometry was ignored). The determination of the jump position x jp as a function of the FC state preparation and its relaxation through creep is the main objective of this section. Ignoring the initialization process directed along the displacement U parallel to the x-axis, U = (U, 0); the force jump ∆f fp pin (x jp ) = f f pin (x jp )f p pin (x jp ) is to be evaluated at the radial jump position x jp . The Campbell curvature then reads and depends on temperature through the position of the jump x jp in multiple ways: first, the pinning parameter κ determining the shape of the pinning force landscape f pin (x) in Fig. We start with the discussion of the field-cooled state and the appearance of hysteretic effects. Here, we have in mind a setup where we fix the magnetic field H and vary the temperature T , typically in a (repeated) coolingwarming cycle. By changing the temperature T , the vortex lattice elastic constant C and the pinning energy e p are modified through their dependence on the Ginzburg-Landau parameters λ(T, B) ∝ (1τb 0 ) -1/2 and ξ(T ) ∝ (1τ ) -1/2 on the reduced temperature τ = T /T c and reduced field b 0 = B/H c2 (0) (we ignore rounding effects appearing at small temperatures). These mean-field dependencies on T and B entail a change in the pinning parameter κ within the B-T phase diagram that varies with the nature of the defect, with the prefactor k and exponents α and β depending on the type of defect/pinning (the dependence ∝ 1/ √ b 0 derives from the field dependence in the effective elasticity; at very small fields, we enter the single vortex strong pinning regime where our analysis has to be adapted, see Ref. 8). The cases of small insulating (k = (ρ/ξ 0 ) 3 , α = 3/2, β = 1/2) or metallic defects (k = 1, α = 0, β = 1/2), of δT c -pinning (with local δT c in the transition temperature T c and k = (ρ/ξ 0 ) 3 (δT c /T c ), α = 3/2, β = -1/2) or δ -pinning (with local changes δ in the mean free path and k = (ρ/ξ 0 ) 3 (δ / ), α = 5/2, β = -1/2) have been discussed in Ref. 12, but other situations may produce alternative dependencies (here, ρ is the size of the defect and ξ 0 the coherence length of the superconducting material at T = 0). Depending on the type of defect, strong pinning may turn on smoothly at the phase boundary H c2 (T ) (this is the case for insulating and metallic defects with β > 0) or collapse from infinity (this is the case for δT c -and δ -pinning with β < 0). However, owed to the factor (1τ ) α with a large exponent α = 3/2, 5/2 characterizing δT c -and δ -pinning, this divergence at H c2 (T ) is strongly suppressed at the small fields where our analysis is valid. As a result, at small fields, strong pinning always turns on smoothly upon decreasing the temperature T below the phase boundary T c2 (H). Also note that thermal fluctuations near the transition shift the onset of pinning to below T c2 (H). In a first step, we establish the onset of strong pinning upon decreasing the temperature T below T c2 (H) at a given field value H. function f pin (x) develops an infinite slope at the point x 0L . This happens at the Labusch temperature T L that is defined through the condition κ(T L ) = 1. The point x 0L corresponds to the asymptotic position x m associated with the inflection point r m of f p (r) at the Labusch point κ = 1, hence x 0L = x m = r m -f p (r m )/ C with f p (r m ) = 0 and f p (r m ) = C, as discussed in Sec. II, Eqs. ( The two other cases, δ -pinning (with ∂ τ x ± | TL < 0) and the metallic defect (with ∂ τ x ± | TL = 0) closely resemble the behavior of the insulating defect and of δT cpinning, respectively, see Fig. We thus conclude, that 'reading' a temperature cycle of the Campbell penetration depth λ C (τ ) allows us to gain quite some insights into the pinning mechanism: For an insulating defect and for δ pinning, the cycle is hysteretic with strong creep upon cooling in the phase, weak creep upon heating in the a-phase, and again strong creep in the final heating phase close to T L where the b -phase is realized. For a metallic defect, the cycle is non-hysteretic but creep is reasonably strong since the system straddles the regime at the edge of the a-phase/bphase. Finally, for δT c -pinning, the cycle is again nonhysteretic but with weak creep as the system resides deep in the a-phase. We note, that other pinning types may occur exhibiting cycles that are yet different from those analyzed here. Below, we determine the Campbell curvatures α FC sp for the different phases a, b, b . These results then produce the Campbell penetration depth λ C (τ ) shown in figures 6(c) and (f) and 7(c) and (f). While for the b and b phases the jump positions at the edges x ± are well defined, for the a phase the jump position depends on the way the phase is entered. E.g., for the coolingwarming loop with underlying insulating defects or with δ -pinning, we have x jp a = x -(T min ) since we enter the a phase from the b phase, while for metallic defects, we enter the a phase upon the onset of strong pinning and hence x jp a = x 0L . In a third case, realized for δ - pinning, the a phase is entered through the b phase with x jp a = x + (T inf ) and T inf the temperature where ∂ τ x + (τ ) changes sign; this situation is realized for δT c -pinning close to T L , see Fig. We now determine the Campbell curvatures α FC sp for the different phases a, b, b potentially appearing in a hysteresis loop, first in the marginal strong pinning situation κ -1 1 valid close to T L and thereafter at large κ potentially realized at small temperatures. For convenience, we scale the results for the curvatures α FC sp using the corrresponding ZFC results α sp , where we denote field-cooled results via an upper index FC or with specific phase indices a,b,b , while the ZFC expressions remain without upper index. Furthermore, while the results for the b and b phases can be pushed to closed expressions, this is not the case for the a phase, as for the latter the jump position x jp a , while constant in temperature, resides somewhere within the bistable interval [x -, x + ], as discussed above. Let us start close to the Labusch point κ-1 1 where the ZFC result for the Campbell curvature follows from Eq. ( For the Lorentzian-shaped potential, this reduces to the simple expression α sp ≈ √ 3π √ κ -1 n p (e p /a 2 0 ), where we have used that x 0 ≈ 2 √ 2ξ to leading order in κ -1. For the FC state at marginal pinning κ -1 1, we evaluate the Campbell curvature (97) using the jump radius x 0 that is same to leading order in κ -1 for all three phases a, b, b . We find the force jumps with the help of the force balance equation (56), ∆f fp pin (x) = C [r f (x)r p (x)], and make use of Eqs. ( As a result, we find the force jumps, relevant, respectively, for the b, b , and a phases of the temperature cycle. For a Lorentzian potential, γ = 3/8 provides the force jumps ∆f fp pin (x ± ) ≈ 3/8 (κ -1) 1/2 e p /ξ and ∆f fp pin (x 0 ) ≈ (κ -1) 1/2 / √ 2 e p /ξ. In-serting these results in the expression (97) for the Campbell curvature, we find, to leading order in κ -1, Given the symmetry between x -and x + of the bistable region within the marginally strong pinning limit, the force jumps in the b and b phases are equal to the force jump (80) in the ZFC state, and hence the FC Campbell curvature is identical to the ZFC result in the limit κ → 1. For the representative point x jp a = x 0 in the a phase, the force jump is larger by a factor 2/ √ 3 ≈ 1.15, resulting in a larger ratio for the Campbell curvature. Including the next (4th) order term τ (e p /4ξ 5 ) δr 4 in the expansion (13) for f p (r m +δr), we find an asymmetric correction to δr max in Eq. ( where the indices ± refer to pinned and free branches, respectively. For a Lorentzian potential, we have τ = 15/(24 √ 2). Accounting for these 4th order corrections in the evaluation of the force jumps (101), the results α b,b sp for the b and b phases separate, in fact, symmetrically with respect to the ZFC result, α sp (t) = [α b sp (t) + α b sp (t)]/2, as the latter involves jumps both at x + and x -. In Fig. At smaller temperatures, the pinning parameter κ grows larger and the Campbell curvature has to be evaluated in the κ 1 limit. Using the expressions ( for an algebraically decaying potential and α sp ≈ √ 6 (3κ) 1/4 n p (e p /a 2 0 ) for the Lorentzian. For the FC state, we approximate the relevant force jumps in the phases a, b, and b as (cf. Eq. ( with x jp a depending on the specific situation, see the discussion above. We then arrive at the following results for the curvatures in phases a, b, and b of the hysteretic temperature cycle, Making use of the large-κ expressions (11) and ( resulting in the following ratios valid at large κ The expression in (109) for the a phase cannot be brought to a simpler closed form as x jp a depends on the preparation. The above results differ from those in Ref. 12 due to the more accurate handling of the (circular) trapping geometry in the FC situation. At small temperatures and large κ, the equivalence between the Campbell curvature in the phases b and b is broken, and the corresponding results are substantially different from the ZFC ones, a consequence of the asymmetric nature of the bistable region at large κ. Note the result (113) that turns out large; the scaling ∝ κ 3/4 follows from the different trapping areas, x 2 + ∝ κ 2 for the FC case and x + x -∝ κκ 1/4 for the ZFC state. In Figs. We now proceed to include the effect of thermal fluctuations or creep on the Campbell length λ C in the FC case. Thermal fluctuations drive the vortex state towards equilibrium, that corresponds to shifting the original position of the force jump towards x 0 , thereby approaching the equilibrium distribution p eq (R) = Θ(x 0 -R). This relaxation can be experimentally observed at any place along the temperature cycle, with a specific example (assuming insulating defects) shown in Fig. the temperature sweep and letting the system relax. Alternatively, creep tends to close the hysteresis loop when cycling the temperature at an ever slower rate. The relaxation of the FC states is largely different in the three phases a, b, and b of the cycle: when the force jump is pinned to the edges x -or x + in the phases b and b , the activation barriers are initially small (as they vanish at x ± ) and hence relaxation is large. On the other hand, deep in the a phase, the jump location x jp a resides away from these edges and the initial barriers U (x jp a ) are already large to start with, resulting in a slow relaxation. Nevertheless, there is an interesting crossover to the fast creeping b and b phases at the edges of the a phase; in the following, we first focus on relaxation of the phases b and b and discuss the slow relaxation of phase a and its relation to the b and b phases at the end. Before deriving the expressions for the time evolved curvatures α FC (t, T ), we summarize our results in Fig. We now return back to the general discussion and derive the time evolution of the Campbell curvatures α FC (t, T ) for the phases b and b . In describing the effect of creep on the Campbell curvature, we make heavy use of the results obtained in Sec. IV B; specifically, we can make use of the shifts δx ± and δr p± , δr f± of the vortex asymptotic and tip position as determined through the dimensionless thermal barrier T defined in Eq. (39). Very close to the Labusch point κ-1 1, the bistable region is symmetric around x 0 and the force jumps at x - and x + are equal, hence, relaxation of the Campbell curvature along phases b and b of the temperature cycle are the same to leading order and identical with the result Eq. (81) for the ZFC state with the properly chosen Labusch parameter κ(T ). The beyond leading-order correction (106) to the tip positions shifts the b and b curves for the curvatures symmetrically down and up with respect to the ZFC result, see Fig. Going to lower temperatures, the pinning parameter κ grows larger and the equivalence between the FC curvatures α b sp and α b sp and the ZFC result α sp is lifted. Using the expression ∆f fp pin (x) = C [r f (x)r p (x)] to evaluate the force jumps, and dropping the pinned against the free vortex tip position, i.e., r f (x) r p (x) for κ 1, we find that where ∆f jp,b pin = ∆f fp pin (x jp -) and ∆f jp,b pin = ∆f fp pin (x jp + ). Combining these results for the force jumps with the renormalized trapping radii x the general expressions for the relaxation of the Campbell curvature during the phases b and b of the temperature cycle assume the form (cf. Eq. ( We observe that, contrary to the situation in the ZFC state where we found a competition between an increasing trapping area and a decreasing force jump, in the FC states, the changes in the trapping area and in the force jumps work together. In particular, the trapping area shrinks with time in the b phase. Hence, relaxing the state during phase b always leads to an increasing curvature, larger then the ZFC result, i.e., a decreasing Campbell penetration depth λ C , while the opposite applies during phase b , see Fig. This result is valid at short times, where δr f-is dominated by the square root behavior of the force profile close to x -. Going beyond short times, such that δx - x -/6, the deviation δr f-≈ r f-/3 + δx -is approximately linear, as discussed in the derivation of Eq. (64), and the Campbell curvature reads In the analysis of the relaxation during phase b , we proceed the same way: we make use of the result (69) for δx + and note that δr f+ ≈ δx + to find the result for the Lorentzian potential. With the above results, we find that the relaxation of the b and b phases under FC conditions is always faster than the relaxation for a ZFC experiment, see Eqs. Finally, we discuss the behavior of the a phase upon relaxation. The a phase can be entered either via the b phase (see, e.g., Fig. For the case where we enter the a phase from the b phase, we have to shift α b sp instead, α a sp (t) = α b sp (t + t a ), and substitute U dp (x jp a ) by U p (x jp a ). In general, when x 0 < x jp a < x + , we shift α b sp , while α b sp is to be shifted when x -< x jp a < x 0 . Translating the seemingly trivial linear-in-time shift t → t+t a to the log(t/t 0 ) plot of Fig. In an experiment, where the relaxation of the Campbell curvature (or length) is plotted versus log-time, the a phase will start out with a seemingly slow decay (a flat curve) as compared to the decay of the b phase, see Fig. Strong pinning theory delivers a quantitative description of vortex pinning in the dilute defect limit. This fact is particularly prominent in the context of the Campbell ac response: not only can we describe a multitude of different vortex states, the zero-field cooled state and various types of field cooled states, we also can accurately trace the time evolution of these states and their signatures in Campbell penetration depth measurements. The strong pinning theory thus provides access to hysteretic and relaxation effects in the ac response that are otherwise, e.g., via weak collective pinning theory, at least so far, not available. In this work, we have studied the effects of thermal fluctuations at finite temperatures T , or creep, on the Campbell penetration depth λ C ∝ 1/ ∆f pin that tracks the force jumps ∆f pin in the strong pinning landscape of Fig. In our analysis of the zero-field cooled (ZFC) state, we found an interesting relaxation behaviour of the Campbell curvature α sp (t, T ) (or penetration depth λ C ∝ 1/ √ α sp ) with a non-monotonous time-evolution at medium to large values of the pinning parameter κ, increasing first at small waiting times t and then decreasing towards a finite equilibrium value α 0 > 0. At small values of κ -1 ll1, the marginal strong pinning situation, we found the curvature α sp (t, T ) rising monotonously; numerical analysis shows that non-monotonicity appears at still rather small values of κ ≈ 2. The decay to a finite value α 0 in the Campbell curvature is very different from the decay to zero of the persistent current density j(t, T ), a fact owed to the different limits of ∆f pin > 0 and ∆e pin = 0 at the branch crossing point x 0 , see Fig. The relaxation of the field cooled (FC) states provides a rich variety of results as well: first of all, we find numerous types of hysteresis loops, depending on the characteristics of the defects, with insulating and metallic pointlike defects, δT c -and δ -pinning studied in more detail here, see also Ref. 12. This different behavior is owed to the competition between an increasing κ(T ) and a decreasing ξ(T ) as the temperature T is decreased, with the scaling of κ(T ) determined by the type of pinning. Depending on the relative motion between the bistable interval [x -, x + ] (with x -∼ κ 1/4 ξ and x + ∼ κξ at large κ) and the initial instability point x 0L = x 0 (T L ) upon decreasing T , the jump location x jp gets pinned at the edges x ± (T ) or stays put somewhere in between-these three cases define the phases b and b , as well as the a phase, that appear in the hysteresis loop when cycling the temperature down and up. The appearance of these phases within a loop again depends on the defect type, with insulating defects and δ -pinning exhibiting all phases in the sequence b (cooling) to a (heating) to b (heating), while the loops for δT c -pinning and metallic defects are dominated by the a phase. The three phases behave quite differently, with the b phase providing a smaller penetration depth λ C at large κ (where α b sp /α b sp ∝ 1/κ 3/2 ), while in terms of creep, the a phase sticks out by its slower decay. Further experimental signatures for these phases are the decay (increase) in magnitude of λ C under creep for the b (b ) phases and a plateau, i.e., an initially much slower relaxation (both up or down is possible) in the a phase due to the presence of large thermal barriers. Such characteristic differences then allow to make conjectures about the underlying pinning landscape. In the present work, we have made an additional step towards better precision in our analytic results. Using the Lorentzian-shaped potential describing a point-like defect as an example, we have provided analytic results including numerical factors; this further illustrates the value of the strong pinning concept as a quantitative theory. Furthermore, care has been taken to properly treat the trapping geometry of strong pinning, see Fig. Several of the predictions made in the present work have been observed in experiments measuring the Campbell penetration length. Examples are the decreasing λ C (t) in a BiSCCO sample In the present study, we have focused on the low-field regime where the trapping length x + stays below the vortex lattice constant, x + < a 0 /2. At larger field values, multiple vortices start competing for the same defect and our single-pin-single-vortex description has to be extended to include several vortices, see also Refs. 22 and 23. This becomes particularly relevant in very anisotropic and layered material with ε 1, where κ ∝ 1/ε can become large and x + ∼ κξ easily goes beyond a 0 /2 even at moderate field values already. Related to the possibility of such very strong pinning is the prediction 30 of a creep-enhanced critical current due to a dominant increase in the trapping area at very large κ. Furthermore, since pinning remains active also beyond 20 j c it would be interesting to measure and analyze the Campbell penetration physics in the dynamical vortex state. c FIG. 4.