Simultaneous breaking of inversion-and time-reversal symmetry in Josephson junction leads to a possible violation of the I(φ) = -I(-φ) equality for the current-phase relation. This is known as anomalous Josephson effect and it produces a phase shift φ 0 in sinusoidal current-phase relations. In ballistic Josephson junctions with non-sinusoidal current phase relation the observed phenomenology is much richer, including the supercurrent diode effect and the magnetochiral anisotropy of Josephson inductance. In this work, we present measurements of both effects on arrays of Josephson junctions defined on epitaxial Al/InAs heterostructures. We show that the orientation of the current with respect to the lattice affects the magnetochiral anisotropy, possibly as the result of a finite Dresselhaus component. In addition, we show that the two-fold symmetry of the Josephson inductance reflects in the activation energy for phase slips. Charge transport in superconductors is driven by the phase gradient of the condensate wavefunction. In the exemplary case of Josephson junctions (JJs), this leads to a well-defined current-phase relation (CPR), which describes how the current I depends on the phase difference φ between the leads To obtain a finite current at zero phase (and vice versa) it is necessary to break the equivalence between the leads (given by the space inversion symmetry) and simultaneously the time-reversal symmetry. This is called the anomalous Josephson effect Noncentrosymmetric superconductors in a magnetic field also show magnetochiral anisotropy (MCA) effects, which arise when certain physical quantities display correction terms linear both in current and magnetic field where γ L is the MCA coefficient for the inductance. As a consequence of the MCA, the critical currents for the two directions of the supercurrent flow differ, leading to a finite current interval where the resistance is zero only for one bias polarity. This is a supercurrent diode effect (first envisioned in Ref. In this work, we study the supercurrent diode effect and the MCA in JJ arrays with large Rashba SOI. We present experiments that complement the main observations reported in Ref. A clean superconductor with synthetic Rashba interaction can be produced combining an epitaxial Al film and a highmobility 2D electron gas (2DEG) confined in a InGaAs/InAs quantum well. If the barrier between 2DEG and Al film is transparent, then the 2DEG former will be proximitized by the superconducting Al, leading to a Rashba 2D superconductor. The combination of superconductivity and SOI is at the basis of topological superconductivity. This material platform has therefore been mainly developed by the community studying Majorana modes and topological superconductivity. Our devices are fabricated starting from a heterostructure whose top layers are Al (7 nm)/In 0.2 Ga 0.8 As (10 nm)/InAs (2DEG) (7 nm)/In 0.2 Ga 0.8 As (4 nm) (see the Supplementary Material of Ref. DC transport measurements provide only partial information about single JJs. For instance, the Josephson coupling between the leads is deduced from the critical current -an interesting situation where an equilibrium quantity is deduced from AC transport measurements. The CPR is not accessible without making use of a SQUID geometry in perpendicular magnetic field. Josephson coupling and CPR can instead be directly accessed in single junctions by measuring its Josephson inductance, clearly with AC measurements. For example, given the CPR relation I = I 0 f (φ) (where I 0 is the relevant current scale and f is a 2π periodic function) the Josephson inductance immediately emerges from the ratio between Josephson voltage and time derivative of the CPR In a simple junction without loop, it is the current and not the phase that is controlled, therefore it is convenient to integrate φ = 2πL İ/Φ 0 to obtain the inverse CPR φ(I): where L(I) is the measured quantity. Therefore, the Josephson inductance as a function of the current is proportional to the derivative of the inverse CPR φ(I). The difficulties in the measurement of the Josephson inductance are related to the fact that it is typically much smaller than the inductance of the cryostat cables. To decouple the sample from the external cabling, it is possible to embed the sample in a low resistance resonator decoupled from the external leads by resistors. The resonance frequency will then directly provide the inductance if the Q factor is above unity. The circuit scheme of the RLC resonator used in this work is shown in Fig. Here R l and L l are, respectively, the total resistance (i.e., sample resistance R plus external circuit resistance in series R s ) and total inductance of the loop (i.e., sample inductance L plus external circuit inductance in series L s ), while C s is the series capacitance, given by an external capacitor. The choice of the working point for the frequency is crucial. For a series RLC, the higher the frequency, the higher the sensitivity. On the other hand, at very high frequency measurements in the presence of magnetic fields are difficult since emerging dissipation would immediately damp the resonance. Moreover, at high frequency (rf regime close to the plasma frequency) the physics of a JJ is not equivalent to that in DC. At very high frequency, one must take into account transmission line resonance on the very sample. For our measurements we have chosen to operate in the MHz range. This frequency regime allows us to operate under large magnetic fields without significant damping of the resonance. Also, this frequency range is below any relevant physical threshold for the JJs under study (plasma frequency ω P ≈ 240 GHz, first transmission line mode for the array ω 0 = 250 MHz), so that for any practical purpose we are operating in quasi-DC regime. Figure This method (which is an adaptation, with modern electronics, of the experiment in Ref. As shown below, the typical inductance of a 3 μm-wide and 100 nm-long JJ is of the order of 100 pH. In the MHz regime we operate in, this inductance is below the resolution limit of our electronics. Therefore, instead of a single junction, we measure an array of thousands junctions. If their spacing is sufficient to exclude mutual (e.g., magnetic) interaction, they will behave as a set of inductors in series, i.e., the measured inductance will reflect the sum of the ensemble. This configuration has advantages and disadvantages. The disadvantage is that the critical current (or field) is set by the weakest junction. When that value is reached the emerging resistance is enough to damp the resonance. For this reason, measured L(I) curves, as e.g. that shown in Fig. The CPR of short ballistic SNS junctions at finite temperature T can be described by the complete Furusaki-Beenakker formula where τ it the transmission coefficient and ∆ * is the effective gap at the leads. In our case τ refers to the average transmission coefficient, while ∆ * referes to the induced gap in the 2DEG region just underneath the epitaxial Al film. The characteristic current I 0 (which coincides with the critical current only for τ → 1 and T → 0) is given by where N is the number of spin-degenerate transverse modes in the channel. To characterize our junctions we need three parameters, namely I 0 , τ and ∆ * . The first two can be obtained from a L(I) measurement at T /T c 1. In particular, τ is determined from the curvature of the graph of L(0)/L versus 2πL(0)I/Φ 0 , which in the low temperature limit depends only on τ The transmission coefficient strictly depends on the quality of the selective Al etching defining the weak link. In our best JJ arrays, we obtained average transmission close to unity, e.g., τ = 0.94 in Ref. The characterization of ∆ * (T ) requires, instead, data at finite temperature, as it is evident from Eq. 4. It is important to notice that for an epitaxial Al/InAs 2DEG bilayer, the temperature dependence of the induced gap ∆ * (T ) differs from that predicted by BCS The robust determination of the number of transverse channels in a 3.15 μm-wide conductor allows us to deduce the Fermi wavelength λ F = 33 nm. To extract the Fermi velocity, an estimate for the effective mass is needed. For bulk InAs the best estimate In this section we will discuss the consequences of the ballistic character on the physics of JJs in the presence of large SOI. Several recent works In a φ 0 -junction, a purely sinusoidal CPR is still antisymmetric around the (φ 0 -shifted) zero current point, i.e., if φ ≡ φφ 0 , then I(φ ) = -I(-φ ). Thus, the positive and negative branch of the CPR are equal and opposite, and the CPR inflection point still occurs at I = 0. In our experiments, we show that if the junction is ballistic and an in-plane field is applied perpendicular to the supercurrent direction, then SOI will not simply lead to a φ 0 shift, but will effectively distort the CPR in an asymmetric way, so that positive and negative branches will differ. As a consequence, positive and negative critical currents will differ, giving rise to the supercurrent diode effect. In the experiments reported in Ref. In the presence of magnetic field (and thus anomalous Josephson effect) each n-term would acquire its own φ 0,n shift. The determination of each φ 0,n is nontrivial where a 1 is proportional to both magnetic field and Rashba SOI strength, while b 2 mainly determine the skewedness. The MCA effect requires both a 1 and b 2 to be nonzero, while the simple anomalous shift φ 0 only requires the former. The supercurrent diode effect can be measured with standard DC transport experiments. Figure The peculiar B z dependence can be captured by the product of the critical current and the first higher harmonic Fourier coefficient b 2 of the Fourier expansion of the Furusaki-Beenakker CPR. The former term contains the envelope of all the harmonics producing the Fraunhofer pattern, while the latter contains the most relevant term for the skewedness of the CPR, which as explained above, determines the diode effect. The curve, calculated from Eq. 4 with parameters extracted from the experiment Finally, for B z = 0 we can extract the B ip dependence of the diode effect, depicted in Fig. As discussed above, the supercurrent diode effect is a direct consequence of the distortion of a skewed CPR produced by an in-plane field in the presence of a spin-split conduction band. The asymmetry between the positive and negative CPR branches implies that (i) positive and negative critical currents are different, (ii) the inductance is not an even function of I anymore, owing to the magnetochiral correction term linear in both current and field, see Eq. 1. The inductance is proportional to the derivative of the inverse CPR, φ(I), therefore (ii) is equivalent to a shift of the CPR inflection point from I = 0 to a finite value I = i * . The latter value can be experimentally determined from the minimum of the L(I) curve. In our junctions the MCA is a small correction, therefore we can approximate the L(I) curve as a parabola near zero current, i.e., L(I) ≈ L 0 + L 0 I + L 0 I 2 . The CPR can then be characterized by the three coefficients L 0 , L 0 , and L 0 . In particular, it is L 0 that mostly determines the MCA. At finite in-plane field B ip , one can extract the MCA coefficient γ L ≡ -2L 0 /(L 0 B ip ). As shown in the L(I) measurements plotted in Fig. For a conductor with purely Rashba SOI, the direction of the current with respect to the underlying lattice is unimportant, since both spin-split Fermi surfaces are isotropic. For generic Rashba (α) and Dresselhaus (β ) SOI parameters, the spin-orbit field Ω is defined such that the perturbative SOI term of the Hamiltonian is The magnitude of the MCA effect depends on the Ω com- ponent parallel to the current, corresponding to a k-space direction perpendicular to the current [k y direction for our axis choice, see Fig. The situation changes in the presence of a small Dresselhaus SOI component (β = 0). In this case, the total spinorbit field | Ω| is reduced (enhanced) for the k-direction where Rashba and Dresselhaus SOI fields are antiparallel (parallel). As a result, a finite Dresselhaus component breaks the symmetry among different crystal directions. To verify the presence of a Dresselhaus component, we have fabricated an array (sample 3) which is, to the best of our ability, identical to the array used for the measurements reported above (sample 1). The only nominal difference is the orientation of the current with respect to the lattice axes: in sample 1 the current is directed along the [110] direction, while in sample 3 it is directed along the [110] axis. We have then repeated the inductance MCA measurements, whose results are summarized in Fig. As discussed above, r = 1 can be attributed to a Dresselhaus SOI component. Numerical quantum transport simulations (computed with the KWANT package In the previous sections we have discussed in detail the twofold anisotropy induced by the in-plane field on L 0 , and thus on the inflection point of the CPR, which is at the basis of MCA. We have also highlighted a weaker, but still evident anisotropy in L 0 . A two-fold anisotropy in L 0 is expected to produce a similar anisotropy in the Josephson coupling E J = hI c /2e and, consequently, an anisotropic activation energy for phase slips in the junctions. The experiments discussed so far mainly focus on the deep superconducting regime at temperatures close the base temperature of our dilution refrigerator, where T ∆ * /k B . For our JJ arrays the Josephson energy is much larger than the charging energy, thus in this regime we cannot detect any resistive phase slip effect. To investigate the angle dependence of the phase slip rate, we must work in a temperature regime closer to T c . However, one must keep in mind that sample resistances larger than few ohms are not compatible with the resonator technique. The resonator can indeed be used to measure very small resistance changes via the Q factor, but as long as the total resistance of the RLC tank is above few ohms (roughly 1 mΩ per junction), the resonance is suppressed altogether. Hence, we studied phase slip rates by conventional DC transport measurements. Figure In conclusion, we have studied the supercurrent diode effect and the magnetochiral anisotropy for the inductance in arrays of Josephson junctions with large spin-orbit coupling. These experiments complement those reported in the literature. We observe a dependence of the diode effect on the mutual orientation of supercurrent and lattice axes, which signals the presence of an additional Dresselhaus spin-orbit coupling term. Finally, we can correlate the anisotropy in the in-plane field dependence of the inductance with that of the phase-slip activation energy obtained from standard DC transport measurements. Superconducting diodes are the first step towards dissipation-free electronics. In perspective, they might play a crucial role in dissipationless memories, or in superconducting microwave detectors with ultra-high sensitivity. 