The nature of the interface in lateral heterostructures of 2D monolayer semiconductors including its composition, size, and heterogeneity critically impacts the functionalities it engenders on the 2D system for next-generation optoelectronics. Here, we use tip-enhanced Raman scattering (TERS) to characterize the interface in a single-layer MoS2/WS2 lateral heterostructure with a spatial resolution of 50 nm. Resonant and non-resonant TERS spectroscopies reveal that the platform for the study of low-dimensional many-body phenomena Yet, to date, nanoscale Raman imaging and spectroscopy have not been used to probe the interfaces in 2D lateral heterostructures. Here, we show that tip-enhanced Raman scattering (TERS) imaging and spectroscopy is a powerful and complementary characterization technique for heterostructure interfaces in 2D TMD semiconductors. Spatial resolutions of at least 50 nm are achieved, and we show that both resonant and non-resonant TERS measurements are sensitive to the local stoichiometry of the heterojunction. The TERS measurements are complemented with KPFM imaging of the heterostructure and are shown to work on a system where photoluminescence (PL) is strongly quenched by an underlying gold substrate. From the TERS characterization, we find that the transition region of the heterostructure drastically varies in spatial extent with sizes ranging from ~600 nm to less than 50 nm within the same crystallite. Using the nanoscale vibrational fingerprinting, we assess the local alloying of the heterostructure and map the evolution of the Raman spectrum across the heterostructure interface. Insight on the origins and nature of multiple Raman modes is gained by mapping their nanoscale transformation across the interface. Overall, TERS is demonstrated as an effective way to study the nanoscale properties of heterostructure interfaces that complements other imaging techniques, laying a foundation for deeper multimodal studies that connect the interfacial structure and composition to macroscopic device performance. Single-layer (1L) lateral 2D heterostructures consisting of a 1L-MoS2 core surrounded by a 1L-WS2 shell were grown on polished sapphire wafers using low-pressure chemical vapor deposition (CVD; see Methods). As-grown crystals were first characterized using several SPM techniques that were cross-correlated with confocal PL imaging and spectroscopy. As discussed in detail in the Methods section, the TERS, SPM, and confocal characterization were performed with a commercial combined AFM and optical microscopy system (Xplora-Nano AFM-Raman, Horiba Scientific). SPM characterization of a representative lateral heterostructure crystal is summarized in Figure shows that the transition between the 1L-MoS2 and the 1L-WS2 is flat, which confirms the predominantly lateral nature of the heterojunction. A small increase in the topography of the heterostructure of ~0.5 nm is observed around the periphery of the 1L-MoS2 core. This topographic feature, which is smaller than the thickness of 1L-MoS2 and 1L-WS2, is attributed to a change in the interaction between the AFM probe and the 2D material as the composition changes (rather than as a sign of overlapping materials). As can be seen from both the topography and the contact potential difference (CPD; Figure Figure The spectrum of the intermediate PL in the heterojunction region indicates that the interface is comprised of a ternary alloy of 1L-MoxW1-xS2. Here, the b is the bowing factor, which has been reported as 0.25 eV 31 for TMD alloys. Using this relationship and the emission energies here, the composition would be coarsely estimated to be 1L-Mo0.09W0.91S2 in the interfacial region (i.e., x 0.09). However, the linewidth of the PL spectrum in the interfacial region (~130 meV, FWHM) is substantially larger than those of the 1L-MoS2 (~50 meV, FWHM) and the 1L-WS2 (~65 meV), suggesting the presence of disorder. As shown below, the interfacial disorder is dominated by a continuous range of alloy compositions and transition widths. The heterostructure is a more complex optoelectronic system than an atomically sharp interface or just a simple uniform alloy composition, necessitating characterization with higher spatial resolutions. Disentangling nanoscale phenomena at the heterostructure interface necessitates a different approach than conventional SPM and confocal optical techniques. The diffraction-limited resolution of the μPL (and μRaman) characterization limits the ability to directly probe structureproperty relationships of the 2D lateral heterostructure interface at length scales smaller than a few hundred nanometers. For SPM techniques that have a higher spatial resolution, unambiguous signatures of material alloying and interfacial disorder are not available. Bridging this divide, nano-optical characterization such as nano-PL, Gap-mode TERS characterization requires the 2D system to be supported by a smooth metallic substrate. To implement the gap-mode TERS characterization here, the 2D crystals were transferred to a gold film using a previously established procedure An optical image of the 2D lateral heterostructure that was characterized in Figures The likely origin of this difference is the sensitivity of CPD measurements to the work function of the material, which depends on both the stoichiometry and the depletion region of the heterostructure. As a result, CPD measurements will report a transition width that is larger than the size of the material interface as determined by just stoichiometry (see Table Gap-mode TERS characterization of the 2D lateral heterostructure provides deeper insight into the nature of the interface. The TERS imaging and spectral analysis using laser excitation at 638 nm are presented in Figure The gap-mode TERS spectrum of the 1L-MoS2 (Figure Identifying the underlying mechanisms is outside the scope of the current work and will be the subject of future investigations that will focus on a careful comparison of polarization-resolved μRaman to gap-mode TERS. Figures A transition region between the 1L-MoS2 core and the 1L-WS2 shell is identified and its width dramatically varies between a pixel-limited size to a few hundred nanometers at the tips of the triangular protrusions of 1L-MoS2. The gap-mode TERS spectrum acquired from this transition region (Figure Considering the μPL characterization (i.e., Figure From the TERS imaging presented in Figure The two representative transition regions shown in Figure To further probe the transition region and the nature of the Raman modes observed under semiresonant excitation, we performed TERS characterization with non-resonant laser excitation at 785 nm (Figure Comparable behavior for this mode has been observed in μRaman spectroscopy of 1L-MoxW1-xS2 alloys, spanning a similar range of energies. The differences in the Raman spectra between resonant and non-resonant laser excitation provide insight into the nature of the observed modes. When the laser excitation energy corresponds to an electronic transition in the material, resonant enhancement of weak/forbidden Raman modes can occur. Finally, in Figure Beyond the transition region in the MoS2 core and the WS2 shell, the energies of these modes do not evolve further (see Figure In conclusion, TERS is a facile and informative characterization technique for heterostructure interfaces in lateral heterostructures between 2D materials. Here, the interface between a lateral heterostructure of 1L-MoS2 and 1L-WS2 has been characterized with a synergistic combination of resonant TERS, non-resonant TERS, confocal μPL, AFM, and KPFM imaging techniques. In particular, the TERS and other scanning probe techniques provide critical nanoscale information that bridges the gap between atomically-resolved STEM studies and diffraction-limited μPL/μRaman studies. On these intermediate length scales at which TERS is ideally suited to probe, we find that the transition region can be highly heterogeneous in size, ranging from widths of <50 nm to 600 nm in a single crystallite. We hypothesize that the different sizes of the transition region result from different reactivities of the edges that form during the growth process. Future studies that use scanning tunneling microscopy and/or nano-second harmonic generation imaging to probe the chemical nature of the edges could test this hypothesis by providing more insight into the structure and reactivity of the edges on the nanoscale. Further, for the TERS characterization, the contributions of resonant excitation and alloy composition have been deconvolved for low-energy vibrational modes in the range of 140-240 cm -1 . By mapping the continuous nanoscale evolution of the transition region from 1L-MoS2, to 1L-MoxW1-xS2, to 1L-WS2, we unambiguously link the 18/39 455 cm -1 mode in 1L-MoS2 to the 433 cm -1 defect-activated mode in 1L-WS2 and reveal how the mode changes with alloy composition. This mode serves as an excellent nanoscale reporter of the composition of the transition region and is used to characterize the heterogeneity in the size of the interface in the 2D heterostructure. These studies provide important insight into the nanoscale properties of the heterostructure interfaces in 2D materials and set the stage for combining TERS characterization with other microscopy modalities and prototype optoelectronic devices to quantitatively understand the role of the heterostructure interface in device performance. Heterostructure growth: The single-layer MoS2/WS2 lateral heterostructures were grown by low-pressure chemical vapor deposition in a multizone quartz tube. High purity MoS2 and WS2 precursor powders (both 99.9%, Alfa Aesar) were finely mixed and placed in a quartz boat at the center of the tube while the epi-ready sapphire substrates were placed downstream at a lower temperature. No prior substrate surface treatment or preparation was used beyond solvent cleaning. The growth was performed at a pressure of 10 mbar under 20 sccm argon flow, with the temperature of the precursors ramped to 970 °C, for a duration of 20 min. The tube temperature for the substrate region was ramped from 790 to 810 °C during the growth. Subsequently, the temperature was allowed to cool down naturally. The AFM and TERS characterization presented in the main manuscript were conducted on an XploRA-Nano AFM-Raman system (HORIBA Scientific) using Access-SNC-Au TERS probes (Applied Nanostructures). TERS maps were collected using patented SpecTop TM mode, where, in every pixel of the map, the tip is placed in direct contact with the sample and the Raman data are collected. Then, to move to the next pixel, the system is rapidly placed into semicontact (tapping) mode to minimize the ware of both the tip and the sample. Measurements of the TERS response of the gold-transferred exfoliated MoxW(1- x)S2 crystals presented in the SI were performed on a TRIOS AFM-Raman platform (HORIBA Scientific) coupled to an imaging spectrograph (Andor) and an electron multiplying charged coupled device (EM-CCD). There TERS measurements of the exfoliated samples were performed using 632.8 nm continuous wave excitation and incident laser intensity of 50 μW. For all TERS spectra, a constant background is subtracted to account for the dark counts of the detectors and any broad emission. The dark counts are estimated from a constant baseline intensity at low wavenumber spanning from 100-400 cm -1 . This background is relatively constant over the course of the TERS measurements and did not exhibit strong pixel-to-pixel or row-to-row variations. To perform gap mode TERS measurements, the crystals needed to be on a gold substrate. A thin gold film (~70 nm) was deposited onto the sample under high vacuum (1.0×10 -7 Torr) using a thermo evaporator (model DV502-A, Denton Vacuum Inc., Moorestown, NJ). Then, a Si wafer was attached to the outer gold surface using an epoxy resin. Once the epoxy cured, the gold film and sapphire substrate were separated by peeling, transferring the 2D lateral heterostructures to the gold surface. Figure Table To prove that the spectral position of the 442 cm -1 peaks in the TERS spectra does depend on the alloying ratio in the Mo x W 1-x S 2 compound, we performed a systematic study on the correlation between the position of this peak in TERS spectra of gold-transferred crystals with the position of the PL peak in the same crystals on the growth sapphire substrate. The correlation results were obtained on a gradient composition sample where the PL peak position in Mo x W 1-x S 2 crystals varied from 635.5 nm to 658 nm depending on the location of the crystal on the substrate. The spectral position of the composition-sensitive peak in TERS spectra of the same crystals after the gold-assisted transfer consistently changes from 437 cm -1 to 444 cm -1 (see Figure patkung@eng.ua.edu