We report the discovery of superconductivity in noncentrosymmetric NbReSi, which crystallizes in a hexagonal ZrNiAl-type crystal structure with space group P 62m (No. 189). Bulk superconductivity, with Tc = 6.5 K was characterized via electrical-resistivity, magnetization, and heat-capacity measurements. The low-temperature electronic specific heat suggests a fully gapped superconducting state in NbReSi, while a large upper critical field of μ0Hc2(0) ∼ 12.6 T is obtained, which is comparable to the weak-coupling Pauli limit. The electronic band-structure calculations show that the density of states at the Fermi level are dominated by Re and Nb d-orbitals, with a sizeable band splitting induced by the antisymmetric spin-orbit coupling. NbReSi represents another candidate material for revealing the puzzle of time-reversal symmetry breaking observed in some Re-based superconductors and its relation to the lack of inversion symmetry. Noncentrosymmetric superconductors (NCSC), where the crystal structure lacks an inversion center, have been widely investigated after the discovery of superconductivity (SC) in heavy fermion compound CePt 3 Si Unconventional SC has been reported in different families of heavy fermion NCSCs, e.g., CePt 3 Si LaNiC 2 Recently, the α-Mn-type noncentrosymmetric Rebased superconductors have attracted considerable interest, mainly due to the observation of broken time reversal symmetry at the onset of SC The ZrNiAl-type compounds are another important family of noncentrosymmetric superconductors. (Zr,Hf)RuP In this paper, we report a systematic study of the superconducting properties of noncentrosymmetric NbReSi by means of electrical-resistivity, magnetization, and heat-capacity measurements, as well as by electronic band-structure calculations. It is found that NbReSi is a fully-gapped superconductor with a superconducting transition temperature T c = 6.5 K and exhibits a large upper critical field of μ 0 H c2 = 12.6 T. The electronic band-structure calculations suggest a sizable band splitting caused by the ASOC. Polycrystalline NbReSi samples were prepared by arc melting stoichiometric amounts of Nb slugs (99.95%, Alfa Aesar), Re powders (99.99%, Alfa Aesar) and Si chunks (99.9999%, Alfa Aesar) in high-purity argon atmosphere, with Ti metal used as oxygen getter. The samples were flipped and remelted several times to improve the homogeneity. The crystal structure and phase purity were checked by powder x-ray diffraction (XRD) measured on a Rigaku diffractometer with Cu Kα radiation. The electrical-resistivity and heat-capacity measurements were performed on Quantum Design Physical Property Measurement System (PPMS) with a 3 He cryostat. The magnetization measurements were carried out using Quantum Design Magnetic Property Measurement System (MPMS). The electronic band-structures were calculated by means of the density-functional theory (DFT) implemented in the Vienna ab-initio simulation package (VASP). The Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhoff (PBE) functional in the generalized gradient approximation was employed. Powder XRD patterns of NbReSi measured at room temperature are shown in Fig. The temperature dependence of the electrical resistivity ρ(T ) [see inset of Fig. To determine the lower critical field H c1 , the fielddependent magnetization M (H) of NbReSi was collected at various temperatures up to T c using a ZFC-protocol. Some representative M (H) curves are shown in the inset of Fig. To study the SC of NbReSi, we also performed heatcapacity measurements. The jump in the specific heat at T c again demonstrates bulk SC in NbReSi (see Fig. where the Coulomb pseudo-potential μ * is fixed to a typical value of 0.13 for metallic materials. The density of states (DOS) at the Fermi level N (E F ) can be esti- mated by N (E F ) = 3γ n /π 2 k 2 B After subtracting the phonon contribution, the zerofield electronic specific heat C e /T of NbReSi is shown in Fig. (2) Here f = (1 + e E/kB T ) -1 is the Fermi function and E = ǫ 2 + ∆ 2 (T ). The temperature-dependent superconducting energy gap is approximated to ∆(T ) = ∆(0) tanh 1.82[1.018(T c /T -1)] 0.51 where ∆(0) is the superconducting gap at 0 K. The red solid line in Fig. To study the upper critical field H c2 of NbReSi, the electrical resistivity and heat capacity were measured under various applied magnetic fields up to 13 T. As shown in Figs. where Φ 0 is the magnetic flux quantum, yielding ξ GL = 5.11 nm for NbReSi. The magnetic penetration depth λ GL = 243.8 nm can be obtained via: The GL parameter κ GL = λ GL /ξ GL = 49.3 is much larger than the threshold value of 1/ √ 2, indicating that NbReSi is a strongly type-II superconductor. The thermodynamic critical field μ 0 H c (0) can be estimated from yielding a value of 181 mT for NbReSi. To get more insight into the underlying electronic properties of NbReSi, we also performed the electronic bandstructure calculations based on DFT, with and without considering the spin-orbit coupling. As shown in Fig. In noncentrosymmetric superconductors, the ASOC in principle can lift the degeneracy of the electronic bands and thus, the admixture of spin-singlet and spin-triplet pairing states is allowed. For NbReSi, the specific-heat results suggest a fully-gapped superconducting state, more consistent with spin-singlet pairing. To further understand the superconducting pairings and the effect of ASOC in NbReSi, the μSR or NMR studies will be very helpful. For comparison, the superconducting-and normal-state properties of NbReSi, as well as the recently reported NCSC TaReSi are summarized in Table I. Different from NbReSi, TaReSi crystallizes in an orthorhombic TiFeSi-type structure (Ima2, No. 46)(see Table . I) The large H c2 that is comparable to the Pauli limit seems to be a general feature in Re-based superconducting alloys, including the α-Mn type materials and NbReSi, and centrosymmetric Re 3 W, in spite of the preserved or broken TRS in their superconducting states [3, is not yet fully understood. It is also possible that the H c2 can be enhanced due to the presence of disorder and nonmagnetic impurities In addition, the observation of TRS breaking in some Re-based superconductors suggests an important role played by Re. While the previous μSR studies on the Refree ZrNiAl-type ZrRuAs and LaPdIn suggest a preserved TRS in their superconducting states To summarize, the noncentrosymmetric NbReSi superconductor were synthesized and investigated by means of the electrical-resistivity, magnetization, and heatcapacity measurements, as well as via electronic band structure calculations. We found that NbReSi shows bulk superconductivity at T c = 6.5 K. Its upper critical field μ 0 H c2 (0) = 12.6 T is comparable to the weak coupling Pauli limit. The low-temperature zero-field electronic specific heat data suggest nodeless SC, with a gap value close to the BCS theoretical value. The specific-heat discontinuity and the electron-phonon coupling constant λ ep suggest weak-coupling SC in NbReSi. Electronic band structure calculations reveal a relatively large band splitting near the Fermi level due to the presence of a strong ASOC. These results suggest that NbReSi represents a new candidate material to study the broken TRS in the superconducting state of weakly correlated NCSCs.