With the evidence of inter-valley attraction-mediated by phonon or topological fluctuations, we assume the inter-valley attraction and aim at identifying universal properties of moiré flat bands that shall emerge. We show that by matching the interaction strength of inter-valley attraction with intra-valley repulsion, the flat-band limit becomes exactly solvable. Away from the flat-band limit, the system can be simulated via quantum Monte Carlo (QMC) methods without sign problem for any fillings. Combining analytic solutions with large-scale numerical simulations, we show that upon increasing temperature, the superconducting phase melts into a bosonic fluid of Cooper pairs with large/diverging compressibility. In contrast to flat-band attractive Hubbard models, where similar effects arise only for on-site interactions, our study indicates this physics is a universal property of moiré flat bands, regardless of microscopic details such as the range of interactions and/or spin-orbit couplings. At higher temperature, the boson fluid phase gives its way to a pseudo gap phase, where some Cooper pairs are torn apart by thermal fluctuations, resulting in fermion density of states inside the gap. Unlike the superconducting transition temperature, which is very sensitive to doping and twisting angles, the gap and the temperature scale of the boson fluid phase and the pseudo gap phase are found to be nearly independent of doping level and/or flat-band bandwidth. The relevance of these phases with experimental discoveries in the flat band quantum moiré materials is discussed. As one of the most intriguing development in 2D materials, moiré superlattices offer a new opportunity to access novel quantum states and quantum phenomena Here, we focus on universal principles/properties that flat-band moiré superconductors shall obey/exhibit, in that, we introduce an inter-valley attractive interaction and study its nontrivial consequence. By matching intervalley attraction strength with intra-valley repulsion, we find that at the flat band limit, such systems can be solved exactly. Away from the flat-band limit, although an exact solution is absent, the model can be simulated via the momentum-space quantum Monte Carlo (QMC) method The bosonic fluid phase can be viewed as a liquid of Cooper pairs, where although the Cooper pairs have fully formed, (quasi)-long-range phase coherence has not yet been developed due to strong fluctuations. Experimentally, key signature of this phase is a large singleparticle gap around the Fermi energy, combined with a high/diverging compressibility. The pseudogap phase is a partially melted boson liquid, where thermal fluctuations start to tear apart some Cooper pairs , feeding single fermion spectral weight into the energy gap. Simulations and analytic theory also indicate that the crossover temperatures between normal fluid and the pseudogap phase (or between the pseudogap and the bosonic fluid phases) are dictated by the energy scale of the inter-valley attractions, and is nearly independent of filling levels or flat-band band width. In contrast, the superconducting transition temperature depends strongly on the bandwidth of the flat band, as well as filling fractions. In the QMC simulations, a superconducting dome is observed, qualitatively consistent with the experimental observations in TBG and TMD systems with chemical potential partially filling all flat bands We consider a generic system with two valleys, labeled by the valley index τ and -τ respectively, connected by the time-reversal transformation (T τ = -τ ). In the flatband limit, kinetic energy can be dropped once other bands are projected out. For interactions, we define it in the momentum space as where q is the momentum transfer in a moiré Brillouin zone (mBZ) and G is the moiré reciprocal lattice vector. We set the interaction strength V (q + G) to be an arbitrary positive function and δρ q+G is the density difference between two valleys where ρ τ and ρ -τ are the fermion density from the two valleys. In band basis, δρ can be projected to the flat band where the form factor λ is computed via the unitary transformation between the plane-wave basis and the band basis (see Supplemental Material (SM) VI A for details). This interaction contains inter-valley attraction and intra-valley repulsion with the same strength V , and this is how inter-valley attractions are introduced in our model. With this interaction, this model is exactly solvable in the flat-band limit, while away from the exactlysolvable limit (i.e. with finite band width and chemical potential), it can be simulated via QMC without sign problem. After dropping the trivial kinetic energy, the flat-band limit of our Hamiltonian is reduced to H = H I [Eq. ( where and ∆ = k,m c -k,m,-τ c k,m,τ creates/annihilates one intervalley Cooper pair and Np is the particle number operator of flat bands. The constant N d is the max electron number that these flat bands can host in one valley. It is easy to verify that these three operators obey the su(2) algebra [σ i , σ j ] = 2i ijk σ k and they all commute with δρ and H I , [σ i , H I ] = 0. In other words, these three operators generate a SU(2) symmetry group. This emergent SU(2) symmetry and exact solution are in analogy to the flat-band Hubbard model Here, we use particle-hole transformation ck,m,-τ = c † -k,m,-τ . It is obvious that ground states for a general inter-valley repulsive model have valley polarized Z 2 , not SU(2) symmetry. This difference can also be seen in charge neutral excitation spectrums as shown in Fig. where The BCS wavefunction may not be favored when kinetic term and chemical potential is introduced, since chemical potential term will favor a certain filling but not mixing states with different particle number. In the exact solution, single particle correlation function can be computed by noticing As shown by red line in Fig. We can also compute the correlation function of Cooper pairs which is in good agreement with QMC simulations (see SM Fig. Despite the finite Cooper gap and diverging superconducting correlation function, Cooper pairs in this boson fluid don't lead to superconduct at any finite temperature. This is because the superconducting order parameter is part of a SU(2) generator. Therefore, a superconducting state would spontaneously break the SU(2) symmetry, instead of just the U(1) charge symmetry. In other words, the symmetry breaking pattern here is in the Heisenberg universality class, instead of XY. For 2D systems at finite T , it has long been known that thermal fluctuations will destroy any order that spontaneously breaks a SU(2) symmetry (i.e., there is no finite temperature order for Heisenberg spins in 2D). Thus, although Cooper pairs have formed at T ∼ V , long-range or quasi-long range phase coherence cannot be developed at any finite temperature. This conclusion is verified in QMC simulations, where we observe a fully-developed Cooper gap at finite T , but the phase coherence remains disordered even down to lowest accessible temperature [Fig. From the fluctuation-dissipation theorem, this divergence in particle-number fluctuations implies a diverging compressibility at low When temperature is reduced, κ increases. In the low temperature limit, because In summary, in the flat-band limit, exact theory analysis predicts a bosonic fluid of Cooper pairs within a full Cooper gap. This bosonic fluid has a high compressibility, which diverges at T → 0. To highlight this diverging compressibility, we label this state as SCBF (for super-compressible bosonic fluid) in our phase diagrams Fig. For simplicity, here we only consider one flat-band per valley, and choose parameters according to twisted homobilayer TMDs With the imaginary-time correlation functions obtained in QMC, we further employ the stochastic analytic continuation (SAC) method to extract the real-frequency spectra )). In Fig. With the exactly solvable limit understood, a kinetic energy term with finite (but small) bandwidth is introduced, which explicitly breaks the SU(2) symmetry. Here, again, we use the kinetic term of a homobilayer TMD and expands the band width to 0.8 meV. Same qualitative features are expected for other more complicated setups, such as TBGs. Without the SU(2) symmetry, a BKT superconducting phase becomes allowed, and in QMC simulations, we indeed observe a superconducting dome with chemical potential partially filling flat bands, in analogy to experiments reported in TBGs. Above the superconducting dome, the pseudogap and SCBF phases remain. Because the band width is still smaller than interaction energy scale, the temperature scales for the pseudogap and SCBF phases, which are dominated by interactions, are almost invariant for different band fillings (see Fig. We proposed a model describing 2D flat-band intervalley superconductor. The exact solution and QMC simulations reveal nontrivial phenomena, such as doping independent gap and large compressibility above the superconducting dome, which seems consistent with experimental studies. The super-compressible fluid phase and pseudogap phases acquire intriguing features. In transport measurements, these states are conductors, but in tunneling experiments, they behaves like an insulator, with a finite gap/pseudogap. However, as the system is cool down to the superconducting phase, this gap evolves adiabatically across the superconducting transition, in direct contrast to an insulating-superconductor transition. Upon gating, the large compressibility will lead to large response in fermion density, which is a unique feature due to moiré flat bands and distinguishes this bosonic fluid from other failed superconductors of nonflat bands and polar angle π(j-1) . Here a M = a 0 /θ is the moiré lattice constant when θ is small. These parameters have been obtained from the first-principle calculations for M oT e 2 homobilayer 2 /2m * a 2 0 , w z , w, ψ = (495meV, 8meV, -8.5meV, -89.6 • ) , where u * m,τ ;G ,X (k) is unitary transiformation matrix linking plane-wave and band basis, while the index X represents all other degrees of freedom, such as layer, sublattice, spin indices, etc. To describe twisted TMDs, one can simply discard this subindex X. For our interaction V (q), we use double-gate screened Coulomb interaction Here θ is twist angle 1.38 • , N k is number of momentum points in mBZ and d is the distance between two screened gates set as d = 2a M . At this twist angle, the dispersion of the top three bands is plotted in Fig. We follow the implementation of momentum space quantum Monte Carlo developed by us in Ref. According to the discrete Hubbard-Stratonovich transformation, e α Ô2 = 1 4 l=±1,±2 γ(l)e √ αη(l)ô + O α 4 , where , we can rewrite the partition function as, e iη(l |q| 1 ,t) Aq(δρ-q+δρq) e η(l |q| 2 ,t )Aq(δρ-q-δρq) ]} Aq(δρ-q+δρq) e η(l |q| 2 ,t) Aq(δρ-q-δρq) , respectively. We see P l = P ({l |q|,t }) Tr[ t Bt ({l |q|,t })] as possibility weight and Ô l = as sample value for configuration {l |q|,t }. Then Markov chain Mento Carlo can compute this Ô . Here, we prove there is no sign problem for our Hamiltonian. Single-particle matrixes between two valleys satisfy, Here, ck,m,-τ = c -k,m,-τ . Then one can see even with flat band kinetic terms, Bt,τ l |q|,t = e -∆τ H0,τ |q| =0 e iη(l |q 1 |,t) Aq(δρ-q,τ +δρq,τ ) e η(l |q 2 |,t) Aq(δρ-q,τ -δρq,τ ) Bt,-τ l |q|,t = e -∆τ H0,-τ |q| =0 e iη(l |q 1 |,t) Aq(-δρ * q,τ -δρ * -q,τ ) e η(l |q 2 |,t) Aq(-δρ * q,τ +δρ * -q,τ ) = B * This is always a non-negative number so that there is no sign problem. First, we show the N d + 1 degenerate ground states belong to one N d + 1 dimensional irrep of SU(2), which can be represented by normal Young diagram below The dimension of irrep can be calculated by hook's rule Then, we derive single-particle excitation of Hamiltonian in Eq. ( , where m, n, n are flat band labels. One can see there is no inter-valley term, so it is expected this single-particle spectrum is the same as that in the inter-valley repulsion Hamiltonian, which can be seen the red lines have same dispersion as shown in Fig. is also an excited eigenstate with the same eigenvalue ε k,τ . We would like to normalize the ground state and single-particle excitation states above it, such as, |ψ 2n = note we use t ∈ [0, β] instead of the usual τ to represent the imaginary time as τ has been occupied as valley index. Besides, we can also exactly derive imaginary time correlation of Cooper pair operators at zero temperature. ∆(t)∆ † (0) = Tr(e -(β-t)H I ∆e -tH I ∆ † ) Tr(e -βH I ) Since pairing correlation function P is defined as ∆∆ † + ∆ † ∆ , we actually achieve P at zero temperature. Next, following the proof of statement 4 in Ref. One can see Bt,τ l |q|,t is an unitary operator for any configuration l |q|,t . In single-particle basis, we write the matrix form of t Bt,τ l |q|,t as U = e M1 e M2 • • • e Mn . According to QMC's formula, Green's function for this configuration is defined as Since we can also easily see Np l = N d , after averaging all configurations, one will get N 2 p -Np 2 = 2 ∆∆ † . Finally, we would like to derive two-fermion excitations following similar method in Ref. This means two-fermion excitations on ground states are orthogonal so that they can be seen as well-defined basis. According to SU(2) symmetry, they should have the same excitation spectrum. By noticing H I applying on this basis forms a closed subspace, One can diagonalize this matrix in subspace to compute eigen excitation states as shown in Fig. Here, we use our exact solution results to benchmark the numerical code. As shown in Fig. We show our ED results here for 3 × 4 system at particle number N = 12 and N = 11 in Fig. QMC+SAC DOS results with kinetic term at different chemical potential are shown in Fig. Average particle number Np versus chemical potential μ is plotted with kinetic term in Fig. (k-K b ) 2 2m * + P b (r) P T (r) P † T (r) -2 (k-Kt) 2 2m * + P t (r), where b and t refer to bottom and top layers. m * is the effective mass, and k is momentum measured from +K point. Moiré potential P b,t,T can be parameterized: