The nitrogen-vacancy (NV) center in diamond is a promising quantum system for magnetometry applications exhibiting optical readout of minute energy shifts in its spin sub-levels. Key material requirements for NV ensembles are a high NV -concentration, a long spin coherence time and a stable charge state. However, these are interdependent and can be difficult to optimize during diamond growth and subsequent NV creation. In this work, we systematically investigate the NV center formation and properties in chemical vapor deposition (CVD) diamond. The nitrogen flow during growth is varied by over 4 orders of magnitude, resulting in a broad range of single substitutional nitrogen concentrations of 0.2-20 parts per million. For a fixed nitrogen concentration, we optimize electron-irradiation fluences with two different accelerated electron energies, and we study defect formation via optical characterizations. We discuss a general approach to determine the optimal irradiation conditions, for which an enhanced NV concentration and an optimum of NV charge states can both be satisfied. We achieve spin-spin coherence times T 2 ranging from 45.5 to 549 μs for CVD diamonds containing 168 to 1 parts per billion NV -centers, respectively. This study shows a pathway to engineer properties of NV-doped CVD diamonds for improved sensitivity. The negatively charged nitrogen-vacancy (NV -) center is a promising spin system for quantum sensing applications NV-ensembles with high NV -concentrations are favored for precision magnetometries Chemical vapor deposition (CVD) synthesis of diamond allows for well-controlled nitrogen-doping by setting the gas flow to the reaction chamber, typically at the lower end of nitrogen doping levels. High pressure high temperature (HPHT) synthesis, on the other hand, usually comes with larger nitrogen content (up to several hundreds of parts per million (ppm)) due to the contamination of the metal solvent-catalysts. However, HPHT diamonds often show strong variations in nitrogen densities between crystals grown under the same conditions, or even show sectors with vastly different P1 concentrations in a single crystal, due to the different nitrogen incorporation efficiencies along different growth directions during synthesis In previous studies, limited ranges of nitrogen concentrations for specific interests have been mostly discussed, for example recently Edmonds et al. Conventional procedures for NV creation pursue mainly a high P1 to NV centers conversion and a high concentration of total NV centers. The simultaneous reduction of the favourable NV -charge state often has been ignored. Here through the irradiation, we study the increase in NV centers as well as the change in charge state distribution. We aim to balance the increase of NV density with maintaining a high NV -/NV ratio. From this, we suggest general approaches to determine the optimal irradiation fluence for different nitrogen densities. Moreover, we investigate the coherence time, T 2 , of the NV center after growth, as well as after irradiation and annealing. We show the connection between P1 center density and T 2 after growth and achieve NV ensembles with long T 2 . Through irradiation and annealing treatments, we monitor the change in T 2 and aim to increase the NV density without compromising T 2 . We discuss combinations from high NV -with short T 2 , to low NV -with long T 2 , which help to identify the appropriate combination to achieve the optimal sensitivity for different applications. In this study, we aim to systematically investigate the growth and irradiation steps, in order to study the NV center and P1 center creation and corresponding NV-T 2 of CVD diamond. To this end, we have grown two sets of (100) orientated CVD diamonds. These are referred to as the 'nitrogen series', with nitrogen flow as the parameter and fixed irradiation conditions, and the 'irradiation series' with fixed nitrogen flow and irradiation fluence as the parameter, Fig. The nitrogen-doped CVD growth of all samples was run in an ellipsoidal-shaped CVD reactor with a 2.45 GHz microwave frequency and equipped with a 6 kW microwave generator The P1 concentration for the nitrogen series was assessed with X-band continuous wave electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) spectra collected at room temperature. The P1 concentration for Nitrogen series #1 and #2 were measured respectively by the spectrometer Bruker ELEXSYS E500 and Bruker ELEXSYS E580, both fitted with a Bruker super-high-Q probehead (ER4122 SHQE). The microwave frequencies were set to 9.45 GHz and 9.84 GHz respectively. For the Nitrogen series #1, before each measurement, a HPHT diamond (secondary calibration) sample with a known spin number was measured to quantify the spin number in each sample. For the Nitrogen series #2, determination of the spin concentrations was performed using the built-in spin-counting feature, from the acquisition software (xEPR). For some sample orientations, it was found that the cavity could not be properly critically coupled. We attributed this effect to the fact that sample edges, made of graphite-like carbon, are conducting. Proper sample orientation was chosen to enable critical coupling. This consists in putting two opposite edges of the square samples parallel to the sample insertion axis. For that cavity, such orientation ensures that no current loop will be created, because of the perpendicularity of the electric microwave field (TE102 mode) to two of the sample edges. The EPR measurement for P1 concentration carries a ∼6% error. The P1 concentration of the irradiation series was estimated from the absorption spectrum (measured with PerkinElmer Lambda 950) in the UV-Visible range (200-800 nm), in which an absorption band at 270 nm has been assigned to the P1 center The NV concentration was estimated from photoluminescence (PL) maps and spectroscopy by a home-built confocal setup (Fig. . Absolute NV -and NV 0 concentrations were then calculated as fractions of the total NV concentrations. The coherence time, T 2 , was measured by a home-built widefield microscope. A modulated 532 nm excitation laser (Laser Quantum opus) was focused onto the samples at a power of 100 mW with a spot size of 0.25 mm, then the NV-PL from a small central region of (16×16 μm) was collected by a sCMOS camera (ANDOR ZYLA 5.5 sCMOS). The T 2 measurement was conducted using the Hahn-echo protocol with MW π time of 120 ns and readout laser time of 8.5 μs and repeated for 20 ms. The initial laser polarization time was 50 ms and background magnetic field was 700 G. The microwave was delivered via an omega-shaped gold resonator with inner diameter of 0.3 cm. The collected PL count was referenced against an immediate secondary spin-echo measurement with an addition π-pulse and T 2 is extrapolated from the exponential function f (t) = a • exp(-t/T 2 ) + c. Nitrogen-doped CVD diamonds usually show detectable NV-fluorescence after growth, since some NV centers are formed directly in the growth, and the growth temperature activates local vacancies to combine with P1 centers but does not reach the point that NV centers become unstable. Working with NV centers that are formed directly during CVD growth is appealing for its technological simplicity as it does not require any irradiation or annealing steps. In this section we first study the in-situ creation of NV centers as well as the incorporation of P1 centers. We have grown the two nitrogen series to map concentrations of P1 centers and NV centers created by different nitrogen flows, showing how NV centers correlate to P1 centers; and how NV charge states behave in this phase. Furthermore, we investigate the coherence time of the series, and plot it as a function of EPR-determined P1 center densities. With all these characterizations we discuss the performance of nitrogen-doped CVD diamonds as a sensing material, without further treatments. We have grown the two nitrogen series with an varying N/C ratio altered by the N 2 to CH 4 flow ratio in the plasma. The N/C ratio was varied from 150 to 10 6 ppm during growth, resulting in an incorporated P1 concentration from 0.2 to 20 ppm (Fig. The as-grown NV -concentration is proportional to the P1 concentration in the entire range (Fig. For NV-ensemble-based magnetometry, the shot-noise limited sensitivity η is determined by the coherence time and the NV density where C is the measurement contrast, I is the PL intensity of NV centers, which is magnified by the NV concentration. The coherence time τ can be set to either T 2 or T * 2 for AC or DC magnetometry respectively. A large √ I • τ leads to better sensitivity, thus both a high NV fluorescence and a long coherence time are preferred. Our nitrogen series showed significant NV fluorescence after growth, which correlated positively to the P1 concentration. The Hahn-echo coherence time T 2 , however, is and NV 0 were formed during the growth, the NV -/NV ratio increases slightly with the P1 concentration. The NV-PL has a high homogeneity in the measured area, and its high precision for relative concentration measurements leads to a negligible statistical error comparing to the systematic error of ∼30%, which was induced by the calibration from the absorption cross-section (Sec. 2.2), therefore the error bars have not been implemented for NV concentrations. For the same reason the P1 concentration measured by EPR with ∼6% error is also not implemented. The error for the NV -/NV ratio was given by the standard deviation of data acquired at different sample positions. shorter for higher P1 concentration (blue circles in Fig. where B N -N V = 2π ×(1.0±0.1) kHz/ppm is the nitrogendominated NV decoherence rate, [N ] is the nitrogen con-centration, and T 2,other = 694±82 μs comes from the decoherence factor independent of nitrogen. In this model, they determined the total nitrogen concentration in the crystal by the secondary ion mass spectroscopy (SIMS), while we measured the single substitutional nitrogen (P1 centers) via EPR. In Fig. The demand for high NV fluorescence and long coherence time is contrary, calling for a balance between nitrogen incorporation and coherence time. For this purpose, the nitrogen-doped CVD growth performs competitive as it is highly controllable to obtain prospective combinations of these two factors consistently. We have proven that after growth, nitrogen-doped CVD diamonds can acquire suffi-cient NV -concentrations, as well as long coherence times for sensing requirements. The sensitivity can be further improved by irradiation and annealing steps after growth, which convert P1 centers into NV centers efficiently, increasing the N V /P 1 ratio while not shortening the T 2 (Eq. 2). According to Eq. 1, with an enhanced NV PL signal I and a consistent coherence time τ , the sensitivity η can be improved. Optimizing the irradiation we can maximize the P1-to-NV conversion rate, while performing the optimal combination of high NV PL signal, charge stability, and long T 2 time. To efficiently enhance the NV concentration in the diamond, subsequent irradiation and annealing treatments are commonly conducted, which have been discussed in previous works We applied e-beam irradiation and subsequent annealing to further create NV centers in our nitrogen-doped CVD diamonds, enhancing the NV/P1 ratio, while not expecting a shortening in coherence time T 2 , since it is limited by the total nitrogen concentration in the diamond, which should be consistent. In this sense, the irradiation condition should be optimized to maximize the P1 to NV - conversion rate: when a P1 center and a vacancy combine into an NV center, it then needs other P1 centers as the donor to provide an electron to charge NV - The irradiation fluence influences the vacancy concentration linearly To optimize the e-beam irradiation, and to understand how the fluence and energy influence the NV creation, we have grown the two irradiation series with fixed growth parameters, which showed high PL consistency after growth (Fig. The 1 MeV series showed similar behavior in NV concentration and charge states, but shifted towards higher fluence by an order of magnitude (Fig. For the same irradiation conditions, the NV concentration also depends on the initial P1 concentration: as in Fig. In Sec. 3.1.1 we have discussed vacancy-limited NV charge state distribution after CVD growth, as much fewer vacancies than P1 centers were in the diamond. After irradiation, we went to the point that the vacancy concentration (up to ∼30 ppm for 3E18 e/cm 2 with 1MeV) was in the same order with-or even higher than-the P1 concentration (2.2 ppm), vacancies have not been fully converted after annealing and the NV creation was P1-limited. Since NV -centers are charged by P1 centers, we suspected that the NV -/NV ratio is dependent on the remaining P1 centers after conversion to charge the NV centers. As support, for the two CVD irradiation series, we measured the P1 concentration twice, as after growth [P 1 grown ] and after irradiation and annealing [P 1 remain ]. After treatment, the NV -/NV ratio seems in fact to be determined by the ratio R re =NV/P1 remain , independent of irradiation fluence or energy (Fig. Another criteria that might be interesting for some applications is R re ∼35%, for which half of NV centers will be in the neutral form NV 0 . This means to remain NV -dominated, R re < 35% is required. For an initial P1 concentration of 2.2 ppm, the optimum can be set depending on different purposes. When focusing on the NV-charge-state stability, we would suggest an optimum of 1E17 e/cm 2 with 2MeV electron, or 1E18 e/cm 2 with 1MeV electron, resulting an NV -/NV ratio of ∼82-86%. When focusing on the total NV creation, the optimum can be set to 2E17 e/cm 2 with 2MeV electron, or 3E18 e/cm 2 with 1MeV electron, resulting an P1 grown to NV -conversion rate R - con of ∼7.3-8.4% while remaining an NV -/NV ratio of ∼66-68%. (More details see Table . 1) We have also noticed that previous works have applied different methods to determine the NV concentration. PL measurements are often applied with different calibration methods, for example comparing the NV-PL intensity with a single NV center Nevertheless the trends and rules we discussed for NV creation should be generally applicable in CVD diamonds. Analysing the NV concentration and charge states after irradiation and annealing steps provides us an overview of the 'final state' for the NV creation. The spectral study gives us further insight of the vacancy creation, the vacancy charge states behavior, and how they influence the NV creation during the treatment steps. To better understand this, and to visualise the defect transformations via irradiation and annealing, we study the absorption spectrum of the 1 MeV series in the UV-Visible range. Fig. Additionally, the spectrum after irradiation showed an increase in the 'ramp', which was defined by Khan et al. describing the gradual increase of absorption with decreasing wavelength conclude, the defect that increased the 'ramp' was induced proportional to the irradiation fluence, it can be largely annealed out at 1000 • C, this suggests that single vacancies can contribute to the 'ramp'. But the exact cause of the 'ramp' and how it influences the NV formation still needs further investigation. Furthermore, a center with ZPL at 489 nm (and a phonon side band centered at ∼460 nm) appeared after irradiation. The 489 nm center was attributed to a defect containing nitrogen atom bound to interstitial carbon atoms To study the NV creation from different as-grown P1 concentrations, as well as to confirm the optimal irradiation conditions, we irradiated the Nitrogen series #1 with P1 of 0.2-2.6 ppm from Sec. 3.1.1, with 2 MeV and used a fixed fluence of 2E17 e/cm 2 . This fluence was chosen based on the discussion of the 2 MeV irradiation series in Sec. 3.2.1, for which a fluence of 1E17-2E17 e/cm 2 was the optimal regime for 2.2 ppm P1). Fig. The irradiation and annealing have largely enhanced the NV concentration in our CVD series, leading to a stronger fluorescence signal, which can be the first approach to a better sensitivity according to Eq. 1. The coherence time, as another key factor, should be stable to prevent compromising the gained sensitivity. We assumed that the coherence time would stay consistent via the treatment, since the total nitrogen content in diamond would not be changed (Sec. 3.1.2). As a confirmation, we measured T 2 of the Nitrogen series #1 (also in Fig. The material-limited sensitivity is difficult to define, pre-Edmonds et al. which limits the sensitivity in theory. In practice, according to Eq. 1, the product of NV fluorescence signal I and the coherence time τ plays a more direct role. Since P1 centers can be only partially converted to NV -centers, the theoretical limit by the material is unreachable, however, enhancing the P1 to NV -conversion rate can push the sensitivity closer to the limit. For our Nitrogen series #1, the product of NV -and T 2 increased from 20-70 times though optimizing the e-beam irradiation, leading to an increase in the √ I • τ factor of around 5-8 times. On the other hand, the ODMR contrast C is equally important for the sensitivity, calling for a high NV -/NV ratio. In the Nitrogen series #1, as discussed in Sec. 3.2.3, the sample NDT-12 with 2.6 ppm P1 shows the highest NV -/NV ratio after irradiation and annealing steps. All other samples with lower nitrogen concentrationsalthough they have longer T 2 -contain high proportions of NV 0 centers. By adapting irradiation fluences for corresponding P1 concentrations, high NV -concentrations and NV -/NV ratios can be both satisfied. That, coupled with the optimization of the growth for long T 2 times, provides possibilities to further improve the sensitivity, by modulating the combination of NV -concentrations and T 2 times. We investigated nitrogen-doped CVD-grown diamond by varying the N/C ratio over a range from 150 to 10 6 ppm. We found that neutral single substitutional nitrogen (P1 centers) are created with a dependence of ∼ 0.09 N/C and created P1 densities in the CVD growth from 0.2 to 20 ppm. NV centers were also created during the growth with a fixed ratio of NV -/P1 density of 0.25%. The NV densities after growth were 0.03-33.9 ppb. Coherence times T 2 of the NV center after growth showed the expected inverse relationship with P1 centers, and they spanned 48-497 μs for P1 concentrations at the range of 0.2-2.6 ppm. Table For that range, we showed the coherence time as a function of the P1 concentration. Comparing this to a previous study where absolute nitrogen content was studied by SIMS, we found agreement if we assume that 75% of the nitrogen was in the form of P1 centers. The created range of NV densities and coherence times showed that as-grown nitrogen-doped CVD diamond can be used as a sufficient and reproducible sensing material. We investigated and optimized the fluence of subsequent high-energy electron irradiation. We found that increasing irradiation fluence increases NV concentrations, however, there is a certain optimal point, above which more fluence creates mainly additional NV 0 and any more NV -. This optimum for 2.2 ppm initial P1 was at 1E17-2E17 e/cm 2 for 2 MeV and at 1E18-3E18 e/cm 2 for 1MeV irradiation. With this optimum, we achieved a P1 to NV - conversion rate ∼7-8%, with an NV -/NV ratio ∼66-86%. Since P1 centers are the main electron donors to charge the NV centers, we interpret the creation of NV 0 above the optimum as the conversion of too many P1 centers to NV centers, such that not enough P1 centers are left to provide electrons to charge the NV center. Based on this model, we assume that the optimal fluence scales with the P1 density for similarly grown CVD diamonds. We also found that for CVD diamonds, the conversion rate from as-grown P1 to NV centers should be smaller than 10% to fulfill an NV -/NV ratio above 80%. In the future, this might be overcome by co-doping with another electron donor, for example phosphorous as a potential candidate. Furthermore, we studied the absorption spectral behavior at the UV-Visible range to visually describe defect transformations during irradiation and annealing. We observed the generation of V -centers (ND1 band) after irradiation, scaling with the fluence. Neutral V 0 centers (GR1 band) were also formed for high fluences. After annealing, V -centers were largely converted, forming NV centers proportional to the irradiation fluence. We found that the appearance of the GR1 band after irradiation can be an indicator of the NV 0 formation after annealing. This sup-ports further to our model, that for over-irradiated samples, the remaining P1 centers are not enough to charge vacancies (or NV centers), therefore neutral vacancies and later neutral NV centers tend to form. From that, we provided a novel approach from the UV-Vis absorption spectrum to determine the optimal irradiation fluence, before annealing the sample. Being treated with our irradiation and annealing protocol, the coherence time T 2 stay consistent. This means the irradiation/annealing provides significant advantages for sensing and sensitivity by increasing the NV density and thus the signal strength without compromising the T 2 . After treatment, we achieved a combination between 549 μs T 2 with 1 ppb NV -and 45.5 μs with 168 ppb. The longest T 2 =549 μs is comparable to T 2 reported previously for single NV We thank Xavier Vidal, Arne Götze, Oliver Ambacher, Brant Gibson, Philipp Reineck and Andrew Greentree for valuable discussions. We thank Michael Ardner for cut- 