Experimental progress finally reached the metallic solid hydrogen phase, which was predicted by Wigner and Huntington over 80 years ago. However, the different structures in the phase diagram are still been debated due to the difficulty of diffraction experiments for high-pressured hydrogen. The determination of crystal structures under extreme condition is both of the basic condensed matter physics, and in planetary science: the behavior of giant gaseous planets (e.g. Jupiter, Saturn...) strongly depends on the properties of inner high-pressured hydrogen. This work describes new possible structures appearing under high pressures of 400∼600 GPa. We applied a structural search using particle swarm optimization with density functional theory (DFT) to propose several candidate structures. For these structures, we performed fixed-node diffusion Monte Carlo simulations combined with DFT zero-point energy corrections to confirm their relative stability. We found P2 1 /c-8 as a promising candidate structure for the H 2 -PRE phase. P2 1 /c-8 is predicted the most stable at 400 and 500 GPa. P2 1 /c-8 reproduces qualitatively the IR spectrum peaks observed in the H 2 -PRE phase. Dense hydrogen undergoes phase transitions to solid crystals under high pressure, providing a variety of solid structural phases. At the lowest pressure, hydrogen assumes a hexagonal lattice of molecules with sufficient internal degrees of freedom to rotate each molecule (phase I) Pioneering work While the phases I-III, H 2 -PRE, and MH are stable down to near 0 K, the phases IV and IV' are stable around or above room temperature In this study, we perform a structural search at zero temperature in a high-pressure region (400 ∼ 600 GPa), where a structure has yet to be determined by experiments. By using the particle-swarm optimization (PSO) algorithm implemented in CALYPSO Among the structures found by structural search, Pbam-8 is predicted by FNDMC to have a static enthalpy comparable with the structures reported in the previous studies as shown in Table A PSO structural search using CALYPSO On obtaining candidate structures using CALYPSO, we replace the exchange-correlation (XC) functionals into Van der Waals (vdW) density functionals (DFs) We evaluate FNDMC static enthalpies using QMCPACK In FNDMC, forces are practical for only simple small systems due to the computational cost. The second derivatives of energy are much more difficult so they are not implemented yet in QMCPACK to our knowledge. Without a Hessian, we cannot calculate phonons. Therefore, we rely in DFT methods to obtain geometry and phonons in this work. We note that, to our knowledge, there is only one example of FNDMC phonon calculation for diamond For fairness of comparison with other studies, we do not perform volume optimization at the FNDMC level. An additional P•V term in the static enthalpy is evaluated by the V (P) dependence using DFTs at P = 400, 500, and 600 GPa. By adding ZPE, we obtain dynamic enthalpies. FIG. of the difference from the C2/c-24 structure (zero reference in the plot). The most stable structure is found to be C2/c-24→ Cmca-12→ Cmca-4 as pressure increases. Figure Using the PSO structural search, we find 10 new candidate structures beyond those reported in preceding works (C2/c-24, Cmca-12, Cmca-4, I4 1 /amd, and mC-24). Comparisons FIG. of their static enthalpies predicted by vdW-DF functional are shown in Fig. Figure laxed structure is identical to P2 1 /c-8. We argue that small numerical errors in the harmonic finite difference approach implemented in Phonopy However, the difference of dynamic enthalpy between P2 1 /c-8 and the second most stable structure is, at most, just 0.049(15) mHartree/atom. Therefore, C2/c-24 or Cmca-12 can be predicted comparably stable as P2 1 /c-8, by taking into account anharmonic contributions to ZPE to Cmca-12 but with a lower formation energy. Therefore, we propose that P2 1 /c-8 is a more promising candidate structure of the H 2 -PRE phase. The structure of P2 1 /c-8 is similar to Pca2 1 found as a candidate structure of the phase V We performed a new structural search for solid-phase hydrogen at zero temperature in a high-pressure region, from 400 to 600 GPa. After obtaining candidate structures predicted using the PSO algorithm, we compared their enthalpies while considering the electron-correlation effects using the FNDMC method with zero-point energy corrections evaluated within the harmonic approximation of a phonon spectra. We found 10 candidate structures in our structural search. Among the structures, Pbam-8 is predicted to have a comparatively low static enthalpy by FNDMC with the previously reported structures. However, Pbam-8 has imaginary phonon modes. We relaxed the structure along the direction of the imaginary mode at the Γ point and obtained a new structure, P2 1 /c-8. This structure has negligible population of imaginary modes at 400 and 500 GPa, which we attribute to numerical error or anharmonic effects. Our dynamic enthalpy evaluation given as the sum of the FNDMC static enthalpy and ZPE predicted by DFT showed that P2 1 /c-8 is the most stable at 400 and 500 GPa. In addition, we found that the predicted IR spectrum of P2 1 /c-8 qualitatively reproduces observed peaks for the pre-metallic phase, H 2 -PRE The structure of P2 1 /c-8 is slightly similar to that of C2/c-24 found as a candidate structure of the phase III 