We propose a versatile setup that allows performing spin-resolved spectroscopy of helical Andreev bound states, proving their existence and therefore the topological nature of the Josephson junction that hosts them. The latter is realized on the helical edge of a 2D topological insulator, proximitized with two superconducting electrodes. The spectroscopic analysis is enabled by a quantum point contact, which couples the junction with another helical edge acting as a spin-sensitive probe. By means of straightforward transport measurements, it is possible to detect the particular spin structure of the helical Andreev bound state and to shine light on the mechanism responsible for their existence, i.e. the presence of protected Andreev reflection within the Josephson junction. We discuss the robustness of this helical Andreev spectrometer with respect to processes that weaken spin to charge conversion. Introduction. -Two-dimensional topological insulators (2DTIs) have been receiving a lot of attention since their first discovery A distinctive feature of a JJ defined in a 2DTI is the presence of helical Andreev bound states (hABSs) We propose a feasible setup to perform spectroscopy of Andreev bound states Setup. -The setup is sketched in Fig. Throughout the paper, we set = 1 unless stated differently. Without loss of generality, we assume channels with positive helicity (rσ > 0) to be on the lower edge and vice-versa. The x coordinate describes the position along each edge. The operator ψ † rσ creates an electron with spin σ = ↑, ↓ ≡ ±1 on right-moving (r = R ≡ 1) or left-moving (r = L ≡ -1) channels. Helical Andreev bound states. -Within our JJ, particles/holes impinging against a superconducting region necessarily undergo perfect AR where E is the energy and the tilde notation indicates the opposite values, i.e. ẽ = h, R = L, ↑ =↓ and viceversa. The amplitude of the hole/particle impinging on the r superconductor is denoted by β c rσ and we introduce the function Φ r (E) = π/2 + EDv -1 -arccos(E/∆ r ). A schematic overview of the scattering amplitude labeling is provided in Fig. Due to the helical nature of the weak link, and the consequent presence of perfect AR, the mid-gap states hosted by the JJ acquire a particular structure and are dubbed hABSs. To better highlight their properties, we temporarily ignore the presence of the QPC. In this case, given Eq. ( Importantly, each class has a specific spin structure: hABSs with ν = +1 (ν = -1) consist only of rightmoving spin-down electrons (holes) and left-moving spinup holes (electrons), illustrated in Fig. -We now demonstrate how the intriguing structure of hABSs can be directly probed by means of the QPC sketched in Fig. where the fermionic operators are evaluated at the position x of the QPC. This Hamiltonian consists of both spin-preserving (amplitude λ p ) and spin-flipping (amplitude λ f ) tunneling terms. The latter can exists only if spin-axial symmetry is broken, a condition that cannot be excluded at the QPC where the pinching of the edges can induce a local modification of the spin-orbit coupling We derive the transport properties on the lower edge using the scattering matrix formalism. The combined effect of the QPC and AR within the JJ results in the relation between outgoing and incoming amplitudes on the lower edge (we suppress the redundant spin index) [63, If only spin-preserving tunneling is allowed (i.e. λ f = 0), the QPC operates as a perfect spin-resolved Andreev spectrometer: G 12 (G 21 ) is indeed only sensitive to electronic states on the upper edge with spin-up (spin-down). This allows us to perfectly distinguish between the two classes of hABSs, as G 12 (G 21 ) exclusively reveals the energy-phase relation of the ν = -1 (ν = +1) class. In particular, we predict This result is displayed in Fig. Importantly, the proposed setup is robust with respect to the two main effects that lead to deviations from the ideal scenario discussed above: (i) Limited spin-resolving power of the detector due to a finite spin-flipping amplitude λ f at the QPC; (ii) Presence of spurious reflection mechanisms within the JJ. In the following, we carefully analyze both of them. Robustness against spin-flip events. -Our device retains a strong spin-sensitivity even in presence of finite λ f . This is shown, for example, in Figs. f and E ν satisfying the energy-phase relations Φ(E ν ) = (π -νχ)/2 of the hABSs. As expected, the difference vanishes for χ = 0, π (when the hABSs are degenerate) and for λ p = λ f (when the tunneling at the QPC becomes spin-independent). By contrast, the maximum absolute value of δG ν (χ) is reached for χ = π/2, 3π/2. In Fig. Figs. stemming from the presence of a Kramers pair of Majorana zero modes (obtained from a proper linear combination of the degenerate hABSs) Spurious backscattering terms. -To study the effects of spurious backscattering mechanisms within the JJ, we begin by considering the example provided in Figs. represents a proof for the absence of hABSs. However, the converse is not true [76] and this calls for a more in-depth analysis of the conductances. Our device provides us with an additional tool that can efficiently detect the presence of spurious electronic backscattering within the JJ, allowing us to distinguish between the presence of hABSs and other mid-gap states. In particular, our setup naturally allows for the measure-ment of the local differential conductances that can be combined to define The four independent quantities G 12/21/11 and Σ are plotted in Fig. . By contrast, mid-gap states with non-helical features offer more channels for the electrons to tunnel between the edges. This results in deviations from Σ = 0 as shown in Fig. To properly demonstrate this, we consider the presence of generic backscattering processes between the two helical channels of the upper edge. To this end, we replace the AR-induced constraints on the scattering amplitudes in Eq. ( describing generic complete reflection processes happening to the left (r = L) or to the right (r = R) of the QPC. The parameters θ r (mod π) control the nature of these processes, which can continuously range from the pure electronic backscattering limit (θ r = 0) to the pure AR scenario considered in Eq. ( ). The analytical expressions of the four differential conductances, determined by imposing Eq. ( Discussion. -We argue that our proposal is within experimental reach, given the degree of maturity of HgTebased 2DTI devices. The edge states exhibit ballistic mean free paths that exceed several micrometers ative. Moreover, in this case, the superconductors should not play any role and the conductances are thus expected not to depend on χ. The aim of this section is to derive Eq. ( In the portions of the helical system which are proximitized by a standard superconductor, an additional proximityinduced pairing is present The resulting Hamiltonian density in th Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) form reads with p = -i∂ x and written in the basis Ψ = (ψ ↑ , ψ ↓ , ψ † ↑ , ψ † ↓ ) T . Focusing on a given proximitized region (and assuming the superconducting pairing to be homogeneous), the BdG equation of the system is given by or equivalently where we denote the eigenvectors of H ζ BdG , with eigenvalue E, as φ = (u ↑ , u ↓ , v ↑ , v ↓ ) T . Its solutions read where we introduce κ = √ ∆ 2 -E 2 . By contrast, in the non-proximitized helical region, we have ∆ = 0 and the solutions of the BdG equations are simply plane waves Let us now consider the reflections from two semi-infinite superconductors located at x = x r , with r = R, L. At first, we focus on an incident electronic plane wave with energy E and amplitude β e rσ [see Fig. As for the scattering of holes with energy E and amplitude β h rσ , we get α e rσ e -irExr = Ce -iχr (-rE + riκ r ) β h rσ e irExr = -Crσ∆ r (A10) which results in α e rσ = e i2rExr e -iχr E -iκ r σ∆ r β h rσ = σe i2rExr e -iχr e -i arccos(E/∆r) β h rσ . (A11) Note that we use the identity (|E| < ∆) In summary, we obtain (c = e/h = ±1, ẽ = h) The parameters χ r and ∆ r are the superconducting phase and pairing potential of the right (r = R) and left (r = L) superconducting lead. Note that, if the two superconductors are located at x r = rD/2, one simply gets 2riEx r = iED regardless of the value of r. Eq. (A13) demonstrates the validity of Eq. ( As for time-reversal symmetry, it add a complex conjugation i → -i, exchanges incoming and outgoing states, flips the propagation direction and the spin, and add a spin-dependent sign to the amplitudes, i.e. α c rσ → σβ c rσ and β c rσ → σα c rσ . Eq. (A13) is not invariant under time-reversal symmetry, since the latter flips the sign of the superconducting phases. In particular, one obtains By rearranging terms, we get which allows us to readily derive the electronic scattering matrix S e QPC as In presence of superconductivity, it is convenient to compute the scattering matrix also for incoming and outgoing holes. In this case, the amplitudes α h rσ and β h rσ are related by the scattering matrix S h (λ p , λ f ) = S e (-λ p , -λ f ), i.e. Appendix C: Scattering matrix on the lower edge In this section, we combine the perfect AR on the upper edge with the scattering at the QPC, aiming at deriving the scattering matrix for the amplitudes on the lower helical edge. By solving the resulting linear system for β e R↑ , β e L↓ , β h R↑ , and β h L↓ we readily obtain Eq. ( where we suppressed the redundant spin index, which is fixed by the (positive) helicity of the lower helical edge. It is interesting to show and comment on the analytical expression of the transmission and reflections coefficients. To this end, it is particularly convenient to use the functions Φ r (E) functions defined in the main text. The coefficients associated with an incoming electron with spin-up (i.e. from the C 1 lead) reads with the denominator The other coefficients of the scattering matrix are given by Note that the modulus squared of the standard transmission and reflection coefficients does not depend on the position x of the QPC. By contrast, the Andreev transmission and reflection coefficients do depend on x at finite energy. We also point out that Andreev transmission c and standard reflection r are both proportional to λ p λ f : Those processes are therefore present only when both spin-preserving and spin-flipping tunneling events are allowed. As expected, the standard reflections vanish for χ = 0, π, i.e. when the whole system is time-reversal symmetric and backscattering within a single helical edge is therefore forbidden. We observe that the standard transmission coefficient vanishes for χ = π and E = 0 (which implies Φ L = Φ R = 0) that is, when the JJ host a Kramers pair of Majorana zero modes and only Andreev processes are allowed. In this case, the other coefficients reads which lead to As stated in the main text, we thus have -e 2 /h ≤ G 12 (0, π) = G 21 (0, π) ≤ 0 and the value of -e 2 /h is reached for λ p = λ f . It is illustrative to consider the case ∆ R = ∆ L , which leads to Φ L = Φ R = Φ. In this case, given the general relation in Eq. ( (C19) By plugging this relation into the expressions of the coefficients, the latter greatly simplify. This allows us to obtain more concise expressions for the conductances. In particular, if we consider the difference between the two non-local conductances G 12 and G 21 , computed for the same χ and for the same energy E which satisfy Φ(E) = Φ ν (χ), we get (C20) Such an expression vanishes for χ = 0, π, i.e. when ABSs belonging to different classes are present at the same time, and reaches its largest absolute value for χ = ±π/2. For χ = π/2 and ν = +1, we obtain the expression reported in Eq. ( FIG. to one of the two different classes of hABSs with ν = +1 and ν = -1. However, the only way for this electron to be reflected to contact C 1 is to tunnel back into the lower edge with via a tunneling event of opposite nature. The whole reflection process, therefore, necessarily consists of both a spin-preserving and a spin-flipping tunneling event at the QPC. By summing over all the possible paths, we can express the reflection amplitude as where we take into account the possibility of k additional reflections between the two superconductors on the upper edge. As for spin-down electrons coming from contact C 2 , the case depicted in Fig. These expressions, which are compatible with Eqs. (C3) and (C10), merely differ by a global phase and they clearly satisfy |r ee ← | 2 = |r ee → | 2 . The scattering processes are distinctively different in case (II), displayed in Fig. As for spin-down electrons coming from contact C 2 , by looking at Fig. Those two terms differ more than just for a global phase factor, leading to The same argument applies to the Andreev transmission coefficients. Hence, a mid-gap state consisting of electronic channels with both spin orientations (i.e. not an hABS), which we mimic in our model by the presence of a magnetic scatterer, results in Σ = 0. In the following, under general assumptions, we demonstrate that Σ = 0 implies θ r = 0, π/2 (mod π), thus proving the existence of hABSs. To this end, we analytically compute Σ as a function of all the parameters of the systems with the generic reflection matrices [see Eq. ( The denominator D is a bounded function and the numerator N is a polynomial in λ p and λ f . Requiring that Σ = 0 regardless of the specific value of the tunneling amplitudes at the QPC is equivalent to require that each coefficient C n,m that multiplies λ n p λ m f in N vanishes. Among the several resulting conditions that have to be met, we focus on one of them, C 2,6 + 2C 4,6 = 0, which can be conveniently expressed as and where we introduce the variable η r that stands for θ r , ξ ee r , ξ eh r , ξ he r , ξ hh r . Eq. (D7) is clearly verified for θ L = θ R = 0 or θ L = θ R = π/2. However, for generic values of θ L and θ R , because of the intricate dependence on η r and the position of the QPC x, we expect that Eq. (D7) can only be valid for specific fine-tuned points in the parameter space. In order to rule out the possibility that the observation of Σ = 0 stems from the fact of having hit one these fine-tuned points, we recommend to measure Σ for several different parameter choices. In particular, the (E -χ) diagram could be sampled [as in Fig. To better discuss the robustness of our analysis and stress the importance of sampling multiple points in parameter space, we numerically compute the maximum value of |Σ| over the whole (E -χ) diagram, which we denote with Σ max , for several different scenarios. In Fig. In Fig. )], and located on the two sides of the QPC (i.e. -D/2 < x M1 < x < x M2 < D/2). In this case, we identify one specific scenario that results in Σ = 0, even in presence of magnetic scatterers. It corresponds to the the fully symmetric configuration with real m 1 = m 2 , ∆ L = ∆ R , x = 0, and x M2 = -x M1 (see the white spots in both panels of Fig. Interestingly, in presence of perfect hABSs, the non-local differential conductance satisfy The situation is different, however, in presence of additional scattering mechanisms on the upper edge. For the sake of concreteness, let us focus on the presence of magnetic impurities. In this case, the transformation (F2) modifies the corresponding scattering matrix as S M (E, m) = S M (-E, -m * ) * [see Eq. (E9)]. Every amplitude appearing in Eq. (C1) results from the interference of paths featuring different numbers of reflections on the magnetic impurity. As long as m is not imaginary, therefore, the transformation m → -m * modifies the interference and thus the differential conductances. This explains why, the relation G 12/21 (E, χ) = G 12/21 (-E, -χ) does not hold in Fig. 