This work reports a novel time-domain expression for the current-response kernels of a Josephson tunnel junction between BCS superconductors with in general different energy gaps, and its use to simulate the classical dynamics of such junctions. The simulations show a dynamic regime characterized by the resonance between the Josephson oscillations and the gap oscillations in the asymptotics of the current kernels that has not been studied previously. The resonance manifests itself as a hysteresis in the dc current-voltage characteristics of the current-biased junctions in the voltage range above the energy gap, in addition to the usual "inertial" hysteresis characteristic for tunnel junctions at voltages below the energy gap. Features of the IV curves related to the gap resonance, including the above-the-gap hysteresis, should manifest themselves in many structures and devices utilizing high-quality Josephson tunnel junctions with relatively large, but achievable current densities. A tunnel junction: two conductors separated by a layer of insulator that is sufficiently thin to allow for charge transfer between the conductors at a rate that is large enough to produce a noticeable current Josephson tunnel junctions possess several other characteristics, starting with the strongly nonlinear dynamics of the dynamic junction variables: Josephson phase difference φ(t) and the voltage V (t) across the junction, that make them ideal building blocks for various devices of superconductor electronics, including digital circuits Classical current response of a Josephson tunnel junction to an arbitrary fixed time-dependent voltage V (t) is well understood for a long time Next Section discusses the main result of the first part of this work, expression for the time-domain current response of a tunnel junction, which is derived in Appendix A. Section III describes the application of this expression to the simulation of the Josephson dynamics of the current-biased tunnel junctions and calculates the current-voltage characteristics of the junction under several different conditions. Section IV estimates the junction parameters under which the gap-resonance regime of the Josephson dynamics is realized, and concludes. Appendix B gives some details of the numerical procedure used in the simulations of the junction dynamics. Consider a Josephson tunnel junction between the two BCS superconductors with in general different energy gaps ∆ 1 and ∆ 2 . If the bias voltage V (t) between the superconductors has an arbitrary dependence on time t, the tunnel current I T (t) that flows in the junction can be expressed through the time-dependent Josephson phase difference φ(t) across the junction (see, e.g., As shown in Appendix A, the pair current I p and the quasiparticle I qp kernels in this equation have the following analytical form for the tunnel junction with the normal-state resistance R N : The functions J 0,1 here are the Bessel functions of the first kind, which for z > 0 can be defined by the following relations while the functions A 0,1 depend on the temperature T of the superconductors through the ratios β j ≡ ∆ j /2T , j = 1, 2, and are defined, also for z > 0, as The first, δ term in the quasiparticle kernel I qp (2) accounts for the normal-state Ohmic contribution I N to the current: At low temperatures, when tanh βx ≡ 1, the functions A j are reduced to the Bessel functions Y j (z), j = 0, 1, of the second kind: As a result, in the low-temperature limit, the current kernels (2) are expressed through the well-studied Bessel functions only: This result generalizes to different energy gaps ∆ 1 = ∆ 2 the equations obtained by Harris This gives for the current-response kernel of the NS tunnel junction: This expression coincides with the D → 0 limit of the general expression for the time-dependent response of an NS junction with an arbitrary electron transparency D The next Section describes the application of the expressions for the current kernels presented in this Section to the simulations of the classical Josephson dynamics of the current-biased junctions. An outline of the derivation of these expressions is discussed in Appendix A. As an application of the current kernels obtained in the previous Section, I now discuss the simulations of the classical dynamics of a Josephson phase φ across a current-biased Josephson tunnel junction formed by the BCS superconductors with in general different gap energies ∆ 1 and ∆ 2 . In this work, the simulations are limited to the low-temperature regime, when the current kernels are given by Eq. ( Classical Josephson dynamics of a Josephson tunnel junction shunted by an Ohmic resistor R S and biased by in general time-dependent external current I(t) (see the equivalent circuit in the inset in Fig. Here, the tunnel current I T is given by Eq. ( The main physical parameter that controls the nature of the phase dynamics in the tunnel junction is the ratio of the time constant R N C of the junction capacitance to the gap time: For the purpose of the discussion of the junction dynamics below, it will be convenient to view β simply as the parameter characterizing the magnitude of the junction capacitance, ranging from the negligibly small capacitance at β = 0 to large capacitance for β 1. It should be noted, however, that this view is misleading in one respect. For typical tunnel junctions, the time constant R N C (and therefore β) is independent of the junction area, in contrast to the absolute magnitude of the junction capacitance, because the area dependence of the junction resistance R N compensates that of the capacitance. Both the time constant R N C and β depend only on the effective electron transparency of the tunnel barrier that is characterized usually through the "critical current density", decreasing with increasing current density as the inverse of it. With this set of the dimensionless parameters and variables, the dynamic equations ( where both times t and τ are normalized to the gap frequency, and the current kernels are expressed through the Bessel functions: Here r j are the partial gaps: Conventions adopted above dictate that the current in the junction is normalized to e.g., i = I/I N . The normalization current I N is different from the junction critical current I C , which is expressed in terms of the complete elliptic integral of the first kind K(m) as (see, e.g., (13) For completeness, one should note that the elliptic integral in Eq. ( One of the main qualitative features of the current in a Josephson tunnel junction are the singularities (peaks and jumps) of the current components resulting from the singularity of the density of state in the superconducting electrodes at the edge of the energy gap. In the time domain, this gap-edge singularity manifests itself in a very slow decay of the quasiparticle and the pair current kernels. Using the standard expressions for the leading asymptotic behavior of the Bessel functions at large arguments, we see that at large time, τ 1, the current kernels Although this expression is derived for the current kernels at vanishing temperature, the finite temperature T does not change the slow-decaying nature of this asymptotic behavior. Using Eq. ( being small static variations of the energy gap over the area of the junction, and electron-phonon relaxation producing finite lifetime of the quasiparticle energy states in the superconducting electrodes of the junction. In junctions with finite electron transparency D (assumed to be vanishingly small in tunnel junctions), finite D itself directly smears the Riedel singularity with the similar transformation of the quasiparticle current kernel i qp (τ ). Parameter w in Eq. ( To develop a more detailed understanding of this hysteresis, it is helpful to look at the time evolution of the Josephson phase φ(t) on the vertical branch of the hysteresis, V V g . An example of this evolution is shown in Fig. In more details, we assume the simplest model of the 2∆/e on the IV curve shown in Fig. phase evolution qualitatively consistent with the actual staircase-like time dependence shown in Fig. where n(t) is an integer that increases by 1 with each period 2π/ω J of the Josephson oscillations. For such time dependence of the phase, sin φ(t) ≡ 1, while sin[φ(t)φ(t )]/2 ≡ 0. This means that besides the Ohmic component, only the pair current gives nonvanishing contribution to the total tunnel current, and Under the assumption that the Riedel singularity is smeared only weakly, the pair component of the tunnel current is dominated in time domain by its large-time asymptotics where the lower limit of the integral is set by condition of validity of the long-time asymptotics of the Bessel functions to η Ω -1 , while the upper limit is determined by the width of the Riedel singularity, e.g., by Eq. ( First, one averages out the rapidly-varying terms of frequency Ω in Eq. ( On the vertical branch of the above-the-gap hysteresis, the deviation δV of the dc voltage V across the junction from the gap value is small. As will be seen soon, it is proportional to the width of the Riedel singularity, δV ≡ V -V g ∝ w. This means that the deviation of the Josephson frequency from 2Ω is also small, and can be neglected when evaluating the integral In this expression, it is assumed that the time t is counted starting at one of the jumps of the staircase-like evolution of the Josephson phase (Fig. In the approximation discussed above, the corresponding integral is: Combining these two results, we obtain an expression for the pair current on the vertical side of the above-the-gap hysteresis in the approximation Although, obviously, the assumption ( By contrast, for fixed bias voltage V across the junction, the regime that approximately describes the highervoltage branch of the above-the gap hysteresis, the pair current does not have a dc component. If the phase evolves simply as φ(t) = φ 0 + ω J t, the non-vanishing contribution to the pair current Eq. ( The same calculation as done above for the phase and indeed averages to zero over time t. This also shows that the current I R introduced in Eq. ( In summary, a novel expression for the time-domain current kernels of a Josephson tunnel junctions between two ideal BCS superconductors with in general different energy gaps is derived and used to simulate the dynamics of the current-biased junctions. The simulations make it possible to study in detail the current-voltage characteristics of such junctions and reveal their qualitatively new features, the main one -an additional hysteresis at voltages above the gap voltage of the junction. The hysteresis is related to the Riedel singularity of the junction supercurrent and is explained in terms of the step-like time dependence of the Josephson oscillations at the gap voltage, that can be viewed as characteristic feature of the resonance between the Josephson oscillations and the gap oscillations with frequency Ω = (∆ 1 + ∆ 2 )/ in the pair current kernel of the junction, where ∆'s are the energy gaps of the two junction electrodes. This regime of the gap resonance exists in the junctions with the relatively short RC time constant, β ≡ ΩR N C 0.6, where R N is the normal-state resistance, and C -capacitance of the junction. In typical Josephson tunnel junctions, RC time constant is nearly independent of the junction area, and characterizes the "critical current density" j. Since β is proportional to the gap frequency, the condition that β is not too large is more difficult to fulfill in junctions employing superconductors with large energy gaps, like niobium that is used frequently to produce the large-scale circuits of superconductor electronics. Aluminum junctions, which are also quite standard, have significantly smaller gap ∆ 0.2 meV, so that the gap frequency is Ω 0.6 THz and reaching the regime of the gap resonance, β 0.6 requires junctions with the time constant R N C about 1 ps. High critical current density can be reached in tunnel junctions with insulator layer thickness below 1 nm. Combined with the relative dielectric constant 8 of the standard aluminum oxide tunnel barrier, this gives the electric capacitance per unit area C 7 • 10 -14 F/μm 2 , and R N C 1 ps for the resistance of unit area 15 Ohm•μm 2 . This translates into a critical current density j 2 kA/cm 2 that should be achievable in junctions which still preserve both the highquality tunnel barriers and superconducting electrodes with sharp edges of the energy gap. The author would like to thank Alexander Kirichenko and Pavel Shevchenko for sharing the unpublished results. This work was supported by the IARPA Supertools program through the Synopsys and Hypres subcontracts. The author would like to acknowledge Timur Fillipov, Deep Gupta, Amol Inamdar, Dmitri Kirichenko, Michail Kupriyuanov, Konstantin Likharev, Vasili Semenov, and Stephen Whiteley for the stimulating discussions of the results. This appendix presents the derivation of the expressions for the current kernels discussed in Sec. I. Since the calculation of the tunnel current in a Josephson junction is described in details in the literature, only the steps leading specifically to Eqs. (2) are outlined. Using the standard method of the tunnel Hamiltonian, the current I T (t) in a Josephson tunnel junction can be expressed as in Eq. ( Here ξ is the energy of the quasiparticle states of the BCS Hamiltonian, f (ξ) is the Fermi distribution function at temperature T , and ρ j (ξ) is the superconducting density of states in the jth electrode. Taking into account in Eq. (A1) that Im e -iξt/ e -iζt/ = -sin ξt cos ζt -cos ξt sin ζt , and one directly obtains Eqs. ( The same transformations of Eq. (A2) as for the Eq. (A1) would give: and reproduce directly the integral part of the quasiparticle kernel (2) in terms of the function J 1 (z) and A 1 (z, β). This conclusion, however, misses the normal-state Ohmic contribution to the current determined by the singular part of the integrals for J 1 (z) and A 1 (z, β) which are not properly convergent. A more accurate transformation of the expression for I qp requires to explicitly separate the singular part of these integrals, something that can be achieved by subtracting the normal density of states [equal to 1 in the conventions of Eqs. (A1) and (A2)] from the superconducting ones: in Eq. (A2). Then, one needs to do the calculation similar to that for the pair current kernel (A1) individually for each term in the expansion (A4). For the last, normal-state term, repeating the steps similar to those in Eq. ( With this result, Eq. (A2) shows that the normal-state contribution to the quasiparticle current kernel is: This expression can be transformed into the corresponding part of Eq. (2). To provide the context for this transformation, it should be mentioned that all current kernels discussed in this work are obtained by the perturbation theory in tunneling which leads to Eq. ( They do not vanish for t < 0 as would be natural for the causal response, and as indeed happens in the nonperturbative calculations (see, e.g., Equation ( The next term in Eq. (A4) one should deal with is ρ-1, i.e. Written in dimensionless form (x = z = ∆t/ ), its real part is: and is absolutely convergent. The second term in the brackets in this expression affects the value of the integral only at z = 0: while the first term is the derivative of the integral (3) for J 0 (z). This gives us the following expression for J 1 (z) for z > 0: For z = 0, the value of J 1 (0) = 0 is determined by the full integral (A7) with removed divergence. Making use of Eq. ( where A 1 is defined in Eq. ( Since the total integral (A8) is absolutely convergent, we know that (A 1 + S) z→0 = 0, i.e. A 1 diverges in the same way as S for small t. Combining the results for the real and imaginary parts of the ρ -1 term we get: (A9) Also, Eq. (A5) for G N (t) can be written as Using Eqs. (A9) and (A10) to evaluate the contributions to the quasiparticle current kernel (A2) of all three terms (besides the normal-state term) in the expansion (A4), one gets the following total: where in the last line we took into account that (A 1 +S) = 0 for t = 0 ensuring that the products (A 1 +S)δ(t) vanish. Together with the normal-state contribution (A6) this equation gives the quasiparticle current kernel (2). The inserts show that even on a fine scale (on the order of 10 -2 ), the two expansions, power series at small arguments and the asymptotic expansions at large arguments, agree very well, without a noticeable transition. the series one can obtain J 0,1 with accuracy better that 10 -4 in this range of the argument, as one can check either by comparison to a different, asymptotic expansion of these functions discussed below, or, by comparison with the numerical tables in For the Bessel functions Y n (x) of the second kind, the power-series expansion similar to Eq. (B1) is where γ = 0.5772156649 is Euler's constant. The discussion of Eq. (B1) above applies to Eq. (B2) as well. The power series of up to m = 100 terms converges for Similarly to Fig. x 30 and gives Y 0,1 with accuracy better that 10 -4 in this range, as one can check by comparison to the asymptotic expansion of these functions. Very slow convergence of the Bessel functions, which decay at large argument x only as x -1/2 , implies that the integrals in Eq. ( With the Bessel functions calculated accurately and in the arbitrary large range of the arguments as described above, Eqs. ( 