The ruthenate family of layered perovskites has been a topic of intense interest, with much work dedicated to the superconducting state of Sr2RuO4. Another longstanding puzzle is the lack of superconductivity in its sister compound, Sr3Ru2O7, which constrains the possible mechanisms of Sr2RuO4. Here we address a microscopic mechanism that unifies the orders in these materials. Beginning from a model of Sr2RuO4 featuring interorbital spin-triplet pairing via Hund's and spin-orbit couplings, we find that bilayer coupling alone enhances, while staggered rotations destroy interorbital superconductivity. A magnetic field then shifts van Hove singularities, allowing intraorbital spin-density wave order to form in Sr3Ru2O7. Our theory predicts that Sr3Ru2O7 without staggered rotations exhibits interorbital superconductivity with a possibly higher transition temperature. Multiorbital systems in which the low-energy behavior is affected by various orbitals provide an ideal setup for the formation of rich electronic phases. One notable example is the family of layered perovskites, Sr n+1 Ru n O 3n+1 . Much attention has been paid to the single layer material, Sr 2 RuO 4 (214), which displays superconductivity (SC) at low temperatures A longstanding puzzles in this family is the lack of SC in 327, constraining the possible superconducting mechanisms of 214. The similarity of these materials means that a model of 214 should be able to explain the lack of SC in 327 and the sensitivity to the differences between the two. The two notable differences introduced by the second layer in 327 are the bilayer coupling and the staggered rotations of the oxygen octahedra. The observation of SDW order in the presence of a magnetic field in 327 suggests a delicate competition between SC and SDW in these two sister compounds, calling for a unified picture. Here, we address the microscopic mechanism of the evolution from SC in 214 to SDW in 327. We show that the absence of SC in 327 supports interorbital pairing in 214 which is sensitive to orbital mixing via spin-orbit coupling (SOC). Using the same parameter set for the Kanamori Hamiltonian, we find interorbital spin-triplet SC is destroyed by the staggered rotations of the octahedra, and intraorbital SDW order emerges under a magnetic field in 327. Further, we predict that ideal bilayer 327 without staggered rotations of the octahedra, denoted (327) 0 , displays interorbital SC with a transition temperature possi- * hykee@physics.utoronto.ca Phase diagram of the single-layer, 214, ideal bilayer (no staggered rotations), (327)0, and real bilayer, 327. 214 features superconductivity at small fields, expanded in (327)0. Both regions are expanded by a factor of 20 to more clearly show their relative sizes. In 327, SC is destroyed by rotations of the octahedra, and SDW order exists at finite field values between Bc1 and Bc2. The values of Bc1 and Bc2 and other relevant parameters are given in the main text. The two distinct paramagnetic regions surrounding the SDW order, labeled PM1 and PM2, represent the low-and high-moment regions, respectively. bly higher than 214, as shown in Fig. Sr 2 RuO 4 was once thought to be a leading candidate for p + ip spin-triplet SC We adopt the Kanamori Hamiltonian, well known for multiorbital systems, to investigate competition between SC and SDW order in 214, (327) 0 , and 327. In multiorbital systems, the distinction between intraorbital, interorbitalsinglet, and interorbital-triplet pairings must all be considered. Among all possible order parameters, inter-and intraorbital SDW, and interorbital SC occur via attractive interactions, however, interorbital SDW is small compared to intraorbital SDW and is therefore not shown. Intraorbital SC and charge-density wave channels feature repulsive interactions, but intraorbital SC is induced from interorbital SC via SOC, though is small in comparison. Taking into account interorbital SC and intraorbital SDW, the effective Hamiltonian is found as, (1) The orbital-singlet, spin-triplet, superconducting order parameter, ∆l † a/b , is written as, with l = x, y, z and a = b represents the sum over the unique pairs of orbital indices in (yz, xz, xy). The intraorbital SDW order parameter, ˆ m a q , is given by, where the electron operator c a † k,σ creates an electron in orbital a with spin σ. To investigate the competition between SC and SDW order in these three systems, we must determine their tightbinding (TB) Hamiltonians. TB parameters are obtained from density functional theory (DFT) calculations, and listed in Tables AI and AII of appendix A. The SC pairing itself is insensitive to the choice of TB parameters, however, the symmetry of the pairing state depends on the details as shown in Ref. Self-consistent mean-field approximation (MFA) calculations are performed for the TB models of 214, (327) 0 , and 327. (327) 0 uses the TB parameters from the single layer with interlayer hoppings added, referred to collectively as the bilayer coupling. In addition to bilayer coupling, intralayer hopping terms may be modified or added in 327 due to the staggered rotations of octahedra not present in the single layer. The phase diagram for each of the three systems is shown in Fig. For the fixed values represented by the asterisk, the phase diagram in a magnetic field perpendicular to the layers is shown in Fig. To understand why SC is enhanced in (327) 0 , consider the effect of the interlayer hopping in a two orbital model. Interlayer hopping is orbital dependent and largest for yz to yz and xz to xz hopping, while it is minimal between xy orbitals. A two-orbital model of xz (or yz) and xy gives insight into the effects of bilayer coupling. We use the basis ) where T represents time-reversal, and , where the top and bottom layers are represented by the subscript 1 and 2, respectively. The kinetic and SOC parts of the Hamiltonian are then given by, where η, τ , σ, and ρ are Pauli matrices representing the layer, orbital, spin, and particle-hole bases, respectively. The orbital dispersions in xz and xy are represented by and left in this general form here. Details of these dispersions used in the full three-orbital model are found in Appendix A. The SOC is given by λ, and the interlayer hopping, t ⊥ , exists only in xz. The interorbital-singlet spin-triplet pairing, ∆ , with a d-vector in the x-direction is written as, Transforming H SC to the band basis, i.e., the basis in which H k is diagonal, it is clear how intraband pairing forms, and how the various terms affect the gap size; the magnitude Character of the mixing of orbitals and spins at the Fermi level at zero field, measured by 2L x(y) S x(y) , for TB models of (a) 214, (b) the bilayer with no rotations, (327)0, and (c) 327. Larger mixing favors interorbital SC of the intraband gaps in the two bands is, This shows first that SOC is responsible for the formation of the intraband gap, consistent with previous works when t ⊥ = 0 , to the pairing on the band, ∆ band , where the pairing on the band is affected by the band dispersion The pairing on one of the bands is increased by t ⊥ if the degeneracy of the bands is increased. Therefore, when the bilayer coupling brings two bands closer together near the Fermi level, the resulting bands feature a more significant mixture of the two orbitals with appropriate spin character via SOC, and thus are more ideal for interorbital SC to form. The effect of the bilayer coupling on the orbital and spin mixing, shown for 214 in Figs. Next, we consider the effect of the staggered rotations present in 327. While the bilayer coupling may bring band energies closer together and increase degeneracy, orbital hybridization is detrimental to the formation of interorbitalsinglet spin-triplet SC In addition to interorbital SC, the Kanamori Hamiltonian also provides the intraorbital SDW instability. Specifically, with the Hubbard interaction, SDW order appears when an appropriate nesting vector exists. Previous studies on the magnetic susceptibility of 214 have found strong intraband nesting for q ≈ (± π 2 , ±π) to (± 2π 3 , ±π) depending on TB parameters Although the nesting in 327 at zero field is not enough for SDW order to form, the presence of a van Hove singularity (vHS) was experimentally identified in the bilayer in the presence of a field Considering possible ordering wave vectors, the intraorbital, intralayer transverse susceptibility is shown in Fig. The SDW order parameters and magnetization are shown in Fig. direction in each of the three orbitals when the wave-vector is in the x-direction. The primary contribution comes from the xy orbital, and the secondary contribution from the xz orbital. The overall magnetization is in the z-direction with the metamagnetic transition occuring at B c1 . A similar result is obtained when calculations are instead performed using a wave-vector in the y-direction, the SDW order occurs with spin in the x-direction, with significant contributions from the xy then yz orbitals. Within this model of the bilayer, no SC regions are found. The absence of SC in 327 must be considered when explaining SC in 214 due to the similarity of the two materials. The most significant differences, bilayer coupling and staggered rotations, primarily affect interorbital SC and therefore provide a natural explanation for the lack of SC in 327. The presence of SDW order in 327 under a field is another piece of the ruthenate puzzle. The Kanamori Hamiltonian provides a consistent framework for both SC and SDW order. The Hund's coupling plays an important role in stabilizing interorbital SC, while the Hubbard repulsion and Hund's coupling together lead to SDW or-der. These interactions plus the increase in the DOS occurring in a field, experimentally observed as a metamagnetic transition, allow SDW ordering to form. The interactions presented here are limited to on-site, but further neighbor interactions have been considered in interorbital SC studies of 214 Some limitations of our theory arise from the finite size of the TB model and MFA. Experiments detect multiple metamagnetic transitions and two SDW phases with different ordering wave-vectors all separated by less than 1T An area of recent development requiring consideration going forward is possible SDW order in strained 214 In summary, we showed that interorbital SC provides a natural explanation for both the presence of SC in 214 and lack of SC in 327. In 327, SC is destroyed by orbital hybridization introduced by staggered rotations, not present in 214. This same model finds intraorbital SDW ordering in 327 when the vHS reaches the Fermi level via a magnetic field. We believe that the lack of SC in 327 is an important piece of the puzzle to understand SC in 214, and therefore interorbital SC should remain among the promising candidates. Additionally, we predict that ideal (327) 0 can feature increased orbital degeneracy by tuning the bilayer coupling strength, and therefore can also exhibit interorbital SC with a possibly higher transition temperature. The TB model is given by, The interlayer hoppings, t 1D ⊥ and t xy ⊥ , represent hopping between layers within orbitals directly above or below each other, while t xz ⊥,x is hopping in the xz(yz) orbital between layers and one lattice site over in the x(y)-direction, and t xz/xy ⊥,y hopping between layers, one lattice site over in the y(x)-direction, between xy and xz(yz) orbitals. The staggered hopping, t stag , allowed by the staggered rotation, represents the hopping between NN 1D orbitals within a layer and changes sign between layers due to the opposite sense of the octahedra rotations between the layers, while t stag ⊥ occurs between 1D orbitals directly above or below each other. Finally, the SOC Hamiltonian is, where the strength of the SOC used is set to λ = 62.5 meV throughout this work. In calculations which feature a magnetic field in the zdirection, the additional term included in the Hamiltonian is, The total z-magnetization calculated in the presence of the field is given by, Transverse susceptibility of the 327 model in the presence of a finite field. The intraorbital, intralayer susceptibilities are individually plotted, which provide the primary contributions to the ordering. The total intralayer susceptibility including intraorbital and interorbital contributions is also shown. Additionally, the total inter layer susceptibility is plotted, which, when included may modify the ordering wave vector due to the differing locations of its peaks. 