Fluids confined in nanopores are ubiquitous in nature and technology. In recent years, the interest in confined fluids has grown, driven by research on unconventional hydrocarbon resources -shale gas and shale oil, much of which are confined in nanopores. When fluids are confined in nanopores, many of their properties differ from those of the same fluid in the bulk. These properties include density, freezing point, transport coefficients, thermal expansion coefficient, and elastic properties. The elastic moduli of a fluid confined in the pores contribute to the overall elasticity of the fluid-saturated porous medium and determine the speed at which elastic waves traverse through the medium. Wave propagation in fluid-saturated porous media is pivotal for geophysics, as elastic waves are used for characterization of formations and rock samples. In this paper, we present a comprehensive review of experimental works on wave propagation in fluid-saturated nanoporous media, as well as theoretical works focused on calculation of compressibility of fluids in confinement. We discuss models that bridge the gap between experiments and theory, revealing a number of open questions that are both fundamental and applied in nature. While some results were demonstrated both experimentally and theoretically (e.g. the pressure dependence of compressibility of fluids), others were theoretically predicted, but not verified in experiments (e.g. linear scaling of modulus with the pore size). Therefore, there is a demand for the combined experimental-modeling studies on porous samples with various characteristic pore sizes. The extension of molecular simulation studies from simple model fluids to the more complex molecular fluids is another open area of practical interest. Nanoporous materials, according to the IUPAC convention, are materials that have pore sizes below 100 nm Elastic properties such as the bulk modulus, longitudinal modulus, and shear modulus are fundamental properties of a material and describe how a material responds to various mechanical loads. Knowledge of the elastic properties of confined fluids is important for probing the behavior and effectiveness of the fluids in various practical applications including high-pressure lubricants The main goals of this review are as follows: 1. Overview the theoretical models employed to predict elastic properties of nanoconfined fluids (Section II). 2. Describe the experimental methods for probing the elastic properties of fluid-saturated porous materials and relating them to the properties of nanoconfined fluids (Section III). In the last two decades, molecular modeling has become a standard tool for studying physico-chemical properties of confined phases When a fluid is confined in the pore space of nanoporous solids, experiments can hardly probe the elastic properties of the fluid itself, they rather probe the solid-fluid composite (see detailed discussion in Section III). Molecular modeling, on contrary, can probe the fluid itself without considering the solid explicitly. Furthermore, since molecular simulations work well for small systems, it is even more natural to simulate the fluids alone, while considering the solid as just an external field. Thus, to our knowledge, all the theoretical works on elastic properties of fluids in nanopores reported the properties of the fluids themselves, rather than the properties of the solid-fluid composites probed in experiments. We will discuss the relation between the experimental data (for composites) and theoretical predictions (for fluid) in Section IV. For most of the theoretical predictions, the main property of consideration is the isothermal compressibility β T , the reciprocal of which is known as the isothermal bulk elastic modulus K T = β -1 T . For a macroscopic system, the isothermal compressibility is defined as where V is the system volume, P is the fluid pressure, and T is the absolute temperature. Here, following Refs. 21-23, we use the same definition of β T for the fluid confined in the pore. However, the definition Eq. 1 can be ambiguous because the fluid in confinement can be anisotropic. In this case it is described by the stress tensor When the pore space is filled by gas adsorption, the compressibility given by Eq. 1, can be readily related to the adsorption isotherm -amount adsorbed as a function of the pressure in the gas phase Also, the pressure in the pore P is related to the chemical potential μ of the fluid via the Gibbs-Duhem equation where n is the average particle density in the pore defined as n ≡ N/V . Assuming that the number of particles in the pore and the temperature are constant, Eq. 3 can be used to rewrite Eq. 1 as Since, at constant temperature and when Eq. 3 is valid, Eq. 4 is only a function of intensive variables (i.e., it does not depend on N nor V ), one can write This transformation is important because in the grand canonical ensemble, which is natural to model adsorption, the number of particles does indeed change while the volume of the system is kept constant. Thus, isothermal compressibility can be rewritten as For a single molecular species at equilibrium conditions, the chemical potential is related to the fugacity f of the bulk fluid in equilibrium with the fluid in the pore by the relation where f 0 and μ 0 (T ) are the fugacity and chemical potential at saturation, respectively. Then Eq. 4 can be rewritten using Eqs. 5 and 7 as Furthermore, when the vapor pressure is low (which is the case for argon at 80 K considered in Figure Statistical mechanics provides a number of formulas based on fluctuations of various properties in statistical ensembles to calculate derivative properties (see e.g. Refs. 21 and 34). Among different statistical mechanical ensembles and associated simulation techniques for molecular modeling, most hold the number of particles in the system constant. The grand canonical Monte Carlo (GCMC) where δN 2 is the variance of N and k B is the Boltzmann constant. Applying Eq. 9 to a small system requires that the fluctuation of N obeys a Gaussian distribution A number of studies report the compressibility of confined fluids calculated using the GCMC simulation technique and applying Eq. 9 to the simulation data. Most of these works focus on the use of compressibility as a qualitative measure of a phase transition, in particular, on the phase transition of water in hydrophobic confinement. For example, Bratko et al. Alternatively to calculating compressibility from the fluctuation of number of molecules in the grand canonical ensemble (Eq. 9), one can use the volume fluctuations in the isothermal-isobaric ensemble: This approach was utilized by Strekalova et al. where W is the internal virial, δW 2 N V T is the variance of the internal virial, and X is a hypervirial function. Corrente et al. utilized Eq. 11 for calculating compressibility of methane confined in carbon nanopores, which was to model the natural gas found in coal and shale systems In addition to various fluctuation formulas (Eqs. 9, 10, and 11), the compressibility (or modulus) of confined fluid can be calculated using molecular dynamics by direct simulation of the fluid compression. This straightforward approach was used by Martini and Vadakkepatt to calculate the modulus of a thin lubricant film behavior in a slit pore Several theoretical works explored the relation between the pressure in the confined fluid and its compressibility. When studying the pressure dependence, the bulk modulus is more natural to use than the compressibility, because for bulk fluids (and solids), the modulus is related to pressure with a simple linear relation, known as Tait-Murnaghan equation where the dimensionless constant α is the slope of the observed linear dependence. Eq. 12 is simply the first two terms of the Taylor series of K(P ), consequently it is rather general and does not depend on whether applied to bulk or confined fluid. Qualitatively, the relation between the pressure and elastic properties of a confined fluid is transparent: the attractive solid-fluid interactions densify the fluid near the pore walls, making it effectively compressed Taking into account the anisotropy of the fluid, they introduced the two moduli: normal K ⊥ T and lateral K T corresponding respectively to P = P ⊥ and P = P in Eq. 13. They presented the resulting moduli as functions of corresponding pressures obtaining in both cases linear relations for each of the temperatures. This suggests that the confined fluid modulus dependence on pressure, similarly to the modulus of a bulk fluid, can be described by the Tait-Murnaghan equation. The data from Ref. 48 are shown in Fig. Another recent work used GCMC simulations to calculate the isothermal modulus of argon fluid confined in spherical nanopores, specifically focusing on the modulus-pressure relation The density of fluids confined in nanopores is spatially dependent, with local maxima near the pore wall in the case of solvophilic confinement, and local minima in the case of solvophobic, e.g., the upper panel of Fig. The local compressibility of a confined fluid can be calculated based on the elastic constant tensor components in k-space from an assumed linear relation between components of the stress rate and the strain rate A different approach has been taken by Evans and coworkers , where z is the spatial coordinate. This allowed investigating the compressibility as a function of distance to the adsorbent wall. They performed DFT calculations of fluid near a single wall and of fluid confined between two walls. They found similar effects on their local compressibility in both cases, indicating confinement effects are largely due to the proximity of the fluid to the surface. They compared how different fluid-wall interactions affected the local compressibility and found that solvophobicity has a larger effect on the compressibility than on the density of the fluid, demonstrating that compressibility can be a good indicator of the solvophobicity of a surface Application of DFT for calculation of local elastic properties was further used by Sun et al. who modeled argon in slit and later in spherical pores where G T and K T are the isothermal shear and bulk moduli, respectively. The stress tensor can be obtained from the Irving-Kirkwood expression [24] where r 12 = r 2r 1 , r 12 = |r 12 |, ρ(r) and ρ (2) (r 1 , r 2 ) are the singlet and doublet pair density functions, respectively, I is the unit tensor, U (r 12 ) is the pair potential, and ξ ∈ (0, 1) is a constant. Using Eqs. 14, 15 Sun et al. calculated the isothermal shear and bulk moduli as and where I 1 and I 2 are auxiliary integrals involving the pair density function, the details of which are in Refs. 58-61. Finally, Sun et al. They found that the elastic modulus has large deviations in the pore from the average value and can have large negative spikes. The negative modulus has been found to relate to the gas-liquid or liquid-solid transitions, which can be stabilized by confinement in nanopores where v is the molar volume, N A is Avogadro's number, p is the energy parameter of the fluid-wall interaction, and a p and b p are the vdW EOS parameters modified by confinement in a pore of radius r p . The geometric function F pr is the fraction of the confined fluid molecules within the square-well region of the interaction with the pore wall for a randomly distributed fluid. The parameter θ is the geometric parameter, related to the pore size, and the linear parameters of the interatomic potentials. Eq. 19 has been shown to be able to model fluid adsorption in nanopores They chose the parameters δ p and p which provided good matching of the EOS to adsorption isotherm data obtained from GCMC simulations of argon in cylindrical silica nanopores at different pore sizes and temperatures. Using the chosen parameters they calculated the isothermal elastic modulus from Eq. 20, these results are shown in Fig. One other relationship that was examined by Dobrzanski et al. was how the elastic modulus depends on the size of the pores. Molecular simulation and DFT works The elastic properties of monolithic solid samples can be measured in a relatively straightforward fashion by applying mechanical stresses to a material and measuring the dimensional changes. Clearly, such approaches cannot be applied to confined fluids directly since the measurements would have to be performed on a fluidsaturated nanoporous medium. However, standard static measurements on rocks usually require relatively large strain amplitudes, and thus can be subject to plastic deformations In isotropic solids there are two types of elastic waves. The first is longitudinal waves, which consist of particle motion parallel to the direction of the wave propagation. The longitudinal wave speed, v l , is related to the longitudinal modulus M . The other type is transverse waves, which consist of particle motion perpendicular to the direction of the wave propagation. The transverse wave speed, v t , is related to the shear modulus G. The following simple relations describe how these elastic properties along with the material density, ρ, determine the wave speeds: The moduli M and G are related to the bulk modulus K: Usually, fluids do not support shear stress, therefore G f = 0, and Eq. 22 indicates there is no difference between the longitudinal modulus M f and bulk modulus K f . In this section we use the subscript "f" for the fluid properties, subscript "s" for the properties of non-porous solid, subscript "0" for the properties of dry porous solid, and no subscript for the properties related to the solidfluid composite (see Figure When the medium of interest is porous and saturated with fluid, the composite properties are determined by those of the solid and fluid constituents. Figure and where G is the shear modulus of a fluid-saturated porous sample, G 0 is the shear modulus of a dry porous sample, the meanings of various K-moduli are indicated in Fig. The elastic moduli of a fluid-saturated porous medium (monolithic solid-fluid composite) can be readily derived from the measurements of the sound speed using Eq. 21. The sound speed is conventionally measured with ultrasonic transducers, a source and a receiver that are attached to the sample surfaces (opposite faces). To secure the uniform filling of the nanoporous medium with the fluid, the samples are gradually filled with condensate by adsorption from the vapor phase, and the speeds of ultrasound propagation through the sample are measured during the adsorption process. A simplified schematic of such an experimental setup is depicted in Figure The work by Warner and Beamish The next important step was the work of Page et al., who combined ultrasonic measurements during vapor adsorption in nanoporous media with optical measurements for hexane adsorption on Vycor glass where m 0 and ρ 0 are mass and density of the dry sample respectively. By plotting ∆M/M 0 computed using Eq. 25, Page et al. demonstrated that the longitudinal modulus of a porous sample is approximately unchanged as the vapor pressure increases until the pores are completely filled, at which point there is a rapid increase in the longitudinal modulus. Their data are shown in Figure To our knowledge, Page et al. Eq. 26 provides the value of K f from the data shown in Figure Irrespective of the value of K s used for calculation of K f , a clear trend is seen: the modulus of hexane in the pores is not constant, but changes linearly with the Laplace pressure. This was pointed out in the paper by Page et al. Similar studies were reported in a series of papers by Schappert and Pelster where K s for Vycor glass was assumed to be equal to K s for quartz. Their method relies on the assumption that the modulus of the porous sample K 0 has a linear dependence on porosity at the low porosity range φ < ∼ 0.25. In a later work, Adsorption-induced deformation is expansion or contraction of porous materials upon fluid adsorption where the first term is related to solid-fluid interactions and the second term is the Laplace pressure: Here, R g is the gas constant, T is the absolute temperature, and V l is the molar volume of the liquid phase. Note that while the first term in Eq. 28 is compressive, the second term causes the tensile stresses when the system is in equilibrium with undersaturated vapor at p < p 0 (at p = p 0 the Laplace pressure term vanishes). Recent experiments by Schappert and Pelster showed a correlation between adsorption-induced deformation and the change of the elastic modulus of the fluid-saturated sample. They measured the speed of ultrasound propagation in a porous glass sample in the course of argon adsorption Since adsorption-induced strains of mesoporous materials at high relative pressures have a logarithmic dependence on the relative pressure, the experiments on adsorption-induced deformation provide a straightforward way to estimate the elastic properties of solid samples, in particular, the solid modulus K s , which is necessary for application of Gassmann equation for the analysis of ultrasonic data measured on a fluid-saturated sample. This approach was used by Gor and Gurevich When M PL and K 0 are known from experimental measurements, Eq. 30 can be used to estimate K s . Note that the value of K s for Vycor glass calculated from the adsorption-induced deformation data from Ref. High pressure in the confined fluid is exerted on the solid, therefore, according to the Tait-Murnaghan Eq. 12, similarly to the change of the bulk modulus of the fluid, there could be a change of the bulk modulus of the solid. Ref. 109 estimated this effect for quartz, based on the constant α from Ref. 122. Because α for solids is noticeably smaller than for fluids, the effects of pressure on the solid could be neglected. The negligible change of the shear modulus of the nanoporous sample when it is filled with fluid also suggests that the high pressure in the pores does not appreciably affect the elastic constants of the solid constituent. Another correlation between deformation and ultrasound propagation has been reported for water adsorp-tion on sandstones. A number of studies have reported a significant reduction of ultrasonic speeds, and/or increase of ultrasonic attenuation in vacuum-dry sandstones, upon imbibition of very small amounts of water Molz et al. Recently, the experimental data from Ref. 33 were revisited by Sun et al., who explored the applicability of elastic effective medium theories, which are routinely used for macroporous media, for the analysis on nanoporous Vycor glass filled with liquid and solid argon Schappert et al. used transverse waves to probe confined fluids which have more complex structure, nheptane, and n-nonane Since Gassmann theory is key to relating the ultrasonic measurements on porous samples to the properties of the confined fluid 851 m/s 2π × 10 7 Hz = 1.4 × 10 -5 m, using the speed corresponding to the bulk liquid nitrogen at normal boiling temperature Second, an important restriction of Gassmann (as well as Biot) theory is that the fluid pressure is uniform within the pore space. This requires that shear stresses in the fluid be negligible, that is, the signal frequency is lower than the crossover frequency of the so-called squirt dispersion f sq , which is on the order α 3 r G 0 /(2πη), where α r is the typical aspect ratio of the pores or cracks and η is the fluid viscosity. For spherical or cylindrical pores, α r = 1 and hence f sq = 10 THz, but f sq can be many orders of magnitude smaller if the solid sample contains thin cracks with α r on the order 0.001 The third condition is related to the applicability of the low-frequency limit of Biot theory 1 GHz, where δ max ≈ 7 -8 nm is the viscous skin depth considered as the maximum pore diameter for the Vycor sample, ρ f = 807 kg m -3 is the fluid density While a number of papers reported theoretical findings on elastic properties of confined fluids Ref. 30 presented the calculation of isothermal modulus of confined liquid argon based on theoretical adsorption isotherms predicted by QSDFT (see Section II A for details). The key result was the logarithmic relation between the modulus and the vapor pressure of the adsorbing argon, shown in Fig. Ultrasonic experiments, discussed in Sec. III can probe the average elastic properties of the confined fluids, but not the local properties discussed in Section II D. The microscopic structure and local properties of confined fluids can be probed by experiments based on neutron or X-ray scattering When fluids are confined in nanopores, many of their properties change compared to the same fluid in the bulk including the density, freezing point, transport coefficients, thermal expansion coefficient, etc. The presented review shows that the elastic properties of the confined fluid also differ from the fluid in the bulk. We summarized the works showing experimental evidence of the effects of confinement on the elastic moduli. However, the number of experimental studies reporting the elastic properties of confined fluids is limited; there is a demand for more experimental measurements which could explore the broad spectrum of the potential porous solidfluid systems. To our knowledge, the experiments that probe the compressibility of confined fluids have been performed almost exclusively on samples of Vycor glass The main theoretical results are the following: 1. The dependence of the elastic modulus of confined fluid on the solvation pressure in the pore through the Tait-Murnaghan equation. [60] 5. The applicability of the Gassmann equation to nanoporous media. [108, 109] 6. Showing that multiple differing methods of molecular modeling (i.e., MD, GCMC, and DFT) and use of various thermodynamic ensembles are able to predict the same values for the elastic properties of the confined fluid. Although the amount of theoretical works on compressibility of confined fluids is richer than experimental, there are open questions. This is because most of the molecular modeling studies reporting the compressibility of confined fluid present qualitative discussion, without a direct comparison and verification from experiments. Particularly, most of the theoretical predictions for compressibility of confined fluids focus on structureless models for molecules, without electrostatic interactions, often represented by the simple Lennard-Jones potential. Such models are only adequate for simple fluids such as argon, nitrogen, methane, etc. At the same time, confined fluids of practical interest include hydrocarbons of different chain lengths as well as water and brine. Simulation for systems, such as confined water Furthermore, even for those simple fluids, some of the questions remain unresolved: the calculation of the compressibility in the limits of the smallest and largest pores. In particular, the calculation of argon compressibility in micropores using grand canonical Monte Carlo simula-tion was hindered by numerical artifacts. On the other hand, calculation of compressibility in large mesopores, above 10 nm, require prohibitively long computational time Although molecular simulation is a powerful theoretical tool for predicting thermodynamic properties of fluids, its computational cost limits its practical application. Even for bulk fluids, engineering applications demand the use of equations of state. In the last two decades, numerous works published in the literature presented several attempts to develop equations of state for confined fluids. While typically those were not employed to predict compressibility, a recent work has demonstrated that it is feasible and showed that one of these equations Finally, a question on the relation between the elastic properties of the confined fluid predicted from thermodynamic theories using properties probed in ultrasonic experiments remains open. While a theory typically focuses on the calculation of the properties of the fluid alone, the experiments probe the fluid-saturated porous medium, i.e., the solid-fluid composite. Therefore, in order to compare the two, one needs to know the properties of the solid constituent and use an effective medium approximation applicable to calculate the composite properties. A recent work used some of the limited experimental data available in the literature to compare to theoretical calculations for the confined fluids properties; the comparison suggested that the classical Gassmann equation can serve as an adequate effective medium approximation 