Dissipative quantum phase transition has been widely believed to occur in a Josephson junction coupled to a resistor despite a lack of concrete experimental evidence. Here, on the basis of both numerical and analytical nonperturbative renormalization group (RG) analyses, we reveal breakdown of previous perturbative arguments and defy the common wisdom that the transition always occurs at the quantum resistance RQ = h/(4e 2 ). We find that RG flows in nonperturbative regimes induce nonmonotonic renormalization of the charging energy and lead to a qualitatively different phase diagram, where the insulator phase is strongly suppressed to the deep charge regime (Cooper pair box), while the system is always superconducting in the transmon regime. We identify a previously overlooked dangerously irrelevant term as an origin of the failure of conventional understandings. Our predictions can be tested in recent experiments realizing high-impedance long superconducting waveguides and would provide a solution to the long-standing controversy about the fate of dissipative quantum phase transition in the resistively shunted Josephson junction. J is always relevant and triggers nonmonotonic renormalization of dangerously irrelevant term ν ∝ 1/ C . Transition occurs at finite EJ /EC in α < 1 (green cross in top panel), while the system always flows to the SC fixed point in α > 1 (bottom panel). Previous perturbative results are reproduced in the limit ν ∝ 1/ C → 0. Understanding physical properties of quantum systems interacting with environmental degrees of freedom is one of the central problems in quantum many-body physics. A wide variety of intriguing quantum phenomena have been revealed in the last half century; key examples include the Kondo problem in heavy fermion materials or mesoscopic structures The aim of this Letter is to fill this gap and provide a solution to the long-standing controversy regarding DQPT. To this end, we systematically analyze RSJ on the basis of numerical and analytical nonperturbative approaches, namely, numerical renormalization group (NRG) and functional renormalization group (FRG). Surprisingly, both analyses lead to the groundstate phase diagram (Fig. While the conventional understanding at an early stage was made by perturbative analyses and duality argument, we point out that these previous considerations implicitly discarded a term (which we call the capacitance term ν ∝ 1/E C ) that was expected to be irrelevant from dimensional counting From a broader perspective, small quantum systems interacting with a bosonic bath as studied here are fairly ubiquitous in e.g., electron-phonon systems and quantum lightmatter systems. Our analyses should have a broad range of applications to those systems which are currently the subject of intense research in different fields. Moreover, in view of the fundamental role of JJ in quantum circuits Model.-We consider the following RSJ Hamiltonian, in which JJ couples to the environmental degrees of freedom represented as a collection of harmonic oscillators where φ is the JJ phase, N = -i∂/∂φ is the charge operator, bath frequencies are is the wavenumber cutoff, and âk (â † k ) is the bosonic annihilation (creation) operator of mode k. The constants v and L have the dimensions of velocity and length, and α = R Q /R is the dimensionless frictional coefficient. We remark that Eq. ( W and thermodynamic limit L → ∞, where we denote the frequency cutoff as W = vK. We first diagonalize the quadratic part, , via the Bogoliubov transformation and rewrite the Hamiltonian (1) as (see e.g., Ref. where we introduce the squeezed annihilation (creation) operators bk ( b † k ). The Hamiltonian (3) can also be derived from a microscopic model of JJ shunted by a transmission line with impedance R, length L, and propagation speed v [51]. A salient feature is that the capacitive coupling g k acquires suppression at frequencies higher than W/ν = αE C /(π ) To perform the NRG analysis we obtain the transformed Hamiltonian ĤU ≡ Û † Ĥ Û , where ĤTLL is the Tomonaga-Luttinger liquid Hamiltonian and f ν (x) is the function that exponentially vanishes on the length scale ν/K = π v/(αE C ) as follows: To derive Eq. ( Benchmark results: the boundary sine-Gordon model.-Before analyzing the exact RSJ Hamiltonian which can be obtained by taking the limit ν → 0 in Eq. In other words, the ground state is phase-coherent and superconducting. Conversely, when α < 1, the Josephson energy E J renormalizes to zero and the charge becomes localized, i.e., the system is insulating. To numerically determine the transition point, we use the dc phase mobility, μ ≡ α/(2π) lim ω→+0 ω φφ ω , that becomes zero (nonzero) in the SC (insulator) phase, where φφ ω is the Fourier transform of the ground-state phase correlation function where ω n0 is the n-th excitation frequency, and we introduce the mobility matrix element μ n0 with |n being the n-th energy eigenstate in the frame after the unitary transformation. We find that it suffices to calculate the dominant matrix element μ 10 for the purpose of locating the transition point. Typical NRG flows of μ 10 in the bsG model are shown in Fig. Previous studies used the bsG model NRG analysis of the exact RSJ Hamiltonian.-To achieve this, we now apply the NRG approach to the exact RSJ Hamiltonian FRG analysis.-To understand these NRG results on a deeper level, we employ a nonperturbative analytical approach known as the FRG Phase coherence cos(φ) and the mobility μ10 plotted against α = RQ/R. The inset indicates the corresponding parameter regions in the phase diagram at Λ = 2.0. At sufficiently large EJ /EC , the system always resides in the SC phase (red curve). When EJ /EC is lower than a critical value (EJ /EC )c, there appears the insulating region as well as the reentrant transition into the SC phase in α 1 (green and blue curves). Parameters are Λ = 2.0 and C = 0.02. (field-independent) wavefunction renormalization, resulting in the following set of flow equations [51]: where l = ln(Λ 0 /Λ) is the logarithmic RG scale, the dimensionless parameters satisfy J(C) = E J(C) /Λ 0 1 at UV scale Λ = Λ 0 , and the integrals of g, h give positive values [51]. When J 1, the flow equation ( the latter of which reproduces the well-known perturbative result implying the presence of DQPT at α c = 1 can significantly grow at low-energy scales due to the nonperturbative corrections, i.e., it can be dangerously irrelevant. To determine fixed points the theory ultimately flow to, we numerically solve Eqs. ( At any E J /E C , the theory initially flows in favor of the insulator phase since the ratio obeys d l ( J / C ) < 0 in UV regimes J,C 1. At an intermediate low-energy scale, however, the theory enters nonperturbative regimes and can eventually exhibit the bifurcating flows to different fixed points depending on E J /E C (top panel in Fig. Discussions.-The proposed phase boundary in Fig. In the strong corrugation regime E J /E C 1, it was argued Meanwhile, if one considers the opposite limit E C W , both the tight-binding description and the duality argument are expected to be valid without such ambiguities. This parameter regime corresponds to the left sides of our FRG phase diagram (Fig. To experimentally test our predictions, one has to take account of the lowest transmission-line frequency ω min = πv/L and finite temperature k B T , which effectively introduce an IR cutoff in RG flows. One needs to renormalize to a sufficiently low-energy scale to attain small cos(φ) close to a fixed-point value; this requires a sufficiently large system size and low temperature. For typical parameters of the insulator phase, α = 0.3 and E J /E C = 0.04, one needs ω min , k B T 0.01E C to attain cos φ 10 -2 [51]. These conditions are within reach of recent experiments In summary, we provided a comprehensive understanding of the dissipative quantum phase transition in a Josephson junction, which has been controversial for many years. We performed both numerical and analytical nonperturbative renormalization group analyses and obtained the phase diagram (Fig. We here provide the derivation of the Hamiltonian (3) in the main text from a microscopic point of view. The Josephson junction (JJ) shunted by a resistor can be modeled by a lumped-element circuit in Fig. The total Lagrangian of the lumped-element circuit in Fig. where dt is the flux given by the integral of the voltage at the i-th node, and Φ(t) is the flux at the node A. We introduce the conjugate charge variables Q i ≡ ∂L/∂ Φi and Q ≡ ∂L/∂ Φ, and quantize them via the commutation relations [ Φi , Qi ] = i and [ Φ, Q] = i . After performing the Legendre transformation, we obtain the following Hamiltonian: where the vectors Q and Φ represent while (N +1)-dimensional matrices A and B are defined by Here, is the series capacitance seen by the resistor, Ā and B are N -dimensional matrices defined as the right-bottom part of A and B, respectively, and w is a N -dimensional vector defined by w = (1/C J , 0, . . . , 0) T . We next introduce a (N +1)-dimensional regular matrix D in the following form: and use it to rewrite the Hamiltonian (S3) via the canonical transformation Φ = D Ψ and Q = D -T P : where We can decouple Ψi and Ψj for i = j in Eq. (S9) by using a matrix D that simultaneously diagonalizes DT Ā-1 D and DT B D in Eq. (S10). One such a choice of D is given by D = where C is a constant with the dimension of capacitance and O B is an orthogonal matrix which diagonalizes the following symmetric matrix Ā1/2 B Ā1/2 : where we introduce γ ≡ (cx/C p1 ) 1/2 . One can show that the matrix Ā1/2 B Ā1/2 has an eigenvector . Each component of v and its eigenvalue are determined by the following relations The latter conditions can be rewritten as (S13) In the continuous limit N → ∞, Eq. (S13) can be approximately solved by with i = 0, 1, . . . , N -1. We then denote the normalized corresponding eigenvector labeled by wavenumber κ = κ i as v κi . In particular, for i = 0, the first component of v κi is given by From Eq. (S15) and Similarly, for i = 0, we get Also, from the definition of D, it follows that where we define λ i as λ i = 4/(cx) sin 2 (κ i /2). From Eqs. (S9), (S10), (S16), and (S18), we finally obtain Here, we omit the zero mode with κ 0 = 0 because P0 commutes with the total Hamiltonian and can be absorbed in the charge offset attenuated by the total circuit capacitance To rewrite the Hamiltonian, we introduce the annihilation and creation operators of the bosonic environmental modes, bi and b † i with i = 1, 2, . . . , N -1, by where we define ω i as ω i = 2v/x sin(κ i /2). Substituting Eq. (S20) into Eq. (S19) and defining E C = 2e 2 /C J , N = P /(2e), φ = 2e Ψ/ , and α = R Q /R = h/(4e 2 R), we obtain Equation (S22) shows that the capacitive coupling g i is strongly suppressed in high-frequency oscillator modes. Therefore, we can approximate tan(κ i /2) and sin(κ i /2) by ∼ κ i /2, leading to the simplified expressions: In the limit of C C → ∞, the series capacitance C p1 reduces to C J and thus Eq. (S21) reproduces the RSJ Hamiltonian (3) in the main text. We here provide the full technical details about the NRG analysis performed in the present work. We start from the Hamiltonian after the unitary transformation where we recall that and Here, the summation is taken over k = nπ/L with n = 1, 2, • • • , M , and W = M πv/L is the frequency cutoff. Note that φ in Eq. (S24) commutes with the Hamiltonian and taken to be φ = 0 in the following. Below we use the unit = W = 1 while W is made explicit in equations when desirable. To extend Wilson's NRG approach to the present problem setting, we first need to represent the environment as a collection of harmonic oscillators with continuous modes. To this end, we rewrite the Hamiltonian (S24) by where we define In the thermodynamic limit L → ∞, this Hamiltonian becomes equivalent to the following Hamiltonian with continuous environmental modes: where ĉω and ĉ † ω satisfy the commutation relation To check this equivalence, we introduce a complete set of orthonormal functions ψ nm on [0, W ] with n ∈ Z ≥0 and m ∈ Z by In the basis of ψ nm , the operators ĉω and ĉ † ω can be written as where ĉ( †) nm is the annihilation (creation) operators of the mode ψ mn . They satisfy the commutation relation [ĉ nm , ĉ † n m ] = δ nn δ mm . Using Eq. (S32), we can rewrite Eq. (S30) as where in the thermodynamic limit L → ∞ the integral gives zero unless m = 0, i.e., the modes with m = 0 are decoupled from the system. We then rewrite each term of Eq. (S29) as Thus, identifying ĉn0 as bk in Eq. (S27) and noting the fact that the summation in Eq. (S27) is taken over ω k = nπv/L = nδ with n ∈ Z >0 , the Hamiltonian (S29) is indeed equivalent to Eq. (S27) in the thermodynamic limit. We can further simplify the transformed Hamiltonian (S27) by introducing a monotonically increasing function g : [0, g -1 (W )] → [0, W ], ε → ω = g(ε) to change the variable as ω → ε. We denote the corresponding annihilation (creation) operator â( †) ε by which satisfies the usual commutation relation In terms of these operators, the Hamiltonian (S29) is represented as In this change of variables, we first choose g(ε) and it automatically determines s(ε) via Eq. (S38). Equivalently, it is also possible to first choose s(g -1 (ω)) as a function of ω and determine g(ε) in such a way that Eq. (S38) is satisfied: (S39) In our calculations, we choose s(g -1 (ω)) = h(ω) 2 , for which Eq. (S39) leads to To perform the NRG analysis, we logarithmically discretize the interval [0, W ] by {d n = W Λ -n } n∈Z ≥0 , where Λ is the Wilson pamameter. We also define e n ≡ g -1 (d n ) and introduce a complete set of orghonormal functions f nm on [0, g -1 (W )] with n ∈ Z ≥0 and m ∈ Z by In the basis of f nm , the operators âε and â † ε can be expanded as where â( †) nm is the annihilation (creation) operator of the mode f nm . Using Eq. (S42), the integrals in Eq. (S37) can be written as and Here, we neglect m = 0 modes in Eq. (S44) as well as couplings with m = m in Eq. (S46) in the same spirit of Wilson's NRG where , (S49) . We can now follow the usual procedure of the NRG calculations. Specifically, at the N -th step of NRG, we first diagonalize the Hamiltonian, by retaining n S lowest-energy eigenstates while truncating the higher excited states. We then add the (N +1)-th bosonic mode, âN+1 , and prepare the matrix elements of ĤN+1 . For this purpose, it is in practice useful to use the following relation: where we prepare the matrix of ξ N +1 (â N +1 -â † N +1 ) and exponentiate it to obtain the matrix elements of the operator cos ΞN+1 . In adding the (N + 1)-th bosonic mode, we include n B lowest eigenstates of the number operator â † : |0 , |1 , . . . , |n B -1 , in the similar manner as previously done for the spin-boson model We note that one can use the Bogoliubov transformation to change the Hamiltonian (S47) into (in analogy with conventional NRG methods) either the chain-NRG form: or the star-NRG form: where b( †) n is the bosonic annihilation (creation) operator and ξ n , γ n , ξ n , γ n are constants of order Λ -n . However, comparing NRG results of these Hamiltonians (S47), (S54) and (S55), we find that NRG analysis based on the Hamiltonian (S47) consistently shows the best convergence and provides reliable results; in the other two cases, accumulations of errors due to truncations of higher Fock states are much more appreciable. All the numerical results in this paper are thus obtained by performing NRG to the Hamiltonian (S47). As discussed in the main text, we first benchmark our NRG analysis by applying it to the boundary sine-Gordon (bsG) model which corresponds to taking the limit ν → 0 in Eq. (S47). Figure Figure We here provide the detailed explanation of the estimation of the critical point α c in the boundary sine-Gordon (bsG) model. First, as mentioned in the main text, we have estimated the crossover scale N (α) as the number of RG steps N at which the mobility matrix element μ 10 becomes half of the insulator-fixed point value. To examine possible dependence on a choice of the threshold value, we have also estimated N (α) at which μ 10 becomes one quarter and three quarters of the insulator fixed-point value. We denote these N (α) as N 1/2 (α), N 1/4 (α), and N 3/4 (α), respectively. We show these estimated crossover scales N (α) in Fig. Second, we vary α c and fit N x (α)(x = 1/4, 1/2, 3/4) against (α -α c ) -1 by a straight line. We calculate the standard error of estimates s in this fitting for each α c , and we determine α c,Λ as the α c which gives the smallest standard error of estimates s. Typical behaviors of s as a function of α c are shown in Fig. We briefly discuss how the present results are related to some of the results obtained before (e.g., Refs. We shall first reexamine the validity of the duality argument. To this end, we rewrite the Hamiltonian (3) in the main text as where we use the sum rule Since the capacitance term ν ∝ W/E C is expected to be irrelevant from its scaling dimension, previous studies simplified the analysis in the weak corrugation regime E J /E C 1 by essentially taking the limit ν → 0 in the Hamiltonian (S56) where |n is an eigenstate of the charge operator N . Meanwhile, previous studies argued that the strong corrugation regime E J /E C 1 can be analyzed on the basis of the following effective tight-binding model (see also discussions in the next subsection) where ĉn (ĉ † n ) represents the annihilation (creation) operator of a particle localized in the potential well labeled by n, and ∆ ∝ e - √ 32E J /E C is the hopping matrix element between the adjacent localized states. One can easily check that these two Hamiltonians are equivalent; this suggests the duality between the weak (S58) and strong (S59) corrugation regimes via the correspondence: E J /2 ↔ ∆ and 1/α ↔ α. As discussed in the main text, these Hamiltonians can be mapped to the boundary sine-Gordon model after a unitary transformation and its perturbative renormalization group analysis indicates the phase transition at α = 1. Then, the duality between weak E J /E C 1 and strong E J /E C 1 corrugation regimes seems to suggest that the transition occurs at α = 1 for any E J /E C . This results in the vertical phase boundary as shown in the red dashed line in Fig. However, as demonstrated in the main text, these arguments in general break down when we consider the setup satisfying the wideband condition E C W as appropriate for experimental systems Tight-binding or instanton description in the strong corrugation regime Next, we examine the validity of the tight-binding description which was introduced as an effective model in the strong corrugation regime E J /E C 1 In the strong corrugation regime E J /E C 1, it was argued that higher bands in the JJ Hamiltonian ĤJJ = E C N 2 -E J cos(φ) can be truncated so that it can be replaced by the (single-band) tight-binding model of phase localized Wannier states |n at φ = 2πZ: where ∆ ∝ e - √ 32E J /E C is the hopping matrix element between the adjacent localized states. This also leads to the replacement of the JJ phase by φ ∼ 2π q with q = n∈Z n|n n|. (S63) One may then approximate the original Hamiltonian (S61) in the strong corrugation regime by the following tight-binding Hamiltonian Ĥ: which gives Eq. (S59) with the identification -iâ † k → b † k . As noted above, this model (S64) is equivalent to the boundary sine-Gordon model and thus exhibits the phase transition at α = 1 in E J /E C 1. We now point out that these arguments can be unambiguously justified only in the limit E C W , while again break down under the wideband condition E C W . Although this point seemed to be not made clear in the literature, such failure should originate from the breakdown of the tight-binding approximation made in deriving Eq. (S64) from Eq. (S61). Specifically, in the wideband limit E C W as considered in the present work, the harmonic potential term αW 2π 2 φ 2 in the Hamiltonian (the third term in the most right hand side of Eq. (S61)) becomes important and the energy acquisition ∼ W by hopping to the adjacent upper site eventually surpasses the band gap ∼ √ E J E C of JJ (see Fig. Meanwhile, if we consider the opposite limit E C W , the φ 2 -term is much smaller than E C N 2 and -E J cos(φ), and thus might be simply neglected and the tight-binding description can still be valid. Another way to see this is to invoke the instanton analysis We here provide the full technical details about the FRG analysis performed in the present work. Integrating out the bosonic environmental degrees of freedom, the imaginary-time action of the RCSJ at the zero temperature is given by (we set = v = 1 in this section): After applying the Fourier transformation to the first and last terms, we can rewrite the action as where we denote the field variable in the frequency basis by φ(ω) = ∞ -∞ dτ φ(τ )e -iωτ . To perform the nonperturbative RG analysis, we consider the following functional ansatz for the effective action at an energy scale Λ: dτ cos(φ(τ )). (S67) Here, for the sake of notational simplicity, we use the variable Λ to represent RG energy scale (but not the Wilson parameter), and we introduce the field-independent dimensionless parameters, J (Λ) and C (Λ), which satisfy the following relations at a UV scale Λ = Λ 0 The functional ansatz (S67) goes beyond the local potential approximation in the sense that the wavefunction renormalization is included, while we neglect a possible field dependence of the parameters and also truncate the less relevant, higher-order Fourier components cos(nφ) with n ≥ 2. We confirm that the inclusion of these higher modes does not affect the results discussed in the main text. We can show that α will not be renormalized at all order at least in the present setup. The flow equation follows from the Wetterich equation where R Λ is the regulator and the dimensionless propagator G Λ is defined by We can obtain the flow equation for the potential term J by projecting the right hand side of Eq. (S69) onto the most relevant Fourier mode: To be concrete, we choose the simple regulator R Λ = Λ from now on, which allows us to analytically perform the integration over φ, leading to where l = ln(Λ 0 /Λ) is the logarithmic RG scale. This gives Eq. ( Here, F (t) is a monotonically decreasing function in t ≥ 0 and satisfies F (t) π 2 √ t at t 1 and F (0) = 1, which lead to the asymptotic expressions in Eq. ( To obtain the flow equation for -1 C , we take the second-order derivative of Eq. (S69) with respect to the field variable and project it onto the lowest Fourier mode. The result is Using the regulator R Λ = Λ and performing the integration over φ, we arrive at the flow equation as follows: × α 4 y 2 + 2πα 3 y 2 + 5zy 2 + π 2 α 2 u 2 + 4(1 + 2zy 2 )(1 + 5zy 2 ) +8π 3 αyz 2u 2 + (1 + zy 2 )(1 + 9zy 2 ) + 16π 4 z(zy 2 + 2zy 2 u 2 + 3z 3 y 6 + u 2 + 5y 4 z 2 -1) , (S77) where we abbreviate the variables as u = J and z = -1 C /2 for the sake of notational simplicity. This equation provides Eq. ( 