we propose a general mechanism for valley and/or spin degeneracy lifting of the electronic bands in doped Bernal bilayer graphene, subject to electric displacement (D) fields. A D-field induced layer polarization (LP), when accompanied by Hubbard repulsion driven layer antiferromagnet (LAF) and next-nearest-neighbor repulsion driven quantum anomalous Hall (QAH) orders, lifts the four-fold degeneracy of electronic bands, yielding a quarter metal for small doping, as also observed in ABC trilayer graphene. With the disappearance of the QAH order, electronic bands recover two-fold valley degeneracy, thereby forming a conventional or compensated (with majority and minority carriers) half-metal at moderate doping, depending on the relative strength of LP and LAF. At even higher doping and for weak D-field only LAF survives and the Fermi surface recovers four-fold degeneracy. We also show that a pure repulsive electronic interaction mediated triplet f -wave pairing emerges from a parent correlated nematic liquid or compensated half-metal when an in-plane magnetic field is applied to the system. Introduction. Altogether an isolated layer of carbonbased honeycomb membrane and its stacked cousins constitute a diverse zoo of gapless chiral quasiparticles, displaying a variety of nodal electronic band dispersion Summary. First we review the key experimental observations and summarize our main results. In BBLG subject to D-field, quantum oscillations show a single peak at frequency (in units of nφ 0 ) ν = 1 at low carrier density n. Here φ 0 is the flux quanta. The corresponding broken symmetry phase (IF 1 We show that the four-fold degeneracy of electronic bands (stemming from the valley and spin degrees of freedom) is completely lifted when a D-field induced layer polarization (LP) is accompanied by Hubbard repulsion (U ) driven layer antiferromagnet (LAF) and intralayer next-nearest-neighbor repulsion (V 2 ) mediated quantum anomalous Hall (QAH) orders. The LAF leads to staggered pattern of electronic spin between the low-energy sites of BBLG residing on complementary layers, while the QAH order supports circulating currents among the intralayer low-energy sites, with opposite orientations on two layers With the disappearance of QAH order, residual LP and LAF yield a valley-degenerate half-metal with broken spin degeneracy [Fig. At even larger doping and weak D-field, one oscillation peak appears at ν = 1/4. This phase (Sym 4 Another phase (Sym 12 ), displaying oscillation peak at ν = 1/12 appears at small and moderate doping, separated by PIP 1 . A three-fold rotational symmetry breaking nematic order, preserving four-fold degeneracy stands as its candidate, which at moderate (low) doping is possibly stabilized by electronic interaction (D-field Finally, with the application of an in-plane magnetic field (B ), a superconductor appears in between PIP 2 and the correlated nematic liquid (Sym 12 ) Model. We arrive at these conclusions from the lowenergy model for BBLG. The unit cell is composed of four sites. Each layer contributes to two of them [Fig. (1) Here x k y , momentum k is measured from the respective valleys, m ≈ 0.028m e is the effective mass of quasiparticle excitations, where m e is the mass of free electrons, u = -Dd 0 is the external D-field induced LP with d 0 as interlayer separation, and μ is the chemical potential measured from the charge neutrality point. The sixteen-dimensional Hermitian matrices are Γ μνρλ = η μ σ ν τ ρ β λ . Four sets of Pauli matrices {η μ }, {σ ν }, {τ ρ } and {β λ } respectively operate on the particle-hole, spin, valley and layer indices, with μ, ν, ρ, λ = 0, . . . , 3. We introduce Nambu doubling to capture superconductivity We neglect the particle-hole asymmetry as it does not play any role in the pattern of symmetry breaking. We also neglect the trigonal warping, which splits quadratic band touching points into Dirac points. As the density of states for quadratic (linear) band dispersion is constant (vanishes linearly) with energy in two-dimensions, the effects of short-range Coulomb interactions, responsible for spontaneous symmetry breaking, are primarily driven by the component quadratic in k. Our proposed candidates for half-and quarter-metals, and the paired state, however, remain unaffected by trigonal warping Quarter-metal. On site Hubbard repulsion is expected to be the dominant component of finite range Coulomb interaction even in BBLG Here ∆ U ∼ U and ∆ V ∼ V 2 are the amplitudes of the LAF and QAH orders, respectively. The corresponding energy spectra are ± ξ 2 k + δ 2 i -μ for i = 1, . . . , 4, where and ξ k = |k| 2 /(2m ). As the four-fold spin and valley degeneracy is completely lifted, the system behaves like a quarter-metal, when |δ 4 | < μ < |δ 3 |, supporting a nondegenerate Fermi surface [Fig. Half-metal. Chemical potential yields an infrared cutoff for the renormalization group (RG) flow of fourfermion interactions. Thus, although at the bare level U > V 2 The relative spin orientations of the ferromagnet and LAF are chosen in such a way that their corresponding matrix operators mutually anticommute, yielding a configuration of maximal condensation energy gain. The energy spectra of H CHF are ±E τ,σ -μ, where for τ, σ = ± and z 2 = ξ 2 k + u 2 . The independence of E τ,σ on τ reflects valley degeneracy of each band. When ∆ 1 < μ < ∆ 2 , the system describes a half-metal [Fig. F . However, for sufficiently small ∆ 2 U + ∆ 2 F , it is conceivable that μ > ∆ 1,2 for the same fixed μ [Fig. Metal. A new phase (Sym 4 The identification of distinct orderings leading to degeneracy lifting in BBLG qualitatively agrees with the evolution of the phase boundaries among them in the presence of B -field Superconductivity. With the application of a B -field, a wedge shaped superconducting regime appears in between Sym 12 and PIP 2 Besides the E g nematicity, singlet s-wave and triplet f -wave pairings (respectively transforming under the irreducible A 1g and A 1u representations of the D 3d group), nucleate in a degenerate fashion in the ordered state at low temperatures, when B = 0. The f -wave pairing changes sign six times among the intralayer next-nearestneighbor pair of sites [Fig. to flow under RG, captured by for y = E g , A 1g , A 1u , A ⊥ 1u . The relevant Feynman diagrams and J functions are shown in the SM To anchor the nature of the pairing by approaching from the compensated half-metal (PIP 2 ) side, we compute and compare the bare mean-field susceptibilities (χ) for all symmetry allowed local pairings. By virtue of possessing majority and minority carriers with opposite spin projections, it can sustain both singlet and triplet pairings. For zero external momentum and frequency The Hermitian matrix M represents a paired state, fermionic Green's function G(iω n , k) = [iω n -H CHM ] -1 , ω n = (2n + 1)πt are the fermionic Matsubara frequencies, and the Boltzmann constant k B = 1 Discussions. We develop a pedagogical theory for spontaneous symmetry breaking and the resulting degeneracy lifting in BBLG, leading to the formations of quarter-and (compensated) half-metals, as observed in recent experiments 