A detailed investigation of the non-equilibrium steady-state electric and thermoelectric transport properties of a quantum dot coupled to the normal metallic and s-wave superconducting reservoirs (N-QD-S) are provided within the Coulomb blockade regime. Using non-equilibrium Keldysh Green's function formalism, initially, various model parameter dependences of thermoelectric transport properties are analysed within the linear response regime. It is observed that the single-particle tunnelling close to the superconducting gap edge can generate a relatively large thermopower and figure of merit. Moreover, the Andreev tunnelling plays a significant role in the suppression of thermopower and figure of merit within the gap region. Further, within the non-linear regime, we discuss two different situations, i.e., the finite voltage biasing between isothermal reservoirs and the finite thermal gradient in the context of thermoelectric heat engine. In the former case, it is shown that the sub-gap Andreev heat current can become finite beyond the linear response regime and play a vital role in asymmetric heat dissipation and thermal rectification effect for low voltage biasing. The rectification of heat current is enhanced for strong on-dot Coulomb interaction and at low background thermal energy. In the latter case, we study the variation of thermovoltage, thermopower, maximum power output, and corresponding efficiency with the applied thermal gradient. These results illustrate that hybrid superconductorquantum dot nanostructures are promising candidates for the low-temperature thermal applications. Thermoelectric materials convert heat into electricity and electricity into the temperature difference based on the Seebeck and Peltier effects, respectively. These abilities of thermoelectric materials could have many applications, including power generation and solid-state refrigeration Fig. To analyse the thermoelectric transport properties, we describe the N-QD-S system by the following Ander-son+BCS model Hamiltonian in second quantization, where ĤN describes the normal metallic reservoir in the noninteracting quasi-particle approximation with single electron kinetic energy k,N and c kσ,N (c † kσ,N ) is the annihilation(creation) operator of an electron with spin σ and wave vector k. ĤS describes the superconducting reservoir. c kσ,S (c † kσ,S ) is the annihilation(creation) operator of an electron with spin σ, wave vector k and energy k,S . The second term in ĤS describes the BCS pair interaction, with a superconducting energy gap ∆. ĤQD describes the Hamiltonian for single-level QD with energy d , and d σ (d † σ ) is the annihilation(creation) operator of electron with spin σ on the QD and n σ = d † σ d σ is number operator. The QD can have maximum occupancy of two electrons with opposite spins. We also consider the intradot electron-electron Coulomb repulsion with the interaction strength U. ĤT represents the tunnelling Hamiltonian between the QD energy level and reservoirs with V kα as the tunnelling amplitude between the QD and the α-reservoir (α ∈ N, S). To diagonalized the BCS part of the Hamiltonian, we use Bogoliubov transformation method which defines the new Fermionic quasi-particle operator γ kσ (γ † kσ ) and coefficients where E k = 2 k,S + |∆| 2 is the excitation quasi-particle energy of the superconducting reservoir. The coefficients To solve above effective Hamiltonian (Eq.( For non-zero Coulomb correlation (U = 0) an equation of motion for a given Green's function involves higherorder coupled Green's functions, thus creating a hierarchy of equations of motion (EOM). In order to truncate the hierarchy of equations one need a decoupling scheme for higher order Green's functions and maintain self-consistency. In Nambu representation, we define the retarded Green's function of the QD as a 2 × 2 matrices Where the diagonal components of G r d (ω) represents the single particle retarded Green's function of electron with spin σ =↑ and hole with spin σ =↓ respectively. The off-diagonal component represents the superconducting paring correlation on the QD. By evaluating different commutator and anticommutator brackets we drive the following EOM for the single electron Green's function with spin σ =↑ Similarly, one may write down the equation of motion for other Green's functions in Eq.( We treated the Coulomb correlations within Hubbard-I approximation, which correctly describes the Coulomb blockade effects where ±σ ∈↑, ↓ and n -σ = d † -σ d -σ denotes the quantum statistical average value of occupation number with spin -σ. Within Hubbard-I decoupling scheme the correlations involving reservoir electrons in the higher order Green's function and the spin flip processes on the dot are neglected (i.e d † -σ d +σ =0). Thus the formalism and results explained in the present paper are relevant for temperatures higher than the temperature associated with the Kondo effect (i.e., Kondo temperature T K ) where -D ≤ k,α ≤ D, with D as the half bandwidth. The tunneling coupling strength of the QD to the αreservoir (α ∈ N, S) is defined by Γ α = 2π|V α | 2 ρ 0,α , where normal metallic density of states ρ 0,α is constant in the range of energy around Fermi level (flat band). Here ρ 0,S is modified in the superconducting state. Finally after solving coupled EOM based on above Hubbard-I scheme we arrive at the expression for the retarded Green's function of electron with spin σ =↑ and off-diagonal superconducting pairing correlation on the QD, with where ρ S is the modified BCS density of states. The other matrix elements is given by G r d, where the lesser Green's function G < d is introduced which obeys the Keldysh equation (in the matrix form) where is the lesser self energy matrix given by, ) Thus the lesser Green's function for electrons on the QD is given by, where θ(|ω|-∆) is the unit step function and distribution function of reservoirs with temperature T α and chemical potential ±μ α (measured from Fermi level In the linear response regime, i.e., for small Voltage biasing (μ S -μ N = eδV → 0) and small temperature gradients (T N -T S = δθ → 0) between the reservoirs, the Fermi function of the normal and the superconducting reservoirs can be expanded around the equilibrium value (average T with μ f = 0), which gives where Substituting above linear relation into Eqs.( with thermoelectric response functions Here, e and h denote the magnitude of the electronic charge and Planck's constant, respectively. The electrical conductance is defined as the flow of charge current per unit voltage between the isothermal reservoirs (δθ = 0). The thermopower (Seebeck coefficient) is defined as the generated voltage per unit thermal gradients in open circuit condition i.e. I C = 0. The electronic thermal conductance is usually given by the heat flow through the central region (in present case QD) when it is coupled between electrically insulating source and drain reservoirs at different temperatures. In such systems, the reservoirs impose open circuit condition I C = 0. However, for a thermoelectric system with non-zero L 1 or S, a voltage will build up across the QD proportional to the temperature difference. Thus, total electronic thermal conductance K is reduced as compared to electrically insulating reservoirs by a factor of S 2 GT . Where P = S 2 G is the corresponding power factor. The performance of the thermoelectric heat engine in the linear response regime is determined by a dimensionless thermoelectric figure of merit ZT . Since we are interested in understanding the electronic thermal properties at low temperatures, we only consider the thermal contribution by electrons, and the lattice or phonon thermal contribution is negligible at low temperatures(K e ≈ K) In the linear response regime, the relationship between figure of merit ZT and efficiency at maximum power output η Pmax is given by where η C is the Carnot efficiency. In the non-linear regime the system is under the influence of finite voltage biasing μ N -μ S = eV (say μ N = eV and μ S = 0) and/or temperature gradient T N -T S = θ (say T N = T + θ and T S = T ). Thus the definition of linear response regime fails, and one needs to go beyond this limit. In the non-equilibrium steady-state condition, the net current flowing through the left normal and right superconducting reservoirs is I N = -I S ≡ I C (current conservation) and can be evaluated from the time evolution of the occupation number operator of the left normal reservoir (d -e k c † k,N c k,N /dt) where are Andreev and quasi-particle contribution to electrical/charge current respectively. The heat current is evaluated from the rate of energy flow at the normal reservoir side and Joule heating in the presence of voltage biasing. where ) are Andreev and quasi-particle contribution to heat current respectively. The heat current satisfy the condition J N + J S = -I C (μ N -μ S )/e and we have shown the calculation for heat current flowing at the normal reservoir side i.e. J Q ≡ J N = -J S -I C (μ N -μ S )/e. Also, the prefactor 2 in charge and heat current is due to the spin degeneracy. Note that for thermal gradient without voltage biasing (i.e. μ N = eV = 0) the subgap ABS heat current is zero and only quasi-particle contributes to the heat current. In order to use N-QD-S as a heat engine or power generator, the temperature gradient θ is set larger then zero. Due to this temperature difference electrons move from left reservoir to the right reservoir and thus create a potential difference (μ N -μ S = eV th ) due to accumulation of electrons on the right reservoir and positive charge to the left reservoir. The thermovoltage (V th ) thermopower (S) and electronic thermal conductance (K) is determined from the open circuit condition, For finite Voltage biasing and temperature gradient above equation is solved numerically to obtain V th and The heat engine generates a finite power P between V = 0 and V = V th and is given by, where V = (μ S -μ N )/e is bias voltage applied to counteract the thermally induced current i.e power is generated when current is driven against the potential difference. The thermoelectric efficiency is defined as the ratio between the generated output power (nonlinear current times voltage) and the nonlinear input heat current i.e η = output power/input heat = P/J Q . The maximal power generated by the heat engine is calculated numerically by using Eq.( where Carnot efficiency η C = θ T + θ . This section presents the numerical results obtained using MATLAB for the linear (subsection III.A) and nonlinear response under electric and temperature field in the Coulomb blockade regime. We analyse two different situations in the non-linear transport regime. In the first situation (subsection III.B), we consider a voltage-driven case for isothermal reservoirs (θ = 0) and discuss the Andreev and quasi-particle charge and heat transport. In the second situation (subsection III.C), the N-QD-S system is discussed in the context of thermoelectric heat engine for finite θ and V . In our calculations, all energies are expressed in the unit of superconducting energy gap ∆. A. Linear Response regime By using above linear response relations (( In this subsection, we study the non-linear electrical current and electronic contribution to heat current as a function of bias voltage. We also study the asymmetric heat dissipation, previously studied for the N-QD-N system FIG. 9: ΓS < ΓN case : ΓN = 0.5∆, ΓS = 0.1∆ and other parameters are same as in Fig. positive, i.e., the dissipation is larger for eV > 0 than for eV < 0 and shows complex variation with bias voltage. On the other hand, if the QD energy level d lies below the particle-hole symmetry point, then asymmetric heat dissipation corresponds to Andreev heat current is always negative, i.e., more dissipation for negative voltages as compared to positive voltages. The situation is completely opposite for the asymmetric dissipation corresponds to the quasi-particle heat current. Thus the total asymmetric dissipation changes the sign, i.e., cross the x-axis or voltage-axis only when quasi-particle contribution becomes finite (i.e., eV > ∆). For normal dominant coupling (Γ S < Γ N ), the asymmetric heat dissipation is perfectly symmetric about the x-axis, i.e., particle-hole symmetry point, and cross x-axis in a more controllable manner for different values of d . The study of the asymmetric heat dissipation can be helpful in the design of superconductor-QD-based nano-devices with controllable dissipation. Fig. It is also interesting to explore the combined influence of electric and thermal fields on heat transport in N-QD-S system and will be address in future work. C. Non-Linear regime : Thermoelectric heat engine In order to use N-QD-S system as a heat engine or power generator at finite thermal gradient, we consider T N = T + θ and T S = T . This temperature difference (θ > 0) between normal and superconducting reservoirs generate a finite thermovoltage V th = (μ N -μ S )/e. It is clear from Fig. Both thermovoltage thermopower are zero for all θ at particle-hole symmetric point ( d = -U/2). By tuning the QD energy level above or below the particle-hole symmetry point, |V th | become a monotonic function of θ for all values of d . This behaviour of V th as a function of θ is consistent with previous result The expectation value d ↑ d ↓ is the measure of the robustness of the superconducting proximity effect at the QD site and quantifies the induced on-site superconducting energy gap ∆ d . The earlier studies of thermoelectric transport through hybrid superconductor-QD nano-structures ignores the self-consistent evaluation of d ↑ d ↓ where G < d,12 is the off-diagonal element of the lesser Green's function (Eq.( We have discussed the non-equilibrium steady-state thermoelectric transport properties of an elementary single-level QD coupled to normal metallic and BCS superconducting reservoirs in the presence of intra-dot Coulomb correlation. In the linear response regime, we studied the Coulomb interaction, background temperature, superconducting energy gap, and dot-reservoir coupling dependence of the thermoelectric quantities as a function of quantum dot energy level. We found that the magnitude of quasi-particle tunnelling near the superconducting gap edge is U -independent and dominates the thermoelectric transport properties. On the other hand, subgap Andreev tunnelling only shows large electrical conductance and no contribution to the thermopower and heat current in the linear response regime. However, Andreev tunnelling plays a significant role in the suppression of thermopower within the sub-gap region. In the non-linear response regime, the subgap Andreev heat current generated in response to a voltage bias becomes significant. It plays an essential role in asymmetric heat dissipation and low-bias thermal rectification. We found that the asymmetric heat dissipation can become zero and changes sign only when quasi-particle heat current become finite, i.e., eV > ∆. This behaviour can be useful for the design of nano-devices with controlled heat dissipation. Further, the N-QD-S system can act as a thermal diode at low voltage biasing with enhanced rectification for strong Coulomb interaction and low background temperature. Finally, the thermovoltage, thermopower, maximum power output, and corresponding efficiency for the N-QD-S device was investigated in the non-linear transport regime. The efficiency corresponding to the maximum power output reaches the value η Pmax ≈ 0.5η C close to the superconducting gap edge for a relatively large thermal gradient. We also observe a small power output with corresponding efficiency η Pmax < ∼ 0.08η C for moderate and large k B θ at d = 0 as a manifestation of the reduced Andreev tunnelling process. Interestingly, to understand electric and thermoelectric transport properties at finite temperature in the Coulomb blockade regime, the proximity-induced superconducting gap on the QD state does not play any significant role. Thus, the aspects that are of particular interest in the present analysis are the investigation of heat transport in response to voltage bias and the study of the thermoelectric heat engine beyond the linear regime, which has not been received much attention in earlier studies. We believe that the presented analytical and numerical analysis provides the basis for the further in-depth understanding of the non-equilibrium charge and heat transport in hybrid superconductor-QD nanostructures. The related research work may also be taken out addressing linear and non-linear thermoelectric transport through multi-level QD 