Interfaces between materials with differently ordered phases present unique opportunities for exotic physical properties, especially the interplay between ferromagnetism and superconductivity in the ferromagnet/superconductor heterostructures. The investigation of zero-and π-junctions has been of particular interest for both fundamental physical science and emerging technologies. Here, we report the experimental observation of giant oscillatory Gilbert damping in the superconducting Nb/NiFe/Nb junctions with respect to the NiFe thickness. This observation suggests an unconventional spin pumping and relaxation via zero-energy Andreev bound states that exist only in the Nb/NiFe/Nb π-junctions, but not in the Nb/NiFe/Nb zero-junctions. Our findings could be important for further exploring the exotic physical properties of ferromagnet/superconductor heterostructures, and potential applications of ferromagnet π-junctions in quantum computing, such as half-quantum flux qubits. One sentence summary: Giant oscillatory Gilbert damping is observed in superconductor/ferromagnet/superconductor junctions with varying the ferromagnet thickness. The interplay between ferromagnetism and superconductivity has induced many exotic and exciting physical properties in ferromagnet (FM)/superconductor (SC) heterostructures Previous experimental studies have demonstrated the switching between zero-and π-junctions in SC/FM/SC structures by varying the temperature and the FM thickness Here, we report the experimental observation of giant oscillatory Gilbert damping in the superconducting Nb/NiFe/Nb junctions with respect to the NiFe thickness, which can be qualitatively explained by the different spin pumping efficiency via the Andreev bound states (ABS) of Nb/NiFe/Nb zero-and π-junctions. Using a minimal model based on the ABS, we show that an unconventional spin pumping into the zero-energy ABS penetrated into SCs could occurs only for the π-junctions, which can lead to the oscillatory Gilbert damping as a function of the NiFe thickness. Figures where m = M/|M| is the magnetization unit vector, γ is the gyromagnetic ratio, H eff is the total effective magnetic field, M s = |M| is the saturation magnetization, and g ↑↓ is the interface spin mixing conductance. The pumped spin current from FM into SCs can be expressed by J s = ħ 4π g ↑↓ m × dm dt The SC/FM/SC junctions consist of a NiFe (Ni80Fe20) layer (thickness: ~ 5 -20 nm) sandwiched by two Nb layers (thickness: 100 nm) grown by magnetron sputtering (see Methods and fig. Above the TC of Nb, spin pumping in the Nb/NiFe/Nb junctions leads to the spin accumulation in Nb near the interface, which can be described by the spin-dependent chemical potentials, as illustrated in Fig. Next, we investigate the spin pumping and spin transfer torque of the Nb/NiFe/Nb junctions in the superconducting states below TC with a superconducting gap (Fig. Remarkably, the oscillating amplitude of the Gilbert damping of the Nb/NiFe/Nb junctions as a function of the NiFe thickness is dramatically enhanced as the temperature decreases into the superconducting states of Nb (Fig. Let us discuss the physical mechanism that induces the giant oscillating Gilbert damping in the following. Apart from the spin pumping via ABS discussed above (Fig. To our best understanding, the most reasonable mechanism is the spin pumping via the ABS, which can qualitatively describe our experimental observation. Previous studies have demonstrated that the energy of ABS inside the superconducting gap depends on the superconducting-phase For π-junctions, ABS is located around the zero-energy inside of the superconducting gap (Fig. The SC/FM/SC heterostructures consisting of Nb (100 nm) and Ni80Fe20 (NiFe; ~ 5 -20 nm) were grown on thermally oxidized Si substrates in a d.c. magnetron sputtering system with a base pressure of ∼1×10 -8 torr. To systematically vary the NiFe thickness that is crucial for the quantum-size effect, we adopted the rotating multi-platter technique that allows us to grow dozens of Nb/NiFe/Nb samples in each run S1B) using a 200-kV JEOL 2010F field-emission microscope. The NiFe thickness is determined by the growth rate that is calibrated by TEM measurement, where the uncertainty of the NiFe thickness is obtained to be smaller than ~ 0.8 nm (fig. The spin pumping of Nb/NiFe/Nb heterostructures was characterized via FMR using the coplanar wave guide technique connected with a vector network analyzer (VNA; Agilent E5071C) in the variable temperature insert of a Physical Properties Measurement System (PPMS; Quantum Design) where S 0 is the coefficient for the transmitted microwave power, H is the external in-plane magnetic field, and H res is the resonance magnetic field. The Gilbert damping constant (α) can be obtained from the slope of the best linear-fitting results of the ∆H vs. the microwave frequency (f) where ∆H 0 is the zero-frequency line broadening that is related to the inhomogeneous properties, and γ is the gyromagnetic ratio. From the best linearly fits of the ∆H vs. f results measured on the typical Nb/Py (12 nm)/Nb sample (red lines in figs. S2C and S5C), α is determined to be 0.012 and 0.0054 at T = 10 and 4 K, respectively. A larger zero-frequency line broadening ∆H 0 is observed for the superconducting state compared to the normal state of Nb/Py/Nb heterostructures, which could be attributed to Meissner screening effect and the formation of trapped magnetic fluxes in Nb The effective magnetization and the gyromagnetic ratio can be fitted via the in-plane Kittel formula where f res and H res are the resonant microwave frequency and magnetic field respectively, 4πM eff is the effective saturated magnetization, and h is the shifted magnetic field induced by superconducting proximity effect. The thickness-dependent gyromagnetic ratio and effective magnetization can be found in fig. Superconducting transition temperature measurement. The superconducting transition temperature (TC) of the Nb/NiFe/Nb heterostructures was determined via the zero-resistance temperature measured by four-probe method in a PPMS using standard a.c. lock-in technique at a low frequency of 7 Hz. The TC of Nb (100 nm)/NiFe/Nb (100 nm) heterostructures exhibits little variation as a function of the NiFe thickness (fig. Supplementary Materials and Methods , the quantum-interference effect starts to be significant in the angular momentum transfer and spin pumping into the Nb layers. Section 1: Model of oscillating Gilbert damping above T C . The oscillatory Gilbert damping in normal metal (NM)/ferromagnet (FM)/NM heterostructures arising from quantum interference effect is analyzed based on previous theory by Mills where ). Using one dimensional model, we obtain where G σ (x, x ′ , ε F ) is the Green's function for conduction electrons with σ-spin at the Fermi energy (ε F ). In a FM, G σ (x, x ′ , ε F ) is related to the exchange energy. For the FM film with a thickness dFM in -dFM/2 < x < dFM/2, the Green's function satisfies the relation Hence, the imaginary part of the Green's function could be expressed by As the reciprocal process of the spin transfer torque, conventional spin pumping is achieved by the magnetization torques provided by the driven quasiparticle carriers Without loss of generality, we start the analysis from a left-propagating electron of energy ε and spin σ = {↑, ↓} = {+, -,}. When the Zeeman splitting J is much smaller than the Fermi energy EF, it has momentum where ν F is the Fermi velocity of the electron. When one electron goes from the FM to the SCs, it is reflected as a hole by the Andreev reflection at the right FM/SC interface; this hole has a phase shift χ = -arccos(ε/Δ) with respect to the electron Similarly, when a hole goes from the metal to the superconductor at the left FM/SC interface, an electron can be reflected. With a proper energy, the Andreev reflections can form a closed path, as a result of which the ABS forms. This requires that the phase accumulated in the reflections satisfies the Sommerfeld quantization condition, i.e. in the ballistic regime, where φ is the phase difference between the two superconductors, dNiFe is the thickness of the FM layer and n is an integer. Since ħν F /∆ ≥ 100 nm with ν F = 2.2 × 10 5 m/s and ∆ = 1 meV at T = 4 K in our experiment ) for ideal case with perfect transparency of electrons/holes. In reality, the interfacial scattering and transport conditions (ballistic or diffusive regimes) of FM could affect the energy of the ABS. Following previous studies The pumped spin current reads where m is the magnetization unit vector, and we define the effective mixing spin conductivity The pumped spin current carries the angular momentum away from the precessing magnetization and hence cause an enhanced Gilbert damping, which is described by where γ is electron gyromagnetic ratio and M s is the saturated magnetization of the ferromagnet. We are now ready estimate the contribution of ABS to the Gilbert damping at T = 4 K with varying transmission coefficient. We take n 0 =0.5 × 10 16 m -2 following Ref. (fig. 