The antimony-based chalcogenide Sb 2 Se 3 is a rapidly emerging material for photonic phase change applications owing to its ultra-low optical losses at telecommunication wavelengths in both crystalline and amorphous phases. Here, we investigate the dynamical response of these materials from nanoseconds to milliseconds under optical pumping conditions. We apply bichromatic pump-probe transient reflectance spectroscopy which is a widely used method to study the optical performance of optical phase change materials. Amorphous regions of several hundreds of nanometers in diameter are induced by pulsed excitation of the material using a wavelength of 488 nm above the absorption edge, while the transient reflectance is probed using a continuous wave 980 nm laser, well below the absorption edge of the material. We find vitrification dynamics in the nanosecond range and observe crystallization on millisecond time scales. These results show a large five-orders of magnitude difference in time scales between crystallization and vitrification dynamics in this material. The insights provided in this work are fundamental for the optimisation of the material family and its employment in photonic applications. The demand for switchable and adaptive components in photonics is ever increasing. A commonly used material for optical memories and signal routing in photonic integrated circuits is Ge-Sb-Te (GST), namely due to its large refractive index contrast between its rocksalt crystalline phase and amorphous phases, at wavelengths across both the visible and near-infrared regions of the electromagnetic spectrum (e.g Δn ~ 3.5 for Ge 2 Sb 2 Te 5 stoichiometry at λ =1550nm). GST also displays fast switching speeds and high durabilities. However, the large extinction coefficients of GST in the near infrared and telecommuncations bands limit its integration in photonic components. Recently, antimony-based sesquichalcogenide PCMs (i.e Sb2Te3, Sb 2 Se 3 , Sb 2 S 3 ) have garnered interest for photonic applications due to their vanishing extinction coefficients in the telecommunications bands and their potential application as reprogrammable components for photonic integrated circuits. The antimony-based chalcogenides Sb 2 S 3 and Sb 2 Se 3 have received little attention until recently in phase change applications. The emergence of interest in optical PCMs with low optical losses in the visible and near-infrared spectrum has opened up new studies in these materials. The PCM Sb 2 Se 3 combines a lower band gap energy and higher melting temperature than Sb 2 S 3 . Sb 2 Se 3 displays comparatively low pulse energy thresholds for both set and reset operation via optically induced switching. In the crystal phase, Sb 2 Se 3 possesses an orthorhombic Pnma crystal structure. The intricate balance between fast crystallization and vitrification dynamics have put chalcogenides at the center of attention for their capability to produce fast non-volatile switching devices. The 'SET' operation refers to the transition from an amorphous state to a crystalline state and entails heating of the PCM above its crystallisation temperature Tc. This is typically a slower process than amorphisation that requires less power. In applications which do not require fast modulation of the material phase a slower crystallisation speed is preferred as this reduces the requirements of the surounding materials to accommodate the subsequent amorphisation. Commonly, PCMs with fast crystallisation dynamics are deposited in thin films, typically tens of nanometres thick, on top of materials with high thermal conductivities, in order to achieve a melt-quenched amorphous phase. Because of this, the optical contrast between switched states of the PCM in films of such thickness is small due to shorter interaction lengths, which makes it hard to distinguish fully crystallised and meltquenched states, let alone any intermediate states that are accessible by partial crystallisation. In-situ measurement of the crystallisation dynamics, mediated by optical excitation, inherently becomes more difficult; the interpretation of optical data often has to be undertaken in conjunction with finite-element method thermal modelling in order to predict material behaviour, wherein it is hard to couple adequately the aforementioned mechanisms. More quantitative methods have been proposed, for example involving fast-heating calorimetry Thin films of Sb 2 Se 3 with thickness of 25 nm were deposited on silicon wafers with (100) orientation, and were capped with a ZnS:SiO 2 layer with 20%:80% composition and 200-nm thickness. Figure In this work we combined photothermal and heat flow simulations of pulsed laser heating to predict the switching performance of the demonstrated materials. We employed finite element method in the multiphysics simulation software COMSOL. The optical properties of the Sb 2 Se 3 and ZnS:SiO 2 layers were obtained via ellipsometry. where z is the depth of the beam in a material i, with temperature-independent absorption coefficient α i . Since the intensity changes radially and along the beam axis the spatial intensity distribution can be written as The heat deposited by the laser beam can then be represented by a heat source Q, which is the heat generated in the material as a function of local intensity I and the Cartesian coordinates as written above. This results in a partial differential equation for the temperature distribution which we must also solve for where C p is the specific heat capacity at constant pressure, ρ is the material density and φ is the laser-induced heat flux. A Heaviside step function is used to gate the emulated optical square pulses incident on the sample in time. Figure Values of 1 Wm -1 K -1 and 0.15 Jg -1 K -1 were used for the thermal conductivity and specific heat C p of Sb 2 Se 3 respectively. Switching off the optical heating (at 500 ns in Figure In the experimental study of this work we investigate the reversible optical switching of Sb 2 Se 3 from an as-deposited pristine amorphous phase (R 0 ) to a laser-induced crystalline state (R 1 ) and back to an amorphised state (R 2 ). All reflectance measurements presented in figures 3-5 are normalised to the average reflectance of the pristine as-deposited amorphous film (R 0 ) over the scanned area. Figure To characterise the pulse energy required for re-amorphisation of the material we performed a parametric switching study. A 20×20 array of 1 μm 2 crystalline spots is first generated by using 12mW, 1s pulses spaced in a 80 μm 2 area of the sample by means of an XY stage. The distance of the spots guarantees adequate spacing between the crystallised areas. The reflectance change between the pristine sample and the crystallised areas was monitored and presented in Figure To observe the temporal evolution of the Sb 2 Se 3 optical response, transient reflectance measurements were performed for both the crystallisation and amorphisation processes. Time-resolved measurements of both crystallisation of the asdeposited Sb 2 Se 3 films and the re-amorphisation of the generated crystallised regions are shown in the first column of Figure The right column of Figure The quenching behaviours in the vitrification processes can be represented by a simple exponential decay function in We have demonstrated the transient measurements of the phase-change of Sb 2 Se 3 chalcogenide thin films through the use of a bichromatic reflectance spectroscopy setup. This measures the change in the refractive index of the phase change material by measuring the reflectance with a continuous laser with insufficient power to heat or modify the film. Time-resolved measurements of the reflectivity throughout the amorphisation of crystalline Sb2Se3 reveals an intermediate state induced by optical heating which increases the reflectivity of the heated region. We attribute this change in optical properties to the weakening of the van der Waals forces between covalently bonded centres during heating. It is noteable that separate crystallisation events may exhibit small deviations from each other i.e the reflectance change achieved with the same crystallisation pulse is different. Figure The crystallisation transient shown in Figure Here we have demonstrated time resolved measurements of both the glass-crystal and crystal-glass transitions for Sb 2 Se 3 through the use of a specially designed pump-probe laser microscope capable of performing transient measurements with nanosecond-scale temporal resolution. These measurements allow for the characterisation of both the crystallisation and vitrification dynamics of the PCM in response to crystallisation and amorphisation pulses respectively. We have demonstrated the reversible phase change of Sb2Se3, and show the threshold behaviour of preseeded crystal domains. In the crystallisation process, the onset of crystallisation in response to the optical heating occurs on the order of a few hundred milliseconds after the initation of the optical excitation, which is indicative of the slow crystallisation dynamics of Sb2Se3. The vitrification dynamics are also explored by utilising the transient optical response of the PCM under test. The quenching rate of the intermediate molten phase in the amorphisation transients, which is dependent on the sample geometry, is shown to be on the order of ~10 8 K s -1 . This work has been primarily focussed on our understanding of the switching dynamics of phase change thin films, however the capabilities of the experimental setup can also be used to investigate the local behaviour of more complex nanoscale geometries. In future communications we intend to use this technique to explore the effect of local nanostructuring on the crystallisation and vitrification dynamics of novel PCMs.