Usually, off-axis digital holographic microscopy requires a coherent light source in order to record a fullfield hologram. Nevertheless, a LASER-based illumination leads to a non-negligible coherent noise, decreasing then the imaging quality. We hereby report a simple method to reduce the coherent noise contribution using a low-temporal-coherence illumination while maintaining a large interference area. A diffraction grating is hence introduced in the reference arm of the interferometer, allowing the coherence plane of the reference beam to be tilted following angular dispersion. The phase planes of the reference beam and the object beam appears to be coplanar. The principle and performance of low-coherence off-axis digital holographic microscopy are demonstrated. The three-dimensional reconstruction of a biological sample is performed. Since the demonstration of recording a modulated interference signal using a vidicon detector in 1967 by W. Goodman In the last decade, many approaches have been developed in order to remove the coherent noise such as recording wavelength-dependent holograms This letter presents an easy-to-implement method enabling to enhance the experimental conditions in transmissive off-axis DHM. Indeed, the interference system requires a low-coherence illumination and a standard diffraction grating in the reference arm for making coplanar the beam coherence planes. The concept of low-coherence off-axis DHM is exposed and the increase in interference pattern width is demonstrated. Furthermore, performance of the imaging technique is estimated. Then, the volume of a neuron is reconstructed. The layout of the off-axis DHM setup is shown in Fig. Without the diffraction element in the reference arm, the width of interference area L is limited by the coherence length of the light source l c and the angle θ between the two beams (L = l c / sin (θ)). Assuming a Gaussian-spectrum light illumination, the number of interference fringes N, having an interference contrast superior to 50%, can be expressed as In this case, the camera records only 38 interference fringes, providing thus fringe-less observation regions as shown in Fig. Performance of the low-coherence interference imaging system was evaluated. Figure 