In this paper, a capacitive flexible tactile sensor was designed to measure the pressure of objects based on MEMS technology. This sensor is a structure of a 4x4 array, with metal Ag as the capacitive electrode, which forms the tactile sensing unit of the sensor. The structure of capacitive flexible tactile sensor was designed and an experimental platform was established to test the performance. The tests show that when the thickness of the intermediate layer is 2 mm and the density is medium, the sensor's sensitivity is the best while the time of both the response and the rebound is fast. With the rapid development of society, a research hotspot field of robotics acttracts more and more attention. The flexible tactile sensor is self-evidently more and more important to a robot in terms of sensing the pressure of external objects Many scholars at home and abroad have conducted researches and achieved some results. HU XiaoHui et al The overall three-dimensional structure of the new capacitive flexible tactile sensor is shown in Figure The overall size of the upper and lower electrode layers is a square of 24mm×24mm, and the electrodes are made into a 4×4 sensor array. The upper and lower electrodes are staggered horizontally and vertically, and each intersecting place constitutes a sensing unit, so there are 16 independent sensing units in total. The structure of the electrode layer is shown in Figure The fabrication process of a capacitive flexible tactile sensor is shown in Figure (a)Silicon wafer is used as the bottom plate with a PI tape pasted on it. Then, it is cleaned in sequence with acetone, anhydrous ethanol and deionized water. After the cleaning, it is put on the heating platform for drying. (b) A layer of positive photoresist is uniformly sprayed on the surface of PI film. The negative film is fixed on the disc by vacuum pump. When the negative film is rotating at a high speed, the photoresist is evenly distributed on the negative film by the glue throwing machine. (c) The photoetching process is carried out by a photoetching machine. The photoetching machine exposes the photoresist through an ultraviolet light source and puts the exposed film into the developer. The photoresist in the exposed area is etched away and the photoetching pattern is fully displayed. Then it is rinsed in deionized water and then taken out for natural air drying. (d) The sample is sputtered with a high vacuum triple target magnetron coater. The vacuum is pumped to 10 -4 Pa, the flow rate controlled to 80, and the power controlled to 100 W. After sputtered with Cr target for three minutes and then with Ag target for 30 minutes, the sample is cooled and taken out. (e) The purpose of stripping process is to remove the remaining photoresist, so that the electrode pattern can be displayed. After the remaining photoresist and Ag attached to the photoresist are removed with acetone, the Ag electrode remained. The experimental platform of the capacitive tactile sensor is shown in Figure In this paper, a capacitive flexible tactile sensor is fabricated by MEMS technology. Three sensors with different intermediate dielectric layers has been designed for comparison. It studies the relationship between the sensitivity and the thickness and density parameters of capacitive flexible tactile sensors, as well as the range, response time and rebound time. After many experimental tests, it can be seen that the comprehensive performance of the intermediate medium layer with thickness of 2mm and medium density is the best.