Recently, nonadiabatic geometric quantum computation has been received much attention, due to its fast manipulation and intrinsic error-resilience characteristics. However, to obtain universal geometric quantum control, only limited and special evolution paths have been proposed, which usually requires longer gate-time and more operational steps, and thus leads to lower quality of the implemented quantum gates. Here, we present an effective scheme to find the shortest geometric path under the conventional conditions of geometric quantum computation, where high-fidelity and robust geometric gates can be realized by only single-loop evolution, and the gate performances are better than the corresponding dynamical ones. Furthermore, we can optimize the pulse shapes in our scheme to further shorten the gate-time, determined by how fast the path is travelled. In addition, we also present its physical implementation on superconducting circuits, consisting of capacitively coupled transmon qubits, where the fidelities of geometric single-and two-qubit gates can be higher than 99.95% and 99.80% within the current state-of-the-art experimental technologies, respectively. These results indicate that our scheme is promising for large-scale fault-tolerant quantum computation. Different from classical computation, based on the nature of quantum coherence and entanglement, quantum computation can effectively solve several hard problems 1,2 that cannot be solved by the classical one. To realize a quantum computer, a set of universal quantum logic gates is the elementary building block It is well-known that quantum gates constructed by geometric phases, e.g., the adiabatic Berry phase 5 , have strong robustness against certain local errors, as geometric phases only depend on the global nature of evolution paths instead of the evolution details. This makes the strategy of constructing quantum gates using geometric phases very promising and it is termed as holonomic or geometric quantum computation (GQC) To realize nonadiabatic GQC, the key step is to construct pure geometric gates, which means that accompanied dynamical phase during evolution process needs to be eliminated. The usual way before is to make the evolution follow some special paths on which the dynamical phase never exists We now proceed to induce a pure geometric phase γ g by inverse design of a system Hamiltonian H(t) that satisfies the conditions of cyclic evolution and parallel transport. This phase is only related to polar angle α(t) and azimuth angle β(t) of evolution states in the Bloch sphere, and thus to be geometric. Considering a set of auxiliary states as follows, where we require the evolution states |ψ ± (t) = exp[iγ ± (t)]|φ ± (t) to satisfy the conditions of cyclic evolution |ψ ± (τ ) = exp[iγ ± (τ )]|ψ ± (0) and parallel transport |ψ ± (t) |H(t)|ψ ± (t) = 0, with γ ± (τ ) being the accumulated total phases after an evolution time τ . Then, the needed two-level Hamiltonian H(t) is calculated to be 27 where the ∆(t) and Ω(t) can describe the detuning and Rabi frequency of driving microwave field, respectively, as , The initial states |ψ ± (0) = |φ ± (0) , after a period of cyclic evolution τ , driven by the Hamiltonian H(t), evolve to the corresponding final states of e ∓iγg(τ ) |ψ ± (0) . Accordingly, the evolution operator is where n = (sin α 0 cos β 0 , sin α 0 sin β 0 , cos α 0 ) is the unit direction vector with α 0 = α(0), β 0 = β(0), σ = (σ x , σ y , σ z ) is the Pauli vector, and geometric phase γ g (τ ) = 1 2 τ 0 [1cos α(t)] β(t)dt. U (τ ) represents a quantum rotation operator with the rotation axis being n by an angle of 2γ g (τ ). As n and γ g (τ ) can be arbitrary, universal single-qubit geometric gates can be obtained. Next, we explore the equations of the shortest path for a set of general geometric gates. As shown above, for a given geometric phase γ g and starting point (α 0 , β 0 ) , different parameters {α(t), β(t)} can be chosen, which corresponds to different evolution trajectories. In particular, a closed circle formed along a smooth trajectory is the shortest path among all the above trajectories, which generally represents a shortest gate-time for a given pulse shape. Specifically, according to Eq. ( where C = 2πγ g -γ 2 g /(π -γ g ) is a constant. Meanwhile, the azimuth angle β(t) can be set to take the form of for t ∈ [0, τ ] with τ being the gate duration. Since the starting point of the Hadamard gate is the point O (π/4, 0), the above result can not be applied. But, we can still obtain an evolution equation that passes point O and the change of azimuth angle β(t) is gradually increased from 0 to 2π. Then parameters' constrain will be The evolutionary trajectories for the geometric gates, on the Bloch sphere, are plotted in Fig. (3), the Rabi frequency can be further calculated as with the pulse shape and time-dependent phase being In addition, the simple forms of β(t) in the Eqs. ( where a k and n (integral number) are free variables to modify the original shapes in order to further shorten the needed gate durations. Here, n = 3 is considered due to the technical limitation of actual pulse generator. Since we only optimize the pulse with three additional term in Eq. ( We now turn to consider the gate robustness of our scheme under decoherence. Here, we mainly evaluate the robustness of geometric π/8 and Hadamard gates of our scheme against Rabi frequency and frequency detuning errors, i.e., σ x and σ z errors, and compare it with the corresponding dynamical gates. The dynamics of an open quantum system can be numerically simulated by using the Lindblad quantum master equation of 35 where ρ denotes density operator of the total quantum system, being the error fractions of the Rabi frequency and detuning, respectively, L(σ) = 2σρσ † -σ † σρ -ρσ † σ is the Lindblad operator for operator σ, σ -= |0 1|, σ z = |1 1| -|0 0|, and Γ, κ being decay and dephasing rates, respectively. To test the robustness of the constructed geometric π/8 and Hadamard gates, we use a general initial state of |ν 1 0 = cos θ|0 + sin θ|1 , after these gate operations, the ideal final states |ν 1 τ will be cos θ|0 +exp(iπ/4) sin θ|1 and [(cos θ + sin θ)|0 + (cos θ -sin θ)|1 ]/ √ 2, respectively. We define the gate fidelity as τ dθ and the integration numerically performed for 1001 initial states with θ being uniformly distributed over [0, 2π]. Assuming the decoherence rates Finally, we propose the physical implementation of our scheme on superconducting quantum circuits consisted of capacitively coupled transmon qubits where ω 0 , α are the frequency and anharmonicity of the transmon qubit, Ω s (t), φ(t) and ω(t) are the driving strength, phase and frequency of the microwave field, respectively. To analyze the Hamiltonian more clearly, we transfer it to the rotating framework with respect to frequency ω(t). It can be found that the obtained Hamiltonian is in the exact same form as Eq. ( Note that, owing to the weak anharmonicity of transmon qubit, the driving field will induce not only energy transitions in the qubit subspace, but also cascade transitions to the noncomputational subspace in a dispersive way, resulting in the information leaked out of the computational subspace. This leakage can be corrected by the "derivative removal via adiabatic gate" technique Here, we consider k = 0, 1, 2, that is, energy level |2 is regarded as the main leakage source, and use the master equation (13) to evaluate the gate performance in practical superconducting system, with an available qubit anharmonicity Remarkably, the implementation of nontrivial two-qubit geometric gates of our scheme can be achieved on superconducting quantum circuits consisted of two capacitively coupled transmon qubits, labeled by Q a and Q b , respectively. Once their respective transition frequencies are set, their coupling strength g is generally fixed. To achieve controllable coupling where α a (α b ) is the intrinsic anharmonicity of transmon qubit Q a (Q b ), and ∆ = ω a -ω b . Using the Jacobi-Anger iden-tity e iβ cos α = +∞ n=-∞ i n J n (β)e inα and making a representation transformation with unitary operator U (t) = expi t 0 ∆ (t )dt (|11 ab 11| -|02 ab 02|)/2 on Eq. ( When meeting the condition of ν(t) = ∆ (t) + α b + ∆ and neglecting high-frequency oscillation terms, the above Hamiltonian reduces to in a two-qubit subspace {|11 ab , |02 ab }, with time-dependent It is obvious that Eq. ( Then, we test the performance of the two-qubit geometric gate by setting γ g = π/4 as a typical example. For a coupling strength of g = 2π × 10 MHz, the optimized gate duration is τ 43.50 ns corresponding to the maximal effective coupling strength g max = 2π × 15 MHz, and η(t) = J -1 1 [g (t)/(2 √ 2g)] can be solved numerically. Other parameters of the transmon qubits are set within the current reachable range In summary, we have proposed a shortest-path-based scheme for universal nonadiabatic geometric quantum gates with higher fidelity and stronger robustness. Moreover, to pursuit shorter evolution time, the pulse-optimization technique can also be applied to the constructed geometric gates, especially for the nontrivial two-qubit geometric gates. Finally, fidelities for geometric single-and two-qubit gates can exceed 99.95% and 99.80% for the implementation on superconducting quantum circuits. Therefore, our scheme provides a promising way to achieve high-fidelity and robust GQC. 