Motivated by the recent discovery of superconductivity in the pentalayer nickelate Nd6Ni5O12 [Nature Materials 10.1038], we calculate its electronic structure and superconducting critical temperature. We find that electronic correlations are essential for pushing Nd6Ni5O12 into the superconducting doping range as they shift the electron pockets above the Fermi energy. As a consequence, Nd6Ni5O12 can be described with a single d x 2 -y 2 orbital per Ni. Instead, for the bilayer nickelate Nd3Ni2O6 we find correlations to drive the system into a three-orbital regime also involving the Ni dxz,yz states. We suggest, however, that single-orbital physics with optimal doping can be restored by substituting 60% of the trivalent Nd or La by tetravalent Zr. Even 35 years after the discovery of high temperature (T c ) superconductivity in cuprates Since infinite layer cuprates are not the best superconductors, finding superconductivity in a finite layer nickelate, the undoped pentalayer Nd 6 Ni 5 O 12 In this letter, we analyze the superconducting pentalayer Nd 6 Ni 5 O 12 and the arguably simplest finite-layer compound, bilayer Nd 3 Ni 2 O 6 , by state-of-the-art density functional theory (DFT) plus dynamical mean field theory (DMFT) As for the undoped bilayer Nd 3 Ni 2 O 6 with formal Ni valence d 8.5 , we show that local DMFT correlations drive a charge transfer from the Ni d xz/yz to the d x 2 -y 2 orbitals, resulting in a per se multi-orbital system with a three-dimensional electronic structure. Remarkably, however, we find that doping to a nominal valence of d 8.8 , the d xz/yz orbitals become fully populated again and the desirable one-orbital physics is recovered: The thus doped bilayer system again shows properties similar to the infinite and pentalayer superconductors. As a dopant we propose Zr, specifically La 2+δ Zr 1-δ Ni 2 O 6 with δ = 0.4. Methods. Structural relaxations for lattice constants and atomic positions are performed with the vasp code For the DMFT calculations, the wien2k bands around the Fermi level are projected onto maximally localized Wannier functions As we will see below, a one-band per Ni site description based on the Ni-d x 2 -y 2 orbital is possible at low energies. Hence, we perform a further Wannier projection onto this d x 2 -y 2 orbital only [see supplemental material (SM) DFT crystal and electronic structure. We consider the series Nd n+1 Ni n O 2n+2 which can be synthesized from the Ruddlesden-Popper perovskite parent compound by oxygen reduction. Specifically, we concentrate on Nd 3 Ni 2 O 6 (n=2), Nd 6 Ni 5 O 12 (n=5, experimentally realized in To further investigate prospective similarity between infinite and finite layers, we list the electronic hopping terms from a Wannier projection in Table While the hopping is similar, the filling of the d x 2 -y 2band, a key factor for superconductivity, differs between the compounds. Nd 3 Ni 2 O 6 hosts a nominal d 8.5 configuration which is far away from the optimal hole doping δ 0.2 (d 9-δ ). Also the doping of Nd 6 Ni 5 O 12 , as predicted by DFT, is not within the superconducting region. The A-M -pocket takes electrons away, leading to δ ∼ 0.24 holes (see SM DMFT results. For both, Nd 3 Ni 2 O 6 and Nd 6 Ni 5 O 12 , electronic correlations dramatically change the electronic structure, see Figs. For the pentalayer, Nd 6 Ni 5 O 12 , electronic correlations have another game-changing effect, see Fig. This brings us back to the bilayer compound Nd and the question: can we tune its electronic structure to one that is favorable for superconductivity? Indeed we believe one can do so through chemical doping/substitution. Here we consider La 2+x Zr 1-x Ni 2 O 6 which has a nominal valence configuration 3d 9-x/2 . At x = 0.4 no electron pockets are present within DFT+DMFT anymore, and the Fermi surface is composed only of a single Ni d x 2 -y 2 orbital (see SM Estimating T c with DΓA. The subsequent single-orbital DMFT calculation for Nd 6 Ni 5 O 12 agrees quite well with the fully fledged calculation with all Ni 3d orbitals, see SM Since the inter-layer hoppings are equally small as in the infinite layer system, we now treat the layers as independent as done previously for NdNiO 2 We have seen that electronic correlations completely alter the electronic structure of finite layer nickelates, even beyond an effective mass renormalization of the bands. In the case of the bilayer nickelate Nd 3 Ni 2 O 6 , DFT predicts a single Ni d x 2 -y 2 band to cross the Fermi energy that accommodates ∼0.5 holes per Ni site (leading to 3d 8.5 ). For such a large hole doping, electronic correlations push the d xy/yz bands across the Fermi level. In the case of the pentalayer nickelate Nd 6 Ni 5 O 12 , DFT predicts an electron pocket around the A and M momenta. This tube-shaped DFT pocket would dope the Ni d x 2 -y 2 band to 0.24-0.27 holes for the three inequivalent layers, beyond the doping range where superconductivity is expected. However, electronic correlations push the electron pocket above the Fermi energy so that there are 0.2 holes per Ni with only a tiny variation of 0.02 holes between the layers. This way the Ni d x 2 -y 2 band is placed in the optimal superconducting doping range; it also has virtually the same hopping terms as NdNiO 2 . Hence electronic correlations are key to explain the experimental observation of superconductivity in Nd 6 Ni 5 O 12 While for NdNiO 2 the A-pocket is possibly only a passive bystander for superconductivity Our phase diagram in Fig. This Supplementary Material presents additional information as well as DFT and DMFT results supporting our conclusions in the main text: Section provides computational details regarding DMFT and analytic continuation, while Section provides details on the Wannier projection,and Section on the calculation of the occupation of the effective Ni 3d x 2 -y 2 orbital. Section compares the effective mass for different nickelates and different Wannier projections. Section supplements the information of the main text by the DMFT spectral functions for other nickelates and other Wannier function projections. Section shows the corresponding Fermi surfaces. Finally, Section presents results for La 2+δ Zr 1-δ Ni 2 O 6 at δ = 0 and 0.4. As noted in the method section of the main text, all DMFT calculations were performed using the w2dynamics code Analytic continuation is performed by the Maximum entropy method With the exception of the undoped bilayer system Nd 3 Ni 2 O 6 where also the Ni 3d xz/yz bands form a quasiparticle peak at the Fermi energy, all nickelates considered only have one strongly correlated band crossing the Fermi energy: the Ni 3d x 2 -y 2 band. In some cases there are additional pockets (bands) that are however only very weakly renormalized compared to the DFT bands. They also do not show a strong broadening nor any formation of (Hubbard) side peaks. This strongly suggests that strong correlations -and thus most likely the mechanism for high-temperature superconductivityresides in these effective Ni 3d x 2 -y 2 band. If pockets are present as e.g. for the infinite layer nickelate system, they do not hybridize with this Ni 3d x 2 -y 2 band. All those reasons indicate that the minimal model for superconductivity is the effective Ni 3d x 2 -y 2 band with an appropriate filling. In the multi-orbital Hamiltonian, this effective single Ni 3d x 2 -y 2 band is made up out of predominately Ni 3d x 2 -y 2 character with some admixtures of the other Ni and Nd orbitals, due to hybridization effects. If we would include the oxygen p orbitals in the multi-orbital calculation they would also contribute to this band. Hybridization with orbitals lying in energy above the Ni 3d x 2 -y 2 orbital such as the Nd states will decrease the occupation of the 3d x 2 -y 2 orbital in the multi-orbital calculation, while hybridization with orbitals lying below such as the other Ni orbitals (or oxygen orbitals if included) will enhance the occupation of the Ni 3d x 2 -y 2 orbital. If we consider a single-band effective low-energy Hamiltonian, such hybridization effects must not be included since it would give the wrong occupation of the effective orbital and the wrong Fermi surface. If all the other bands are completely below or above the Fermi energy, they are fully occupied or fully empty, and the occupation of the effective low-energy Hamiltonian is simply given by the electrons remaining after filling all orbitals below the Fermi energy. If there are, however, pockets present, which do not hybridize noticeable with the target band and are hence not included in the low-energy effective Hamiltonian, their occupation has to be accounted for. For transition metal oxides, this is the established DFT+DMFT procedure in case of a projection onto only the five d-orbitals or onto three t 2g or two e g orbitals In the following we explicitly describe how we calculated the occupation of the effective single orbital Hamiltonian (Ni 3d x 2 -y 2 orbital) using the latter procedure without the aforementioned hybridization effects. In Table In the case, where pockets are present which do not hybridize with the correlated Ni d x 2 -y 2 and hence are not included in the DΓA calculation, the extraction of the correct filling becomes more involved. Below we outline the corresponding approach used for all compounds: Once local correlations are taken into account the Nd derived pockets are shifted above the Fermi surface and can be considered as empty. Thus there is an average filling of 0.8 electrons per Ni layer for the effective d x 2 -y 2 orbitals in DMFT. For DFT, on the other hand, there is a pocket. Here, the occupation of the Ni d x 2 -y 2 orbitals has been obtained by adjusting the chemical potential of the d x 2 -y 2 -only projection to lie on top of the full-d projection, and subsequently integrating the spectral function from -10 eV to 0 eV. Due to the presence of Nd derived pockets within DFT, this occupation is lower than 0.8 on average. For the infinite layer case, we performed a Wannier projection onto the Ni d x 2 -y 2 , Nd d xy and Nd d z 2 orbital, which do not hybridize notably. We then fix the position of the pocket bands to their respective location within the DMFT calculation and again integrate the resulting spectral function of the two pockets from -10 eV to 0 eV to obtain the number of electrons in the pockets n pockets . The occupation of the Ni d x 2 -y 2 orbital is then given by 1 -x -n pockets . This is the only case, where we have to employ an approximation, namely that the shape of the pocket and its spectral weight do not change by electronic correlations. For the pocket this is indeed a good approximation. We also cross-checked our result by computing the DMFT Fermi-surface and using Luttinger's sum rule Occupation La 2+δ Zr 1-δ Ni2O6 For δ = 0.4 the pockets are pushed above the Fermi surface by local correlations within DMFT. Hence the corresponding filling is simply given by the nominal valence 3d 9-δ/2 (3d 8.8 when δ = 0.4) and correspondingly the occupation of Ni d x 2 -y 2 is n = 0.8. DMFT allows us to compute the mass renormalization created by local correlations. As discussed in the main text, the quasi-particle weight Z and thus also the effective mass m * /m b = 1/Z are stunningly similar for the infinite layer and the pentalayer compound. We display this effective mass m * /m b as a function of the occupation in the Ni d x 2 -y 2 orbital in Fig. Let us also emphasize that the mass renormalization in the fully fledged calculation with all dorbitals in Table II are quite similar to that in the projection onto a single Ni 3d x 2 -y 2 band in Table In the main text we presented the k-resolved (integrated) spectral function A(k, ω) (A(ω)) for the bilayer in Fig. Information (i) is displayed in Fig. Information (ii) is displayed in Fig. In the main text we discussed the possibility to engineer a superconducting bilayer nickelate compound. Given the results of Fig. 