Layered two-dimensional van der Waals (vdW) semiconductors and their heterostructures have been shown to exhibit positive photoconductance (PPC) in many studies. A few recent reports have demonstrated negative photoconductance (NPC) as well that can enable broadband photodetection besides multi-level optoelectronic logic and memory. Controllable and reversible switching between PPC and NPC is a key requirement for these applications. This report demonstrates visible-to-near infrared wavelength-driven NPC and PPC, along with reversible switching between the two, in an air stable, high mobility, broadband black phosphorus (BP) field effect transistor (FET) covered with a few layer MoS2 flake. The crossover switching wavelength can be tuned by varying the MoS2 bandgap through its flake thickness and the NPC and PPC photoresponsivities can be modulated using electrostatic gating as well as laser power. Recombination-driven NPC and PPC allows for reversible switching at reasonable time scales of a few seconds. Further, gate voltage-dependent negative persistent photoconductance enables synaptic behavior that is well-suited for optosynaptic applications. Heterostructures based on layered van der Waals (vdW) materials have recently gained significant interest owing to the realization of a variety of optical The observation of negative photoconductance along with PPC in photodetectors can enable broadband photoresponse with enhanced spectral resolution Recently NPC has been reported in a WS2/rGO hybrid structure under infrared light as a result of recombination between photogenerated electrons in WS2 with holes in rGO. In this work, we demonstrate wavelength-driven (visible-to-near infrared) NPC and PPC, along with reversible switching between the two, in an air-stable BP FET covered with a few layer MoS2 flake. BP is chosen for its high hole mobility and broad spectral response (visible as well as NIR) and MoS2 is chosen for its air-stability, optical bandgap tunability and spectral response in the visible range. The NPC is a consequence of light absorption in the MoS2 flake, which results in photocarrier generation. Photogenerated holes are captured by intrinsic traps in MoS2 whereas the photogenerated electrons diffuse towards the BP/MoS2 heterointerface to recombine with holes in the BP channel leading to a reduction in the net device current under illumination. As the wavelength is increased beyond the absorption edge of the MoS2 flake, the phototransistor exhibits PPC solely based on the positive photoresponse of the BP flake. The critical wavelength for the crossover between NPC and PPC can be tuned through an appropriate choice of the MoS2 flake thickness that determines its bandgap and absorption edge. The wavelength-driven NPC-PPC switching is reversible over multiple wavelength cycles, with rise and fall times of a few seconds, and the negative and positive photoresponsivities in the visible and NIR regimes can be tuned using electrostatic gating or laser power. Hence, a broad and tunable spectral response with distinct NPC and PPC regimes, that can be reversibly switched between using wavelength cycling, has been realized in a BP/MoS2 heterostructure phototransistor. The presence of gate voltage-dependent negative persistent photoconductance makes this device promising for optosynaptic applications as well. BP flakes were mechanically exfoliated on a 90 nm SiO2/Si substrate using scotch tape. Source/drain contacts were then formed on the few layer BP flake using electron beam lithography (EBL) and metal deposition (Cr/Au ∼ 5/40 nm). An additional contact was fabricated adjacent to the source/drain contacts of the BP FET. Next, MoS2 flakes were mechanically exfoliated onto a polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) stamp and large, thin flakes were transferred on to the FET to ensure complete coverage of the BP flake and the extra contact. Further, contacts were formed on the MoS2 flake using EBL and metal deposition (Cr/Au ∼ 5/40 nm). Table Individual field effect transistor performances were studied for the BP and MoS2 FETs. Their transfer and output characteristics are shown in Figure Photoresponse of the BP/MoS2 heterostructure was obtained under 690-900 nm laser illumination. The light was incident on the phototransistor for 30 seconds and then turned off. The photoresponsivity (R) was calculated using the equation: R = Iph/Pin, where Iph =Ilight -Idark with Ilight and Idark being the currents with and without illumination and Pin is the incident optical power. As shown in Figure The interlayer recombination occurring at the BP/MoS2 interface under visible light, as discussed above, depends on (i) the electron concentration of MoS2 (nM) and (ii) hole concentration of BP (pBP). These carrier concentrations are modulated by the applied gate bias electrostatically and optically and light intensity respectively. Also, the hole concentration in BP is affected by the trapping and detrapping at the BP/SiO2 interface which varies with applied gate bias. Wavelength (nm) on the interlayer carrier recombination. Under illumination for varying VG, the Iph (dependent on carrier recombination) will be maximum where the effective electron and holes concentrations in MoS2 and BP respectively will be nearly equal (as shown in Figure Figure When the phototransistor is illuminated with 780 nm laser (NIR), a positive photocurrent is observed, as shown in Figures Temporal Photoresponse: Next, temporal measurements were carried out in order to understand the variation in the speed of the device for negative and positive photocurrent regimes. As shown in Figure The negative photocurrent depends on the free carrier concentrations of BP and MoS2 flakes that can be modulated in magnitude (photoresponsivity) and spectral range by the gate voltage and the optical absorption range of the MoS2 flake respectively. Given that light absorption by the MoS2 flake results in generation of photocarriers that diffuse towards BP resulting in interlayer recombination and hence, negative Iph, the optical spectral response of MoS2 determines the crossover wavelength from NPC to PPC for the phototransistor. The spectral response of MoS2 is limited by its bandgap which varies with the thickness of the flake and therefore, the crossover wavelength increases for the first few nanometers of the MoS2 flake as the bandgap decreases with increasing thickness, till the bandgap becomes constant (∼ 1.2 eV) for a few layer MoS2 flake. Figure Hence, it exhibits a negative optical response to both 690 and 840 nm illumination since its λt is greater than 1000 nm (which is difficult to demonstrate given the limitation of our measurement setup). As the flake thickness of MoS2 increases further, the diffusion of electrons from the top surface (high optical absorption region) of the MoS2 flake towards BP becomes less favorable. This leads to negligible interlayer recombination resulting in a direct flow of electrons from conduction band of MoS2 to the contacts. This leads to a positive Iph for visible and NIR illumination, as shown in Figure The BP/MoS2 device architecture gives the advantage of switching the photocurrent from negative to positive values within a time scale of a few seconds as the wavelength switches from 700 to 750 nm, as shown in Figure This work demonstrates wavelength-dependent photoconductance polarity and reversible NPC-PPC switching in a BP/MoS2 phototransistor. Table The NPC is a result of recombination between photogenerated electrons in MoS2 with holes in the BP flake. The NPC-to-PPC crossover wavelength is tunable with the thickness of the MoS2 flake. MoS2 thickness modulates its bandgap and optical absorption range thereby resulting in NPC (PPC) for wavelengths within (beyond) the absorption range. The device offers dual fold application: first, different photoelectric response to different wavelengths, owing to the presence of both NPC and PPC in the same device, expands its application prospects to broadband photoelectric sensing and second, the presence of negative persistent photoconductance at negative gate voltage offers a promising avenue for optocontrolled synaptic applications. The BP transistors were fabricated using a degenerately doped p-type Si substrate with 280 nm thermally grown SiO2. BP flakes were mechanically exfoliated using scotch tape and transferred onto the substrate. The flakes were then identified using an optical microscope and source/drain contacts (along with an additional adjacent contact) were patterned by electron beam lithography (Raith 150-Two) using poly(methyl methacrylate) resist. Source/drain metal (Cr/Au -5/40 nm) was deposited using sputtering followed by lift-off. Further, MoS2 flakes were mechanically exfoliated from the molybdenite crystal using polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) and were transferred on the fabricated BP FET using a pickand-transfer process using a micromanipulator setup. The contacts on MoS2 were fabricated using e-beam lithography and metal deposition. The final device image was taken using a Olympus BX-63 microscope and the SEM imaging was done using Raith 150-Two. ULVAC-PHI/PHI5000 Versa ProbeII focus X-ray photoelectron spectrometer was used for XPS measurements and Horiba HR 800 Raman spectroscopy system with a 532 nm laser was used for Raman imaging. Before optical characterization, the device was placed on a PCB with large gold contact pads. The device contact pads were wire bonded using gold wire to the large PCB contact pads. The optoelectronic measurements were done in ambient conditions under a BX-63 Olympus microscope using a Keysight B1500A semiconductor device analyzer using an NKT laser with a wavelength range of 690 to 900 nm. Switching of laser power was done using input of square pulses of 10 V peak-to-peak to the laser power controller unit from an Agilent 33220A function generator. The laser was incident on the device through the objective lens of the BX-63 Olympus microscope.