The in situ estimation of the thermal properties of existing building wall materials is a computationally expensive procedure. Its cost is highly proportional to the duration of measurements. To decrease the computational cost a methodology using a D-optimum criterion to select an optimal experiment duration is proposed. This criterion allows to accurately estimate the thermal properties of the wall using a reduced measurement plan. The methodology is applied to estimate the thermal conductivity of the three-layer wall of a historical building in France. Three different experiment sequences (one, three and seven days) and three spatial distributions of the thermal conductivity are investigated. Then using the optimal duration of observations the thermal conductivity is estimated using the hybrid optimization method. Results show a significant reduction of computational time; and reliable simulation of physical phenomena using the estimated values. Recently, reducing carbon emissions has become one of the most important tasks worldwide. The building sector is responsible for approximately one-third of global energy-related carbon emissions The mathematical formulation of the heat transfer process is given below: where c is the thermal conductivity. Both properties depend on the space coordinate. The inside and outside surface temperatures of the wall are set as boundary conditions: The initial condition of the problem is defined as a solution of the steady state problem: The contact between layers is assumed to be perfect, thereby imposing continuity on the temperature and the heat flux This section outlines a mathematical model to represent space dependant thermal conductivity k and volumetric heat capacity c. Generally, the spatial distribution of the thermophysical properties is defined as a piecewise function. The expression for thermal conductivity k is formulated as: while volumetric heat capacity c is defined as: where are piecewise functions and can be written as: where x int i-1 and x int i are the left and right interfaces of the layer i, respectively. This article focuses solely on the estimation of the thermal conductivity of the wall. Therefore, the piecewise parameterization is used to characterize the variation of the volumetric heat capacity. However, thermal conductivity may depend on moisture content in a wall that changes spatially due to daily cycles of temperature and relative humidity where M is number of the chosen basis functions { Y i ( x ) }. This article deals with three different types of the properties parameterization : the standard-case scenario as piecewise functions, the polynomial interpolation, the spline interpolation. The first is defined above. The next parameterization is found through a polynomial interpolation. Thermal conductivity is formulated by standard series of the polynomial basis functions, and it yields to: Finally, thermal conductivity is presented using a piecewise polynomial interpolation. Therefore, where Y i ( x ) is polynomial with a different degree for each wall layer, or where G is the chosen polynomial order. The further choice of a parameterization will depend on the structural identifiability of unknown parameters since it varies due to number of available measurements. Searching an optimal experiment observation sequence to estimate the thermal properties of a multilayer wall under real climate conditions This section introduces the dimensionless model equations. Let us define the following dimensionless variables: where subscripts ref relate to a characteristic reference value, and superscript ⋆ for dimensionless parameters. Thus, equation (1) becomes: Dirichlet-type boundary conditions are converted to: The initial condition is transformed to: After defining the governing equation, this section details the construction of the numerical model. Let us discretize uniformly the space and time intervals, with the parameters ∆x ⋆ and ∆t ⋆ , respectively. The discrete values of function u ( x ⋆ , t ⋆ ) are defined as u n j def := u ( x ⋆ j , t ⋆ n ) , where j ∈ { 1, . . . , N x } and n ∈ { 1, . . . , N t }. The solution u ( x ⋆ , t ⋆ ) is obtained using the Dufort-Frankel numerical scheme. This numerical model is chosen due to its explicit formulation without loss of accuracy or reliability where and The nonlinear coefficients are approximated by: Searching an optimal experiment observation sequence to estimate the thermal properties of a multilayer wall under real climate conditions The next section presents different steps required to solve the parameter estimation problem. The issue is to determine the thermal conductivity within each layer of the wall. Each case of the thermal conductivity parameterization holds its own set P of unknown dimensionless parameters. The parameter set of the piecewise representation directly corresponds to the thermal conductivity values of wall layers: The set of the polynomial parameterization consists of polynomial coefficients, and its number depends on the chosen order of the series: Unlike the polynomial representation, the number of the coefficients of the spline interpolation differs depending on the layer. Therefore, its parameters set is expressed as: We define the component of the parameter set P as P m ∈ P with m ∈ { 1, . . . , N p } , where N p is the total number of unknown parameters and varies depending of chosen parameterization. In case of piecewise it equals to the number of all wall's layers, or N p = N; for polynomial and spline interpolations N p = M and N p = G × N respectively. Therefore, the aim is to estimate these parameters P m . The recovery of the parameters P is based on the minimization of a difference between the computed temperature distribution u ( x , t ) and the given temperature measurements u obs . The cost of this minimization procedure is highly proportional to the number of parameters and the length of the observations. Thus, it is important to check whether all parameters can be identified, and if the estimation process requires all the measurement data. The next sections introduce a methodology on how to answer these questions. Initially, it is of capital importance to check whether the parameters can be identified independently from the measurements. One may introduce the formal identifiability of the unknown parameters as follows. We assume here u ( x , t ) is the only observable field. A parameter P m ∈ P is Structurally Globally Identifiable (SGI) if the following condition is satisfied [16]: This property should be demonstrated for each type of parametrization. Before performing the parameter identification process we need to study whether the parameters can be estimated regarding the given experimental design. These results are obtained using practical identifiability by calculating the sensitivity coefficients. The sensitivity coefficient is defined as the first wall under real climate conditions derivative of the (numerical) observations with respect to an unknown parameter [17, 18]: The function X P m measures the sensitivity of the estimated field u with respect to changes in the parameter P m . If the value of X P m is small it can be concluded that that the parameter P m does not influence the output u and cannot be identified with accuracy. Moreover, the inverse problem is also ill-conditioned. If the sensitivity coefficients are linearly dependent, the inverse problem becomes illposed. Therefore, to get the best estimation of parameters P, it is necessary to have linearly-independent sensitivity functions X P m with large magnitudes for all the parameters P m . The sensitivity coefficients are computed by direct differentiation of the governing equation ( For instance, if the thermal conductivity is formulated as a piecewise function, the sensitivity coefficient of the unknown parameter k ⋆ i is given by the following differential equation: where , and the derivative of the thermal conductivity yields to: Similarly, sensitivity equations for coefficients of the polynomial and spline representations are retrieved. The difference lies in the calculation of the thermal conductivity derivative. In case of polynomial parameterization, the derivative is computed as: An analogous expression is obtained for the spline parameterization: (31) Finally, to improve the precision of the estimated results, it is crucial to find an optimal experiment design (OED). Under the optimal experiment, we mean measurement conditions that maximize the estimated parameter accuracy. The purpose of this study is to determine the optimum duration of experiment δ τ , to retrieve which period of observations provide us with maximum accuracy. To search for this optimal experiment design, we introduce the following measurement plan: The choice of the experimental design relies on the maximization of certain quality indicators [19], thus the objective of OED is to find a measurement plan π that maximizes a chosen function Ψ: Several objective functions Ψ can be applied, in this article a measurement plan is analyzed using a D-optimum criterion: where F ( π ) is the modified Fisher matrix. The elements of the matrix represent the average value of the parameters sensitivity during the measurement plan π and are defined according to where X P i is the sensitivity coefficient of the solution related to the parameter P i , σ is the measurement uncertainty, N p is the number of parameters, and N m is the total number of measurements, and δ τ is the duration of experiment, which should be investigated. Additionally, the initial time of measurements t ini ∈ [ 0 , τ max ] and the total number of periods N δ τ in the whole interval [ 0 , τ max ] are defined. For example, to find an optimal week during one year of observations fifty two Fisher matrices should be investigated, therefore, in this case δ τ = 7 [ days ], t ini shifts every seven days from the first observation day and N δ τ = 52 . Thus, from a numerical point of view, to detect the optimal period of measurements one should choose the duration of the experiment, calculate the modified Fisher matrix for the chosen measurement plan and then find an optimal sequence that maximizes the D-optimum criterion. After finding the optimal sequence, the parameter estimation problem is solved by minimizing the following cost function by the optimization method: The value of u num results from the solution of the direct problem , where σ i is a standard deviation of the measurement u obs i of the i-th sensor [11]. The norm is calculated according to: A priori parameters values, denoted as P • , are used in the minimization process and to compute the sensitivity coefficients. The results of the parameter estimation problem are written as P est . The optimization of cost function is performed through the OPTRAN package The optimization problem is completed when one of several stopping criterion is met: (1) the maximum number of iterations or objective function evaluations are exceeded, or (2) the best design in the population was equivalent to a target design, or (3) the optimization program tried all four algorithms but failed to produce a non-negligible decrease in the objective function. The reliability of the model is assessed by comparing the numerical results with experimental observations. The residual for temperature is computed according to: where χ ⋆ i is the sensor location, the super script "num" defined the output field computed with the model and "obs" stands for the experimental observation of the field. Meanwhile, the efficiency of a numerical model can be measured by its computational (CPU) run time required to compute the solution. It is measured using the Matlab environment with a computer equipped with Intel i7 CPU and 16 GB of RAM. The issue is to estimate the thermophysical properties of the wall of a historical building. The house, built in the XIX century, is located in Bayonne, France. The West oriented wall of the living room was considered for the study. The wall is composed of three materials: lime coater, rubble stone and dressed stone. The wall was monitored by sensors which were placed on both sides of the wall surface and three were installed within the wall. The set-up is illustrated in Figure 0.05 0.23 0.42 0.2 0.48 The total uncertainty on the observations are evaluated through the propagation of the uncertainties. For the temperature, the total uncertainty is computed according to: where σ T = 0.5 • C is the measurement sensor uncertainty, σ x is the uncertainty due to the sensor location. The latter is given by following formula: where ∂T ∂x is calculated at the location of the sensors using the numerical model and the a priori values of the parameters. The term δ x varies according the location, it is 1 cm when x ∈ { χ 1 , χ 2 , χ 3 }, and Several figures present the calculated total uncertainty. Figures Table Thermal conductivity The purpose of this section is to demonstrate the theoretical identifiability of the unknown parameters. Moreover, the number of unknown parameters is determined, since it depends on the number of the points of observations and the spatial distribution of thermal conductivity. The evaluation of each case is discussed below. The first demonstration is carried out when thermal conductivity is presented as a piecewise function: First, the parameter 1 the governing equation ( One may formulate the following equation for the second set: In the case of our model, if . By subtracting equation (44) from equation (43), one may obtain: Searching an optimal experiment observation sequence to estimate the thermal properties of a multilayer wall under real climate conditions Therefore, it can be concluded that k ⋆ 1 ≡ k ⋆ ′ 1 . Similar demonstrations can be carried out to prove that the parameter k ⋆ 2 is SGI by using the observations at x ⋆ = x ⋆ 2 or x ⋆ = x ⋆ 3 . However, based on the argumentation above, the parameter k ⋆ 3 is not SGI since there are no observations in the third layer. Therefore, in this particular case only parameters k ⋆ 1 and k ⋆ 2 can be identified theoretically. The next parameterization assumes that thermal conductivity is given by constant values on the first and third layers while changing linearly on the second wall layer. We denote this representation as a linear parameterization. Therefore, the following expression is used: Using the same steps from the previous case, one may conclude that parameters k ⋆ 1 and { k ⋆ 20 , β 21 } are SGI; the parameter k ⋆ 3 cannot be identified theoretically. Indeed, there is only one linear formulation of k ⋆ ( x ⋆ ) for the second layer. The two observations at points { x ⋆ 2 , x ⋆ 3 } uniquely identify the coefficients k ⋆ 20 and β 21 . Another hypothesis implies that thermal conductivity is presented as a second-order polynomial according to the space variable. Therefore, The theoretical identifiability of k ⋆ ( x ⋆ ) is proven below. Using this function k ⋆ ( x ⋆ ) we observe field u ( x ⋆ , t ⋆ ) : Let us suppose that there is another polynomial k ⋆ ( x ⋆ ), and corresponding variable u ( x ⋆ , t ⋆ ) : Subtracting one equation from another, and using that u ( x ⋆ , t ⋆ ) ≡ u ( x ⋆ , t ⋆ ), one may obtain: The terms ∂u ∂x ⋆ , ∂ 2 u ∂ x ⋆ 2 are linearly independent. The polynomial k ( x ) -k ⋆ ( x ⋆ ) has at most a second order degree. However, it has 3 zero values, the number of observable fields. Therefore, it can be concluded that the polynomial k The choice of the thermal conductivity spatial distribution can be questioned. The answer lies in the number of available sensors. In this particular case, at most three parameters can be theoretically identified. In order to use more complex formulations of the thermal conductivity parameterization, the experimental design should provide more observable fields. For example, to increase an order of the polynomial parameterization and use a cubic polynomial, one has to put one more sensor inside the wall. With the given theoretical identifiablity, one may search the Optimal Experiment Design to ensure a high quality parameter estimation. Aim of this section is to demonstrate how to select an optimal measurement plan, which allows us to estimate the thermal conductivity accurately and efficiently. Furthermore, it can be remarked that the search of the OED requires only the knowledge of wall boundary conditions. So the methodology is reproducible and does not need measurements inside the wall. The three different measurement plans are investigated: To calculate the modified Fisher matrix using Eq. ( The issue now is to demonstrate the practical identifiability of the parameters for the selected three days of observations, t ini = 18/01 , δ τ = 3 . For the sake of compactness, the sensitivity coefficients are presented only for the piecewise thermal conductivity. Furthermore, as discussed in Section 4.2, the piecewise parameters are more sensitive. Section 4.1 shows that the two parameters k ⋆ 1 and k ⋆ 2 are theoretically identifiable for piecewise representation. Therefore, only two sensitivity functions were computed. The calculation was performed for the whole year. Next, considering the different periods of the year, reported in Table For this particular case this value is -0.0029, which proves the sensitivity coefficients are not correlated. It can be concluded that the unknown parameters k ⋆ 1 and k ⋆ 2 are identifiable from the practical aspect, and should be estimated during the winter season. Similarly, the total sensitivity can be computed for linear and polynomial thermal conductivity representation. The results are reported in matrices ( 54). The matrices values do not equal to the zero value, so, the parameters can be estimated practically. The parameter estimation problem is solved using the optimization procedure described in Section 2.5.4 and the direct numerical model detailed in Section 2.4. The space and time discretization are ∆x ⋆ = 10 -2 and ∆t ⋆ = 10 -2 corresponding, from a physical point of view, to ∆x = 5 • 10 -3 m and ∆t = 3.6 s. The direct problem is solved for three days in January, t ini = 18/01 , δ τ = 3 as justified in Section 4.2. The three separate cases of thermal conductivity parameterization are analyzed. First, the piecewise representation of the thermal conductivity was studied. As a result of the theoretical identifiability, only 2 parameters k ⋆ • 1 and k ⋆ • 2 were identified. The initial guess and the estimated results are reported in Table Searching an optimal experiment observation sequence to estimate the thermal properties of a multilayer wall under real climate conditions content in the wall. The residuals for each thermal conductivity representation during the studied period t ini = 18/01 , δ τ = 3 can be compared. As shown in Figure Searching an optimal experiment observation sequence to estimate the thermal properties of a multilayer wall under real climate conditions t [ day ] The benefit of the reduced measurement plan can be calculated. To obtain an accurate parameter estimation 150 iterations were required. In addition, the computational time of the numerical model for three days was 4 seconds, therefore, the overall estimation lasted 10 minutes. Similarly, as the computational time for one month was 40 seconds, at least 100 minutes are necessary to obtain the estimated values. Finally, whole year simulation requires 400 seconds, and the parameter estimation problem is solved in 17 hours. These evaluations assume that the convergence criteria of the optimization algorithm does not change with the length of observation sequence. Nevertheless, it underlines the advantage of the approach in terms of CPU time. iter. The aim of this section is to investigate the prediction of the model with the experimental data during the whole observation period. This issue is important since the parameter estimation problem has been solved for a reduced measurement plan of three days. Thus, its reliability needs to be evaluated. The numerical model was calculated for one year of observations using the estimated parameters. Figure In addition, the observation uncertainties for the sensor locations are represented. It can be noted that the mean values of the residuals lay between 0.0 • C and 0.5 • C. Moreover, the computed residuals mean values are smaller than the observations mean values, indicating the satisfactory reliability of the numerical model. Furthermore, one may conclude that during the one year observations the quadratic representation gave better results on the second and third sensor locations. However, the piecewise and the linear interpolations have better results for the first sensor location. Finally, the temperature distribution in the wall was computed during the last three days of the experimental campaign. The calculation was performed using the estimated parameters of the quadratic representation. Figure In the context of identification of thermophysical parameters of a building wall, the length of observations plays an important role. The accuracy of estimated parameters proportionally depends on the quantity of observations points, however, a long experiment is a computationally expensive task. To find a balance between these two opposite conditions a methodology for determining the optimal duration of the experiment was investigated. The concept of the optimal experiment design (OED) was explored to decrease the duration of an experiment since this approach provides the best accuracy of estimated parameters. The search of the OED was done using the Fisher information matrix, quantifying the amount of information contained in the observations. This article studies the wall of a historical building composed of three layers. It was monitored during one year by five sensors: two were placed on the wall's surfaces, while three others within the wall. The estimation of the thermal conductivity of the wall took several steps. First, different spatial parametrizations were proposed to reproduce the variation of thermal conductivity according to the length of the wall. However, only three parametrizations (piecewise, linear and quadratic) were structurally identifiable. Then, the sensitivity coefficients were computed and the practical identifiability of the parameters was discussed. Next, in order to increase the accuracy of the estimation of unknown parameters the D-optimum criterion was analyzed for three measurement plans: one, three and seven days. It can be noticed that the criterion reaches the maximum value in January, while the minimum is in the summer period. Then, the three days in January were chosen as an optimal measurement plan as a compromise between the accuracy of the identification method and overall experiment cost. Third, the estimation of thermal conductivity using measurements during these three days was performed by the hybrid optimization method. Results have shown that the implementation of the quadratic representation of thermal conductivity's spatial variation has the best agreement with observations among others two. It can be remarked that a large computation gain is achieved by decreasing the length of observations from one year to three days. Last, the reliability of the model is evaluated by comparing the numerical prediction using the estimated parameters values to the whole year of observations. A very satisfactory agreement is observed highlighting the good reliability of the proposed approach. It indicates that the estimated parameters values using the obtained optimal sequence of three days can be applied to accurately predict a physical phenomenon. This study shows that the substantial reduction of the length of observations using OED, nevertheless, provides sufficient information to accurately simulate physical processes. Moreover, the OED approach can be applied for in situ measurements only and is not depending on the number of sensors inside the wall. However, it requires a priori information of parameters values and depends on a chosen physical model. Further works should focus on the extension of the methodology for more complex mathematical models including for instance coupled heat and mass transfer in porous materials. Latin letters 