Ti 4 Ir 2 O superconductivity Pauli limit -carbide heat capacity multigap correlation For their superior abilities to carry large currents, superconductors have been widely used to generate high magnetic fields at different settings, such as medical magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), maglevs, particle accelerators, etc. At low temperatures, the Zeeman energy splitting (Δ ) is the key factor limiting 2 . When the external magnetic field is large enough (≥ 0 ), driving Δ comparable with twice of the superconducting energy gap, the Cooper pairs are broken. In a Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) weak coupling scenario, the Pauli paramagnetic limit (or, Pauli limit for short) is expressed by 0 = 1.86 × (T/K). 2 of most type-II superconductors falls below , regardless of the value of In addition to unconventional superconductivity, large spin-orbit scattering In this study, we focus on a suboxide of the so-called " -carbide" family, also known as the E9 3 -type phases. The -carbide type phase adopts a cubic crystal structure of the space group 3 (No. 227), which is derived from the Ti 2 Ni type after small atoms, typically C, N, or O, take the interstitial sites. W 3 Fe 3 C, the first member in the family, was discovered in the 1950's Ku et al. reported several -carbide type superconductors in 1984 Here we report the synthesis and a systematical study of superconductivity in Ti 4 Ir 2 O. Bulk superconductivity of = 5.12 K is revealed by magnetic susceptibility and heat capacity measurements, confirming a previous report by Polycrystalline samples of Ti 4 Ir 2 O were prepared by solid state reactions. Stoichiometric amount of titanium (powder, 99.99%), iridium (powder, 99.99%), and TiO 2 (powder, 99.95%) was mixed thoroughly, and then cold pressed into pellets. The pellets were placed in corundum crucibles, which were subsequently sealed into niobium tubes under purified argon. The niobium tubes were heated to 1800 K, held at the temperature for 20 hours, and then cooled down to room temperature by switching off the furnace. To avoid the oxidation of niobium tubes at high temperatures, heating treatments were carried out under an argon atmosphere. Grey and dense solid was obtained after opening the niobium tubes. No reaction between the samples and the niobium tubes was observed, and the weight losses after the reactions were negligible. We also performed reactions at lower temperatures or using arc-melting methods. However, these alternative methods did not produce singlephase samples. (see Supporting Information) Powder x-ray diffraction (XRD) measurements were carried out on a PAN-analytical x-ray diffractometer equipped with Cu-K radiation at room temperature. The Rietveld refinement of the XRD results were performed with the GSAS package First-principles calculations were carried out in the frame of the density functional theory (DFT), using the QUANTUM ESPRESSO (QE) package The crucial roles of interstitial C, N, or O have been frequently observed in other -carbide type phases, such as Rietveld refinement was performed and the result is shown in Figure Superconductivity is evidenced in both resistivity and magnetization measurements, as shown in Figure giving 0 = 0.263 mΩ cm, = 10.25 nΩ cm K -2 . At lower temperatures, ( ) starts to drop from 5.22 K ( ), reaching zero at 5.13 K ( ), indicating the occurrence of superconductivity. Such a sharp transition implies a superior homogeneity of our sample. In Figure determined from the magnetization measurement is 5.12 K, which is in very good agreement with the value from ( ). Figure Results from ( ) and ∕ -under various magnetic fields allow us to determine 2 of Ti 4 Ir 2 O. In Figure The fit to 2 is carried out using the WHH relation is the dimensionless magnetic field, and ( ) is the digamma function. = ( 2 h 2 -2 SO ∕4) 1∕2 , where is the Maki parameter, and SO is the parameter measuring the spin-orbit scattering. WHH fit of 2 gives: = 1.90, SO = 14.05. Such a large SO means that there is little Pauli limiting effect in Ti 4 Ir 2 O, and the spin-orbit scattering dominates. However, as shown in Figure Alternatively, 2 can also be fitted with the phenomenological Ginzburg-Landau (G-L) relation: 0 2 ( ) 2 . The G-L fit is also shown in Figure The isothermal magnetization ( -) curves, shown in Figure giving 0 1 (0) = 13.18 mT. A full magnetization loop at 2.0 K is shown as the inset of Figure ), the penetration depth ( ), the G-L parameter ( ), and the thermodynamic field ( (0)) can be estimated. These parameters are summarized in Table in which is the number of atoms per formula, and is the ideal gas constant. From equation(3) we get Θ = 372 K. According to the McMillan relation 1.29 ( ) (eV -1 per f. u.) 8.83 experimental value deduced from . ′ ( ) (eV -1 per f. u.) 7.26 theoretical value from DFT calculation with SOC. the behavior, while maintaining the entropy balance. The two superconducting gaps are determined to be Δ 1 = 1.37 meV, and Δ 2 = 0.57 meV. Notice that the larger one is above the BCS weak coupling value (Δ 1 ∕ = 3.10 > 1.76). This again indicates an enhanced electron-phonon coupling in Ti 4 Ir 2 O, which is further evidenced by the large jump at (Δ ∕ = 1.77). Results from the first principles calculation are shown in Figure The Barder analysis was based on the converged charge densities, resulting in a valence configuration of Ti the formation of Ti-O bonds. DOS at is slightly lowered with SOC, giving a theoretical ′ ( ) = 7.26 eV -1 per f. u.. This value is comparable with the one calculated from . The slightly enhancement of experimental ( ) is possibly due to the electron-electron correlations. Notice that locates near a pronounced peak of DOS, which arises from the relatively flat energy dispersion of the bands near . After the projection to each atomic orbital, we find that DOS at originates mainly from the Ti-3 orbitals, with minor contributions from the Ir-5 components. First we would like to discuss the stoichiometry of Ti 4 Ir 2 O, because -carbide type phases frequently host vacancies on the interstitial sites Next we focus on the origin of the large 2 . One possible cause of the enhancement of 2 is the spin-triplet component in the order parameter, which can be induced by non-centrosymmetric crystal structures The reduction of -factor can cause a violation of the Pauli limit. To elucidate this, a fit to the normal state magnetization data is carried out based on ( ) = 0 + ∕( -), giving a temperature independent term of 0 = 1.73 × 10 -3 emu mol -1 . After subtracting the core diamagnetic contributions from Ti 4+ , Ir 4+ , and O 2-, we obtain an estimation of the Pauli paramagnetic susceptibility ∼ 1.84 × 10 -3 emu mol -1 . Therefore, the Wilson ratio = 2 2 ∕(3 2 ) ∼ 3.9. Such a large indicates the existence of strong electron correlation and/or a low-lying magnetic order To summarize, we report a detailed investigation of superconductivity in Ti 4 Ir 2 O. Being a strong-coupled superconductor with = 5.1 ∼ 5.7 K, Ti 4 Ir 2 O exhibits many intriguing properties. It has a large 0 2 (0) of 16.45 T, which is beyond the Pauli paramagnetic limit. A multigap superconductivity is evidenced by the temperature dependence of 2 , the heat capacity measurements, and the DFT calculations. Moreover, a strong electron correlation in Ti 4 Ir 2 O, which is comparable with typical heavy fermion superconductors, is revealed by the large values of the Wilson ratio and the Kadowaki-Woods ratio, as well as the relatively large Sommerfeld coefficient ( ). These results make Ti 4 Ir 2 O a rare example to study the interplay between strong electron correlation and multigap superconductivity. We notice that these results also strongly suggest unconventional superconductivity. Questions like whether there are spin fluctuations, or a direct observation of the multigap feature through spectroscopy methods are still open, calling for further studies. Given the fact that there are numerous -carbide type compounds, most of which are not systematically investigated for their transport properties, detailed studies in this structural family may flourish in the near future. 