Electronic conduction pathways in dielectric thin films are explored using automated experiments in scanning probe microscopy (SPM). Here, we use large field of view scanning to identify the position of localized conductive spots and develop a SPM workflow to probe their dynamic behavior at higher spatial resolution as a function of time, voltage, and scanning process in an automated fashion. Using this approach, we observe the variable behaviors of the conductive spots in a 20 nm thick ferroelectric Hf0.54Zr0.48O2 film, where conductive spots disappear and reappear during continuous scanning. There are also new conductive spots that appear during scanning. The automated workflow is universal and can be integrated into a wide range of microscopy techniques, including SPM, electron microscopy, optical microscopy, and chemical imaging. Oxide films have found multiple applications in the semiconductor industry. Passive dielectric films are broadly used as a gate dielectric or form sacrificial layers during semiconductor processing. Functional oxides such as ferroelectrics and antiferroelectrics are used for tunable microwave elements, information, or energy storage. Scanning probe microscopy (SPM) is an ideal tool to study the local conductivity of thin film materials. Here, we developed an automated workflow for scanning probe microscopy (namely, feature-exploration workflow) that enables exploration of specific features in microscopy images, extending previous work on controlled tip trajectories To explore the structure and functionalities of the conductive hot-spots in an automated fashion, we developed a feature-exploration workflow enabling the whole measurement process (from the large FoV scan to small FoV zoom-in scans) to be driven by a computer. Figure Therefore, we performed FE-cAFM measurement based on the cAFM image in the 2 nd scan under Vdc = 7.4 V (Figure Given that our observation is not identical to several previous works-it was found that the conductivity of HfO2 based films is related to the oxide diffusion, trap density, and dielectric thinning, In summary, we developed a machine learning based feature-exploration workflow for automated microscopy measurements. This workflow enables the exploration of specific features (e.g., conductive channel, defect, surface contamination, etc.) observable in microscopy images. It locates these features based on a large FoV microscopy image then drives it to perform zoomedin measurements in an automated manner. By integrating this feature-exploration workflow with conductive atomic force microscopy (FE-cAFM), we investigated the conductive spots in a HZO thin film. The FE-cAFM allowed us to explore the evolution of each conductive spot observed in a large FoV cAFM current image, revealing that the conductive spots appear, disappear, and/or reappear as a function of scan cycles and applied DC voltages. Owing to the capability of the feature-exploration workflow, we discovered variable behaviors of these conductive spots, which may imply their potentially different formation mechanisms. Noteworthily, we can carry out this feature-exploration workflow anytime during microscopy measurement (that said, not necessarily from the very beginning of the measurement). As long as we observe objects of interest in the microscopy image during measurement, we can immediately carry out the feature-exploration workflow to replace human-guided trivial zoomedin measurements. In addition, the parameters in this feature-exploration workflow can be customized by users, in doing so, we are able to focus on the specific features of our interest, e.g. only focusing on features with specific sizes. This feature-exploration workflow is universal, which can be implemented in any microscopies, including SPM, electron microscopy, optical microscopy, and chemical imaging. The detailed methodologies of the feature-exploration workflow are established in Jupyter notebooks and are available from the authors. The 20 nm thick HZO layer was prepared via atomic layer deposition (ALD) atop a 100 nm thick TaN layer that was prepared via DC magnetron sputtering. Full growth details are provided elsewhere. The cAFM was performed on an Oxford Instrument Asylum Research Cypher microscope using Budget Sensor Multi75E-G Cr/Pt coated AFM probes (∼3 N/m).