Over the past decade, a combination of crystal structure prediction techniques and experimental synthetic work has thoroughly explored the phase diagrams of binary hydrides under pressure. The fruitfulness of this dual approach is demonstrated in the recent identification of several superconducting hydrides with T c s approaching room temperature. We start with an overview of the computational procedures for predicting stable structures and estimating their propensity for superconductivity. A survey of phases with high T c reveals some common structural features that appear conducive to the strong coupling of the electronic structure with atomic vibrations that leads to superconductivity. We discuss the stability and superconducting properties of phases containing two of these -molecular H 2 units mixed with atomic H and hydrogenic clathrate-like cages -as well as more unique motifs. Finally, we argue that ternary hydride phases, which are far less-explored, are a promising route to achieving simultaneously superconductivity at high temperatures and stability at low pressures. Several ternary hydrides arise from the addition of a third element to a known binary hydride structure through site mixing or onto a new site -and several more are based on altogether new structural motifs. Many diamonds have been broken, and CPU hours have been burned. Yet, at long last the elusive goal of hightemperature superconductivity in light element systems, as originally proposed by Ashcroft in 1968 The obsession with squeezing hydrogen until it metallizes can be traced back to a 1926 proposal by J.D. Bernal. This idea was communicated in the literature for the first time by Wigner and Huntington, who proposed that at 25 GPa hydrogen, the first element of the periodic table, would follow its neighbors in group I to adopt a metallic solid structure For a while, it seemed as though a completely different family of materials, the superconducting cuprates, could be the first to break the room-temperature barrier, with a Y-Ba-Cu-O phase that possessed a T c of 93 K being the first to surpass the boiling point of liquid nitrogen Despite the continuing increase of the predicted pressure of hydrogen metallization A plethora of studies on the Si-H In this Perspective, we review superconductivity in hydrides stable at elevated pressures, with particular focus on the alkaline and rare earth metal binary hydride phases as well as on ternary hydride systems that can be constructed by alloying these binaries with another metal or a main group element. In section II we provide an overview of the computational techniques and methodologies employed in current computational studies of high-pressure hydrides, first covering ab initio crystal structure prediction, then the equations and procedures used to estimate T c s. In section III we present the binary phases, grouping them into families based on structural motifs of the hydrogen sublattices -mixing of molecular and atomic hydrogen, clathrate-like cages, and additional curious motifs including fused H 5 pentagons. Ternary hydride materials ranging from substitutions of a third element into a binary hydride phase to altogether new structures are covered in Section IV, and we close with a brief outlook in Section V. At the pressures required to stabilize many of the superconducting polyhydrides, the chemical intuition developed from living at atmospheric pressure breaks down. Seemingly bizarre stoichiometries such as NaCl 3 Several techniques for predicting global and important local minima of a crystalline material have been leveraged to great success. The global optimization schemes used towards this end are stochastic in nature, with no guarantee of finding the true global minimum within a potential energy surface (PES) that can be highly complex and contain several competitive local minima. The techniques that have been developed are thus based on several metaheuristics designed to find good solutions for optimization problems. These include minima hopping Over the course of a CSP search, a single run can generate hundreds to thousands of structures. Often, multiple runs are required to ensure the global minimum has been found -and furthermore, CSP is often performed at various pressures. All of this is compounded by the fact that identification of stable phases requires generation of a full convex hull of a system. While some CSP techniques construct the convex hull on the fly, others require individual searches be performed for all chosen stoichiometries. Each of these thousands of structures is then optimized, typically using density functional theory (DFT), to the nearest stationary point. With the exception of dynamics based schemes, CSP explores the 0 K PES, as calculating the vibrational contributions to the free energy requires a significant increase in computational power relative to local relaxation. Geometry optimizations are usually performed within DFT using the generalized gradient approximation (GGA) functional family, commonly that of Perdew, Burke, and Ernzerhof Structures of a similar composition are ranked by enthalpy (for high pressure calculations) or internal energy (for ambient pressure calculations). The relevant thermodynamic quantity is plotted versus composition to trace out the convex hull. The phases that lie on the hull are thermodynamically stable, but dynamic stability must also be checked by calculating phonon dispersions and confirming the absence of imaginary phonon modes. At this point, additional corrective factors to the hull can be considered, including the zero-point energy (ZPE) and the role of anharmonic effects. The latter is quite onerous to calculate, so it is typically neglected. However, it has been illustrated that anharmonic effects can alter the PES and superconducting properties of many of the high temperature superconducting hydrides Let us now summarize the computational workflow for the discovery of superconducting hydrides. After choosing a system for study, CSP runs at various pressures are carried out to find the most stable configurations as a function of composition. A number of the top candidates are chosen for a second round of local optimizations with higher accuracy settings, obtaining finalized lattices and enthalpies of formation. Calculations of phonon dispersions show which phases are dynamically stable and allow for the inclusion of ZPE into the 0 K enthalpy of formation. A convex hull is plotted -often with and without the ZPE -indicating which structures are expected to be stable (or low-lying metastable) at various pressures. Metastable phases are often reported because the real experimental conditions used for the synthesis can stabilize them. The following may guide the selection of structures to keep: a datamining analysis of the Materials Project database revealed that the median metastability (by DFT calculation) of all known inorganic crystalline materials was roughly 15 meV/atom, going up to roughly 70 meV/atom at the 90 th percentile. In 1911, Onnes detected an abrupt disappearance in the resistivity of Hg metal at very low temperatures Within BCS theory T c can be obtained via: where ω is the average phonon frequency of the system, N (0) is the single spin DOS at E F , and V is the pairing potential from the electron-phonon interaction. This expression, however, does not account for the damping effect in the electronphonon interaction that arises because the displacements of the heavier ions associated with the phonon modes are slower than the motion of the light electrons. To account for this, the Eliashberg equations with phonon linewidth, γ qj , and frequency, ω qj for a phonon j with a wavevector q. McMillan performed numerical solution of the Eliashberg equations for 22 systems to determine a simple expression that could be used to estimate T c based on the Debye frequency, Θ D , and the renormalized Coulomb repulsion parameter, μ * . The electron-phonon coupling constant, λ, is derived from the Eliashberg spectral function according to In cases where the phonon spectrum of the system differed greatly from that of Nb -in Hg, for example -the electron phonon coupling (EPC) constant λ extracted from tunneling experiments differed from the value of λ obtained by solving Equation 3 given experimental values of T c and Θ D . Thus, for systems with λ > 1 the McMillan equation often failed to accurately capture the superconducting behavior. Subsequently, Allen and Dynes published a modified version of the McMillan equation This equation was based on 217 numerical solutions of the Eliashberg equations for 0 ≤ μ * < 0. This procedure was found to drastically reduce the dependence of T c on the shape of the spectral function, resulting in an expression that is quite accurate for predicting T c for materials with λ < 1.5. In a computational study, the Eliashberg spectral function can be calculated for a material using DFT codes including the Quantum Espresso and where the logarithmic average of the phonon frequency ω ln is calculated as in Equation An alternative way to calculate T c is via density functional theory for superconductors (SCDFT) Within these hydride phases, the hydrogen sublattice can assume many forms -atomic/hydridic hydrogen, molecular H 2 and H - 3 (and more exotic) units, weakly covalent clathrate cages, and more. One ubiquitous group of phases are those with a mixture of atomic H and molecular H 2 . Among these, the presence of distinct hydrogenic motifs is associated with varying degrees of electron transfer to and from the molecular and atomic units, which strongly influences the electronic structure and superconducting properties of the resulting phases. An immensely common structure type among metal hydride phases is the I4/mmm symmetry phase (Figure Depending on the volume of the unit cell and amount of electron transfer between the metallic and hydrogenic lattices, the apical hydrogens, H a , can be treated as weakly bonded to nearly hydridic in character, while the basal hydrogens, H b , are generally formally considered hydridic, so that the overall distribution of charge can be expressed as . This phase has been predicted to lie on the convex hull of numerous metal-hydrogen binary systems: CaH The staggering array of binary systems for which this structure is stable lends itself well to probing property trends based on character of the metal element, as seen in a recent overview. The distance dependence of the H a -H a contact on the valence and size of the metal atom has noteworthy consequences on the predicted T c s, whose values are recorded in Table 117 . Lower T c s are associated with LaH 4 In addition to I4/mmm ScH 4 , the Sc-H system contains another phase mixing atomic and molcular H 2 -Cmcm ScH 7 . In this structure, where layers of H 2 units alternate with layers of Sc and atomic H (Figure A calcium hydride compound consisting of Ca embedded in a curious "sodalite-like" hydrogenic cage with most of the EPC being derived from symmetry breaking breathing and rocking motions within the H 4 units at Γ as favored by the Jahn-Teller effect. This discovery prompted numerous investigations into the possibility that other metal hydrides could possess similar structures when squeezed. In short order, a YH 6 phase isotypic to CaH 6 was predicted to be stable above 110 GPa when including ZPE effects It did not take long before theory predicted that MgH 6 123 and ScH 6 43,106,107 Im 3m phases would be stable above 263 GPa and 275 GPa, respectively. Similar to YH 6 , the contributions to the EPC in MgH 6 were spread throughout the Brillouin zone. Several polymorphs of ScH 6 have been predicted, with symmetries including Cmcm 107 and P 6 3 /mmc In addition to these, a number of other high-pressure MH 6 phases have been predicted with crystal structures that can be derived from distortions of the highly symmetric H 24 polyhedra that comprise the Im 3m structure. One example is ZrH 6 , which forms a phase with I4/mmm symmetry above 275 GPa 116 , although it is very close in energy to a P 2 1 /c structure until 320 GPa. This I4/mmm structure is obtained by slightly stretching the cubic Im 3m phase to a c/a ratio of 1.08. More complex distortions occur in the R 3m structure predicted for SrH 6 , in which opposite hexagonal faces in the sodalite-like H 24 framework are opened up, resulting in a helical hydrogenic arrangement 103,104 (Figure Hydrogenic clathrate-like cages are also prevalent for the MH 9 stoichiometry. The predicted structure with the highest symmetry is a P 6 3 /mmc arrangement of M@H 29 cages with a [4 6 5 6 6 6 ] framework (Figure P 6 3 /mmc YH 9 (which lies on the convex hull above 200 GPa As in the case of the MH 6 stoichiometry, MH 9 phases with structures based on distortions of the M@H 29 clusters have also been proposed. One example is a C2/m symmetry CaH 9 structure stable above 235 GPa 102 . H 2 and bent H 3 motifs comprise its hydrogenic network, reducing the overall symmetry of the H 29 cluster. Compared to P 6 3 /mmc YH 9 , in which three valence electrons are available for donation into the hydrogen network, Ca can only donate two, reflected in the calculated Bader charges. With fewer donated electrons occupying nonbonding or antibonding orbitals in the hydrogenic framework, the H 2 and H 3 units in C2/m CaH 9 remain intact rather than disproportionating into the H 29 cluster present in YH 9 where the H-H contacts are nearly equidistant. Finally, a TbH 9 phase with C2/c symmetry was predicted to be stable above 175 GPa Among the most promising candidates for high temperature superconductivity identified by CSP techniques are the LaH 10 and YH 10 phases, for which an F m 3m structure is predicted Several additional REH 10 phases assuming F m 3m symmetry have been predicted, including CeH 10 43,109,124 , which has a maximum estimated T c of 156-168 K at 94 GPa 109 (although some studies also propose an R 3m phase with a much lower estimated T c of < 56 K Analogous to what is found for certain MH 6 and MH 9 phases, the R 3m MH 10 structure can be derived by a distortion of the parent clathrate F m 3m phase where the hydrogenic network is broken up into puckered graphene-like nets. For the Ac-H 121 and Sr-H 104 systems the R 3m configuration is predicted to be preferred, for which AcH 10 has an estimated T c of 226-251 K at 200 GPa 121 . In contrast to CeH 10 and TbH 10 , which have been predicted to assume both structure types, so far calculations have only located R 3m CaH 10 , which lies slightly above the convex hull at 400 GPa, with an estimated T c of 157-175 K 102 . These complex structural relationships encourage careful Most high-T c superconducting hydrides can be classified as possessing hydrogen lattices involving mixed atomic and molecular hydrogen (MgH 4 ), clathrate-like structures (LaH 10 ), or covalent 3D networks (H 3 S), in which the electronic structure of the system is responsive to H atom motions, thereby conferring a strong EPC. Some phases, however, defy these classifications and feature curious hydrogenic motifs as well as superior superconducting properties (see Table Above 220 GPa, Immm ScH 10 is predicted to become stable Pentagonal motifs surface again in Cmmm ScH 12 , with strips of edge-sharing H 5 pentagons running along the c direction that are spaced by Sc atoms 107 (Figure Between the remarkably low pressures of 75-100 GPa, Cmcm AcH 4 is predicted to be stable 121 . It is based on corrugated layers composed of H in distorted square nets with Ac atoms in between (Figure As described above, the phase diagrams of the various binary hydride systems have been thoroughly explored by theory, and experimental groups are making steady progress in synthesizing promising candidates. However, the high pres-sures required to stabilize these phases leave the quest for a room-temperature atmospheric pressure superconductor incomplete. One way to accomplish this goal is to once again make use of the concept of chemical precompression by adding a third element into the mix. This third element can slot into void spaces present in a binary hydride framework, function as a dopant to raise or lower electron counts, or facilitate the stabilization of altogether new geometrical motifs unobserved in binary hydrides. The vast number of possible two-element-plus-hydrogen combinations is at once promising and daunting. Computationally, building a ternary convex hull is highly intensive, with many more possible stoichiometries to explore. As such, the current literature on ternary superconducting hydride materials is at times piecemeal, with systematic trends not yet identified, limiting the researcher's predictive power with regard to these phases. In what follows, we present a literature survey of ternary superconducting hydride phases that have been predicted thus far, grouping them into families where possible based on structural features or relationship to known binary prototypes. For brevity, we focus on phases with predicted T c s over 100 K (see Table Several ternary phases based on partial substitution of a third element in a binary hydride structure have been studied theoretically. One example is the CaYH 12 phase, which contains the same metal/hydrogen arrangement as found in Im 3m CaH 6 and YH 6 , but with the Ca and Y atoms in a B2 (CsCl-type) arrangement, reducing the overall symmetry to P m 3m 139 . Of course, with an even larger unit cell, more complex coloring patterns can occur. For CaYH 12 , a structure with F d 3m symmetry, in which the Ca-Y sublattice displays a B1 (rock-salt) arrangement, possessed an even lower enthalpy and was dynamically stable above 170 GPa (Figure A similar series of Sc-Ca-H ternary phases based on Sc/Ca mixing in binary I4/mmm MH 4 and Im 3m MH 6 phases have also been proposed, with the phase having the highest estimated T c being P 4/mmm ScCaH 8 (212 K at 200 GPa) With the extremely high T c s of binary La and Y hydrides, a clear choice is to consider phases based on their mixture. A joint experimental/theoretical study 144 demonstrated both synthetic feasibility and high T c , measuring T c s of 253 K and 237 K for (La/Y)H 10 and (La/Y)H 6 respectively, with the latter being higher than measured for binary YH 6 . This result indicates the beneficial nature of La incorporation into the Y-H binary. The ternary convex hull was also calculated at 200 GPa. Notably, the only La-Y-H ternary that lay on it at 0 K was an R 3m symmetry LaYH 20 structure, while increases in temperatue eventually found La all present on the convex hull, highlighting the importance of thermal effects and reinforcing the importance of considering metastable phases from the 0 K convex hull. The above phases can all be constructed by partially substituting a third element onto one (or more) lattice sites in a known binary phase. However, as noted above, ternaries can also be created by adding a third element into void regions in a binary phase, thereby further tuning doping and leveraging the idea of "chemical precompression." Two particularly fascinating materials based on this strategy are Li 2 MgH 16 , an electron-doped variant of MgH 16 , and LaBH 8 , a cousin of the high-T c binary LaH 10 . Binary MgH 16 , based on a network of Mg 2+ cations in a lattice of H δ- 2 molecules, has been predicted to lie on the convex hull above 200 GPa 120 . The donated electron density from the Mg atoms occupies the H 2 σ * orbital, weakening the H 2 units -although not to the extent of forming fully extended networks as in the clathrate structures. The addition of lithium as an electron-doping agent was proposed to further perturb the H 2 units, resulting in the P 3m1 Li 2 MgH 16 structure, which lies only 20 meV/atom shy of the convex hull at 300 GPa. Despite these substantial changes, adding Li to MgH 16 does not drastically alter the pressure range of phase stability. The situation is somewhat different for LaBH 8 , where boron atoms occupy H 8 cubes that are empty in structurally related LaH 10 (Figure A third fruitful family of ternary hydrides are those based on covalent networks such as those found in H 3 S -the first high T c hydride to be synthesized. Considering other ternary H 3 S-based systems, studies using the virtual crystal approximation (VCA) Prior to the experimental observation of the carbonaceous sulfur hydride system, two groups identified promising metastable C-S-H phases based on methane intercalation into an H 3 S lattice 157,158 (Figure One of the most well-known structures among intermetallic superconductors is the A15 phase adopted by Nb 3 Sn 12 (T c =18 K). A ternary P m 3 LiPH 6 phase comprised of a colored A15 lattice was predicted above 250 GPa 102 . A large peak in the DOS just below E F was observed, with an estimated T c as high as 167 K at 200 GPa. ELF analysis indicated that the H atoms are not bound to one another, with H-H distances of 1.14 Å at 300 GPa. In addition to a large Hbased contribution to the DOS at E F , the low atomic mass of Li was also thought to enhance T c , especially upon comparison with previously identified isotypic MgSiH 6 and MgGeH 6 phases with much lower T c s (63 K 171 and 67 K 172 ). Additional investigation of the Li-P-H system showed that the inclusion of ZPE effects renders several phases including LiPH 6 metastable. From 250-400 GPa, a R 3 phase with LiP 2 H 14 stoichiometry was found, built from P@H 9 polyhedra and interstitial Li and H atoms 161 . At 230 GPa this phase reaches an estimated T c =169 K, with the majority of the EPC resulting from H-H stretching modes. Without performing full CSP searches, Na and Be were substituted for Li in this structure to examine the role of atomic mass on T c , finding enhancement at high pressures with NaP 2 H 14 having T c =159 K at 400 GPa (relative to 90 K for LiP 2 H 14 at this pressure). With the high T c s of the CaH 6 and H 3 S phases in mind, the Ca-S-H system was investigated. In addition to a number of semiconducting phases based on H 2 molecules in a Ca/S lattice, a P 6m2 CaSH 3 structure with stacked alternating S-H honeycomb nets and CaH 2 layers was found to lie 3-28 meV/atom above the convex hull in the 150-250 GPa pressure range, and on the hull at 300 GPa 159 . Two vHs were found to lie bracket E F resulting in a T c as high as 94-101 K at 128 GPa. It was proposed that replacing Ca by other alkaline earth metals, and S with heavier chalcogens could lead to other superconducting materials in this structure type. In analogy to the chemical precompression strategy to metallize hydrogen, Mg-doping was proposed as a way to metallize methane, resulting in the prediction of a P 4/nmmsymmetry MgCH 4 phase stable above 75 GPa, where it overtakes a semiconducting P ban structure 160 . A maximum T c of 121 K was predicted at 105 GPa. With the aim of incorporating large amounts of H into the system, prompted by the report of NH 4 and NH 7 structures 173 , N-Si-H ternaries were explored at 300 GPa 162 . While all candidate ternary structures were metastable, the lowest-lying of these was P 2 1 /m NSiH 11 , lying 42 meV/atom above the con-vex hull. Weakly bound H 2 units account for most of the hydrogen in the phase, with some atomic hydrogen covalently linked to nitrogen. At 300 GPa, NSiH 11 has an estimated T c of 98-110 K, with the interaction of N atoms with the Si-H network leading to almost half of the EPC. Less than a decade after the theoretical prediction of high temperature superconductivity with a T c up to 220-235 K in a clathrate-like CaH 6 phase Ternary hydrides -or quaternary and higher -represent a new frontier where the search is on for superconducting materials that maintain dynamic stability to lower and lower pressures FIG. a Tc was calculated using the Allen-Dynes modified McMillan equation (Equation 5) b Tc was calculated by numerical solution of the Eliashberg equations c Values estimated from Figure 4 in Ref. 43 d