High Q-factors are of utmost importance to minimize losses of superconducting radio-frequency cavities deployed in continuous wave particle accelerators. This study elucidates the surface treatment that can maximize the Q-factors in high-beta 650 MHz elliptical niobium cavities. State-of-the-art surface treatments are applied in many single-cell cavities, and surface resistance studies are performed to understand the microwave dissipation at this unexplored frequency. The nitrogen doping treatment is confirmed to be necessary to maximize the Q-factors at medium RF fields. We applied this treatment in 5-cell high-beta 650 MHz cavities and demonstrated that extremely high Q-factors were obtained at medium RF fields with this treatment. We also demonstrated that adding a cold electropolishing step after N-doping is crucial to push the quench field of multicell cavities to higher gradients. The Proton Improvement Plan II (PIP-II) project aims to upgrade the Fermilab accelerator complex to power the world's most intense high-energy neutrino beam for the Deep Underground Neutrino Experiment (DUNE). The high-power proton beam will also enable muon-based experiments and a broad physics research program PIP-II includes the construction of a 215 m superconducting linear accelerator (linac) that will accelerate protons up to 800 MeV by using 5 different types of superconducting cavities: half-wave resonators (HWR), single-spoke resonators (SSR1 and SSR2), and low-and high-beta 650 MHz elliptical cavities (LB650 and HB650). The last section of the linac will be composed of HB650 cavities, which are 5-cell β = 0.92 650 MHz elliptical cavities. These cavities require high Q-factors (Q 0 = 3 × 10 10 ) at relatively high gradients (E acc = 18.8 MV/m, B pk = 73.1 mT) to limit the power dissipation, and consequently cryogenic consumption during the operation in a continuous wave mode of the linac The specifications for the PIP-II HB650 cavities are very challenging compared to specifications of cavities with similar frequency and geometry implemented in other machines such as the Spallation Neutron Source (SNS) at the Oak Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL) and the European Spallation Source (ESS) The goal of the present article is to clarify which surface treatment is capable of maximizing the performance of highbeta 650 MHz cavities, indicating a possible processing path for HB650 cavities for the PIP-II project. For this purpose, we analyzed the performance of several single-cell niobium β = 0.9 650 MHz cavities, which were subjected to different state-of-the-art surface treatments (electropolishing, lowtemperature baking and N doping). The performance of single-cell cavities was then analyzed in detail. In this paper, we present the field dependence of the surface resistance components, high-field Q-slope onset and quench field as a function of different surface treatments. The most promising surface treatment obtained from this study was applied to 5-cell β = 0.9 niobium cavities, and will be applied to 5-cell β = 0.92 cavities to qualify the first set of cavities for the PIP-II prototype cryomodule. The RF design of the β = 0.9 and β = 0.92 HB650 cavities is very similar and enables the combined use of both cavity types in the prototype cryomodule (pCM). According to the final PIP-II linac design, only β = 0.92 HB650 cavities will be procured during the production phase The cavities analyzed in this paper were fabricated using high residual-resistivity-ratio (RRR>300) niobium. The following sections describe the results obtained in clean niobium, low-T baked and N-doped cavities, which underscore the specific processing and surface treatment flow in each case. All RF measurements were conducted in the cavity vertical test stand (VTS) facility at Fermilab within the temperature range of 1.4-2.0 K. Niobium cavities in the clean regime are characterized by a very low concentration of impurities, i.e. very large residual resistivity ratio (RRR) and mean-free-path (l) within the RF penetration depth In Fig. Very long baking at relatively low temperatures is known to be an effective "cure" for the high-field Q-slope and enables niobium cavities to reach an accelerating gradient near the theoretical limit imposed by the superheating field H sh In Fig. Examples of the residual and BCS surface resistances of a low-T baked cavity are shown in Figs. C. N doping for high Q at medium gradient N doping is applied to niobium cavities to obtain very high Q-factors at medium RF fields of approximately 15-20 MV/m 21 . However, as mentioned in the introduction, previous studies have shown that at these frequencies, N-doped cavities do not show the anti-Q-slope typically observed in 1.3 GHz cavities N doping is performed immediately after high-T baking, when the cavity is still in the high-temperature furnace, by injecting 25 mTorr of nitrogen at 800 • C for some minutes. The process may be followed by a diffusion step, where nitrogen is shut off but the cavity remains at 800 • C for a certain amount of time before one turns off the temperature and lets the system cool naturally. After this doping process in the furnace, some micrometers must be removed via EP from the inner cavity surface to eliminate nonstoichiometric niobium nitrides that form during the process. In this manuscript, we have studied the effects of two different N-doping treatments: the so-called "2/6" and "3/60" treatments The Q-factor versus accelerating field curves of the analyzed N-doped cavities are shown in Fig. The single-cell study reveals some interesting findings, in particular: i) the HFQS onset of clean niobium cavities appears at ∼ 25 MV/m (97 mT) in agreement with higher frequency cavities, while the residual resistance exponential growth starts at ∼ 80 mT; ii) the HFQS cannot be mitigated with low-temperature baking, but its onset may be pushed to a higher RF field; iii) N-doped cavities show the highest Qfactors at medium RF fields. To strengthen this last point, Fig. As discussed in the previous section, the observation of early residual resistance exponential growth is unlikely to be due to a real frequency dependence of the HFQS phenomenon. Meanwhile, this particular behavior resembles that typically observed in clean niobium cavities treated with buffer chemical polishing (BCP) instead of EP Our findings also confirmed that N doping maximizes Qfactors at medium RF fields in 650 MHz cavities. Even though the reversal of R BCS as a function of the RF field is not ob- served, the presence of impurities still minimizes R BCS between 60-80 mT, enabling very high Q-factors within the PIP-II operating gradient. Since N doping resulted in the best performance in terms of the Q-factor in single-cell cavities, we implemented the same treatment in the PIP-II β = 0.9 5-cell 650 MHz cavities. after the N-doping treatment. This result is consistent with the previously mentioned hypothesis that cold EP helps promote cavity surface polishing. The electropolishing setup at Argonne National Laboratory (ANL) is shown in Fig. To verify the optimal amount of post doping EP removal, the cavities were subjected to an additional 3 μm of cold EP for a total of 10 μm of EP removal after doping. In Fig. We investigated the effects of different state-of-the-art surface treatments on the performance of high-beta single-cell 650 MHz cavities. Our findings confirm that, even in this regime, N doping enables us to obtain the highest Q-factor values at medium RF fields. The nature of the early quenching observed in these cavities must be better understood and is most likely related to a non optimal EP process. The initial study in single-cell cavities enabled us to define the processing required to obtain high Q at medium RF fields in PIP-II 5-cell HB650 cavities. High-Q processing was then successfully transferred from single-cell cavities to PIP-II HB650 cavities, which qualified the first set of cavities for jacketing and subsequent cryomodule assembly. Further studies that focus on extending this research in PIP-II LB650 cavities are currently ongoing. All of these studies are of crucial importance to advance both the performance and the fundamental understanding of elliptical SRF cavities with resonance frequencies lower than 1.3 GHz. These types of cavities are of great interest for future particle accelerators for both high-energy and nuclear physics. FIG. 7. Q-factor versus accelerating field measured at 2.0 K in 5cell cavities subjected to [a] 2/6 N-doping followed by 7 μm EP and 75-120 • C baking and [b] 2/6 N-doping followed by 10 and 13 μm EP.