The demand for high-speed and highly efficient optical communication techniques has been rapidly growing due to the ever-increasing volume of data traffic. As well as the digital coherent communication used for core and metro networks, intensity modulation and direct detection (IM-DD) are still promising schemes in intra/inter data centers thanks to their low latency, high reliability, and good cost performance. In this work, we study a microresonator-based frequency comb as a potential light source for future IM-DD optical systems where applications may include replacing individual stabilized lasers with a continuous laser driven microresonator. Regarding comb line powers and spectral intervals, we compare a modulation instability comb and a soliton microcomb and provide a quantitative analysis with regard to telecom applications. Our experimental demonstration achieved a forward error correction (FEC) free operation of bit-error rate (BER) < 10 -9 with a 1.45 Tbps capacity using a total of 145 lines over the entire C-band and revealed the possibility of soliton microcomb-based ultra-dense wavelength division multiplexing (WDM) with a simple, cost-effective IM-DD scheme, with a view to future practical use in data centers. Microresonator-based frequency combs offer a variety of applications including distance ranging Although coherent communication appears to be the main microcomb-based transmission application, IM-DD is a simple and cost-effective transmission method and is still essential for short-distance communications, for example, in local area networks and intra/inter data center communications This paper studies the properties of a microcomb as a multi-wavelength light source for WDM communication applications, mainly focusing on the simple and cost-effective IM-DD method using two different microresonator platforms. We demonstrate that an error-free operation of the total 145 lines with 10 Gbit/s IM-DD encoding is possible even in extremely dense Kerr soliton microcomb generated from a 10 GHz-FSR magnesium fluoride microresonator. Here, no FEC is postulated to exploit the simplicity of the IM-DD method. In addition, we compare the BER performance for different comb states to investigate the feasibility of using a microcomb in the IM-DD application. The other motivation behind this work is to use a theoretical analysis to fairly evaluate soliton microcomb properties for different platforms in terms of available comb power and comb bandwidth. The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we introduce the basic properties of microresonator-based frequency combs and describe the generation of an ITU Telecommunication Standardization Sector (ITU-T) aligned microcomb. In Section 3, versatile analyses are provided as a guide to the requirements of optical communications regarding soliton power and bandwidth for two microcomb platforms. In Section 4, we compare the transmission properties in different microcomb states using a silicon nitride microresonator. In Section 5, we describe ultra-dense IM-DD transmission in a 10 GHz-FSR crystalline microresonator. We first illustrate the concept of a WDM communication system in which a microresonator frequency comb is exploited as a multi-wavelength light source [Fig. Microcombs are excited by tuning a c.w. pump laser frequency to a high-Q resonance For practical WDM applications, the frequency comb spacing should be precisely aligned with the standard spectral grid defined by the ITU-T. Since the comb spacing is essentially determined by the resonator FSR for a single-FSR microcomb, the design and fabrication of microresonators contribute fundamentally to wavelength alignment. In addition, post-fabrication resonance tuning via the thermo-optic effect is a useful method for realizing precise alignment on the DWDM grid. To demonstrate a 100 GHz grid-aligned microcomb, we use a Si 3 N 4 microresonator with a radius of 228 μm, and the cross-sectional dimensions are 0.8 μm (height) × 1.6 μm (width). The measured FSR of the cavity is 99.8 GHz, and the absolute wavelength offset between a cold resonance and the ITU-T grid is approximately 0.5 nm at room temperature (RT). We tune the resonances by controlling a thermo-electric cooler (TEC) mounted under a cavity sample to bridge such large wavelength differences. As a result, a resonant wavelength shift of 20.2 pm/K is achieved, which agrees with the previously reported value Resonator fabrication based on a lithographic technique facilitates precise FSR adjustment. However, precise control will present a technical challenge, particularly for high-Q crystalline microresonators because millimeter-sized crystalline resonators are generally fabricated by a manual grinding and polishing method. Therefore, during fabrication considerable effort is needed to obtain the desired resonator diameter. Here, we use an MgF 2 resonator with an FSR of 25.24 GHz. The generated comb spectrum is shown in Figs. In this section, we begin with a discussion of comb power and comb bandwidth in different microcomb platforms for telecom applications. Although there are several resonator platforms that can be used for microcomb generation, a straightforward approach is to choose from a typical free-spectral range (comb mode-spacing), comb line power, and comb bandwidth. Since the comb line power and bandwidth of a soliton microcomb can be analytically derived from the Lugiato-Lefever equation (LLE) Figure Then, we changed the group velocity dispersion (GVD) β 2 with a fixed FSR and a pulse duration of 100 GHz and 41 fs for Si 3 N 4 and 25 GHz and 200 fs for MgF 2 resonator [Figs. This section compares the BER performance in different comb states (i.e., Turing pattern, MI comb, and soliton comb) to investigate which states are suitable for IM-DD transmission. In our experiment, different microcomb states are generated using a Si 3 N 4 resonator with an FSR of 400 GHz. Figure Finally, we perform the measurement on a soliton comb. DKS combs are mode-locked and feature coherent and low-noise properties; therefore, recent transmission experiments have been focusing on utilizing soliton states. Nevertheless, the low pump-comb conversion efficiency is an unavoidable drawback of the soliton comb, which results in it having a low optical signal-to-noise ratio (OSNR) as a light source. Indeed, the power ratio of the pump to comb line is approximately 25.4 dB in an MI comb phase2 but can reach 32.7 dB in a soliton comb, as shown in Fig. The important findings are the Turing pattern and soliton comb can provide low-noise light sources for transmission applications, whereas the smaller the pump-cavity detuning changes, the worse the comb noise property becomes in chaotic MI combs. Some previous demonstrations of microcomb-based optical transmission are considered to represent operation in a relatively low-noise comb state, such as an MI comb phase1 Although a narrow comb mode spacing boosts the transmission capacity of DWDM communication, the line powers obtained from such a large-size resonator are much lower than those obtained with a wider FSR comb, as shown in Fig. A 7-mm diameter MgF 2 microresonator yields a single soliton with an FSR of 10 GHz, which ultimately enhances the transmission capacity with an NRZ encoding with data encoding rate of 10 Gbit/s. The experimental setup is shown in Fig. For the transmission demonstration, we modulate the observed soliton comb with 10 Gbit/s NRZ coding and monitor the BERs after a 40-km fiber transmission. Figure While the maximum modulation rate is limited by a comb spacing of ∼10 GHz to avoid the crosstalk between the other channels, advanced modulation formats (e.g., PAM4, and PAM8), could increase the total transmission capacity as demonstrated by a very recent study of data transmission with wavelength selective switching using integrated soliton microcombs In conclusion, we investigated the properties of a microcomb as a candidate for a multi-wavelength light source with the IM-DD method. Starting with the introduction of microcombs on two different platforms, we discussed the advantages and disadvantages in terms of scalability, coupling method, and frequency spacing. A multifaceted analysis based on LLE provides a comprehensive strategy for deciding a platform from the viewpoint of line power and comb bandwidth, which govern the fundamental performance of transmission applications. While a microcomb exhibits distinct noise-level performance depending on the pump and resonator condition, we characterized each comb state through BER measurements using a chip-integrated microring resonator. Then, we demonstrated extremely dense data transmission using a 10 GHz mode spacing soliton microcomb in a crystalline microresonator. The results anticipate a net rate of 1.45 Tbit/s without FEC, even though a narrow FSR comb exhibits relatively low line power compared with a comb with a wider mode spacing. The results encourage the use of the IM-DD configuration rather than coherent communication, particularly in intra/inter data center networks where ultralow latency and cost-effectiveness are still of primary importance. Theoretical analyses of soliton power and bandwidth have been conducted in several previous studies where η is the coupling ratio, A eff is the effective mode area, n 2 is the nonlinear index, n 0 is the refractive index, c is the speed of light in a vacuum, and δω = (ω 0 -ω p ) is the pump detuning. Eliminating the detuning term from Eq. ( The optical spectrum of a soliton and each comb line power is given by assuming a hyperbolic secant form as follows, where D 1 /2π is the resonator FSR, Δω is the relative frequency from the pump, and thus P(Δω = 0) corresponds to the maximum comb line power. The soliton emerges only when satisfying the bistability condition, which defines the minimum pump detuning as, where Δν corresponds to the cavity linewidth in hertz. Using the Q-factor, this relation is rewritten as, Meanwhile, the maximum detuning for the existence of a soliton is given by, Thus, regarding the cavity linewidth, the detuning range for the existence of a soliton is given by where P in is the input power and P th is the threshold power for parametric oscillation, The maximum detuning can be rewritten by substituting Eq. ( which suggests that the maximum detuning is proportional to the cavity FSR and Q-factor. At the maximum detuning, furthermore, eliminating the detuning term from Eq. ( Funding.