The protected helical surface states in thin films of topological insulators (TI) are subject to inter-surface hybridisation. This leads to gap opening and spin texture changes as witnessed in photoemission and quasiparticle interference investigations. Theoretical studies show that universally the hybridisation energy exhibits exponential decay as well as sign oscillations as function of film thickness, depending on the effective band parameters of the material. When a step is introduced in the TI film e.g. by profiling the substrate such that the hybridisation has different signs on both sides of the step, 1D bound states appear within the hybridisation gap which decay exponentially with distance from the step. The step bound states have linear dispersion and inherit the helical spin locking from the surface states and are therefore non-degenerate. When the substrate becomes an s-wave superconductor Majorana zero modes located at the step ends are created inside the superconducting gap. The proposed scenario involves just a suitably stepped interface of superconductor and TI and therefore may be a most simple device being able to host Majorana zero modes. The surfaces of strong topological insulators (TI) like Bi 2 Se 3 , Bi 2 Te 3 and Sb 2 Te 3 carry spin-locked non-degenerate helical surface states. As long as the surfaces are isolated, i.e. their distance is much larger than the surface state decay length into the bulk the 2D dispersion is described by isotropic Dirac cones to lowest order in momentum counted from the time-reversal invariant (TRI) points and by warped cones with sixfold symmetry due to higher order terms. They have been verified indirectly by magnetotransport measurements Aside from the modulated excitation gap at the Dirac point the oscillation of t(d) gives rise to another novel and highly interesting scenario which is the subject of this investigation. Suppose the film thickness is not constant but changes in a FIG. steplike manner at a certain lateral position (see Fig. As a starting point for the homogeneous thin film we use the isotropic TI surface state model on the top (T) and bottom (B) surface of the film. We will use α, σ, κ indices and associated Pauli matrix vectors (α, σ, κ) to denote two dimensional T/B surface, | ↑ , | ↓ spin and | ± 1 helicity spaces. The unit in each space is denoted by (α 0 , σ 0 , κ 0 ). On a single isolated surface, using the operator basis ψ † k = (c † ↑k , c † ↓k ), the isotropic 2D model Hamiltonian is given by where k = (k x , k y ) is the wave vector counted from the TRI Dirac point, σ the spin, ẑ the surface normal and v the velocity, furthermore k ± = k x ± ik y and k = |k| = (k 2 x + k 2 y ) 1 2 . This expression is proportional to the helicity operator κ k = (σ × k) • ẑ/k, namely h k = (vk)κ k. The eigenvalues or dispersions of the Dirac cone and associated eigenvectors in the spin basis | ↑ , | ↓ are described by where the columns of the unitary matrix S k are the helical eigenstates | ± 1 . In this basis the helicity operator is simply represented by the Pauli matrix is the azimuthal angle of the k-vector. In a TI film with thickness d much larger than the surface state decay length the top and bottom surfaces may be considered as independent surface states. One only has to keep in mind that surface normals are oppositely oriented to the global ẑ direction, i.e. ẑT = -ẑ B ≡ ẑ. Therefore helicities for both energies are also opposite on T, B surfaces according to κ B k = -κ T k and therefore h B k = -h T k ≡ -h k . However, when the film thickness is reduced (below a few quintuple layers) the T,B surface states overlap and a hybridisation of equal spin (and therefore equal helicity) eigenstates develops. This problem has been fundamentally treated and analyzed in great generality in the work of Asmar et al or in helicity representation according to The eigenvalues of the film Hamiltonian are then obtained as Which exhibit a thickness dependent hybridisation gap t(d) at the Dirac point k = 0. Each of these dispersion branches is twofold degenerate which is inherited from the (T,B) degeneracy of states in the uncoupled (t = 0) case. The degeneracy is lifted if the bottom surface experiences an effective bias due to the substrate effect. This can be described by adding a term ∆ su σ 0 α z to Eq. ( where split band indices 1, 2 refer to ± inside the square root. Since the above substrate term can in principle be canceled by an applied bias voltage (eV) term at the substrate we will keep the degenerate thin film model of Eq. ( The thickness dependent effective hybridisation t(d) may be obtained from the solution of a subtle boundary value problem for the thin film Here the energy t 0 and thickness d 0 , d 0 scales are determined by the parameters of bulk bands Due to their universal origin we are confident that the gap oscillations will eventually be found in thin films of a suitable TI material. This expectation is the starting point for the following investigation of intriguing appearance of 1D topological states for profiled thin film geometry. The TI surface state form linearly dispersing 2D bands or Dirac cones inside the bulk gap ∆ b (Fig. Let us adopt a step geometry with the step extending along the x-direction, separating the left (L) and right (R) regions of the surfaces at y = 0 and the surface normals oriented parallel to z (Fig. where t L = t(d L ) and t R = t(d R ), we assume 2L 0 is the sample length along x, y (Fig. If a localised bound state exists at the step it has to fulfil the envelope equation with |E| < |t L |, |t R |, i.e., lying inside the hybridisation gap of 2D surface states. It is convenient to introduce rescaled energies Ê = E/v and t = t/v which have the dimension of wave number or inverse length (units QL -1 ). The wave function is a four spinor defined by (tr for transposed): (11) For the the L,R sides of the step we use the following ansatz to solve Eq. ( where k L y = -iκ L and k R y = iκ R are given by the inverse decay lengths κ R , κ L of the bound state localised at the step. Inserting into Eq. ( The second equation follows because the first one has to be fulfilled for both sides L and R simultaneously. The remaining relation to determine κ α is obtained from the boundary condition at the step according to φ L (k x , 0) = φ R (k x , 0). These λ = L, R wave functions for step states with energies Ê (Eq. ( The matrix has rank 2 and therefore 2 components a 1 ≡ a T λ ↑ and a 2 ≡ a T λ ↓ may be considered as free parameters for the solution. The other two components are obtained as The ratio a 1 /a 2 is fixed by the continuity condition φ L (k x , 0) = φ R (k x , 0). From the two equations above we obtain Taking the product and using the symmetrised Eq. ( we finally arrive at the second relation This equation together with the one in Eq. ( For a localised step state within the thin film hybridisation gap one must have both κ R , κ L > 0. It is easy to see from the above expressions that this can only be possible if the we have the fundamental relation where we defined τ RL = sign( tR -tL ). Inserting κ R,L for these to cases into Eq. ( which form two linear dispersing branches of 1D excitations localised at and moving along the step with an energy inside the thin-film hybridisation gaps for We note that the dispersion relation, i.e. the velocity v is independent of the size of hybridisations t L , t R and hence of the asocciated asymmetric decay of the wave function perpendicular to the step. This non-degenerate step state as enforced by the boundary conditions exists as long as t(y) changes sign when crossing the step. It is therefore topologically protected as long as this condition is fulfilled. These 1D topological states inside the gap of hybridised 2D topological thin film states are schematically shown in Fig. The four amplitudes a λ of the wave function in Eq. ( The complete normalised wave functions of the two nondegenerate step states are finally given by where the normalisation is ) with L 0 denoting half the step length in x-direction and κ L,R corresponding to the two possible cases of Eq. ( The spinors a ± (and also the total wave functions φ ± ) then fulfil κ z a ± = ∓a ± . This property is inherited from the isolated T,B film states. Because of the 1D character of step states it means the spin is always locked perpendicular to k = k x x, i.e. parallel to y. It is also useful to consider the expectation values of the spin σ. One finds a ± |σ T y |a ± = ± 1 2 and a ± |σ B y |a ± = ∓ 1 2 . All other spin expectation values vanish. The eigenvectors a ± define the field operators Ψ λ (x, y) (λ = ±) of helical step states according to (now using k = k x for 1D states): where the quasiparticle operator algebra for the 1D helical step states is defined by χ kλ = a † λ Ψ k which is explicitly given by (using the abbreviation τ = τ RL = sign( tR -tL ) in Eq. ( They fulfil the canonical anti-commutation relations {χ kλ , χ † k λ } = δ kk δ λλ . In terms of these 1D quasiparticle operators the 1D step state Hamiltonian may be written as (cf. Eq.( These step states form the basis to construct Majorana end states through the proximity effect originating from the superconducting substrate. Before this, however we consider the situation for a more realistic step profile. The existence of the 1D step states is not tied to having a sharp step. A more softer profile serves the same purpose, for example replacing Eq. ( To solve the wave equation Eq. ( with The form of spinors in Eq.( Our investigation of step states is based on the underlying assumption that the influence of higher order warping terms for the 2D surface states can be neglected in the 1D step state formation. Firstly it is well known how to include them in the surface state formation of thin films where they modify the isotropic Dirac cones and circular Fermi surface into cones and Fermi surface with six-pronged 'snowflake' shape. A complete theory for homogeneous thin films, including the lowest order Dirac term (Eq. ( which has to be added to the unperturbed Hamiltonian in Eq. ( Writing the four component eigenvectors a ± in Eq. ( In each of the two 1D bands of quasiparticles confined to the step the helical spin locking is protected since it is inherited from the 2D topological surface states. Therefore they may be considered as spin-locked 1D excitations. If they open a superconducting gap originating from the proximity effect of a superconducting substrate it is natural to expect Due to the proximity effects the spin-singlet pairs of the substrate can propagate a certain distance into the normal state of the TI which is governed by its coherence length of the latter This means the inter-band pairing of spin-locked 1D quasiparticles naturally results from the proximity induced spin-singlet pairing of 2D surface states. Hereby we neglected on the right side i) triplet terms with equal amplitude since they cannot be induced by the s-wave substrate and ii) inter-(T,B) surface pairing of 2D helical states which is difficult to justify on the basis of the proximity effect. Then the pair amplitude is given by where ∆ T,B are the s-wave order parameters on the two TI surfaces introduced by the proximity effect. If ξ n d they may be almost equal. The proximity induced superconducting pair potential for the 1D surface states is then Introducing the Nambu spinors for the two 1D bands according to χ tr k = (χ k+ , χ k-, χ † -k+ , χ † -k-) and adding the normal quasiparticle part in Eq. ( Here the λand τ Pauli matrices act in the space of 1D bands (±) and Nambu particle-hole space, respectively . For simplicity we first set μ = 0 i.e. the chemical potential lies at the Dirac point in Fig. where generally the SC gap is inside the larger 2D hybridisation gap, except when d is close to nodal points of t L,R (d) (Fig. Now we will search for zero energy solutions of the BdG Hamiltonian inside the SC gap and whose wave function has to be located within the step length -L 0 ≤ x ≤ L 0 , where ∆ 0 is finite. Replacing k → -i∂ x in the above Hamiltonian we obtain the equation In the space of four dimensional Nambu spinors χ k the real space BdG Hamiltonian of Eq. ( where C = [2λ/(1 -exp(-4λL 0 ))] -1 2 . The decay length λ -1 of the end states is given by λ = (39) The complete zero energy wave functions in the SC gap, including the y-dependence from Eq. ( where -L 0 ≤ x, y ≤ L 0 . The wave functions for A, B blocks are related by permutation of the two 1D band states according to P φν A,B = φν B,A defined by the permutation operator P = λ x τ 0 which is a symmetry of the Hamiltonian. Therefore the wave functions of the zero energy states should also be symmetrized by taking the combination φν A,B + P φν (41) For these symmetrised zero energy wave functions we may construct their corresponding field operators according to which fulfil the reality condition γ † i = γ i (i = 1, 2). These quasiparticle operators for the MZM satisfy the canonical Majorana anti-commutation rules {γ 1 , γ 1 } = {γ 2 , γ 2 } = 2 and {γ 1 , γ 2 } = 0. The real-space density profile p(x, y) = |w u (x, y) + w d (x, y)| 2 of these SC in-gap zero-energy states is governed by three (inverse) length scales: i) perpendicular to the step by κ to the right and left and ii) parallel to the step by λ = |∆ 0 |/v. This means that the Majorana density profile can be quite anisotropic and change rapidly as function of the relative TI film thicknesses d L , d R on both sides of the step. In the general case when both t L (d L ) and t R (d R ) are not located close to the zeroes of the oscillatory function in Eq.( Finally we briefly give the results for the case of general position of the chemical potential μ = 0 inside the hybridization gap (Fig. which have now two branches (1, 2) emerging from k 1,2 = ±k c and a SC gap 2|∆ 0 |, independent of the position of the chemical potential inside the hybridisation gap. The solutions for the MZM end states may be found in analogy to the above derivation. The essential difference lies in the MZM wave functions now given by where λ 1 = |∆ 0 |/v and λ 2 = μ/v. Thus, in addition to the exponential decay from the ends there is an oscillation of MZM form factors which becomes faster than the decay for |μ| > |∆ 0 |. Analogous to Eq. ( where we split w u,d (x) = w u,d (x) + iw u,d (x) into real and imaginary parts. we have now an additional Majorana pair (γ 1 , γ2 ) complementing Eq. ( The doubling is related to the existence of two Bogoliubov excitation bands for μ = 0 arising from from k In this work we have shown that the helical surface states in thin films of topological insulators may be manipulated in an interesting and promising way. It has previously been theoretically derived on general grounds that in thin films the surface states exhibit hybridisation due to inter-surface wave function overlap. This leads to a hybridisation energy that both decays exponentially and oscillates with film thickness depending on materials parameters and simultaneously leads to a gapping of the 2D helical surface states. This can be exploited in a simple way by profiling the film thickness in a suitable manner, for example by introducing a step in film thickness via the substrate such that the intersurface hybridisation has opposite sign on both sides of the step. This leads to the appearance of novel type of nondegenerate 1D helical states confined spatially to the step with linear dispersion and again helical spin locking. These states are protected by the sign change of the hybridisation and their decay perpendicular to the step is controlled by the modulus of the hybridisation energy. It should be possible to investigate the existence of these 1D step states and their dispersion by STM spectroscopy. Before this, however, it would be useful to check by STM and ARPES experiments whether homogeneous thin films indeed exhibit the theoretically predicted and prerequisite oscillations in hybridisation energy. This should immediately translate in the (rectified) oscillations of the gap size of coupled surface states. While Bi 2 Se 3 does not seem to exhibit such oscillations the theoretical band parameters for Bi 2 Te 3 and Sb 2 Te 3 are apparently more favourable for their appearance. If these conjectures can be experimentally verified in some cases another highly attractive possibility opens up: When the substrate becomes a simple s-wave superconductor the proximity effect leads to induced gapping of the 1D helical step states. Since the latter are nondegenerate fermions with spin locking this can create Majorana type zero-energy modes inside the proximity effect induced gap which are localised at the end of the steps where the gap drops to zero. Their inverse localisation lengths along and perpendicular to the step is proportional to the SC gap energy and left/right inter-surface hybridisation energies. These Majorana end states should, like 1D step states themselves be observable with STM spectroscopy. The present proposed scenario for creating Majorana states is exceedingly simple, requiring only a suitably profiled (s-wave superconducting substrate) to create the 1D step states. Since the latter are already nondegenerate by their helical spin-locked nature one should not need additional arrangements like applied magnetic fields or applying additional ferromagnetic layers which have been discussed before in the wire-type geometries for creating Majorana states. The present simplistic geometry may be replaced by more elaborate ones. For example the step may not be extended to the whole width [-L 0 , L 0 ] of the sample but may only be present for |x| ≤ x 0 < L 0 . When |x| approaches x 0 the thicknesses d R , d L may be gradually changed on both sides of the step to a common d 0 which satisfies t R (d 0 ) = t L (d 0 ) = 0. Then the 1D helical step state will also cease to exist at ±x 0 position within the thin film area. This would presumably simplify investigations by STM method and suppress unwanted effects from sample ends. Another extension would be a regular array of steps that are a certain distance y 0 apart leading to sign change of t(y) with period 2y 0 . This configuration would be suitable for studying the effects of 1D step state overlap. Finally one might form a ring-like step, i.e. a quantum dot with the proper thickness inside and outside the ring to support a 1D ring state. This should lead to a discretization of the linear dispersion of step states, depending on the diameter of the ring and the thickness variation characteristics. It is therefore certainly worthwhile to study these configurations and the possible in-gap (hybridisation, superconducting) states and their physical consequences further. 2 Se 3 .