The effect of Poisson's ratio to the reflector reshaping is investigated through mechanical study of reconfigurable reflectors in this paper. The value of Poisson's ratio corresponding to the minimum deforming stress is given and an auxetic lattice is proposed for the reflector surface. The parameters of the auxetic lattice are investigated for vary Poisson's ratio. A case of reconfigurable reflector is studied, the curvature change and strain are calculated by surface geometry analyse, and the negative Poisson's ratio is established for vary thickness. According to RMS calculation by the FEM structure analyse, the thickness can finally be established. Conventional reflecting antennas with fixed reflector surface can not adapt the radiation patterns. In contrast, the in-orbit space antenna with mechanically reconfigurable reflector(MRR) can adapt its radiation pattern by reshaping the reflector,and cover several different areas during lifetime. So a space-reconfigurable antenna can reduce the quantity of antennas and saving launching cost. In addition, MRR can reduce the manufacturing accuracy by compensating their shape errors. Thus, a MRR has potential for a variety use of space applications such as Earth Observations and Telecommunications. In past few decades,many investigations have been performed in MRR research K.Photopidan skip the tricot mesh and use a net of interwoven wires to increase the bending stiffness.In the work of Ref. 5And Ref. 7, the ends of the wires can free glide through the hole at the fixed rim.Thus,the tensile stress became small, and the effective stiffness ratio D/E was high. In Ref. 6, the rim of the reflecting surface was released, and no requirement for tensile modulus, see Fig. Leri Datashvili etc. Shubao Shao with coworkers In the present paper, the stress analyses on reflector reshaping is performed, and the relationship between the Poisson's ratio and main principal stress on reflector surface during reshaping is investigated. In the situation of large curvature deformation, material with negative Poisson's ratio has advantage for its small stress, and a NPR lattice skin is introduced to form the reflector surface. The reflector reshaping is achieved by the actuation of numbers of actuator under the surface. A elastic out-of-plane deformation from original shape is achieved through a combination of a change in curvature and in-plane strain. And the stress is found by the superposition of bending( B  ) and membrane (in plane) stress( M  ). According to the theory of elastic mechanics, the following formulas are used to calculate the stress of the morphing skin in the x ,y direction and shear stress. 2 () 1 in which E is the Young's modulus, ν is the Poisson's ratio of the material, xy  is the shear strain,and x  , y  are strain in dimensions x and y. For the case of a reflector surface, Kx and Ky are vary with position or with actuation. And Kx×Ky may be either positive which appears a bowl shaped surface, or negative, which corresponds to a saddle shape. In the situation of bending deformation dominated, the membrane stress is neglected, and consider the principal curvature directions as x and y dimension. Thus, the major principal stress is the maximum of σBx and σBy. The bending strain on surface in two direction can be calculated by curvature change (Kx,Ky) and thickness t: So the bending stress in x and y dimension are : Et KK In order to investigate the the effect of Poisson's ratio on stress, Assume: And equation( The maximum principal bending stress: can be considered as a proportionality coefficient K, and the investigation on the relationship between the bending stress with Poisson's ratio come down to . As the domain of Poisson's ratio is ( )  can also be expressed as a piecewise function: In order to find the maximum bending stress at vary Poisson's ratio, derivative of B  is calculated as followed: , the value of  corresponding to the minimum bending stress (short for ,the bending stress is monotonic about Poisson's ratio. Taking the domain of  into consideration, the value over the range of (-1,1) should be excluded. ,the bending stress is increase with  ,and when 1 -=  ,the bending stress is decrease with  . Fig. The membrane stress in x and y dimension are as followed: × The main principal stress for the situation of only in-plane deformation is The deformation of reflector surface under point actuation mostly including bending and extension. Total strain in x and y dimension combined bending strain and membrane strain can be add together in these form: Combining formula (1),( The main principal stress is obtained by bring the value of The reflector prototype presented in this paper has two shapes which are corresponding to two different coverage area(area 1,area 2), as shown in Fig. As can be seen from the calculation results of Matlab is used to calculate the membrane and shear strain. The results are shown in Fig. The thickness of reflector surface is a important parameters with an influence over out-of-plane deformation. As can be seen from equation (18), the bending stiffness is a cubic relationship of thickness. As mentioned above, the bending stiffness to tensile modulus should be large enough for achieving smooth reshaping. For this purpose, increasing thickness is a effective way which can significantly increase the bending stiffness, but it will lead the final displacement to lower local change in curvature and a more overall displacement. According to stress analysis for vary thickness above in Fig. RMS of reconfigured reflectors with vary thickness is calculated and shown in Fig. The investigation of Poisson's ratio for the material of mechanical reconfigurable reflector surface is given in this paper. The reshaping deformation is achieved though a combination of a change of curvature and in-plane strain. Based on the stress analysis, ratio corresponding to the minimum stress are related to the thickness, the ratio of curvature change and the ratio of in-plane strains in two principal dimension. When curvature change in same direction (i.e. δKy/δKx>0), the Poisson's ratio corresponding to the minimum bending stress (νBmin) is negative, otherwise, νBmin is positive, and when δKx×δKy=0, νBmin is zero. Similarly for the membrane stress, νMmin are negative, positive and zero when δεy/δεx>0, δεy/δεx<0 and δεy×δεx=0 respectively. And for the main principal stress which is found by superposition of bending and membrane stresses, when thickness is small, the membrane stress is dominated, νmin is close to νMmin, and while thickness increasing, the stress is account for the main part, νmin is close to νBmin. A case of reconfigurable reflector surface is investigated in this paper. As for the demand of negative Poisson's ratio, a NPR lattice with elliptic voids is proposed, of which Poisson's ratio can be tailored by adjust the ellipticity. The determination of thickness should take accuracy and actuation force into consideration. Increasing the thickness can reduce the RMS, but also the actuation force increasing.