Various transition metal trichalcogenides (TMTC) show the charge-density-wave and superconductivity, which provide an ideal platform to study the correlation between these two orderings and the mechanism of superconductivity. Currently, almost all metallic TMTC compounds can show superconductivity either at ambient pressure or at high pressure. However, most TMTC compounds are semiconductors and even insulators. Does the superconductivity exist in any non-metal TMTC compound? In this work, we managed to manipulate the electronic behavior of highly insulating HfS3 in term of pressure. HfS3 underwent an insulator-semiconductor transition near 17 GPa with a band gap reduce of ~1 eV. The optical absorption and Raman measurement provide the consistent results, suggesting the structural origin of the electronic transition. Upon further compression, HfS3 becomes a superconductor. The superconducting transition was initialized as early as 50.6 GPa and the zero-resistance is reached above 91.2 GPa. The superconducting behavior is further confirmed by both the magnetic field effect and current effect. This work sheds the light that all TMTC may be superconductors, and opens a new avenue to explore the abundant emergence phenomena in TMTC material family. Transition metal chalcogenides (TMCs) are a sort of layer-structured semiconductors or metals with great potential as next generation electronics and optoelectronics Different from the TMDC in form of typical two-dimension structure, TMTCs show the characters of quasione-dimension properties. The chemical formula of TMTCs is MX3, where M is transition metal atom belong to either group IVB (Ti, Zr, Hf) or VB (Nb, Ta) and X is chalcogen atom from group VIA (S, Se, Te). As shown in Table Trisulfides with M from group IVB are all semiconductors with band gap from ~1 to ~ 3 eV The standard four-probe electrical resistance measurement under high pressure was measured in a commercial cryostat from 1.7 K to 300 K by a Keithley 6221 current source and a 2182A nanovoltmeter. A BeCu alloy diamond anvil cell (DAC) with two opposing anvils was used to generate high pressure. For Run #1, 300 μm culets were used and 100 μm culets were used for Run #2. In these experiments, a thin single crystal sample was loaded into the sample chamber in a rhenium gasket with c-BN insulating layer. A ruby ball is loaded to serve as in-ternal pressure standard for Run #1, while the Raman signal of diamond culet was used to calibrate the pressure for Run #2. The high-pressure Raman spectra were collected using a Renishaw Micro-Raman spectroscopy system equipped with a second-harmonic Nd:YAG laser (operating at 532 nm). A 532 nm laser was used, with a spot size of 1-2 μm. A pair of low fluorescent diamonds were used for Raman measurement. The laser power was maintained at relatively low power level to avoid overheating during measurements. KBr was used as pressure medium. In-situ high-pressure UV-VIS absorption spectroscopy was performed on a home-designed spectroscopy system (Ideaoptics, Shanghai, China) with a 405 nm laser. The high-pressure infrared experiments were performed at room temperature on a Bruker VERTEX 70v infrared spectroscopy system with HYPERION 2000 microscope. A thin HfS3 single crystal was loaded and KBr was used as pressure medium. The spectra were collected in transmission mode in the range of 600-8000 cm -1 with a resolution of 4 cm -1 through a ∼50×50 μm 2 aperture. The electrical transport measurements on single crystal HfS3 were conducted as a function of temperature up to 121 GPa. Two runs of experiments have been conducted and the resistance-temperature (R-T) curves are shown in Fig. . Such a sharp transition suggests a possible superconducting transition. This is further confirmed by the resistance measurement at much higher pressure. The sample reaches zero resistance at ~1.8 K at 91.2 GPa and further compression can move both the Tc onset and Tc zero to higher temperature (the Tc onset is determined from the cross point of two straight lines above and below the transition, while Tc zero is defined as zeroresistance temperature), as seen in the inset of Fig. To further verify the pressure-induced superconductivity in HfS3, electric transport measurements under external magnetic field and various currents have both been conducted. Fig. The resistance of HfS3 crystal becomes measurable only from above 17.7 GPa, which suggests that the electronic transition might take place near this pressure point. To better understanding the electronic structure evolution, optical absorbance of HfS3 as a function of pressure via both UV-VIS and IR spectroscopy has been carried out (Fig. Above 17.9 GPa, the band gap is out of the detecting range of UV-VIS spectroscopy. The color of the sample also changes from transparence to black (Fig. GPa, close to that at ambient condition. To understand the mechanism of the electronic transition observed by transport measurement and optical absorption experiment, we collected the Raman spectra under high pressure, as presented in Fig. All these three Ag modes share the similar pressure coefficients within the range of 1.5 ~ 2 cm -1 /GPa. The Bg mode at 141 cm -1 shows a relatively higher d/dp value and starts to decay above 7 GPa. At around 16~18 GPa, all peaks in this group disappear while a new mode at 159 cm -1 appears, indicating that a phase transition should occur. Group II corresponds to internal deformation of the chains and includes 3 Bg modes (219, 246 and 260 cm -1 ) and 2 Ag modes (267 and 274 cm -1 ). The first two Bg modes show different pressure coefficients and merge together above ~7 GPa. It finally disappears above 13.6 GPa while another mode at 238 cm -1 starts to show up. The Ag mode at 274 cm -1 shows a quite high value of pressure coefficient and becomes undetectable above 7 GPa. For 260 and 267 cm -1 modes, a reversal of relative intensity can be observed at 3.1 GPa. Both of them last up to 19.7 GPa and then are replaced by a new mode at 321.4 cm -1 . Similar with group II, group III also corresponds to internal deformation of the chains. In this group, the Ag line at 322 cm -1 shows a moderate d/dp coefficient as compared with that of other modes. The other mode in this group, the Ag line at 353 cm -1 , decays a lot from 3.1 GPa and then raise up from 13.6 GPa. The strengthening of this mode should be corresponding to the intermediate phase since it disappears above 19.7 GPa together with the 322 cm -1 , and then the 385 cm -1 mode comes out, as shown in Fig. According to previous study on TiS3, there is an isostructural phase transition near 22 GPa Based on spectroscopy and electric transport measurements, the pressure-temperature (P-T) phase diagram of HfS3 has been plotted and is shown in Fig. Within the highest-pressure limit (121 GPa) in this work, Tc zero increases with pressure, which differs from the decreasing trend of theoretically predicted Tc in TiS3 ( In conclusion, HfS3 undergoes an insulator-to-superconductor transition under high pressure up to 121 GPa. 