A metallic ring based, diode-integrated, low-profile, power-dependent, reflective metasurface working from 3 GHz to 3.6 GHz is proposed in this letter. Unlike the previous study which shifts a band up and down to change the impedance of the surface, the triggering of the diodes directly transforms the structure from a surface wave supportive state to a self-induced bandgap topology if exposed to high power RF illumination. We demonstrate the concept by conducting the EM-circuit cosimulation and measurements for a 6 by 8 unit 2D prototype. Near field scan experiments verify that the proposed topology works in two distinct states, the ON and OFF state, and high-power measurements prove that the reflection varies with the incident signal power. The highest 10 dB decrement in transmission occurs at 3.3 GHz with 52 dBm illumination. This structure can be used to protect sensitive devices from large signals while otherwise supporting a communication channel for small signals. T HE development of microwave technology [1], [2] in electronic devices and communication systems has brought much convenience to daily life. However, such lowpower and sensitive systems can be easily interfered, or even damaged, by the complex electromagnetic environment or by external microwave sources. The incident waves can induce currents, which also radiate into the shielding, around any gaps in a metallic enclosure, even if the openings are electrically small. Microwave absorbers are used to protect devices from incoming signals by absorbing the energy. Conventional approaches Although these approaches could reduce the transmission through gaps and openings, such linear absorption behaviour of conventional absorbers can also impair the performance of the protected device itself, especially for low-power communication systems. Nonlinear In this letter, we propose a self-induced, diode-integrated, power-dependent, reflective metasurface which changes the topology of its surface wave band structure to create a selfinduced bandgap with high power illumination as shown in Fig. The unit cell is designed to transition between two states (the ON and OFF states) based on the incident power: the low power state (the OFF state) as shown in Fig. To prove this concept, an EM-circuit co-simulation is conducted using Ansys Electronic Desktop. The full wave simulation model is shown in Fig. To verify the existence of the bandgap and the powerdependent effect, two measurements are conducted on a pair of 2D 6 by 8 unit cell static surface and the diode PCB prototypes. All PCBs are manufactured in the OFF state. Copper wires are soldered at the gaps of the OFF state sample to create an ON state prototype in Fig. The first measurement is the near field scan, as shown in Fig. Here we observe the bandgap from 3 GHz to 3.6 GHz. The frequency shift compared to the simulation results could be caused by the variation of the permittivity of the FR4 substrate. For frequencies outside the bandgap, such as 2.75 GHz and 4.05 GHz, the difference in the field scan results between the ON and OFF states is negligible. On the other hand, for frequencies inside the bandgap, such as 3.3 GHz, 3.45 GHz and 3.6 GHz, the OFF state scan demonstrates a much stronger field compared to the ON state. These near field scan results indicate that the bandgap topology helps to reduce the transmission. After verifying the working status of the static state models, the diode-integrated reflective surface is measured under different power levels. The samples are placed on a 120 cm by 60 cm ground plane. As shown in Fig. The static state prototypes, as well as the diode-integrated sample are measured under various power levels. The OFF state results are used as the baseline representing the surface with no effect on the incoming wave. Subtracting the measured S 21 for the OFF state from that for the ON state or diodeintegrate sample, the difference directly indicates the impact brought by the self-induced bandgap. As shown in Fig. In this letter, we propose the first power-dependent reflective metasurface by directly changing the band structure to open The proposed structure is low-cost, low-profile and it has a simple geometry which does not require any control circuit. Additionally, it shows a wider transmission variation range (10 dB) compared to previous work on power-dependent absorbers (approximately 4.8 dB for 