In the present work, we will study the superconducting properties of a mesoscopic threedimensional prism with square transversal section under an external magnetic field in both Zero-Field Cooling (ZFC) and Field-Cooling (FC) process. The studied sample is a three-band system (with three condensates ψ1, ψ2, ψ3), in which we take a Josephson type inter-band coupling simulated via γ parameter. We analyze the magnetization, superconducting electronic density and free Gibbs energy considering both processes. As results, we found an interesting tunneling of vortex and antivortex between the bands, and vortex cluster configuration in the sample. This behaviour is due to the non-monotonic interaction between the bands. During the last decades the study of highly correlated systems (HCS) has taken on great relevance within the scientific community, due to the discovery of high critical temperature superconductors (HTSc) In this work, we will study a superconducting nanoprism, through the functional of a three-band system. We will consider the interaction between the three bands, in Josephson type coupling. Thus, the Gibbs energy density for the the superconducting order parameter complex pseudo-function ψ i = |ψ i |e iθi (θ i its phase), and magnetic potential A is where: and (1 -T /T ci ) and β i are two phenomenological parameters, i = 1, 2, 3 in the equations 1 and 2. The equation 3 describes our Josephson coupling proposal. The inclusion of the parameter ζ i in the equation 2 indicating the height of the super-currents in each band. In the London gauge ∇ • A = 0, The general form of time dependent Ginzburg-Landau equations for a three-band (3B-TDGL) system in dimensionless units are given by where: and and the equation for the vector potential is: γij from the equation 4 until the equation 12, represents the Josephson coupling between the i and j band. The boundary conditions n • (i∇ + A)ψ i = 0, i = 1, 2, 3 with n a surface normal outer vector. Also, we defined r2 . We express the temperature T in units of the critical temperature T c1 , length in units of the coherence length ξ 10 = / √ -2m 1 α 10 , the order parameters in units of ψ i0 = -α i0 /β i and the Ginzburg-Landau parameter κ = 1.0. We choose the zero-scalar potential gauge at all times and use the link variables method for to solve the 3B-TDGL equations Time is in units of the Ginzburg-Landau characteristic time t GL = π /8k B T c1 , and the vector potential A is scaled by H c2 ξ 10 , where H c2 is the bulk upper critical field. Gibbs free energy G in G 0 = H 2 c ξ 10 /4π ξ 2 10 units. We present the layout of the superconducting sample in Figure In the following sections, we will present the order parameter and its phase in each band, magnetization and Gibbs energy, for all cases presented in the table I. Now, the study will be carried out via the ZFC and FC processes. For the ZFC process, we choose H = 0.9 and H = 1.1. For the FC process all our simulations are performed taking T = 0. A. Zero-Field-Cooling process at H constant. With this, we begin to present the ZFC process, for two chosen values of the external field H = 1.1 and H = 0.9. We show the magnetization -4πM as a function of temperature T , for the superconducting sample in Fig. the Fig. In the present work, we have studied superconducting properties in a three-band nano-prism, composed of three order parameters that interact with each other through an inter-parameter Josephson-type coupling. In this three-dimensional-orbital system we have studied the magnetization, superconducting electronic density and the Gibbs free energy, under Zero-Field-Cooling and Field-Cooling processes. In this three-band system, an interesting paramagnetic behaviour have been found that are not observed in a system with a single or two (conventional) orbitals, we attributed this behavior to the competition between bands, effect similar to that obtained in magnetic frustration. We have also observed the tunneling of vortex and anti-vortex between the superconduct-ing bands as well as vortex clusters. We propose that the study of these properties can be used to analyze threeorbital superconducting systems such as copper oxides CoO 2 (Cuprates), iron oxides FeO 2 (Iron pnictides) and nickel oxides NiO 2 (Niquelates). and with the phases, see the appendix (B), we can write the last Eq. as for the second term and for the third term Now, grouping the Eqs (A4), (A5) and (A6), we have that replacing the last Eq. in Eq. (A3) finally, we can define γ23 , for the firth term of the last Eq. and with the phases, see the appendix (B), we can write the last Eq. as for the second term and for the third term Now, grouping the Eqs (A10), (A11) and (A12), we have that replacing the last Eq. in Eq. (A9), 