To extend the Moore's law in the 5 nm node, a large number of two dimensional (2D) materials and devices have been thoroughly researched, among which the "cold" metals 2H MS2 (M = Nb, Ta) with unique band structures are expected to achieve the sub-60 mV/dec subthreshold swing (SS). The studied "cold" metal field-effect transistors (CM-FETs) based on the "cold" metals are capable to fulfill the high-performance (HP) and low-dissipation (LP) goals simultaneously, as required by the International Technology Roadmap for Semiconductors (ITRS). Moreover, gaps of "cold" metals also enable the CM-FETs to realize negative differential resistance (NDR) effect. Owing to the wide transmission path in the broken gap structure of NbS2/MoS2 heterojunction, the recording 4110 μA/μm peak current, several orders of magnitude higher than the tunneling current of the Esaki diode, is achieved by NbS2/MoS2 CM-FET. The largest peak-valley ratio (PVR) 1.1 × 10 6 is obtained by TaS2/MoS2 CM-FET with VGS = -1V at room temperature. Our results claim that the superior on-state current, SS, cut-off frequency and NDR effect can be obtained by CM-FETs simultaneously. The study of CM-FETs provides a practicable solution for state-of-the-art logic device in sub 5 nm node for both more Moore roadmap and more than Moore roadmap applications. The Moore's law now faces the bottleneck due to the short channel effect of Si-based metal-oxide-semiconductor field field-effect transistors (MOSFET). In this work, we conduct a comprehensive electronic and transport calculation of "cold" metals (NbS2 and TaS2) and their devices with transition metal dichalcogenide (TMD) channels. The SS of CM-FETs successfully breakthrough the 60 mV/dec thermionic limit at room temperature. In terms of more Moore field (to extend the Moore's law), CM-FETs are capable to fulfill the on-state current, power consumption and cut-off frequency (fT) requirements of both ITRS high performance (HP) and low dissipation (LP) goals. Apart from the favorable performance against ITRS goals, the CM-FETs with unique band structures of "cold" metals can successfully achieve the negative differential resistance (NDR) effect, which is expected to fulfill the multifunctional ICs in the more than Moore field. Owing to the wide transmission path in the broken gap characters of MS2/MoS2 heterojunctions, the peak current is several orders of magnitude higher than the typical tunneling current of Esaki diode, In the more Moore domain, we only focus on whether the transistors can satisfy the ITRS goals and extend the Moore's law. The calculated lattice constants of monolayer 2H NbS2 and TaS2 are a1 = 3.36 Å and a2 = 3.31 Å respectively, which is in agreement with previous results. where VGS is voltage applied between gate and source electrodes. IDS is the drain-source current. kB and T are the Boltzmann constant and temperature, respectively. q is the electronic charge. COX and CS are the oxide capacitance and semiconductor capacitance, respectively. The thermionic limit of 60 mV/decade is owing to the constant term ln10( ) 60 k T q  . Because carriers in the source have an energy distribution complying to the Fermi-Dirac distribution f(E). = g(E)f(E), where g(E) is the DOS distribution as a function of energy. Based on Eq. ( shown in Figure where T(E) is the transmission coefficient, fS and fD are the Fermi-Dirac distribution functions for source and drain electrodes, εS and εD are the Fermi levels of source and drain electrodes, respectively. On-state current (Ion) is obtained by the corresponding on-state gate voltage (VGS(on)). The VGS(on) is defined as where VGS(off) is the off-state gate voltage defined by ITRS standards in 2013. To present a panoramic performance analysis of CM-FETs in 5 nm node, Ion and SS of our work compared with previous results are shown in Figure3. The Ion of CM-FETs ranges from 693 μA/μm to 2643 μA/μm and TaS2/MoS2 CM-FET with largest Ion is about three times higher than that of ITRS HP goals. The Ion performance is only inferior to the monolayer arsenene and antimonene MOSFETs (Ion of 3200 μA/μm and 2980 μA/μm, respectively) and comparable with the black phosphorus (BP) MOSFET with 1994 μA/μm Ion. As is known, the BP is limited to the poor air-stability. , where Qch is the charge in gate electrode region. All CM-FETs fT in Figure To better understand the mechanism of extreme low (sub-60 mV/dec) SS achieved by the CM-FETs, we take the NbS2/MoSe2 CM-FET as an example to plot the projected local density of states (PLDOS) in Figure Thermal emission current can directly transport through the channel region. With the increasing of VGS, ΦB and EVG are overlapped. Therefore, the current is only tunneling around the top of EVG, so the transmission efficiency, T(E), around the εS decreases rapidly compared with its counterpart in Figure Apart from the temperature effect, PVR and peak current are regarded as two decisive factors for practical applications. The NDR performance of NbS2/MoS2 and TaS2/MoS2 CM-FETs compared with previous results is summarized in Figure and BP/Al2O3/BP heterojunction NDR devices. However, the poor air-stability of BP and the small peak current of MoS2/WSe2 NDR device hinder their practical application. Compared with previous results superior in either PVR or peak current, the NDR devices in our work are fully capable to achieve both large PVR and peak current simultaneously. Especially, the peak currents in this work are several orders of magnitude higher than previous results. The large peak current not only improves the noise margin ability of NDR devices and relevant circuits, but also increases the output power and enhances the stability of oscillation circuits. With the large peak current and PVR, NbS2/MoS2 and TaS2/MoS2 CM-FETs are suitable for the MVL system and multifunctional device in more than Moore field. Other data are extracted from the BP/ReS2, In summary, we present a comprehensive electronic and transport calculation of nanoscale CM-FETs based on the "cold" metal NbS2 and TaS2 heterojunctions. The Ion of CM-FETs with 5 nm channel length can achieve ITRS HP and LP goals simultaneously to further sustain the more Moore roadmap, which are rarely fulfilled in previous calculations because of the contradictory requirements of HP (high drain current) and LP (small SS). The dilemma is successfully solved by the superior switching performance of "cold" metals and the favorable mobility of 2D TMDs. The extreme low SS of 45 and 47 mV/dec is obtained for NbS2/MoSe2 and TaS2/MoSe2 CM-FETs, respectively In terms of NDR effect in more than Moore field, our results claim that the large peak current and PVR can be both achieved by NbS2/MoS2 and TaS2/MoS2 CM-FETs, owing to the wide broken gap feature, which is an obstacle of the Esaki diode. We find that the peak currents and PVR can be effectively controlled by the gate voltage and immune to the temperature influence. The recording 4110 μA/μm peak current and 1.1 × 10 6 PVR are achieved by NbS2/MoS2 and TaS2/MoS2 CM-FETs, respectively. The results prove that "cold" metal materials are competitive candidates for multifunctional logic devices and can be employed into the MVL system and radiofrequency circuits. We calculated the electronic and transport properties of "cold" metal MS2 and their devices with TMD channels based on density functional theory (DFT) and non-equilibrium Green function (NEGF) with Atomsitix Tool Kit 2020 package. 