High entropy carbides ceramics with randomly-distributed multiple principal cations have shown high temperature stability, low thermal conductivity, and possible radiation tolerance. While chemical disorder has been shown to suppress thermal conductivity in these materials, little investigation has been made on the effects of additional, extrinsically-generated structural defects on thermal transport. Here, (Zr0.25Ta0.25Nb0.25Ti0.25)C is exposed to Zr ions to generate a micron-scale, structural-defect-bearing layer. The reduction in lattice thermal transport is measured using laser thermoreflectance. Conductivity changes from different implantation temperatures suggest dislocation loops contribute little to phonon scattering while nanoscale defects serve as effective scatterers, offering a pathway for thermal engineering. High entropy carbide ceramics (HECs) have emerged in the last several years as a promising class of materials for applications involving high temperatures or other environmental extremes. Borrowing from the maturing field of complexity-engineering and entropic-stabilization in metal alloys To date, experimental studies of the thermal transport characteristics of these HEC materials have been relatively few and primarily focused on five-cation chemistries including (Hf 0.2 Zr 0.2 Ta 0.2 Nb 0.2 Ti 0.2 )C In particular, the interplay between chemical disorder, stoichiometry, and structural defects in relation to thermal transport has yet to be explored in HECs or, to a large extent, in any high entropy ceramic. Frameworks for understanding the effects of structural defects, and tailoring performance by extrinsically introducing such defects, are well-established for single-principal-element materials and compounds Here, the coupled effects of chemical disorder and extrinsically-imposed lattice defects are studied in (Zr 0.25 Ta 0.25 Nb 0.25 Ti 0.25 )C. This four-cation HEC was originally synthesized Hf-free by Wang and coworkers to study its potential, if any, for use in nuclear systems, as Hf has a large neutron absorption cross section defect-bearing region using a multi-layer thermal transport model. A combination of SDTR and electrical resistivity measurements on a pristine bulk HEC are used to determine the total heat capacity and estimate the electron contribution to thermal conductivity. The resulting thermal performance is interpreted in the context of previously-measured concentrations of defects from electron microscopy, showing that dislocation loops serve as much less effective thermal scatters in these chemically disordered structures than would be expected from classical phonon scattering theory. The (Zr 0.25 Ta 0.25 Nb 0.25 Ti 0.25 )C specimens investigated in this work have been described previously For both pristine and ion irradiated (Zr 0.25 Ta 0.25 Nb 0.25 Ti 0.25 )C, SDTR is used to extract thermal properties including thermal conductivity, κ, thermal diffusivity, D, and, in the case of the assynthesized material, the specific heat capacity, C p . In SDTR, periodic local temperature variations are induced using an intensity-modulated 660 nm CW heating laser and detected using a 532 nm CW probing laser through the thermoreflectance effect The thermal layering model used for pristine and asirradiated (Zr 0.25 Ta 0.25 Nb 0.25 Ti 0.25 )C is shown in Fig. To ensure this parameterization results in the highest sensitivity to the thermal properties of the defect-bearing layer, a detailed sensitivity analysis is carried out, see Fig. where φ(ξ) is the spatially-varying thermal phase delay and ξ is the parameter in question. Fig. Only very weak sensitivities to the precise gold coating thickness and segmented irradiated layer thickness are observed. Together, these sensitivities ensure that the values reported from the three-layer optimization are representative of the defect-modified thermal characteristics. Total thermal conductivity as measured in these carbide ceramics contains contributions from both electron and lattice (or phonon) thermal transport A description of the 4-point probe measurements as well as the conversion of ρ e to κ e is provided in the Supplementary Materials. From κ e and the measured total thermal conductivity, κ tot , the phonon thermal conductivity can be estimated as κ p = κ totκ e . The relative electron contribution to κ tot has been shown to be a sensitive function of carbon stoichiometry, and therefore bonding character, in binary carbides and these HECs measurements of pristine (Zr 0.25 Ta 0.25 Nb 0.25 Ti 0.25 )C with a thick gold transducer return room-temperature thermal property values of k tot = 9.14 ± 0.20 W/m•K and D = 3.70 ± 0.06 mm 2 /s, which imply a specific heat capacity of C p = 293 ± 4 J/kg•K, with all uncertainties listed as the standard error of multiple spatially-varying measurements. Although no direct comparisons exist for this 4-cation HEC in the literature, these values are consistent with the thermal properties measured in bulk (Hf 0.2 Zr 0.2 Ta 0.2 Nb 0.2 Ti 0.2 )C synthesized using the same procedure 4-point probe measurements indicated that pristine (Zr 0.25 Ta 0.25 Nb 0.25 Ti 0.25 )C specimens have an electrical resistivity ρ e = 149 ± 2 μΩ•cm. This is higher than that of binary carbides such as TiC and TaC (68 and 25 μΩ•cm, respectively Using the three-layer thermal transport model as described above, Fig. The behavior of the lattice thermal conductivity in the presence of these structural defects is most easily explored using the simplified Klemens-Callaway-Debye model where and C(ω), v g (ω), and τ (ω) are the phonon-frequencydependent heat capacity, group velocity, and relaxation time, respectively where n is the dislocation loop density and d l is the loop diameter, with each relationship containing prefactors, not shown here, to maintain the correct dimensionality This theoretically identically scattering strength from loops, coupled with the similarly in thermal conductivity between the pristine sample and that exposed at 500 • C, implies that dislocation loops are effectively not scattering phonons in this chemically complex ceramic. This conclusion is reached by noting that at 500 • C, few residual point defects are expected following irradiation given the increased defect mobility at high temperatures. These data suggest, therefore, that the interactions between phonons and dislocation loops is inherently distinct in materials with a high degree of chemical complexity compared with traditional ceramics. Analytical dislocation loop scattering models, after Klemens, propose that the long-range strain field associated with dislocations is responsible for the majority of phonon scattering Even though the reduction in κ p is likely overestimated here due to assumption of constant κ e across exposure conditions, electrons scatter little from extended loops. Therefore, the conclusion that residual nanoscale structural defects are the primary contributors to conductivity reduction remains unchanged. Altogether, that lattice thermal conductivity is reduced by ∼20% at 25 • C, in a microstructure expected to contain a high density of both nanoscale and extended defects, supports the conjecture that heat carrier scattering from extrinsic nanoscale defects (point defects and small clusters below TEM resolution) can be used as a tool with which thermal conductivity may be engineered in these systems. Although ion beam irradiation was used to generate extrinsic structural defects in this work, other post-synthesis processing treatments could similarly be used for such defect injection and thermal engineering in the future. Here, the impact of lattice defects extrinsicallygenerated using ion irradiation on thermal transport in a chemically complex carbide ceramic with four principal cations has been systematically studied using a laser thermoreflectance technique. Multi-layer thermal modeling allows the defect-affected thermal conductivity of a micron-thick damaged layer generated by ion implantation to be measured. Additional electrical resistivity measurements on as-synthesized material shows that this HEC has a thermal carrier partitioning, between electrons and phonons, in line with that previously observed in similar materials. The reduction in thermal conductivity is observed to be greatest in materials irradiated at low temperatures where a significant population of retained nanoscale defects is expected. At high temperatures, however, little reduction in overall or phonon thermal conductivity is observed. Coupled with prior investigations showing that small dislocation loops have formed under these exposure conditions at all temperatures, these observations indicate that dislocation loops are contributing little to phonon scattering, likely due to a suppression of their long-range strain fields. Nanoscale defects still serve as effective scatterers of thermal carriers in this system, opening a pathway for controlled ther-mal transport engineering in the presence of maximized chemical disorder in high entropy ceramics. To determine the thickness of the Au coating to use for the as-synthesized (Zr 0.25 Ta 0.25 Nb 0.25 Ti 0.25 )C to provide the highest degree of sensitivity to C p , a detailed sensitivity analysis is carried out using the previously-measured values for the thermal parameters of (Hf 0.2 Zr 0.2 Ta 0.2 Nb 0.2 Ti 0.2 )C for the two-layer thermal model as shown in Fig. The results of this sensitivity analysis re-computed with the final values optimized for (Zr 0.25 Ta 0.25 Nb 0.25 Ti 0.25 )C, κ s = 9.14 W/m•K and D s = 3.70 mm 2 /s, are shown in Supplementary Fig. Table Thermal parameters D2 and k2 are labeled by † , for the 3-layer model, as they are optimized self-consistently, ie. their ratio k2/D2 = ρCp is fixed to the value independently optimized for the pristine HEC. In the pristine case, D2 and k2 are optimized independently, allowing ρCp to be determined directly from SDTR measurements. The thermal properties of the 81 nm Au coating layer are measured independently using SDTR on a BK7 glass standard, while values for the 14 nm film are inferred using a constitutive model for the conductivity of thin Au films optimized to films generated from the sputter coater used for sample preparation, as these films are too transparent to the heating laser for reliable SDTR measurement The multi-layer thermal transport model used to model the SDTR response, and therefore extract thermal transport properties, contains complex dependencies on the thermal parameters (thermal diffusivity -D and thermal conductivity -κ) of each modeled layer as well as the interfacial thermal resistance -R th -between each layer and the convolved spot size of the pump and probe lasers -R s Example SDTR data on (Zr 0.25 Ta 0.25 Nb 0.25 Ti 0.25 )C is shown in Supplementary Fig. The reference measurement of heat capacity of pristine (Zr 0.25 Ta 0.25 Nb 0.25 Ti 0.25 )C was conducted using a differential scanning calorimeter (DSC 204 F1 Phoenix) with a heating rate of 10 K/min over a temperature range of 40 to 400 • C in an N 2 atmosphere. The reference standard used was Al 2 O 3 . As reported in the main manuscript, the representative value at ∼335 K for the low end of this temperature range is 315 ± 5 J/kg•K. To estimate the electronic contribution to thermal conductivity for as-synthesized (Zr 0.25 Ta 0.25 Nb 0.25 Ti 0.25 )C, fourpoint probe measurements were made using a Signatone Pro4 system using a probe head consisting of four springloaded tungsten carbide needles spaced at 0.040" and a Keithley 2400 source meter. Prior to measurement, the system was calibrated with a p-type, boron doped, silicon calibration standard with electrical resistivity ρ e = 0.002 Ω•cm from VSLI Standards Incorporated. Per the standard specifications, the system is calibrated at 100 mA, and therefore all resistivity measurements are made in the rage 11-105 mA to remain within a fixed offset range of the Keithley source meter. The specimen measured has a square cross section with side lengths of 4.75 mm and a thickness of 0.99 mm. The voltage drop on the measurement head was recorded in steps of 5 mA by manually controlling the current source in dual-polarity mode and is shown in Supplementary Fig. As stated in the main manuscript, this measured resistivity is used to estimate the electronic contribution to thermal conductivity as κ e = LT /ρ e . However, as detailed by Rost and coworkers, the Lorentz constant in this family of materials is routinely overestimated by L = L 0 = 2.44 × 10 -8 WΩK -2 where ρ 0 is a reference "pristine" resistivity taken from TaC, A is the impurity contribution for our disordered material evaluated from the measured HEC resistivity ρ e (from ρ e = AT /Θ D ), T is the measurement temperature, Θ D is the Debye temperature, k f and q D are the Fremi and Debye wave vectors, respectively, and J n [Θ D /T ] are the Debye integrals defined as In the calculation of L th a constant ratio k f /q D = 2 -1/3 is assumed, taken from free electron theory assuming monovalency and consistent with previous work in refractory carbides and nitrides X-ray photoemission spectroscopy (XPS) measurements of the sample were collected with a Kratos AXIS Supra XPS system using a monochromatic Al Kalpha source. XPS spectra were collected after 0, 10, and 40 minutes of Table Ar sputtering on two areas of the as-synthesized specimen: one that had not been coated with an Au transducer and one that was coated for measurement and later had the Au coating mechanically removed. Ar sputtering was performed with an Ar gas cluster source, operated at 5 kV at a 45-degree angle to the specimen. The scans presented in Supplementary Fig. of Au coating, fixed values of semi-infinite substrate thermal properties, and a 10% reduction in conductivity in the middle, defect-bearing layer. To ensure a constant heat capacity, the values of D and κ in the defected layer are changed in the same proportion in this analysis. Of these parameters, the highest sensitivity is to the thermal properties of the layer of interest.