Applying direct growth and deposition of optical surfaces holds great promise for the advancement of future nanophotonic technologies. Here, we report on a chemical vapor deposition (CVD) technique for depositing amorphous selenium (a-Se) spheres by desorption of selenium from Bi2Se3 and re-adsorption on the substrate. We utilize this process to grow scalable, large area Se spheres on several substrates and characterize their Mie-resonant response in the mid-infrared (MIR) spectral range. We demonstrate sizetunable Mie resonances spanning the 2-16 μm spectral range, for single isolated resonators and large area ensembles, respectively. We further demonstrate strong absorption dips of up to 90% in ensembles of particles in a broad MIR range. Finally, we show that ultra-high-Q resonances arise in the case where Se Mie-resonators are coupled to low-loss epsilon-near-zero (ENZ) substrates. These findings demonstrate the enabling potential of amorphous Selenium as a versatile and tunable nanophotonic material that may open up avenues for on-chip MIR spectroscopy, chemical sensing, spectral imaging and large area metasurface fabrication. Subwavelength Mie resonators are key for achieving light manipulation with low losses and have shown great promise as enabling components of meta-optics and nanophotonic technologies Here, we demonstrate for the first time, desorption of selenium from Bi2Se3 and re-adsorption on the substrate, resulting in condensation of amorphous selenium (a-Se) spheres. While CVD processes involving solid precursors are well studied, this is the first example of combined dissociation and sublimation of the precursor, leading to unique morphological and structural condensation mediated by thermal and compositional equilibrium. We study the Mie-resonant characteristics of a-Se in various morphologies and demonstrate Mie-resonances spanning the entire 2-16 μm MIR range. Using singleparticle infrared spectroscopy, we demonstrate size-tunable magnetic and electric resonances in truncated spherical particles, culminating in strong absorption (90%) resonance dips in ensembles of resonant particles. Finally, we show Mie resonance pinning effect in Se resonators placed on an epsilon-near-zero (ENZ) substrate. In the vicinity of the ENZ wavelength, high-Q resonances (Q~40) emerge with the resonance position independent of the resonator size. These findings demonstrate the potential of Se Mieresonators as a versatile low-loss building block for infrared applications. Spherical a-Se deposits were achieved by CVD-like growth on various substrates, including Si with 90nm oxide layer, C-plane sapphire, and (100) Si, with typical substrate sizes of 1 -2 cm 2 (see supporting information for full fabrication details). The growth process is schematically illustrated in Figure Interestingly, the deposition of selenium on our substrate is a result of two consecutive phase transitions where the first is into liquid phase (red-marked temperatures in Figure Coupling metasurface resonators to ENZ materials has been previously explored due to the unique optical properties arising in the vicinity of a vanishingly small permittivity, including dynamically tunable metasurfaces and wavefront control of Se resonators can be significantly enhanced when coupled to low-loss ENZ substrates. We demonstrate this by coupling Se resonators to a sapphire substrate, as illustrated in Figure The ENZ region at~11 μm is followed by a spectral range of negative permittivity with low losses, which can be used to excite surface phonon polaritons (SPhPs) (dashed line in Figure The long wavelength peak (at λ~15μm) of the spectra is due to a localized surface phonon mode. This resonance is slightly red shifted as size increases and is also influenced by the rapid change in the permittivity at these long wavelengths. This resonance is also characterized by narrow linewidths with quality factors reaching Q~43. To further investigate these spectral features, we used FDTD numerical calculations to study the field distributions. Figures 7d and 7e represent the electric (i) and magnetic (ii) field distributions of these two resonances at 11.1μm and 14.8μm, respectively. The resonance at ~ 11.1μm is driven by the ENZ region. Since the resonator is placed on a vanishingly small permittivity, the MD-like mode is concentrated at the top of the resonator and at the resonator-air interface where the denser permittivity (air, ε=1) exists, and hence the local density of optical states is higher. Furthermore, the low permittivity of the substrate is also responsible for the predominantly backscattered radiation towards the denser medium (air). At longer wavelengths however (λ>12μm), the negative permittivity of the Sapphire substrate can support surface phonon modes. Indeed, as can be seen in Figure (where ε = ̵ 1, see supporting information Figure We have demonstrated a novel growth method for a-Se spherical particles on various substrates, and their optical characterization as Mie-resonators. Numerical and experimental observations reveal that the multipolar Mie scattering infrared spectra is dominated by the MD and MQ resonance modes. We In our experiments, we used a setup consisting of a FTIR spectrometer (Nicolet, iS50R) coupled to an infrared microscope (Nicolet, Continuum Infrared Microscope). Spectra were acquired with reflection measurements, where infrared radiation was focused on the sample by a 20x Cassegrain objective with NA=0.5, defining a beam spot size of ≈250μm. The reflected light was collected by the same 20x objective. A variable knife-edge square aperture located in the image plane was used to define the signal collection area and only the signal originating from that area was directed to the MCT detector. For ensemble measurements, we used aperture size of 30μm X 30μm, whereas for single particle measurements the aperture size was optimized to maximize the signal to noise ratio (typically it was 20μm x 20μm). All FTIR spectra were gathered as Psample/Pbackground, where Psample is collected from an area with the particles present and Pbackground is collected from an adjacent area with no particles present. We have used a commercial three-dimensional FDTD software, Lumerical's Solutions For the numerical calculations, we used the refractive index (n) value of Se n = 2.65 for all the wavelengths from 2μm to 16μm FDTD simulation were performed to investigate the electric and magnetic field distributions at the Mie resonance wavelengths with two different substrates. The large local density of optical states (LDOS) of the Si substrate, pulls the optical modes of the truncated sphere downwards to the interface with SiO2/Si Substrate. However, beyond the leakage to the substrate, the field distributions are quite similar. The effect of the SiO2 is negligible and similar field plots are obtained for a pure Si substrate. S3: Electric and magnetic field distribution of Se particle (d=3.3μm) placed on the Si substrates, and in homogenous medium (air), respectively. 