The lower critical field, Bc1, is one of the fundamental quantities of a superconductor which directly manifests the Cooper pair bulk density in the material. Although this field can be measured using several techniques, the most conventional method is to calculate this field from the experimentally measured DC penetration field, Bp, which is defined as the starting point of the deviation of the DC magnetization curve, M(Bappl), from a linear dependence. Surprisingly, we found no mathematical routine which describes how this starting point of deviation can be found. Here, we propose the extraction of Bp from the fit of M(Bappl) dataset to the power law, where the threshold criterion Mc can be established by a convention. The advantage of this approach is that the procedure extracts one additional characteristic parameter: the power-law exponent. We demonstrated the applicability of this approach to polycrystalline ThIr3, WB4.2, BaTi2Bi2O, Th4H15, to thin films of Pb and MgB2 and to Nb single crystal. In most reports, Bc1(T) analysis is limited by the extraction of the London penetration depth. We advanced the analysis to extract primary thermodynamic superconducting parameters (i.e. the ground state superconducting energy gap, (0), the relative jump in electronic specific heat at transition temperature, ΔC γT c , and the gap-totransition temperature ratio, 2Δ(0) k B T c ) from Bc1(T) data. This extraction was performed for Nb, ThIr3, TaRh2B2 and NbRh2B2. Method to extracting the penetration field in superconductors from DC magnetization data I. Introduction Walther Meissner and Robert Ochsenfeld discovered that an external magnetic field, B, is expelled from the superconducting tin and lead It should be stressed that both Eqs. 1,2 can be represented by a universal equation where the subscript MO designates the Meissner-Ochsenfeld field (i.e. the maximum flux density at which the superconducting state starts to collapse), m e is the mass of the charge carrier, μ 0 is magnetic permeability of free space, and the bulk Cooper pair density describes by the following equation: (a detailed discussion of the advances of Eq. 3 vs Eqs. 1,2 presented recently PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI:10.1063/5.0081288 the superconductor, is a direct way to determine the bulk density of Cooper pairs, n(T), in the superconductor. One of the most conventional methods for determining B MO is based on the analysis of M(Bappl) curve to find a point where the curve deviates from a straight line (this line is also designated as the Meissner line). Perkins et al. where 2a is the strip width or the disk diameter and 2b is the sample thickness. It should be mentioned that there is an alternative approach, where the calculation is based on the demagnetization factor, N (which is another way to account the sample geometry, more details can be founded in Ref. Based on that, accurate determination of B MO is directly related to accurate extraction of the first flux entry field, Ben, from experimental M(Bappl) curves. Surprisingly, we found that there is no standard procedure for this extraction. Available procedure descriptions are pretty unclear: "... At low magnetic fields (H < 15 Oe) the Mv data collected at 0.5 K was fitted with the linear formula Mv(H) = -bH, where b is the slope of the fitted line. ... A rough estimation of the lower critical field at 0.5 K (not corrected for demagnetization) is Hc1(0.5 K) = 10 Oe." This is the author's peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online version of record will be different from this version once it has been copyedited and typeset. This description should be commented upon, because if the fit of the volume magnetization, Mv, to linear function was performed in applied magnetic fields (Bappl) of 0 mT < Bappl < 1.5 mT, how it was possible to define the first flux entry field as Bp(0.5 K) = 1.0 mT, because, by the definition, Bp is the starting point for the deviation of Mv(Bappl) from straight line. And, why is the field range of 0 mT < Bappl < 1.5 mT was chosen for the linear fit? Similar uncertainties of the used procedure and, what is important, unexplained arbitrary chosen field range, which is used for the linear fit, can be found in hundreds of papers. In this paper we proposed strict mathematical procedure to extract the first flux entry field from the magnetization data and demonstrated the applicability of the proposed technique for a wide range of superconductors: for pure metals (type-I lead and type-II niobium), Th4H15 hydride, BaTi2Bi2O oxide, boron-based bulk WB4.2, , TaRh2B2 and NbRh2B2 compounds and MgB2 thin film, and 5d-electron compoundThIr3. In this work we propose the procedure for extracting the penetration field from the magnetization data, M(Bappl), which is similar to that used to deduce the transport critical current, Ic, from the E(I) curves where E0 is the instrumental offset, k is a linear term used to accommodate incomplete current transfer in short samples, Ec is the electric field criterion (for which the conventional value is Ec = 1 μV/cm and n are free-fitting parameters, while Ec is arbitrary chosen fixed parameter. Despite the fact that the critical current, Ic, can be defined based on fundamentally different physical effect The power-law approximation of E(I) curves (Eq. 7) is reasonably accurate where E 0 and k are the free-fitting parameters in Eq. 7, and p ≲ 5. It should be noted, that because the primary purpose of using Eqs. 7,8 is to determine the parameters at which the dissipation starts, that lower p value implies that more accurately the parameters in Eqs. 7,8 will be deduced. For instance, we can mention recent report by Yanagisawa et al By applying several different fitting functions to approximate M(Bappl) curves, measured as for Type-I, as for Type-II superconductors, we found that the power-law function is the one which is most simple and accurate. Thus, to fit M(Bappl) curves, we propose to use the fitting function: where M0 is an instrumental offset, k is a linear term (which is also named Meissner slope), and Mc is the threshold criterion (which we discuss below) and n is the power-law exponent. It should be emphasized that there is a close approach that defines B p based on the following equation: For instance, Eq. 10 was used by Eley et al M c = 0.005 × |M(B appl , T lowest )| max is in a use also The best practice for M(B appl ) data fit to Eq. 9 is to utilize strict M c criterion defined by Eq. As mentioned above, the power-law function (Eq. 7) is a good approximation of the E(I) curves if Eq. 8 is satisfied. Another condition is that M(B appl ) curves should be measured at narrow B appl steps to make it possible to deduce B p with high accuracy. This particularly true for samples in which the power-law exponent n (Eq. 9) was not high, n ≲ 5. Considering the different options under similar conditions for the M(B appl ) data fitted to Eq. 9, we found that the conditions described in Eq. 7 can be also applied to the M(B appl ) data fit: where preferable value for p ≲ 5. To demonstrate the main features of the proposed routine (Eqs. 9,11,13) in Figures We now return to the above-mentioned above paper by Carnicom et al The uncertainties of the deduced parameters can be reduced by choosing wider B appl range for the fit (see Figure However, there can be an issue with the accuracy of the deduced parameters, if a larger p-value (Eq. 13) was used. To demonstrate that Bp and n-value and their uncertainties can be reliably deduced for the M(B appl , T) datasets which have dense raw data at low B appl in Figures The fourth representative ceramic is shown in Figure This is the author's peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online version of record will be different from this version once it has been copyedited and typeset. Overall, M(B appl , T) data analysis for ceramic samples (Figures In the subservient sessions we applied Eqs. 9,11,13 to analyse the data for thin films of lead (Section 3.5) and bulk single crystals of niobium (Section 3.6), where the M(B appl , T) curves demonstrate sharp transitions, which are characterized by n > 10. Lock Figs. 8,9 represent a nice demonstration for films granularity problem which can be, in more general, considered as a demonstration of the problem defined Matthias The meaning of n-value can be understood, if one considers three lead films with thickness 2b > 180 nm, which all of which exhibit B p ~60 mT (which all of which are in the expected range > 180 nm. Based on this, the concept of "Type-III superconductors" To demonstrate that proposed method is also applicable for epitaxial thin films of type-II superconductors, in Fig. Niobium is a practically important low-κ Type-II superconductor which exhibits κ ≅ 1 Stromberg Figure Sample Nb-49 had cylindrical shape with the length of about 2b = 12.7 mm and the diameter of 2a = 0.635 mm (i.e. b a = 20) and, thus, by utilizing Eqs. 5,6 (proposed by Brandt Based on this, deduced B p (T) represents the lower critical field (Figure When Bc1(T) data were deduced, many research groups or . If experimental capability allows the application of a reasonably large magnetic field, then the upper critical field data, B c2 (T), is also measured A deeper analysis of the deduced B c1 (T) data can be based on mentioned above Eqs. 1-4, which shows that B c1 (T) is directly linked to the bulk density of Cooper pairs in the material. Thus, the analysis of B c1 (T) can reveal the primary superconducting parameters of the material, for instance, the ground state energy gap, (0), and the gap-to-transition temperature This is the author's peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online version of record will be different from this version once it has been copyedited and typeset. ). Second, the London penetration depth, λ(T), for s-wave superconductors can be expressed as where kB is the Boltzmann constant, and Δ(T) is the superconducting energy gap, for which in our previous works where is the relative jump in the electronic specific heat at Tc (where γ is so-called Sommerfeld constant),  = 2/3 for s-wave superconductors, and temperature-dependent lower critical field for s-wave superconductors is: )) In the result, five major superconducting parameters of the superconductor (i.e. the transition temperature, Tc, ground state London penetration depth, (0), the relative jump in This is the author's peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online version of record will be different from this version once it has been copyedited and typeset. k B T c ) can be deduced from the fit of B c1 (T) to Eq. 23. Since 1965, niobium was considering to be two-band superconductor . As it was mentioned by Gor'kov and Kresin Because in Type-I and low- superconductors this condition is difficult to suffice, the two-gap picture is washed out and the one-gap picture is observed in samples. In this regard, sample Nb-49 prepared and studied by Stromberg Truly, an upturn in B c1 (T) at T ≲ 2.5 K can be seen in Fig. where μ 0 is the permeability of free space. The upturn was observed in perfect niobium thin films by Talantsev et al J c,total (sf, T) = J c,band_1 (sf, T) + J c,band_2 (sf, T) Details can be found in Fig. dataset for niobium to two-band model: where the lower critical field for each band is described by Eq. 21. We also assumed that both bands have the same κ(0) = 1.0 . The reason for the latter originates from the fact that raw experimental dataset should have a sufficiently large experimental dataset which cover as wide as possible temperature range of 0 K < T ≤ T c . However, it can be seen in Fig. whereas this joint parameter is free fitting. The result of the B c1,total (T) fit to Eqs. 23,26,27 is shown in Fig. Overall, the fit confirms that niobium is a moderately strong electron-phonon coupled superconductor, for which deduced , has a large uncertainty, originating from the aforementioned issue of the absence of experimental data below T = 1.154 K. Now, we return to polycrystalline ThIr3, for which raw Ben(T) data were reported by Górnicka et al It is important to discuss the value of the Pauli-Chandrasekhar-Clogston limiting field, B PCC (0), which can be calculated from the deduced Δ(0). Simple-minded form of the equation described this field is where μ B denotes the Bohr magneton. However, this simplistic form is based on two hidden, but important, assumptions: 1. the Lande g-factor is: and 2. the material is weak-coupled superconductor: In general, these two assumptions are incorrect, and the proper expression for the Pauli-Chandrasekhar-Clogston limiting field is Thus, if the material exhibits strong charge carrier scattering, then g can be well below 2. I addition, the superconductor can be either strong coupled, either exhibits d-or p-wave gap symmetry (for which Δ(0) > 2 × k B T c It should be noted that the charge carrier scattering is not small in ThIr3, which can be proven if one looks at the temperature dependent resistance shown in Fig. Recently, Carnicom et al The fit of B c1 (T) data for TaRh2B2 to Eq. 23 (for which we used κ(0) = 48 k B T c (deduced from the specific-heat data) reported by Carnicom et al In regard of the Pauli-Chandrasekhar-Clogston limiting field, B PCC (0) = 11.9 ± 0.6 T, which was calculated based on deduced Δ(0) = 0.976 ± 0.054 meV and assumed g = 2. This value is well matched to the extrapolated ground state upper critical field B c2 (0) = 11.7 T reported by Carnicom et al However, if one looks at (T,Bappl = 0) data for NbRh2B2 (Fig. Additionally, the application of Eq. 23 to fit B c1 (T) data for NbRh2B2 returned different free-fitting parameters from those ones reported by Carnicom et al and the ratio: k B T c = 3.45 ± 0.12, which indicates that this compound is weak-coupled superconductor. Because all deduced values were significantly different from the values reported by Carnicom et al where γ 0 , A, and Δ(0) are the free-fitting parameters. It should be stressed that all low-T asymptotes of the Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer theory, which for s-wave superconductors were first proposed by Mühlschlegel Thus, we limited C el (T, B = 0) to the minimal dataset, for which the fit to Eq. 32 can be converged. This value was calculated for: and the fit is shown in Fig. is in unprecedent agreement with the value of Δ(0) deduced from the analysis of B c1 (T) (Fig. is different, but not overwhelmingly different with the extrapolated B c2 (0) = 18.0 T In conclusion, in this paper, we propose a mathematical routine to deduce the temperature dependent first flux entry field data, B p (T), from DC magnetization data, M(Bappl), by utilizing a power-law fitting function for which the threshold criterion Mc can be chosen based on convention, similar to the electric field criterion of Ec = 1 V/cm, which is widely used to define critical currents in superconductors. The routine can be an additional and, from our point of view, a more formalized mathematical tool to extract B p (T) data from experimental DC magnetization curves. The proposed routine, from other hand, has reasonably strict requirements for the raw experimental data. One of the most important requirements is that measurements should be performed by using a very small steps of Bappl, especially for samples with the power-law exponent n ≲ 5 to deduce B p (T) dataset with reasonable accuracy. This is the author's peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online version of record will be different from this version once it has been copyedited and typeset. In addition, we demonstrated how deduced/reported B p (T) datasets can be analysed to extract the ground state energy gap, Δ(0), gap-to-transition temperature ratio, 2Δ Carnicom et al Green balls show the chosen values for which satisfy the condition of M(B appl )-M 0 -k×B appl M c ≅ 31. This is the author's peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online version of record will be different from this version once it has been copyedited and typeset.PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE ASDOI:10.1063/5.0081288