Since the discovery of superconductivity in infinite-layer nickelates RNiO2 (R=La, Pr, Nd), great research efforts have been paid to unveil its underlying superconducting mechanism. However, the physical origin of the intriguing hole-doped superconductivity phase diagram, characterized by a superconductivity dome sandwiched between two weak insulators, is still unclear. Here, we present a microscopic theory for electronic structure of nickelates from a fundamental model-based perspective. We found that the appearance of weak insulator phase in lightly and heavily hole-doped regime is dominated by Mottness and Hundness, respectively, exhibiting a unique orbital-selective doping originated from the competition of Hund interaction and crystal field splitting. Moreover, the superconducting phase can also be created in the "mixed" transition regime between Mott-insulator and Hund-induced insulator, exactly reproducing the experimentally observed superconducting phase diagram. Our findings not only demonstrate the orbital-dependent strong-correlation physics in Ni 3d states, but also provide a unified understanding of superconducting phase diagram in hole-doped infinite-layer nickelates, which are distinct from the well-established paradigms in cuprates and iron pnictides. To decipher how superconductivity (SC) emerges from normal state is a crucial step toward the physical understanding of unconventional superconductor Although the SC mechanism in infinite-layer nickelates is a controversial topic, there has been several theoretical consensus for its electronic structures. The normal state is more proximate to a Mott-Hubbard insulator In this work, driven by recent x-ray experimental observations First-principals analysis.-To construct a reliable microscopic model of nickelates, an accurate description of its crystal field splitting (CFS) is the first step, which will shed lights on bonding nature and put strong constrains on model. Recently, the experimental measurement of CFS in nickelates has been exploited by resonant inelastic x-ray scattering (RIXS) Due to such a disagreement between theory and experiment, we use three different methods to check the CFS in detail. First, the CFS is calculated through Wannier downfolding, dubbed as "crystal" method. Using five effective Ni 3d orbitals to fit the first-principles band structures (Fig. where σ is spin index, i and α is site-and orbital-index for 3d In order to investigate the interactions in nickelates, we consider the following Hamiltonian where U (U ′ ) denotes intra-(inter-)orbital Coulomb repulsion, and J H denotes Hund's coupling. We take U ′ = U -2J H so that the Hamiltonian is rotationally invariant in the orbital space. The U (U ′ ) and J H on 3d WFs are estimated from the first-principles calculations with constrained random phase approximation (cRPA) Two weakly insulators.-Having established the microscopic two-band Hubbard model with orbitals relevant to lowenergy physics of nickelates, we first consider the evolution of its electronic structures upon hole-doping. We introduce a slave-boson formalism Furthermore, the competition between Hundness and Mottness can be revealed by the renormalization factor Z α (i.e. inverse of effective mass ∼ m -1 α ) of two bands, which qualifies the effective carrier quasi-particle weight, as shown in Fig. Here we stress that the "mixed" phase exhibits weakly insulating behavior in both lightly and heavily hole-doped regimes (Fig. Superconductivity.-Last we turn to study the SC in our model. We assume the carrier pairing is mediated by the spin fluctuations, and additional anti-ferromagnetic interactions between the moment of charge carriers survive , where J denotes the effective spin exchange strength between 3d x 2 -y 2 orbitals. Then we treat this interaction at the mean-field level, and selfconsistently solve the pairing strength and critical temperature in the Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) equations (see To see the robustness of SC, other η and J H values are studied here. Due to the screening effect from other 3d WFs, the realistic J H between 3d x 2 -y 2 and 3d xy may deviate from the value listed in Tab. I up to 30%. And the three different models in determining CFS allows a reasonable window for η. In Fig. Conclusion.-Using comprehensive many-body computations based on a first-principles microscopic Hamiltonian, we present a unified physical picture for understanding the holedoping superconducting phase diagram in infinite-layer nickelates Supplementary Materials for: " Microscopic Theory of Superconducting Phase Diagram in Infinite-Layer Nickelates " In this supplemental materials, we provide some more numerical results to support the conclusions we have discussed in the main text. In Sec. A, we present the computational details of density-functional theory and dynamical mean-field theory calculations, and make a comparison with CaCuO 2 . In Sec. B, we present an introduction of the slave-boson method for meanfield calculations. In Sec. C, we outline the Bogoliubov-de Gennes equation for superconductivity used in this work. In Sec. D, we provide further discussion to understand the contribution of R 5d electrons from rare-earth element. A-1. Crystal structure Density functional theory (DFT) calculations are performed within the plane wave, projector augmented wave method as implemented in the Vienna ab initio simulation package VASP To obtain parameters such as onsite energy and hopping integral, we downfold the full Hamiltonian into the subspace in Wannier90 package the Hamiltonian of 17 bands as bare Hamiltonian). In this limit, the obtained onsite energy of Ni 3d WFs is shown in Fig. Furthermore, in the downfolding process, we can construct "effective" (five) Ni 3d orbitals only, dubbed as the crystal model (compared with cluster method as shown below). In practice, this is equivalent to choosing subspace as (five) Ni 3d orbitals only in the Wannier downfolding. And the obtained on-site energy for Ni 3d orbitals is shown in Fig. Based on the above band structure calculations and Wannier downfolding scheme, here we can calculate the effective 3d orbital sequence (which is related to the RIXS experiment) through the cluster model proposed by Eskes et al. The other symmetry allowed hoppings are shown in Fig. At step-3, we can construct a 2 × 2 matrix for each 3d and the corresponding effective p orbitals. Diagonalizing the matrix gives two eigenvalues. Since the effective p orbitals have lower onsite energies than 3d, the higher eigenvalue gives the onsite energy of related effective 3d orbitals. For NdNiO 2 , the parameters from above downfolding are: Importantly, the cluster method can also infer the information on the effective 3d orbitals. Here we compare NiO 4 cluster from NdNiO 2 and CuO 4 cluster from CaCuO 2 (see A-6 for more information). At shown in Tab. III, CaCuO 2 is a typical charge-transfer insulator and the contribution from O 2p orbitals is close to 50%, except for d z 2 effective orbitals. But the 2p contributions are much smaller in NiO 4 , here we take effective 3d x 2 -y 2 orbital as an example. We see the weight of O 2p in this effective orbital of NdNiO 2 is around 23.8%. As a comparison, we find the weight of O 2p orbital in CaCuO 2 is around 44.8%. Thus, the component of O p-orbital in NiO 4 is only half of that in CuO 4 . This is one of key difference between NdNiO 2 and CaCuO 2 . This difference is able to explain that, in the recent EELS experiment DFT+DMFT provides an impurity model approach towards 3d orbital sequence. We have performed calculations with LaNiO 2 and NdNiO 2 . In both compounds, Ni-3d orbitals are considered as correlated impurities. In addition, for NdNiO 2 , two different methodologies are employed for Nd-4f orbitals, namely 1) open-core treatment, and 2) correlated impurity on the equal-footing as Ni-3d. For each case, we have performed calculations using both U d = 5.0 eV, J d = 0.8 eV and U d = 6.0 eV, J d = 0.9 eV. For the realistic Nd calculations, U f = 6.0 eV, J f = 0.7 eV is employed for Nd-4f orbitals as well. In all calculations, the continuous time quantum Monte carlo (CTQMC) impurity solver is employed. The solver samples 2×10 9 steps at 116K. We show the crystal field splitting obtained from DFT+DMFT calculations in TAB. IV. In all cases, the low-energy effective crystal field splitting has the same order as experimental observation. Here we conclude the DMFT calculations give consistent results about the Ni 3d sequence. To make a comparison with cuprates, here we consider the infinite layer cuprate CaCuO 2 In the main text, we have shown numerical results and detailed discussion on the crystal field splitting of Ni 3d orbitals. Here, we would like to provide a physical picture to understand this result. A vast of band structure calculations have shown a multi-band nature around the Fermi level We use slave-boson mean-field method to deal with the interaction between electrons. The slave-boson mean-field method was first introduced to describe the un-occupied states In this paper, we use two-orbital slave boson method to deal with interaction term where α = 1, 2 (label d x 2 -y 2 and d xy respectively) is band index, and σ =↑, ↓ is spin index. These 16 slave-boson states have been listed in Tab. V. The introduction of 16 slave-bosons enlarge the Hilbert space to an unphysical one, so we need some local constraints to form a physical space. Summing up all slave boson operators we define And define the operators Thus, the physical subspace is given by two kinds local constraints: These constraints ensure that the slave-boson states form a complete set in the physical local Hilbert space of the slave-boson model. The first relation (S6) represents the completeness of the boson operators, i.e., the total probability of slave-bosons on one site is 1. The second relation (S7) is similar to the conservation of the number of particles, i.e., the charge of bosons should be equal to the electron number. Therefore, we have to ensure that in the physical subspace the operators Qiασ are identical to the operators f † iασ fiασ . Using these constraints and neglecting the spin-flip and pair-hopping term in Hund coupling, the interaction term becomes quadratic in the boson operators : But the hopping term become more complex by the correction of slave-bosons. There is a mapping for hopping term: where The "z-operators" keep track of the bosons during hopping processes and the choice of the "z-operators" is not unique. In our choice, the hopping term canbe written as : Only the hopping term is corrected here, and the on-site energy is unchanged. The saddle-point approximation is equivalent to a mean-field approximation where the Bose fields and Lagrange multipliers are treated as static and homogeneous fields And we define a new factor q ασ =< z † ασ zασ > to describe the corraction of hopping. In our choice, q-factor is defined as a real number from 0 to 1. And as Hubbard interaction strength increase, q-factors decrease. If the band is half-filling, q-factor will become zero which means a Mott insulator. And the hopping term can be written as where η k = cos k x -cos k y , asuming a d-wave symmetry pairing, and we define order parameters as Before to solve the Hamiltonian (S20), we need to consider the influence by slave-bosons. As mentioned in the previous section, slave boson method modifies hopping term with q-factors, so we also introduce the q-factors into superconductivity: And order parameters also be modified by q-factors: So we can conclude that if the electron kinetic energy is zero, there is no superconductivity in system. To slove the Hamiltonian (S22), we introduce the BdG method. The Bogoliubov transformation of Fermion operator is where the ′ over the summation means only sum with positive energy eigenvalue, γ † nkσ and γnkσ are the quasi-particle generation and annihilation operators and they satisfy the anticommutation relation. By using Bogoliubov transformation, the diagonalized Hamiltonian canbe written as We mark a new kinetic energy parameter as ε k = -2(K + t α )(cos k x + cos k y ) for simplicity. And the commutation relation between the creation (annihilation) operator of electrons and the system Hamiltonian is Substitute Eq. (S24) and Eq. (S25) into Eq. (S26) and compare the coefficients of the quasi-particle operators on both sides of the equation. We can get the coupled equations of coefficients {u nk , v nk }: And the self-consistent equations of mean-field order parameter and number of density can be written as where n F (E nk ) is the Fermi-Dirac distribution with energy E nk . Self-consistent iteration Eq. (S27) and Eq. (S28), we can get the mean-field order parameters. The last point to mention is that although the superconducting order parameter ∆ d is written here as a complex number, it is actually a real number under the conditions we consider. In the main text, we only keep two correlated Ni 3d orbitals in the construction of effective model, by neglecting 5d electron band from rare-earth element. Here we present several remarks, and explain why we discard R 5d electron band in the effective model: 1. We notice that, in a recent experiment on Nd 6 Ni 5 O 8 compound 2. In infinite-layer nickelates, the band around the Γ point is mainly made of 5d z 2 orbital, which has sizable hybridization with Ni 3d z 2 orbital. However, as we elucidated in the main text, both RIXS experiment 3. Under hole-doping, 5d band around the Γ point quickly vanishes (or its contribution around the Fermi level vanishes), which implies this 5d band is irrelevant to the superconducting nature Based on the above reasons, we speculate that the 5d band from rare-earth element contributes to modify the electron correlations on Ni 3d z 2 orbital through the hybridization effect, and to serve as a charge reservoir. In this regarding, the existence of a R-5d band can explain that the charge carriers changes from electron-like to hole-like upon hole doping in the Hall measurement. That is, The existence of R-5d band contributes electron-like carriers in the parent compound, and then these electron-like carriers continues reduce upon hole doping. At the critical doping level, contribution of R-5d band around Fermi level vanishes, so that the carrier type becomes hole-like. This is confirmed in many DFT calculations, e.g. ǫ(1) and ǫ(2) are onsite energy for d x 2 -y 2 and dxy WFs. t(1) & t(2) (t ′ (1) & t ′ (2)) are in-plane nearest (next-nearest) neighbor hopping strength for d x 2 -y 2 and dxy WFs. U (U ′ ) and JH represent the intra-(inter-)orbital Coulomb repulsion and Hund's coupling. R ǫ(1) -ǫ(2) t(1) t ′ (1) t(2) t ′ (2) U U ′ JH bitals {d x 2 -y 2 , d xy } more relevant to Fermi level [39], √ 2 (pz 2 -pz 4 ) is omitted for symmetry reason. State ǫ(d) ǫ(effective p) Hopping {d x 2 Here dyz -1 √ 2 (pz 2 -pz 4 ) is omitted for symmetry reason. O p weight d x 2 -y 2 -1 2 (px 1 -py 2 -px 3 + py 4 ) d z 2 -1 2 (px 1 + py 2 -px 3 -py 4 ) dxy -1 2 (py 1 + px 2 -py 3 -px 4 ) dxz -1 √ 2 (pz 1 -pz 3 ) FIG. S5. Momentum-resolved spectral function from DFT+DMFT calculations for LaNiO2 and NdNiO2 at 116 K. A-6. 3d sequence in CaCuO2