Topological superconductivity is an exotic phenomenon due to the symmetry-protected topological surface state, in which a quantum system has an energy gap in the bulk but supports gapless excitations confined to its boundary. Symmetries including central and time-reversal (TRS), along with their relations with topology, are crucial for topological superconductivity. We report muon spin relaxation/rotation (μSR) experiments on a topological noncentrosymmetric superconductor PbTaSe2 to study its TRS and gap symmetry. Zero-field μSR experiments indicate the absence of internal magnetic field in the superconducting state, consistent with previous μSR results. Furthermore, transverse-field μSR measurements reveals that the superconducting gap of PbTaSe2 is an isotropic three-dimensional fully-gapped single-band. The fully-gapped results can help understand the pairing mechanism and further classify the topological superconductivity in this system. In unconventional superconductors, symmetries in addition to U(1) gauge symmetry are broken in the superconducting state, leading to exotic and potentially useful properties, therefore realization and study of superconductivity in systems with reduced symmetry is one of the most crucial research field. Among these, noncentrosymmetric crystal structures with significant spin-orbital coupling are of particular interest Topological superconductivity is an exotic phenomenon due to the symmetry-protected topological surface state Recently, a noncentrosymmetric superconductor PbTaSe 2 with transition temperature T c = 3.7 K was reported to host a Z 2 topological state with topological nodal-line state by ab initio calculations, angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) and soft pointcontact spectroscopy experiments It is worth noting that PbTaSe 2 is a 3-dimensional material with strong anisotropic behavior We report the μSR experiment results on single crystalline PbTaSe 2 . No evidence of TRS breaking is confirmed. We find fully-gapped superconductivity in both in-plane and out-of-plane directions. Our results prefer the single-band picture. Most intriguingly, the normalized superfluid density in two directions have exactly same temperature dependence, suggesting a possible isotropic three-dimensional gap. PbTaSe 2 single crystals were grown by the chemical vapor transport (CVT) method as previously reported μSR experiments were performed at the DOLLY beam line at Paul Scherrer Institut, Villigen, Switzerland. A mosaic of single crystals were stacked and aligned with the (001) basal plane attached to a copper sample holder using dilute GE varnish. Helium-3 cryostat was used to cool the sample down to 0.25 K. In a μSR experiment, spin-polarized positive muons are implanted into a sample. On decay of the muon after an average lifetime of 2.2 μs, a positron is emitted preferentially along the direction of the muon spin. The time evolution of muon spin polarization is determined by detecting decay positrons from an ensemble of 1-2 × 10 7 muons. The functional form of the muon spin polarization depends on the spatial distribution and dynamical fluctuations of the muon magnetic environment. During the experiments, the initial muon spin is 45 • from the c-axis, which was surrounded by four detectors: Forward, Backward, Up, and Down. Hence we can measure the muon spin polarization along two different directions, i.e. parallel and perpendicular to the c-axis. As a trade, due to the angle between muon spin and detectors, the initial asymmetry in our experiments is much lower than the common value that is about 0.25. Zerofield (ZF) μSR was performed above and below T c to study whether there is spontaneous small magnetic field in the superconducting state due to the TRS breaking In transverse-field (TF) μSR experiments, an external magnetic field μ 0 H (field cooled from above T c in a superconductor) was applied to induce a flux-line lattice (FLL) where the internal magnetic field distribution is determined by the magnetic penetration depth λ, the vortex core radius and the structure of the FLL. The external field μ 0 H should be between μ 0 H c1 and μ 0 H c2 . In our case, μ 0 H c1 is about 4-9 mT The muon spin relaxation rate is related to the root-mean-square (rms) width of the internal magnetic field distribution in the FLL, and hence also related to λ, the details of which will be discussed after presenting the experimental results. We first applied magnetic field parallel to c-axis to obtain the penetration depth in the abplane and study the gap symmetry in that direction The μSR data were analyzed with musrfit software package Representative ZF asymmetry time spectra at selective temperatures are shown in Fig. where the first and second terms represent sample and background signals, respectively. Here a 0 is the initial asymmetry, and f denotes the fraction of muons stopping in the sample. The data of the first 0.1 μs is dropped to avoid the early-time problems. The temperature independent f = 0.68 is determined from TF-μSR. The dynamic ZF Kubo-Toyabe (KT) function G dyn KT , which was used previously to fit ZF-μSR data of Cu The temperature dependence of the ZF relaxation rate Λ is shown in Fig. 1. H c-axis Fig. The TF-μSR asymmetry spectra in PbTaSe 2 can be well described by the function where the first and second terms represent sample and background signals, respectively. The relaxation rate of copper σ TF Cu = 0.24 μs -1 is also temperature independent, consistent with previous report Similar results were obtained with field parallel to abplane, shown in Fig. The Gaussian relaxation rate σ is related to the Gaussian internal field distribution where Φ 0 = 2.07 × 10 -15 Wb is the fluxoid quantum, and ξ is the coherence length. Based on the well-known relation we obtain ξ c = 32.1 nm and ξ ab = 16.2 nm, where ξ c and ξ ab are the coherence length parallel to c-axis and abplane, respectively That is to say, σ SC is proportional to λ -2 , and the complicated coefficient can be reduced by normalizing σ SC (T ) to σ SC (0). Based on the London approximation, the superfluid density n s (T ) is also proportional to λ -2 . For a fully gapped s-wave superconductor, n s can also be written as where n 0 is the superfluid density at zero temperature, E is the energy difference above the Fermi energy, f = 1/[exp(E/k B T ) + 1] is the Fermi function, k B = 8.617 × 10 -5 eV/K is the Boltzmann's constant, and ∆ is the gap function. For a fully-gapped s-wave superconductor, the temperature dependence of ∆ can be approximated by where ∆ 0 is the zero temperature gap The fitting results of normalized superfluid density n s (T )/n s (0) are plotted in Fig. Previous work using μSR reported that two-gap model could describe the in-plane behavior of PbTaSe 2 better Comparing our experimental results with previous theoretical calculations, we can find similar isotropic superconducting gap around H point in reciprocal space as defined in Ref. The anisotropy of relaxation rate in different directions suggest an anisotropic penetration depth λ. Since λ relates to effective mass, the strong anisotropy suggests a possible tensor effective mass. This point is further supported by the anisotropic μ 0 H c2 and coherence length ξ. Noticed that spin-orbital coupling plays the most significant role at H point that induces topological properties Given that the dominant superconducting gap of PbTaSe 2 is the isotropic gap around H point, PbTaSe 2 is a 3D material. Besides, the fully gapped picture is also consistent with topological superconductivity. The presence of TRS is consistent with the picture of a 3D Z 2 topological superconductor In summary, we performed ZF and TF-μSR experiments on single crystalline PbTaSe 2 . The preservation of TRS is confirmed by ZF-μSR. The pairing symmetry is derived from TF-μSR, indicating an isotropic 3D fullygapped single-band picture, satisfying the requirement of topological superconductivity. The complicated band structure could account for the multi-band picture, but the other bands are not dominant in superconductivity.