Coupling a conventional s-wave superconductor to a ferromagnet allows, via the proximity effect, to generate superconducting triplet correlations. This feature can be employed to achieve a superconducting triplet spinvalve effect in superconductor-ferromagnet (SF) hybrid structures, for example by switching the magnetizations of the ferromagnets between parallel and antiparallel configurations in F1SF2 and SF1F2 trilayers, or in SF bilayers with both Rashba and Dresselhaus SOC. It was recently reported that geometric curvature can control the generation of long ranged triplets. We use this property to show that the superconducting critical temperature of an SF hybrid nanowire can be tuned by varying the curvature of the ferromagnetic side alone, with no need of another ferromagnet or SOC. We show that the variation of the critical temperature as a function of the curvature can be exploited to obtain a robust, curvature-controlled, superconducting triplet spin-valve effect. Furthermore, we perform an analysis with the inclusion of spin-orbit coupling and explain how it modifies the spin-valve effect both quantitatively and qualitatively. In recent years, progress in the fabrication of nanostructures with curved geometries have opened new perspectives regarding their properties and applications. From etching Micromagnetic studies show that geometric curvature in magnetic materials induces two main effects, an anisotropy term and a chiral or extrinsic Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction (DMI) The effects of geometric curvature in nanostructures have been extensively studied in the ballistic framework. In these systems curvature has two main consequences: the appearance of a quantum geometric potential causing interesting phenomena at the nanoscale Interestingly, it has been demonstrated that Rashba spinorbit coupling in magnetic structure leads to DMI and magnetic anisotropy The fact that geometric curvature has non-trivial consequences on nanostructures suggests that the inclusion of geometrically curved materials, and in particular magnetic materials, could provide new prospects for the modeling of spintronic devices, as we already showed for a superconductor/ferromagnet/superconductor (SFS) Josephson Junction in our previous work In the field of superconducting spintronics The critical temperature T c of superconducting hybrid structures can be influenced and controlled through the magnetic properties of ferromagnets, allowing in some cases to realize so-called superconducting spin-valves. Such devices were proposed in the form of SF 1 F 2 In this work we show that geometric curvature alone allows for control of the superconducting critical temperature of an SF structure with a curved ferromagnet, thereby realizing a superconducting spin-valve effect. We also show that the inclusion of SOC can increase the magnitude of this effect. The article is organized as follows: in Section II we introduce the relevant Hamiltonian and treat it within a covariant formulation for the introduction of geometric curvature. In Section III we extend the formalism to the Usadel equation, focusing on a curved nanowire. We then present our numerical results in Section IV, followed by a discussion and summary in Section V. We will start by considering the following Hamiltonian describing the motion of electrons in the presence of spin-orbit coupling: where k = -i∇, m * is the electron effective mass and σ is the Pauli vector. The components of the vector α give the strength of the spin-orbit coupling due to asymmetric confinement in the different directions. In order to study how the Hamiltonian of Eq. ( As a start, we parametrize the 3D space as R(s, n, b) = r(s) + n N (s) + b B(s). Here r(s) is the parametrization of the curve in the plane of the curvature and s, n and b are the arclength, normal and binormal coordinates respectively, as it can be seen in Fig. With this, as shown in the Appendix, we obtain the following metric tensor: where η(s, n) = 1κ(s)n. In order to derive the correct form of the Usadel equation for a general curved manifold we rewrite the Hamiltonian of Eq. (1) in a general covariant form: where we used the Einstein summation rule, with the Greek indices running over the components t, n, b in the covariant basis defined in the Appendix. The terms G λμ and G are the inverse and the determinant of the metric tensor respectively, and ǫ λμν is the Levi-Civita symbol. The (space) covariant derivatives are defined through their action on any general covariant vector v μ as λμ v ν , with Γ ν λμ representing the Christoffel symbols: To further simplify the derivation we exploit the last term in Eq. ( With the assumption of weak spin-orbit coupling, the Hamiltonian of Eq. ( Therefore the SOC enters the Hamiltonian with the usual form of a 2×2 matrix-valued SU(2) vector field C. Curvature-induced spin-orbit coupling When a material with initially regular atomic lattice is induced to bend, the interatomic distances become non-uniform, leading to tensile and compressive strains in the material, see Fig. The deformation leads to an additional potential in the material, which for small strains is assumed to be linear in strain where Λ is the deformation potential constant. This approximation should be applicable when the thickness of the material is much smaller than the local radius of curvature. The potential in turn leads to an electric field (see Eq. (A. which when averaged over a volume with infinitesimal thickness ds in the tangential direction results in an electric field pointing along the normal direction In the rest frame of an electron moving with momentum p this translates to a magnetic field B ∼ p × E due to the asymmetry in the normal direction. Here we have defined the curvature-dependent spin-orbit constant α N = Λg|e|κ(s)/4m * c 2 In order to derive an effective Hamiltonian for a curved nanowire one can apply a thin-wall quantization procedure The second term is the quantum geometric potential, which is neglected in the following as it only leads to an overall energy shift. With the use of Eq. ( having a vector structure in the geometric space and a 2 × 2 matrix structure in spin space. In this work we will make use of Green's functions in the diffusive limit and study the dynamics through the second order partial differential Usadel equation The Hamiltonian of Eq. ( We restrict ourselves to the case of diffusive equilibrium, allowing us to consider just the retarded component ĝR of the quasiclassical Green's function to describe the system where ρ3 = diag(1, 1, -1, -1), ε is the quasiparticle energy, ∆ = antidiag(∆, -∆, ∆ * , -∆ * ) with ∆ superconducting order parameter and magnetization M = h μ diag(σ μ , σ * μ ). Here we have set = 1. We have also defined the spacegauge covariant derivative as: where we have defined the gauge-only covariant derivative . We now rewrite the first term of Eq. ( For the case of a nanowire we can ignore the dependence of ĝR on n and b and take the limit n, b → 0. Therefore the Usadel equation takes the form: where the effects of the curvature enter the equation through the Pauli matrices, contained in the spin-orbit field and the magnetization. In order to solve the Usadel equation either analytically or numerically for superconducting hybrid systems, boundary conditions are needed. In this work we will employ the Kupryianov-Lukichev boundary conditions Here ∂I is the gauge covariant derivative at the interface, j refers to the different materials comprising the hybrid system, with j = 1, 2 denoting the materials on the left and right side of the relevant interface, L j represents the length of the material and ζ j = R B /R j is the interface parameter given by the ratio between the barrier resistance R B and its bulk resistance R j . To solve numerically Eq. ( with N = (1-γγ) -1 and Ñ = (1-γγ) -1 and the tilde conjugation denotes the operation γ(s, ε) = γ * (s, -ε). Therefore, with the use of this parametrization we have reduced the equation for the 4 × 4 matrix ĝR to one for the 2 × 2 matrix γ. To study the system depicted in Fig. the Kupriyanov-Lukichev boundary conditions at the SF interface. Substituting Eq. ( where the index j runs over the physical components (see Eq. (A.17)) T, N, B of the SOC field and σ 2 = antidiag(-i, i). In Eq. (20a) both the exchange field vector h = (h T , h N , h B ) and the Pauli vector σ = (σ T , σ N , σ B ) are expressed in curvilinear components. We note that the result obtained here for the Riccati parametrization of the Usadel equation is the same as in Upon substitution of Eq. ( The corresponding equations for γ are simply obtained by tilde conjugation of Eqs. (20a) to (21b). To interpret the effects of the geometrical curvature and spin-orbit coupling components in our system, we will now study the curved ferromagnet in the limit of weak proximity effect. In this limit Here f is the anomalous Green's function, the off-diagonal block matrix in ĝR , and is defined in terms of the scalar function f 0 and the d-vector d = (d T , d N , d B ) representing the condensate functions for the singlet and triplet components, respectively. For the system of Fig. with θ(s) = κs. Consequently, we get the following form for the γ matrix: In this limit it becomes straightforward to identify the SRT For instance, if the exchange field h is directed along the T direction the SRT can be identified with d T , while d N and d B represent the LRTs. The weak proximity limit allows us to consider only the terms linear in γ both in the Usadel equation and in the Kupriyanov-Lukichev boundary conditions. With the SO field given by Eq. ( By inspecting these equations it is possible to understand how the mechanism for singlet-triplet conversion works in the ferromagnet. Let us consider an exchange field along the T direction: at the SF interface on the ferromagnet side, due to the proximity effect, singlets are present, which are partially converted into the SRT component d T by the exchange field. The presence of geometrical curvature and/or spin-orbit coupling results then in the generation of LRT components d N , d z . The effect of κ, α N and α B in Eqs. (24a) to (24c) is twofold: the triplets undergo spin-precession and spin-relaxation. The former can be identified with the terms having a first derivative of a triplet component and describes the rotation of the spin of superconducting triplet correlations while moving along the ferromagnet. The latter appears as an additional imaginary component of the triplet energy and represents a loss of spin information due to frequent impurity scattering. Consequently, both curvature and spin-orbit coupling independently provide a pathway for LRT generation. At the same time, if their value becomes too large, they become detrimental for the triplets. An estimate of the value for the crossover between the two regimes can be provided by comparison of the spinprecession prefactor ǫ p ∼ D F κ/L F and the spin-relaxation prefactor ǫ r ∼ D F κ 2 /2, where we for simplicity consider geometric curvature only. Therefore, a transition from spinprecession dominated to spin-relaxation dominated regimes occurs when ǫ p ∼ ǫ r , i.e. when κL F ∼ 2 or κL F /π ∼ 0.6. The inclusion of SOC terms will shift the transition towards 0 Finally, we note that in Eqs. (24a) to (24c) κ and α N always appear together in the same form, highlighting that they have the same effect on the d-vector components. It is therefore possible to define an "effective" curvature κ = κ + 2α N and consider α N as a factor which boosts the effects of the geometrical curvature. In order to obtain numerical results for the hybrid system of Fig. where λ is the coupling constant between electrons, N 0 is the density of states at the Fermi level, γ ≃ 0.577 is the Euler-Mascheroni constant, and T c is the critical temperature of the hybrid system. ∆ 0 and T c0 are the superconducting gap and critical temperature of the bulk superconductor, respectively. Once a self-consistent solution is found, we can extract the critical temperature of the system for different values of the geometrical curvature κ, the intrinsic and extrinsic (curvatureinduced) spin-orbit coupling constants α B and α N , and ferromagnet and superconductor lengths L F and L S . The critical temperature plots were obtained through a spline interpolation of 17 data points for geometric curvature between 0 (straight wire) and 2π/L F (ring). We consider the exchange field of the ferromagnet to be along the tangential direction h T and the interface parameter ζ = 3. We normalize energies to the bulk gap of the superconductor at zero temperature ∆ 0 , and lengths to its (diffusive) coherence length ξ 0 . Furthermore, we considered a conventional s-wave superconductor with the material parameter N 0 λ = 0.2. We note that the critical temperature of the hybrid system will always be smaller than the bulk critical temperature of the superconductor. This is due to the proximity effect, where singlet correlations leak into the ferromagnet. As is clear from Eq. ( Analyzing the curvature dependence of the critical temperature of the hybrid system, a range of parameters give a significant variation with respect to the bulk critical temperature, suggesting a superconducting triplet spin-valve effect tunable via the geometrical curvature. To understand how this effect works we consider again the weak proximity effect limit. As discussed in the previous section, curvature κ and spinorbit coupling constants α N and α B have two effects on the SRT and LRT components: spin-precession and spinrelaxation. While the former, linear in curvature and SOC constants, converts SRTs into LRTs, the latter, proportional to the square curvature and SOC constants, causes their spin to decay while diffusing in the ferromagnet. Therefore, for small κ and/or α N , α B the precession mechanism dominates over the relaxation, and SRT correlations are converted into LRT allowing for more singlets to be converted in SRTs, thus reducing the number of singlets in the superconductor and lowering the critical temperature. On the other hand, when the relaxation FIG. term dominates, for high κ and/or α N , α B , as discussed in the previous section, the triplet components are subjected to spin relaxation, causing them to decay faster. Consequently, κ, α N and α B result in an increased suppression of these superconducting correlations in this case, giving a higher critical temperature of the system. To study this spin-valve effect, we start by considering the case of zero spin-orbit coupling. We consider two different lengths of the superconductor: L S = 0.55ξ 0 and L S = ξ 0 . In Fig. It is worth analyzing the effect of varying the magnitude of the exchange field h in the curved ferromagnet. In Fig. We now consider the presence of curvature-induced spinorbit coupling α N . Since we previously saw that α N is proportional to the curvature we can define it to be α N = aκ, with λg|e|/4mc 2 . In Fig. We briefly note that the α N = 0 curve was obtained by letting κ span from 0 to 4πL F in the numerical calculations. This case is of course unrealistic since we can not go over κ = 2πL F (closed ring), but it is useful for interpreting the results for α N = 0. Another effect of the presence of the curvatureinduced SOC is to broaden the variation over the curvature of T c . This is not so evident in Fig. The effective curvature picture also helps to understand the second region of decreasing T c in Fig. Let us now neglect the curvature-induced SOC and focus only on the intrinsic term proportional to α B . For the sake of completeness we note that this component of the spin-orbit coupling could also be induced extrinsically by generating an asymmetry in the confinement of the nanowire, for instance by an electric field pointing in the binormal direction. In Fig. We conclude with an analysis of the case where both curvature-induced and intrinsic SOC are present. In Fig. The curvature-induced SOC constant normalized to the curvature a = α N /κ depends primarily on two parameters: the deformation potential Λ and the effective mass m * of the electrons. To obtain a rough estimate for the size of a we consider Gallium Manganese Arsenide (Ga,Mn)As, a ferromagnetic semiconductor with effective mass m * ∼ 0.09m e , where m e is the bare electron mass We can also see that a wide range of values of α B ξ 0 / is in principle possible depending on the combination of ferromagnet and superconductor. The Rashba SOC strength varies greatly between materials, but typically lie in the range α B m * / ∼ 1 × 10 -3 eV nm to 1 × 10 -1 eV nm for semiconductors and heavy metals The curvature of the FM is expected to also affect the magnetic state In summary, we have discussed the effects arising in geometrically curved diffusive nanostructures and presented a covariant formalism for the Usadel framework, allowing us to study an SF hybrid nanowire where the ferromagnet presents geometric curvature. By solving the Usadel equation we have calculated the critical temperature of the structure as a function of the geometric curvature, for various parameters, with and without spin-orbit coupling, which predicts the behaviour for a broad range of possible material choices. We have found that our system presents promising characteristics for the realization of a superconducting spin-valve: the critical temperature can be controlled by varying the curvature of the ferromagnet alone. For the right choice of parameters the critical temperature of the structure undergoes a consistent variation when varying the curvature, up to 40% of the critical temperature of the bulk superconductor. Moreover, we have explored the effects of curvature-induced and intrinsic spin-orbit coupling and observed that in some cases their presence boosts the spin-valve effect. We also noted that analyzing the dependence of the critical temperature on the curvature can help understand how relevant the spin-orbit coupling is in the system. We have shown that geometric curvature alone can tune properties for which previously magnetic inhomogeneities or multiple spin-orbit coupling components were needed. Curvature control of the superconducting proximity effect and long range triplet generation therefore open for many new possibilities in superconducting spintronics device designs and func- tion. Realization and characterization of geometrically curved nanostructures, especially those including magnetic materials, is still in an early phase, so that many new possibilities are yet to be explored.