We report on the charge-ordered structure of LiRh2O4 arising below the metal-insulator transition at 170 K. Structural studies using synchrotron X-rays have revealed that the charge-ordered states of Rh 3+ and Rh 4+ with dimerization are realized in the low-temperature phase below 170 K. Although the low-temperature ground state resembles that of CuIr2S4, a charge ordering pattern satisfying the Anderson condition is realized in LiRh2O4. Based on structural information such as the short-range order of dimers appearing above the transition temperature and the weakening of the correlation between rhodium one-dimensional chains appearing in the crystal structure, we argue that the Coulomb interaction plays an important role in determining the charge ordering patterns. Structural symmetry breaking caused by the ordering of electronic multiple degrees of freedom coupled to the lattice, occurs ubiquitously in transition metal compounds The spinel LiRh 2 O 4 has a 4d 5.5 electronic configuration that is isoelectric to CuIr 2 S 4 , and shows a nonmagnetic insulating transition below 170 K In this letter, we report the identification of a charge-ordered structure with dimerization in the lowtemperature phase of LiRh 2 O 4 . From synchrotron powder X-ray diffraction (PXRD) experiments, we clarified that the correlations between one-dimensional chains of Rh extending in the xy-plane were weakened in the band Jahn-Teller phase. Hereinafter, we refer to the onedimensional chains of Rh with xy-, yz-, and zx-characters as "xy-chain", "yz-chain", and "zx-chain", respectively. Consequently, the local dimers on the xy-chain becomes weakly interacting between the xy-chains. Upon cooling, the fluctuating local dimers become ordered, and a charge-ordered state with dimers is realized in the same manner as the ground state of magnetite proposed by Anderson LiRh 2 O 4 powder samples were prepared according to the reference Figure In Figure Since the atomic scattering factor of Rh is much larger than that of Li and O and contributes significantly to the diffraction intensity, we will focus on the contribution of Rh in the following sections and discuss the cause of the peak broadening. The pyrochlore lattice of LiRh 2 O 4 consists of an entanglement of xy, yz, and zx-chains oriented by the t 2g orbitals of Rh, as shown in Figure Of the two split peaks present in the IT-phase, the sharper peak splits into two when the temperature is lowered to the LT-phase, as shown in Figure The results of the Rietveld analysis assuming space group A2 1 22 are shown in Figure The G(r) corresponding to the local structure was obtained for the PDF analysis of the diffraction data. The data (blue circles) at 30 K are compared to a model G(r) calculated using the A2 1 22 symmetry in Figures The proposed structure is schematically shown in Figure For our system, the local dimers forming the IT-phase reported previously may provide important information Thus, in LiRh 2 O 4 , dimer fluctuations appearing in the IT-phase develop into the ordered state at LTphase. Since the orbital degrees of freedom have already been lost in the IT-phase, which is a unique feature of LiRh 2 O 4 , it is clear that this dimer fluctuation is a different state from the ODL. Furthermore, it has been argued that the ODL is not a direct reflection of the low-temperature ordered state and needs to be studied independently Finally, we discuss the origin of the dimer fluctuations. For example, the ODL appears due to local nematicity in the iron-based superconductor FeSe. It has been argued that the existence of ODL explains the discrepancy between the tetragonal-orthorhombic transition temperature of 90 K and the huge energy splitting between 3d yz and 3d xz orbitals corresponding to 580 K 