In two-dimensional (2D) systems, the melting from a solid to an isotropic liquid can occur via an intermediate phase that retains orientational order. However, in 2D superconducting vortex lattices, the effect of orientational correlations on transport, and their interplay with disorder remain open questions. Here we study a 2D weakly pinned vortex system in amorphous MoGe films over an extensive range of temperatures (T ) and perpendicular magnetic fields (H) using linear and nonlinear transport measurements. We find that, at low fields, the resistivity obeys the Vogel-Fulcher-Tamman (VFT) form, ρ(T ) ∝ exp [ -W (H)/(T -T 0 (H))], characteristic of fragile glasses. As H increases, T 0 (H) is suppressed to zero, and a standard vortex liquid behavior consistent with a T = 0 superconducting transition is observed. Our findings, supported also by simulations, suggest that the presence of orientational correlations gives rise to a heterogeneous dynamics responsible for the VFT behavior. The effects of quenched disorder become dominant at high H, where a crossover to a strong-glass behavior is observed. This is a new insight into the dynamics of melting in 2D systems with competing orders. Thermal melting of 2D crystalline solids has been investigated in a variety of systems, including colloids, electrons on the surface of liquid helium, raregas atoms on substrates such as graphite, liquid crystal films, dust plasmas, and vortices in thin superconducting (SC) films in a magnetic field Here, we perform extensive magnetotransport measurements on a-MoGe thin films similar to those used in the STS studies that revealed the presence of hexatic correlations at low H Our samples are 22 nm thick a-MoGe films with SC transition temperatures T c ∼ 7.6 K at zero field (see Methods), and low normal-state sheet resistances R s ≈ 78 Ω indicative of a very weak disorder Measurements of ρ(H) at fixed T (Fig. To explore the melting of the VL, we extract ρ(T ) curves at fixed H (Fig. is often used to describe the linear resistivity in the vortex liquid regime at low enough T ). ( Here W (H) is independent of T , and T0 (H) provides the temperature where ρ is expected to vanish. Since we are interested in the vortex diffusivity, we have also performed fits to ρ(T ) = (h/2e) 2 n v D v /(k B T ), where n v = B/Φ 0 is the vortex density (Φ 0 = h/2e is the quantum of magnetic flux attached to a single vortex, h is Planck's constant, e is electron charge), k B is the Boltzmann constant, and the vortex diffusion coefficient For both ( The results for T 0 (H) are shown in Fig. The behavior observed in the high-field (H > H * , T 0 = 0, T > T c ) regime ("Arrhenius" in Fig. is a signature of a viscous vortex liquid In the normal state (H > H c2 ), V -I characteristics are ohmic (Fig. Within the context of glasses, one can define a temperature T 0 , where the relaxation time diverges and the configurational entropy vanishes We performed Monte Carlo (MC) simulations on the 2D XY model in a transverse field. Its Hamiltonian reads: where θ i represents the SC phase of the condensate, J the effective Josephson-like interaction between nearest neighboring sites, and F μ i is the Peierls phase resulting from the minimal substitution prescription, The intensity of the magnetic field B ẑ = ∇ × A can be expressed in terms of the quantum-flux fraction f passing through a unitary plaquette f = Ba 2 /Φ 0 , where a = 1 is the lattice spacing. Within the model (4), vortices appear as topological excitations of the phase variable θ i , allowing for the direct characterization To establish the superfluid phase, we computed the superfluid stiffness J s , namely the global phase rigidity of the condensate (see Methods). At the same time, to establish the orientational order of the VL, we computed the six-fold orientational order parameter G 6 , where the sum runs over the N v vortices of the lattice, ψ 6j indicates the local orientational order relative to the j-th vortex (see Methods for details), and • • • denotes the thermal average and the average over 10 independent numerical simulations. The temperature dependence of J s and G 6 is shown in Fig. To study vortex dynamics we tracked in time each individual vortex, and we computed the vortex mean-square displacement ∆r 2 (t) at several temperatures, as shown in the inset of Fig. The most remarkable observation is that the temperature T 0 extracted from the VFT fit in Fig. Our study has revealed similarities between the thermal melting of a 2D VL in weakly pinned a-MoGe films and the behavior of fragile glass-forming liquids. The results of our numerical work strongly support the existence of a glassy dynamics in the absence of strong disorder. Using the analogy with strong and fragile glasses Samples. a-MoGe films with thickness t = 22 nm were grown on surface-oxidized Si substrate through pulsed laser deposition. The reported chemical stoichiometry of these thin films, as seen from the dispersive X-ray analysis, is Mo 71±1.5 Ge 29±1.5 ; their properties have been described in detail elsewhere Measurements. Resistance was measured using the standard four-probe ac technique (∼13 Hz or 17 Hz) with either SR 7265 lock-in amplifiers or a LS 372 resistance bridge. Some of the measurements were performed using a dc reversal method with a Keithley 6221 current source and a Keithley 2182A nanovoltmeter. The excitation current densities were 0.1-10 A cm -2 , depending on the temperature, and low enough to avoid Joule heating. dV /dI measurements were carried out by applying a dc current bias I dc and a small ac current excitation (∼ 13 Hz) through the sample (I ac = 1 μA at T > 1 K and I ac = 10 nA at T < 1 K), while measuring the ac voltage across the sample for 150 s and recording the average value for each I dc . Several cryostats were used to cover a wide range of temperatures and fields: a HelioxVL 3 He system (0.25 ≤ T ≤ 200 K) with H up to 9 T; a dilution refrigerator (0.02 ≤ T 1 K) and a 3 He system (0.3 ≤ T < 60 K) in superconducting magnets with H up to 18 T; and a variable-temperature insert (1.8 < T ≤ 200 K) in a Quantum Design PPMS with H up to 9 T. The fields, applied perpendicular to the film surface, were swept at constant temperatures. A low sweep rate of 0.1 T/min was used to avoid heating of the sample due to eddy currents. Measurements in the dilution refrigerator and the HelioxVL 3 He system were equipped with filters, consisting of a 1 kΩ resistor in series with a π-filter [5 dB (60 dB) EMI reduction at 10 MHz (1 GHz)] in each wire at the room temperature end of the cryostat to reduce high-frequency noise and heating by radiation. Furthermore, the dilution refrigerator and the 3 He system measurements in 18 T magnets were carried out in the Millikelvin Facility of the National High Magnetic Field Laboratory, which is an electromagnetically shielded room. Simulations. We have performed Monte Carlo (MC) simulations on a spin system on a square grid with lattice spacing a = 1, linear size L = 56 and uniform magnetic field, whose intensity can be expressed in terms of the quantum-flux fraction f passing through a unitary plaquette f = Ba 2 /Φ 0 . Here we considered f = 1/L, which results in N v = f L 2 = 56 vortices with a given vorticity. Although the system size simulated is smaller than in other numerical simulations of particle systems The superfluid stiffness J s is defined as the linear response to an infinitesimal phase twist in a given direction, say μ, and it reads: It accounts for two contributions: the diamagnetic part J μ d , proportional to the energy density of the system, and the paramagnetic part J μ p , given by the connected current-current response function. As in Eq. ( The local orientational order parameter ψ 6j is obtained by means of a Delaunay triangulation of the VL. It is defined for the hexagonal symmetry, as where N j is the number of nearest neighbors of the j-th vortex, and θ jk is the angle that the bond connecting the two neighboring vortices j and k forms with respect to a fixed direction in the plane. The global six-fold orientational order parameter G 6 is then obtained by summing over all the N v vortices and by computing its average, as given by Eq. ( where Ψ 6 = 1 Nv Nv j=1 ψ 6j with ψ 6j defined in FIG. To further characterize the three phases found, we have computed the structure factor of the vortex lattice defined as: where N v is the total number of vortices, ν(r i ) is the local vortex density, equal to one if a vortex occupies the site r i and zero otherwise, and k is the vortex lattice reciprocal vector. In Fig. The VL has indeed two ways to align with respect to the underlying square lattice: to be perfectly commensurate with the x-axis or with the ŷ-axis. In order to identify the isotropic to hexatic liquid transition, we have computed the orientational susceptibility χ 6 . The susceptibility of the orientational oder parameter χ 6 is defined as where Ψ 6 = 1 Nv Nv j=1 ψ 6j with ψ 6j defined in Eq. ( The heterogeneous nature of the vortex dynamics in the hexatic phase has its fingerprints in different observables. Together with the mean-square displacement ∆r 2 (t) , reported in the main text, we also computed the self-part of the intermediate scattering function F s (|k * |, t), and the non-Gaussian parameter α 2 (t). The resulting trends in time for different temperatures are shown in Fig. where |k * | = 2π/a v (with a v the lattice spacing of the VL) is the reciprocal vector at which the structure factor shows its first peak (see Fig. which quantifies the heterogeneity of the dynamics in terms of strength and extent in time With decreasing temperature the height of the dome increases, signalling the increase of the heterogeneous dynamics strength. At the same time, the peak of the dome moves to longer times, reflecting the increase of the time scale at which vortices escape from their cage. Supplementary Video S1: Heterogeneous vortex motion in the hexatic phase. Images of the vortex motion at T = 0.045 for different MC times. In this regime, the dynamics is strongly heterogeneous in both space and time. The vortices remain indeed trapped for a long time in the cage formed by their neighbors before exiting in a collective burst along the symmetry axis of the vortex lattice. In the video, the vortices are represented as colored disks, centered at a given position x i at time t i . Each frame shows vortex evolution over ten consecutive discrete time steps t i . To help visualize the time evolution, we assigned to each disk a radius r i that is increasing with increasing time t i . As a consequence, larger disks identify the vortex position at larger times. In addition, we add a solid black line connecting the centers of the disks to help visualize the vortex motion as a function of time. The grey lines in the background show the trails left by the vortices during the whole simulation. The horizontal line at the bottom of the image indicates the time flow. Note that the time steps t i are not equally spaced with respect to the MC time. Indeed, for the sake of the memory allocation, we have stored the data each t MC = int(A q ) + kA Nq , with q ∈ [0, N q ], k ∈ [0, N k ] and A = 1.3.