The interaction of crystalline defects leads to strain hardening in bulk metals. Metals with high stacking fault energy (SFE), such as aluminum, tend to have low strain hardening rates due to an inability to form stacking faults and deformation twins. Here, we use in situ SEM mechanical compressions to find that colloidally synthesized defect-free 114 nm Al nanocubes combine a high linear strain hardening rate of 4.1 GPa with a high strength of 1.1 GPa. These nanocubes have a 3 nm selfpassivating oxide layer that has a large influence on mechanical behavior and the accumulation of dislocation structures. Post-compression TEM imaging reveals stable prismatic dislocation loops and the absence of stacking faults. MD simulations relate the formation of dislocation loops and strain hardening to the surface oxide. These results indicate that slight modifications to surface and interfacial properties can induce enormous changes to mechanical properties in high SFE metals. in situ scanning electron microscopy | yield strength | plasticity train hardening in metals is intimately related to the accumulation and interaction between dislocations and other crystalline defects Recently, unusual deformation microstructures have been observed in extruded single crystal Al and Al nanowires which conflict with conventional knowledge of high SFE metals. In bulk single crystal Al samples that undergo equal channel angular pressing, it is found that a crystal orientation that maximizes shear stress for a single twinning system can induce the formation of short, ~10 nm stacking faults and microtwins with thickness of several atomic layers While these previous studies clearly showed the strong influence of initial defect structure, crystal orientation, and surface properties on the deformation in low SFE metals, these unusual deformation mechanisms, and the challenge of achieving both high strength and strain hardening in metallic nanostructures Synthesized Al nanocubes are shown in Figure Pronounced strain hardening occurs, which was quantified using a linear strain hardening rate, Θ = dσ dε . The Al nanocubes exhibited a hardening rate of 4.1 ± 1.6 GPa. The true crosssectional area cannot be measured in situ, so the true strain hardening rate is estimated using the Poisson's ratio of Al Post-compression TEM images of a representative Al nanocube are shown in Figure From the combination of TEM images, FFT analysis, and previous experimental results on (100)-oriented FIB milled Al nanostructures( The statistical likelihood for dislocation interactions decreases in nanoscale samples due to decreased sample volume and increased dislocation annihilation at free surfaces. This has led to minimal strain hardening and large slip events in defect-free fcc Ag It is unclear whether the dislocation loops are the primary driver of plasticity or are a byproduct of other dislocation interactions. Prismatic dislocation loops have been observed to nucleate in single crystal <100>-oriented Al nanostructures in tension but were transient and disappeared with increased strain Al nanocubes differ from other colloidally synthesized fcc nanocubes in that they form a native oxide which serves as a rigid surface that can block dislocation motion at the interface. However, previous work has shown conflicting evidence on the role of a coating. Compression of FIB-milled pillars with sputtered or atomic layer deposited metal or oxide coatings showed strain hardening with final dislocation densities comparable to the Al nanocubes due to the inability of dislocations to annihilate at free surfaces MD simulations of 40 nm Al nanocubes were performed to understand the role of surface roughness and the oxide layer on dislocation loop formation and strain hardening. Figure Figure MD simulations suggest that the mechanical behavior of the Al nanocubes is due to the combined effect of surface roughness and the rigid oxide layer. The introduction of hemispherical surface roughness results in the appearance of dislocation loops similar to those observed experimentally. These defect structures are absent in the MD samples with perfectly smooth surfaces (Figure Stacking faults are formed in the MD simulations but not the experiments because of differences in nanocube size and strain rate. Dislocation activation volume scales with b 3 , where b is the magnitude of the Burgers vector. This indicates that partial dislocations are preferable over full dislocations because partial dislocations have a lower Burgers vector of b = a 6 ⁄ 〈211〉 In summary, in situ SEM compressions of 114 nm defect-free Al nanocubes showed extensive strain hardening that is two order of magnitudes higher than bulk single crystal Al. Numerous dislocation loops were observed in postcompression TEM images, as well as the absence of stacking faults and twins. MD simulations of 40 nm Al nanocubes show that dislocation loops form due to stress concentrators on the oxide coating while strain hardening occurred due to trapping of dislocations by the oxide coating. These results provide strong evidence that high SFE metals can have high strain hardening through dislocation accumulation. This can be achieved through careful control of surfaces and interfaces, such as the surface oxide in the nanocubes, or grain boundaries in polycrystalline metals. Synthesis. All chemicals were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. 0.5 M dimethylethylamine alane (DMEAA) in toluene, 0.5 M Tebbe's reagent in toluene, cyclohexane, and tetrahydrofuran (THF) were stored under in a glovebox under argon. All dilutions from aspurchased concentrations were performed in a glovebox using a glass syringe. Al nanocubes were synthesized using a previously developed method TEM images were acquired on a FEI Tecnai G2 F20 X-TWIN TEM at 200 kV. FFT images were acquired using ImageJ. Simulations. Molecular dynamics simulations were performed using LAMMPS Two types of nanocube samples along with a reference nanocube were used to investigate the effect of sample geometry and boundary conditions. The reference nanocube was a perfectly smooth cubic geometry with unconstrained degrees of freedom at the surface. To investigate the effects of surface roughness, a cubic sample with semi-spherical protrusions and indentations was constructed. The diameter of the protrusions/indentations was 40 Å and they were placed in a regular grid with alternating protrusions and indentations to cover the entirety of the cube's surface. To investigate the effect of a rigid oxide surface layer, a nanocube with rigid surface boundary conditions was also subjected to compression simulations. This sample was initially smooth and the first 4 atomic layers from the free surface were considered the surface layer. Surface atoms of a given face were required to move as a rigid body in the direction perpendicular to that face. This disallowed shear across the face, mimicking a rigid surface layer. Atoms belonging to 2 surface faces (edge atoms) or belonging to 3 surface faces (corner atoms) were subject to the rigid body condition of all adjacent faces. This means that edge atoms must move as a rigid body in the directions perpendicular to its axis and corner atoms must move as a fully rigid body. This set of boundary conditions allows the box to undergo arbitrary deformation that maintains its rectangular shape while disallowing shear across any face. 