In this present study, the pseudopotential plane-wave (PP-PW) pathway in the scheme of density functional theory (DFT) is utilized to investigate the various physical properties on (Ba0.82K0.18)(Bi0.53Pb0.47)O3 (BKBPO) single perovskite superconductor. We have analyzed elastic constants and moduli at zero and elevated pressures (up to 25 GPa) as well. The calculated values of Poisson's ratio, Pugh's indicator, and Cauchy pressure of the studied superconductor are found to be brittle in nature at ambient conditions. The calculated machinability index and hardness values of BKBPO perovskite indicate its superior industrial applications to similar ones. We also have investigated the anisotropic nature incorporating both the theoretical indices and graphical representations in 2D and 3D dimensions, which reveals a high level of anisotropy. The flatness of the energy bands near EF is a sign of Van-Hf singularity that might increase the electron pairing and origination of high-TC superconductivity. The computed band structure exhibits its metallic characteristics is confirmed by band overlapping. A band of DOS is formed for the strong hybridization of the constituent elements. The orbital electrons of O-2p contribute most dominantly at EF in contrast to all orbital electrons. The orbital electrons at the EF are higher from both the partial density of states and charge density mapping investigation. The coexistence of the electron and hole-like Fermi sheets exhibits the multi-band nature of BKBPO. On the other hand, Fermi surfaces with flat faces promote transport features and Fermi surface nesting as well. The calculated value of the electron-phonon coupling constant (λ = 1.46) is slightly lower than the isostructural superconductor, which indicates that the studied BKBPO can be treated as a strongly coupled superconductor similar to the reported isostructural perovskite superconductors. Furthermore, the thermodynamic properties have been evaluated and analyzed at elevated temperature and pressure by using harmonic Debye approximation (QHDA). Perovskite oxide (ABO3) is one of the most useful classes of materials for its unique physical properties, such as superconductivity (high-Tc) Moreover, four of the previously discovered Bi-based perovskite superconductors were thoroughly investigated by the first-principles method and demonstrated some interesting findings The current research uses the CASTEP package for the electron-ion interactions, whereas, Broyden-Fletcher-Goldfarb-Shanno (BFGS) technique In addition, the sampling integration is settled to the ultrafine state throughout the first Brillouin zone in the crystal lattice, where the atomic positions, as well as lattice parameters, retain quite relax A novel Bi-based simple perovskite superconductor BKBPO with space group Pm 3 ̅ m (#221) having cubic structure Besides, both stress and strain have three tensile and three shear components, producing six components totally. The polycrystalline mechanical properties such as Bulk modulus (B), Shear modulus (G), Young's modulus (E), and Poisson's ratio (ν) can be calculated from these independent elastic constants. The researcher, Hill et. al. The authors showed that the polycrystalline moduli are the arithmetic values of the moduli in the Voigt (BV, GV) and Reuss (BR, GR) approximation, and are given by BH ≡ B = 1⁄2(BR + BV) and GH ≡ G = 1⁄2(GR + GV), where B and G represent the Bulk and Shear moduli, respectively. The Young's modulus, E, and Poisson's ratio, ν are then calculated from these data using the following formulas (Eq. 1) The Young's modulus, E of above expression is inversely connected with critical thermal shock where, σ is the flexure strength and α is the coefficient of thermal expansion. The application of material as TBC is strongly dependent on the value of R. It is seen from Table C11> 0, C12> 0, (C11-C12)>0, and C44>0 Our calculated elastic constants of BKBPO completely obey the above conditions under 0 GPa indicating that BKBPO is a mechanically stable alloy. The calculated values of the bulk modulus (B), shear modulus (G), Young's modulus (E), Poisson's ratio (ν), and Pugh's indicator (G/B) of BKBPO at zero pressure are given in Based on the G/B ratio Therefore, the Bi-based perovskite superconductor is found to be ductile in accordance with the above-mentioned indicator, whereas (Ba0.62K0.38)(Bi0.92Mg0.08)O3 is brittle (Table for covalent materials but for ionic materials, ν = 0.25 or more which suggests that our system can be treated as an ionic alloy. On the other hand, the value of ν is between 0.25 and 0.5 for the central force solid. So, the studied superconductor can be considered as central force solid material (0.25<ν< 0.50) The machinability index, M denotes the favorable economic scale of machine utilization, plasticity, temperature and plastic strain, the lubricating nature of a material, and cutting forces is written as Eq. 3 A solid material that has a large value of M bears excellent lubricating properties, lower friction value, and higher plastic strain value It is hard to overstate the role of pressure on the elastic constants and moduli in understanding, exploring, and modifying the solid materials for various practical applications. We have applied hydrostatic pressures on the studied BKBPO superconductor, which is ranging from 0 to 25 GPa. The directionally dependent properties of a system can be described from the knowledge of various anisotropy indices. Anisotropy of solid material is caused by asymmetry and specific orientation of the molecules themselves in a material. Most importantly, various applications of a system under varying external stress in engineering purposes, as well as crystal physics and mechanical durability can be developed significantly by studying the elastic anisotropy The calculated A U value for the BKBPO superconductor indicates the anisotropic nature, as A U = 0 is used for the isotropic nature of a substance. Additionally, the concept of percent anisotropy in shear and bulk modulus (A G and A B ) proposed by Chung and Buessem A B = B V -B R B V + B R for {100} shear plane, A 1 = 4C 44 C 11 + C 33 -2C 13 Table The level of anisotropy rises owing to the deviation from unit value, whereas, for an isotropic crystal, it is, The values of Ai (i = 1 to 3) show elastic anisotropy for (Ba0.82K0.18)(Bi0.53Pb0.47)O3 superconductor, which obey our previous discussion and the relation A1 = A2 = A3 reflects its cubic symmetry. Furthermore, Zener anisotropy index (A), and equivalent Zener anisotropy (A eq ) are also analyzed to get the precise anisotropy measurements by the following well-known relations (Eqs. 11-12) All the calculated values are displayed in Table 12 2.12 2.12 2.12 0.066 0 0.708 1.59 degree of anisotropy at varying directions, whereas, a perfectly isotropic crystal holds the spherical shape. It is clear from Figures The observed 2D and 3D graphical plots conclude that anisotropy increases following the order E<G <v (Figure The calculated values of E, G, and  in three primal directions are listed in Table Where, v t1 is the first transverse mode and v t2 denotes the second transverse mode. The calculated acoustic velocities along different directions of BKBPO perovskite are given in Table Table The band structure is the spectrum of the energy eigenvalues of a periodic system that contains information about both the bonding interactions within molecules (intra-molecular) and the intermolecular interactions. However, the material properties can be understood if one can identify the character of dominant bands at the Fermi level, their energies, etc. The calculation of the electronic band structure helps to understand the shape of the Fermi surface. is very analogues to the reported BKBO perovskite superconductors To visualize the electronic behavior and carry out the evidence of band crossing the EF of a material, the Fermi surface topology is an essential investigation. From The charge density mapping is a foremost tool to predict the bonding nature, interactions among the atoms, and exchange of electrons in space as well. The charge density mapping in the crystallographic plane of (001) with electron density scale is depicted in Figure Furthermore, no charge gets transferred (overlapping) among electron distributions of Ba/K, O, and Bi/Pb ions. We also see the strong ionic bond of O-2p with Bi/Pb and K atoms from the PDOS calculation curve for the hybridization of O-2p and Bi/Pb -6s,6p orbitals. Therefore, the Bi-based BKBPO perovskite exhibits ionic character, which is also evidenced from the mechanical property investigations. The aforementioned scenario of charge density is observed for similar perovskite superconductors. The spherical charge distribution around all atoms is connected to the ionic nature of the compound which reveals the metallic characteristics as well The thermodynamic parameters include bulk modulus (B), Debye temperature (D), specific heats at constant volume (CV) and constant pressure (CP), volume thermal expansion coefficient (VTEC), and entropy (S) are deeply investigated (Figure Specific heat is the amount of heat required to increase the temperature of one kg of mass by 1 K. The variations of the heat capacity of the studied compound at constant volume, CV, and constant pressure, CP are represented in and after this CV becomes nearly constant at high temperature. The same nature was also found for CP (Figure . This indicates that phonon thermal softening originates during the increment of temperature. It can also be seen that the variations of CV and CP with temperature in the low-temperature range look similar (Figures But at high temperatures CP is greater than CV, this can be explained by the following relationship (Eq. 15) CP-CV = αV 2 (T) BTV The value of Tm for the studied superconductor has been listed in Table By using the Eliashberg equation in McMillan formula Where,  expt and  calc introduce the experimental and theoretical values of electronic specific heat coefficient, respectively. It is possible to calculate the  calc by using the given relation  calc = 2kB 2 N(EF)/3 In summary, theoretically, the structural, mechanical, electronic, and thermodynamic properties of BKBPO perovskite superconductor together with its anisotropic behaviors are investigated for the first time using the CASTEP program in the framework of density functional theory. The studied single cubic perovskite entirely fulfills the Born stability criteria fairly. The elastic constants and moduli have been investigated and analyzed at zero and elevated pressures (up to 25 GPa). According to Poisson's ratio, Pugh's indicator, and Cauchy pressure, it can be concluded that BKBPO is found as brittle. Furthermore, we have also calculated the machinability index and hardness values which indicate its better industrial applications as TBC material. Metallicity in the studied compound is ensured from the band overlapping features. In the band of DOS, the O-2p orbital contributes robustly at EF compared to all others. At the Fermi level, the giant dispersion for robust hybridization between orbital electrons originate flatness of the band at X point in momentum space is considered as an auspicious criterion for phonon mediated electron pairings to ameliorate superconducting behavior. We also have investigated the anisotropic nature of BKBPO perovskite, implying a greater degree of anisotropy. Besides, the presence of the electron-hole-like Fermi sheets (multi-sheets nature) and the flat faces of Fermi surfaces promote transport features in the studied superconductor. In addition, the estimated value of the electron-phonon (e-ph) coupling constant (λ = 1.46) reveals its strongly coupled superconducting nature. Finally, the quasi-harmonic Debye approximation (QHDA) has been employed to observe the thermodynamic characteristics at high temperatures and pressures. Young's modulus (E in GPa), Pugh's indicator (G/B in GPa), machinability index(μM), Poisson's ratio (), and Vickers hardness (Hv in GPa) of BKBPO at P = 0 GPa. maximum and minimum limits of Young's Modulus, E (in GPa), Shear Modulus, G (in GPa), and Poisson's ratio, v for BKBPO superconductor.