Transition metal dichalcogenides are known to possess large optical nonlinearities and driving these materials at high intensities is desirable for many applications. Understanding their optical responses under repetitive intense excitation is essential to improve the performance limit of these strong-field devices and to achieve efficient laser patterning. Here, we report the incubation study of monolayer MoS 2 and WS 2 induced by 160 fs, 800 nm pulses in air to examine how their ablation threshold scales with the number of admitted laser pulses. Both materials were shown to outperform graphene and most bulk materials; specifically, MoS 2 is as resistant to radiation degradation as the best of the bulk thin films with a record fast saturation. Our modeling provides convincing evidence that the small reduction in threshold and fast saturation of MoS 2 originates in its excellent bonding integrity against radiation-induced softening. Sub-ablation damages, in the forms of vacancies, strain, lattice disorder, and nano-voids, were revealed by transmission electron microscopy, photoluminescence, Raman, and second harmonic generation studies, which were attributed to the observed incubation in 2D materials. For the first time, a sub-ablation damage threshold is identified for monolayer MoS 2 to be 78% of single-shot ablation threshold, below which MoS 2 remains intact for many laser pulses. Our results firmly establish MoS 2 as a robust material for strong-field devices and for high-throughput laser patterning. Understanding the optical responses of twodimensional (2D) materials under strong excitation is important. For example, semiconductor transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) have demonstrated strong optical nonlinearities such as second harmonic generation (SHG), In this work, the multi-shot ablation threshold for monolayer MoS 2 and WS 2 is studied and described based on a phenomenological model for the first time. We also carried out transmission electron microscopy (TEM), and second harmonic generation (SHG), photoluminescence (PL), and Raman spectroscopies to reveal morphological and optical property changes in MoS 2 in the sub-ablation damage regime to provide insight into defect formation. The saturation threshold is found to be about 75% of the single-shot ablation threshold and coincides with the damage threshold as measured by second harmonic generation. This provides direct evidence that incubation begins with laser-induced defects in 2D materials, including vacancies and lattice distortion. Monolayer MoS 2 films and WS 2 flakes were grown by chemical vapor deposition on c-cut sapphire (Al 2 O 3 ) and transferred to a borosilicate glass and Al 2 O 3 substrate, respectively. The ablation threshold F th was determined by measuring the ablated hole area as a function of the incident peak fluence F where the linear extrapolation of the hole area versus ln(F ) yields the threshold fluence F th at zero area. To model the data, we generalize the phenomenological model introduced by Sun et al. to 2D materials, which was formulated in terms of the change in absorption and critical bulk energy density. where A 0 is the initial absorption, ∆A = A max -A 0 is its maximal change (typically positive), G 0 is the initial critical surface energy density needed for single-shot ablation, ∆G = G min -G 0 is its maximal change (typically negative), and the coefficients β and γ are rate constants. Importantly, F = ξF is the internal fluence inside the 2D materials where ξ represents the intensity enhancement factor due to the interference effect of the supporting substrate, which are ξ = 0.63 and 0.53 for borosilicate glass and Al 2 O 3 , respectively. By combining Eqs. ( where F th (1) = G 0 /A 0 is the intrinsic single-shot ablation threshold and F th (∞) is the intrinsic multi-shot ablation threshold at saturation. From Eq. ( To obtain a large R value, Eq. ( TABLE I: Fit parameters for Fig. To visualize such sub-ablation damage, a MoS 2 film was transferred to a holey carbon film grid for high resolution transmission electron microscopy (HR-TEM). The left image in Fig. To reveal more optical signatures of these defects, we performed various optical spectroscopies on pristine MoS 2 and MoS 2 exposed to a single pulse at 0.83F th (1). Figure For single pulse exposure at 0.83F th (1), the reduction of the Mo-S bonds is estimated below 5% from Fig. 