We report the observation of fractional quantum Hall (FQH) effects in a two-dimensional electron gas (2DEG) confined to an InAs/AlGaSb quantum well, using a dual-gated Hall-bar device allowing for the independent control of the vertical electric field and electron density. At a magnetic field of 24 T, we observe FQH states at several filling factors, namely ν = 5/3, 2/3, and 1/3, in addition to the ν = 4/3 previously reported for an InAs 2DEG. The ν = 4/3 and 5/3 states, which are absent at zero back-gate voltage, emerge as the quantum well is made more symmetric by applying a positive back-gate voltage. The dependence of zero-field electron mobility on the quantum-well asymmetry reveals a significant contribution of interface-roughness scattering, with much stronger scattering at the lower InAs/AlGaSb interface. However, the dependence of the visibility of the FQH effects on the quantum-well asymmetry is not entirely consistent with that of mobility, suggesting that a different source of disorder is also at work. The interface between the fractional quantum Hall (FQH) insulator and an s-wave superconductor has drawn significant interest as a playground for realizing topological states of matter with non-Abelian quasiparticles In this paper, we report the observation of FQH effects at several filling factors-ν = 5/3, 2/3, and 1/3 in addition to 4/3-in an InAs/AlGaSb QW. In particular, we use a dualgate configuration to tailor the distribution of the electron * hiroshi.irie.ke@hco.ntt.co.jp wave function within the QW and demonstrate that it has a significant impact on the visibility of the FQH effects. The ν = 5/3, 4/3 FQH effects, which are absent at zero back-gate voltage (V BG ), emerge as the QW is made more symmetric by applying a positive V BG while keeping the electron density the same. We study the correlation between the FQH features and electron mobility as a function of the potential asymmetry. While the results suggest a dominant role of interfaceroughness scattering in the mobility variation, it alone cannot account for the behavior of the visibility of the FQH effects, which suggests another source of disorder that affects FQH effects. We used a 2DEG formed in an InAs/AlGaSb heterostructure grown by molecular beam epitaxy on an n-type GaSb (001) substrate. Figure The heterostructure was processed into a Hall bar with a gate structure designed specifically for this study as shown in Figs. The distance between adjacent voltage probes and the width of the Hall bar were 400 and 250 μm, respectively. Magnetotransport measurements were carried out at magnetic fields of up to 24 T using a cryogen-free superconducting magnet We first show the high-field transport data obtained at V BG = 0 V. Figures As shown in the inset of Fig. To associate the observed behavior of the FQH effects with the shape of the QW, we need to know at which V BG the QW becomes symmetric. We did this by locating the V BG value for which the second subband becomes occupied at the minimum density at a zero magnetic field. Such an analysis reveals sub. -0.8 Gn BG < 0 that, for n = 8.7 × 10 15 m -2 , which corresponds to ν = 3/2 at 24 T, the QW becomes symmetric at V BG = 4.9 V. Thus, we quantify the asymmetry of the QW by δ n BG , the electron density added by the back gate with reference to the symmetric point for a given n. By taking into account the electron density supplied from the top gate, we find that the QW becomes symmetric at V BG = 4.2 and 5.5 V for ν = 4/3 and 5/3, respectively. The data in Fig. To identify the source of disorder that limits the visibility of the FQH states, we examine the behavior of electron mobility, the most common measure of sample quality. In Fig. We have calculated mobility limited by interface-roughness scattering following the method in Ref. For the fit shown in Fig. We note that the behavior of the FQH effects is not entirely consistent with the δ n BG dependence of mobility. For example, upon increasing δ n BG from -2.1 × 10 15 to 0 m -2 , mobility decreases, whereas the FQH states become better developed. [For ν = 4/3 (5/3), δ n BG = -2.1 × 10 15 and 0 m -2 correspond to V BG = 1.2 (2.6) and 4.2 (5.5) V, respectively.] It is known that short-range disorder such as alloy disorder is less detrimental than long-range disorder such as Coulomb scattering on FQH effects It is worth mentioning that the InAs 2DEG samples used in most studies, including ours, are undoped, where the electrons are induced by the Fermi-level pinning at the semiconductor surface We have observed FQH effects at ν = 5/3, 4/3, 2/3, and 1/3 in an InAs 2DEG using a dual-gated Hall bar with gatedefined edges. We demonstrated that the shape of the QW confinement potential has a significant impact on the visibility of the FQH states. Comparison with the variation of zerofield electron mobility suggests an additional source of disorder, other than interface roughness and background impurities, that affects the FQH effects. Our results hint at the need to further optimize the heterostructure design, in addition to improving crystal quality, for the realization of robust FQH states in InAs.