A comprehensive study of thermodynamic properties of three samples of bimetallic molecular magnets [Co II (pyrazole) 4 ] 2x [Fe II (pyrazole) 4 ] 2(1-x) [Nb IV (CN) 8 ]•4H 2 O with x=0 (Co 2 Nb), 0.5 (CoFeNb), and 1 (Fe 2 Nb) is reported. The three samples display the same crystallographic structure crystallizing in the tetragonal system with space group I4 1 /a. Their heat capacities are measured in the temperature range 0.36-100 K without applied field as well as in the field of μ 0 H=0.1, 0.2, 0.5, 1, 2, 5, and 9 T. The results imply the presence of the second-order phase transitions to magnetically ordered phases at 4.87(8) K, 7.1(2) K, and 8.44(3) K for x=0, 0.5, and 1, respectively. The corresponding thermodynamic functions are analyzed to discuss the stability of the mixed compound and the magnetocaloric effect (MCE). The Gibbs energy of mixing is found to be positive but smaller in magnitude than the energy of thermal fluctuations indicating that the mixed sample is marginally stable in the full detected temperature range. The enthalpy of mixing is negative, which points to an ordered arrangement of the Co(II) and Fe(II) ions in the solid solution CoFeNb. The negative values of the entropy of mixing are explained by considering the enhanced rigidity of the crystal lattice of the solid solution sample. To extract the magnetic contribution to the heat capacity an approach based on a reasonable frequency spectrum is adopted. Taking advantage of the in-field heat capacity measurements MCE was described in terms of the isothermal entropy change ΔS M and the adiabatic temperature change ΔT ad . The magnitudes of these quantities are typical for the class of molecular magnets. The values of |ΔS M | max detected for μ 0 ΔH=5 T amount to 7.04, 5.26, and 4.93 J K -1 mol -1 for Co 2 Nb, CoFeNb, and Fe 2 Nb, respectively, and are on the order of those obtained for the same field change in the isostructural compounds. The values of ΔT ad detected for μ 0 ΔH=5 T amount to 4.16, 2.47, and 2.01 J K -1 mol -1 for Co 2 Nb, CoFeNb, and Fe 2 Nb, respectively, and are larger or comparable to those observed for the isostructural compounds. Temperature dependences of exponent n, quantifying the field dependence of ΔS M , display minima close to the transition temperatures implying through their values that the studied compounds belong to the universality class of the threedimensional (3D) Heisenberg model. The regeneration Ericsson cycles employing the studied compounds as the working substance were considered. Most surprisingly, the Ericsson cycle operating between the temperatures corresponding to the full width at half-maximum of the |ΔS M | signal (T C ,T H ) turns out to be totally ineffective. Through shifting the temperature of the hot reservoir T H down to the temperature T max corresponding to |ΔS M | max the coefficient of performance is rendered positive and comparable to that of the Carnot cycle. A detailed analysis indicates that the regeneration Ericsson cycle operating between T C and T max should be most efficient for the maximal studied value of the applied field (=9 T) with irrelevant differences between the studied compounds. For almost three decades now magnetic coordination networks have been given assiduous attention of both chemists and physicists, resulting in materials displaying a long-range magnetic order above room temperature Magnetocaloric effect, i.e. heating or cooling of a magnetic material following switching on or off of applied magnetic field in adiabatic conditions, is an area of intensive research due to the fact that magnetic refrigerators represent an environmentally friendly technology dispensing with media associated with ozone depletion or greenhouse effect. Moreover, they were demonstrated to show an enhanced efficiency in comparison to conventional gas compression-expansion refrigerators In the field of molecular magnetism MCE has been investigated most of all for single molecule magnets (SMMs) whose large ground-state spin value promises a substantial entropic effect In this paper we are considering three samples of bimetallic molecular magnets with the formula [Co II (pyrazole) 4 ] 2x [Fe II (pyrazole) 4 ] 2 In order to study thermodynamic properties of the reported compounds their heat capacities have been measured by relaxation calorimetry. The compounds are demonstrated to display transitions to magnetically long-range ordered states at 4.9 K (Co 2 Nb), 7.3 K (CoFeNb), and 8.8 K (Fe 2 Nb) as indicated by the positions at which the derivative dC p (T)/dT vanishes revealing the local maxima of C p (T). The measured values of C p are prerequisites of a detailed discussion of thermodynamic properties of the three samples with the focus on the mixed compound CoFeNb. The paper is organized as follows. On providing the experimental details in Section 2 we analyze and discuss the thermal behavior in zero applied field in Section 3. Then, in Section 4, we go on to describe an extraction procedure of the magnetic contribution to the heat capacity. Section 5 is devoted to the calculation and discussion of the magnetocaloric effect of the studied samples with some comments on its practical aspects. We close the paper in Section 6 with a bunch of general conclusions. The polycrystalline samples of Co 2 Nb, Fe 2 Nb were synthesized according to the procedures reported in Just in the beginning let us focus on the zero-field data. Figure where A (in units of energy) is proportional to the local field strength, and I denotes the nuclear spin quantum number. The corresponding contribution to the molar specific heat has the following form where β=1/k B T. Apart from the contribution from the nuclear magnetism, at low temperatures we expect a contribution from the ionic magnetism and lattice vibrations. We represent these contribution by a single algebraic term BT C . Thus the low temperature molar specific heat of the samples takes on the form We fitted formula C LT (Co 2 Nb) to the experimental data within the temperature range 0.36-0.75 K and obtained a plausible set of best-fit parameters: A Co =0.0076(5) K, A Nb =0.0061(3) K, B 1 =0.746(9) J K -1 mol -1 , C 1 =2.47 where μ N =5.050783699(31)×10 -27 J T -1 is the nuclear magneton At the same time, the enthalpy of mixing ΔH mix is negative in the full temperature range. To understand the implications of this fact let us assume that there are N lattice sites in the crystal structure on which substitution takes place and each such lattice site is surrounded by z nearest neighboring sites belonging to this set. Then the total number of the nearest-neighbor bonds is 1/2Nz, where the factor 1/2 arises since there are two ions per bond. Next, let the energy associated with Co-Co, Fe-Fe and Co-Fe nearest neighbor pairs be, respectively, E CoCo , E FeFe and E CoFe . If the Co and Fe ions are mixed randomly, then the probability of Co-Co, Fe-Fe and Co-Fe neighbors is x 2 , (1-x) 2 and 2x(1-x), respectively, where x denotes the mole fraction of the Co ions. Hence the total enthalpy of the solid solution is given by which can be rearrange to read The first term in Eq. ( To minimize the internal energy of the compound the number of Co-Fe neighbors should be maximized, thus the solid solution is expected to form an ordered compound with Co and Fe ions filling the sites in an alternating fashion. Although the negative values of the enthalpy of mixing ΔH mix can be understood in terms of an ordered arrangement of the Co and Fe ions in the solid solution CoFeNb, the fact that the excess entropy ΔS mix is also negative in the full temperature range is more surprising and more challenging to rationalize. Assuming that the entropy of the solid solution is mainly vibrational in origin, i.e. related to the structural disorder caused by thermal vibrations of the atoms at finite temperature, let us consider a toy model of a one-dimensional lattice whose sites may be occupied by two types of atoms A and B. The pure compounds Co 2 Nb and Fe 2 Nb correspond to the configurations where the sites are occupied exclusively either by Atype atoms or by B-type atoms, while the solid solution CoFeNb is tantamount to the configuration where there are exactly as many A-type atoms as the B-type atoms in the system and either they are randomly distributed over the lattice sites or their distribution is ordered with an alternating arrangement of the atoms forming the ...ABABAB... chain. Figure where k f is the force constant, m (i) is the mass of the atom, k is the wavevector, and a -the distance between the nearest neighbors (the lattice constant). The basis of the lattice configuration (4) is diatomic (there is an alternating arrangement of atoms of mass m 1 and m 2 ), which leads to the presence of two branches in the phonon spectrum with the following dispersion relation where "+" corresponds to the optical branch, while "-" -to the acoustic branch, , and a is still the distance between the nearest neighbors (the lattice constant being now 2a). Knowing that the entropy associated with a single phonon mode of circular frequency ω at temperature T is given by the formula where β=1/k B T, one can calculate the molar vibrational entropy of the four lattice configurations in the continuous limit using the formulas where R is the molar gas constant, and factor "3" accounts for one longitudinal and two transverse modes. Assuming m 1 =m Co =58.933194 u, m 2 =m Fe =55.845 u , and allowing for a change of T vib =T vib,0 (1+δ[%]/100) within some range for mixed configurations (3) and (4) as induced by a possible change of the force constant k f , we calculated the corresponding entropies of mixing defined by Figure for an array of values of δ=-10, -5, -3, -1, 0, 1, 3, 5, 10 % (a similar plot for ) ( is not shown for being almost the same). It can be seen that stiffening of the lattice (δ>0), which may be due to the requirement of accommodating two different atoms within the same lattice structure, leads to negative values of the entropy of mixing. This is most probably the case with our solid solution sample CoFeNb. Finally, we want to analyze the entropy content of the studied samples associated with the discrete degrees of freedom, i.e. nuclear and ionic spins. For this purpose, we choose to look at the entropy differences between the samples assuming that the lattice contributions in all three cases are comparable and will cancel each other out if we take duly into account the entropy of mixing for CoFeNb which was shown above to be vibrational in origin. Figure where δS=ΔS mix (100K)≈-3.78 J K -1 mol -1 is a correction accounting for the changes of the lattice contribution of the mixed compound. The corresponding estimates read and are depicted in Fig. In general, the measured heat capacity is a conglomerate of several contributions stemming from various degrees of freedom. Except for the fortuitous case of a sharp transition phenomenon, the task to subdivide a total heat capacity among each contribution is far from straightforward. One of the most widely adopted approaches is to calculate the lattice heat capacity by adopting a plausible Debye temperature or a pair of Debye and/or Einstein temperatures where is the sought for lattice contribution to the heat capacity. The characteristic frequencies of the Einstein contributions were based on the known intramolecular vibrations for pyrazole where the first term corresponds to the low-temperature magnetic contribution from the electronic degrees of freedom, while the second term accounts collectively for the hyperfine splitting of the 59 Co and 93 Nb nuclei. Fitting function in Eq. ( The two main MCE characteristics of the studied compound, i.e. the temperature dependence of the isothermal entropy change ΔS M and the adiabatic temperature change ΔT ad , were determined indirectly using the measured heat capacity values. ΔS M was calculated using the formula where T min denotes the left boundary of the experimental window. In this way we deliberately neglect the entropy contribution in the interval (0,T min ) which involves both the nuclear contribution as well as the contribution from electronic degrees of freedom. While the former contribution is difficult to follow especially in nonzero magnetic field, the uncertainty associated with the latter one is on the order of the contribution ΔS 1 in Table becomes roughly inversely proportional to temperature, i.e. the higher the temperature the smaller the entropy changes. Table It is interesting to look at MCE for the lowest field change values μ 0 ΔH=0.1, 0.2, 0.5, and 1 T, see Fig. The field dependence of MCE has been studied intensively either experimentally The value of n means that in the vicinity of a given thermodynamic point (T,H) the entropy change behaves approximately as H n . The high-temperature limit of an n vs. T curve, n=2, is the consequence of the Curie-Weiss law, where the magnetic entropy change using the equation implied by the Maxwell relation, yields a quadratic field dependence of ΔS M . The value of n in the low-temperature regime cannot be easily predicted, however, if the magnetization displays only a weak field dependence there, Eq. ( The values of n at T c practically coincide with its values at the minima being equal to 0.59, 0.72, and 0.68 for Co 2 Nb, CoFeNb, and Fe 2 Nb, respectively. They are close to the value of 0.6424(4) obtained with Eq. ( A commonly accepted measure for the performance of a substance undergoing a magnetic cooling cycle is the refrigeration capacity (RC), defined as where the temperatures T C and T H of the cold and hot reservoir, respectively, are usually selected as to cover the full-width at half-maximum of the entropy change peak ΔS M (T,ΔH). This quantity is a measure of how much heat can be transferred between the cold and hot reservoirs in one ideal refrigeration cycle. Table where the isothermal entropy change ΔS M (T,H) is given in Eq. Finally, the coefficient of performance (COP) of the refrigeration cycle is given by The discussion of cycle Ericsson 2 would be fully analogous. It is sufficient to take into account that T H =T max in this case. Immediately Eq. ( The molecular field model for an exchange coupled system with partial substitution Let us assume that the system consists of two sublattices A and B with stoichiometric factors ν A and ν B respectively. Sublattice B is occupied by the B type ions with spin S B and the Landé factor g B , while sites of sublattice A are randomly filled with the A 1 type ions ( . The Hamiltonian pertinent to the system is given by the following formula where (ij) denotes the summation over the pairs of the nearest neighbors, J XY is the superexchange coupling constant be2tween the X type ions and the Y type ions, μ B is the Bohr magneton, and H  is the external magnetic field. We neglect the superexchange coupling within the A sublattice (J AA =0) and the B sublattice (J BB =0), as in the case under study the corresponding bridges involve many atoms. A full solution of the model is an extremely complex task that could only be tackled by the quantum Monte Carlo methods. We therefore decide here for a simplified approach based on the molecular field approximation (MFA). In the framework of MFA the Hamiltonian in Eq. (A1) is reduced to the following form (k B -the Boltzmann constant) one can venture to calculate the magnetic susceptibility χ of the system. An additional simplification stems from the fact that the model is isotropic (all exchange interactions are of the isotropic Heisenberg type) and the scalar counterpart of Eq. (A3) can be used. Then the system is in the paramagnetic state and the molar magnetizations are directly proportional to the magnetic field, i.e. M X =χ X H X , where is the paramagnetic molar susceptibility of sublattice X, and c X is the number concentration of the X type ions ( ). The system of linear equations M X =χ X H X (X=A 1 , A 2 , B) can be solved by the Cramer method for M X and the total susceptibility of the system can be calculated as The MFA estimate of the transition temperature T c may be found through the straightforward algebra by solving the equation χ -1 =0 for T. The x-dependent result may be written where the extreme transition temperatures read . ) In the case under study sublattice A corresponds to the Co sublattice in Co 2 Nb, next it is substituted by the Fe ions, so that A 1 =Co and A 2 =Fe. The B sublattice corresponds to the untouched Nb ions, i.e. B=Nb. The pertinent values of parameters are: ν Co =2, ν Nb =1, Z NbCo =4, Z CoNb =2, S Co =1/2, S Fe =2, S Nb =1/2, g Co =5.03, g Fe =2.16, g Nb =2 Using parameters in Table