Deep learning (DL) inverse techniques have increased the speed of artificial electromagnetic material (AEM) design and improved the quality of resulting devices. Many DL inverse techniques have succeeded on a number of AEM design tasks, but to compare, contrast, and evaluate assorted techniques it is critical to clarify the underlying ill-posedness of inverse problems. Here we review state-of-the-art approaches and present a comprehensive survey of deep learning inverse methods and invertible and conditional invertible neural networks to AEM design. We produce easily accessible and rapidly implementable AEM design benchmarks, which offers a methodology to efficiently determine the DL technique best suited to solving different design challenges. Our methodology is guided by constraints on repeated simulation and an easily integrated metric, which we propose expresses the relative ill-posedness of any AEM design problem. We show that as the problem becomes increasingly ill-posed, the neural adjoint with boundary loss (NA) generates better solutions faster, regardless of simulation constraints. On simpler AEM design tasks, direct neural networks (NN) fare better when simulations are limited, while geometries predicted by mixture density networks (MDN) and conditional variational auto-encoders (VAE) can improve with continued sampling and re-simulation. In this work we consider the problem of designing artificial electromagnetic materials (AEMs), such as metamaterials, photonic crystals, and plasmonics. The goal of AEM design is to find the geometric structure, material composition, or other features of an AEM -denoted g -that will produce a desired electromagnetic (EM) response (e.g., a specific transmission or absorption spectrum), denoted s here DIMs are data-driven methods, and therefore assume access to a dataset of design-scattering pairs, D = {(g n , s n )} N n=1 , which are obtained by evaluating the so-called "forward model" of the AEM system forward model, f , yielding impressive results Ill-posed problems are those that violate one of the three following Hadamard conditions 13 : (i) existence; (ii) uniqueness; and (iii) smoothness. In principle, inverse AEM problems can violate any of the three Hadamard conditions, however, most recent attention has been given to violations of condition (ii), which is sometimes called "one-to-manyness", or non-uniqueness. We refer the reader to other sources for a more thorough treatment of the other conditions In recent years a large number of specially-designed models have been proposed, or adapted from the machine learning community, in order to overcome non-uniqueness in inverse AEM problems Despite the rapid growth of DIMs in AEM research over the past several years, there has been little replication and benchmarking, making it difficult to determine the extent to which real methodological progress is being made over time. This also makes it challenging for researchers and practitioners in the AEM community to choose methods that are best-suited to solve their problems. One fundamental reason for the absence of benchmarking may be the difficulty of reproducing the computational simulations from a previous study, which requires substantial expertise and computation time. Furthermore, publication often provide an insufficient level of detail to accurately reproduce simulations. One potential solution to this problem, which has become common in the machine learning community, is for authors to release their datasets and trained models. As noted in recent reviews Another challenge with the study of DIMs is the selection of an appropriate inverse problem. Few studies investigate whether the problem under consideration truly exhibits non-uniqueness, or compare to a conventional DNN. These are important considerations since most DIMs are built upon the assumption that non-uniqueness is present in the data. If there is no non-uniqueness, then any performance differences between inverse models must be due to other factors that are unrelated to ill-posedness. Furthermore, simpler models such as conventional DNNs may achieve more accurate results in these cases. In this work we will show that not all inverse problems exhibit non-uniqueness, and in such cases it may be sufficient to simply use a conventional DNN. One final challenge with the study of DIMs, especially within the context of AEMs, is scoring. One advantage of many modern DIMs is that they can propose multiple solutions for a given input (i.e., value of s). Despite this capability, nearly all studies in AEM only evaluate the accuracy of the first proposed solution. Furthermore, in practice it is often possible, or desirable, to evaluate the efficacy of several designs (e.g., via numerical simulation) and adopt the best one. Recent machine learning research has shown that modern DIMs can achieve substantially better results if several proposed solutions are considered, and that the best DIM depends on how many proposed solutions can be considered (i) The first public and accessible benchmark of inverse AEM problems. In this work we develop a benchmark dataset comprising three unique inverse AEM problems: nanophotonic shell, graphene multi-layer stack, and an all-dielectric metamaterial array. These problems were chosen to represent several unique sub-fields within AEM research, increasing the generalizability of any results obtained via the benchmark. Furthermore, we adopted our benchmark tasks from recently-published AEM research, helping to ensure their relevance and significance to the broader AEM community. To support replication, we publish our benchmark datasets and documentation online. Crucially, we also publish fast and easily-accessible forward simulators for each benchmark problem. As we discuss in Sec. 2, an accurate simulator is generally needed to evaluate the performance of DIMs, however making them fast and easily-accessible is not always trivial. (ii) The first systematic comparison of deep inverse models for AEM tasks. Using our benchmark resources, we perform a systematic comparison of nine state-of-the-art DIMs. One of these techniques, the conditional invertible neural network (cINN) is adapted from the machine learning community, and is novel in the context of AEM research. We systematically optimize each of these models and then compare their performance on the benchmark tasks. Rather than evaluating their accuracy using a single proposed solution, following Ren et al. (iii) Identifying and addressing non-uniqueness in inverse AEM Problems. Inverse problems are not guaranteed to exhibit non-uniqueness, which has several important implications when solving inverse AEM problems. We discuss these implications and make several recommendations. In particular, we suggest that researchers always include a conventional DNN as a baseline model when solving inverse problems, and we propose a measure for the level of non-uniqueness present in a given task. The remainder of this work is organized as follows: Section 2 introduces the design of our benchmark, including the benchmark problems, performance metrics, and data handling; Section 4 describes the eight DIMs in our benchmark comparison; Section 5 describes our experiments; Section 6 discusses the results of our experiment; and Section 8 presents our final conclusions and future work. The objective of our benchmark is to establish a shared set of problems on which the AEM community can compare DIMs, and thereby measure research progress more reliably. To achieve this goal, we chose three initial problems to include in our benchmark, and we share resources to maximize the accessibility of the benchmark. In data-driven inverse modeling we assume access to some dataset, D = {(g n , s n )} N n=1 , comprising N pairs of input and output sampled from the forward model of our system (i.e., AEM system in our case). Each pair is generated by first sampling some input, g ∈ G, where G refers to some designer-chosen domain. In AEM problems G is often a hypercube as illustrated in Fig. The error of DIMs is typically measured using re-simulation error, given by L(s, ŝ(z))), where L refers to some measure of the error between s and ŝ(z) = f (ĝ(z)) (e.g., mean squared error (MSE)). We assume that we are permitted to evaluate T proposed inverse solutions by passing them through the forward model (e.g., a computational simulator) so that we can compute their re-simulation error and then take the solution with the lowest error. Then the objective of DIMs is to minimize the expected (i.e., average) error over the testing dataset, given T solution proposals. A sample estimator for this metric is given by where Z i is a set of z values that is indexed by the variable i. Note that, at T = 1, the re-simulation error is equivalent to mean squared resimulation error, a widely-used metric in the AEM literature. Therefore the goal of the DIMs will be to learn an inverse function that minimizes rT . For our benchmark, we propose to use MSE as the loss, since it is widely used for AEM problems The three AEM problems that we selected for inclusion in our benchmark are presented in Table Graphene-Si 3 N 4 2D Multi-layer Stack (Stack). The geometry of a multi-layer stack of alternating graphene and Si 3 N 4 dielectric layers, as depicted in Fig. All-dielectric metasurface supercell (ADM). This problem was originally described and published in One challenge with benchmarking DIMs is that it requires access to a computationally fast implementation of the true forward function, f ; this is needed to compute the re-simulation error (Eq. 1) for each DIM. Many AEM problems, such as the ADM problem here, rely upon computational simulators to evaluate f , which is time-consuming to setup, difficult to replicate across studies, and computationally slow. This is a major obstacle to evaluating DIMs on many modern AEM problems that rely upon computational simulation. In this work we propose a general strategy overcome this problem, first suggested in Ren et al., The (Python) code base for our benchmark task is maintained at the following remote repository: https://github. com/BensonRen/AEM_DIM_Bench and can be easily download. The code base includes all model architecture and code, and is open source under MIT license. We will maintain our code base through a remote repository at github. This will allow users to post comments or concerns about the code, as well as build upon the code repository. Invertible neural networks (INNs) and conditional INNs (cINNs) have recently been found to achieve state-of-the-art results for solving general data-driven inverse problems INNs are based upon flow-based models To achieve this level of complexity, the transformation is often implemented with a deep neural network, and the parameters θ are learned based upon real-world data. Other contemporary models make the aforementioned assumptions (notably, the variational autoencoder) however, flow-based models (FBMs) are unique because they impose structure on the deep neural network that ensures that it is bijective (a one-to-one mapping), and therefore invertible. Furthermore, the inverse function f -1 can be readily evaluated once the FBM is trained (i.e., once we infer f ), so that it is trivial to evaluate by Inspired by the success of FBMs in modeling complicated distributions, The INN is trained by making forward passes (i.e., computing [s, z] = f θ (g)) for samples of data in the training dataset. The parameters of the model are adapted to make accurate predictions of s as well as making predictions of z that are normally distributed. Mathematically, the objective function, or "loss", for training the INN is given by: Here σ is a hyper-parameter controlling the trade-off between accurate s prediction and the normality of z. The variable J represents the Jacobian matrix of the mapping learned by the neural network to account for the probability volume change due to change of variable, which is trivially computed using invertible network structure . INNs can also optionally be trained with an additional loss term comprising a maximum mean discrepancy (MMD) In all of the AEM problems considered in our benchmark the dimensionality of the output is substantially larger than the input (i.e., |s| >> |g|), breaking an assumption of the INN that |s| < |g|. To address this problem we follow the approach in Conditional Invertible Neural Network (cINN). The cINN was introduced in Kruse et al. Similar to the INN, the loss enforces the normality of z, however, s no longer appears because the cINN is not tasked with predicting it. Once again J represents the Jacobian matrix of the mapping learned by the neural network, this time when mapping from g to z. In this section, we describe the DIMs that are included in our benchmarking experiments in Sec. 6, as well as some key properties. While we believe this section encompasses a large proportion of existing work on DIMs within the AEM community, it is not intended to encompass all work. We refer the reader to recent review articles for a more comprehensive treatment of the topic 3 . It is our hope however that AEM community will utilize our benchmark dataset and results to rigorously evaluate important additional models from the AEM literature in future work. Here we describe two key properties of DIMs with respect to AEM applications. Table A second important property of some DIMs is that they rely on an iterative process for inferring each inverse solution. Most DIMs attempt to learn a direct mapping from s to g, and therefore inference of a single solution proposal is computationally efficient. In contrast, iterative methods usually make an initial set of guesses for the inverse solution, denoted Z 0 . A search for superior solutions is then performed based upon Z 0 , and the results are used to update Z 0 . This process is then repeated for some fixed number of iterations, or until the quality of the solutions (e.g., estimated resimulation error) no longer improves. As we find in Sec. 6 iterative methods can often achieve the superior accuracy, although the computation required to infer solutions can be substantially larger than other methods. It is worth noting however, that this additional computation time is usually only a small fraction of the time for other processes, such as training the DIMs or evaluating f using computational simulators. Applications to AEM problems NN Chen et al. Liu et al. Johnson et al. Deng et al. Ma et al. In this section we provide brief descriptions of each benchmark model. We focus on describing the specific implementation that we use for our experiments, and its justification. For a more thorough treatment of the models we refer readers to the references in Table In this approach the inverse problem is treated as a standard regression problem and a conventional DNN is used Genetic Algorithm (GA). Genetic Algorithms (GAs), a set of iterative, optimization-based algorithms for inverse AEM design Once the fitness of each candidate geometry is comptued, the next step is the selection of "parent" geometries from this population. Crossover and mutation operations on this "parent" subset produce the next generation. We utilize a "roulette-wheel" selection pattern, as implemented by Zhang et al Neural Adjoint (NA). Neural Adjoint (NA) method was recently proposed in Ren et al. The boundary loss was found to greatly improve the performance compared to prior methods, and therefore we adopt the NA from Ren et al. Tandem Network (TD). The so-called data collision problem causes unstable gradient signals, and one method proposed to mitigate this issue is the tandem structure Mixture Density Network (MDN). MDNs 62 account for the one-to-many nature of the inverse problem by assuming the distribution of conditional probability p(g|s) is a mixture of Gaussian random variables. Its effectiveness has been shown on recent AEM design The fundamental goal of this work is to establish a rigorous comparison of the above-mentioned deep inverse models applied to different problems in metamaterial design. The overall design of our experiment is as follows: (1) Collect data: we generate the training data using code as section 2 illustrated; (2) Train the model as described in section 4 on the training set; (3) Evaluate each model's ability to reproduce the target spectra s gt in the test set for every dataset, through re-simulation of the 200 predicted candidate geometry solutions ĝ. For each dataset-DIM pair, we use 24 GPU-hours (specification of hardware used can be found in the appendix Section 6) for network training and hyper-parameter optimization (e.g., width and depth of models, learning rates, regularization strength, model-specific parameters like number of Gaussian for MDN and VAE, KL-divergence coefficient for VAE, MSE coefficient and padding dimension for INN and cINN, mutation rate of the GA etc.. We used a uniform grid of several hyper-parameters dimensions, adjusting the grid range and granularity from heuristics). This was sufficient to evaluate more than 80 hyperparameters settings for each model-dataset pair. We empirically found this number sufficient to achieve diminishing performance returns for each model. During this optimization process, we trained all models on the same training dataset, D tr , for each problem. All model (all implemented in Pytorch 67 ) are trained using Adam To evaluate the quality of a particular hyperparameter setting during the optimization process we measured r T =1 on D val and ultimately chose the model for final testing that achieved the lowest validation error. The final estimate of error for each model-task pair was evaluated by computing r T on D te . The final size and run time of each model-dataset pair can be found in the appendix. Our experimental results are presented in Fig. A major objective of these experiments is to compare the performance of state-of-the-art DIMs. This is challenging because the relative performance of the DIMs depends strongly upon the number of permissible solution proposals (i.e., value of T ). This is because the error of multi-solution DIMs (see Table Deterministic probabilistic Stack 1.22e-6 1.39e-6 6.37e-7 4.37e-6 1.30e-3 9.38e-6 3.95e-5 1.86e-6 Shell 3.60e-3 3.91e-3 6.12e-3 7.13e-3 1.08e-2 9.03e-2 1.02e-1 1.09e-2 ADM 1.16e-3 1.10e-3 1.72e-2 1.66e-3 9.08e-3 7.45e-3 7.34e-3 6.42e-3 T=200 NA GA NN TD INN cINN MDN VAE Stack 5.83e-7 1.36e-6 --1.29e-3 3.78e-7 3.03e-7 2.46e-7 Shell 1.58e-3 3.02e-3 --9.36e-3 1.03e-2 8.05e-3 1.91e-3 ADM 3.00e-4 7.73e-4 --9.05e-3 1.73e-3 1.55e-3 1.39e-3 Table Given the dependency of performance on T , it is difficult to make general statements about the best-performing DIMs. To simplify this analysis we discuss the performance of the DIMs under two more specific scenarios that are especially relevant to AEM applications: when T = 1 and T → ∞, respectively. In the last section we discuss the computation time required for each of the DIMs, and its implications for selecting an appropriate DIM. The vast majority of existing AEM literature evaluates DIMs using r T =1 (i.e., mean-squared re-simulation error) making it an important scenario to consider in our benchmark. In Table Given these results, the best-performing DIMs on our benchmark are iterative (see Table In this subsection we consider the relative performance of DIMs when they are permitted to make a large number of solution proposals. It is computationally intensive to evaluate their asymptotic performance (as T → ∞) for all experiments, and therefore we use T = 200 as an approximation. We argue that this is an important performance measure for inverse AEM problems because it closely reflects the goals of AEM researchers in practice. Most often researchers want the best-performing design, and will evaluate numerous candidate designs in pursuit of this goal. When using DIMs in particular, the quantity of data needed to train the models is substantially larger than T = 200, implying that evaluating T = 200 solutions (or more) with a simulator will often be feasible. Furthermore, and as we show here, doing so often yields substantially-better designs. Therefore we believe this performance measure is of particular interest to the AEM community. To our knowledge we are the first to propose this measure for evaluating the performance of inverse solvers on AEM problems. In Table Regarding the Stack task, all of the models achieve very low error rates (< 10 -5 ). As discussed later in Sec. 6.1, the Stack problem does not exhibit significant non-uniqueness, suggesting that superior performance does not imply superior ability to address non-uniqueness. In this case many DIMs still achieve reductions in error as they make more proposals because they are making slight improvements in their estimates of the same inverse solution, rather than a superior unique solution. As a result, the improvements in accuracy are very small as T increases (note the logarithmic error scale). Another consideration when utilizing DIMs is their computation time: specifically their training and design-inference time. The precise computation time of a DIM will depend strongly upon the particular task, model size (number of free parameters), and hardware being utilized; a full discussion of these dynamics is beyond the scope of this work. Therefore we present benchmark timings of each DIM on our three benchmark tasks, using a common hardware configuration (a single Nvidia RTX 3090 graphics processing unit). These measures therefore provide rough estimates of computation time that can be expected in many real-world settings for each model. The results of our benchmark timings are provided in Table In general the MDN, cINN, and INN models require the longest time to train, while the NN, VAE, GA and NA tend to require the least amount of time. The training times also vary across tasks, with the ADM task requiring substantially less time than the others. This is likely due to the smaller quantity of training data available compared to the other problems. Regarding inference time, the NA and GA are substantially slower than the other models, due to their iterative inference procedure. These models tend to achieve the best performance and therefore this imposes a trade-off between design quality and computation time. However, we note that the inference time of the models is relatively small compared to their training time. Furthermore, the time required for computational simulations is usually (though not always) much greater than the time required for training and (especially) solution inference with DIMs. Ultimately the relevance of these factors, and the most appropriate trade-offs, will be problem dependent. In the AEM literature DIMs are often evaluated, or compared, on an inverse problem without verifying whether the problem truly exhibits non-uniqueness. One good reason for this may be that there is no general test for determining whether a problem exhibits non-uniqueness. However, in general there is no guarantee that an inverse problem will be ill-posed, in which case DIMs may not offer any advantages over conventional regression models. As we show, conventional models may achieve superior performance in these cases. Furthermore, any performance differences between two DIMs on a well-posed problem cannot be caused by differences in their ability to address non-uniqueness, making such performance comparisons (between DIMs) potentially misleading. To mitigate these risks, we propose that a conventional NN always be employed as a baseline approach when solving inverse problems. This ensures that a suitable model is included in case the problem is actually well-posed, and provides a baseline performance to ensure that there is some advantage to using DIMs. Furthermore, one can treat the relative performance of a state-of-the-art DIM and conventional NN as a hypothesis test for the presence of non-uniqueness. If the DIM achieves superior performance, it implies that its modeling assumption of non-uniqueness is (likely) more accurate for the problem than the NN's assumptions of uniqueness. More precisely, we propose the following measure of non-uniqueness: Here r N N and r N A are the re-simulation errors of a conventional NN and the neural-adjoint DIM, when T = 1. We suggest the NN and the NA because they represent state-of-the-art deep conventional and inverse models, respectively. We use T = 1 to avoid giving the NA an advantage by evaluating multiple of its solution proposals, while the NN can only submit one solution; in principle, if the problem is non-unique then the NA will yield superior performance even when T = 1. Finally, it is also important to ensure that the NA and NN are similarly-sized models (i.e., have similar number of free parameters), since model size can often impact performance. This suggests that for some inverse problems, a simple regression model can indeed substantially outperform DIMs (when T = 1), and therefore it can be costly exclude them when solving inverse problems. Because the NN outperforms the DIMs, it suggests that non-uniqueness is not a major obstacle to solving this problem. This is corroborated by the extremely low error of 6.34e -7 achieved by the NN. From Fig. Crucially, these results also imply that care must be taken when interpreting the performance differences between DIMs on the Stack problem. Because there is relatively little non-uniqueness, differences in performance are largely due to factors that are unrelated to addressing non-uniqueness. Although the Stack problem is well-posed, we do observe that as T grows, the performance of the DIMs improves, and the DIMs do eventually outperform the conventional NN. We hypothesize that this occurs because the DIMs are obtaining marginally more accurate approximations of the same inverse solution found at T = 1 by the NN, rather than identifying superior unique solutions. In the Appendix we provide further evidence that this is indeed the case. To corroborate the γ measure and its implications, we also present visual evidence of the non-uniqueness present in each benchmark task. In Fig. For problems with a single unique solution, we expect that highly similar spectra will tend to have designs that are also similar. This is the case for the Stack problem in Fig. Recently deep inverse models have been found successful for solving inverse AEM problems (e.g., material design). This has led to the rapid proliferation of different models for performing inverse design, but relatively little rigorous testing or comparison among them. In this work we present the first benchmark performance comparisons of state-ofthe-art deep inverse models (DIMs) on inverse AEM problems. We selected three inverse AEM problems to include in the benchmark, which were chosen carefully to be relevant and diverse. We then evaluated the performance of eight different DIMs on each of our three benchmark tasks. Six of these DIMs were were employed in recent AEM studies, while two of them (the INN and cINN) are introduced to the AEM community for the first time in this study. Recent inverse AEM studies typically measure the accuracy of DIMs based upon the first solution that they propose for a target AEM scattering. However, many recent DIMs can propose multiple solutions for a given target scattering and in this work we evaluated the performance of DIMs as a function of the number of solution proposals that they were permitted to make, denoted T . Therefore, in our benchmark we evaluated DIM performance as a function of T , for T ∈ [1, 200] This measure is much richer than the conventional performance measure (equivalent to T = 1), and we believe it better reflects how DIMs are often used in practice=. Benchmarking results. The results of our benchmark indicate that DIMs can achieve error levels ranging from nearly 10e -3 for the Shell problem, to 10e -7 on the Stack problem. We believe this level of error (illustrated in Fig. Publication of resources for future benchmarking. To make our experiments easily replicable, we publish code and documentation for our benchmark datasets and DIMs. Importantly, we also publish fast and easily-usable simulators, which are necessary to benchmark DIMs. It is our hope that researchers will utilize these resources to rigorously evaluate new DIMs, as well as build upon our benchmark by adding new models and tasks. 10.2 Neural Adjoint with Boundary Loss (NA). We supply the loss function and the process flow chart of the NA method. The loss function during inference time can be written as: L inf er = ( f (ĝ) -g gt ) 2 + L bdy (6) where f is the forward proxy function, μ g and R g are the mean and range of the training set g. ĝ is the trainable We supply the loss function and the process flow chart of the TD method. The 2-stage training loss function for TD are as follows L 2 = ( f (f -1 (s)) -g gt ) 2 + L bdy (10) where the L bdy is the same as defined in eq 7. In our benchmarking tasks, to make a fair comparison, the same forward network f is used for TD, the Genetic Algorithm, and the Neural Adjoint with boundary loss. We also provide some quantified measurement of the distance that is not distorted by the dimensionality reduction, we provide D r (defined below) to reflect the "localness" of the clustered points, normalized by the pairwise distance of the whole dataset. D r ≈ 1 would mean that the cluster is closer to randomly drawn from the whole dataset, therefore a localized draw would have a D r < 1. Avg pairwise G distance within cluster Avg pairwise G distance between all points where C is the number of cluster (5 in our case), K is the number of data points in each cluster (5 in our case), N is the size of the whole dataset, G c,i represents the i-th geometry of cluster c. The D r value is labelled on the right top corner of Fig 7. As this "closeness" measure increase from order: Stack < Shell < ADM, we see the same trend quantitatively with the perceived one-to-manyness on the plot as well. Here we list the hardwares we used in the model training and inference to provide context for our running time. We are using NVIDIA GTX3090 cards for GPU, AMD 3990X (64 cores, 2.90GHz, 256 MB cache), RAM: 256GB.