Analytical method for the second-order homogenization of two-phase composites within Mindlin-Toupin strain gradient elasticity theory is proposed. Direct approach and self-consistent approximation are used to reduce the homogenization problem to the problem of determination of averaged Cauchy stresses, double stresses and static moments of Cauchy stresses inside the inclusions under prescribed quadratic boundary conditions. The ellipsoidal shape of inclusions and orthotropic properties of phases are assumed. Extended equivalent inclusion method with linear eigenstrain is proposed to derive the explicit relations between the Eshelby-like tensors and corresponding concentration tensors that are used to define the averaged field variables inside the inclusions. Obtained analytical solutions allow to evaluate the effective classical and gradient elastic moduli of composite materials accounting for the phases properties, volume fraction, shape and size of inclusions. Presented solution for the effective gradient moduli covers the full range of volume fraction and correctly predicts the absence of gradient effects for the homogeneous classical Cauchy medium. Examples of calculations for the composites with spherical inclusions are given. Micro-scale definition of the wellknown simplified strain gradient elasticity theory is provided. Namely, it is shown that this theory is the phenomenological continuum model for the composites with isotropic matrix and with the small volume fraction of stiff isotropic spherical inclusions, which have the same Poisson's ratio to those one of matrix phase. Determination of additional material constants of the strain gradient elasticity theory (SGET, Correct evaluation of SGET parameters for the certain materials allows one to extend the ability of continuum description and take into account the size effects, such that, the influence of the inclusion size in composites In the present paper we consider the problem of determination of the effective elastic properties of inhomogeneous materials with ellipsoidal inclusions based on the analytical second-order homogenization method. The goal is to find the classical elastic moduli as well as the high-order (gradient) moduli of the composite material assuming that phases and the effective medium are the Mindlin-Toupin strain gradient continua. Such problem is old enough and the possibility for determination of the high-order properties of the composite materials have been discussed in Computational methods for determination of gradient moduli based on the numerical simulations with the unit cells and periodic fragments have been widely considered (see, e.g. Analytical second-order homogenization methods with an effective strain gradient medium have been also developed. Dilute approximation solution (for the case of small volume fraction of inclusions) have been proposed in Ref. In the present paper we develop an extension of analytical method proposed by Ma and Gao Note, that in the initial work The main issue in the present study is to define the averaged quantities τ ij x k (the averaged moments of Cauchy stresses τ ij ) and x i x j (the normalized moment of inertia tensor) for the inhomogeneous medium. These quantities usually arise in the second-order homogenization (see Thus, in the present paper we propose an approximate self-consistent approach for evaluation of the averaged moments of Cauchy stresses τ ij x k that also solves the problem of determination of the normalized inertia tensor x i x j . Approximation is given in a sense that during evaluation of term τ ij x k we assume that inclusions are embedded in the effective medium. It is shown that within such approximation we can reduce the second-order homogenization problem to the problem of determination of the averaged field variables only inside the inclusions. These averaged field variables can be found then by using Eshelby-like tensors (that were derived previously within SGET Note, that the problems with linear and polynomial eigenstrains are widely known in classical elasticity The rest apart of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we provide a brief description of SGET formulation. In Section 3 we describe the secondorder homogenization method following Consider an orthotropic linear elastic body occupying the region Ω with smooth boundary ∂Ω without any edge. The strain energy density of the second gradient orthotropic material within Mindlin Form II can be presented as follows where ) is an infinitesimal strain tensor; ε ij,k is the strain gradient tensor; u i is the displacement vector at a point with coordinates x i ; the comma denotes the differentiation with respect to spatial variables and repeated indices imply summation. The constitutive equations for the Cauchy stress tensor τ ij and the thirdorder double stress tensor μ ijk are given by: The boundary value problem statement of SGET can be obtained based on the variational approach and for the case of the body with smooth surface without any edge it can be presented as follows where σ ij = τ ij -μ ijk,k is the total stress tensor; b i is the body force; ti , mi , ūi , ḡi are the traction, double traction, displacements and normal gradients of displacements that can be prescribed on the body surface ∂Ω, respectiely; traction and double traction are related to stresses as follows: where n i is the unit outward normal vector on the ∂Ω; and D i = (...) ,in i (...) ,k n k is the surface gradient operator. Continuity conditions at the contact of two strain gradient materials should be prescribed for the same quantities that arise in the boundary conditions in (4): where square brackets [...] denote the difference between the enclosed quantities evaluated from the both sides of the contact surface. By using definitions for strain and relations (2), (3), (4) 1 , the equilibrium equations of SGET in terms of displacements can be presented in the following form: 3 Second-order homogenization method In this section we will follow the approach that was used in Ref. ijklmn = G * ijklmn . These tensors should be found based on the homogenization procedure, that will be described in this section. We consider the body (homogeneous or inhomogeneous) occupying the region Ω. Quadratic boundary conditions for the displacements vector are prescribed on the body surface: where ε 0 ij = ε 0 ji and κ 0 ijk = κ 0 ikj are the constant tensors of the second and the third order, respectively. Corresponding displacement gradients, strain and strain gradients are the following: ūi If κ 0 ijk = 0 in (9) then we obtain the standard form of the linear boundary conditions, in which ε 0 ij is the homogeneous strain field prescribed at the external surface of the body. Coefficients κ 0 ijk define the gradients of strain field in (9), Instead of these constraints, one should also assume that there exist some appropriate body force that provides the fulfillment of equilibrium equations. Such an approach was used, e.g. in where V is the volume of the body under consideration and we will use the notation with triangle brackets for the quantities averaged over the body volume: Using divergence theorem and taking into account the equilibrium equations (4) 1 and prescribed boundary conditions Considering two-phase composite and using the standard definitions for the averaged quantities through the volume fractions: where c 1 and c 2 = 1 -c 1 are the volume fractions of matrix and inclusions, respectively. Then, we should use the so-called average strain theorem and its generalization for the strain gradients. In the case of prescribed QBC ( These relations ( ijkl -C (1) ijklmn -G (1) For the equivalent homogeneous medium from ( where we introduce the notation for the normalized moment of inertia tensor Based on the energy equivalence principle we should assume then that the strain energy density in composite medium equals to those one in the equivalent homogeneous medium, i.e. U = U * . Then, using ( ijkl -C (1) It is seen, that for the effective classical moduli we came to the standard relation of the direct homogenization approach where A ijkl 2 is the strain concentration tensor averaged over the inclusion domain and we take into account the symmetry of the structure that leads to the absence of coupling terms related to the prescribed strain gradients (see Substituting ( ijmn -C (1) Remaining task in ( Relation for the effective gradient moduli where A ijklmn 2 is the six-order strain gradient concentration tensor averaged over the inclusion domain; and we take into account that this tensor obeys the following symmetries A ijklmn = A ijkmln (due to symmetry of strain tensor). Definition of the concentration tensor A ijklmn 2 based on the averaged Eshelby-type tensors within the extended Eshelby equivalent inclusion method and self-consistent approximation will be presented in next sections. Definition of the averaged moments of Cauchy stresses τ ij x k and inertia tensor E ij in (20) within analytical approach is not simple. Assuming that the domain under consideration is the RVE with the single inclusion we can obtain only the dilute approximation solution without interactions between inclusions (since in this case we will assume that the remote boundary conditions (9) can be prescribed on the boundary of RVE). Direct evaluation of τ ij x k and E ij for the composite medium leads to the integration over full domain and, for example, the normalized moments of inertia of the macroscopic body will arise in the solution. Thus, to overcome these problems of analytical method, in Section 5 we will introduce an approximate self-consistent approach that allows us to avoid the integration over the whole body in Let us develop an extended variant of Eshelby equivalent inclusion method that can be applied within SGET for evaluation of the field variables inside the single inclusion embedded into infinite matrix and subjected to the far-field QBC where ε * ij = ε * ji and κ * ijk = κ * ikj are some constant tensors. The elastic strain ε E ij and gradient of elastic strain ε E ij,k inside the domain Ω 2 can be defined as: where ε T ij and ε T ij,k are the resulting total strain and the total strain gradient, respectively, that arise in the domain Ω 2 due to presence of the eigenstrain and action of the surrounding material; and the following transformations are valid: where S ijkl , S ijklm , S ijklm and S ijklmn are the Eshelby-like tensors that arise when one consider the Eshelby inclusion problem within SGET (see For the following analysis, let us find the strain, static moment of strain where E (2) lk = x l x k 2 is the normalized inertia tensor for the domain Ω 2 . Averaged elastic strain, static moment of elastic strain and gradient of elastic strain can be found by using Relations for the averaged total strain, its static moment and gradient (26) can be presented as follows: where we take into account that tensors S ijklm and S ijklm are position-dependent and have antisymmetric distribution inside the domain Ω 2 for the case of linear eigenstrain Then, let as find the averaged Cauchy stresses, moments of Cauchy stresses and double stresses inside the domain Ω 2 . Using constitutive equations (2), (3) for matrix phase, relations ( The key point now is the assumption that we can chose the linear eigenstrain * ij ijkl and G ijklmn , by an equivalent inclusion with properties C (2) ijklmn , such that Taking into account ( Based on standard derivations with Eqs. (29) 1 , (34), (37) 1 one can easily find the following relations for the averaged concentration of the strain field inside the inclusion, that arise due to prescribed QBC: where I ijkl is the fourth-order identity tensor, and T ijkl 2 is the strain concentration tensor within dilute approximation problem. Using almost the same derivations, from (29) 3 , ( rstlmn -G rstlmn ) Expression for the concentration of the first moment of strain tensor inside the inclusion ε lm x k 2 can be derived by using (29) 2 , ( rskl -C (1) Thus, we obtain the representations for the averaged tensors T ijkl 2 (38), T ijklmn 2 (39) and Tijklmn 2 (40) that define the concentration of strain, strain gradient and fist static moment of strain inside the inclusion due to prescribed QBC (9) within the dilute approximation, i.e. for the case of small volume fraction of inclusions. All solutions ( The next step is to derive the solution for the effective properties of composite material based on Eqv. Self-consistent solution for the effective classical moduli C * ijkl within SGET can be obtained by using standard approach. Instead of initial composite material (Fig. within self-consistent approximation: where S * ijkl is the averaged Eshelby tensor evaluated by using effective properties of composites material. Definition Gradient elastic moduli can be found by using relation where S * ijklmn is the averaged Eshelby-like tensor evaluated by using effective properties of composite material. Next, let us consider the problem of definition of the averaged moments of Cauchy stresses τ ij x k . We will do it in a sense of self-consistent approximation, i.e. we consider an auxiliary problem for the inclusion embedded into the effective medium under prescribed QBC Physical treatment for the proposed modified self-consistent approximation can be related to the non-local nature of the moments that arise in the material microstructure. Indeed, the average concentration of the moments of Cauchy stresses in the given RVE will be significantly affected by the other RVE's in the neighborhood. Replacing the matrix material by the effective medium (Fig. Since the considered RVE (Fig. Now, let us find the averaged moments of Cauchy stresses in the considered RVE (Fig. where the averaging in the first term ε lm x k 1 is performed over the part of RVE that is filled by the effective medium (in the initial composite material this part is filled with matrix). Using divergence theorem and taking into account prescribed modified QBC Similarly to (40) 1 , we can define now the averaged moments of strain field inside the inclusion ε lm x k 2 as follows: where Ãijklmn 2 is the concentration tensor for the moments of strain field in the inclusions and we take into account that we used the modified QBC As it is seen from Eqv. ( where S * lmrst x p 2 is the averaged static moment of the fifth-order Eshelbylike tensor evaluated by using the effective material constants of the composite material. This tensor can be found based on the inclusion problem within SGET (see To find the overall effective gradient moduli of the composite material we should use relations ijkprs -G (1) After simplifications, equation ijkprs -G (1) Derived solution ( (1) For the strain gradient phases, solution (50) predicts that homogeneous media will have the properties of the corresponding phase: ijklmn (if c 2 = 1). Similarly to the expression for classical moduli The restriction of solution It should be also noted, that the use of the standard self-consistent approach, or the use of any other kind of the known averaging schemes (e.g. Mori-Tanaka, generalized self-consistent method, etc.) do not allow to overcome the problems with analytical definition of τ ij x k . Solutions for the effective gradient moduli (like In this section we provide some illustrations for the derived solutions. We consider a composite material with isotropic matrix and isotropic spherical inclusions. For simplicity, we assume that phases are the classical Cauchy materials, i.e. G (1) ijklmn = G (2) ijklmn = 0. As the consequence, the fifth-order Eshelby-like tensor in (2) np I ijklmp . Therefore, the relations for the effective properties ( ijmn -C (1) where the strain concentration tensor A mnkl 2 should be evaluated by using Eqv. where ν * is the effective Poisson's ratio of the composite material, that should be found using ( Tensors of classical elastic moduli in (51) can be represented through the Lame's constants: Normalized inertia tensor for the spherical inclusion of radius R should be evaluated in (51) by using definition Substituting the first relation into the second one in ijpq -C (1) Dilute solution for the small volume fraction of inclusions can be obtained from ijlm -C ijlm )δ kn One more simplified relation can be obtained from ( ijkl -C ijkl ) ijmn -C ijmn )E This relation ( ijmn -C ijmn )δ kn In these examples we consider the composite materials with different stiffnesses and Possion's ratios of phases. In Fig. where no summation for the repeated indexes is assumed and effective classical moduli C * ijlm are evaluated using the same method (self-consistent, dilute, Voigt) that is used for the gradient moduli. Proposed normalization Moreover, the square roots of these normalized constants Ḡ * ijklmn can be also treated as some non-dimensional length scales calculated in terms of inclusions' radius. For the considered case we found that there exist three independent gradient moduli of the macroscopically isotropic composite material that are Ḡ * iikiik , Ḡ * iikjjk and Ḡ * ijkijk (where i = j and no summation for the repeated indexes is assumed). Values of these moduli are shown by different colors in Fig. In Fig. Most significant gradient effects arise in the composites with high contrast between the phase stiffnesses. Namely, for the ratio between Young's moduli of phases E 2 /E 1 = 100 the normalized gradient moduli in the self-consistent solution achieve the value ∼ 10 (Fig. Change of the Poisson's ratios of phases significantly affects the results. Namely, when matrix and inclusions have the same Poisson's ratio (Fig. where l is the single length scale parameter of material. Length scale parameter for the equivalent medium can be defined now by using the derived solutions for the homogenization problems. The most straightforward way is to use the Voigt solution. Comparison between the phenomenological relation ijlm -C (1) From Thus, from the point of view of the Voigt approximate solution, the widelyknown isotropic simplified SGET (60) can be treated as the continuum theory for the composites with isotropic matrix and with stiff spherical isotropic inclusions, which Poisson's ratio is the same to those one of matrix phase. As it is seen from Fig. In this paper we proposed a variant of self-consistent approximate approach for the second-order homogenization of two-phase composites within SGET. We derive analytical solutions for the effective classical and gradient moduli, which are reduced to derivation of averaged concentration tensors for the strain, moment of strain and strain gradient inside the inclusions. These concentration tensors are represented through the Ehselby-like tensors based on the proposed extended variant of Eshelby's equivalent inclusion method. Peculiarity of this extended method is the requirement for the equivalence between averaged Cauchy stresses, moments of Cauchy stresses and double stresses in the homogeneous medium with linear eigenstrain and in the corresponding medium with inclusion under prescribed QBC. Derived solutions are applicable for the composites with orthotropic phases and with ellipsoidal inclusions. As the particular case, these solutions can be used for the composites with isotropic phases, for which the closed form solutions for the Ehselby-like tensors have been already obtained within SGET in Ref. In this paper, we present an example of calculations for the composites with spherical inclusions and with Cauchy-type phases. In our further work it is planned to derive the solutions for the composites with other shape of inclusions and also for the composites with Midlin-type phases. A validation of the proposed method based on the comparison with numerical solutions should be also performed (though some open questions are still exists in the numerical second-order homogenization approaches). We start with Eqv. (B.1) Also we consider Eqv. where we use the definition for the moments of total strain tensor (29) 2 . Substituting (B.2) into (B.1) we obtain: (2) ijlm -C (2) ijlm J lmknpr ε np x r 2 -2κ 0 npq E (2) qr = 0 ijst ε st x k 2 = J lmknpr 2κ 0 npq E (2) qr ⇒ ε np x r 2 -J -1 lmknpr C (1) lmij ijst ε st x k 2 = 2κ 0 npq E (2) qr ⇒ I stknpr -J -1 lmknpr C (1) lmij ijst -C (2) ijst ε st x k 2 = 2κ 0 npq E (2) qr ⇒ ε st x k 2 = 2κ 0 npq E (2) qr I stknpr -J -1 lmknpr C (1) lmij ijst -C (2) ijst In this Appendix we derive the representation for the averaged moments of Cauchy stresses τ ij x k RV E that were used within the modified self-consistent approximation proposed in Section 5. We start with equation ( (2) Using definitions for averaged quantities and definitions for strain tensor, we can rewrite (C.1) as follows: Then, in the first surface integral over ∂Ω 12 in (C.3) we use the divergence theorem and reduce it to the volume integral over inclusion domain. Also, in the second surface integral over ∂Ω RV E in (C.3) we can take into account the prescribed modified QBC Averaged displacement field inside RVE u l can be found by using prescribed displacements at the boundary. Accounting for modified QBC We denote tensor E ij as the normalized inertia tensor, since the standard inertia tensor should be defined accounting for the body mass. Here and in the following we will denote the tensor product of strain tensor and position vector like ε ij x k or * ij x k as the averaged moment of strain (or of the eigenstrain). These quantities are needed to find the static moment of Cauchy stresses τ ij x k in the considered approach.