NaAlSi is a quasi-two-dimensional semimetal with superconductivity below Tc = 6.8 K and a band structure characterized by nodal lines near the Fermi level and potential topological surface states. Electrical resistivity measurements on its superconducting transitions in magnetic fields were made using plate-like single crystals. In the magnetic field-temperature phase diagram, we observed a substantial reduction in resistivity in a pre-transitional zone above the bulk superconducting regime only when the magnetic fields were perpendicular to the plane, rather than parallel to it. Significant sample (thickness) dependence, reentrant behavior, and sensitivity to electrode configurations all indicate that a portion of the crystal has an upper critical field greater than the bulk superconductivity in the pre-transitional region. This fractional superconductivity may occur on the side surface of the crystal. Topological insulators are states of matter that cannot be connected adiabatically to conventional insulators. They have garnered considerable attention due to their remarkable features, which includes a robust metallic surface state that is protected by the topology having a crossing point of linearly dispersive bands. Resistivity measurements at 300 K on single crystals revealed a moderate two dimensionality with anisotropy of approximately 10. In this paper, we describe unique superconducting transitions in resistivity for several single crystals of NaAlSi. We found a decrease in resistivity in the pre-transitional zone above the bulk superconductivity region in the B-T phase diagram for B || c, but not for B || a. The magnitude of the decrease was very sample-dependent; the thicker the crystal, the greater the reduction. It is proposed that a portion of a crystal, which is likely crystal's side surface, has a higher upper critical field than the bulk superconductivity. As previously reported, single crystals of NaAlSi were grown in a boron nitride crucible using the Na-Ga flux technique. Resistivity (ρ) and heat capacity (Cp) measurements were performed in a physical property measurement system (PPMS, Quantum Design Inc.). The resistivity was determined using the standard four probe method with indium metal electrodes on the crystal surfaces; typical silver or gold metal pastes were not suitable as electrodes due to their high contact resistance. For the majority of experiments, a pair of current electrodes was positioned on the crystal's top surface and a current I of 1-5 mA was delivered along the b axis (inset, Fig. The superconducting transitions in resistivity obtained in the previous study We measured resistivity at B || c on thicker crystal C with t = 1.2 mm. In comparison to the other two crystals, the ρ of crystal C at 1.8 K increases more gradually above Bc2 off , as seen in Fig. of a dip in thin crystal B. For thicker crystal A, the dip becomes a smooth slope, whereas for more thicker crystal C, the dip becomes a downwardly convex variation with a much smaller magnitude. These three crystals, as well as the others analyzed in this study, must have almost identical crystalline properties due to their growth in the same sample batch. Indeed, dispersion in their physical parameters, such as T c , B c2 , normal-state resistivity, and residual resistivity ratio, were negligible. Thus, the sample dependency is most likely due to crystal thickness: the thicker the crystal (in the sequence of crystals B, A, and C), the greater the resistivity reduction in the transitional and pretransitional regimes. The B-T phase diagram of Fig. All the resistivity measurements described above were performed using pairs of voltage electrodes attached on the top surface of crystals. To rule out the possibility that the observed atypical transitions were caused by an irregular electrical current flow in a crystal, we repeated the resistivity experiment using two pairs of voltage electrodes on the top and side surfaces of crystal D with t = 0.5 mm. The actual experimental setup is seen in the inset photograph of Fig. In comparison to crystal B of comparable thickness (Fig. It is noted that the magnitudes of ρn differ significantly between the two measurements: the ρn values at 8 K just above T c are 172 and 46 μΩ cm for the top and side surfaces, respectively, representing a factor of four discrepancy. Other measurements on three additional crystals revealed comparable variations in ρn by several factors. The side surface appears to have a lower resistivity than the top surface, although the reason is unknown. We observed characteristic resistivity reductions in a temperature (magnetic field) range below T * (B * ) and above the Tc (Bc2) of the bulk superconducting transition only at B || c in NaAlSi. At this pre-transitional regime, there was a considerable sample (thickness) dependence on the behavior: a smooth variation in resistivity for crystal A, a reentrant change for thinner crystal B, and a larger reduction for thicker crystal C. Similar results were found with two different experimental setups that included voltage electrodes on the crystal's top and side surfaces. In the B-T phase diagram, the B * and Bc2 lines exhibit comparable T dependences and merge toward zero-field Tc as temperature increases. It is well established that a low-dimensional superconducting fluctuation results in an increase in conductivity σ above Tc, as defined by σ ~ (T -Tc) -(4 -d)/2 , where d represents dimension. The relevant phase transition should have occurred nonuniformly or in a small fraction of the crystal, because there was no anomaly at T * in the heat capacity of Fig. The merging of the B * and Bc2 lines in the phase diagram implies that the zero-field Tc values of the bulk and fractional superconductivities are nearly identical. This indicates that the two superconductivities are based on similar electronic states and the mechanisms are analogous. Thus, it is plausible that NaAlSi itself is responsible for both; provided the high crystalline quality observed in previous single-crystal X-ray diffraction analyses, To begin, consider the existence of fractional superconductivity at crystal surfaces. The top surface layer, which is perpendicular to the magnetic field along the c axis, is excluded from the source, whereas the side surface layer, which forms a 30o angle with the c axis, can have an enhanced upper critical field due to the geometry, even if the superconducting properties remain the same. When the bulk superconductivity is suppressed at B > Bc2 on , the side surface layer retains its superconductivity, allowing for increased current flow in the side-surface layer at the expense of bulk current flow. This unidirectional current flow must lead to a lower voltage drop across the top-surface electrodes, as observed by the decreases in apparent resistivity at Bc2 on -B * . The greater reduction observed in thick crystal C in Fig. Very interestingly, our recent resistivity measurements on a NaAlSi crystal showed that the resistive transition changes remarkably as a function of magnetic field angle, revealing a distinct two-step transition when the magnetic field is positioned halfway between the c and a axes. If surface superconductivity does exist in NaAlSi, one may consider its relation to the topological surface states. A similar situation is expected when thin layers surrounding specific crystalline defects exhibit fractional superconductivity. Due to the fact that our crystals contained approximately 1-2% Ga per formula unit, such defects could be caused by Ga impurities. A fractional superconductivity having an enhanced upper critical field could be caused by thin superconducting layers formed around Ga impurities or clusters of defects. Even in this case, a contribution from the interface's topological state may be assumed. In any case, identifying superconductivity that is not bulk is always difficult, and additional careful experiments are required. Finally, we would like to draw attention to additional mysteries that will be addressed in a future study. The reentrant behavior observed in thin crystal B is unexpected, as it indicates that the contribution of fractional superconductivity below B * vanishes as the bulk superconducting transition at Bc2 on approaches. The fractional superconducting region appears to have been absorbed into the matrix, resulting in the loss of the enhanced Bc2 in its two dimensionality. This implies that there is some "communication" between the surface and bulk superconductivities. On the other hand, the large difference between the top and side electrode measurements in Fig. We observed unusual superconducting transitions in resistivity in the quasi-two-dimensional sp semimetal NaAlSi with topological nodal lines. In the B-T phase diagram with B || c, there is a pre-transitional zone above the bulk superconducting region where the resistivity decreases in various ways depending on the samples (crystal thicknesses). In the pre-transitional region, it is likely that a fractional superconductivity with enhanced Bc2 occurs at crystal surfaces or at around certain crystalline defects. NaAlSi provides an intriguing platform for studying a novel aspect of superconductivity. Wang, Commun. Mater. 1, 56 (2020).