Metal halides perovskites (MHPs) are attracting considerable interest for optoelectronic applications, with Cs2AgBiBr6 one of the main contenders among lead-free systems. Cs2AgBiBr6 crystallizes in a nominally double-perovskite structure, but exhibits a soft lattice with large atomic fluctuations characteristic of MHPs. While crucial to understand electron-phonon and phononphonon couplings, the spatio-temporal correlations of these fluctuations remain largely unknown. Here, we reveal these correlations using comprehensive neutron and x-ray scattering measurements on Cs2AgBiBr6 single-crystals, complemented with first-principles simulations augmented with machine-learned neural-network potentials. We report the discovery of an unexpected complex modulated ground state structure containing several hundred atoms, arising from a soft-phonon instability of the low-temperature tetragonal phase. Further, our experiments and simulations both reveal extensive correlated 2D fluctuations of Br octahedra at finite temperature, arising from soft anharmonic optic phonons, reflecting very shallow potential wells. These results provide new insights into the atomic structure and fluctuations in MHPs, critical to understand and control their thermal and optoelectronic properties. Metal halide perovskites (MHPs) exhibit outstanding performance for photovoltaic, optoelectronic and radiation detection applications Importantly, many studies of inorganic MHPs highlighted the importance of lattice instabilities of the halide octahedra framework, and of strong phonon anharmonicity on the electron-phonon coupling, which is key in the * olivier.delaire@duke.edu optoelectronic response Large amplitude atomic fluctuations in MHPs arise from soft and anharmonic potentials, which also result in very low thermal conductivities and large thermal expansion coefficients Here, we report the first momentum-resolved investigation of the crystal structure and phonons in Cs 2 AgBiBr 6 single-crystals using inelastic neutron scattering (INS) and diffuse scattering of both neutrons and x-rays. Our experiments are complemented with first-principles simulations of anharmonic phonons and structural distortions, extended to large simulation scales with a surrogate neural-network potential derived from machinelearning. Our experiments and simulations both reveal a surprisingly complex ground state, and pervasive 2D correlated fluctuations of Br octahedra tilts. The average structure of Cs 2 AgBiBr 6 is cubic doubleperovskite (F m 3m) at room temperature Figure While the behavior observed in Cs 2 AgBiBr 6 establishes a more general character in the MHP family of slow correlated fluctuations first observed in CsPbBr 3 To investigate the phononic origin of the diffuse rods, and anharmonic renormalization in the cubic phase, we performed ab initio molecular dynamics (AIMD) simulations at 300 K and 150 K (cubic). The AIMD trajectories were used as input to the temperature-dependent effective potential (TDEP) method to obtain renormalized second-order force-constants and associated phonon dispersions While our TDS simulations using renormalized forceconstants account for the observed diffuse scattering signal very well, the TDEP method still describes the system within an effective second-order harmonic approximation. To fully include the effect of anharmonicity on the phonon spectral functions, without the limitations of perturbation theory, we further used machinelearning based molecular dynamics (MLMD), with a neural-network force-field trained against AIMD data (see Appendix). Figure Inelastic neutron scattering -We now compare our INS measurements with our phonon simulations and show that low-energy acoustic modes retain a sharp nature, contrasting strongly with the behavior of soft, broad optic phonons for Br octahedra rotations. We conducted high-resolution INS on Cs 2 AgBiBr 6 single-crystals using the Cold Neutron Triple-Axis Spectrometer (CTAX) and HB-3 triple-axis spectrometer at the High Flux Isotope Reactor (details in Appendix). The TA phonons measured along [4, K, 0] and [-H, 4, -H] at 300 K are shown in Fig. The INS spectra were fit with a damped harmonic oscillator (DHO) model convolved with the experimental resolution (details in supplement). The resulting phonon energies and linewidths are shown in Fig. Tetragonal phase instability and ground state -As discussed above, the tetragonal phase results from a modulation of the cubic structure by out-of-phase octahedral rotations, due to the soft zone-center optic mode. Indeed, distorting the cubic structure with the eigenvector of the zone-center mode resulted in a tetragonal structure with space group I4/m, whose parameters (Table In addition, our low-T x-ray measurements clearly show a broad diffuse intensity maximum at X points at 134 K (cubic phase) and strengthening at 100 K (tetragonal) and gradually splitting into sharper maxima close to K points, eventually condensing into intense superstructure Bragg spots (Fig. In summary, we reported the first momentum-resolved investigations of complex dynamic fluctuations in the double-perovskite Cs 2 AgBiBr 6 based on single-crystal neutron and x-ray scattering measurements, rationalized with first-principles simulations augmented with large scale machine-learning models. We revealed the occurrence of systematic diffuse scattering rods arising from slow, correlated 2D fluctuations of Br octahedra derived from strongly anharmonic low-energy optic phonons. While arising from distinct phonon branches, these large fluctuations share similarities with the overdamped zone-boundary acoustic modes in the singleperovskite CsPbBr 3 , suggesting a general behavior of slow correlated 2D fluctuations in MHPs. Critically, a new low-symmetry phase was discovered at T ⩽ T c2 = 39 K, emerging from a phonon instability of the tetragonal phase near the K-point, and resulting in an unusually complex ground state with several hundred atoms in the unit cell. Our results suggest ubiquitous lattice instabilities in the halide perovskite family resulting from their anharmonic potential energy surface, and reveal a much more complex ground state than previously known in Cs 2 AgBiBr 6 . The complex anharmonic lattice dynamics yield large thermal fluctuations and strongly impact the electron-phonon coupling and thus the thermal and optoelectronic properties of these compounds. by the square of the atomic scattering factors for each element. Further details are given in Ref. Neutron diffuse scattering experiments were conducted using the CORELLI instrument at SNS, Oak Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL) as a function of temperature. Unlike conventional single-crystal x-ray or neutron diffractometers, CORELLI uses a wide wavelength band to cover large swaths of wave-vectors Q in reciprocal space, but enables the discrimination of purely elastic vs inelastic signals with a resolution of ∼ 1 meV, through the use of a semi-random chopper and cross-correlation technique. The crystal was mounted on an aluminum pin with thin copper wire, with the pin wrapped in Gd-foil to reduce background, and the assembly was loaded on closed-cycle refrigerator. Measurements were performed on cooling down to T ∼ 10 K as well as warming to ∼ 400 K. At selected temperatures, the sample was rotated over a wide range of angle (360 • ) to collect large continuous data volumes in reciprocal space and investigate the diffuse scattering. Inelastic neutron scattering (INS) measurements were conducted on the Cold Neutron Triple-Axis Spectrometer (CTAX) and HB-3 triple-axis spectrometer at the High Flux Isotope Reactor (HFIR), ORNL. A few single crystals of Cs 2 AgBiBr 6 were used with mass 0.2∼0.4 ġ. Samples had mosaics of about 30 ′ . Using CTAX, we measured acoustic modes along [4, K, 0] at 300 K and 100 K, [-H, 4, -H] at 300 K, [0, 4 -K, 0] at 300 K, [2 + H, 2 -H, 0] at 300 K, and optic mode at Q = (3, 1, 1) at 550 K, 300 K, and 135K. Using HB-3, we measured the lowest optic mode at Q = (7, 1, 1) at 300 K. In CTAX experiments, the fixed final energy mode was used with E f = 5 meV for measurement along [4, K, 0] at 300 K and 100 K, and with E f = 4.8 meV for measurements along [-H, 4, -H] at 300 K, [0, 4 -K, 0] at 300 K, [2 + H, 2 -H, 0] at 300 K and Q = (3, 1, 1) at 550 K, 330 K and 135 K. PG002 monochromators and analyzers were used. The collimation settings were 30 ′ -100 ′ -80 ′ -120 ′ , and energy resolution was ∼ 0.3 meV at zero energy transfer. The high-order energy contamination of neutron beam was removed by a cooled Be filter. Samples were mounted in the (H, K, 0) plane using Bragg peaks (4, 0, 0) and (0, 4, 0) for measurements along [4, K, 0] and [2 + H, 2 -H, 0]. The scattering plane (3H, K, H) defined by (3, -1, 1) and (3, 1, 1) was used for measurements at Q = (3, 1, 1), along [-H, 4, -H], and [0, 4 -K, 0]. While [-H, 4, -H] is not within the (3H, K, H) scattering plane, the required tilts were reachable with the instrument goniometer. We note that [4, K, 0] and [0, 4 -K, 0] both correspond to wave vec-tors along ⟨001⟩, and are TA modes and longitudinal acoustic (LA) modes from Γ to X, respectively. Along [2 + H, 2 -H, 0] and [-H, 4, -H, we probe the two nondegenerate TA modes from Γ to K, which have distinct polarizations. In the HB-3 experiment, the fixed final energy mode was used with E f = 13.5 meV. PG002 monochromators and analyzers were used. The collimation setting was 30 ′ -40 ′ -40 ′ -70 ′ , and the energy resolution was ∼ 1 meV at zero energy transfer. The sample was mounted in the (H, K, 0) plane. Q = (7, 1, 1) was reached with tilts of the instrument goniometer. First-principles phonon simulations were performed using VASP The dynamical structure factor S(Q, E) was computed for the cubic and tetragonal phases using either the harmonic or renormalized force-constants to obtain phonon frequencies ω s and eigenvectors e ds . The simu-lated phonon intensity was calculated as where b d is neutron scattering length of atom d, Q = kk ′ is the wave vector transfer, and k ′ and k are the final and incident wave vector of the scattered particle, q the phonon wave vector, ω s the eigenvalue of the phonon corresponding to the branch index s, τ is the reciprocal lattice vector, d the atom index in the unit cell, exp(-2W d ) the corresponding Debye-Waller factor, and is the mean Bose-Einstein occupation factor. The phonon eigenvalues and eigenvectors in Eq. 1 were obtained by solving dynamical matrix using Phonopy We have extended the molecular dynamics simulation to a larger scale to access the well-resolved dynamics in (Q, E) space using a machine-learned force-field (MLFF) based on a neural-network potential. To generate a forcefield that describes the dynamics over a broad temperature range, we generated AIMD training datasets over a range of temperatures using VASP e -iQ•(R I i (0)-R J j (t)) e iEt/ħ dt (2) where R I i (t) is the i th atom position of element type I at time t, and the summation indices i and j represent the sum over I th and J th kind of elements in the simulation cell. The total measured neutron scattering intensity is then proportional to: Diffuse scattering intensity calculations were performed with MLMD using a 10×10×10 supercell containing 40000 atoms. We ran MLMD simulations at 125 K and 300 K with durations of about 100 ps with 1 fs time steps. We computed the total scattering intensity, S(Q) at 0.1 ps interval (∼1000 configurations) according to: where i is an index running over all atoms of type I, and b I coh is the coherent neutron scattering length of atom type I. The diffuse scattering intensity of pair I -I is defined as: where index i enumerates atoms of element type I. Note S(Q) ̸ = I S I-I (Q). The S(Q) and S I-I (Q) computed at different time points were then averaged to obtain the diffuse scattering pattern.