Rechargeable Aluminium-organic batteries are an exciting emerging energy storage technology owing to their low cost and promising high performance, thanks to the ability to allow multipleelectron redox chemistry and multivalent Al-ion intercalation. In this work, we use a combination of Density Functional Theory (DFT) calculations and experimental methods to examine the mechanism behind the charge-discharge reaction of the organic dye 3,4,9,10-Perylenetetracarboxylic dianhydride (PTCDA) in the 1,3-ethylmethylimidazolium (EMIm + ) chloroaluminate electrolyte. We conclude that, contrary to previous reports claiming the intercalation of trivalent Al 3+ , the actual ionic species involved in the redox reaction is the divalent AlCl 2+ . While a less-than-ideal scenario, this mechanism still allows a theoretical transfer of four electrons per formula unit, corresponding to a remarkable specific capacity of 273 mAh g -1 . However, the poor reversibility of the reaction and low cycle life of the PTCDA-based cathode, due to its solubility in the electrolyte, make it an unlikely candidate for a commercial application. The global transition to renewable energies is causing a surge in the demand for cheap and dependable energy storage technologies. Although Lithium-ion batteries, the current industry standard for grid-level applications, is a mature technology with reliable performance, there are a number of concerns related to its safety and long-term availability of its rarest elements, such as lithium and cobalt. Therefore, it is essential to look into alternative battery technologies, which are better suitable for applications at the multi-megawatt-hour scale. In this work, we have targeted such task by examining the redox mechanism of 3,4,9,10-Perylenetetracarboxylic dianhydride (PTCDA) in the 1,3-ethylmethylimidazolium (EMIm + ) chloroaluminate electrolyte. PTCDA is an organic dye molecule which has found application in many fields of research, including a variety of emerging energy storage technologies. To predict the correct redox mechanism taking place in the system, we performed a series of DFT calculations using the Quantum ESPRESSO package. The Al 3+ -intercalated structure (PTCDA-Al 2 ) was calculated by manually placing Al atoms in key positions of the PTCDA lattice (i.e. symmetrically arranged to allow coordination by the O atoms), and allowing the structure to relax again. All the examined starting points relaxed to the converged structure shown in Figure In order to predict the structure of AlCl 2+ -and AlCl + 2 -intercalated PTCDA, the starting points for the geometry optimisations were obtained by adding chlorine atoms to the relaxed Al 3+ -inserted structure, co-planar with the O-Al-O bond, at a distance compatible with the formation of a covalent Al-Cl bond. In both cases, the structures relaxed into an configuration in which the Al atoms are at the centre of a tetrahedral coordination environment by two O atoms and two Cl atoms (Figure Perhaps the most compelling evidence for the determination of the redox mechanism is given by the analysis of the thermodynamics and predicted reaction voltage of each redox process. These were calculated by using the Nernst equation ∆ r G • -= -nF E • -, where ∆ r G • -is the Gibbs free energy of reaction for a given redox process, n is the number of electrons transferred in the reaction, F is the Faraday constant, and E • -is the equilibrium voltage at standard conditions. Because the system is at constant pressure and room temperature, ∆ r G • -can be approximated to the energy of reaction ∆E r , which is obtained by subtracting the total energy of the products to the total energy of the reagents. Galvanostatic discharge/charge tests were performed on prototype battery devices using PTCDA as cathode. It can be seen from Figure Energy disperse X-ray (EDX) spectroscopy was performed on the discharged cathode to assess its elemental composition (Figure 4 Materials and methods DFT data was obtained using the Quantum ESPRESSO package. 3,4,9,10-Perylenetetracarboxylic dianhydride (PTCDA) (Sigma-Aldrich) was annealed at 450 • C for 4 hours under nitrogen atmosphere to promote partial oligomerisation of molecular units and prevalent formation of the αpolymorph. 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium (EMIm) chloride (Sigma-Aldrich) and Aluminium trichloride (Sigma-Aldrich) were gradually mixed in a 1:1.3 molecular ratio under magnetic stirring in a nitrogen-filled glovebox. An exothermic reaction takes place, leading to the formation of a pale yellow liquid. the mixture was left stirring for at least two hours before being used in the battery devices. Custom-built Swagelok-type cells consisting of a cylindrical PEEK body with an inner diameter of 12 mm and two Molybdenum rods as current collector were used as casings for the battery devices. All components were initially baked at 100 • C under vacuum at least 2 hours to remove any water, then immediately transferred into a nitrogen-filled glovebox with the oxygen and water levels kept below 1 ppm. PTCDA-coated Mo foils were used as cathodes, and 11 mm diameter, high-purity Al foil discs (11 mm diameter) were used as anodes. Glass microfibre (GF/D) discs with 12 mm diameters, soaked in approximately 120 μL of the electrolyte, were used as separators. The devices were then wrapped with Parafilm as an additional moisture barrier, and taken outside the glovebox for electrochemical testing. X-ray diffractogram were acquired with a PANalytical Xpert XRD device, using a Cu Kα source. SEM images and EDX spectra were acquired using a ZEISS Sigma VP SEM using an accelerating voltage of 15 kV. Samples were sputter coated with Pt to allow electric conductivity and enhance image quality. for ex-situ analysis, discharged battery devices were taken disassembled inside the glovebox, the cathodes were rinsed with dichloromethane, and kept inside the glovebox until immediately before the measurement to limit ambient exposure. Galvanostatic charge-discharge experiments were performed using a NEWARE BTS CT-4008-5V10mA-164 battery analyser system. FTIR spectra were acquired using a PerkinElmer Spectrum II spectrophotometer equipped with a UATR accessory.