We demonstrate that embedding physics-driven constraints into machine learning process can dramatically improve accuracy and generalizability of the resulting model. Physics-informed learning is illustrated on the example of analysis of optical modes propagating through a spatially periodic composite. The approach presented can be readily utilized in other situations mapped onto an eigenvalue problem, a known bottleneck of computational electrodynamics. Physics-informed learning can be used to improve machine-learning-driven design, optimization, and characterization, in particular in situations where exact solutions are scarce or are slow to come up with. Optical composites (metamaterials and metasurfaces) emerge as flexible platforms for novel optical applications that include superimaging, planar lensing, and sensing We develop the class of ML models that map the spatial profile of permittivity of the composite to the combination of the propagation constant and parameters that determine spatial behavior of the mode supported by the system (Fig. Note that although we present data for 1D composites, the mathematical formalism used to map Maxwell equations to an eigenvalue problem, rigorous coupled wave analysis (RCWA) In the case of periodic layered materials considered in this work (with x being the direction of layer growth), solutions to Maxwell equations can represented as a linear combination of modes with either transverse-electric (TE, E z = 0, H z = 0) or transverse-magnetic (TM, E z = 0, H z = 0) polarization, with full Maxwell equations reducing to independent partial differential equations for E z and H z components, respectively, and with remaining (x, y) components of the fields expressed in terms of their z counterparts. In particular, propagation of the TM-polarized waves is given by: with ω being angular frequency and c being speed of light in vacuum. RCWA to convert differential Eq.( In the equations above q m = 2πm Λ is the multiple of the reciprocal lattice constant, Λ is the period of the composite, m represent the Fourier coefficients of 1/ (x), and parameter k 0 plays the role of the x component of the quasi-wavenumber of the mode. In all practical realizations, finite Fourier expansions (rather than Fourier series) have to be used. The complexity of the composite determines the number of terms in Fourier expansions that are required for adequate representation of permittivity and electromagnetic fields, and in turn determines the size of the matrix Â. As the complexity increases, direct solution of Eq.(3) becomes increasingly slow and resource-intensive, motivating the development of tools that avoid the direct solution of the eigenvalue problem, such as ML-assisted mode analysis presented here. To comprehensively assess the performance of the MLbased models we generated three datasets, representing geometry of the particular composite and the (highestk y ) mode propagating in this composite. In these studies, the size of the unit cell was fixed at Λ = 5λ 0 (with λ 0 = 2πc/ω being free-space wavelength) and each period of the composite was assumed to contain 10 layers of identical thickness, the quasi-wavenumber of the mode was parameterized by the angular parameter θ via k 0 = ω c sin θ, and Fourier expansions contained the components corresponding to m ∈ [-m max , m max ] with m max = 50 in Eq. The first two (photonic) sets contained data for lossy (0 < < 0.1) low-index (1 < < 4) and high-index (1 < < 16) dielectric stacks, with randomly-assigned permittivity for each sub-layer. The remaining set was similar to the high-index dielectric set with 25% of configurations containing plasmonic sub-layers with permit- Fig. In this work we use three different approaches to train the ANNs-based models. First, the default physicsagnostic "black box" formalism is used. In this approach, mean-squared deviation between components of predicted and ground truth sequences are used as optimization criterion during the training process Our implementation of the physics-informed training follows the recipe for dynamic adjustment of the loss In addition to enforcing the consistency with Maxwell equations, Physics-informed training enables the expansion of the training set by "padding" it with configurations of composites that the model may expect to see in future deployments. As we show below, even in absence of full solutions, these configurations (termed unlabeled data below) can significantly improve the quality of the resulting ML model. A properly trained ML model should correctly predict the propagation constant of the mode as well as its spatial profile. We therefore use two (dimensionless) parameters to characterize the performance of the ML models, the normalized error in prediction of propagation constant δ and the modal overlap across the unit cell O (see Appendix for derivation), In the expressions above, the quantities with "gt" superscript represent the ground truth, while the quantities with no superscript represent ML predictions and "*" corresponds to complex conjugation. Figure Figure All models lose accuracy when the training set is further decreased by considering only ∼200 configurations, a subset of initial training pool representing one preselected value of parameter θ [see Eq.( One of the main limitations of ML models is their limited ability to predict the properties of systems that significantly deviate from their training data. As seen in Fig. However, the models trained on high-index plasmonic or photonic datasets perform poorly when they are deployed to analyze the modes of low-index configurations and vice versa. This phenomenon is illustrated in Fig. Once again, the performance of the models based on physics-informed training can be significantly improved by expanding their original plasmonic training set with unlabeled low-index configurations. Note that such an improvement in model generalizability does not affect model's performance on its original dataset. Overall, our analysis suggests that unlabeled subset promotes physics-consistency, with resulting models correctly predicting eigenvalue/eigenvector pairs of Eq.( Along with prediction accuracy, prediction speed represents another major factor in practical applications of mode analyzers, such that optimizing the geometry of the composite to achieve the particular field distribution, mode confinement, propagation constant, etc. Here, pretrained ML models are drastically faster than their direct Physics-solver counterparts (it takes ∼ 0.3s to predict the properties of the high-k y modes in all 8000 elements of a given set on our desktop with Intel Core I7-10700 processor and NVidia GeForce RTX-3060 GPU), compared with ∼ 80s it takes to run RCWA algorithm. In our tests the prediction speed was almost independent of the ML solver as well as of the complexity of the problem (see below); given previous research we expect the prediction speed to grow when the size of the dataset is significantly increased (to ∼ 10 5 . . . 10 6 configurations). The time it takes to train the model depends not only on the size of the training set but also on the method used. "Black box" and Meaning-informed models train virtually in the same time (∼ 200 . . . 250s for 5000 epochs). The Physics-informed model trains substantially slower (300...600s for 5000 epochs, depending on the size of the training dataset). Therefore, when the number of configurations under study is small, it is beneficial to use direct solvers. Once the number of configurations reaches some critical value, ML-based tools increasingly outperform their physics-based counterparts in terms of the overall train-ing+prediction time. For the 1D toy model of moderate complexity considered in this work, ML-learning tools "break even" with brute-force solvers when the number of configurations reaches ∼ 2 × 10 4 . The advantage of ML tools grows as complexity of the composite increases. For example, increasing the dimensionality of the eigenvector (by increasing the parameter m max ) strongly affects the RCWA runtime. However, the time required to train black box-and meaning-informedmodels grows at the slower rate, while the time it takes the model to predict the solutions are virtually unaffected by these changes (see Fig. Overall, it is seen that the ML-based solutions provide meaningful speedup for large-scale exploratory studies of optics of composites, especially when a pre-trained model is used. We developed an approach to introduce Physics-based constraints into ML algorithms for analysis of optical composites and demonstrated that Physics-informed ML models provide better generalizability and better accuracy than their "black box" counterparts. The utility of the Physics-informed ML has been illustrated on example of calculating the properties of the highest-index mode of the periodic multilayered composites, where pretrained ML models offer orders of magnitude (0.3s vs FIG. 80s) speedup over conventional numerical solutions of Maxwell equations. The developed formalism is directly applicable to calculation of modes in arbitrary periodic composites and can be extended to non-periodic and guiding structures, resolving crucial computational bottlenecks in design and optimization of composite-based applications. More importantly, the ability to introduce Physicsbased constraints into ML algorithms provides the pathway to merge the benefits of powerful patternrecognition-based learning that are inherent to ML with the benefits of analytical scientific knowledge that has been accumulated within Physics community. where superscripts gt and * represent ground truth and complex conjugation, respectively. Direct substitution of Eq.( The value O = 1 represents the perfect match between the predicted field profile and the ground truth (with exception of a multiplicative complex-valued constant). The values O 1 represent poor match between the two field profiles. Fig. with parameters w δ and w O representing the relative weights of the loss associated with accuracy of prediction of the propagation constant and the field profile, respectively (see Eq. ( Fig. It is also important to notice that ML models perform well only on the dataset that they have been exposed to during the training. For example, the ANN trained on low-index data fails to predict high-index data and vice versa (as mentioned in the main manuscript, high FIG. Appendix E: Physics-Informed Models In addition to meaning-informed loss, Physics-Informed models incorporate learning objectives inspired by analytical equations underlying the solutions of Maxwell equations. Explicitly, we introduce Physics Loss (PL) that enforces Eq.(3) of the main manuscript via Importantly, PL defined by Eq.(E1), can be used to assess physics-consistency of the solutions produced by the ANN even in absence of the ground truth (on unlabeled datasets). Therefore, PL can be utilized to expand the training set beyond the constraints of pre-calculated data. However, since Eq.(E1) is satisfied for any electromagnetic mode supported by the periodic composite, this equation by itself cannot ensure that the solution corresponds to the mode with largest propagating constant. Similar situation appeared in the previous work where ANN was trained directly on matrices Â To force the ANN towards the highest-propagation constant mode, we followed the approach of Ref. The full loss of PI model combines its MI counterpart, as well as dynamically-weighed contributions of the Physics-and Spectrum losses, , and t being the training epoch index, enforcing the training process that is affected by the spectrum loss only at the beginning stages of the training and by PL at the later stages. The parameters that define the dynamics of the training were set to t 0 S = 100, t i P = 150, t 0 P = 300, while the relative weights for Spectrum and Physics Loss were fixed at w 0 S = 75, w 0 P = 1 for unlabeled training configurations and w 0 S = 0, w 0 P = 0.5 for labeled configurations. Similar to BB and MI models, the total loss for the training set is computed as arithmetic mean of the configurationspecific loss. FIG. In general, performance of the PI models trained exclusively on known solutions (labeled data) closely matched the performance of their MI counterparts. Summary of these results is shown in Fig. However, as discussed in the main text, the training set of PI models can be expanded by providing configurations with no known solutions as unlabeled data. As seen in Fig. Finally, we note that PI models can be trained exclusively on unlabeled data. Fig. Our analysis indicates that while the addition of spectrum loss somewhat mitigates this problem, the relatively dense spectrum of the propagation constants, and therefore a complex loss function topology, makes it extremely challenging to guide the model towards the right (and correct) mode without extra constraints that are provided by labeled data in models shown in Fig. 