Free-space optics (FSO) is an attractive technology to meet the ever-growing demand for wireless bandwidth in next generation networks. To increase the spectral efficiency of FSO links, transmission over spatial division multiplexing (SDM) can be exploited, where orthogonal light beams have to be shaped according to suitable amplitude, phase, and polarization profiles. In this work, we show that a programmable photonic circuits, consisting of a silicon photonic mesh of tunable Mach-Zehnder Interferometers (MZIs) can be used as an adaptive multibeam receiver for a FSO communication link. The circuit can selfconfigure to simultaneously receive and separate, with negligible mutual crosstalk, signals carried by orthogonal FSO beams sharing the same wavelength and polarization. This feature is demonstrated on signal pairs either arriving at the receiver from orthogonal directions (direction-diversity) or being shaped according to different orthogonal spatial modes (mode-diversity), even in the presence of some mixing during propagation. The performance of programmable mesh as an adaptive multibeam receiver is assessed by means of data channel transmission at 10 Gbit/s a wavelength of 1550 nm, but the optical bandwidth of the receiver (> 40 nm) allows its use at much higher data rates as well as in wavelength-division multiplexing (WDM) -SDM communication links. he concepts of space diversity and space multiplexing are well established in communications systems and are widely employed in microwave wireless systems to implement high capacity multiple input -multiple output (MIMO) links. In the optical domain, space division multiplexing (SDM) has been known for several decades A powerful alternative technology for the manipulation of the FSO beams is offered by programmable photonic integrated circuits (PICs). These circuits are general-purpose meshes of tunable integrated interferometers, arranged either in feed-Multibeam Free Space Optics Receiver Enabled by a Programmable Photonic Mesh forward or recursive topologies, which can implement arbitrary linear transformations In this work, we show that a programmable mesh of MZIs can implement an adaptive multibeam receiver for a FSO communication link. The circuit can self-configure to simultaneously receive signals carried by spatially overlapped FSO beams sharing the same wavelength and polarization, provided that they are orthogonal in some way. Several examples are provided demonstrating that arbitrary pairs of orthogonal beams, sharing the same wavelength and polarization, can be separated with negligible mutual crosstalk; these examples include beams arriving from orthogonal directions (direction-diversity) as well as beams arriving from the same direction but shaped according to different orthogonal spatial modes (mode-diversity), and even when the two beams have undergone some mixing during propagation. The programmable photonic circuit employed in this work consists of an integrated mesh of tunable beam splitters, which are realized by means of balanced Mach-Zehnder interferometers (MZIs). The topology of the circuit is shown in the schematic of Fig. An M×N diagonal mesh can perform arbitrary linear transformations from an M-dimensional vector space to an N- dimensional vector space When the second beam is shone onto the photonic chip, its intensity is spatially sampled by the 2D antenna array and copropagates with the first beam in the same M single-mode waveguides, thus being apparently indistinguishable inside each waveguide. However, due to the original orthogonality of the two free-space beams, no portion of the second beam is transmitted to WG1 output port. The second row of MZIs stages can be used to coherently reconstruct the power of the second beam in the output port WG2. Generalizing the concept to a mesh with M input waveguides and N rows of MZIs, we can conclude that such a device can couple, reconstruct and separate N orthogonal free-space beams, which are spatially sampled by M optical antennas, and transmit them to N single mode output waveguides, with arbitrary sorting order and no mutual optical crosstalk. This is the basic concept of the multibeam FSO receiver developed in this work. If the propagation of the light is reversed, the mesh can operate as a multibeam transmitter The programmable mesh of Fig. The nine waveguides connecting the grating couplers to the mesh share the same optical length in order to minimize the wavelength dependence of the multipath interferometer implemented by the mesh so the circuit can have the widest possible wavelength range of operation. All the 15 MZIs of the mesh (8 MZIs in the first row, 7 MZIs in the second row) are identical and are controlled by means of thermal tuners [see Fig. The photonic chip was mounted on an electronic printed circuit board (PCB) [see Fig. As a first example application, we show that the programmable mesh can operate as a direction-diversity receiver, that is, a multibeam receiver capable of individually detecting beams that simultaneously arrive from different directions. This concept is demonstrated here by considering the case of N = 2 beams, but this functionality can be generalized to N beams arriving from N directions utilizing a mesh with N rows of MZIs. As shown in the scheme of Fig. Figure The beam impinging on the 2D optical antenna array from each source can be individually coupled to the desired output waveguide (WG1 or WG2) of the mesh through automatic tuning and stabilization algorithms applied to each row of the mesh To better understand the behavior of the mesh in the tuned state, we reversed the direction of the light propagation by injecting the light into WG1 and WG2 ports and measuring the far field pattern radiated by the 2D optical antenna array when the mesh is configured in the case of Fig. Such a low crosstalk level enables us to use the integrated mesh as a direction-diversity receiver in a FSO communication system, where the optical beams are employed to transmit two independent data channels. To this aim, the two beams TX1 and TX2 were used as carrier wavelengths for the transmission of independently modulated 10 Gbit/s on-off keying signals. The results of the transmission experiment are shown in Fig. In principle, the coupling, separation and sorting of free-space beams can be operated by the programmable mesh on any set of orthogonal beams. As a second example, we consider two free-space beams, sharing the same wavelength (1550 nm) and state of polarization (TE), and coming from the same direction, yet being shaped according to different orthogonal spatial modes. In this case, the programable mesh receiving these two beams operates as a multibeam mode-diversity receiver. This situation is schematically shown in Fig. In order to generate the two spatially overlapped orthogonal beams, the setup of Fig. Adopting the same automated procedure described in Sec. IV for configuration of the circuit, the first MZI row of the mesh is lined up to maximize the coupling from one of the two modes (for instance Mode 1) to the output port WG1, which leads to nulling of the other mode (Mode 2) at this port. The bar chart of Fig. By reversing the propagation direction of the light, the farfield profile of the beam generated by the 2D optical antenna array can be we observed for the various different configurations of the mesh. All the possible cases handled by the two-diagonal mesh are reported in Fig. The performance of programmable mesh as a multibeam mode-diversity receiver was assessed by means of data channel transmission. Two intensity-modulated 10 Gbit/s OOK data streams were transmitted on the spatial and direction overlapped modes (HG00 and HG10-like) at the same carrier wavelength of 1550 nm and the same polarization state. The eye diagrams of the received signals, after the separation performed by the mesh, are shown in Fig. We also evaluated the wavelength range across which the mesh can guarantee a high isolation in the separation of the two modes. To this end, the carrier wavelength of the two modes was swept across a 35-nm-wide range from 1535 nm to 1570 nm. The width of this range is mainly limited by the wavelength-selective response of the grating couplers of the 2D optical antenna array. In the results reported in Fig. In this section we extend the concept of the mode-diversity receiver presented in Sec. V to other examples of spatially overlapped beam pairs that can be disentangled by the programmable mesh. In particular, we show that the mesh can still separate two orthogonal free-space beams even after they have propagated spatially overlapped through a mode mixing obstacle or a free-space path perturbation. Mathematically, this means that the linear transformation performed by the mode mixer, which maps the original orthogonal modes to another pair of orthogonal beams, can be inverted by the mesh. Referring to the experimental setup of Fig. From the point of view of the mesh, the operation needed to be performed to separate these new modes at the output ports WG1 and WG2 is conceptually identical to the one discussed in Sec. V. In fact, no a-priori information on the shape of the incoming beams is required and the self-configuring procedure to line up the MZI rows is exactly the same. Figure In this work, we reported on an integrated adaptive multibeam receiver for FSO communications that is realized by means of a programmable silicon photonic mesh of thermally tunable MZIs. A 9x2 mesh (M = 9 input optical antennas, N = 2 output waveguides) was used to simultaneously establish two communication channels that are associated with spatially overlapped FSO beams sharing the same wavelength and polarization. The photonic circuit can be operated as either a direction-diversity receiver or a mode-diversity receiver, and can effectively separate pairs of orthogonal beams even after they have undergone mode mixing. In all the cases considered, the beams are separated and arbitrarily sorted at the two output ports with negligible mutual crosstalk (< -25 dB), allowing the use of the receiver in SDM systems, as demonstrated by data channel transmission at 10 Gbit/s. The optical bandwidth of the receiver, spanning across the extended telecom C-band (1530 nm -1570 nm) allows its use in high data-rate systems as well as in wavelength-division multiplexing (WDM) -SDM communication links. The automated control strategies used for the configuration of the MZI mesh, exploiting the implementation of local feedback loops in each MZI stage, enable scalability of the proposed architecture to circuits with a larger number of optical antennas, as well as to MZI meshes with a larger number of rows, which can handle more orthogonal beams. Moreover, the adaptive nature of the receiver would also allow the possibility of compensating for dynamic changes in the FSO link, caused by, for instance, moving obstacles or turbulence, so as to maintain the optimum communication link. Applications are also envisioned to more advanced FSO processing, including wave-front sensing, phase front mapping and reconstruction, beaming through scattering media and chip-to-chip FSO communications.