Recently, higher-order topological insulators have been attracting extensive interest. Unlike the conventional topological insulators that demand bulk gap closings at transition points, the higher-order band topology can be changed without bulk closure and exhibits as an obstruction of higher-dimensional boundary states. Here, we report the first experimental realization of three-dimensional surface-obstructed topological insulators with using acoustic crystals. Our acoustic measurements demonstrate unambiguously the emergence of one-dimensional topological hinge states in the middle of the bulk and surface band gaps, as a direct manifestation of the higher-order band topology. Together with comparative measurements for the trivial and phase-transition-point insulators, our experimental data conclusively evidence the unique bulk-boundary physics for the surface-obstructed band topology. That is, the topological phase transition is determined by the closure of surface gap, rather than by closing the bulk gap. Our study might spur on new activities to deepen the understanding of such elusive topological phases. various classes of topological phase of matter It is well known that a conventional TI cannot be adiabatically deformed to a trivial insulator without breaking the symmetry or closing the bulk energy gap, and the obstruction can be captured by topological invariants defined for bulk. The case becomes more subtle for HOTIs. Similar to the conventional TIs, some of the HOTIs (e.g. the breathing Kagome lattice model Moreover, to the best of our knowledge, so far there is no experimental realization of three-dimensional (3D) surface-obstructed TIs (SOTIs), which feature closed surface band gap at the phase transition point. Based on a simple model, here we construct a 3D acoustic SOTI and report a complete experimental characterization for such new topological phases The type of boundary obstruction in D depends on the obstruction of D , as well as the dimension of its nontrivial boundary signature. More specifically, as sketched in Fig. Experimental results.-The band topologies of the above three systems were identified by our acoustic experiments. All samples were 3D-printed with photosensitive resin. Figure Conclusions.-Following a simple 3D model that describes a surface obstruction between distinct topological phases, we designed and fabricated three acoustic Excellent agreements were achieved among the tight-binding model, full-wave simulations, and our acoustic experiments. In contrast to those reported previously In addition, comparing to those dispersive ones, the dispersionless hinge states (Supplemental Materials) can freeze the propagation of sound along the hinge. Potential applications can be anticipated for such unique topological hinge states, e.g., acoustic sensing and energy trapping. Last but not the least, our findings can be generalized to electronic, cold atom, photonic, and elastic/mechanical systems.