We consider the optical properties of the half-filled AB-stacked bilayer graphene with the excitonic pairing and condensation between the layers. Both intra and interlayer local Coulomb interaction effects have been taken into account and the role of the exact Fermi energy has been discussed in details. We have calculated the absorption coefficient, refractive index, dielectric response functions and the electron energy loss spectrum for different interlayer Coulomb interaction regimes and for different temperatures. Considering the full four-band model for the interacting AB bilayer graphene, a good agreement is achieved with other theoretical and experimental works on the subject, in particular, limiting cases of the theory. The calculations, presented here, permit to estimate accurately the effects of excitonic pairing and condensation on the optical properties of the bilayer graphene. The modifications of the plasmon excitation spectrum are discussed in details for a very large interval of the interlayer interaction parameter. The bilayer graphene (BLG), which could be obtained from the mature bulk graphite by the subsequent exfoliation techniques, is recognized as a promising structure in which one can control the induced band gap by the external gate voltage which favorites their applicability to optical processing devices. The external electric field can tune the bilayer graphene from the semimetal to the semiconducting state In addition, recently, a new type of symmetry breaking effects has been found in the ABstacked bilayer graphene, related to the formation of the excitonic condensate state when tuning the local interlayer Coulomb interaction parameter In the present paper, we have calculated the optical properties in the bilayer graphene based on the solutions for the excitonic gap parameter, chemical potential and the exact Fermi energy of the BLG, given in a series of our previous works The paper is organized as follows: in the Section 2, we introduce the bilayer Hubbard model for the AB-stacked bilayer graphene. In the Section 3, we calculate the complex optical conductivity function in the BLG with the excitonic pairing and condensation regime. Furthermore, in the Section 4, we obtain the numerical results for the optical properties in the BLG and we discuss the role of the excitons. Next, in the Section 5, we give a short conclusion to our paper. The tight-binding part of the bilayer Hubbard Hamiltonian of our BLG structure is given by Here, a † σ (r) (a σ (r)) and b † σ (r) (b σ (r)) are the electron creation (annihilation) operators at the different sublattice positions A and B in the layer 1 of the BLG, while the same operators with the tilde notations are the electron creation (annihilation) operators in the layer 2 of the BLG. The phase factors near the electron operators appear after the Peierls-Onsager substitution The linear term in vector potential is responsible for the paramagnetic part of the total current operator, and we neglect the second order diamagnetic contribution. The interaction term includes the local on-site Hubbard interaction in the individual layers (described by the term-U ) and between the layers in the BLG (described by the W -term). The interaction terms U and W in Eq.(2) describe the local Coulomb interactions in the individual layers and between the layers respectively. Namely, the consideration of the local interlayer coupling simplifies the problem considerably when passing into the Fourier space representation of the total Hamiltonian H t = H 0 + H int . Throughout the paper, we will use the parameter γ 0 as the unit of the energy scale. In order to calculate the optical absorption, the dielectric response and the refractive index of the BLG with the excitonic pairing interaction we should calculate first the ac optical conductivity in the BLG. For this, there are several ways to treat the bilayer graphene in the presence of the external field. One of those is to assume the presence of the external bias voltage which makes the potential difference between two layers of the bilayer. Furthermore, it leads to the charge imbalance between the layers. In such approach, the Coulomb interaction between the layers is often neglected We will calculate the real part of the ac conductivity σ ij (Ω) in the BLG with the help of the retarded polarization function Π R ij (Ω) using the standard Kubo-Green-Matsubara formalism where is the real frequency retarded function, which is obtained after the analytical continuation of the bosonic Matsubara frequencies iω m into the upper half of the real axis in the complex plane, i.e., iω m → Ω + iη + with η + being the infinitesimal positive constant, and the bosonic Matsubara frequencies ω m are give as usual by ω m = 2πm/β, where m = 0, ±1, ±2, ..., and where τ is the imaginary time, and T τ is the chronological time ordering Let's mention here, that the paramagnetic current operator j i (r) describes the in-plane electric current density, driven in the BLG layers by the external electric field. For the site-dependent paramagnetic current density operator, we get where the vectors δ and δ ′ are the nearest neighbor vectors in different layers of the bilayer graphene. The constituents of δ, for the bottom layer-1, are given by , where a 0 = √ 3d is the sublattice constant (with d, being the carbon-carbon length in the graphene sheets). For the layer-2, we have obviously We see that the vectors in the top layer-2 are oriented differently and it is not difficult to realise that δ ′ = -δ. Next, the current operator j i (τ ) in Eq.( where is the electron velocity operator for the individual graphene sheet. It is worth to mention here that we perform the full 4band calculation scheme, beyond the Dirac-cone approximation. We calculate the expression of the polarization function in Eq.( Here, the continuous variable x of integration appears after the introduction of the non-interacting density of states ρ(x) by where γ k is the tight-binding dispersion v F is the Fermi velocity, which relates to the intralayer hopping parameter γ 0 , i.e., v F = √ 3a 0 γ 0 /2 . The function P ij (x) in Eq.( where the dimensionless coefficients α i (x) and β i (x) are defined as where ) is the polynomial of third order in ε i (x). Namely, we have with the coefficients ω i , i = 1, ...3, given by The effective chemical potentials μ eff 1 and μ eff 2 that appear in Eq.( where ) is again a polynomial of third order in ε i (x), namely we have with the coefficients ω ′ i , i = 1, ...3, given as We see that ω ′ 1 , ω ′ 2 (x) and ω ′ 3 (x) could be obtained from the coefficients ω 1 , ω 2 (x) and ω 3 (x) in Eqs. eff and by setting simultaneously ∆ + γ 1 = 0. The function n F (x) in the expression of the optical conductivity function is the usual Fermi-Dirac distribution function n F (x) = 1/(e βx + 1). The principal attention in Eq.( Indeed, the parameters ε 2 (x) and ε 3 (x) are the low energy conduction and valence bands, and ε 1 (x) and ε 4 (x) are the split valence and conduction bands in the usual tight-binding notations In Fig. leading also to the enhancement of the Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS)-Bose-Einstein-Condensate (BEC) excitonic crossover in the BLG. A threshold mechanism of creation of the band gap E g and the hybridization gap ∆ H in the single-particle excitation spectrum has been also discussed there, in details. It is particularly important to notice here that the opening of the excitonic band gap, discussed in the mentioned papers, is totally different from the formation of the asymmetry band gap between the low energy conduction and valence bands (known like the "sombrero" shape, where a special attention have to be paid to the singularity points Ω ′ = ±Ω when performing the numerical integration in Eq.( We consider here the suspended bilayers, and the interaction effects have a spectacular impact on the conduc- where ǫ g = 2.5 and d n = 2.36 is the normalized interlayer distance (the interlayer distance is normalized to the interatomic separation in the given graphene sheet of the BLG, i.e., we take d n = d/a, where d = 0.335 nm is the interlayer separation in the BLG and a 0 = 0.142 √ 3 nm is the sublattice constant in the graphene sheet). The imaginary part of ε xx (Ω) leads to absorption loss if it is positive and absorption gain if it is negative. We see in Fig. tudes of the optical loss spectra are decreasing with the increase of W , suggesting the enhancement of the strong optical transmission in the BLG in the very narrow range of the photon's wavelengths. We have calculated also the absorption coefficient α(Ω) and the real part of the complex optical refractive index n(Ω) for all mentioned values of the interlayer interaction strength, by fixing the intralayer Coulomb interaction at the value U = 2γ 0 = 6 eV. For this, we used the wellknown relations We see in Fig. Recently, the refractive index of graphene has been measured by two independent experimental techniques for determining both the real and imaginary refractive index values of graphene The obtained experimental value of the refractive index is also attainable from our theory if we consider the slightly higher value of the interlayer Coulomb interaction parameter. Particularly, for the value W = 2γ 0 = 6 eV (which is already the strong coupling limit of the BLG, when the condensate states are developing The spectrum of the dielectric function in the BLG is important in order to determine the electron energy loss function, i.e., the plasmon excitation spectrum in the BLG Particularly, measuring optical properties with EEL spectroscopy offers advantages of better spatial resolution and it extends to higher photon's energies. The maximum of the loss-function is identified as occurring at the point where ǫ 1 (Ω) crosses zero with a positive slope, i.e., when dǫ 1 /dΩ > 0, and when ǫ 2 (Ω) << 1 but with a negative slope, i.e., when dǫ 2 /dΩ < 0. It is clear from pictures in Figs. 2, 3, 4, 5 that the plasmonic excitation peaks will be situated at the very high-frequency regions and the BLG will be transparent only at the very high frequencies of the electric field component of the light. For the low frequencies, the BLG will show strong screening effects. In Fig. We have calculated the optical properties of the interacting bilayer graphene. The full interaction bandwidth has been taken into account, and we have used the accurate four-band model of the BLG, which involves the contributions coming from all four bands, by avoiding various simplifications related to the low-energy effective considerations, given in the existing literature on the same subject. We observed that the optical properties of the bilayer graphene become more spectacular when including the interlayer interaction parameter W . We have calculated theoretically the optical conductivity as a necessary prerequisite, in order to consider the excitonic effects in the system. We have shown that all optical properties in the interacting bilayer graphene are strongly related to the behavior of the chemical potential and the exact Fermi level in the BLG. At the new charge neutrality point, governed by the excitonic pairing and condensation in the BLG, and corresponding to the interlayer coupling strength W c = 1.49γ 0 = 4.47 eV, the chemical potential passes into its upper bound solution. In this case, the optical absorption spectra get switched inversely from the red-shifted lines into the blue-shifted ones. This effect affects the whole optical spectra and the physical properties of the bilayer graphene. The dielectric response function, absorption coefficient and the refractive index of the BLG system get different and opposite behaviors when the Fermi energy passes from its lower bound solution to the upper bound one, after modifying the interlayer Coulomb interaction parameter. The optical absorption coefficient shows the largest absorption peaks, situated in the far UV range of the photon's wavelengths. By calculating the real part of the complex refractive index, we have shown that for the photon's wavelengths starting from UV-C up to visible region, the refractive index of the bilayer graphene increases continuously with increasing the interlayer coupling parameter, up to the charge neutrality value W c , while, in the deep and shorter UV-C side of the incident wavelengths, the refractive index decreases when increasing W . For the values of W above the charge neutrality value (W > W c ), the refractive index shows the opposite behavior, i.e. the refractive index decreases with W the mentioned interval of the photon's wavelengths, while it is increasing for the shorter wavelengths. We have calculated also the electron energy loss function, taking into account the interaction effects in our BLG system. Considering again various interlayer coupling regimes, we have obtained the high energy plasmonic peaks in the BLG. In the low-energy part of the spectrum, the amplitudes of the plasmonic peaks get gradually reduced due to the excitonic interaction effects and also the stacking ordering in our bilayer graphene system. At different stages of our calculations, we have compared our results with the exact ab-initio calculation and experimental results. We have explained in details the common features and deviations from those results. Presented work could be very interesting for correct estimations of various important optical parameters in the interacting bilayer graphene. Since the growing experimental interests in the optical properties of the graphenebased materials and heterostructures, the correct understanding of the interaction effects and their leading renormalizations on different physical quantities in the bilayer graphene is straightforward for correct understanding the behavior of the measured physical quantities. We hope that the theory, given here, will meet the most demanded criteria and situations concerning the physics and the measurements of different optical parameters in the bilayer graphene.