We present direct evidence for an enhanced superconducting T c on the surface of cleaved single crystals of Ba(Fe 0.95 Co 0.05 ) 2 As 2 . Transport measurements performed on samples cleaved in ultra high vacuum (UHV) show a significantly enhanced superconducting transition when compared to equivalent measurements performed in air. Deviations from the bulk resistivity appear at 21K, well above the 10K bulk T c of the underdoped compound. We demonstrate that the excess conductivity above the bulk T c can be controllably suppressed by application of potassium ions on the cleaved surface, indicating that the enhanced superconductivity is strongly localized to the sample surface. Additionally, we find that the effects of the potassium surface dosing are strongly influenced by the presence of residual gas absorbates on the sample surface, which may prevent effective charge transfer from the potassium atoms to the FeAs plane. This is further support for the conclusion that the effects of the dosing (and enhanced superconductivity) are localized within a few layers of the surface. The field of high temperature superconductivity, particularly in the cuprates and iron pnictides, has benefited greatly from complementary information from both bulk-sensitive thermodynamic (transport, calorimetry) and surface-sensitive spectroscopic (angle resolved photoemission, scanning tunneling microscopy) probes. However, care must be taken when connecting properties derived from surface sensitive techniques to their bulk counterparts. For instance, symmetry breaking at the material/vacuum interface can lead to electronic reconstructions and charge transfer at the surface. Such a 'self doping' effect has been reported at the surface of cleaved single crystals of YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7-δ where the surface termination heavily influences the apparent doping observed in angle resolved photoemission (ARPES) experiments In this letter, we present evidence for a modified superconducting state on the surface of cleaved single crystals of underdoped Ba(Fe,Co) 2 As 2 . Due to the weaker bonds between the Ba layer and FeAs layer than between the Fe and As atoms themselves, single crystals of Ba(Fe,Co) 2 As 2 tend to cleave at the Ba layer. To maintain charge neutrality, half of the Ba ions should remain on each of the separated surfaces (Figure In an effort to directly connect the aforementioned effects seen in surface probes to the transport properties, we have performed a series of in situ transport measurements on cleaved samples of underdoped Ba(Fe 1-x ,Co x ) 2 As 2 , x = 0.05. Single crystal samples were grown using the flux method and annealed using the procedure described in Ref. We propose that this decrease in resistance in the UHV cleaved samples can be attributed to an enhanced superconducting T c at the sample surface. To investigate the origin of the excess conductivity, we have measured the V(I) characteristics of the cleaved samples in this regime. Pulsed V(I) measurements were conducted using the same Keithley current source/voltmeter previously mentioned. Using a 500 μs pulse width, and a 0.5% duty cycle the average power was sufficiently low that no heating effects were observed at any applied current. Because the changes in the voltage characteristics are small and deviate only at low currents, we plot (Figure A shuttered effusion cell with a molten potassium source (flux calibrated using a quartz crystal microbalance) was used to controllably and repeatably apply fractions of a monolayer of potassium to the cleaved sample surfaces. Between each dose the resistance between 7K and 35K was remeasured, with results plotted in Figure A final piece of evidence which points towards the surface-derived nature of the enhanced superconductivity is the sensitivity of potassium dosing effects to residual gas adsorbates on the sample surface. By varying the delay time between cleaving the sample and dosing the surface, we have examined how the residual gas adsorbates modify the effects of potassium deposition on a series of samples which displayed the double transition pictured in Figure As a layer of adsorbed gas molecules builds up on the sample surface, it likely impedes effective charge transfer from the potassium ions to the top FeAs layer, which is consistent with effects of 