Data are presented on mutual and self-inductance of various inductors used in multilayered superconductor integrated circuits: microstrips and striplines with widths of signal traces from 250 nm to a few micrometers, located on the same circuit layer at various distances from each other (from 250 nm to a few micrometers) and/or on different layers spaced vertically; effect of long slits in the ground plane(s) along the inductors on their mutual inductance; inductance of right-angled bends; inductance of meanders. Simple analytical expressions for mutual and selfinductance of the basic inductors are given, describing experimental data with accuracy better than 2% in a very wide range of parameters. They can be used for superconductor integrated circuit design and calibration of numerical inductance extractors. Measurements were done using circuits fabricated in fully planarized fabrication processes with eight niobium layers and Nb/Al-AlOx/Nb Josephson junctions, known as the SFQ5ee and SC1 processes developed at MIT Lincoln Laboratory for superconductor electronics. Mutual inductance decreases exponentially with distance between striplines and as a second power of the distance between microstrips, strongly depends on magnetic field penetration depths in superconducting ground planes, whereas superconducting properties of the signal traces are practically immaterial. Weak dependence of mutual inductance on the linewidth of superconducting wires indicates that area of superconducting flux transformers -the essential component of all digital circuits using ac power, superconducting qubits, and sensor arrays -scales poorly with the linewidth, putting a predictable upper limit on the integration scale of such circuits. Recent advances in fabrication technology have enabled fabrication of niobium-based superconductor integrated circuits with feature sizes down to 150 nm, increased circuit density above 10 7 Nb/Al-AlO x /Nb Josephson junctions (JJs) per square centimeter There are cases when strong mutual coupling is required, e.g. for making compact superconducting flux transformers. Transformers are an absolutely essential component of all superconductor logic and memory circuits utilizing alternating current (AC) powering and clocking schemes such as Quantum Flux Parametron (QFP) As will be discussed in more detail elsewhere, superconducting flux transformers (mutual inductors) are very poorly scalable circuit component, i.e. they have a very weak dependence of area on the linewidth of superconducting traces. This makes superconductor electronics with its extremely wide-spread use of and reliance on flux transformers a poorly scalable technology in general A large amount of work was done to study inductance of various structures typically encountered in superconductor integrated circuits fabricated with relatively large, about 1 μm and larger, feature sizes Because superconductor integrated circuits contain a large number of inductors, the size of inductance matrix for numerical inductance extraction is typically very large, and finding its elements is extremely computation intensive. Therefore, knowing mutual inductance of various circuit components and its dependence on the distance between them allows circuit designers to properly truncate the inductance matrix by neglecting certain elements due to their smallness. In order to address these issues and enable circuit design into the advanced nodes of fabrication processes developed at MIT LL, in this work we present mutual inductance data for the main types of inductors used in modern superconductor integrated circuits. We derive simple analytical expressions that accurately describe mutual and self-inductance of superconducting microstrip and stripline inductors in a wide range of parameters, typically with better than 2% accuracy. These expressions can be used in conjunction with superconductor circuit layer tools for computer assisted circuit design and for calibration of numerical inductance extractors. We evaluate a few examples were mutual inductance is essential for determining correctly total inductance of composite inductors comprised multiple primitive inductors, e.g., meanders. We compare results of the measurements with numerical simulations using commercial inductance extraction software: a transmission line extractor wxLC and a full threedimensional extractor InductEx @ 6.0. For measuring self-and mutual inductance, in a course of several years, we fabricated a large number of 5 mm x 5 mm test circuits in all main fabrication processes on 200-mm wafers, developed at MIT LL for superconductor electronics: the standard 8-Nb-layer planarized process SFQ5ee with the nominal minimum linewidth of 350 nm A schematic cross section of the processes used is shown in Fig. Interlayer dielectric in all processes is planarized using chemical mechanical polishing (CMP). As a result, each Nb layer is deposited on a smooth planar surface, allowing to pattern deep sub-micrometer features using a deep-UV photolithography. The minimum Nb line spacing, s achievable in the processes is limited by gap fill requirements to 250 nm. The minimum linewidth, ww we used for inductors in the SFQ5ee and SC1 processes was 250 nm, and 120 nm in the SC2 node Inductance and mutual inductance measurements of various features were done using a SQUID-based method From the period of SQUID modulation, ΔI mag , we extracted the difference of inductances of the SQUID arms where L =│L right -L left │ and N is the number of SQUIDs connected to the common magnetic bias I mag . This differential method allowed us to eliminate parasitic inductance, L p associated with connection of the inductors under test to the bare SQUID on one end and to the ground plane(s) on the other end. If ΔI mag is measured with 1% accuracy and the resistors are identical within 1%, the accuracy of this method can be estimated as 1.4%. Similarly, a mutual inductor, L M was placed parallel to the inductor L right , and a modulation current I mod was fed into it from a separate current source, Fig. In all cases, the differential length, l of the individual inductors and the mutual running length of the parallel signal conductors in coupled inductors, l M was made much larger than the inductor width, w, and the spacing, s, between the coupled inductors, typically l ~ 100w, 100s. For instance, for all inductors with linewidth w ≤ 0.25 μm, we used l = l M = 30 μm, and longer for larger linewidths. This allowed us to neglect edge effects of narrow, 0.25-μm, perpendicular wires feeding current into LL MM . It is convenient to characterize long and uniform inductors by the self-and mutual inductance per unit length, LL ll = LL/ll and MM ll = MM/ll MM , and compare the measurements with numerical simulators based on an infinite line approximation. For comparison with a full 3D inductance extractor, the actual layout of inductors in GDSII format was used. The maximum magnetic modulation current which could be supplied to each SQUID was limited by the critical current of the superconducting wires, Ic which was about 20 mA for the narrow lines used. This sets the lower limit on the mutual and self-inductance which could be measured at about 0.1 pH or at 4 fH/μm for the typical lengths of inductors used. Hereafter, we use notations M#aM#, e.g., M6aM4, for microstrips, where the first M# indicates the signal conductor layer (e.g., M6) placed above the ground plane (GP) indicated by the second M#, e.g., M4. Inverted microstrips are labeled as M#bM#, e.g., M6bM7 indicates the signal conductor on layer M6 placed below M7 ground (sky) plane. Similarly, various striplines are referred to by indicating the signal conductor first and then the two ground planes, e.g., M6aM4bM7 refers to a stripline with signal conductor formed on the layer M6 placed above M4 and below M7 ground planes. In all stripline cases, the two ground planes were connected together around their edges about 20 μm far away from the inductors in Fig. Development of methods for calculating self-and mutual inductance of normal conductors of various shapes started with Maxwell who developed the method of geometric mean distances (GMD) For any superconducting loop, the loop self-inductance can be defined as a coefficient in the expression relating the total energy of the loop, U and electric current in the loop, Here U m is the energy of magnetic field around and inside the conductor, and U k is the kinetic energy of the current carriers inside the superconductor. The total inductance LL is the sum of magnetic, or geometrical, inductance LL mm and kinetic inductance LL kk , where and m, e, and n s are electron mass, charge, and Cooper pair number density, respectively, j s is the superconducting current density, and μ 0 = 4π•10 -7 H/m is vacuum permeability. The integral in the numerator of ( where ll is the superconductor length. The quantity in parenthesis defines the London penetration depth of magnetic field into a superconductor λλ LL = (mm/2nn ss ee 2 ) 1/2 In general, magnetic inductance is a loop property and cannot be defined without specifying the loop, e.g., the return current path, whereas kinetic inductance is a materials property and can be defined for any piece of superconductor. A concept of partial inductances, i.e. inductances of the segments of the loop can also be justified for superconducting loops similar to A textbook definition of self-inductance was introduced long before the discovery of superconductivity, see This definition applies only to the magnetic part of inductance because kinetic inductance does not create magnetic flux. Kinetic inductance creates an additional difference in the phase of the superconducting wave function Ψ = Ψ 0 ee iiii between the ends of the loop but does not create magnetic flux. This follows from the quantum-mechanical expression for the current density in superconductors, i.e., the generalized second London equation where Φ 0 = 2e/h is the flux quantum and AA ⃗ is vector potential; see, e.g. where Φ mm is the magnetic flux threading the path. For a closed path, θθ 2 -θθ 1 = 2ππnn, where nn is integer, and the quantity on the left hand side of (6) known as fluxoid becomes quantized. Fluxoid quantization turns into a familiar flux quantization Φ mm = nnΦ 0 if there are no currents in the bulk of the superconducting loop. Using ( The latter expression is used in superconductor circuit simulation tools such as PSCAN For two inductors (loops) with self-inductances LL 1 and LL 2 and current II 1 and II 2 , respectively, a part of magnetic flux created by inductor LL 1 may leak into inductor LL 2 , adding constructively or destructively to its self-induced flux, and vice versa. Mutual inductance is defined using relationships where Φ 1 and Φ 2 are the total magnetic fluxes threading each loop and MM 12 = MM 21 = MM is the mutual inductance. Inductors are termed adding inductors, MM > 0, if the self-flux and the induced flux add constructively, and opposing inductors, MM < 0, if the induced flux has the opposite sign to the self-flux due to an opposite winding of inductors, or opposite current direction in them. With this definition, a loop self-inductance is mutual inductance of the loop with itself. Similarly, for N inductors, an inductance matrix is defined as where all diagonal elements are self-inductances LL iiii ≡ LL ii and all off-diagonal, ii ≠ jj, components are mutual inductances LL iijj = LL jjii ≡ MM iijj = MM jjii . Typical logic cells of superconductor integrated circuits may contain a few dozens of inductors. Note, that definitions ( where both inductances are purely magnetic, and κ is a coupling constant which depends only on the geometry of the inductors. This may create some confusion because superconductor inductance extraction tools simulate (extract) the full inductance and separating it into two parts is not possible. Hence, if the coupling constant in the software is calculated using κκ = MM/(LL 1 LL 2 ) 1/2 , it becomes dependent on the value of kinetic inductances and is no longer a purely geometrical factor. For instance, κ would decrease with increasing kinetic inductance, e.g., due to decreasing inductors cross sections or increasing the value of London penetration depth, whereas the actual magnetic coupling in (10) may remain constant. It is well known that for a serial connection and parallel connection of two inductors, L 1 and L 2 , the total inductance is, respectively, and depends on the value and sign of the mutual inductance, M. In deriving these and other expressions for various connections of inductors, e.g. a star (T-connection), triangle, etc., it is assumed that connecting several inductors together does not alter their inductance values. This assumption may not necessarily be true for superconducting circuits because connecting various superconducting thin-film shapes forming inductors between multiple layers usually alters current distribution in them and in superconducting ground planes carrying return currents. Therefore, modeling superconducting inductors in general requires numerical methods and software allowing for inductance and mutual inductance extraction from actual layouts. Most methods of computing self-and mutual inductance are based on dividing an inductor into filaments -straight pieces of wires with length ddll ⃗ and of small cross-section so the current II in them can be treated as uniform. Magnetic field ddBB �⃗ (rr ⃗) created by each filament at a point rr ⃗ away from the filmanet is found using Biot-Savart-Laplace law Then, magnetic flux through any loop is calucalted as a sum (integral) of fluxes ddΦ = (ddBB �⃗ • ddSS ⃗ ) induced by all filaments. For a uniform current distribution, currents in all filaments are the same and equal to the total current divided into the number of filaments in the inductor cross section. For a nonuniform disribution, Maxwell's and London equations need to be solved to find currents in the filaments self-consistently. Numerical methods and inductance extraction software for superconductors have been subjects of active development, initially for two-dimensional (2-D) and later for 3-D structures; see In the simplest case of an infinitely long, thin filament (wire) of circular cross section with current II, the flux per unit length through any surface bordered by two lines parallel to the axis of the wire at distances RR 1 and RR 2 is This follows from the Ampere's circuital law for an infinitely long cylindrical wire BB(RR) = μμμμ 0 II 2ππRR and Gauss's law, where R is the distance from the wire axis and μ is the relative magnetic permiability of the space around the wire, which hereafter will be always assumed equal 1. Equation ( infinitely long superconducting wire of circular cross section placed parallel to a superconducting ground plane with penetration depth λ, see Fig. The first and the second terms in ( If rr 1 ≲ λλ 1 magnetic field completely penetrates the wire and current in the wire can be consider uniformly distributed; here λλ 1 is magnetic field penetration depth of the wire material which, in general, may differ from the ground plane. Magnetic field inside the wire gives an additional radius-independent contribution wire unit length. Hence, total self-inductance per unit length of a superconducting cylindrical wire above superconducting ground plane is as was demonstrated in If rr ≫ λλ 1 , magnetic flux is expelled from the wire except the sheath of thickness λ 1 , and the self-inductance is Consider now two parallel cylindrical wires with axis-toaxis distance in the x-direction, pp xx and axes to the ground plane distances h 1 and h 2 as shown in Fig. where RR 1 and RR 2 are distances from the axis of the first wire and from its image to the axis of the second wire, respectively. RR 0 and RR 3 are distances from the axis of the first wire and from its image to the x-z reflection plane at yy = -λλ; see Fig. . Putting these into (18) gives for per unit length mutual inductance of two circular wires above superconducting ground plane Repeating the same calculations for the flux ΦΦ 12 induced into the first inductor by current II 2 in the second inductor, it is easy to verify that MM 12 = MM 21 . We note that mutual inductance In superconductor integrated circuits all inductors are formed by patterning planar thin films of thickness tt into strips (traces) with width ww, so that cylindrical wires are not encountered. For calculating mutual inductance of wires with arbitrary cross section, the distances RR ii between the centers of the wires entering expressions For rectangular cross sections, RR ggmmdd can be presented as RR ggmmdd = pp • kk(ww/pp, tt/ww), where pp is distance between their geometrical centers, and kk(ww/pp, tt/ww) is a weakly varying function of ratios ww/pp and tt/ww, and mutual orientation of the cross sections, whose values are close to 1 and tabulated in The typical thickness of superconductor layers is tt = 200 nm and the smallest dielectric thickness dd mmiinn between adjacent Nb layers is also 200 nm; see Fig. In the given above ranges of parameters, values of kk in 0.92 ≤ kk ≤ 1 range for rectangular cross sections with long sides parallel to the line joining their geometrical centers For rectangular cross section, the general expression for rr ggmmdd was derived by Maxwell In Self-and mutual inductance of conductors with any noncircular cross sections can be also evaluated by replacing them with equivalent cylindrical conductors defined as conductors producing equal far field. Any shape can be related to the equivalent circle or several circles by various transformations. Equivalent radii rr eeee for many practical as well as more academic cross sections were given in For rectangular cross sections with arbitrary aspect ratio tt/ww, which is the most important case for integrated circuits and purposes of this work, a relation between rr eeee /ww and tt/ww ratio was developed in where K(k) is the complete elliptic integral. In the full range of aspect ratios 0 ≤ tt ww ≤ 1 ⁄ , results of where the second term was given in with equivalent radius rr eeee given by In Mutual inductance of two rectangular microstrips (per unit length) with dielectric thickness, trace thickness, and trace width, respectively, dd 1 , tt, ww 1 , and dd 2 , tt 2 , ww 2 can be found similarly to , see Fig. where ss is the spacing between facing edges of the microstrips in the horizontal plane. Note that for microstrips with tt ww ⁄ ≤ 1 shown in Fig. Values of llnn kk for various tt/ww and ww/pp ratios are tabulated in 4.2.1 Self-inductance. Self-inductance expression (24) with rr eeee given by ( We can see that analytical dependence where uu ii and vv ii are the analytical and numerically simulated values, respectively, and n is number of data points. In the range of thicknesses 0 ≤ d 1 ≤ 5 μm presented in Fig. Similar to Fig. Comparison with numerical simulations and experimental data in Fig. Dependence of mutual inductance of two identical microstrips on spacing between their facing edges is shown in Fig. Numerically simulated mutual inductance of two identical microstrips at zero spacing but without electrical contact, ss → 0 as a function of their width is shown in Fig. as shown by black solid curve in Fig. A small difference between the numerical simulations and analytical results, clearly visible in Fig. Why mutual inductance of wide superconducting traces is somewhat larger than of normal metal traces with the same dimensions is easy to explain. Proximity to superconducting wire #2 alters symmetrical current distribution in wire #1 and symmetrical distribution of magnetic field created by wire #1 due to Meissner effect in wire #2, and vice versa. Both wires become strongly interacting. Magnetic field created by wire #1 induces Meissner screening currents in wire #2. On the side surface of wire #2 facing wire #1 and on the top surface of wire #2, these screening currents flow in the same direction as the excitation current in wire #1, while they flow in the opposite direction on the bottom surface, facing the ground plane, of the wire #2 and on its side facing empty space on the right. As a result of magnetic interaction, currents on the facing sides of the wires attract each other and, otherwise symmetrical, distribution of current along the width in wire #1 distorts and shifts towards wire #2 while magnetic field strength between the wires and under wire #1 reduces. This reduction in magnetic field results in reduction of selfinductance of wire #1 caused by proximity to wire #2. Expulsion of magnetic flux from the volume of wire #2 increases magnetic field under wire #2, between its bottom surface and the ground plane, and increases magnetic field near the side of wire #2 facing empty space. As a result, total magnetic flux threading the loop between the bottom surface of wire #2 and the ground plane increases with respect to the flux which would be induced without existence of Meissner screening currents in wire #2. Therefore, mutual inductance of wide superconducting wires is somewhat larger than mutual inductance given by expressions ( superconducting transformers is microstrip inductors spaced vertically and placed above each other, because it allows to achieve large mutual coupling without the need to fabricate very closely spaced inductors on the same layer as described in 4.1.4. Instead, inductors are formed on different superconducting layers and share the same ground plane. Because of a close proximity of inductor traces in the ydirection, this arrangement is more difficult for analytical treatment than the previously considered side coupling. We will consider in some detail coupling of M5aM4 microstrip inductors to M6aM4 microstrip inductors because this is the most convenient combinations for making compact transformers for SFQ and QFP logic cells due to proximity of these layers to Josephson junctions. The general expression (25) applies, and for microstrips of the same width ww placed symmetrically above each other ss = -ww 2 ⁄ . For this inductors d1=200 nm, d 2 =615 nm, and, at the smallest nominal (corresponding to the SFQ5ee process Design Rules) distance RR 1 in Fig. Dependence of mutual inductance of M5aM4 and M6aM4 microstrips on horizontal distance pp xx between their geometrical centers is shown in Fig. It is clear from In integrated circuit fabrication, the main source of dielectric thickness variations is dielectric CMP which usually has a linewidth and underlying metal density-dependent planarization rate, dishing, and other topography effects. As a result, dielectric thickness above large pieces of metal in circuits (such as ground planes) and the next metal layer, e.g., dielectric I4 between M4 and M5, may be somewhat different from the process target value (200 nm in this case) and differ from dielectric thickness between two narrow lines on the same metal layers. However, when dielectric layer I5 on top of M5 is processed, presence of a large ground plane on M4 layer does not affect its planarization. It is determined by other factors such as area density uniformity of Josephson junctions, in this particular example. Therefore, potential variation of multilayer dielectric thickness between distant metal layers, e.g., M4 and M6, formed by multiple depositions and multiple dielectric CMPs, are much less significant. In order to quantitatively examine importance of thickness variation in vertical transformers, in Fig. Finally, we examine dependence of mutual inductance between aligned (ss = -ww) microstrips M5aM4 and M6aM4 on their linewidth. Expression We note that mutual inductance of vertically spaced microstrips in the considered type of transformers is lower than mutual inductance of their central filaments. Also, as clear from Fig. It is very important to note that MM ll dependence on horizontal and vertical separation between microstrips is logarithmical, i.e., coupling of microstrips is long-range and slowly decaying without any characteristic scale. Therefore, using microstrips in logic cells of dense integrated circuit is highly inadvisable. Using pairs of microstrips in transformers is also highly problematic in circuits requiring high area density of transformers, such as AQFP, RQL and superconducting qubit circuits, because of a significant mutual coupling between adjacent transformers. Some of these problems can be mitigated by using striplines for inductors and transformers with comprising wires placed between two parallel ground planes. Striplines for rf and microwave transmission became widely used since 1950s due to their advantages over microstrips. Therefore, literature devoted to analysis and synthesis of striplines made of normal metals is as enormous as literature on microstrips, and we cannot reference even a tiny part of it. Many useful formulas and references are given in Similarly to microstrip configuration, inductance of a wire between two infinite ideal (with zero magnetic field) penetration depth) ground planes can be found using the theory of images. The main difference and complication is that two ground planes, like two mirrors, create an infinite set of image currents, as shown in Fig. where vv pph = (εεεε 0 μμμμ 0 ) -1/2 is the speed of light on the transmission line; εε and εε 0 are, respectively, the relative permittivity of the dielectric between the ground planes and the absolute permittivity of vacuum; (εε 0 μμ 0 ) -1 2 = cc is the speed of light in vacuum. This gives the following self-inductance It is instructive to find inductance of a cylindrical wire between two ideal (with zero magnetic field penetration depth) ground planes using flux calculations because it clarifies properties of inductive loops involved and will be used for finding mutual inductance between multiple wires. In the cross section of the structure in Fig. Top Inset shows cross section of two parallel wires of different diameter placed between two ground planes at different distances to them. Φ 21 is the flux induced by the current in wire #1 though the loop between the wire #2 the bottom ground plane, side of which has length h 2 + λλ and shown by the solid blue line. Bottom Inset shows two contours (loops) which can be used to calculated magnetic flux and self-inductance per unit length of the wire in superconducting state: bottom loop LL 1aa runs counter clockwise along the surface of the wire in the -zz direction at xx = rr 1 , yy = h 1 and inside the ground plane at yy = -λλ in the +zz direction. Since vector potential is independent of the zz-coordinate, contributions to the contour integral from the two vertical sides of the loop (along the ±yy-directions) cancel each other. Similarly, loop LL 1bb runs along the top surface of the wire at xx = rr 1 , yy = h 1 and inside the top ground plane at yy = nn + λλ. Both loops are threaded by the same magnetic field lines having opposite directions below (pointing in the page) and above the wire (pointing out of the page), and inducing the same amount of magnetic flux through the loops. This picture is similar to an asymmetric coaxial line. associated with each of these loops, which are connected in parallel and comprise the total inductance. This becomes immediately clear when comparing with coaxial lines.) Magnetic flux ΦΦ 1 through loop L 1a is equal to magnetic flux through loop L 1b and has the opposite direction because all magnetic field lines passing over the wire also have to pass below the wire -they are closed loops squeezed between the two infinite ground planes connected in the y,z plane at -∞ and +∞. Inductance of any structure can be found by calculating flux induced in any loop through which all field lines within the structure must pass. In our case this can be either loop L1a or L 1b . Magnetic flux per unit length through any of these loops can be found using the Stokes' theorem as a contour integral of the vector potential AA(xx, yy, zz) over the loop in the y,z plane. Due to the symmetry of the problem, this integral for the loops of unit length in the z-direction reduces to because the only nonzero component of the vector potential AA zz (x,y) created by current in infinitely long wire is independent of the z-coordinate. In the magnetostatic approximation, vector potential created by a circular wire with current I at any point with coordinates (xx, yy) between two infinite ground planes can be found identically to the electrostatic potential of a uniformly charged wire between two ground planes calculated by Kuntz and Bayley On the surface of the wire xx = rr 1 , yy = h 1 , the vector potential is ) 2 ), For a symmetrical location of the wire between the planes (2h 1 = nn), self-inductance (30) reduces to The latter expression appeared in electrical engineering literature 21 years later than the work In the case of superconducting ground planes with finite magnetic field penetration depth λλ, image reflection plane is located inside each of the ground planes, a distance λλ away from the surface facing the wire. Hence, distance nn between the ideal ground planes in all previous formulas of this section should be replaced by nn + 2λλ, and distance between the wire and the bottom ground plane h 1 should be replaced by h 1 + λλ. We also need to account for kinetic inductance of the supercurrent in the wire. Then, the total inductance of superconducting cylindrical filament with uniform current distribution placed between two superconducting ground planes becomes where λ 1 is magnetic field penetration depth in the wire, which may differ from that in the ground planes. In the limit nn + 2λλ ≫ ππrr 1 , expression (36) reduces to Sinusoidal term in ( Consider the second circular wire of radius rr 2 running in the z-direction with axis at (pp xx , h 2 ) parallel to the previously considered first wire with radius rr 1 and axis at (0, h 1 ), see Fig. From and vector potential is zero inside the ground plane, AA zz (pp xx , -λλ) = 0. Then, mutual inductance per unit length is If axes of the wires are on the same (x,z) plane at yy = h 1 = h 2 , the mutual inductance reduces to ). ) . with the characteristic decay length (nn + 2λλ)/ππ. To conclude, we note that results presented above are totally different from an incorrect expression given in some textbooks, e.g. in 5.1.3 Mutual and self-inductance of striplines of rectangular cross section. It is important to note that Maxwell's GMD method does not work for striplines because vector potential of a filament between two ground planes is very different from vector potential of an isolated filament. To illustrate this let us consider mutual inductance between a strip of rectangular cross section, carrying current II (wire #1) and a cylindrical wire (wire #2) between two ground planes. We represent a rectangular wire of width ww and thickness tt as NN + 1 parallel cylindrical filaments of diameter tt, carrying equal currents II 1 (NN + 1) ⁄ . Each cylindrical filament creates an infinite number of images reflected of two ground planes, as shown in Fig. where we placed the center of the first filament at the front edge of the wire facing point pp xx . So, instead of a logarithm of geometric mean distance NN -1 ∑ llnn RR ii for the collection of filaments, we have a geometrical mean NN -1 ∑ llnn ff(RR ii ) of functions of distance ff(RR ii ) to the point. Obviously the latter cannot be reduced to a logarithm of the geometric mean distance unless ff(RR ii ) ≡ RR ii . Mutual inductance between a rectangular wire and a circular filament with center at pp xx is found using Filaments of wire #1 located closer to the position of wire #2 than the geometrical center of wire #1 make much larger contribution to mutual inductance To calculate self-inductance of striplines of rectangular cross section, we use an equivalent wire radius rr eeee given by , ⁄ to reflect that superconductor film thickness tt 1 and dielectric thickness dd 1 between the wire and the bottom ground plane are the fabrication process parameters. According to where λλ 0 is the bulk value of penetration depth. All niobium layers in MIT LL current fabrication processes use 200-nm films having λλ = 90 nm, except for layer M5 with thickness tt MM5 = 135 nm. If somebody decides to use M5 layer as a ground plane, this thin-film correction gives λλ MM5 = 96 nm. Comparison with the experimental data and numerical simulations for various combinations of layer in striplines is given in the following section. Interesting to note that mutual inductance remains nonzero even if one or both of the stiplines have zero dielectric thickness between the signal wire and any of the ground planes due to coupling via flux (currents) in the λλ sheaths. We also note that all formulas above were derived for infinite ground planes. In real circuits, ground planes have finite width which may cause an additional coupling of microstrips and striplines by magnetic flux leakage around the ground planes. This is the so-called external mutual inductance; see e.g., 5.2.1 Self-inductance. Numerous experimental data for selfinductance of various striplines in the fabrication processes available at MIT LL and their comparison with numerical simulations using wxLC were given in We also performed similar measurements for inductors M5aM4bM9, M6aM4bM9, M7aM4bM9 and M8aM4bM9 in our newer SC1 / SC2 fabrication processes having a much larger value of nn = 1.815 μm and very different values dd 1 = 260 nm, 655 nm, 1.055 μm, and 1.455 μm for these striplines, respectively, than in the SFQ5ee process. We have found the same excellent agreement with numerical simulations using wxLC and with expression (45) as described above, but do not present these data due to lack of space. Sensitivity of the selfinductance of striplines and microstrips to geometrical parameters dd 1 and nn diminishes with decreasing linewidth due to a rapidly growing contribution of kinetic inductance which becomes dominant at ww ≲ 150 nm. SFQ5ee process. Due to a very large number of possible combinations, we consider here only mutual inductance of inductors of the same types as in Sec. 5.2.1 and having equal widths of the signal conductors, ww 1 = ww 2 = ww. Inductors M5aM4bM7 and M6aM4bM7 are the typical case of highly asymmetric placement of the signal strip between the ground planes and convenient for testing expressions The typical mutual inductances (per unit length) MM ll of M6aM4bM7 inductors fabricated in the SFQ5ee process are shown in Fig. Dependence MM ll (pp xx ) simulated using the above given nominal thicknesses of all layers, λ = 90 nm, and wxLC software Due to a strong dependence of MM ll on d 1 and H in The best agreement of the experimental data was found with the simple analytical expression The largest coupling coefficient κκ = MM ll /LL ll achievable in transformers using parallel M6aM4bM7 inductors with ww = 0.25 μm is κκ(ss = 0) = 0.352, at zero spacing between them. At a more practical ss = 0.25 μm, the coupling coefficient reduces to 0.156 and becomes negligibly small at ss = 1 μm where κκ = 0.018, independently of the linewidth. Hence, for superconductor circuit design purposes, mutual inductance of M6aM4bM7 inductors in the MIT LL SFQ5ee process can be neglected if ss ≥ 1 μm because, at equal currents in the inductors, coupled magnetic flux becomes less than 2% of the self-induced flux and cannot affect operation of SFQ and other types of superconductor logic cells. SFQ5ee process. Inductors M5aM4bM7 have inverted structure of M6aM4bM7 inductors. The only difference is in thickness of the M5 and M6 layers. Dependence of mutual inductance of M5aM4bM7 striplines on the distance between their geometrical centers is shown in Fig. Inspection of the cross section in Fig. The largest coupling coefficient achievable using parallel M5aM4bM7 inductors with ww = 0.25 μm is κκ(0) = 0.303 corresponding to ss = 0. This κκ(0) is smaller than for M6aM4bM7 inductors because the latter have smaller kinetic inductance; see discussion in Sec. II and eq. SFQ5ee process. In order to investigate dependence of mutual inductance on dielectric thicknesses H, we measured also M6aM5bM7 inductors which have the same nominal dd 2 = 200 nm as M6aM4bM7 inductors in Sec. 5.2.2, but smaller nn. The actual thicknesses measured from the cross sections were dd 1 = 250 nm and nn = 631 nm (see Table The measured and simulated dependences of the mutual inductance for various linewidths are given in Fig. Because MM ll strongly decreases with increasing spacing, modulating the measuring SQUID via the mutual inductance required applying very large currents, which started to exceed the critical current of the superconducting M6 wires used (about 25 mA) at ss ≈ 1 μm. Therefore, data points shown in Fig. The measured coupling coefficients at ss = 0.25 μm are κκ = 0.105 and 0.083 for ww =0.25 and 0.5 μm, respectively. They reduce, respectively, to 0.042 and 0.035 at ss = 0.5 μm, and become about 0.005 at ss = 1 μm. Therefore, mutual coupling of M6aM5bM7 inductors in integrated circuits can be ignored for all practical purposes already at ss ≳ 0.7 μm. The mutual inductance decay length is even smaller for symmetrical M1aM0bM2 and geometrically similar stripline inductors with nn = 600 nm, about 0.25 μm. Their mutual coupling can be similarly neglected at ss ≳ 0.7 μm. the same plane. Increasing MM ll above the filament model By the reciprocity theorem, mutual inductance between the filament and the wire is the same if current is applied to the filament on the right of the Inset. This means that the total flux threading a wide stripline inductor can be calculated as a mean value of fluxes induced in parallel loops formed between individual filaments comprising the wide strip and the ground planes. process at MIT LL. For a comparison, we studied mutual inductance of stripline inductors in our newer fabrication process, process SC1 The measured mutual inductance for striplines with w=0.25 μm is shown in Fig. It is easy to see that simple analytical expression The red dash-dot line marked a) in Fig. A few comments concerning mutual and selfinductance extraction are required. In wxLC, inductance matrix is calculated in the infinite line approximation of the layout type b) in Fig. In InducEx, the user needs to define locations and types of ports, specifying between which layers electric current is applied. This creates some disconnect from reality because, in the test circuits, currents to the inductors under test are applied very far away from the points P1 and P3 in the layouts of types a) and b) and extracted from the ground planes also very far away from point P3 and P4, basically at the contact pads on the edges of 5-mm test chips. In the measurements, points P1 and P2 only indicate the length of the inductor being measured. Therefore, inductance and especially mutual inductance extraction results of InductEx may depend on the type of ports used. To investigate this, we used InducEx to extract mutual inductance of two long parallel striplines in configuration b) using different types of ports while keeping all other layout features, e.g., connections between the edges of the ground planes, the same as in the layout a). The uppermost dash-dot (brown) curve in Fig. The lowest dash-dot curve (magenta) in Fig. The physical and mathematical differences between the considered cases are quite significant. For the dash-dot brown curve for layout b), current excitation is applied between the M6 inductor, e.g., at port P1, and the M4 ground plane right under it. Therefore, to involve the top ground plane M7, the ground currents in the M7 plane need to flow towards its edges to vias to the M4 ground plane, from where they can flow back under the M6 inductors. This spreading out of the ground currents creates an extra inductance and significantly increases mutual coupling between adjacent M6 lines. Contrary to this, in the case of M6 [M4 M7] ports (magenta dash-dot curve), both ground planes are perfectly connected (in the software) right at the ports, along their width. These ideal connections of the ground planes near the inductors (which do not exist in the actual circuits), prevent screening currents from spreading away from the inductors and, hence, reduce mutual inductance, especially at large distances where exponentially small tails of these currents determine mutual coupling. Other possible combinations of the port types, e.g., all M6 [M7] ports or a mix of M6 [M4] and M6 [M7] ports, give mutual inductance extraction results (not shown in Fig. In layout a) with M6 [M4 M7] ports, the problem of artificial connections between the ground planes at the ports also exists but its effect is much smaller due to a very large distance (> 20 μm) between the ports P1 and P3, and P2 and P4. Hence, distribution of the return ground currents here is determined by the layout physics and less affected by the mathematical definition of the ports. These examples demonstrate large sensitivity of the extracted mutual inductance in InductEx to seemingly small differences in specifications of the ports, which does not exist in the real circuits and real measurements. and M5aM4bM7 striplines. Mutual inductance of two striplines is maximized when they are aligned above each other and couple vertically because exponential dependence on the distance pp xx is eliminated in this case. For making ac and dc flux transformers in superconductor integrated circuits, the most convenient are vertically aligned narrow striplines M6aM4bM7 and M5aM4bM7 of equal width. Their mutual inductance at ww = 0.25 μm is shown in Fig. For the vertically aligned strips, distance between their geometrical centers pp xx in expression ( Equivalent radii of ww = 0.25 μm M5 and M6 strips are rr eeee1 = 112.1 nm and rr eeee2 = 132.8 nm, respectively. This dependence is shown in Fig. The measured self-inductances of both striplines are also shown in Fig. Mutual inductance increases with decreasing the linewidth and saturates at ww → 0 while self-inductance continues to increase as ww -1 due to increasing kinetic inductance. Hence, superconducting flux transformers should favor narrow strips despite that their traditionally defined coupling coefficient κκ linearly decreases to zero with decreasing ww. Perforations in ground planes are frequently used in designing RF circuits; see, e.g. If a signal trace, LL 1 runs across the width, gg or along the length, ll sslliitt of a rectangular slit in superconducting ground plane(s), the return current, which normally flows just under the signal trace, needs to split at the point of intersection into two currents flowing around the perforation. This increases inductance of the trace and mutual inductance to a neighboring trace, LL 2 . If the trace runs along a long slit ll sslliitt ≫ gg when end effects can be neglected, we can still use per unit length selfand mutual inductances. Inductance of the trace placed symmetrically over the slit in the ground plane (microstrip configuration) or symmetrically between congruent slits in both ground planes (stripline configuration) can be described as where LL ll (0) is self-inductance without the slit given, e.g., by expression ) 4 with ββ ≈ 1 360 ⁄ under the logarithm in expression Presence of slit(s) in the ground plane(s) increases mutual inductance of all types of inductors within or near the slit. For instance, Fig. Numerical simulations with slotted GPs are shown by dashdot lines (using wxLC) and solid lines (using InductEx) for several values of gg. Agreement with the wxLC simulations based on transmission line approximation is excellent: the cumulating MAD between the data for all values of gg and the simulated values is χχ = 1.4%. However, mutual inductance extracted using InductEx6.0 from the actual layouts of the tested inductors (which include the M6 wires, the slotted GPs, and vias connecting the GPs at the periphery) is noticeably larger than the measured values in all cases. The cumulative MAD is χχ = 12.2%, i.e., almost an order of magnitude larger than in the case of wxLC. With increasing gg, the slope of the MM ll (ss) dependences decreases. This is equivalent to increasing the decay length (nn + 2λλ)/ππ in where, instead of the actual distance between the GPs, we use an effective distance nn eeeeee ~gg and, instead of the actual distance from the bottom GP to the trace center h 1 , we use an effective distance h 1eeeeee ~nneeeeee 2 ⁄ MM ll = ). On the other hand, at small slit widths gg ≲ 2nn and small spacings ss ≲ nn/2 when increase in the mutual inductance is relatively small, mutual inductance of two parallel striplines can be very well described, similarly to the self-inductance ), It is also obvious from the presented data that slits, even of small width, have gigantic effect on the mutual inductance, much stronger than on the self-inductance, especially when mutual inductance is low, i.e., inductors are far apart. Hence, relatively narrow slits in the GPs can be used to make more efficient flux transformers without significant compromise of the circuit density. However, one should be very careful in designing and using wide slits (moats) for the purpose of trapping magnetic flux in them because, at the same time, they strongly enhance mutual coupling of all nearby inductors; see also Inductors defined on adjacent metal layers and aligned over each other are the most convenient configuration for realizing flux transformers. Their mutual inductance can also be substantially increased by slotting the GPs as shown in Fig. It is easy to infer the actual dielectric thicknesses realized in a given fabrication run at a particular location on the wafer from the self-inductance data on the microstrips, which depend only on h ii , and on the striplines, which depend on both h ii and nn. This gave us an increased value of dd 1 , between 220 nm and 240 nm depending on location on the wafer, and very close to the target value of dd 2 = 615 nm, consistent with the mutual inductance data in Fig. To conclude, relatively narrow slits ~ 1 μm in the ground plane(s) can increase mutual inductance of adjacent narrow wires by ≳50% both for vertically and horizontally spaced inductors. Mutual inductance of vertically spaced inductors is very sensitive to the difference h 2 -h 1 , i.e., the difference in the local dielectric thicknesses dd 2 -dd 1 , and can be used as a sensitive nondestructive method of measuring the local interlayer dielectric thickness. This high sensitivity could be a source of variability of the flux transformer using vertically coupled inductors. E.g., a 9% change in the dielectric thickness between layers M5 and M6 in the SFQ5ee process would cause a 10% change in the mutual inductance of M5 and M6 wires in the transformer. In this respect, transformers formed using closely spaced wires in the same plane could have smaller variability but would also have larger area. Straight-line inductors described in the previous sections are widely used in logic cells and in passive transmission lines. Very often inductor bending is needed to connect JJs with different x,y coordinates. There is a considerable microwave engineering literature on inductance and capacitance associated with discontinuities of microstrips and striplines; see In superconductor circuit design community, a rule of thumb has been to assign an additional inductance, LL cc to a corner square of the right-angled bend equal to 0.56LL ssee , where LL ssee is the sheet inductance (inductance per square) of the straight-line inductor. This number comes from analogy to extra resistance of the corner square of right-angled bends of thin-film resistors Inductance of a bend is associated with redistribution of magnetic field around of and currents in the signal wire and in the ground planes, the so-called current crowding near the inner corner It would be natural to define the bend inductance as the difference between inductances of the bended and straight inductors of the same length. Instead, it has been a custom to calculate inductance associated with a right-angle bend as referenced to the corner square between lines OQ and OQ' in Fig. where LL ll is the inductance per unit length of the straight line inductor. Using definition (51), L c can be measured by the differential method described in Sec. 2, Fig. To increase sensitivity of the measurements and avoid errors related to measuring small differences of two big numbers, we used meandered striplines with multiple rightangled bends spaced a distance ss as shown in Fig. If mutual inductance between the straight segments of inductors with bends can be ignored, self-inductances of the left and right inductors in the test structure and their difference, Lmes which is measured using the SQUID modulation period (see Sec. 2), can be presented as where LL ll and ll are, respectively, the linear inductance of the straight stripline and the total length of the inductors measured along the central line, i.e., the total length between the first and the last vertex if drawn as a fixed-width polyline; NN ccll and NN ccrr are the numbers of 90-degree bends in the left and the right inductors of the differential SQUID, respectively. This gives where LL ssee ≡ LL ll ww is inductance per square. The LL cc values extracted using eq. ( Negative values of the corner inductance of microstrips can be found in many published theoretical and experimental results, e.g. Because electric current in the adjacent vertical sections flows in opposite directions, mutual inductance of the nearest neighbors is negative (opposing inductors). Then, inductance of the i-th vertical section of the right-arm serpentine can be presented as The first (ii = 1) and the last (ii = NN cc /2) vertical segments have only one nearest neighbor. Using MM iijj ≡ MM jjii = MM ll Δyy, we sum up the inductances of the vertical sections to obtain where we included inductance of the corners. Similarly the sum of all horizontal sections of the meaner with total length ll hccrr gives simply ), where ll = ll vveerrtt + ll hccrr is the total length of the meander along its central line. We used meanders with Δyy = ss + ww. Inductance of the left-arm serpentine inductor in the measurements does not require any correction with respect to the eq. ( The corner inductance obtained using this more general expression is shown in Fig. The LL cc /ww ratio, shown in Fig. which is, for considered striplines, always larger than the length of the straight-line inductor LL LL ll ⁄ . Hence, serpentine inductors always occupy larger area than straight-line inductors with the same linewidth. Both LL cc and the ratio LL cc /(LL ll ww) ≡ LL cc /LL ssee strongly depend on the inductor linewidth; see also Fig. For a comparison, we extracted LL cc and LL cc /LL ssee from the layouts of the striplines with bends, using InductEx 6.0. The accuracy of InductEx with the defaults settings for the SFQ5ee process was not sufficient for the extraction, giving random values of the corner inductance which changed between small positive and small negative numbers. We increased the number of filament layers (in the z-direction, perpendicular to the ground planes) from 2 to 3 for all Nb layers in the stripline and decreased the maximum allowed segment size (in the film plane) from 1 μm (recommended setting) to 0.15 μm. However, with these settings, we were not able to extract inductances from the actual layout, occupying 80 μm × 80 μm, of the two serpentine inductors used in the differential measurements because of insufficient computer memory and timeout errors. Instead, we used a truncated design consisting of two ground planes of 20 μm x 20 μm connected by vias around their perimeter and two simplest striplines: one straight-line and another one with a single 90-degree bend as shown in the Inset in Fig. We see that, at very large values ww ≳5 μm (ww dd 1 ⁄ ≳ 8), the extracted LL cc /LL ssee ratios indeed approach 0.56. However, they are noticeably, up to 30%, larger than the measured values at smaller ww. At ww < 0.1 μm, the numerically extracted corner inductance becomes negative. In order to check that this is not an artifact, we extracted corner inductance for other types of inductors in the SFQ5ee process: microstrips M6aM4 (dd 1 = 615 nm), microstrips M6bM7 (identical to microstrips M1aM0, M2aM1, M3aM2, and M4aM3, etc., with dd 1 = 200 nm, and symmetrical striplines M1aM0bM2 (identical to M2aM1bM3 and M3aM2bM4) with dd 1 = 200 nm and nn = 600 nm. The results are shown in Fig. The extracted inductance of right-angled bends of both types of the microstrips gives negative values of the corner inductance at ww/dd 1 ≲ 1 in agreement with the literature data, e.g. 7.1.4 Discussion of the negative L c . Although negative corner inductance seems unphysical, it is simply a result of the definition A simple interpretation of the corner inductance can be given as related to a negative mutual inductance between the straight segments near the corner MM bb . In this case we can present inductance of the bended wire as LL = LL ll (ll 1 + ll 2 + ww) -MM bb , from which LL cc = LL ssee -MM bb . This mutual coupling exists only near the corner where two segments come very close to each other because mutual inductance of striplines ⁄ asymptotically approaches 0.56, the value following from the analogy with the resistance of the right-angled bend of thin film conductors exponentially decays with distance on the scale pp 0 = (nn + 2λλ) ππ ⁄ ≈ 0.38 μm for this type of parallel inductors. Theoretically, with decreasing ww, the mutual inductance of the bend region may become larger than LL ssee , resulting in the negative LL cc . The maximum value of MM bb can be estimated from ( However, mutual inductance of microstrips is much larger than of the striplines and decreases with distance only as a power law pp -2 , see eq. Dense serpentines (meanders) use much smaller spacing between the adjacent segments than the sparse meanders, typically equal to the minimum allowed spacing; see Fig. Electric current in the vertical segments LL yy1 , LL yy2 , ... , LL yyNN of the meandered inductor in Fig. As an example, we measured M6aM4bM7 serpentines with NN = 3 and ∆yy + ww = 30 μm. The ratio of inductance of these serpentines to the inductance of the straight stripline of the same length and width can be expressed as LL ssttrriipp was measured independently on the same chip; it can be also calculated using eq. ( We studied mutual and self-inductance of all typical inductors encountered in advanced multilayered superconductor integrated circuits using planarized layers and mostly sub-micrometer linewidths comparable to the thickness of the superconductor layers and interlayer dielectrics. We presented a set of simple analytical expressions describing: self-inductance of superconducting microstrips, exp. We demonstrated that mutual inductance of stripline inductors (two ground planes) decays exponentially with distance between the strips with the decay length (nn + 2λλ)/ππ, whereas mutual inductance of microstrip inductors (one ground plan) is long-ranged and, at large distances, decreases only as (h 1 + λλ) 2 /(ss + ww) 2 with spacing between them. Therefore, in the fabrication processes developed at MIT LL (the SFQ5ee, the SC1, and the SC2 processes), mutual coupling between any striplines can be neglected if spacing between them ss ≳ 1 μm, whereas coupling between the microstrips remains strong even at ss~4 μm. Therefore, stripline inductors should be exclusively used in VLSI circuits to minimize parasitic coupling between adjacent inductors and transformers. The use of microstrip-based inductors and transformers is not recommended in dense circuits due to a large and poorly controlled parasitic coupling between them. Perforations in the ground plane (long slits placed along the inductors) have relatively small effect on the self-inductance but substantially increase mutual inductance of inductors near or within the slit, a few times with slits of moderate width ~2 μm. Long slits with sparse narrow bridges across them have nearly the same effect as slits without bridges. We also measured inductance of right-angled bends of striplines and found that, contrary to the general belief, corner inductance strongly decreases with decreasing the linewidth and becomes negligible below ww ≈ 0.25 μm. At very large linewidth ww > 5 μm, the corner inductance asymptotically approaches 0.56LL ssee , the value following from analogy between inductance of the bend and the bend contribution to the resistance of thin film resistors. The corner inductance of microstrips becomes negative at linewidths smaller than the dielectric thickness between the strip and the ground plane. A surprising observations for us was that mutual inductance of superconducting inductors in the range of linewidths and thicknesses relevant to integrated circuits does not depend on superconductivity of their signal traces and only depends on the magnetic field penetration depth in superconducting ground planes and the geometrical dimensions. The normal metal signal traces with superconducting ground planes would have the same mutual inductance as superconducting traces. The main source of variability (parameter spreads) of superconducting transformers is the exponential dependence of mutual inductance on spacing between the parallel traces and a very strong dependence on dielectric thickness between them, whereas dependence on the linewidth is weak. We compared the experimental data and the analytical expressions with numerical simulations using wxLC software of M. Khapaev The presented set of data is sufficient for designing superconductor integrated circuits in the fabrication processes available at MIT Lincoln Laboratory such as the SFQ5ee and the SC1/SC2 processes, whereas the presented analytical expressions can be used for calculating mutual and selfinductance of inductors in any fabrication process for superconductor electronics or with normal metals. And the last but not the least, it follows from the results that superconducting transformers are poorly scalable component of superconductor integrated circuits due to a weak dependence of mutual inductance of vertically or horizontally spaced inductors on the linewidth and, as a consequence, very weak dependence of the transformer area on the linewidths. This is because self-inductance of the transformer's primary and secondary strongly increases with decreasing the linewidth due to the growing as ww -1 kinetic inductance, which does not contribute to mutual coupling, while the current carrying capacity of the wires decreases linearly with decreasing ww. These issues and their consequences for scalability of superconductor electronics using ac powering and clocking schemes will be discussed in detail elsewhere.