We consider an electron model of superconductivity on a three-dimensional lattice where there are on-site attractive Hubbard interaction and long-range repulsive Coulomb interaction. It is claimed that fully gapped s-wave superconductivity within this model, if present, exhibits spontaneous translation symmetry breaking possibly related to a charge order. Our discussions are based on an application of the Lieb-Schultz-Mattis theorem under some physical assumptions. The inconsistency between the proposed supersolid and experiments can impose some constraints on a reasonable choice of a theoretical model. Superconductivity and superfluidity are well understood based on the spontaneous broken U(1) symmetry of the particle-number conservation. One of the essential differences between a charged superconductor and neutral superfluid is that there is no Nambu-Goldstone (NG) boson associated with the U(1) symmetry in the former, while the linearly dispersive sound mode exists as an NG boson in the latter. The absence of an NG boson in a charged superconductor is often explained by the screening effect of the long-range Coulomb interaction, which could be regarded as a variant of Anderson-Higgs mechanism However, the physics of these two explanations seem to be slightly different; the gapped NG boson is a consequence of an electric field coupled to a charge density in the former approach, while it is driven by a fluctuating magnetic field coupled to a charge current in the latter approach. This may be a physically relevant difference in a non-relativistic condensed matter system where the electric field and magnetic field can be distinguished In this study, we revisit this subtle problem based on the Lieb-Schultz-Mattis theorem for low energy spectra and ground state degeneracy (GSD) for general quantum many-body systems The aim of this study is to investigate possible outcomes of a reasonable model of superconductivity based on the well established experimental fact that an s-wave superconductor is fully gapped. This in turn can impose some constraints on a model choice. For this purpose, we consider the following Hamiltonian defined on a cubic lattice of a linear size L with the periodic boundary condition, where ij is a pair of nearest neighbor sites and σ =↑, ↓ is the spin index. c iσ is an annihilation operator of an electron at site i and spin σ, and n iσ = c † iσ c iσ , n i = σ n iσ . The second term is an attractive interaction arising from e.g. phonons, and the third term is the repulsive Coulomb interaction on a lattice, V ij = V /|i -j| for i = j. (More precisely, the attractive term should be regarded as a sum of a phonon mediated interaction and on-site repulsive Coulomb interaction.) The charge density is measured from the average density ρ = p/q per unit cell with coprime integers p, q. The total number of electrons is N = ρL d with d = 3 in the present model. Equation ( In absence of the Coulomb interaction (U = 0, V = 0), Eq. ( where they are related by the translation operator as In this case, the on-site ↑↓ Cooper pair is regarded as a boson which has an effective hopping ∼ t 2 /U in the second order perturbation when U ≫ t, and a supersolid of the effective bosons could be stabilized by the interaction V Here, we do not directly examine existence or absence of a superconducting state in our model with both non-zero U, V , but instead we introduce some physical assumptions which are necessary to describe desired properties of superconductivity. We first focus on low energy states in the attractive Hubbard model at V = 0 and later take the Coulomb interaction into account. Now we simply assume that there is a long-range order of the spin-singlet Cooper pairing in the ground state of the attractive Hubbard model, The bulk order parameter is defined as O = i c i↑ c i↓ . In this case, single-particle fermion excitations and spin excitations will be gapped and thus it is natural to assume that there are only two kinds of low energy states in the N -particle Hilbert space H N , namely, the ground state |Ψ 0 and states with NG excitations. It is known that the NG boson is related with collective particle density excitations, where the variational states (up to normalization) are good approximations of the exact excited states N =0 H N and the tower of states has energies ∼ L -d measured from E 0 . The tower of states is well approximated by the variational states O m |Ψ 0 and (O † ) m |Ψ 0 up to normalization. However, these states belong to H N -2m and H N +2m respectively, but not to H N which contains |Ψ 0 . As mentioned before, these states are not relevant in the present study for an isolated superconductor with the particle-number conservation law. Next, we consider the full Hamiltonian with both non-zero U, V under the assumption that the system is superconducting (i) There are gapless excitations above the ground state(s). (ii) There is a gap between the ground state sector and excited states, and the ground state sector has GSD ≥ q. This is a non-perturbative statement which is valid for any parameters, but we cannot fully identify which one will be the case in the present system. However, as was discussed in the introduction, the long-range Coulomb interaction can lead to the screening effect and the NG boson will be gapped out. Therefore, there are no low energy excited states in H N above the ground states, and the first possibility (existence of gapless excitations) is excluded. The remaining possibility is that there are at least q-hold degenerate ground states with a gap above them. We stress that the system cannot be a simple uniform Z 2 topologically ordered state, because GSD ≥ q is filling dependent and is clearly distinguished from the Z 2 topological degeneracy which depends only on the global topology of the underlying manifold on which the Hamiltonian is defined. Besides, these degenerate ground states are different from the tower of states since the former belong to H N . The remaining resolution is that they are related to translation symmetry breaking Then, the translation symmetry is spontaneously broken in the physical ground states and they are related each other as T x | Ψn = | Ψn+1 (mod q) just like the naive guess Eq. ( In the previous section, we have shown that a system described by the electron Hamiltonian with both a local attractive interaction and long-range Coulomb interaction will exhibit a supersolid state. Our argument is non-perturbative and general, although it is just qualitative and magnitude of a charge order could be tiny in a realistic parameter region. Although we have introduced several assumptions (U(1) long-range order, no gapless excitations other than the NG boson at V = 0, and gapping NG boson by the Coulomb interaction) so that the argument goes step by step, they are combined into simpler assumptions that the Hamiltonian Eq. ( The problem discussed in the present study is a highly subtle issue, and indeed the two theoretical approaches for the absence of the NG boson have been thought basically equivalent. The key is a coupling to the U(1) gauge field, which is to some extent common for both approaches. However, as discussed above, there is no gauge degrees of freedom and no magnetic field in a Coulomb interacting model which takes only an electric field into account (in this sense the model is non-gauged), while dynamical electromagnetic fields are fully coupled to electrons in a gauged model. This may bring a clearer difference in their outcomes than the charge order proposed in the present study. Our crude discussion is just a single step, and further investigation will be necessarily for this subtle but fundamental problem.