The knowledge of the local electronic structure of heterogeneous solid materials is crucial for understanding their electronic, magnetic, transport, optical, and other properties. VASP, one of the mostly used packages for densityfunctional calculations, provides local electronic structure either by projecting the electronic wave functions on atomic spheres, or as a band-decomposed partial charge density. Here, we present a simple tool which takes the partial charge density and the energy eigenvalues calculated by VASP as input and constructs local charge and spin densities. The new data provides a much better spatial resolution than the projection on the atomic spheres. It can be visualized directly in the real space e.g. with Vesta, or averaged along planes spanned by two of the lattice vectors of the periodic unit cell. The plane-averaged local (spin) density of states can be easily plotted e.g. as color-coded data using almost any plotting program. DensityTool can be applied to manipulate, visualize, and understand the local electronic structure of any system calculated with VASP. We expect it to be useful especially for researchers concerned with inhomogeneous systems, such as interfaces, defects, surfaces, adsorbed molecules, or hybrid inorganic-organic composites. Density-functional theory (DFT) For a given periodic system, the Kohn-Sham Using the energy levels, it is common to define the density of states (DOS) as DpEq " with N e the band occupancy. The DOS is an important property which describes the complete electronic structure of the entire material. This is very convenient in case of periodic solids with rather smaller unit cells, where the spatial variation of DOS is not important. On the other hand, when one is studying the electronic structure of inhomogeneous systems like e.g. interfaces, defects, surfaces, adsorbed molecules, or hybrid inorganic-organic composites, access to spatially resolved DOS is more convenient. Such a quantity is the local DOS (LDOS) which combines the energy levels with the partial charge density: Alternatively, LDOS can be understood as energy-resolved partial charge density, starting with the definition of the total charge density with the unit cell volume Ω cell and the Fermi-Dirac distribution function f n,k . In magnetic systems the spin becomes an additional quantum number when it is conserved (e.g., for collinear magnetism and systems without spinorbit coupling). We thus have the spin-resolved quantities and Using these, the total quantities can be recovered as the sum of the spinresolved parts, e.g., the total charge density becomes ρprq " ρ Ò prq `ρÓ prq. In addition, information about the spin-part of the magnetization can be deduced from the spin density sprq " ρ Ò prq ́ρÓ prq LSDOS can be used to study the energy-and position-dependent contributions to the spin magnetization. For example, such an approach can be applied to identify the origin of local magnetization at surfaces In the following we present a tool which takes P n,k and n,k calculated with the VASP After successfully finishing a self-consistent calculation with the VASP package, the eigenstates n,k are listed in the EIGENVAL file. Setting further LPARD=T, LSEPB=T, LSEPK=T in the input file (INCAR), the partial charge densities P n,k are calculated by VASP from the preconverged wave functions and stored in the PARCHG.nnnn.kkkk files. These files are the basic input of DensityTool. In VASP, the structure of the calculated system is defined by a periodic unit cell spanned by the three lattice vectors L i , i " 1, 2, 3. The volume of the unit cell Ω cell " L 1 L 2 L 3 | L3 ̈p L1 ˆL 2 q| with L i and Li the magnitude and the unit vector of the lattice vectors L i . In the numerical calculation, the partial charge density (along with other quantities) is sampled on a discrete mesh in the real space with N i mesh points along each of the three lattice vectors and the eigenvalues (band structure) are sampled on another discrete mesh in the Brillouin zone in the reciprocal space. The spacing of both meshes can be set in VASP input files. Therefore, the L(S)DOS is also expressed on the real-space discrete mesh. To evaluate the Brillouin-zone integrals above, their discretized version must be employed. W k are weights of the k-points and their values depend on the discretization of the reciprocal unit cell in the original VASP calculation. With DensityTool we are aiming at the construction of the L(S)DOS and its visualization. Therefore, it is useful to express the E-dependence of L and S on a regular mesh, as it is already the case for the spatial coordinates. For this purpose, we approximate δpE ́ n,k q in all equations by with a proper smearing parameter σ. By this approximation LpE, rq and SpE, rq becomes continuous in E and in particular it can be evaluated on an equidistant set of E values. We further introduce a threshold parameter η and redefine Eq. ( Thus, for a given energy E, only those P n,k are considered, for which g n,k pE, σq ą η σ ? 2π . This procedure ensures a substantial speed up of the summation over all n and k. As an optimal compromise we propose to set η " 0.001, for which 99.98% of the distribution area of g n,k is recovered. Finally, DensityTool can also calculate the L(S)DOS averaged on a plane spanned by two of the lattice vectors for each of the discrete mesh points along the third lattice vector and for each E. This way three-dimensional data is obtained which can be visualized e.g. as a scatter plot with color coded z-coordinate of the plot. For example, we choose to average the data on the plane spanned by L 1 and L 2 with area We can thus define the plane-averaged LDOS as For our numerical evaluation it is more convenient to rewrite Eq. ( where Pn,k pr 3 q is the partial charge average (PCA) over the area A 12 , Pn,k pr 3 q " Note that the real-space integrals must be evaluated on the discrete mesh and thus Using Eq. ( In this section we demonstrated how plane-averaged and total L(S)DOS is calculated from the output of VASP with DensityTool. A final subtlety remains related to magnetic systems with conserved (collinear) spin (ISPIN=2 in VASP). In this case, the primary output of VASP is P n,k prq and s n,k prq " P Ò n,k prq ́P Ó n,k prq. The spin-resolved partial charge density P Ö n,k prq can be obtained from this data as P Ö n,k prq " 1 2 pP n,k prq ̆sn,k prqq. In addition, we provide an alternative approach, which is computationally faster, but only applicable to cases with small spin splitting of the energy levels. In this approximation we use Eq. ( LSDOS can be approximately calculated using the same approach, but by substituting P n,k prq for s n,k prq in Eq. (2). DensityTool is written in FORTRAN. The code is provided at https: //github.com/llodeiro/DensityTool, including installation and execution instructions. It is a post-processor to VASP and it takes its output written to the EIGENVAL, CHGCAR, and PARCHG files as input. In addition, input parameters are necessary, which control the exact routines that should be used and the numerics. Most convenient way to do this is to execute DensityTool by letting it read the input parameters from a text file (see DENSITYTOOL.IN in our examples). Please find the list of the available input parameters in the User Manual. Depending on the choice of routines, different tasks can be performed by DensityTool. For plane-averaged L(S)DOS, the PCA or partial spin average (PSA) must be calculated first with Eq. ( We summarize the available routines in Tab. 1 and provide their detailed description in the User Manual. We demonstrate the capabilities of DensityTool on the example of concrete inhomogeneous systems. This type of systems can be seen as a prototypical field where the tool can be successfully applied. In particular, we present our results calculated with DensityTool for two inhomogeneous systems: a composite inorganic-organic system, and a perovskite slab model. The composite inorganic-organic system of interest is a hydrogenized Si(111) slab with the F6-TCNNQ molecule adsorbed to one of the surfaces. The atomic structure of the calculated system is shown in the bottom panel of Fig. The location of the molecular orbitals of the F6-TCNNQ molecule both in real space as well as on the energy axis can be made visible with this method. In addition, the plane-averaged LSDOS gives insight into the magnetic properties of the system. While there is no magnetization visible for the Si states, the orbitals of the attached molecule appear to be spin-polarized. Note that this is in agreement with Fig. In this example we studied a slab model of the CH 3 NH 3 PbI 3 perovskite, also known as MAPI. Particularly, we used (2 ˆ2q ˆ6 slabs of (001) MAIand PbI 2 (unpolarized )-terminated surfaces of MAPI, see Ref. Using DensityTool, we calculated the LDOS of both systems in the noncollinear setting. For this case, the partial charge density written by VASP is the starting point. Only its average in the plane parallel to the slab surface is needed and it is calculated with the PCA routine. Subsequently, the plane-averaged LDOS is calculated around the band gap with the LDOS routine. We present the results in the left and right panel of Fig. With DensityTool we provide a practical post-processor to VASP, which allows for the manipulation and visualization of the partial charge density in the form of LDOS or LSDOS, which can be also averaged in a plane spanned by two of the three lattice vectors of the periodic unit cell. This approach is complementary and in many cases superior to the commonly used approach of projecting the DOS on the atomic spheres. Using the partial charge density and DensityTool, a better spatial resolution can be achieved and also vacuum regions can be studied. The L(S)DOS in real space can be also visualized as a constant-value contour for chosen energy values. DensityTool takes directly the output of VASP as input. The planeaveraged L(S)DOS is written to a set of files (one for each energy value) and it can be plotted with any common plotting program. Full L(S)DOS is written in the VASP format (e.g. the one of CHGCAR) for compatibility. The data can thus be easily visualized using e.g. VESTA We believe that DensityTool will be utilized to improve the understanding of the local electronic structure of inhomogeneous systems, such as interfaces, defects, surfaces, adsorbed molecules, or hybrid inorganic-organic composites.