In this paper, we present a Bound states in the continuum (BIC) metamaterial in heterogeneous structures based on the universal coupled mode theory. We find the more general physical parameters to represent BIC, which are the resonant frequencies and corresponding phases of metamaterial structures. Therefore, BIC metamaterial comes from the equal value of the resonant frequencies and phases of metamaterial structures which are not only for homogeneous structures. Meanwhile if slightly vary one of metamaterial structure's resonant frequency and phase by varying geometry, we can obtain the quasi-BIC instead of broken symmetry of homogeneous structures. In this paper, we provide the BIC and quasi-BIC with one example of two heterogeneous structures which are cut wire (CW) and Split-Ring Resonator (SRR), to widely extends the metamaterial BIC beyond common sense. Furthermore, we demonstrate the simulation results and experimental results to proof our idea. Bound states in the continuum (BIC) is initially proposed in quantum mechanics The reason of causing metamaterial BIC is that if two lossy fields of metamaterial structures have the same phase and resonant frequency of single metamaterial structure, the far field of two lossy fields have destructive interference with each others. When we slightly vary one of metamaterial structure, the far field of two lossy fields can not destructive interference, but provides high Q Fano-shape resonance instead, so-called broken symmetry of quasi-BIC. The most intuitive choice and common sense for BIC metamaterial is made of two uniform structures and quasi-BIC comes from the broken symmetry of homogeneous structures, which can obtain the high Q resonance. The coupled mode theory (CMT) is a prosperous and universal theory and it widely used in many systems mental physical parameters for BIC metamaterial, such as the resonant frequencies and corresponding phases of metamaterial structures The paper is organized as follows. In section II, we firstly introduce the universal coupled mode theory for metamaterial BIC. Section III employs the universal coupled mode theory to predict the BIC with the same phase and resonant frequency of CW and SRR. After that, we slightly change the phase and resonant frequencies of CW, which provides a different Q-value of quasi-BIC. In addition, we give the experimental results to demonstrate our device. In the section IV, we provide the further discussions on our design. Finally, we conclude in Section V. The universal coupled mode theory can be described as following where |a| 2 and |b| 2 as the energies in each metamaterial structure. ω is the frequency of input THz wave. ω a and ω b represent the frequencies of the metamaterial structures, which is the same as the resonant frequency of the corresponding metamaterial structure (ω a = ω 1 ; ω b = ω b ). Ω is the coupling strength with loss, due to the loss of transferring energy from one metamaterial structure to another, with Ω = g -i √ γ a γ b e iφ , where g is the coupling strength between two metamaterial structures. γ a and γ b are the loss terms of metamaterial structures, which is close to γ 1 , γ 2 for each single metamaterial structure (γ a = γ 1 ; γ b = (γ 1 -γ 2 )/2). φ is the phase information, which can be calculated by the phase φ 1 and φ 2 for each metamaterial structure (φ = (φ 1 -φ 2 )d, where d is the width of metamaterial structure). E is the amplitude of external exciting THz wave. Subsequently, we can obtain the energy amplitudes a, b of each metamaterial structure by solving the Eq. 1, as shown, Then we calculate the effective susceptibility which is the linear superposition with energy amplitudes |a| 2 and |b| 2 . the effective electric susceptibility of the metamaterial can be written as Finally, we obtain the transmission spectrum with T ≈ 1 -Im(χ eff ) Hence, we can predict the transmission spectrum of the structure Based on the prediction of our theory, we carefully select the structures of CW and SRR to obtain the BIC or quasi-BIC. In other to easier demonstration, we fix the structure parameters of SRR, where the gap of SRR is 4 μm; width of SRR is 4 μm and the side length of SRR is 60 μm. Besides, the width of CW is fixed 20 μm with the length L of CW, as shown in Fig. For the BIC case, we select the length L 0 of CW as 85.5 μm, where the resonant frequency of CW is 0.6097 THz and the corresponding phase at the resonant frequency is 26.125 degrees. Besides, the resonant frequency of SRR is 0.6095 THz and corresponding phase at resonant frequency is 26.051 degrees, as shown in Fig. Based on our universal coupled mode theory, if we slightly change the length L which varies the resonant frequencies and the corresponding phases of CW, the resonant frequencies and corresponding phases of CW and SRR are not match. Therefore, the Fano resonant shapes will appear in the transmission spectrum, so-called quasi-BIC cases. In order to demonstrate the correct prediction of our theory, we propose the full-wave simulations, our theory and experiments by varying the length of CW from L = 67 μm to 110 μm, as shown in Fig. From the results of Fig. In order to better demonstrate the BIC with different structures, we vary the length of CW L from 66 μm to 107 μm, which crosses the same phase and resonant frequency of CW and SRR (L 0 = 85.5 μm). Therefore, from the universal coupled mode theory, we can easily predict that the highest Q-value appears when the same phase and resonant frequency of CW and SRR ,such as the L 0 = 85.5 μm. Therefore, when the length of CW is L 0 = 85.5 μm, it is the BIC point. When the length L of CW is farther away from the BIC point, the Q-value of resonant will be smaller instead. The relationship between the Q-values and the length L of CW can be fitted by function Q ∝ α -2 , where α is the asymmetric parameter which is given by α = L-L0 L0 It is worth emphasizing that we employ the CW and SRR as the heterogeneous example to construct BIC and quasi-BIC in this paper, but our conclusions and results can be extended to arbitrary heterogeneous structure to build up the BIC and quasi-BIC, not only for CW and SRR. In this paper, we propose the new configuration of metamaterial BIC with two heterogeneous structures (Cut Wire and Split-Ring Resonator). We firstly theoretically and experimentally demonstrate the BIC and quasi-BIC with two heterogeneous structures. Our theory implies that resonant frequencies and corresponding phases of metamaterial structures are more fundamental physical parameters of BIC and we give the simulation and experimental results to proof our idea. This finding will extend the boundary of metamaterial BIC and could be widely used in applications.