Two-dimensional ferroelectrics (FEs) are promising in the miniaturization of memory devices with ultra-high-density data storage and low power consumption. However, many thiophosphate monolayers, i.e., analogs of CuInP2S6 and referred to as ABP2X6, lose ferroelectricity and instead exhibit an antiferroelectric (AFE) or paraelectric ordering. We propose to tune the AFE ABP2X6 monolayers into the FE ordering through interface engineering. The mechanism is that there are couplings between the charge polarizations of the ABP2X6 monolayers and the local dipoles as well as the induced electronic polarizations in the substrate which have a tendency to stabilize the FE ordering. We further perform first-principles calculations for CuInP2Se6 and CuCrP2S6 monolayers and their van der Waals heterostructures. We find that an AFE CuInP2Se6 monolayer becomes FE as interfaced with graphene, MoS2, and h-BN monolayers. In contrast, the CuCrP2S6 monolayer remains AFE since there is a large energy difference between the AFE and FE phases. Interfacing it with a MoTe2 monolayer induces a metal-insulator transition for the heterostructure, whereas interfacing with a polar surface MgO(111) can drive it into FE. The interfacing effect can also be used to manipulate the FE properties of ABP2X6 multilayers. We further find that the AFE-to-FE transition is electrically switchable in these systems. In particular, it is accompanied by an indirectdirect band-gap transition for the CuInP2Se6 monolayer. Our study offers an effective approach to tune the FE and electronic properties of ABP2X6 thin films for applications in electronics and optoelectronics. Ferroelectric (FE) memory devices that allow nonvolatile and fast read-write processes are promising in ultra-high-density data storage with low power consumption. Conventional FEs, such as perovskite oxides, lose ferroelectricity as their thickness is reduced to a few nanometers due to the depolarization field The above discoveries have inspired a great number of explorations of ferroelectricity in layered twodimensional (2D) materials In this paper, we find that interface can be used to tune the FE properties of ABP 2 X 6 monolayers and multilayers. We provide an energy augment that involves a coupling between the charge polarizations of the monolayers and dipoles of the substrates. This coupling lowers the energy of one FE ordering while keeping that of the AFE ordering unchanged and thus may change their relative stabilities. We illustrate the idea in CuInP 2 Se 6 and CuCrP 2 S 6 monolayers by performing first-principles calculations. Moreover, we find that the CuInP 2 Se 6 monolayer undergoes an indirect-to-direct band-gap transition as it transforms from the AFE ordering to the FE ones, which can be tuned ferroelectrically and holds potential applications in electronics and optoelectronics. We use a slab structure to model the monolayers and heterostructures. For CuInP 2 Se 6 -based heterostructures, the slab consists of a 1 × 1 unit cell of a CuInP 2 Se 6 monolayer and a 2 × 2 supercell of a MoS 2 monolayer, whereas for CuCrP 2 S 6 , the slab contains a 1 × 1 unit cell of a CuCrP 2 S 6 monolayer and a √ 3 × √ 3 supercell of a MoTe 2 monolayer. These supercells give rise to small lattice mismatches between the overlayers and the substrates (< 2%). In addition, for CuCrP 2 S 6 , a polar surface, i.e., MgO(111), is also used as the substrate. For each heterostructure, we investigate the stacking effect by performing calculations for a number of configurations in which the ABP 2 X 6 monolayer is artificially shifted with respect to the substrate. We perform DFT calculations for our systems using the Vienna Ab initio Simulation Package We begin by investigating the energetics of ABP 2 X 6 monolayers obtained from first-principles calculations. We have considered PE, FE, and AFE orderings for all the systems, which are shown in Fig. We now turn to our idea of interface engineering of ferroelectricity in ABP 2 X 6 monolayers, which is shown in Fig. Therefore, the coupling lifts the degeneracy of the two FE phases: It lowers the total energy of one FE phase while it increases the total energy of the other one. The FE phase with P parallel to P ext is expected to have a lower energy than the one with P antiparallel to P ext . In contrast, the effects of this coupling on the total energies of the AFE and PE phases are expected to be negligible. As a result, the coupling changes the energy differences between the FE and the AFE phases and may thus enhance the stability of the FE phases [Figs. 2(b) and 2(c)]. In ABP 2 X 6 -based interfaces, two types of dipoles contribute to P ext . One is ion-dipole (P i ) of the substrate such as the Mo-S dipoles in MoS 2 . The other one is the induced electronic polarization (P e ) in the substrate owing to the interface interaction. We classify the AFE ABP 2 X 6 monolayers listed in Table I into two categories according to comparisons of U 0 and ∆E: ∆E < U 0 for type-I monolayers and ∆E ≥ U 0 for type-II systems, respectively. For type-I systems, the phase diagram of an AFE monolayer as a function of V int is shown in Fig. For type-II systems, the FE phases remain energetically higher than the AFE phase when |V int | < ∆E enhancing the coupling strength such that |V int | ≥ ∆E can tune FE1 into the ground state. However, FE2 becomes energetically higher than the PE phase since ∆E ≥ U 0 (see Appendix B). We now apply the above scheme to specific materials, which are CuInP 2 Se 6 and CuCrP 2 S 6 monolayers, respectively. Based on the values of U 0 and ∆E shown in Table . I, both are type-I AFE systems. However, there is a significant difference between them. For the CuInP 2 Se 6 monolayer, ∆E is small (less than 20 meV) and is much smaller than U 0 , whereas for the CuCrP 2 S 6 monolayer, ∆E is relatively large and is comparable to U 0 . We choose different transition-metal dichalcogenide (TMD) monolayers, graphene, and h-BN monolayer as the substrates for the convenience of computation. Although a free-standing TMD monolayer is nonpolar, the local dipoles pointing from the top and bottom chalcogen atoms to the transition metal atoms are expected to have different effects on the total energy of the ABP 2 X 6 monolayer. This is because these two types of dipoles have different distances to the dipole of the overlayer. The local dipoles next to the interface will dominate the coupling between the TMD and ABP 2 X 6 monolayers. Figure In addition to the MoS 2 monolayer, we also investigate the effects of interfacing the CuInP 2 Se 6 monolayer to graphene as well as a h-BN monolayer [Fig. Song et al. reveal via first-principles calculations that CuInP 2 Se 6 thin films with a size of less than six layers show AFE ordering within each layer (the layers are ferroelectrically coupled) We now discuss the effects of interfacing on the phase stability of a CuCrP 2 S 6 monolayer. The DFT+U method We further look at the effects of a polar substrate on the phase stability of the CuCrP 2 S 6 monolayer. We choose MgO(111) as the substrate since it is a well-known polar surface. Previous studies revealed that this surface demonstrates various surface reconstructions, among which octopolar and p(1 × 2) reconstructions were already experimentally observed In addition, we perform calculations for the above CuInP 2 Se 6 -and CuCrP 2 S 6 -based interfaces using different vdW functionals/methods; the results are shown in Appendix F. One can see that these methods give the same trend in the stability of different orderings. We now discuss the interfacing effects on the polarization of ABP 2 X 6 monolayers. We calculate the polarization for each structure by artificially displacing the Cu atoms along the kinetic path FE1-AFE-FE2; the results are shown in Fig. CuCrP 2 S 6 shows different trend from CuInP 2 Se 6 in that the polarizations for both states are reduced when it is interfaced with MoTe 2 and MgO(111). For the FE1 state of CuCrP 2 S 6 /MoTe 2 , the reduction in the total polarization is because the whole system becomes metallic, which can be expected from the band alignments (see Appendix G). Thus, the screening effect reduces the polarization of the interface. For the FE2 state, the polarization reduction due to that the dipoles of the constituents are antiparallel with each other. For CuCrP 2 S 6 /MgO(111), the system is metallic in both the FE1 and FE2 phases due to strong interface bondings (see Appendix H). Therefore, a reduction in the total polarization can be naturally expected. As already mentioned above for CuCrP 2 S 6 /MoTe 2 , the system experience a metal-insulator transition on a FE switch (see Fig. In conclusion, we have demonstrated that interface can be an effective way of engineering ferroelectricity in 2D ABP 2 X 6 monolayers. In our model, the polarizations of the monolayers are coupled to local dipoles of the substrates and the induced electronic polarizations in the substrate. These couplings can stabilize the FE ordering, that is, they lower (increase) the total energy of one (the other) FE phase while keeping that of the AFE phase almost unchanged. We have applied the strategy to CuInP 2 Se 6 and CuCrP 2 S 6 monolayers, for which the energy difference (∆E) between the FE and the AFE phases are about 12 and 68 meV, respectively. The interfacial interaction between a CuInP 2 Se 6 monolayer and vdW monolayers such as MoS 2 , graphene, and h-BN leads to an energy change of 25 ∼ 30 meV for the FE phase and thus can overcome ∆E while keeping the other FE phase as a local minimum of the energy surface. Therefore, a FE switching is feasible for this system, which is supported by our NEB calculations. The vdW interfaces can also drive an AFE-to-FE phase transition for the multilayers of CuInP 2 Se 6 . However, in the case of a CuCrP 2 S 6 monolayer, a vdW-type interface interaction is found to be insufficient to drive the FE-to-AFE phase transition. Interfacing it to a polar surface MgO(111) can make one of the FE orderings to be energetically lower than the AFE phase, for which a FE switching of different order-ings is still likely. We further find a FE switching of electronic structure for CuInP 2 Se 6 and CuCrP 2 S 6 -based interfaces. Our strategy is universal and can also be applied to other ABP 2 X 6 monolayers and 2D materials with out-of-plane charge polarizations. Besides, our study can help understand the effects of interfacing in devices made of CuInP 2 S 6 thin films and MoS 2 substrate as already obtained by recent experiments In Table Figure So, charge transfers in CuInP 2 Se 6 /MoS 2 , CuInP 2 Se 6 /graphene, and CuInP 2 Se 6 /h-BN heterostructures are expected to be negligibly small. By contrast, MoTe 2 has a type-III band alignment with the FE1 phase of the CuCrP 2 S 6 monolayer and has a type-II band alignment with the FE2 and AFE phases. This behavior helps to understand the band structures shown in Fig. MoTe CuCrP2S6 -2 -1 0 1 2 Γ Υ Γ S Χ Γ Υ Γ S Χ Γ Υ Γ S Χ Γ Υ Γ S Χ Γ Υ Γ S