This study presents an HTS electromagnetic model combining the thin-strip, homogeneous and multi-scale methods using T-A formulation. In particular, we build the thin strips as both the analyzed HTS tapes and the boundaries of the homogeneous bulks where the non-analyzed tapes are merged. Thus, the coil geometry is re-constructed with several bulks, but the bulks' boundaries and domains are tackled with different electromagnetic properties, and solved by T and A formulations, respectively. Firstly, we introduce the modeling process and highlight the differences and advantages over the previous models. Then, the accuracy of the proposed model is validated by comparing the results with those from the reference model based on a 2000-turn coil. The distributions of normalized current density, magnetic flux density and hysteresis losses from the two models are highly consistent, and the error of the total loss is less than 1%. Besides, the proposed model is the most time-saving among all the advanced models. Furthermore, the model can be applied in 3D simulations, and the high accuracy and efficiency are validated by simulating a 50turn racetrack coil. The proposed method provides a feasible approach to simulating coils with many stacked tapes, and we will continue exploring more applications in solving HTS systems with complex geometries. Finite element (FE) numerical model has been a powerful tool for understanding the electromagnetic behaviors of high temperature superconductors (HTS). Based on the state variables to be solved, different FE models are defined: A-V 1,2 , T-W In the electromagnetic modeling of rare-earth-barium-copper-oxide (ReBCO) tapes, the highly nonlinear E-J power relationship and the high aspect ratio impede the traditional numerical models to be applied for simulating large-scale coils. The former factor makes the calculation challenging to converge, and the latter leads to large numbers of mesh nodes and degrees of freedom to be solved. To address the issue, two main approaches are proposed according to the factors causing difficulties: eliminating the high aspect ratio or reducing the simulations of ReBCO tapes with E-J power law. The high aspect ratio of superconducting tapes can be changed by expanding or eliminating their thicknesses. Accordingly, the approximations of anisotropic bulks and thin strips are developed. Based on the anisotropic homogeneous-medium approximation, Zermeno et al. employed the homogenization method to simulate a stack of ReBCO tapes with anisotropic bulks using H formulation The idea of reducing simulations of HTS tapes can be found in the multi-scale method proposed by Queval et al Recently, combination models have been studied, in which two or more advanced methods (homogenization, thin strip, multiple scales, and densification) are employed in one numerical model to explore more feasible approaches on simulating large-scale HTS systems efficiently. Berrospe-Juarez et al combined the thin-strip and multi-scale methods by T-A formulation In this paper, we propose a new method that combines the thin-strip, homogeneous and multiscale methods in one numerical model by using T-A formulation. Section II introduces the modeling strategy, and the differences and advantages over the previous models. In Section III, a coil of 2000turn stacked tapes is simulated with different models to validate the accuracy and efficiency of the proposed one. The application in the 3D simulation is presented based on a racetrack coil in Section IV. Conclusions are given in Section V. Figure , is the locally normal vector of the strip, and T is the magnitude of the current vector potential. In this case, 2D planar geometry is used, and the tapes are 1D lines, currents flow in the Non-Analyzed tapes longitudinal direction only (Jz). The governing equations are where Jz,tape, r, and By represent the current density, resistivity, and magnetic flux density in the analyzed tape, respectively. The applied transport current Ia in each tape is imposed by setting the boundary conditions for T (T1 and T2) shown in Figure where d is the real thickness of the superconducting layer. Usually, T1 or T2 is set to zero, and the other one is Ia/d. With the current densities in the analyzed tapes, the current densities distributed in the bulk domains can be characterized by interpolation. Linear interpolation is used to obtain the current density in the bulk domain n: ⁄ /60 where Jtape,n, Jtape,n+1, and Jbulk,n represent the current density in the tape n, tape n+1, and the domain between them, respectively. F1 and F2 are linear functions varying with y between yn and yn+1. yn and yn+1 represent the coordinates of the edges n and n+1, respectively. f is the ratio of the HTS layer's thickness to the practical tape's thickness. With the current densities in all the bulk domains, the magnetic field of the whole coil can be estimated by solving A formulation: where A is the magnetic vector potential, μ is the magnetic permeability, and B is the magnetic flux density. Thus, the By in equation ( where Ec is the threshold electric field used for defining critical current in measurement, Jc is the critical current density, and n value defines the steepness of the transition from superconducting to normal state where L and δ are the width and thickness of a tape, respectively. With the losses of the analyzed tapes calculated, the losses in the non-analyzed tapes can be estimated by interpolation. The T-A formulation is implemented with the Magnetic Field modules coupled with PDE module in lower dimensions in COMSOL. General Extrusion operators built-in COMSOL are used to call the Jtape in equation ( In the proposed model, thin strips are solved by T formulation as the conventional T-A thinstrip model, but those strips are no longer imposed with surface current density in the A formulation to calculate the magnetic field. Since the current densities in the bulk domains cover the carrying currents of the whole coil. Due to the characterization that all the magnetic fields are produced by the bulk domains, no magnetic field distortions appear. The distortions occurred in the T-A simultaneous multi-scale homogeneous model built in Both the T-A homogeneous model and the proposed one build the coils with bulks only. The difference is that the T formulation is applied in the bulk domains in the former, while thin strips are still solved by T formulation in the latter. Advantages of the thin-strip modeling include that the normal vector n )⃗ can be easily determined, and no extra Neumann boundary conditions are needed. While these issues have to be considered in the T-A homogeneous model The proposed model presents a combination of thin strips, homogenization technique and multi-scale method, but the thin strips exist as both the analyzed tapes and the boundaries of the bulks. Thus, we still refer to it as the T-A simultaneous multi-scale homogeneous (T-A SMSH) model. A coil made of 2000 turns is simulated, which has been previously studied AC transport currents at 50 Hz are imposed in every tape of the coil with 11 A amplitude. The distributions of normalized current density, magnetic flux density, and hysteresis losses are shown in The piecewise cubic Hermite interpolating polynomial (PCHIP) method is used to obtain the total loss of the coil 14 . The total losses, degrees of freedom (DOFs), computing time, and efficiencies of all the numerical models are shown in Table From Table The computing efficiency of a model can be defined as the number of DOFs solved per second. One can see that the efficiencies of the three T-A models are at about the same magnitudes, and are much higher than those of the H models. Combining the homogenization technique, the T-A homogeneous and the T-A SMSH models are the two most time-saving models, both of which can finish the simulation within several minutes. Since the coil in the T-A SMSH model is divided by the analyzed tapes, with fewer bulks come fewer DOFs to be solved. Thus, the computing time of the T-A SMSH model is shorter than that of the T-A homogeneous model. It can be expected that the computing time will be further reduced, if the T-A homogeneous model is built with fewer bulks Furthermore, we extend the T-A simultaneous multi-scale homogeneous method to simulate 3D HTS coil models. The detailed governing equations of the T-A formulation in 3D simulations can be found in A racetrack coil with 50 turns is simulated, which was studied by 3D H homogeneous method 9 and multi-dimension method Equations ( where S is the surface area of a thin-strip analyzed tape, and δ is the thickness of a tape. The losses in the non-analyzed tapes are estimated by interpolation. In the multi-dimension method study, we compared its computing time of simulating the racetrack coil with the 3D H homogeneous model in the case of Im = 100 A, where the 3D H homogeneous and multi-dimension models spent 8.6 h and 2.9 h, solving 238505 and 306911 (coil submodel) + 679 (single-tape submodel) DOFs, respectively In the present paper, we propose an ingenious idea to combine the thin-strip, homogeneous and multi-scale methods in one numerical model. Innovatively, we treat the bulks' boundaries and domains with different electromagnetic properties, and solve them by T and A formulations, respectively. The study focuses on introducing the modeling process and benchmarks of the combination method. It has been demonstrated that the proposed model fully employs the advantages of the three advanced methods, which could rebuild the target coils with extremely simplified geometries. And it has been validated that the solving of the proposed model is highly accurate and time-saving both in the 2D and 3D simulations. However, due to the relationships of the current density and the current and magnetic potentials, the A formulation should be solved with quadratic orders at least to maintain the current density distribution accurate, which results in large numbers of DOFs to be solved in the 3D T-A models if the meshing is fine. The problem also occurs in the 3D T-A SMSH model and should be studied carefully later. We conclude that the proposed model provides a feasible approach to simulating coils with a huge number of stacked tapes. And we will continue exploring its applications in solving practical HTS systems with complex geometries. a