We present an analog silicon photomultiplier (SiPM) based on a standard 55 nm Bipolar-CMOS-DMOS (BCD) technology. The SiPM is composed of 16×16 single-photon avalanche diodes (SPADs) and measures 0.29×0.32 mm 2 . Each SPAD cell is passively quenched by a monolithically integrated 3.3 V thick oxide transistor. The measured gain is 3.4× 10 5 at 5 V excess bias voltage. The single-photon timing resolution (SPTR) is 185 ps and the multiple-photon timing resolution (MPTR) is 120 ps at 3.3 V excess bias voltage. We integrate the SiPM into a coaxial light detection and ranging (LiDAR) system with a timecorrelated single-photon counting (TCSPC) module in FPGA. The depth measurement up to 25 m achieves an accuracy of 2 cm and precision of 2 mm under the room ambient light condition. With co-axial scanning, the intensity and depth images of complex scenes with resolutions of 128×256 and 256×512 are demonstrated. The presented SiPM enables the development of cost-effective LiDAR system-on-chip (SoC) in the advanced technology. and light detection and ranging (LiDAR) In this work, we focus on a-SiPMs for LiDAR applications The SiPM proposed in this work comprises 16×16 SPADs with cathode nodes connected together to bias voltage V op , as shown in Fig. As shown in Fig. As a first step in the characterization, we performed the I-V measurement of the SiPM. Fig. The measurement setup used for charge spectrum and timing jitter characterization is shown in Fig 1c . A 780-nm laser pulsed at 10 MHz repetition rate and with an optical pulse width of 40 ps FWHM (ALS PiL079XSM) illuminates the whole SiPM area by means of a diffuser, while the light intensity on the array is adjusted by using neutral density filters. The quenching transistor is controlled with a voltage of 1.5 V. The output signal from the SiPM is taken across a 50 Ω load resistor, and amplified by a commercial amplifier (Mini Circuits ZKL-2R5+). The amplified signal is detected by an oscilloscope (Teledyne LeCroy WaveMaster 813 Zi-B), where the acquisition is triggered by the rising edge of the laser trigger pulses. The amplified pulse shape of the SiPM output signal is shown in Fig. By extracting the area enclosed by the pulses generated from different fired cells, the charge spectrum can be acquired. In Fig. where Q is the accumulated charge from avalanche, q the elementary charge q = 1.602 × 10 -19 C, R L the load resistor, which is 50 Ω in our case and A denotes the amplification factor of the amplifier. We calculated V • s as the average of the distances two successive peaks the charge spectrum. Fig. The timing jitter performance is a critical parameter for Li-DAR applications and it affects the precision of the measured distances. As the SiPM can resolve multiple photon events, the single-photon time resolution (SPTR) and multi-photon time resolution (MPTR) have been both measured in this work. We used the time-correlated single-photon counting (TCSPC) technique to accumulate the time differences between laser trigger signal and SiPM pulses. By adjusting the threshold voltage at the output of the amplifier, we can obtain SPTR and MPTR as shown in Fig. We integrate the SiPM into a co-axial LiDAR system as shown in Fig. To characterize the dark count rate (DCR) and crosstalk probability, we put the device in the dark and count the pulses using a counter implemented in FPGA by adjusting the threshold voltage of the comparator from 50 mV to 350 mV. The excess bias voltage was fixed to 3.3 V, which is also the condition we used for range and LiDAR measurements. As shown in Fig. We started with a single-point range measurement in order to characterize the precision and accuracy of the LiDAR system. A movable object covered with white paper under indoor light condition (200 lux) is illuminated by the collimated laser. The laser powered with 1 mW average power runs at a repetition frequency of 5 MHz, corresponding to an unambiguous detected range of 30 m. The measurement was conducted from 0 to 25 m with a step of 0.5 m. A commercial rangefinder was used to measure the ground truth. In this measurement, the time-to-digital converter (TDC) in the FPGA was configured with the resolution of 37.5 ps. To obtain better ambient light suppression, we set a 250 mV threshold voltage to only count multi-photon events. We acquired a large set of events and organized them in histograms, with an exposure time of around 5 seconds. For each distance, 10 measurements were implemented, processed and then averaged to find the estimated distance value. The histogram processing is based on the center-of-mass (CoM) method. Here, we define the accuracy as the difference between the averaged distance value from 10 measurements to the ground truth, while the precision is the standard deviation of the measurement As shown in the photographs of Fig. The results of the measurement with both intensity and depths are shown in Fig. In this work, we have reported the design, experimental characterization and LiDAR application of the first analog SiPM in a 55 nm BCD process. The SiPM can be extended to a larger arrays by integrating more SPAD microcells. Furthermore, the results will enable the development of a costeffective LiDAR system-on-chip (SoC) by integrating frontend circuits, TCSPC module and other analog or digital blocks in the advanced technology. The current results demonstrate the suitability of the approach based on this a-SiPM. 