We systematically investigate the topological properties of spin polarized Rydberg-dressed fermionic atoms loaded in a bilayer optical lattice. Through tuning the Rydberg coupling strength and the inter-layer tunneling amplitude, we identify different types of topological superfluid states generated from the inter-layer pairing and relative gauge phase modulation of the couples 2D p-wave superfluids. These phases includes gapped/gapless with/without time reversal symmetry. One of the most interesting states is a gapless paired topological superfluid with both the time-reversal symmetry and particle-hole symmetry. This state is equivalent to a topological Kondo lattice model with the spin-orbit coupling, an in-plane magnetic field, and an additional particle-hole symmetry [1]. The flexibility of experimental manipulation in such Rydberg-dressed ferminoic systems therefore becomes a promising system for realizing interesting topological superfluids. A Majorana fermion is defined to be its own antiparticle To stabilize interesting phases (nematic states, classical crystals, or quantum solids) in condensed matter systems, the interactions are required to be strong enough to compete with the Fermi energy. One have to search and synthesize strongly correlated materials, which is a difficult task. On the other hand, the Rydberg atoms provide a better playground for investigating interesting phases from its highly tunability. E.g., the length scale and strength of the effective inter-atom interaction can be manipulated easily by external fields x and ∆ σ y ) as well as the inter-layer pairing (∆ z ) at the same time (here σ =↑, ↓ stands for the upper/lower layer index). Similar to the emergent gapless phases induced by inversion symmetry breaking in three dimensions The manuscript is organized as follows: In Sec. II we briefly describe the physical system of Rydberg atoms in 2D bilayer optical lattice. We derive the effective mean-field Hamiltonian and discuss their symmetry properties. In Sec. III we explain how to detect the topological properties using entanglement spectrum/entropy as well as finite size calculation. We then show our calculation results for the two types of phases in Sec. IV A and Sec. IV B. We then provide further discussion in Sec. V and conclude our paper in Sec. VI. In Appendix A, we explicitly calculate the single-particle energy spectra of mean-field Hamiltonian. We consider a single-species Fermi gas, where each atom is weakly coupled to its Rydberg excited state by an off-resonant two photon transition via an intermediate state. In the far detuning and weak coupling limit, we can apply the standard perturbation and adiabatic approximation c , and R c ≡ (C 6 /2|∆|) 1/6 are the interaction strength and the averaged soft-core radius (Rydberg blockade radius). C 6 is the averaged van der Waals coefficient, which can be shown to be negative (U 0 < 0) for all orbital states when exciting 6 Li to a |nD state with n > 30 The full system Hamiltonian for spin polarized Rydberg Fermi gas in a 2D bilayer optical lattice can be expressed as follows in the real-space coordinates: where c † r (c r,σ ) is the creation (annihilation) operator of fermions for the layer index σ and the in-plane coordinate r = (i x , i y ). μ, t and t z are the chemical potential, the intralayer hopping amplitude, and the inter-layer hopping amplitude. V ⊥ (r -r ) and V (r -r ) are the interlayer and intralayer interaction, respectively. In order to simplify the system for a concrete discussion and comparison, below we will consider the situation when the Rydberg blockade radius, R c , is tuned to be close to the inplane lattice spacing, a, and the interlayer distance, d, so that only the nearest neighboring attractive interaction are considered throughout this paper. Extension to longer range interaction could be also carried out easily, but we believe all the quantitative results we discuss below will not change. By considering the nearest-neighboring-site interaction only, we could simply obtain the following mean-field Hamil-tonian by introducing the nearest neighboring coupling: Here ∆ z is the gap function between the upper (↑) and bottom layer (↓) on site r, and ∆ σ x(y) are the gap function between the nearest-neighboring sites for σ =↑, ↓ layers. More precisely, we have Here the four phases α ↑,↓ and φ ↑,↓ are all arbitrary by fixing the gauge phase of the inter-layer pairing, ∆ z ≡ ∆ s . We have set ∆ p and ∆ s are both real and positive. The phase difference between ∆ σ x and ∆ σ y makes the system different from the ordinary p x ± ip y pairing system, and may generate interesting topological properties as we will study later. Throughout this paper, we set ∆ z = ∆ s to be real and positive in order to fix the overall gauge phase. The schematic figure for the system investigated in this paper: Rydberg-dressing spin-polarized fermions are loaded into a bilayer system with an in-plane square optical lattice. The Rydbergdressing amplitude and radius, Rc, could be manipulated in a wide range of laser detuning and Rabi coupling strength. Herre we just consider the case when Rc is similar to the in-plane lattice constant (a) and inter-layer spacing (d), so that only the nearest neighbouring interaction, V , and the inter-layer on-site interaction, V ⊥ , are included in the Hamiltonian for simplicity. (b) The torus generated by the periodic boundary condition in both x and y direction of the bilayer system. When we consider the edge mode with an open boundary condition in x axis, we cut the torus by keeping periodic boundary condition in the y direction. As a result, the system becomes equivalent to two co-centered "finite cylinders" as shown in (c). After introducing the mean-field pairing and the Fourier transform along the y direction, Hamiltonian becomes equivalent to a 4leg ladder with the index ±ky and σ =↑ / ↓, which could then be diagoanlized easily to get the full energy spectrum as well as the edge mode at the boundary of the x axis. See the text for more details. We analyze the mean-field Hamiltonian both for the periodic boundary condition and the open boundary condition. The former provides the band structure properties in the bulk while the later reveals the existence of possible topological protected boundary states. To investigate the bulk properties with the periodic boundary condition, we transform the field operators as c r,σ = 1 N k c k,σ e irk with r = (i x , i y ), k = (k x , k y ) and N being the total number of lattice sites in the 2D plane. The resulting Hamiltonian can be expressed to be (after neglecting a constant term) and the Nambu spinor T . Here we have defined and where σ 0 = I and σ α (α = x, y, z) are Pauli matrices. The general form of the effective magnetic field, d k , can be very complicated. Here we show three typical d k that we will discuss in details in the following sections: One should notice that the above Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) Hamiltonian is similar to the noncentrosymmetric superconductors Now we examine the symmetry class of the Hamiltonian by considering the time-reversal symmetry (T ), and the particlehole symmetry (P), chiral symmetry (C) in the original BdG Hamiltonian. They are respectively defined as, Within the spinor representation, the first three symmetry operations could be also expressed by Pauli matrix in the isospin basis as following: We note that unlike the chiral superconductor with p x + ip y pairing which breaks the time-reversal symmetry, the bilayer system we study here provides a possibility of the timereversal symmetric state. More precisely, we find that for t z = 0, φ ↑ = -φ ↓ and α ↑ = π + α ↓ , the mean-field Hamiltonian is time-reversal invariant, T H(k)T † = H * (-k). In other words, the chiral directions of the two superfluids in the upper and lower layers are opposite, making the time-reversal symmetry restored if reversing the parity in the z axis. Furthermore, we show that after a unitary transformation, the time-reversal symmetric case with t z = 0, φ ↑ = φ ↓ = 0, α ↑ = 0, and α ↓ = π could be exactly mapped onto a topological Kondo lattice model with spin-orbital coupling, an external magnetic field, and an additional particle-hole symmetry In the rest of this paper, we always consider the cases when ∆ s and ∆ p are finite but with different combination of t z , α ↑/↓ and φ ↑/↓ . More precisely, we consider the following 2 × 2 × 2 = 12 representative system parameters with 2 values of t z (= 0 or = 0), 2 values of (α ↑ , α ↓ ) (= (0, 0) or = (0, π)), and 3 values of (φ ↑ , φ ↓ ) (= (0, 0), = (π/2, π/2) or = (0, π)). Moreover, we observe several gapless phases in our mean-field Hamiltonian. In particular, we only show two cases describing gapless phases with two values of t z (= 0 or = 0) by fixed (φ ↑ , φ ↓ ) = (0, 0) and (α ↑ , α ↓ ) = (0, π). Topological quantum numbers are known to play a important role in characterizing the topological order phases. To compute the topological invariant that distinguishes these phases, we may consider a our 2D superconductor model described by a Hamiltonian H(k) in momentum space. By diagonalize H(k)|ψ n (k) = ε n (k)|ψ n (k) , we can obtain a collection of bands ε n (k) and eigenstates ψ n (k) for integer n The Chern number assigned to the n-th band based on Berry connection is defined by Besides of the Chern number, a topological phase can be also characterized by the quantum entanglement between the subsystem and the environment For 1D Kitaev model, λ α is given by the eigenvalues of the block Green's function matrix, i.e., G i,j ≡ c i c † j with the site indices i and j inside the subsystem A. In Ref. It has been known that the entanglement spectrum λ α of the subsystem A can be obtained by diagonalizing the entire Green's function matrix G r1,σ1,r2,σ2 After applying periodic boundary condition in one direction (say y) only, we could choose interface along the x-direction and the entire Green's function matrix of wave number k y is given by where L x is the number sites in the x-direction and k x , k x takes values in the first Brillouin zone. G(k x , k y ) σ1,σ2 is a 4 × 4 matrix determined by the eigenvectors of mean-field Hamiltonian Eq. 4. We numerically diagonalize the block's Green's function for the subsystem A with a finite size, e.g., L A = 20 and L = 40 as shown in Fig. Besides the calculation of entanglement spectrum of a bulk, we also investigate the edge state properties for the bilayer system numerically. According to the bulk-edge correspondence, a nontrivial bulk topological phase should imply the existence of edge states inside the gap. In order to study these edges states more clearly in the 2D systems, we first do Fourier transform along a direction parallel to the edge to get a family of 1D Hamiltonians, which are parametrized by the wave number along the edge. More precisely, for example, we can make Fourier transform along the y-direction first for the field operator, c x,y,σ = 1 √ Ly ky e iyky c x,ky,σ with L y being the lattice size along the y direction (periodic boundary condition). An effective BdG Hamiltonian can then be easily derived to be H BdG = ky H ky , where -tc † x,ky,σ c x+1,ky,σ + e iφσ ∆ p c † x,ky,σ c † x+1,-ky,σ +ie iασ e iφσ ∆ p e iky c † x,ky,σ c † x,-ky,σ + h.c. One can see that is a four-leg ladder system for a given momentum k y . We could then apply a finite size exact diagonalization in the xdirection, making the original 2D system mapped to an effective 1D 4-leg ladder system. Since the system has two boundary edges at x = 1 and x = L x , we could then solve the eigenmode spectrum of this finite size system as a function of the momentum k y numerically. In general, a phase transition between different phases occur only when the energy gap of the bulk spectrum closes. Thus, to identify parameter regions for which different (topological phases) are realized, we would first examine the bulk spectrum of the system. To obtain the bulk spectrum, we would adopt periodic boundary condition (PBC) to form bulk Hamiltonian and study the phase boundary. On the other hand, from the bulk-edge correspondence, a nontrivial bulk topological number implies the existence of gapless edge states. To investigate edge states, we would consider the open boundary condition along one direction to form a family of 1D Hamiltonians parametrized by wave number k. For example, by solving numerically the energy spectrum as a function of the momentum k y in the y direction, we could study edge states near the interface. By tuning parameters of the Hamiltonian, the phase transition will occur. We may classify these phases into two types according to their energy gap of the bulk spectrum and topological order: Type I: topological order phase with symmetry P by fixed t z = 0 and (φ ↑ , φ ↓ ) = (0, π), (α ↑ , α ↓ ) = (0, π) . Type II: topological order phase with symmetries, P, T , C by fixed t z = 0 and (φ ↑ , φ ↓ ) = (0, 0), (α ↑ , α ↓ ) = (0, π) As a check and benchmark, we first calculate the the energy eigenvalues of the bulk Hamiltonian for such a anti-symmetric case with (φ ↑ , φ ↓ ) = (0, π) and (α ↑ , α ↓ ) = (0, π). As explained above, depending on the parameter t z /t and |∆ s |/t, the corresponding phase will make a transition to either topological order phase or trivial phase. In the following, we would show the details for energy spectra and entanglement spectra. A simple evaluation shows that the eigenvalues of matrix in Eq. ( We discuss two cases: |∆ s |/t = 0 ( see Fig. In this model, the gap of the system for |∆ s |/t = 0 closes only when the following condition is satisfied: Therefore, the gap closes at k y = 0 or k y = π. From a straightforward calculation, it is found that this condition is equivalent to (-μ/t∓2) 2 +4-2(-μ/t∓2) cos k x = (t z /t) 2 , where "-" term corresponds to k y = 0, "+" term corresponds to k y = π, and k x is related to the lattice size. This is, the gap of the system closes at k which is determined by Hamiltonian parameters. First, we consider the parameters with |∆ s |/t = 0 and t z /t = 0, then the Hamiltonian reduces to a bilayer chiral p-wave superconductor without interlayer interaction. It can be reduced to 2d chiral p-wave superconductor model. There are three phases separated by three quantum critical points at μ/t = 0, ±4, which are labeled by the Chern number (Ch) as Ch= 0 (|μ/t| > 4), Ch= -1 (-4 < μ/t < 0), and Ch= 1 (0 < μ/t < 4). Since in the torus geometry, there are two entangling boundaries that will lead to an additional twofold degeneracy together with the twofold degeneracy from the bilayer of the system in the entanglement spectrum. The number of the λ α = 1/2 in the entanglement spectrum is four times the Chern number, N 1/2 = 4|Ch|. I,e, N 1/2 = 4 when the Chern number is unity (Ch= ±1). Our numerical results agree with the analytic result of the Chern number, confirming the topological properties in our current system. There are two phases which are labeled by by N 1/2 as N 1/2 = 4 (topological phase) and N 1/2 = 0 (trivial phase). We shall now look more carefully into the edge states. We impose the periodic boundary condition in the x direction. Fourier transforming along the x direction and obtain a family of 1D Hamiltonians parametrized by k x . Suppose that the system has two edges at y = 1 and y = L. By solving numerically the energy spectrum as a function of the momentum k x in the y direction, we then study edge states. Figs. Next, we consider the case |∆ s |/t = 1. In Fig. x , k * y ) are determined by Eq. ( We then impose the periodic boundary condition in the both x direction and y direction. The energy spectra with open boundary condition as a function of momentum are shown in Fig. x . These results are consistent with the bulk-edge correspondence for the topological gapless phases We consider the fixed parameters with (φ ↑ , φ ↓ ) = (0, 0), (α ↑ , α ↓ ) = (0, π) at t z /t = 0. In this case, the meanfeild Hamiltonian has parity and time reversal symmetry. In particular, this model can be transformed to Kondo lattice model in some special case First, it is easy to check that for such a anti-symmetric case with fixed t z /t = 0, the energy dispersion for this system are as expected. Again, the energy gap of the system closes only when the following condition is satisfied: It is found that this condition is equivalent to The gap closing points are shown in Fig. However, in this case, we do not find the Majorana zero modes at each end in gapless region (see Figs. Nevertheless, we can directly calculate the topological charge which is given by the winding number that corresponds to eigenstate of effective Hamiltonian of a gapless point. To compute the effective Hamiltonian, We first expand the Hamiltonian around the gapless points (k 0 x , k 0 y ) up to linear terms, i.e. k = k 0 + q, so that H(k) ∼ H 0 (k 0 ) + H 1 (q), where and Since the analytic solutions of H 0 are not generally available, we first numerically calculate its two eigenvectors, |v 1 and |v 2 , with zero eigenenergy at E k = ±0. Here, we just consider gapless points (see Fig. Here v x (k 0 ) and v y (k 0 ) are two "velocity functions" of the gapless point. Note that σ x/y are Pauli matrix expressed in another basis, which are rotated from {|v 1 , |v 2 }, in order to simplify the notation to the conventional Wyel point form in the 2D system. Note that, within this new basis, the chiral symmetry is given by σ z , i.e. σ z H eff (q)σ z = -H eff (q). As a result, we can further rescale the effective Hamiltonian and express it into polar coordinate: where E 1 (q) ≡ v x (k 0 ) 2 q 2 x + v y (k 0 ) 2 q 2 y and θ q ≡ tan -1 vy(k 0 )qy vx(k 0 )qx . The corresponding winding number could then be calculated to be The topological charge of the gapless points at point (ii) (see Fig. In the literature, there have been several proposals to measure Majorana modes. In condensed matter systems, the chiral Majorana fermions in two dimensions can be measured from the quantized thermal Hall conductivity However, in the gapless topological superfluid proposed here, the Majorana zero modes appear when the relative gauge phases between the inter-layer s-wave pairing and the intralayer p-wave pairing order parameters are changed from their conventional value, (α ↑ , α ↓ , φ ↑ , φ ↓ ) = (0, 0, 0, 0). According to Table Since such kind of many-bidy gauge phase may not be easily manipulated, it becomes important to how to measure such spontaneously emergent gauge phase in the present experiment. According to the calculated positions of the associated gapless points, see Fig. It is known that the time-of-flight image for a free expansion time t is obtained by integrating over the z direction, i.e., n T oF (x, y) ∝ ∞ -∞ dz n mr/ht w0 mr ht 2 G|c † j,σ c j ,σ |G e i(jx-j x )kxa e i(jy-j y )kya ×e i(σ-σ )kzd In order to investigate results of these two different gauge phases more specifically, in (b1) and (b2) we further show their integrated density distribution both in the x and y directions for comparison. We could see that in the regime of gapless topological phase (b2) (same as the case in Fig. In this paper, we propose that a topological state can be prepared and observed in a paired 2D p-wave superfluids, where spin polarized fermionic atoms are loaded in a bilayer optical lattice with a weak coupling to Rydberg excited states The (a1) and (a2) are the calculated ToF images for two different gauge phases, (α ↑ , α ↓ , φ ↑ , φ ↓ ) = (0, 0, 0, 0) and (α ↑ , α ↓ , φ ↑ , φ ↓ ) = (0, π, 0, π). (b1) and (b2) are the integrated density distribution, nT oF (x, y), for (a1) and (a2) respectively. Both direction in x and y direction are shown together for comparison. associated quantum degenerate Majorana zeros modes appear in the edge, confirmed by the zero energy mode and entanglement spectrum numerics. Our work paves the way for future investigation of the many-body physics with non-Abelian statistics under time-reversal symmetry.