In this article, we report single crystal growth of superconducting binary compound Pb2Pd. The crystal is well characterized through X-Ray Diffraction (XRD), Selected Area electron diffraction (SAED), Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM), Field emission Scanning electron Microscopy (FESEM) and X-Ray Photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). The bulk superconducting nature of the synthesized crystal is determined through AC susceptibility and magneto-heat capacity measurements. The specific heat jump at superconducting transition suggests Pb2Pd to be a moderately coupled s-wave superconductor. The topological non-trivial character of Pb2Pd is evidenced through bulk electronic band structure and Z2 invariants, which are calculated under the protocols of Density Functional Theory (DFT). Surface states spectrum of Pb2Pd is also studied, which further claims Pb2Pd to have topological non-trivial band structure. The discovery of topological insulators (TIs) has renewed the field of quantum condensed matter. Since then, a flurry of research has been carried out on the materials with symmetry protected topological states, which are characterized by nontrivial topological invariants viz. Z2, Z4 and the Chern numbers TSMs with bulk superconducting properties are emerged as the materials of interest as these are regarded as the possible candidates to realize topological superconductivity Topological superconductors are considered as the key materials to host Majorana fermions NbC In this article, we report the synthesis of Pb2Pd single crystal using solid state reaction route, this sample is well characterized through various characterization techniques. Bulk superconductivity is the key issue for superconducting topological materials, and the same with Tc onset at 2.86K is confirmed in the synthesized Pb2Pd crystal through AC susceptibility and magneto-heat capacity measurements. This is the first report showing magneto-heat capacity measurements for Pb2Pd crystal. Further, the topological properties are studied through DFT calculations and theoretical simulation of topological invariants. The Z2 invariants of Pb2Pd shows the presence of strong topology, which is further verified by studying the surface state spectrum. It is worth mentioning here that this is the first report on such topological invariants for Pb2Pd. Solid state reaction route is used to synthesize the single crystalline sample of Pb2Pd. 4N pure powders of Pb and Pd were mixed in 2:1. The mixture was made homogenous by grinding it inside MBraun Glove Box filled with Argon gas. This homogenous mixture was then palletized and vacuum encapsulated in quartz ampoule under the pressure of 5 × 10 -5 mbar. This ampoule was heated to 900°C at 120°C/h for 24 hours. At this higher temperature Pb itself acts as flux and helps Pd to melt, despite of its higher melting point. The hold time of 24 hours at 900°C is utilized in melting the sample and to homogenize the melt. Then the sample is slowly cooled to 460°C at 2°C/h and then kept at this temperature for 24 hours. After that, the sample is quenched at 460°C in water. The step of quenching at 460°C is very crucial as the phase formation temperature of Pb2Pd and PbPd is very close and the both phases have simultaneous existence at around 445°C To study and understand the topological properties of synthesized Pb2Pd crystal, the first principle simulations have been carried out and Z2-invariants are also calculated to categorize the topology present in the system. For this, Density Functional Theory (DFT) based on first principle calculations are executed in QUANTUM ESPRESSO Stacking of atomic planes in (002) plane direction as revealed by TEM image, suggests that the crystal of Pb2Pd is grown in (00l) direction, it is also consistent with previous report To get more insight about crystalline nature of synthesized Pb2Pd, surface morphology is visualized through FESEM image. viz. Pb 4f5/2 and Pb 4f7/2. These peaks occurred due to core levels of Pb 2+ cations and the corresponding binding energies are found to be 138.55eV and 143.42eV for Pb 4f7/2 and Pb 4f5/2 respectively. These values are shifted from the binding energy values for metallic Pb Generally, AC susceptibility measurements give the hint about the granularity of the sample. For a granular superconductor, Tc tends to shift to lower temperature with increasing the amplitude of the AC field. This effect occurs due to the intergranular coupling of superconductors. The shift of Tc with respect to the change in AC field amplitude determines the strength of intergranular coupling Demagnetization factor depends on the shape of the sample, and for a perfectly cylindrical sample its value is accounted to be 1. Here due to crystalline nature of the sample, measurements have been carried out on a mechanically cleaved rectangular flake. For a rectangular superconducting sample, demagnetization factor can be calculated by the following formula as suggested in ref. Where a and b are dimensions of the sample in perpendicular to applied field and parallel to the applied field, and these are 3.1mm and 0.21mm respectively. The other parameter q is shape dependent parameter and for a rectangular sample it is determined by the following formula The value of q is found to be 0.866 and the corresponding value of demagnetization factor is found to be N=0.927. In the above equation the first term nT represents electronic contribution to heat capacity and the second term βnT 3 phonon contribution to heat capacity. The coefficient associated with these terms can be determined by linearly fitting the C/T vs T 2 plot with equation (3). The Fig. Here, kB is Boltzmann constant. The obtained value of Dc(EF) is 2.35 states eV -1 f.u. -1 . The coefficient associated with phonon contribution term i.e., βn is related to Debye temperature with the following formula Here R=8.314 J mol -1 K -2 , n=3 (for Pb2Pd). The obtained value of θD is 122 ± 1K. Now the values of θD and Tc are used to determine the electron phonon coupling constant λe-ph using the McMillan formula Here, the value of μ * is taken to be 0.13 as taken in ref. Pb2Pb to be a bulk superconductor with conventional s-wave pairing. The obtained value of α from the fitted plot is 5.68, which is also higher than the BCS value for weakly coupled superconductors. The corresponding value of superconductivity energy gap at absolute zero (0) is found to be 0.70meV. All above discussed parameters suggest that synthesized Pb2Pd single crystal is a moderately coupled superconductor with conventional s-wave pairing; these results are in agreement with the previous report on the same compound Fig. 0Oe, 20Oe, 30Oe and 50Oe. In this plot, C/T is plotted against T to visualize the heat capacity jump more clearly. These measurements give the value of Tc onset to be 2.86K, 2.75K, 2.66K and 2.40K at 0Oe, 20Oe, 30Oe and 50Oe respectively. It can be clearly seen that the Tc is decreasing with increasing field. Critical field is plotted against the temperature and fitted with the following equation where Tc is taken to be 2.86K. The fitted plot is shown in inset of Fig. here, C and n are taken in per unit volume. The molar volume of Pb2Pd is found to be 4.14×10 -5 m 3 /mole and the magnitude of heat capacity jump, △C γ n T c is taken to be 1.83. The obtained value of Hc(0) is found to be 249Oe, which is nearly equal to 260Oe, which is obtained from the fitted plot. Moreover, the Cel is determined at the various applied fields. Cel/T is plotted against T and is shown in Fig. For this, specific heat in superconducting state is proportional to vortex density and linearly depends on magnetic field giving (H) ∝ H In the present case, (H) is found to have a linear relationship with the applied field as shown in inset of Fig. To determine topological non-trivial character of synthesized Pb2Pd crystal, bulk electronic band structure and DOS are calculated using DFT protocols. The band structure calculation is performed using the cell parameters obtained from the Rietveld refinement. Both the SOC and without SOC protocols are executed in calculations as these are applied in Quantum Espresso with Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof (PBE) exchange-correlation functional m e The  parameter is given as the ratio of superconductivity characteristic lengths viz. London penetration depth i.e. (0) and BCS coherence length (0), and represented as κ = λ(0) ξ(0) . The London penetration depth is calculated by using the relation , and its value is found to be 27.36nm. (0) is calculated by using the relation ξ(0) = 0.18ħ 2 k F k B T c m * . Here kF is Fermi wave vector and is calculated by considering a spherical Fermi surface. For spherical Fermi surface, Fermi wave vector is given by kF=(3n 2 ) 1/3 , where n is carrier concentration. Pb2Pd provides 8 electrons per unit cell, so total electron density can be calculated by determining the ratio of number of electrons per unit cell and total volume of a unit cell i.e. n=8/V, where V=275.068Å 3 . The value of n is found to be 2.90×10 28 m -3 , and the corresponding value of kF is found to be 0.95 Å -1 . This value of Fermi wave vector is used to calculate the BCS coherence length, which is found to be 230.98nm.  parameter is calculated by taking the ratio of both the characteristics lengths and it is found to be 0.12, which is much less than 1/√2, the cut off value for type-II superconductivity. Our results shows that Pb2Pd is a type-I superconductor, which is in agreement with muon spin rotation (-SR) measurements in ref. which is a catalogue of all possible topological materials. Further, we calculated the surface state spectrum using the iterative Green's function implemented in Wannier Tools. The surface card is set to be plane (011), and the calculation was done by taking 101 slices of one reciprocal vector. The plane (011) is shown in figure The same Z2 index is reported for Bi2Te3, which is considered as a strong topological material superconductivity in a superconducting sample. Heat capacity measurements are carried out on synthesized Pb2Pd crystals at different magnetic fields viz. 0Oe, 20Oe, 30Oe and 50Oe.