With the excitation and demagnetization of a magnet for magnetic resonance imaging in mind, we theoretically and numerically investigated electromagnetic coupling-especially its dependence on the round-core radius R-of multi-filament helically wound superconducting tapes under steady-state conditions in a constantly ramped magnetic field. We found that even in a rapidly ramped magnetic field, the electromagnetic coupling can be suppressed by reducing R to close to the tape width. We also clarified that the coupling sweep rate at which the electromagnetic coupling starts scales as R -2 , showing that the dependence on R reflects the penetration of magnetic flux from the edges of the tape. Even when the round core is as narrow as the tape width, the behavior is considered to be similar to the electromagnetic response of a flat tape rather than that of a tubular wire. C ORC (Conductor on Round Core) wire, which comprises a rare-earth barium copper oxide YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7-δ coated conductor on a round core Y. Higashi and Y. Mawatari are with National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST), Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8568, Japan (e-mail: y.higashi@aist.go.jp). Manuscript received mmmm dd, yyyy; revised mmmm dd, yyyy. Regarding theoretical studies, based on the thin-sheet approximation using the current vector potential, EM analyses have been performed to investigate the magnetization loss and EM coupling in a sinusoidally oscillating applied field Despite the aforementioned studies, how the EM coupling depends on the core radius remains unclear and is yet to be investigated systematically. Clarifying the conditions for the EM coupling would give valuable information about how fast an applied field can be swept given the practical parameters of the CORC cable or wire. As opposed to previous theoretical studies In the present study, we use numerical simulations to investigate the magnetization loss and EM coupling of a multifilament helical SC tape in an applied magnetic field with a high sweep rate of β = 300 mT/s, which is two orders of magnitude higher than a typical sweep rate of an MRI magnet; in particular, we focus on the dependence on the core radius. We assume, for example, the fast demagnetization of an MRI magnet during an emergency stop. SUPERCONDUCTING TAPE We examine numerically the model of a four-filament helical SC tape with conductors of finite normal resistivity ρ n embedded in slots between the filaments. We assume that the coupling current between the SC filaments flows uniformly through the thermal stabilizing layer. The stabilizer information (e.g., conductivity, thickness, and effective length responsible for the transverse conductance) can be incorporated via the transverse conductivity (resistivity) σ n = 1/ρ n as discussed in Section III, thereby reducing a three-dimensional model to a two-dimensional model where k = 2π/L p and L p is the pitch length of the helical conductor. The axial coordinates (ξ, ζ) are orthogonal on the tape surface. We consider the helical SC tape surface with a full conductor pitch L p spanned by -w 0 /2 ≤ ξ ≤ w 0 /2 and -L tape /2 ≤ ζ ≤ L tape /2, with L tape = L p 1 + (kR) 2 being the tape length (see Figs. Because an MRI magnet operates in a magnetic field as high as a few teslas, we may assume that the parts of the SC tape that are perpendicular to the applied field are fully penetrated by magnetic flux vortices. For a concrete estimate, in a multi-filament helical tape, the full penetration field can be estimated using the formula for a flat tape, namely, , where μ 0 is the magnetic permeability of a vacuum and J c is the critical current density. Meanwhile, in the parts of the tape that are parallel to the applied field, the perpendicular field component is small and does not reach B p , and the loss generated in such parts is negligibly small. In the fully penetrated state, the spatial profile of the magnetic field on the SC tape does not change, being kept in the steady state, as long as we disregard the magnetic field and its angle dependence of J c ; that is, J c is constant. The approximation of constant J c is effective for evaluating the power loss At high fields, magnetization losses dominate transport losses In previous work, by adopting the thin-sheet approximation that takes account of only the perpendicular field component, we derived the steady-state Faraday-Maxwell equation for a constantly swept applied magnetic field B a = βt x with rate β = dB a /dt where g(ξ, ζ) a scalar function defined on the helical SC tape surface. The contour lines of g(ξ, ζ) describe the current streamlines on the helical tape surface (see Fig. To model a multi-filament helical SC tape, we adopt the SC nonlinear resistivity ρ sc and the transverse linear one ρ n for the filaments and slots, respectively, namely, ρ n for resistive slots, (3) which is defined via the electric field E-current density J characteristic of E = ρJ . Herein, we disregard the dependence of J c on the the magnetic field and its angle. We set J c = 5 × 10 10 A/m 2 , E c = 1 μV/cm for the electric field, and n = 15 in the power of the SC nonlinear resistivity. We incorporate the effect of a copper thermal stabilizer on the multi-filament helical SC tape through ρ n which yields ρ n ∼ 1 × 10 -9 Ωm, and we use this value throughout the paper. To obtain the solution for g(ξ, ζ), we solve Eq. ( g( , )/(J c w 1 /2) In Fig. The power dissipated on the tape surface per unit length is given by Fig. For an effective tape width w, by taking the thin-filament limit of w/R → 0, we obtain the following analytical formula for the loss power per unit length where B(p, q) = 2 π/2 0 dθ cos 2p-1 θ sin 2q-1 θ is the beta function with positive real numbers p and q. For R/w 0 100, the long L tape means that the SC resistance R || sc becomes large relative to the transverse resistance tape . Therefore, the coupling current flows from the SC filaments to the resistive slots, resulting in the EM coupling of the SC filaments. In this case, we have w ≈ w 0 , and the analytical values of P filam (β, w 0 )/β agree well with the numerical ones (dotted line in Fig. Meanwhile, for R/w 0 1, R || sc remains small relative to R n . Thus, no EM coupling occurs, and we have w ≈ w 1 . The analytical values given by 4P filam (β, w 1 )/β agree well with the numerical ones (dashed line in Fig. Fig. For large β, w 0 is viewed as being the effective tape width because of the EM coupling. Thus, in the case of R/w 0 = 100, the loss power at β = 1000 mT/s shows quantitatively good agreement with P filam (β, w 0 )/β (dotted line in Fig. R/w 0 = 100 R/w 0 = 10 R/w 0 = 1 analytic, P filam (β,w 0 )/β analytic, 4P filam (β,w 1 )/β Fig. We examine the mechanism for EM coupling in a multifilament helical tape in the similar way as in Ref. Herein, the SC filament resistance in the longitudinal (ζ) direction can be evaluated as R || sc = ρ sc (L tape /2)/w 1 d 0 . For a nearly flat tape with a thick round core with R/w 0 1, the length scale at which magnetic flux vortices enter a superconductor can be viewed as being the filament width w 1 , and therefore the electric field in the superconductor is evaluated as ∼ βw 1 (e.g., Ref. Meanwhile, in the case of a nearly tubular wire with a thin round core (R/w 0 ∼ 1), the characteristic length scale of the flux motion can be viewed as being the core radius R, and therefore the electric field is evaluated as ∼ βR, leading to ρ sc ∼ βR/J c . Therefore, the coupling sweep rate in the case of R/w 0 ∼ 1 is estimated as In Fig. The measurement of ac losses for a fixed low amplitude of a sinusoidally oscillating applied magnetic field with sweeping a frequency f as in Refs. where μ 0 the vacuum permeability and the magnetic field on the SC tape is evaluated as B ∼ μ 0 J c d 0 /π based on the Bean model. The estimation (15) can be obtained via the same way as in Ref. We consider that SC tapes are subjected to an applied magnetic field as high as a few tesla, which is far above a full flux penetration field B p . For concreteness, B p for striated helical tapes is approximately estimated via the flat tape formula for the filament width w 1 ; B p = (μ 0 J c d 0 /π)[1 + ln(w 1 /d 0 )] ≈ 0.260 T Regarding the excitation and demagnetization of an MRI magnet, we simulated numerically the magnetization loss of a multi-filament helical SC tape in the steady state in a constantly ramped magnetic field. Even in a rapidly ramped field with a rate of β = 300 mT/s, no EM coupling of the SC filaments was seen for R/w 0 ∼ 1 because of the short pitch length. However, for R 10w 0 , the SC filaments were coupled electrically, showing the striation to be ineffective. The coupling sweep rate scaled as R -2 for R/w 0 1, reflecting the penetration of magnetic flux from the tape edges. This behavior is considered to be similar to the EM response of a flat tape rather than that of a tubular wire, even when the round core is as narrow as the tape width, which is nearly a tubular wire.