Internal optical forces emerging from plasmonic interactions in gold nanodisc, nanocube and nanobar dimers were studied by finite element method. A direct correlation between the electricfield enhancement and optical forces was found by observing largest magnitude of optical forces in nanocube dimers. Moreover, further amplification of optical forces was achieved by employing optical power of the excitation source. The strength of optical forces was observed to be governed by the magnitude of polarisation density on the nanoparticles, which can be varied by modifying the nanoparticle geometry and source wavelength. This study allows us to recognise that nanoparticle geometry along with the inter-dimer distance are the most prominent design considerations for optimising optical forces in plasmonic dimers. The findings facilitate the realisation of all optical modulation in a plasmomechanical nanopillar system, which has promising applications in ultrasensitive nanomechanical sensing and building reconfigurable metamaterials. The property of noble metal nanostructures to exhibit surface plasmon resonance, the collective oscillation of the electron cloud on the metal surface in response to the oscillating electric field of the incoming light, avails them novel applications for sensing and detection at the nanoscale. The optical properties of metal nanoparticles Optical forces realised in MNPs are usually very small in magnitude to realise any motion in bulk systems. However, the opto-mechanical force balance at the nanoscale allows unique opportunities for leveraging these forces to drive the mechanics in nanomechanical systems. The integration of optical properties of MNPs with the mechanical properties of nanomechanical resonators opens up new possibilities for optically designing and controlling the motion in these hybrid systems, while at the same time benefiting from the miniaturization for their effortless integration with next-generation technological platforms. So far the utilisation of optical forces has mostly been implemented in studies focused on the trapping of molecules and similar entities. However, their potential for independently driving motion at the nanoscale has not been well explored. Here, we present a numerical study for the case of a plasmomechanical nanopillarantenna system, which consists of a singly clamped nanopillar dimer structure with metal nanoparticle on top of it, and report on design considerations of metal nanoantennas with the aim of maximising electrostatic forces between nanoparticles in a dimer for prospects of optically driving motion in these systems. The proposed nano-pillar antenna configuration offers the possibility to combine the free-space adressability of metal nanoparticles with three dimensional motion of nano-pillar resonators, which avails this system advantages over other nanomechanical structures such as beams, bridges or strings. The actuation and transduction of nanomechanical resonators by optical forces generated in MNPs can be utilised for multiple purposes such as ultra-sensitive force and mass sensing applications The numerical study was performed using a commercial electromagnetism solver tool COMSOL Multiphysics (Version 5.5) For calculation of optical forces in plasmomechanical nanopillar system, light was perpendicularly incident on the gold nanoparticle dimer system with electric field aligned along the inter-particle axis of the dimer (see schematic in Fig. As shown in (Fig. The plane wave approximation condition often complies with a coherent source with an illumination area large enough to substantially exceeds the geometric scattering cross-sections of the scatterer under exposure. In real world scenarios however, we often come across light sources with a Gaussian profile and a limited spot size. To draw relevance of our studies with excitation source conditions used in experimental set-ups, we calculated optical forces in the nanodiscs using Gaussian beam excitation conditions. We observed striking similarities in the inter-particle gap dependent trends and the overall magnitude of optical forces obtained by Gaussian beam excitation with that of optical forces calculated using planewave excitation conditions (see Supplementary Note 5). An attractive force of 4.57 pN/(mW/μm 2 ) was calculated in 100 nm radius nanodisc dimer under Gaussian beam excitation as compared to 5 pN/(mW/μm 2 ) under plane wave excitation. The observations provide a reasonable validation for exploring plasmonic enhanced optical forces under plane wave excitation conditions. The next set of numerical studies on internal optical forces was performed on gold nanocube dimers as they display great potential for localisation and enhancement of the local electric field. Nanocube dimers of varying sizes and configuration have previously been explored for their ability to strongly confine the electromagnetic field around their corners and in the gap region between them To understand the effect of particle diameter on optical forces in nanocube dimers, we calculated optical forces in gold nanocube dimers by varying the edge-length, while keeping a constant separation distance of 10 nm. The excitation wavelength for each case was chosen corresponding to the plasmon resonance of the nanocube dimer. With increasing edge-length the optical forces between the nanocube dimers grow stronger in magnitude. An attractive force of 0.32 pN/(mW/μm 2 ) was present between nanocubes of 50 nm edge length, which further rises on increasing the edge-length to 150 nm as seen in (Fig. All cases of nanobar dimers were excited at their respective plasmon resonances. in Supplementary Note 8. The change in the optical forces vs wavelength (here now on referred to as spectral response of optical forces), in a nanocube dimer of 50 nm edge-length exhibits a broad peak which follows its scattering spectra. On increasing the edge-length of the nanocube dimer to 125 nm, the spectra of optical forces narrows down substantially, while the scattering spectra further broadens and exhibits additional peaks, as expected due to field retardation effects experienced for increase in the size of the nanoparticle. On the other hand the spectral response of the optical forces in nanodisc dimers follow the scattering spectra closely and does not substantially deviate from it, even for increasing radii of the nanodiscs. The distribution of electric charges on the nanostructure's surface could potentially be the prominent reason for such behaviour, which in case of a nanocube dimer is altered with variation in the edge-length. The increase in nanocube's edgelength leads to the asymmetric distribution of charge over the nanocube's surface, which causes narrowing of the spectral range of the attractive forces. To support our explanation, we studied the polarisation density for a nanocube dimer with an edge-length of 125 nm and 10 nm inter-particle separation to observe the charge distribution over it. The degree of polarisation for the dimer was seen to vary substantially within a small wavelength range around its plasmon resonance, along with asymmetric distribution of the electric charges across the facing sides of the nanocubes in the dimer configuration (see Supplementary Note 9). We extended our studies of optical forces to the case of a nanobar dimer to gain a better quantitative under-standing of the relation between charge distribution on the nanostructure's surface and the spectral response of the resulting optical forces. Studying optical forces for a nanobar configuration allows the possibility to vary the length of the nanostructure while keeping the edge length and thickness constant. Choosing this geometry therefore offers insights into changes in distribution of charge on the nanobar dimer by varying its aspect ratio. The side-length h and thickness t of the nanobar dimer was fixed to 50 nm at 10 nm inter-particle separation, while the length w was varied from 50 nm to 150 nm. As seen in (Fig. The irradiance from the excitation source plays an important role in enhancing light-matter interactions in plasmonic nanostructures and can strongly influence the optical forces resulting from it, given the emitted power levels do not exceed the damage threshold of the structures under illumination. Metal nanostructures, inparticular gold, can resist changes to its optical properties upon radiant exposure upto a few hundred milliwatts ing the beam spot to the order of the excitation wavelength offers the possibility for improving optical forces as a consequence of increase in the electromagnetic energy density. We resolved this constraint by employing the non-paraxial beam approximation condition for our Gaussian beam source, which has been introduced in recent version of COMSOL Multiphysics (Version 5.6), allowing 1:1 ratio of the beam spot to the excitation source wavelength. This formulation utilises the plane wave expansion methodology to generate a Gaussian beam with a tighter spot size (see Supplementary Note 11). The dimer nanoantennas were excited at their respective plasmon resonance conditions, which is 625 nm for the nanodisc and 670 nm for the nanobar. The deviation of the beam spot between the two cases of excitation was small enough to not externally influence the magnitude of the optical forces. The relation of the attractive optical forces with power levels of the excitation source for a nanodisc and nanocube dimer can be seen in (Fig. For estimation of maximum deflection in a nanopillar dimer, we compared nanodiscs and nanocube dimers of varying diameter at 10 nm inter-particle distance. Assuming silicon nanopillars with youngs modulus E = 150 GPa, we chose the length of pillars L = 10 μm for our study, since a high dynamic range of 85-90 has been recently reported for pillars around this height In summary, we presented detailed studies on optimising optical forces in gold nano-dimers. Our findings emphasize on the essence of electric-field enhancement for boosting optical forces arising from plasmonic interactions, and guide towards the design considerations which aid in maximising them. We observe the role of polarisability of gold nanoparticles as central in governing the nature of optical forces and show the strong influence of nanoparticle geometry on it. Using a novel numerical methodology, the influence of optical power was studied on the optical forces, signifying the role of the excitation source for amplifying their magnitude. Our results highlight the potential of optical forces realised in metal nanostructures for driving and reading out the motion of nanomechanical resonators, particularly when integrated with nanopillar structures. The all-optical actuation and transduction of nano-pillar antenna arrays has immense potential for ultra-sensitive mass and force sensing, optical modulation and reconfigurability, while offering low power demands and robust integration at the nanoscale. Scattering properties of a 100 nm diameter gold nanosphere were calculated in the visible region using dielectric function from Johnson and Christy 1 . In Fig. The calculated scattering spectra of nanodisc dimers of radius 50 nm, 75 nm and 100 nm are shown in Fig. Electric field enhancement was calculated for nanodiscs of radii 50 nm, 75 nm and 100 nm at gap distances of 50 nm and 10 nm respectively. Light was incident perpendicular to the plane of nanodiscs with electric field aligned along the inter-particle axis of the dimer. Fig. The polarisation maps of nanodisc dimers were obtained by calculating the charge induced on the nanodisc dimers upon optical excitation. Incident light was injected along z-axis with electric-field vector aligned along the x-axis. Fig. Gaussian beam excitation Fig. We observe the effect of the degree of sharpness of the edges of a nanocube dimer on its optical properties in Fig. Electric field (E-field) enhancement was calculated in nanocube dimer of edge length 100 nm and 150 nm at an inter-particle separation of 10 nm. The nanocube dimers were excited by plane wave travelling perpendicular to the plane of the cubes and the orientation of the electric field was kept along the inter-particle axis of the nanocubes for plasmonic coupling between the nanocubes. Fig. Fig. The relation of optical forces with wavelength was studied in nanodiscs, nanocubes and nanobars at an inter-particle distance of 10 nm. The scattering properties of the respective geometries were plotted to observe the correlation between the optical properties and the internal plasmonic forces present in them. The optical force spectra was fitted 1:1 in magnitude to the scattering spectra for gaining better visibility into the wavelength dependent trends exhibited by the optical forces compared to the scattering properties for each dimer case. As we can see in Fig. The correlation of polarisation density with electric field enhancement was studied in nanocube dimer with 125 nm edge-length and 10 nm inter-particle spacing. Incident light was injected along z-axis with electric-field vector aligned along the inter-particle axis of the cube dimer, i.e x-axis. Fig. the excitation wavelength is red-shifted to 809 nm, corresponding to the second peak in the scattering spectra of the nanodimer 17b, the hot-spots of electric-field enhancement shift towards the outer edges of the nanocube dimer, as shown in Fig. The Gaussian beam source was formulated using COMSOL Multiphysics (Version 5.6) using the nonparaxial approximation 2 . The formulation works on the idea of constructing a beam by addition of waves travelling in multiple directions with the same wave number k. The resulting wave allows the possibility for realising a beam with a waist size which is comparable to its wavelength i.e 1:1. This is however not achievable using the conventional paraxial approximation, since reducing the waist size of the beam results in angular deviation in the beam propagation direction. Fig. https://www.comsol.com/blogs/the-nonparaxial-gaussianbeam-formula-for-simulating-wave-optics/