We have simulated the performance of the Josephson Travelling Wave Parametric Amplifier (JTWPA) based on the one-dimensional array of RF SQUIDs. Unlike the ideal model in which all SQUIDs are assumed to be identical, we allowed variation of the device parameters such as the geometric inductance of the SQUID loop, capacitance to ground, Josephson junction capacitance and critical current. Our simulations confirm the negative effects of variation of the device parameters leading to microwave reflections between individual cells and the shift of the flux bias from the optimal point. The strongest effect is caused by the variation of the geometric inductance as it varies both the wave impedance and the flux bias. The most detrimental, however, are point defects, such as shorts to ground making the circuit opaque to microwaves. This imposes stringent requirements on the fabrication process making it extremely challenging. We highlight the strict limitations on parameter spread in these devices while also discussing the robustness of the scheme to variation. Josephson weak links are ideal components for building parametric amplifiers due to their non-linear inductance and zero dissipation To increase interaction of the Josephson element with microwaves, a typical configuration of the JPA includes a resonant circuit coupled to the Josephson element, this imposes a limit on the amplifier's operating frequency and bandwidth set by the properties of the resonator (see, e.g., In recent years, superconducting parametric amplifier devices have seen renewed interest In this paper, we study a JTWPA scheme first proposed The design proposed in For clarity, we assume that the signal and pump tones propagate from left to right in the scheme shown in Fig. In this model the array is described as a chain of two impedances, one impedance along the direction of propagation, Z 1 and one impedance to the return line, Z 2 . In this case these are the impedance of the rf-SQUID and the impedance of the capacitance of the transmission line to the ground plane, respectively, this can be written in complex notation as: where ω = 2πf and the other terms are as described in Fig. where Z π depends on Z πL , the (potentially different) impedance of the preceding cell. For Z π ≡ Z πL , and approximating that Z 1 = iωL G as iωL G iωL J we can simplify Eq. ( where the cut-off frequency of the array, ω c is a function of the lumped elements and is given by: From Eq (3) we see that for ω < ω c , It is evident from this that the parameters that will most greatly influence the impedance are L G and C 0 . Junction capacitance/parallel plate shunt capacitance should have limited impact in this regard given the relative sizes of the impedances in this parameter set. This approximation in Eq. ( Variation of the junction critical currents will have a limited affect on impedance as the Josephson inductance, is theoretically infinite under our operating conditions. So the total cell inductance L -1 G is dominated by L G for the optimum three wave bias point φ = π/2. However, the optimal bias point itself, may be perturbed by variations in I c . Which may impact the quadratic non-linearity coefficient, affecting the efficiency of the 3WM. Apparently variation of critical current or geometric inductance will have an impact not only on the impedance of the rf-SQUID but also on the dominant wave mixing process and the maximum amplification that is possible in the device through the non-linearity, β. Up to this point we have considered electrical parameters that can be controlled through device design. We should mention though that flux noise may have a significant effect on the device performance through the variation of the the phase across the Josephson junctions, φ, see Eqs. ( Other things will also affect the phase, such as optical rectification We complete simulations in the same manner as in Ref. The ladder type model of a discrete element transmission line is simulated using the WRspice program, a platform proven adequate for use in Josephson circuits An ideal scheme is first simulated with all the parameters equal throughout the SQUID array. The proper flux bias is calculated from Eq. ( In all systems where impedance mismatches occur, a ripple forms along the length of the wave due to complex interference between the forward and backward propagating waves having multiple reflections. This ripple has nodes along the length of the array for every λ/2 period of the signal wave, while the maximum of the signal gain between nodes depends on the particular wave mixing dynamics in the array As seen in Eq. ( Envelopes of signal wave gain caused by variation of various parameters. (a) Junction capacitance, CJ , has very little impact on the gain profile due to its limited effect on impedance or wave-mixing. (b) Capacitance to ground, C0, creates a considerable envelope around the ideal signal profile mostly due to impedance mismatch. (c) Geometric inductance, LG, has by far the greatest effect due to both the impedance mismatch, effect on flux bias and the wave mixing properties of the medium. (d) Critical current, Ic ∝ (1/LJ ) has a considerable impact but less than either of C0 (b) and LG (c). Its effect on impedance is minimal, but its large effect on the wave mixing properties compounds to create a sizeable envelope around the ideal case. ever, that should this parameter be changed significantly for the purpose of dispersion engineering or other endeavours to the point where Z C J ∼ Z L G , then its impedance contribution is not negligible and we can assume variation in it would also incur a significant envelope. The capacitance of the transmission line to the ground plane, C 0 , enters the expression for impedance of the line, see Eq. ( As expected, the geometric inductance of the rf-SQUID, L G has the largest effect on gain than any other individual parameter, as shown in Fig. Variation in geometric inductance also directly affects the amount of flux penetrating the loop, therefore, in this way it can have a similar effect to what would be expected of flux noise. While the prominent ripple lends to the idea that impedance mismatches are the dominant factors impacting the device, it is however, difficult to tell how much of an effect the variation in flux has, or the effect of the strength of the non-linearity β either. The fact that this parameter is the most effectual is The bounds of the envelopes from the stochastic simulations of variation in each parameter plotted against the respective standard deviation. Standard deviations that cause variation outside of the ±3 dB band can be considered unacceptable as it would results in a narrow or inconsistent bandwidth. good in terms of device fabrication. The loop area can be made quite large to achieve the needed inductance, making the absolute variation that may occur a smaller percentage of the whole. Variation of critical current can have a direct effect on the wave impedance of the line via the Josephson inductance, although its impact is likely to be small due to the large impedance of the Josephson inductance which is a direct consequence of the 3WM scheme proposed. Critical current also has a direct effect on the optimal flux biasing point and the strength of the 3WM non-linearity via Eqs. ( The difference in the impact of variation in the individual parameters can be studied through the bounds of the individual envelopes, this is plotted in Fig. The specific amount of variation that is tolerable to obtain a relatively flat bandwidth depends on the specific parameter set. However, this result shows that within some bounds (I c : σ = 8 %, C 0 : σ = 4 %, L G : σ = 3 %) variation is tolerable for this parameter set at this frequency. This can further be tested through the simulation of a scheme with simultaneous variation in all parameters that is likely to occur in a realised sample. Using a realistic fabrication process we assume the percentage variation of each parameter for both a better and a worse case scenario, as shown in Fig. From the envelopes it can be seen that the performance gets significantly worse with all added variations. However, the situation is reasonable with an optimal fabrication method and the gain of the amplifier at the final node can be expected to be 10 ± 2 dB. Although, in the worse case studied the situation is considerably less promising with final node gain of 10 +20 -10 dB. This translates to an unpredictable gain in the worse case scenario. It may be tempting to see possible silver-linings to these variations in that larger amplification can be seen in some conditions as shown in the case of two individual results taken from the make-up of the worse case envelope in Fig. It should be noted though, that the device performance over the full frequency range for either of the cases with ripple does not differ too greatly from the ideal case with no variation, excepting the two obvious peaks. Appar- ently, a smaller ripple in the gain across the frequency response for each of the cases with variation may be hidden by the frequency step of ∼260 MHz but we don't expect these ripples to be substantial. This is, in part, due to the fact that the size of the ripple is reduced towards the end of the array. The reason for the diminishing ripple is not currently properly understood but is thought to be a real physical effect due solely to the reflection characteristics of the device at the array ends With modern techniques the variation that can be expected in the most consequential parameters like geometric inductance (loop area) can be kept low, allowing for functional devices to be fabricated. It is still possible that the variation that is natural to even the best techniques will result in aberrant behaviour at specific frequencies, however, the device may behave well aside from this. Unfortunately, there is another common problem that may arise in fabrication, namely localised defects. Mistakes can occur in either fabrication or sample handling that lead to shorts along the line to the ground plane, broken inductive loops, or shorted junctions. These localised defects can have very different effects depending on the specific type of defect. This can include almost complete reflection of incident waves at the defect, or a small impedance change to the array depending on a shorted capacitor defect or a shorted junction defect respectively. Perhaps, the most devastating defect to consider would be a short in the ground capacitor, the effects of which are shown in Fig. The situation is the same for a broken inductance loop As shown the tones continue to propagate, but a significant impedance mismatch causes reflections from these points and a ripple forms along the gain curve. if a flux bias is used. Although should a current bias be used instead, a broken geometric inductance may lead to I > I c in the junction, putting it in the dissipative regime. Should the defective junction result in an open circuit as opposed to a short and there is also a defect in the geometric loop within a single cell then, no matter the biasing scheme, the step like change in propagation is again seen. It is, however, unlikely to see both these defects occur in a single cell. In conclusion, we have completed a quantitative analysis of the effect of random parameter variations within the SQUID array proposed in reference We have also studied the maximum fabrication tolerances that can be present in such a device that will ensure the gain to be within ±3 dB corridor. Finally, we have shown that even with a few point defects, shorted junctions, the device shows a robust performance, particularly for long arrays. Thus with state-of-the-art fabrication facilities the rf-SQUID embedded JTWPA is a strong candidate for broadband, high gain, high yield parametric amplifiers. Our approach to analysis of the parameter variation on the JTWPA performance is not limited to this scheme alone. Such analysis would give greater confidence in predicting the behaviour of as yet unrealised samples.