We computed structural, elastic, electronic and optical properties of Be2X(X = C, Si, Ge, Sn) family of antifluorite with ab initio DFT calculations using the generalized gradient approximation (GGA). The different parameters such as geometry optimization, band structure, density of states, elastic constants, dielectric functions have been studied. We also calculated bandgap using PBE0 and HSE hybrid functionals to compare experimental bandgap of Be2C. Although three of the compounds are hypothetical in nature, their formation energy found to be negative. The calculated values of elastic constants indicates antifluorite Be2X are mechanically stable. The graph of real part of epsilon shows negative value giving promising result for blanket behaviour of Be2X from radiation damage. Antifluorite Be 2 X(X = C, Si, Ge, Sn) structure form the simplest family of metalsemiconductor (Group II-IV elements) hybrid materials. Antifluorite structure has a similar structure to diamond. Group IV atoms occupy fcc sites with eightfold coordination and II atoms are at tetrahedral sites with fourfold coordination of resulting structure of cubic Fm-3m space group. The first member of the family Beryllium carbide is colourless in pure state and is a transparent crystalline solid and very hard compound, like diamond, a pure carbon compound Calculations were carried out through DFT package Quantum Espresso (version 6.7) using pseudopotential plane-wave method The antifluorite has cubic structure. The space group of antifluorite structure is Fm-3m with space group number 225. The structure consists of 4 molecules per unit cell. The atomic positions are given in Table The calculated lattice constant for Be 2 C using GGA is in good agreement with the experimental data. The experimental data are not available for other three structures. The calculated Bulk modulus value is also found to be in good agreement with other GGA calculations The stiffness matrices [C ij ] is calculated using PBE functionals and Energy-strain method. There are three independent elastic constants C 11 , C 12 and C 44 for a cubic system. These elastic constants are used to calculate elastic property terms through the Viogt-Reuss-Hill (VRH) averaging scheme for cubic system Young's modulus E and Poisson's ratio v are also calculated from the relations, Their calculated value is shown in Table The band structure, total and projected density of states (DOS) For Be 2 C, the indirect band gap is obtained to be 1.170 eV and direct band gap is 4.132 eV. The result is close to experimental data The dielectric function give the behaviour of the material that how it responds to the incident electromagnetic radiation. We calculated the real part ε 1 (ω) and imaginary part ε 2 (ω) of the dielectric function by solving Bethe-Salpeter Equations. The real part that shows the physical properties of a crystal. The imaginary part shows the energy loss of photons in a material when there is electron transition between electronic bands. The real and imaginary are plotted in Figure In real part of dielectric function graphs, the regions where real dielectric function decrease with the increase of photon energy gives the abnormal dispersion region. The points where ε value takes zero value at some phonon energies corresponds to plasmon frequencies They are shown in Appendices. The refractive index of the four structures is shown in Table The zero-frequency reflectivity R(0) and maximum reflectivity n(ω) for the four structures are mentioned in the Table A first principle DFT method has been implemented to investigate Structure, Elastic, Electronic and Optical properties of Be 2 X(X = C, Si, Ge, Sn). The lattice parameter at equilibrium is in good agreement with experimental data and previously calculated for Be 2 C and Be 2 Si. The study of elastic property indicates fragile and brittle nature of Be 2 C. The band gap in cubic structure of Be 2 C is found to be 4.132 eV. The other three structures Be 2 X(X = Si, Ge, Sn) shows metallicity nature. The optical properties terms that includes dielectric function, reflectivity, absorption coeffcient, refractive index, extinction coeffcient, and electron energy loss are studied in 0-10 eV energy range. The negative value of ε shows that Be 2 C and other three structures can be used as blanket material for prevention from UV radiation damage. The low optical absorbance of Be 2 C against other three structures in the visible region restricts its use in Solar Cell and other optopelectronic applications. Due to less research work on Be 2 C and hypothetical compounds Be 2 X(X = Si, Ge, Sn), all results has not be compared. Thus, this study can be helpful for further research on this crystal. This work was supported in part through computational resources provided by the Supercomputer Center Kathmandu University, which was established with equipments donated by CERN. a