The robust, scalable simulation of flowing electrochemical systems is increasingly important due to the synergy between intermittent renewable energy and electrochemical technologies such as energy storage and chemical manufacturing. The high Péclet regime of many such applications prevents the use of off-the-shelf discretization methods. In this work, we present a high-order Discontinuous Galerkin scheme for the electroneutral Nernst-Planck equations. The chosen charge conservation formulation allows for the specific treatment of the different physics: upwinding for advection and migration, and interior penalty for diffusion of ionic species as well the electric potential. Similarly, the formulation enables different treatments in the preconditioner: AMG for the potential blocks and ILU-based methods for the advection-dominated concentration blocks. We evaluate the convergence rate of the discretization scheme through numerical tests. Strong scaling results for two preconditioning approaches are shown for a large 3D flow-plate reactor example. With the steady transition to renewable energy comes a surge of intermittent electricity Such simulations require the solution of highly coupled systems of partial differential equations (PDEs). An important model in the presence of fluid flow is the Nernst-Planck (NP) equation, which describes the transport of an ionic species by advection, diffusion and electromigration For the electroneutral system, arriving at a steady-state solution is a challenging numerical task and therefore the discretization scheme has to be chosen with care. In particular, specific treatment is required for the typically advection-dominated nature of the flow. The considered physical equations have been successfully discretized with several methods in the past. The authors in After discretization and linearization, large, sparse linearized systems must be solved. Iterative methods using appropriate preconditioning techniques In this paper, we present a high-order DG spatial discretization and scalable preconditioning approaches for the electroneutral Nernst-Planck equations. The electroneutral system is arranged in a charge-conservation formulation that is necessary for the proper penalization of the potential terms in the DG scheme. Additionally, this formulation also allows for block preconditioning with specific treatment of the potential block and concentration blocks. In section 2, the equations for the relevant electrochemical physics in an electroneutral setting are described. We explain how to reorder the equations and exploit the electroneutrality condition to eliminate a species variable and construct the charge conservation equation. Next, in section 3, we detail the spatial discretization process using the DG finite element method including necessary treatment for the hyperbolic and elliptic parts of the resulting system. Then, in section 4, we outline our approach to numerically precondition and solve the resulting discrete nonlinear problem. Finally, in section 5, we perform a convergence test for our discrete scheme and show scaling results for a large three-dimensional, industry-relevant problem. We consider the equations for electroneutral multi-ion transport. First, we describe the standard Electroneutral-Nernst-Planck model, as well as appropriate boundary conditions for a flow-plate reactor. Then, we discuss alternative formulations including the Charge-Conservation-Nernst-Planck model, which will be used for our Discontinuous Galerkin scheme in section 3. A nondimensionalization of that model is also given. We consider the flow of a dilute electrolyte solution containing m ≥ 2 chemical species in a domain Ω ∈ R d , d = 1, 2, or 3. In the presence of an electric field, the mass transport is described by the Nernst-Planck equation At steady state, the conservation of mass of each species k = 1, . . . , m is given by where c k is the molar concentration of species k, D k is the molecular diffusion coefficient, u is the velocity of the electrolyte, z k is the valence (charge number), μ k is the mobility constant, F is the Faraday constant, Φ is the electric potential in the electrolyte, and R k is a reaction term. The first term in (1) describes molecular diffusion, the second, advection, and the third, electromigration. The mobility constant is given by the Nernst-Einstein relation where R is the universal gas constant, and T is the thermodynamic temperature. The system currently consists of m equations (1), and m + 1 unknowns: the m concentrations c k and the potential Φ. An additional equation is required to complete the system. A commonly-used relation is the electroneutrality approximation which states that there is no charge separation and that neutrality is maintained everywhere. This approximation is obtained from the Poisson equation and is appropriate when considering length scales greater than nanometers In For convenience, we denote the advection-migration transport as q k = uz k μ k F ∇Φ so that (1) can be written as We now provide boundary conditions that are appropriate for a flow plate reactor. The boundary ∂Ω is partitioned with respect to the direction of the velocity at the boundary into the inlet boundary Γ in , the outlet boundary Γ out , the wall boundary Γ wall and the electrode boundary Γ elec . We have where n is the outward normal, so that The location of the wall and electrode boundaries are determined beforehand. The boundary conditions are given by where g k represents electrochemical reactions at the electrode surface. In our numerical experiments, we will consider the specific case of a simple n-electron transfer redox reaction Ox + ne -→ Red, where the current density J n at the electrodes is given by the Butler-Volmer equation where J 0 is the exchange current density, c o and c r are the concentrations of the oxidant Ox and reductant Red, respectively, c * o and c * r are reference concentrations, α 1 and α 2 are the anodic and cathodic charge transfer coefficients, respectively, n is the number of electrons in the reaction, and Φ app is the applied potential. The reaction rate in Alternative formulations of the ENP system (1) and ( In our case, we are interested in the Discontinuous Galerkin (DG) finite element method We formulate a charge conservation equation by summing over all conservation of mass equations (1) weighting each by z k F . The advection terms cancel due to electroneutrality (3), and we obtain (10) However, we note that the system consisting of (1) and ( assuming that z m = 0. Combining This conservation of charge equation replaces the conservation of mass of species m in the system. The system now consists of m equations: conservation of mass equations (1) for k = 1, . . . , m -1, and a conservation of charge equation Here we perform a nondimensionalization of the CNP model consisting of (1) and Let the following nondimensional variables: and the differential operator with respect x Substituting ( where Dk = D k Luavg is the inverse Péclet number. We note that the electroneutrality condition ( so that ĉm is eliminated using In order to nondimensionalize the charge conservation equation ( The boundary conditions ( In the specific case of the Butler-Volmer equation ( where In this section, we introduce a Discontinuous Galerkin (DG) scheme for the CNP model ( We begin by introducing the appropriate functional notation. Let T h be a subdivision of Ω with element K ∈ T h . The broken Sobolev spaces are defined as Let Γ = ∪ K∈T h ∂K denote the set of element boundaries. The restrictions of functions in H 1 (T h ) to Γ are called traces and belong to the function space Denote the space of polynomials of degree p on each element κ with Q p . A proper finite element space is defined as Next we introduce some trace operators needed for the numerical fluxes. For u ∈ T (Γ), we define the average {u} and jump and Jumps on exterior faces are defined as Following a combination of Analyzing We multiply (4) by a test function v and integrate over the domain Ω. - The diffusion term can be treated exactly like in where δ p is a penalty parameter that depends on the polynomial order p of the finite elements. In where C IP > 0 needs to be large enough for stability, and h is the cell diameter. The diffusion term results in The advection-migration term combines the advection effect from the transport velocity v and the migration effect from the potential gradient ∇Φ, which can be treated with the combined variable q k . This combined term is treated as in Since the reaction term is cell-local, and it is assumed not to contain derivatives of the primary solution variables, no further treatment is needed. Note that the gradient potential term ∇Φ in the mass conservation equations ( A penalty term is required for the stability of the DG scheme and that is why we are using the CNP model. Indeed, the gradient potential term in the charge conservation equation ( We introduce the following short-hand notation for ( which results in The fluxes for the concentration term are chosen as Without loss of generality, the case with only two species in the system (k = 2) results in where a 1 = a 12 . For the potential term, we choose fluxes with interior penalty This results in with the standard symmetric interior penalty flux. Note that in this example we assume the same test function space for all concentrations c k and the potential Φ. Therefore, we use the same penalty parameter δ p . If the polynomial spaces have different orders, the penalty parameters for both terms should be chosen accordingly. In our numerical experiments, we use Let the short-hand notation for the current at the electrode boundary where g k are the reaction rates from The DG scheme for the problem eqs. ( for all v m ∈ V p h . Recall that the eliminated concentration c m can be recovered from the substitution A crucial aspect in the practical usability of this specific discretization is the ability to solve it efficiently when applied to real world problems. Domains for such applications are usually three-dimensional and nonlinear couplings appear through species reactions. Consequently, the numerical solution approach has to be scalable on a desired hardware architecture to provide feasible turnaround times for experiments. As a first performance measure, we are focusing on hexahedral mesh elements, which allow for a tensor product element approach After discretization, the nonlinear system arising from (43) has to be linearized and solved frequently. To solve the nonlinear system, we employ a Newton method along with backtracking linesearch We can rewrite (43) as a block residual equation where R Φ is the residual of the discretized charge conservation equation (43b), and R ci , i = 1, . . . , m -1, correspond to the residuals of the mass conservation equations (43a). Linearization of the residual R results in the block matrix . . . This block system is used in the following sections to determine preconditioning strategies. We first describe the preconditioning strategy for a piecewise linear discretization. When dealing with block systems resulting from the discretizations of systems of PDEs with different underlying physics, it is usually not sufficient and never optimal to use the same preconditioner for each block. Analyzing the linearized block system (44), we immediately notice that the A ΦΦ block only consists of terms that resemble a Poisson equation, for which preconditioners like Algebraic Multigrid (AMG) Continuing with the diagonal, the A c k c k blocks are not as simple and involve a diffusive term as well as a (usually dominant) advective term with anisotropic coefficients. In this case, classical AMG will not work well since its heuristics require elliptic-like properties. Instead, we apply preconditioned GMRES iterations We choose a block-triangular preconditioner of the form Inverting a block-triangular matrix requires the inversion of the diagonal blocks, which are approximated by in the first approach, and in the second. AMG is more memory intensive for higher-order discretizations. In this case, p-multigrid has been successful in the past For the concentration blocks, we consider the same additive Schwarz method described for p = 1. We do not consider the use of GMG for the high-order case. The block preconditioner (45) with the described p-multigrid method for the potential block exhibits convergence issues for some numerical experiments of section 5 for p = 3. It is unclear to the authors why this is the case. Instead, a different ordering of the preconditioning steps works better: solving the concentration blocks first, then the potential blocks. We theorize that the couplings are important in the low-order coarse problem but have only heuristic evidence. We thus use the following preconditioner: Inverting this matrix only requires the inversion of the diagonal blocks, which are approximated by The implementation is part of the EchemFEM package To help the convergence of Newton's method, we start with a constant initial guess for the concentrations using the inlet values c in k . For the potential, we obtain an initial guess by first solving the charge conservation equation with constant concentrations (a Poisson equation). For this initial potential solution, we use the solver for the potential block defined in appendix Appendix A, with a conjugate gradient tolerance of 10 -2 . In this section, we investigate the numerical performance of the DG scheme and preconditioning strategies. We perform a convergence test for polynomial orders p = 1, 2, 3 and strong scaling tests for a large parallel plate flow channel example for p = 1 and p = 3. All tests are performed in three-dimensional domains. In section 3, we established a discretization scheme based on well-known DG methods. As a first step, we have to make sure that the presented method provides the expected accuracy. Optimally, we would be able to prove an error estimate and therefore a theoretical convergence rate through analysis of (43). Another, although less thorough, way of determining the convergence rate is by solving a manufactured problem and comparing the solution against the known analytical solution. The way the scheme was set up, we expect the convergence rate to be similar to the minimum rate of each individual treated equation. Therefore, the convergence rate of the concentration variables should be close to that of an advection-diffusion-reaction equation, i.e. p + 1 2 in the advection-dominated regime We use the nondimensional version of a two-ion system with inverse Péclet numbers D1 = 5 × 10 -6 and D2 = 10 -5 , and charge numbers z 1 = 2 and z 2 = -2. The analytical manufactured solution is chosen as on the domain Ω ∈ (0, 1) 3 . All boundary conditions on ∂Ω are prescribed using the exact solutions. Additionally, a parabolic velocity profile is defined with u = (6y(1 -y), 0, 0) in the whole domain. We choose an initial mesh size using 64 hexahedral elements with a polynomial order of p = 1 and compute the L 2 error norms of each variable Then, we subsequently halve the element size h e using uniform refinement. The process is repeated for polynomial orders p = 2 and p = 3. Figure Looking at these results, one has to keep in mind that we determined the convergence rates on a Cartesian grid, and they might deteriorate on unstructured or curved grids We now briefly investigate how the accuracy of the method relates to computational cost. For the manufactured solution problem described above, we calculate the total computational time and total L 2 error as we vary the size of the problem. The total error is the sum of the concentration and potential errors. On an Intel 18-core Xeon E5-2695 v4 architecture with 2.1 GHz clock speed, we use two nodes and a total of 64 processors. For p = 1, we use the preconditioner described in section 4.1 with the additive Schwarz method for the concentration blocks, and for p = 3 we use the preconditioner for high order described in section 4.2. -- In table 1, we provide computational timings and total L 2 errors for p = 1 and p = 3 as we vary the problem size. We note that the computational resources are fixed so there is insufficient memory for the largest high-order case. Additionally, the first row of results is around a thousand degrees of freedom per processor, which is not typically cost-efficient. Even so, the smallest p = 3 problem is twice as accurate and seven times faster than the largest p = 1 problem. It is evident that increasing polynomial order is preferable to mesh refinement when seeking high accuracy results. We consider a 3D extension of the parallel plate reactor from The velocity field u = (u x , u y , u z ) in the reactor is given by the parabolic profile Choosing zero-Neumann boundary conditions on xy-faces means that the channel is periodic in the z-direction. For this test case, we choose u avg = 0.03 m s -1 . We consider the three-ion system from At the electrodes, the electrochemical reaction is given by the Butler-Volmer equation ( which has an average of J0 = 30 A m -2 over the width of the channel. We first use a structured hexahedral mesh such that, in the xy-plane, elements are concentrated in the electrode region as illustrated in figure We also consider a mesh where the xy-plane is an unstructured mesh as illustrated in figure We begin with 256 processors (on 8 nodes) and successively double the number of processors and nodes. In figure First, we discuss the scaling results for the unstructured mesh in figure Finally, we look at the scaling results for p = 3 and the preconditioning strategy described in section 4.2. We note that the p-multigrid method used for the potential block performs poorly on meshes with high element aspect ratios such as the ones used above. The scaling tests are therefore performed on a mesh with moderate aspect ratios. The width of the channel is changed to w = 0.01 m. We consider an unstructured coarse mesh similar to the one illustrated in figure In this work, we propose a high-order Discontinuous Galerkin (DG) scheme and block preconditioners for the electroneutral Nernst-Planck equations. We choose a model formulation where the electroneutrality condition is substituted to obtain a charge conservation equation. In the DG scheme, this equation is treated as an elliptic equation for the electrical potential, whereas in the mass conservation equations, an upwind scheme is used for the combined advectionmigration term. In numerical convergence tests, the scheme exhibits a p + 1 order of convergence for the potential and a p + 1 2 order of convergence for the concentrations. For p = 1, both proposed block preconditioners use Algebraic Multigrid for the potential block whereas an Additive Schwarz method with ILU is used for the concentration blocks, by itself or as a smoother for a Geometric Multigrid method (GMG). While both methods exhibit decent strong scaling, the GMGbased approach is less expensive on the structured mesh, although its scaling is limited by the direct solver used for the coarse grid solution. For higher order, a p-multigrid method is used for the potential block, where Algebraic Multigrid is applied to the lower-order coarsened problem. The strong scaling is less than linear in the high-order case. For future extensions, coupling this solver with fluid dynamics is of particular interest. The Stokes or incompressible Navier-Stokes equations are relevant for flow reactors as well as the pore-scale of porous electrode systems. On the larger length scale, Darcy flow is appropriate for porous electrodes, and its multiphase extension for gas-diffusion electrodes (GDE). Further work is needed for preconditioning in the case where electrolyte bulk reactions are present, where reaction rate constants can vary wildly. Porous " coarsen_type " : " HMIS " , 14 " agg_nl " : 3 , 15 " interp_type " : " ext + i " , 16 " agg_num_paths " : 5 , 17 } , 18 } , 19 % For each concentration block k , using the ASM prec ondition er : 20 " fieldsplit_ [ k ] " : { 21 " ksp_rtol " : 1E -1 , " ksp_type " : " gmres " , 23 " pc_type " : " asm " , 24 " sub_pc_type " : " ilu " , 25 } , 26 % Otherwise , for each concentration block k , using the GMG precond itioner : 27 " fieldsplit_ [ k ] " : { 28 " ksp_rtol " : 1E -1 , 29 " ksp_type " : " gmres " , 30 " pc_type " : " mg " , 31 " m g _ l e v e l s _ k s p _ t y p e " : " richardson " , 32 " m g _ l e v e l s _ p c _ t y p e " : " asm " , 33 " m g _ l e v e l s _ s u b _ p c _ t y p e " : " ilu " , 34 " mg_coarse " : { 35 " pc_type " : " python " , 36 " pc _python_ type " : " firedrake . AssembledPC " , 37 " assembled " : { 38 " mat_type " : " aij " , 39 " pc_type " : " telescope " , 1 " mat_type " : " matfree " , 2 " snes_type " : " newton " , 3 " snes_rtol " : 1E -6 , 4 " ksp_type " : " fgmres " , 5 " ksp_rtol " : 1E -3 , 6 " pc_type " : " fieldsplit " , 7 % For the potential block 8 " fieldsplit_ [ m ] " : { 9 " ksp_rtol " : 1E -1 , 10 " ksp_type " : " cg " , 11 " pc_type " : " python " , 12 " mat_type " : " matfree " , 13 " pc _python_ type " : __name__ + " . C o a r s e n P e n a l t y P M G P C " , 14 " p m g _ m g _ l e v e l s _ k s p _ t y p e " : " chebyshev " , 15 " p m g _ m g _ l e v e l s _ k s p _ m a x _ i t " : 4 , 16 " p m g _ m g _ l e v e l s _ k s p _ n o r m _ t y p e " : " u n p r e c o n d i t i o n e d " , 17 " pm g_mg_lev els_ " : { 18 " pc_type " : " python " , " pc _python_ type " : __name__ + " . " + " Ce llIntegr alPC " , 20 " a s s e m b l e d _ p c _ t y p e " : " jacobi " , 21 } , " p m g _ c o a r s e _ m a t _ t y p e " : " aij " , 23 " pmg_mg_coarse " : { 24 " ksp_type " : " cg " , 25 " ksp_rtol " : 1e -3 , 26 " pc_type " : " hypre " , 27 } , 28 } , 29 % For each concentration block k , using the ASM prec ondition er : 30 " fieldsplit_ [k -1] " : { 31 " ksp_rtol " : 1E -1 , 32 " ksp_type " : " gmres " , 33 " pc_type " : " python " , 34 " pc _python_ type " : " firedrake . AssembledPC " , 35 " assembled " : { 36 " pc_type " : " asm " , 37 " pc _asm_ove rlap " : 1 , " sub_pc_type " : " ilu " 39 } , 40 } , The reduction factor REDFACTOR for the coarse grid redistribution is chosen depending on the number of processors such that the solver sub-communicator always includes exactly 8 nodes. The default overlap for ASM is one element. The custom preconditioner CoarsenPenaltyPMGPC is p-multigrid with p = 1 on the coarse level where the proper penalization parameters are used for the DG discretization. The custom preconditioner CellIntegralPC is used to ignore inter-element contributions. These custom solvers are available in the EchemFEM package 