A comparative analysis of the properties of FeSe1-xTex crystals in the range of x values of about 0.4 and pure FeSe crystals is presented. We found that the anomaly in R (T) at the structural transition for the former differs significantly from the corresponding anomaly for the latter. This indicates a change in the type of the ground state in the studied compounds. Within the framework of the crystal field model, this can be explained as a consequence of a change in the distortion of the tetrahedral environment of iron, which leads to a change in the positions of the energy levels within t2g multiplet. Depending on the mutual position of the degenerate xz and yz levels and the xy level, the type of transition can change from orbital ordering to magnetic ordering. The electronic and magnetic instability of the tetragonal plane of iron atoms surrounded by pnictides or chalcogenides is an important factor The binary compositions in this series, FeSe and FeTe have phase transitions of different types. For FeTe, the structural transition around 70 K is accompanied by antiferromagnetic ordering and at low temperatures FeTe remains non-superconducting. In the case of FeSe no magnetic ordering occurs below the structural transition at around 90 K and at low temperatures FeSe is superconducting. It should be noted that the nature of the structural transition in these materials is still under debate. Any substitutions at chalcogen positions in FeSe and FeTe suppress structural transitions. For FeTe, the suppression of the magnetic transition is accompanied by the onset of superconductivity, which is very similar to the scenario for the onset of superconductivity in cuprate superconductors and suggests related mechanisms of high-temperature superconductivity. For FeSe 1-x S x materials, with increasing x the value of T C first increases slightly, and then rapidly decreases. The structural transition in this series is completely suppressed for compositions with x about 0.2 An excess of iron in Fe 1+δ Se 1-x Te x crystals significantly changes their properties Here we present the results of studies of the transport properties of two compositions FeSe 1-x Te x with a tellurium content of about 30-40%. For these compositions, the change in the electronic properties during the structural transition is intrinsically different from that of pure FeSe. It may indicate that the low-temperature ground state has changed from the orbital order to the magnetic order. The FeSe and FeSe 1-x Te x crystals were grown using recrystallization in AlCl3/NaCl/KCl flux technique with a constant temperature gradient along the quartz ampoule The temperature dependencies of the resistivity ρ xx of compositions with 30-40% tellurium and pure FeSe differ significantly (see Fig. Fig. The temperature dependence of the Hall constant R H is shown in Fig. As mentioned above, the behavior of resistance near the structural transition and below for FeSe 1-x Te x x ≥ 0.3 is significantly different from that of FeSe. First, the form of the singularity at the structural transition changes. For FeSe, when the temperature decreases, the value of the derivative dρ xx /dT drops sharply and is then restored approximately to the original value. This roughly corresponds to the formation of a small step on the temperature dependence of the resistivity ρ xx (T). Similar shape have anomalies on curves ρ xx (T) for FeSe 1-x S x 9 and FeSe 1-x Te x with a low tellurium content Formally, one could argue that for substituted compositions the singularity at the transition is similar to the left half of the singularity for FeSe -the transition from the flat region of ρ xx (T) to the low-temperature part. Therefore a change in the shape of the singularity could be caused by a change in the slope of ρ xx (T) in the hightemperature part due to the transition to the bad-metal state. This description of the evolution of the shape of singularity during a structural transition may be correct. Nevertheless, a noticeable change in the behavior of the resistance in the region between the superconducting and structural transitions also deserves attention. The inset in Fig. If we suppose that the two domes shape of the phase diagram is the result of the modulation of excess electron energy by disorder, then there can be an immediate boundary between two types of the low-temperature order which exist in FeTe and FeSe. In the vicinity of this quantum phase transition, various anomalies in the properties of the compounds should be observed. For FeSe 1-x Te x , significant changes in the properties occur at x < 0.4. In this range of compositions, the piezoresistivity coefficient changes the sign, and the type of the majority carriers changes, which may also be connected with changes in the crystal field The crystal field can influence the type of ordering. In the studied compounds, the dispersion for d-orbitals is several electron volts. Nevertheless, the crystal field determines which orbitals are at the Fermi level. Under substitution, the lattice parameters change anisotropically. In this case, the distortion of the tetragonal environment of iron changes, which should cause changes in the relative position of the levels in the t 2g multiplet. Depending on the degree of the population of the states corresponding to different orbitals, either conditions for orbital ordering ( see Fig. The study of the electron transport properties in FeSe 1-x Te x compositions with x=0, 0.3, and 0.4 suggests the crossover in the ground state from nematic orbital order in compositions with a low tellurium content to magnetic order in compositions with x greater than about 0.3. If confirmed, this can be an example of the itinerant system with magnetic and orbital order competition, that deserves further in-depth study.