Electrically injected and detected nonlocal magnon transport has emerged as a versatile method for transporting spin as well as probing the spin excitations in a magnetic insulator. We examine the role of drift currents in this phenomenon as a method for controlling the magnon propagation length. Formulating a phenomenological description, we identify the essential requirements for existence of magnon drift. Guided by this insight, we examine magnetic field gradient, asymmetric contribution to dispersion, and temperature gradient as three representative mechanisms underlying a finite magnon drift velocity, finding temperature gradient to be particularly effective. In ordered magnetic insulators, spin waves can transport spin and heat without an actual motion of electrons Spin transport via incoherent magnons, i.e., by a drive such as temperature that does not select a single mode, has also been proposed and demonstrated Taking further inspiration from this similarity, one may consider the possibility of modulating the magnonic spin propagation length in nonlocal transport studies using pre-existing drift currents. Such effects have previously been demonstrated for electronic spin transport In this article, inspired by the similarity between nonlocal spin transport in electronic and magnonic systems, we theoretically examine the emergence of drift currents and concomitant control of spin propagation length in magnonic systems. We first establish the drift phenomenology for magnons thereby clarifying its qualitative role in nonlocal magnon transport experiments. Equipped with these insights and using the Boltzmann equation approach As compared to electronic spin transport where the first term on the right hand side accounts for the particles that have arrived from the left bin, and the second term accounts for those arrived from the right bin. Employing Taylor expansion in (1) and denoting n(x, t) simply by n, we obtain where the final result takes the form of particle continuity equation The right hand side of (3) accounts for particles disappearing with a time constant τ n = τ /(1 -p + -p -). Here, we have assumed the particles to completely vanish at large enough times. In general, relaxation tends to bring the particle density to an equilibrium value When one considers electrons which are conserved In uniformly ordered magnets, a homogeneous applied magnetic field typically does not break the spatial symmetry from the perspective of magnons. Even though it breaks the spatial symmetry for the spin system and consequently the magnetic ground state, the magnon Hamiltonian remains spatially invariant. This has motivated several authors to consider the magnetic field gradient as the driving force for magnon flow We now describe our general model for magnonic spin transport observed via electrical injection and detection of spin in a ferromagnetic insulator using the setup depicted in Figure Focusing on the magnon propagation in the ferromagnetic insulator first, the transport can be formulated in terms of the magnon continuity, derived using the Boltzmann equation approach where j j j m is the magnon current density, τ m is the magnon decay time, and n 0 is the equilibrium magnon density. As detailed further in A, the relatively simple formulation of ( These are characterized by a larger time scale τ m τ . The situation is thus similar to the case of random walk considered in the preceding section. Due to this hierarchy of time scales, primarily the nonzero magnon chemical potential characterizes the excess magnons (injected by a heavy metal, for example) and their transport in the magnet where the general form of n(r r r, t) = n 0 + χμ(r r r, t) is obtained using the Boltzmann theory formulated in A for the various specific cases considered in this work. Further, the magnon current density can be expressed in the following general form: where j j j 0 is a spatially homogeneous contribution independent of μ, σ m is the magnon conductivity where D m = σ m /χ is the magnon diffusion constant. We treat In order to capture the qualitative physics within a simplified analytic model While being a good approximation for thin films, it breaks down when the magnetic layer thickness is comparable to the magnon diffusion length of few microns. Under those conditions, a two-or three-dimensional numerical modeling is necessary where we assume the injector to be located at x = 0, and j in is proportional to the charge current driven through the injector electrode as detailed in B. With these assumptions and in steady state, the solution to where λ m ≡ √ D m τ m is the magnon diffusion length, v dx is the x component of the drift velocity, we assume |v dx τ m | λ m for simplicity, and we further required μ(x → +∞) → 0 in obtaining the above solution. Equation Within our assumption of a weakly coupled detector electrode, as detailed in B, the nonlocal voltage signal detected by the right heavy metal electrode is proportional to the magnon chemical potential at its location x d where we assumed λ m assumed already. Equation In typical experiments, the heavy metal electrodes are coupled not so weakly to the magnetic insulator since the detected signal is directly proportional to the square of this coupling, quantified via the interfacial spin conductance Such effects can be captured by solving the full 3-dimensional We now derive expressions for magnon current and the corresponding drift velocity considering a spatially dependent dispersion. An example of this situation is an applied magnetic field with its magnitude varying linearly in space. Such a drive has been considered by several authors Here, we follow the Boltzmann equation approach of Ref. In this approach, a WKB approximation is made and magnons are assumed to have an energy ω that depends on the spatial position: Here, we consider the spatially dependent part to result from the Zeeman energy due to the applied magnetic field H(r r r)x x x: ω H (r r r) = |γ|μ 0 H(r r r), where γ is the typically negative gyromagnetic ratio, and μ 0 is the permeability of vacuum. The contribution ω s = ω 0 + βk 2 results from anisotropy and exchange interaction. As outlined in A, the dependence of magnon current on the drives is obtained by solving the Boltzmann equation at short time scales corresponding to the time τ . The magnon current becomes (A): where where n B ( ) = 1/(exp( /(k B T )) -1) is the Bose distribution function with k B the Boltzmann constant and T the temperature. Retaining only linear contributions, we obtain from Eqs. ( where A comparison of the magnon current expression thus obtained [( In obtaining our result in the form of Furthermore, the drift velocity given by ( Equation We now consider a mechanism for drift that emerges from spatial symmetry breaking in the reciprocal space. This ensues when the dispersion bears a contribution leading to the group velocity breaking the spatial symmetry Their role in influencing the magnon chemical potential can thus also be anticipated. Here, we restrict our discussion to the thin film situation which is unable to distinguish between the two surfaces of the magnet, keeping in mind that transport dominated by one surface yields results similar to our analysis below. We account for the spatial symmetry breaking in the reciprocal space by including a small antisymmetric contribution to the magnon dispersion Such contributions have been theoretically predicted and experimentally observed in chiral magnets and hybrids In our theoretical analysis here, we account for the antisymmetric contribution perturbatively i.e., we retain terms up to the first order in ω a (k k k) and assume that it does not alter the symmetric Brillouin zone of the material. The latter assumption is justifiable when by a spatial symmetry breaking via an interface perpendicular to v v v 0 The magnon current can be evaluated using where where Employing the two equations above in Considering the expressions above are evaluated as: where χ, D m , and Γ have been defined previously in Eqs. ( One might consider an alternative approach. The ω a (k in evaluating The ensuing drift velocity [( The low temperature limit of Γ → 1, which corresponds to a vanishing drift velocity (Figure where t ≡ k B T D / ω 0 1. As shown by the numerically generated plot of Figure Thus, for yttrium iron garnet with the lowest dispersion branch T D of about 400 K The mechanisms for spatial symmetry breaking, and consequently drift, considered above may be classified as "coherent" since they stem from altering a single-particle property -the energy. Now, we consider an incoherent mechanism in the form of temperature gradient. A spatial symmetry breaking by a thermodynamic property, such as temperature, describing the ensemble could also lead to drift. Our consideration of thermal gradient for effecting drift is encouraged by the success of thermally driven spin currents in a wide range of magnetic materials and hybrids The magnon current can be evaluated via Employing the current expression thus obtained in the magnon continuity equation ( In obtaining the results above [Eqs. ( Equations The parameter Λ [( T D = 400 K Inspired by the corresponding role in electronic spin transport we estimate these drives to potentially result in an increasing magnitude of the drift velocity, with thermal drive potentially offering the largest values. Our analysis here assumes a quasi-continuous magnon dispersion and evaluates the transport coefficients, especially the drift velocity, in terms of the Brillouin zone sum over all magnon modes. While providing useful general relations, the present endeavor will benefit from a more microscopic and numerical analysis in the future, where a spin Hamiltonian is instead the starting point. This will be especially important for examining the case of asymmetric contribution to the magnon dispersion with regards to its spatial dependencies and the Brillouin zone rigidity. On the experimental side, our analysis anticipates and paves the way for employing thermal drive, and the consequent drift currents, in controlling the magnon propagation length in nonlocal magnonic spin transport experiments. In this section, we derive our general methodology followed in investigating the magnon chemical potential dynamics. Making use of the fact that two very different time scales govern the magnon number decay and their transport For simplicity, we consider only two time scales that suffice for the problem at hand. τ is a small time governed by the magnon number conserving scattering events mediated by exchange interaction where f ≡ f (r r r, k k k, t) is the distribution function, v v v g ≡ ∇ ∇ ∇ k k k ω is the group velocity, and the right hand side represents the collision integral. Within our two-times model, we may express the collision integral as the sum over magnon-number conserving term and magnon-decay term To formulate the magnon continuity, we integrate the equation above over the whole Brillouin zone (BZ): where the magnon density n(r r r) and current density j j j m (assuming that v v v g does not depend on the spatial coordinate r r r) are given by: In (A3), the term in curly brackets vanishes due to its magnon conserving nature. This part of the collision integral redistributes magnons between different k k k values but does not change their total number. Equation (A4) is our general formulation of magnon continuity, which is nearly assumption free. Making the relaxation time approximation for magnon decay via leads us to the continuity equation ( To complete the analysis under a given drive, we need to evaluate the current density using (A6) and the Boltzmann equation (A2) on short time scales: where the small magnon decay term is disregarded. We further employ the relaxation time approximation: where the assumed μ needs to be determined by solving the more general spin-continuity equation ( where the right hand side takes different forms depending on the drive considered. Substituting the above perturbative solution to f in (A6) yields the desired current-drive constitutive relations for the system. approximation above is valid under the limit g int wL → 0 such that the entire spin potential drops across the highly resistive interface where t m is the magnet thickness and the injector is assumed infinitesimal in size and located at x = 0. This accomplishes our first goal mentioned above regarding the boundary condition. Employing analysis similar to (B2), we evaluate the spin current absorbed by the detector electrode as: where the detector is assumed to be located at x = x d . Thus, we see that the spin current absorbed and the detected signal is governed by the magnon chemical potential at the detector location: μ(x d ), thereby accomplishing our second goal mentioned above. Finally, the voltage generated in the detector electrode Employing the equations above, we obtain the desired expression for nonlocal magnetoresistance: where I ci = j ci wt is the charge current driven through the injector, we employed the relation Hence, the experimentally observed signal diminishes at low temperatures. Further, g int is unaffected by the asymmetric contribution to the dispersion considered in Section V up to the first order in ω a , similar to the magnon density 