Control of the spin wave dynamics in nanomagnetic elements is very important for the realization of a broad range of novel magnonic devices. Here we study experimentally the spin wave resonance in thick ferromagnetic rings (100 nm) using perpendicular ferromagnetic resonance spectroscopy. Different from what was observed for the continuous film of the same thickness, or from ring with similar lateral dimensions but with lower thicknesses, the spectra of thick patterned rings show a non-monotonic dependence of the mode intensity on the resonance field for a fixed frequency. To explain this effect, the theoretical approach by considering the dependence of the mode profiles on both the radial and axial coordinates was developed. It was demonstrated that such unusual behavior is a result of the competition between exchange and dipolar fields acting at the spin excitations in the structure under study. The calculations are in a good agreement with the experimental results. Standing spin waves (SW) are being studied in magnetic materials since the late fifties of 20 th century, when Charles Kittel theoretically predicted their existence in perpendicularly magnetized ferromagnetic films The discovery of new fascinating properties of ferromagnetic rings (vortex and onion magnetic states below saturation, specific features of the switching behavior and peculiarities of magnetic dynamics) Obvious advantage of magnetic rings when compared with dots is the option to vary the internal diameter, which provides additional possibility to control their magnetic properties, including the SW spectra. This explains the extensive investigation of magnetic rings during the last twenty years. However, in previous studies of magnetic dynamics, the main attention was paid to thin rings (with thickness below 50 nm) Ferromagnetic rings have axial symmetry similar to dots, but the topological nonequivalence of the shape of dots and rings leads to specific differences of corresponding SW spectra even in the case of thin nanoparticles However, for the SWs in magnetically saturated samples so far this was always the case. In this work we prepared ferromagnetic rings array by combining lithography (ring width 400 nm, dipolar limit) with a large thickness (100 nm, exchange limit). Opposite to the majority of previous investigations, we consider the saturated state, when the external magnetic field is applied perpendicularly to the rings' plane (perpendicular geometry). The observed SW modes are inhomogeneous along the sample thickness and their intensities are not reciprocally proportional to mode number, as in the typical SW resonance, that was attributed to the competition between exchange and dipolar fields. A simple analytical approach presented here fits quantitatively the experimental data. The periodic array of Ni80Fe20 rings was fabricated on a silicon substrate using deep ultraviolet lithography at 248 nm exposure wavelength followed by electron beam evaporation and ultrasonic assisted lift off process in resist thinner. An adhesion layer of 5 nm Cr followed by 100 nm thick Ni80Fe20 film were deposited at a constant rate of 0.4 Å/s with a base pressure of 4 × 10 - 8 Torr. Details of the fabrication process are described elsewhere The microwave absorption of the samples was studied using broadband perpendicular ferromagnetic resonance spectroscopy (FMR) at room temperature. The special attention was given to the precise alignment of the external magnetic bias field Hop along the normal to the sample plane. Microwave signal was generated by a continuous wave microwave generator at a specific frequency in the range from 6 GHz to 13 GHz. The samples were placed on top of a 50 Ω microstrip line with the ring arrays facing the line. The width of the microstrip line was 3 mm, the size of the sample -5×5 mm, and the intensity of microwave signal on the sample was estimated to ne 2 dBm. Hop was additionally modulated with an ac field (Hac) of 20 Oe, generated by the pair Helmholtz coils placed around dc magnet poles. The output dc signal of the interferometric detector was fed into a digital lock-in amplifier which was locked to the Hac modulation signal. The FMR signal detected in this way represents the first derivative of the field sweeping absorption curve at a selected frequency. For each frequency Hop was swept from 18 kOe to 0. A sketch of the field geometry is shown as the top right inset in Fig. The microwave absorption spectrum for a 100 nm thick Ni80Fe20 continuous film at f = 11 GHz is shown in Fig. Here A is the exchange stiffness constant, and K is the out-of-plane wave vector of the spin wave excitations. Standard Ni80Fe20 values were selected for the parameters A and γ, A= 1.3×10 -6 erg/cm, γ/2π = 2.93 MHz/Oe, while the quantized values of K were extracted from the experimental resultstodescribe the field gaps between the three observed modes, K1 = 0.47π/a, K2 = 1.4π/a, K3 = 2.3π/a, where a = 100 nm is the film thickness. Such values of K are not standard for spin wave resonance with "pinning" conditions at the surfaces z = ±a/2 (when quantized values of K for detectable modes should be K1 = π/a, K2 = 3π/a, K3 = 5π/a), or for spin wave resonance with "free" boundary conditions (when only one homogeneous "Kittel" mode with K1 = 0 could be observed in experiment). Therefore, mixed boundary conditions take place in this case. If 21 KK  and 32 KK  are close to 2, the equal pinning forces act at the both surfaces of the film, and the boundary conditions for spin wave excitations can be described by only one pinning parameter. However in our case such values are much smaller (actually 21 KK  and 32 KK  are close to / a  ). This experimental observation gives the evidence of different pinning at the upper and lower film's surfaces, which strengths can be described by two different pinning parameters, protective layer was deposited on top of NiFe film. As a result, the bottom surface of NiFe film is free from oxide layer (remnant oxygen on the substrate was absorbed by Cr film), therefore pinning is almost absent. On the contrary, the top surface of NiFe film was exposed to the air during chamber venting, which led to its oxidation, and, subsequently, to the noticeable pinning parameter. The profile of the spin wave excitation along the film's thickness can be chosen in the next form, cos( ) sin( ) , where the amplitudes While the analytical theory of SW in thin circular magnetic dots was developed more than ten years ago for both saturated where ( ) m   can be performed as a linear combinationof zeroth-order Bessel functions of the first and the second kind, We also assume, that the functions ( ) m   satisfy pinning conditions at the ring's edges, Full pinning is actually an approximate assumption for the nanostructures whose thickness is not extremely smallin comparing with the lateral dimension. However our preliminary estimations proved that in the present case this approach is reliable, as additional corrections of boundary conditions on the sides of the ring does not change the result significantly. Application of thepinning conditions leads to the system of two equations, from which the quantized values of the in-plane wave vector , and the corresponding So, due to the system's confinement in radial and axial directions, every spin wave mode profile corresponds to the set of two quantized values of wave vectors (km, Kn). Further, we have used the set of two numbers (m,n), to identify the mode profile μm,n(ρ, z),the corresponding frequency fmn and the effective matrix element of the inhomogeneous demagnetizing field Nmn. The effective demagnetizing factor of the ring along the normal direction is also a function of radial and axial coordinates, Applying the formula we receive for N(ρ, z) of the ring with the inner radius r and the outer radius R the next expression, To explain the experimentally observed FMR spectra of rings (Fig. ) which can be calculated by employing the formulae (2), ( ) where   In the case K = 0 (i.e., when the mode's profile is homogeneous along z), , i.e. coincides with the matrix element of dipole-dipole interaction for perpendicularly magnetized thin films and for planar elements like circular dots The first five roots of (4) can be calculated numerically. In the case of r = 1100 nm and R = 1500 nm, we have β1 = 11.77, β2 = 23.554, β3 = 35.337, β4 = 47.12, β5 = 58.902. The corresponding profiles of the radial component, μm(ρ), calculated by formula (3), are presented in It is natural to assume that the boundary conditions for rings at the surfaces z = ±a/2 are similar to the boundary conditions for the reference film. Hence, the corresponding values of outof-plane wave vectors Ki are close to the set that we defined before for the 100 nm thick continuous film, i.e., K1 = 0.47π/a and K2 = 1.4π/a. Next we will show that the theoretical approach, developed in the paper allows us to explain the physical origin of such effect. As the demagnetizing field in infinite films -4πM does not depend on Kn while F(k = 0, K) = 0 for any K (formula (10a)), the field gaps between different modes in the films are defined only by the exchange interactions, i.e. the term The results are presented in Fig. Using the broadband ferromagnetic resonance technique, we observed the important peculiarity of standing spin wave modes in isolated 100 nm thick Ni80Fe20 rings in the perpendicular geometry in comparing with the reference film, particularly the non-monotonic dependence of the absorption amplitudes from the resonance magnetic field. The multi-resonance spectra of the 100nm reference film demonstrate that modes with different inhomogeneous profiles along the film thickness are excited. It is natural to assume that the modes with inhomogeneous profiles along the thickness of the ring are detected as well. To describe such kind of excitations, we calculated spin waves dispersion in rings, taking into account the dependence of mode profile from two spatial variables, radial coordinate ρ and axial coordinate z. This allowed us to achieve a quantitative agreement between experimental data and calculations of spin wave dispersion. Developed theoretical approach explains the physical reason of the observed effect as a competition between exchange and dipolar fields acting at the spin excitations in confined planar particles. where σ is a pinning parameter, spin wave excitations are chosen as a superposition of cosinusoidal and sinusoidal functions: Inserting (A2) into (A1) we receive the next system of homogeneous linear equations with unknown coefficients AK and BK: sin( / 2) cos( / 2) cos( / 2) sin( / 2) 0 sin( / 2) cos( / 2) cos( / 2) sin( / 2) 0 From (A3) we find the transcendental equation This is easy to see, that when the differences between wave-vectors along thickness of the film are about / a  , like in our case, the simple approach (presented above) with equal pinning at the both surfaces of the film cannot explain why all three modes are detectable. Really, assume that for the first mode  , i.e., this mode has sinusoidal form and its intensity is equal to zero, which conclusion does not agree with our experiment. If we assume that 1 cos( ) 0 Ka  , this is easy to prove in the same way, that the third mode is undetectable. This is a typical situation, when there is a reason to assume different pinning at the upper and lower boundaries of the film and to introduce two different pinning constants, 1  and 2  . In such a case the boundary conditions can be written in the form (instead of (A1)): () () We have again two cases: In the formulae (A12) and (A13) the function () tg Ka satisfies the relation (A10). 2 ) + 4πMF(k m , K n )]