Deep learning based generative models such as deepfake have been able to generate amazing images and videos. However, these models may need significant transformation when applied to generate crystal materials structures in which the building blocks, the physical atoms are very different from the pixels. Naively transferred generative models tend to generate a large portion of physically infeasible crystal structures that are not stable or synthesizable. Herein we show that by exploiting and adding physically oriented data augmentation, loss function terms, and post processing, our deep adversarial network (GAN) based generative models can now generate crystal structures with higher physical feasibility and expand our previous models which can only create cubic structures. Discovering novel materials for high-temperature superconductors, high-capacity batteries and solar panels are highly desirable in a wide variety of industries. Traditionally, this new materials exploration step is mostly done via a trial-anderror tinkering process, which is both tedious and costly for both experimental exploration or computational exploration using e.g. first principle calculations. With the emergence of high performance computing and the machine learning and deep learning techniques, there are two promising approaches for discovering new materials: (1) generating new chemical formula/compositions Our contribution includes the following: • We develop deep generative models for crystal structure generation for non-cubic materials compared to our previous work • We propose a novel mechanism for data augmentation by exploiting an intrinsic physical property of the crystal structures, the symmetry operations • We develop a physics guided loss function to push the generative models to create more physically meaningful structures. • We develop a physics-guided post processing step to finetune our generated materials structures. Physics guided generative models With a large number of materials, the generator can learn how to assign different fractional coordinates with a multiplicative factor of 0.25 combining with other crystal information, such as lattice and element properties. However, we only focus on three space groups (Fm 3m, F 43m and Pm 3m) in that study. Compared to the 230 space groups in crystal materials, it is critical to develop generative models for other space groups as well for generating materials. However, most other space groups only have relatively small number of materials and we need a way to increase the number of materials for each space group. As discovered in our previous work The larger the number of atoms in the unit cell, the higher the difficulty to optimize its structure successfully. Here, we propose a novel self-augmentation method to increase the training samples for space groups with insufficent samples by exploiting the physical spatial symmetry of the crystal structures. We take CaCO6 (F 43m) as an example from our The material CaCO6 has 32 atoms in the unit cell, of which both Carbon and Calcium elements have 4 unique atom positions and Oxygen has 24 unique ones. For each element, we can choose anyone as the base atom site. The selfaugmentation process is to randomly select one base atom site for different elements to create a sample. The process can be repeated multiple times. In this work, we use 3 sets of base atom positions representations for one sample and each materials can generate multiple number of samples. We use 32 in our model. Hence, one materials can be augmented 32 times with different coordinate combinations with the same lattice, space group encoding and element properties. (c) Physics guided losses Different from our previous model where L inter and L intra are the atom distance losses for different elements and same elements in our 3 sets of base atom positions, respectively. Take first representation in Figure We also set an upper bound for atom distances. The upper bound primarily limits the size of a unit cell and is defined as follow: where λ volume and λ abc are balancing parameters. We calculate the cosine similarities between volume, unit cell lengths for real and fake materials in a minibatch. (d) Clustering and merging atoms of the same element to avoid colliding atoms One of the challenges for generating structures with high symmetry is that they tend to have a large number of symmetry operations. For example, Here we propose a post-processing step to reduce the number of atoms in the unit cell. We cluster the nearby atoms of the same element and merge the elements that are crowd together using hierarchical clustering. Figure We apply the VASP We collect the training crystal structures from the Materials Project Our losses consist of three parts: discriminator loss, generator loss and physics loss. Wasserstein distance is used to improve the model stability and balancing parameter for gradient penalty is 10.0 in this work. λ inter and λ intra are 3.5 and 5.0. λ volume and λ abc are 12.5 and 5.0. Learning rate for discriminator is 0.0002. Learning rate for generator and physics losses are both 0.0005. All training code are written using Pytorch. We trained generative model for 12 different space groups and generated 50,000 structures. Some of the generated stable crystal structures are shown in Figure 