Laser ablation is often explained by a two-temperature model (TTM) with different electron and lattice temperatures. To realize a classical molecular dynamics simulation of the TTM, we propose an extension of the embedded atom method to construct an interatomic potential that is dependent on the electron temperature. This method is applied to copper, and its validity is demonstrated by comparison of several physical properties, such as the energy-volume curve, phonon dispersion, electronic heat capacity, ablation threshold, and mean square displacement of atoms, with those of finite-temperature density functional theory. The development of ultrashort pulse lasers has opened up a new research field, where many intensive investigations have been performed due to the peculiarity of the phenomena caused by irradiation with ultrashort pulse lasers. Irradiation of ultrashort pulse laser causes a nonequilibrium state that is extremely different from the equilibrium state. Specific phenomena observed in the nonequilibrium state have been reported to date. For example, irradiation of a ultrashort pulse laser onto a solid surface produces an ultrafast structural change, 1,2 coherent phonon, The nonequilibrium state is very complicated, so that no systematic description has been offered to date. One of the most employed methods to investigate ultrashort laser-irradiated metals is the well-known twotemperature model (TTM). Based on this TTM with the finite-temperature density functional theory (FTDFT), previous simulations have succeeded in reproducing the phenomena of laser irradiated materials, such as the resolution of the Jahn-Teller distortion in bismuth Care should be taken in simulations of ablation caused by ultrashort pulse laser irradiation because significantly large volume changes and large displacement from the equilibrium position are involved in this phenomena. In addition, the dynamics around the equilibrium volume, such as the phonon dispersion and bulk modulus, are implied to be important for representation of the spallation processes during ablation. In this paper, we propose a function of the T edependent IAP within the EAM potential in Sec. II. We then suggest a parameter fitting strategy for the T edependent IAP parameters in Sec. III. From a comparison with the calculation results based on FTDFT, we also show that the T e -dependent IAP reproduces important physical properties for ultrashort pulse laser ablation, such as the mean square displacement and the ablation threshold T e , in Sec. IV. Finally, we provide conclusions in Sec. V. A. Embedded atom method (EAM) potential (Te = 0) We start from a brief review of the conventional EAM potential at T e = 0 K. The EAM potential 21 is a simple empirical many-body potential for metals. In this potential, the total energy of a system E tot is expressed as Here, E two is the two-body potential, and E emb is the many-body potential or so-called embedded potential. E two is the repulsive part of the potential energy, and E emb is the attractive part because it represents the cohesive energy. E two is generally written as where i and j are atom indices, r ij represents the distance between the i-th and the j-th atoms, V is the pair function, and N is the total number of atoms. Finnis and Sinclair where A is a fitting parameter, and where the function φ(r ij ) is the pair potential and is dependent on only r ij . ρ i represents the host electron density at the i-th atom created by its surrounding atoms. From here, we derive Eqs. ( where E c i is the center energy of d i (E) and f (E) is the Fermi-Dirac distribution. Using E band i , E emb is expressed as In the case of T e = 0, this equation can be written as where E F is the Fermi energy. Under the rectangular model, d i (E) can be written as where N a is the number of electron states and W i represents the band width. In this model, Eq. ( Using the number of electrons at the i-th atom N e i , the following equation can be derived: Using this equation, Eq. ( If we assume that the number of electrons at the i-th atom is conserved, which is physically reasonable in metals, then N e i is a constant value. N a is also a constant value so that the following relation can be derived: The second moment μ (2) i , can be calculated as follows In the second equality, Eq. ( (2) i is a summation of the square of the transfer energy t(r ij ), between the atomic orbitals of the i-th and j-th atoms, so that μ (2) i can be expressed as a function of r ij . Combined with Eq. (4), μ (2) i can be written as Using Eqs. ( Based on this consideration, Eqs. ( To construct the function of the T e -dependent IAP that can be applied to the condensed state and the atomic state, we consider the following. The following function is used as a function form of the T e -dependent IAP for the free energy of the system: where F tot (T e ) and S tot (T e ) are the total free energy of the system and the total electronic entropy of the system, respectively. E tot (T e ) and S tot (T e ) are expressed by the following equations: Here, E two (T e ) is the two-body potential, and E emb (T e ) and S emb (T e ) are the embedded potentials. We assume that S tot (T e ) can be expressed by the embedded potential form because S tot (T e ) is not attributed to two-body effects, but is attributed to the many-body effect from the occupation rate of the density of states. The electronic entropy of the i-th atom for independent particles that occupy single-particle states S i (T e ), is expressed as The total electronic entropy S tot (T e ) can then be expressed as Figure where μ represents the chemical potential. Using Eqs. ( This relation indicates that if Eq. ( Furthermore, using the 2nd-order Taylor expansion of the Fermi-Dirac distribution, this equation is rewritten as (24) Using this equation, the electronic entropy of the atomic state S atom , where the local DOS is expressed as the delta function, can be expressed as Similarly, from Eq. ( Therefore, the following relation can be derived: Here, we explain the fitting parameters to represent the T e -dependent IAP for the free energy in Eq. ( where α 1 (T e ), α 2 (T e ), a 1 (T e ) and a 2 (T e ) are the fitting parameters, and ρ i is described as: The internal energy in Eq. ( In addition to using Eq. ( where Eq. ( Here we explain the flow used to determine the parameters of the T e -dependent IAP for MD simulations of laser ablation. In this study, the following two processes were performed (Figure Here, we explain the details of the fitting process. Parameter fitting of E tot (T e ) and F tot (T e ) was performed at 300 K, and from T e = 5000 to 50000 K with an increment of 5000 K. Parameter values of the other T e are estimated by linear interpolation. A simple example of the interpolation is represented in Fig. First, parameter fitting was started from T e = 300 K. We intend to obtain both appropriate F tot (T e ) and E tot (T e ); therefore, the parameter fitting of these values are carried out separately. Parameter fitting of E tot (T e ) is performed at each T e before the fitting of F tot (T e ), i.e., Below threshold value ? Fitting data [E tot (T e ) and F tot (T e )] are calculated using the VASP code The root mean square error (RMSE) was used as the evaluation function for the parameter fitting. The definition of the RMSE is where E FTDFT is the internal energy or the free energy of the FTDFT calculations and E IAP is that of the IAP calculations. q is the index of the structures and N atom q is the number of atoms in the q-th structure. The nonlinear mean square method was used for the parameter fitting. The Gauss-Seidel method was used to solve the non-linear equations. In the fitting process, many IAP [E tot (T e ) and F tot (T e )] were obtained as candidates. In this process, the best IAP was selected from these IAP for the ablation simulation. The best IAP was considered as the potential that could reproduce the FTDFT results of the cohesive energy, the lattice constant, the bulk modulus, the phonon dispersion, the means square displacement (MSD), and the ablation threshold electron temperature T thr e because these values are expected to be important for a valid ablation simulation. The definition of the MSD is where t is the elapsed time after T e is increased, and r i (t) represents the position of the i-th atom at t. The cohesive energy, the lattice, and the bulk modulus are standard physical properties that should be reproduced by any IAP. The phonon dispersion represents the stability of the structure and is related to the melting temperature, which is important to describe the spallation process. The MSD is related with the diffusion of atoms and the expansion rate, and thus changes significantly with each phase, i.e., solid, liquid, and gas. The importance of T thr e in an investigation of the mechanism of ablation is obvious. The cohesive energy, the lattice constant, and the bulk modulus B, are calculated by fitting the energyvolume (EV ) curve to the following Murnaghan equation of state, 43 where V , V 0 , and B ′ are the volume, equilibrium volume, and the derivative of B with respect to pressure, respectively. In this study, if all the errors of these values are below 20%, then the IAP is considered to be an appropriate potential. Calculation conditions for the phonon dispersion are as follows. Forces that act on atoms were calculated using the VASP code First-principles MD simulations were performed to calculate the MSD and T thr e . The details of the MD simulation are the same as those explained for the fitting process. MD simulations were performed three times with different initial configurations. When the bottom and surface atoms are within the cutoff radius of the IAP, ablation is considered to have occurred at this T e . We consider that if the error of T thr e is less than 2500 K, then this IAP is appropriate. The MSD calculation results are used to determine the best IAP from all IAP that satisfy all the criteria explained above. Here, we analyze the validity of the IAP obtained by comparison of the IAP calculation results with the FTDFT calculation results. The RMSE of the fitting results with the best IAP is shown in Fig. B. Volume dependence of E and F Figure The results for the cohesive energy, lattice constant, and bulk modulus at T e = 300 K are summarized in Table I. The result of the IAP calculations overestimates the value of the bulk modulus, whereas the values of the lattice constant and the cohesive energy are very close to the experimental values. Figure Figure G. Electronic heat capacity: Ce(Te) Figure The IAP was developed for high-electron temperature simulation and the validity of the developed IAP was demonstrated. First, we extended a formalism of the EAM potential to the T e -dependent potential under the rectangular model. We then showed a fitting methodology for parameters of the developed T e -dependent IAP. The developed T e -dependent IAP was applied to copper, and its validity was demonstrated by a comparison of several physical properties, such as the energy-volume curve, phonon dispersion, electronic heat capacity, ablation threshold, and the MSD of atoms, with those calculated by FTDFT. The calculated results of the developed T e -dependent IAP for properties important to describe laser ablation, such as the MSD and ablation threshold T e , were in good agreement with the results of these properties calculated by FTDFT. These results indicate that laser ablation caused by ultrashort pulse laser irradiation of metals can be simulated with certain accuracy.