Slow light waveguides are advantageous for implementing high-performance singlephoton sources required for scalable operation of integrated quantum photonic circuits (IQPCs), though such waveguides are known to suffer from propagation loss due to backscattering. A way to overcome the drawback is to use topological photonics, in which robust waveguiding in topologically-protected optical modes has recently been demonstrated. Here, we report single-photon sources using single quantum dots (QDs) embedded in topological slow light waveguides based on valley photonic crystals. We demonstrate Purcell-enhanced single-photon emission from a QD into a topological slow light mode with a group index over 20 and its robust propagation even under the presence of sharp bends. These results pave the way for the realization of robust and high-performance single-photon sources indispensable for IQPCs. High-performance single-photon sources are recognized as a key element for scalable operation of integrated quantum photonic circuits (IQPCs) based on discrete variables. To implement such a quantum light source, it is essential to incorporate solid-state quantum emitters, such as semiconductor quantum dots (QDs), into photonic nanostructures for efficiently funneling their radiation into IQPCs. Among various platforms, slow light waveguides in photonic crystals (PhCs) [ 1 ] are particularly attractive. The slow light modes largely enhance light-matter interactions, which accelerate the emission of quantum emitters into the modes via the Purcell effect and thereby boost the performance of the single-photon source. In addition, the photonic bandgap effect in the PhCs strongly suppresses unwanted radiation into non-guided modes and thus further improves the source efficiency. Importantly, the slow light waveguides in PhCs have also been employed for studying nonlinear optics at single-photon levels [ 2 ] , and chiral lightmatter interactions [ 3 ] . However, PhC waveguides are known to often suffer from non-negligible propagation loss due to backscattering, which becomes more prominent when approaching the slow light regime [ 4 , 5 ] . Since the backscattering is induced by structural imperfections, which are inevitably accompanied with nanofabrication processes, a rather different approach might be necessary to solve the issue. One possible strategy for mitigating the scattering loss in the slow light PhC waveguides is the use of topological photonics. Topologically-protected modes have been demonstrated to exhibit robust waveguiding immune to disorders [ 6 ] . Among reported topological waveguides, those based on valley photonic crystals (VPhCs) [ 7 -14 ] have attracted much attention, since they can be realized using simple dielectric slabs. Therefore, VPhCs can be naturally implemented in conventional photonic integrated circuit platforms [ 7 , 8 ] and hence can be combined with QDs [ 9 , 11 , 15 , 16 ] . So far, the coupling of single QDs to topological waveguides have been demonstrated [ 17 ] . However, all these demonstrations utilized fast light modes that naturally emerge in topological bandgaps. In contrast to slow light modes, such fast light modes could exhibit only moderate enhancement in light-matter interactions. In this Article, we report single-photon sources based on single QDs embedded in topological slow light VPhC waveguides. Single QDs coupled to the topological slow light waveguide exhibit large Purcell enhancement of spontaneous emission rate up to a factor of ~ 12. The generated single-photons robustly propagate through the slow light mode with a high group index (ng) over 20 even with sharp waveguide bends. These results pave the way toward high-performance integrated quantum light sources required for IQPCs. Figure The waveguide is formed at the interface between two topologically-distinct VPhCs, denoted as type A (colored in blue) and type B (red). Figure Figure nm. The highest ng extracted from the measured FP fringes for the straight and Z-shaped waveguide are ~ 40 in the topological band. It is noted that we obtained higher ng of up to ~56 for topological modes in a different waveguide which exhibits a clearer FP spectrum particularly near its high ng region. These results demonstrate robust propagation of light emitted from QDs through topological slow light waveguides even under the presence of the sharp bends. The observed contrast between trivial and topological modes in PL spectra also highlights the impact of the topological protection in slow light waveguides. For the estimation of the BZ edge position of the fabricated topological waveguides, we fitted the measured ng for 11 different samples with the same design using theoretical curves computed by the 3D PWE method (solid lines in Figure The fitting curve was plotted in Figure Next, we optically investigated single QDs in straight waveguides at 6.5K. For inspecting each single QD, we excited a QD in a waveguide by impinging 775 nm laser pulses and measured its PL emission guided through the waveguide modes from the right-side output port one by one, as depicted in the inset of Figure QDs measured in unpatterned area (~ 1.2 ns). The observed lifetime reduction suggests that the emission rate of QD-A was enhanced by the Purcell effect in the topological slow light mode. Note that we also confirmed single-photon emission from the QD-A by intensity autocorrelation measurements. We also investigated wavelength dependence of QD spontaneous emission rates for 49 different QDs in 10 different straight waveguides. Figure Figure In order to confirm the single-photon nature of the QD emission, we performed intensity autocorrelation measurements on QD-B using a Hanbury Brown-Twiss setup equipped with two SSPDs. Figure In summary, we have demonstrated QD-based single-photon sources embedded in topological slow light VPhC waveguides. We observed a large reduction in PL lifetime of a single QD by a factor of up to ~12 due to the Purcell effect in the topological slow light modes. In the slow light regime with a high ng of ~25, we demonstrated Purcell-enhanced single-photon generation from a QD and its robust propagation even under the presence of sharp waveguide bends. These results will be of importance for the development of topologically-protected IQPCs with robust and high- Here, E(r) represents local electric field at a position r in the waveguide. The electric field of the waveguide modes was calculated by the 3D plane wave expansion method. We assumed that the QD dipole is primarily coupled to the electric field towards the wave propagation direction (Ex). Since the QDs exist only in the GaAs slab, the maximum possible Γ wg s were calculated using the maximum field intensity within the dielectric region. The calculated Γ wg s for each waveguide mode plotted in Figure Here, E x and E y are the electric field of x and y components in waveguide. The locations at which |S3| approaches 1 will exhibit strong chiral coupling with a circularly polarized QD emission.