Many computational models have been developed to predict the rates of atomic displacements in two-dimensional (2D) materials under electron beam irradiation. However, these models often drastically underestimate the displacement rates in 2D insulators, in which beam-induced electronic excitations can reduce the binding energies of the irradiated atoms. This bond softening leads to a qualitative disagreement between theory and experiment, in that substantial sputtering is experimentally observed at beam energies deemed far to small to drive atomic dislocation by many current models. To address these theoretical shortcomings, this paper develops a first-principles method to calculate the probability of beam-induced electronic excitations by coupling quantum electrodynamics (QED) scattering amplitudes to density functional theory (DFT) single-particle orbitals. The presented theory then explicitly considers the effect of these electronic excitations on the sputtering cross section. Applying this method to 2D hexagonal BN and MoS2 significantly increases their calculated sputtering cross sections and correctly yields appreciable sputtering rates at beam energies previously predicted to leave the crystals intact. The proposed QED-DFT approach can be easily extended to describe a rich variety of beam-driven phenomena in any crystalline material. The holy grail of materials engineering is atomic scale control of the material structure. Towards this aim, electron irradiation by transmission electron microscopy (TEM) can be an effective means of structural manipulation with spatial control Sputtering occurs when the energy transferred to the PKA is greater than the PKA's displacement threshold E d . This means that a displacement is possible only if the kinetic energy of the beam electron exceeds some critical energy c . Many computational models have been proposed to predict both E d and c to calculate electron beam-induced sputtering rates in 2D crystals To account for these effects, we combine quantum electrodynamics (QED) and density functional theory (DFT) to derive the probability of beam-induced electronic excitation in 2D insulating crystals. The basic idea is as follows: DFT can provide effective singleparticle states that can be decomposed into a plane-wave basis This paper is divided into three sections. First, we describe the key physical processes that dictate the rate of beam-induced sputtering in a 2D insulating crystal. Second, we derive the probability of beam-induced electronic excitation in these materials as a function of beam energy. Finally, we show how this excitation probability can be used to predict sputtering cross sections in hBN and MoS 2 that quantitatively agree with experiment. The majority of present-day beam-damage models focus solely on the interaction between the beam electron and target nucleus. These models are thus centered on one process: energy transfer from the beam electron to the nucleus. For this, one defines a differential cross section dσ/dE( b , E) providing the distribution of energy transfers E for a given beam energy b . The McKinley and Feshbach differential cross section can adequately describe dσ/dE for light nuclei (Z < 20) where p b is the momentum of the beam electron, β is its velocity, Z is the atomic number of the target nucleus, and α is the fine structure constant. One can then calculate the displacement cross section by integrating dσ/dE over all E large enough to cause a displacement, so that where E max ( b ) is the maximum possible energy transfer for a given beam energy, i.e, the energy transfer resulting from a direct collision, and the step function θ enforces that the cross section is zero when E max < E d . We will leave the step function implicit going forward for the sake of compactness. The critical energy c is then the beam energy for which E max = E d . Therefore, the observation of sputtering at energies well below c is completely at odds with equation To address the limitations of equation ( 1. Beam and material electrons: a beam electron can excite some number n i ground state electrons to the conduction band (i denotes the initial interaction with the beam). The probability of this event for a given beam energy b is P i ( b , n i ). 2. Material electrons and nuclei: Some number n f beam-induced excitations can survive long enough for the target atom to leave its original site (f denotes the final system at the completion of sputtering). This depends on the nuclear kinetic energy E and the excitation lifetime τ . The probability that n f of the n i excitations survive is 3. Beam electrons and material nuclei: the energy transferred to a material nucleus by the beam electron can exceed the PKA's displacement threshold E d (n f ), which depends on the number of surviving excitations n f . We define {E d } as the set of all displacement thresholds for all possible n f . Sputtering occurs when E > E d (n f ). The differential cross section for an energy transfer E from the beam electron to material nucleus is dσ/dE( b , E). The sputtering cross section can then be calculated by coupling dσ/dE to P i and P f for all possible n i and n f . With the terms defined above, this excitation-sensitive sputtering cross section can be written as If P i and P f are non-negligible when n i and n f are nonzero, and E d depends strongly on n f , then interactions with the material electrons must be considered. We will later show that this makes σ in equation ( For a crystal in its ground state, an occupied electron energy eigenstate has zero overlap with any unoccupied state. However, the collision of a beam electron can give an occupied state a momentum boost that breaks this orthogonality. Thus, the boosted ground state has a nonzero probability of being measured in an excited state. We can use this idea to derive P i ( b , n i ), the probability that a beam electron with kinetic energy b excites exactly n i material electrons. The derivation can be broken down into four steps: (i) determine the amplitude for a free electron to scatter from one momentum eigenstate into another after collision with another free electron; (ii) generalize the formalism to obtain the amplitude for scattering from one wave packet into another by summing over the amplitudes for each momentum component of one wave packet to scatter into each momentum component of the other; (iii) decompose a pair of occupied and unoccupied crystal states into a momentum basis and plug them in as incoming and outgoing wave packets respectively, then square the amplitude to obtain the corresponding excitation probability for a particular transition; (iv) Compute the sum of all transition probabilities and use combinatorics to determine P i ( b , n i ). The following subsections address each step (i-iv) in detail. We first derive the scattering amplitude for momentum transfer between two free electrons via Møller scattering ūs4 (p 4 ) γ μ u s1 (p 1 ) 1 where s n = 1 or 2 denotes the spin of the nth electron, u s (p) is a Dirac spinor, and ūs (p) is its conjugate (section S1). The factor of 1/2 before the summation arises from the assumption that the incoming states are spin unpolarized. The first term in brackets is the t-channel describing momentum transfer p 3p 2 and the second is the u-channel describing momentum transfer p 4p 2 . Because the DFT cutoff energy is much smaller than the beam energy, it is always the case that |p 2 | is much smaller than |p 1 |. Furthermore, we need only consider outgoing momenta for which the kinetic energy associated with either |p 3 | or |p 4 | falls within the DFT cutoff energy. In these cases, the magnitude of one outgoing momentum is similar to |p 2 |, while that of the other is much greater. This means that one channel's momentum transfer is always much larger than the other's. As the momentum transfers reside in the denominators of either channel in equation We can use the resulting M to obtain the free electron scattering amplitude where T is the scattering operator The free particle scattering amplitude in equation ( On the right side, we have inserted two resolutions of the identity given in equation (S8). Inserting equation ( Using the delta function to integrate over p 4 and p z 3 yields where it is understood that p 4 and p 3 satisfy p 1 + p 2 = p 3 + p 4 (section S3). The normalization of 4-momentum states |p n in terms of 3-momentum states |p n as defined in equation (S9) allows us to rewrite the expression as We can then discretize the momenta by replacing d 3 p i /(2π) 3 with V -1 and d 2 p ⊥ i /(2π) 2 with A -1 , where V and A are the volume and cross sectional area of the simulated crystal, i.e., the volume and cross sectional area of the unit cell times the number of k-points used to sample the BZ. With this, the amplitude for electron states |φ 1 and |φ 2 to scatter into |φ 3 and |φ 4 takes the form 1 In the next subsection, we replace |φ 1...4 with states relevant to electron beam-induced excitation. We now consider the specific case of beam-induced excitations to determine the form of the four electron states in equation The values of 1...4 need to be clarified before moving forward. The zeroth components of the initial and final beam momenta obey the free particle dispersion relations, so The beam energy that appears in equation ( Sputtering from a 2D crystal often requires that the beam electron is backscattered or nearly backscattered, in which case, its final trajectory after collision with the nucleus is nearly antiparallel to its initial trajectory and perpendicular to the crystal surface. Given that many 2D materials (including hBN and MoS 2 ) possess inversion and/or reflection symmetry about the crystal plane, we assume that the likelihood of excitation before and after the collision are about equal. In light of this, we calculate the excitation probability during a sputtering event assuming the beam electron's trajectory is not altered by its collision with the nucleus. That is, we impose that p 1 = |p 1 |ẑ until an electronic excitation is induced. We can now evaluate the bra-ket products in equation Meanwhile, the ground and excited crystal states can be expanded into a plane-wave basis, so that where each G is a reciprocal lattice vector. By re-expressing p 2 and p 3 as G 2 + k 2 and G 3 + k 3 respectively, we find Lastly, we do not care where the outgoing scattered electron ends up, so we wish for |p b to satisfy The excitation amplitude is then obtained by plugging in the bra-ket products from equations ( where it is understood that p 2 = (m + nk , G 2 + k) and p 3 = (m + n k , G 3 + k ), and p 4 and p z 3 satisfy p 1 + p 2 = p 4 + p 3 . Squaring this amplitude yields the probability of a single electronic excitation from the valence band state |nk to the conduction band state |n k for a given beam energy b , that is, We are finally ready to derive P i ( b , n i ), the probability that a beam electron excites a particular number of electrons n i . First, we define the sum of all transition probabilities where k and k run over all k-points, n over the valence bands, and n over the conduction bands (those possessing states with energy between the Fermi level and the work function). The index j in the right-most expression labels the possible single-particle excitations (e.g., j = n k ← nk). Combinatorics tells us that the probability of exciting exactly one excitation is In the large-crystal limit, the number of states, and thus the number of transitions, is large so that the summations over j i in equation In this limit, the probability of exactly one beam-induced excitation can be written as In the same way, the probability of two excitations is In general, the probability of exactly n i beam-induced excitations is approximately Thus, we see that the probability P i can be written purely in terms of S. We can now use formula The probabilities plotted in figure With P i ( b , n i ) derived in formula We have demonstrated how the interaction between the beam and material electrons can induce electronic excitations in the material. In this section, we show how these excitations bring about much larger sputtering cross sections than those predicted by a ground state theory. We start by showing how electronic excitations can reduce the displacement threshold E d . We then show that longer excitation lifetimes increase P f for nonzero n f , giving the beam-induced excitations more opportunities to lessen E d . This motivates us to write the sputtering cross section in equation (3) analytically in terms of the excitation lifetime τ . Finally, the resulting equation is used to predict the sputtering rates of boron and nitrogen in hBN and sulfur in MoS 2 , which can be made to agree well with experiment for appropriate values of τ for each material. We begin by describing how beam-induced excitations can reduce the displacement threshold E d in a process called bond softening. As E d is the lower bound of integration over E in equation ( Here instead, we make three simplifying assumptions that allow us to calculate E d with only ground state DFT. Before describing these assumptions, we first define some important terms. Consider the moment immediately after the beam electron collides with a material nucleus. The nucleus now has a velocity corresponding to the kinetic energy E transferred from the beam electron. The resulting nuclear motion away from its equilibrium position causes the energy of the system to increase. In this sense, the system climbs an energy surface from the bottom of its equilibrium well. Far away from the well's bottom, the energy surface eventually plateaus. If the system reaches this plateau, the displaced PKA moves freely away from its initial site without deceleration. At this point, we consider the PKA to have sputtered. We call the energy at the well's bottom E 0 and that at the plateau E s . If the energy surface is static throughout the entire process, then the displacement threshold is simply E d = E s -E 0 . When E > E d , the system has enough energy to climb out of the well, and the PKA sputters. Our task now is to determine how beam-induced excitations in the material electrons and their subsequent relaxation affect E 0 and E s . To facilitate this, we make the following assumptions. Assumption 1: the excited electrons and holes occupy the band edges. To justify this, we shift our focus to the material electrons immediately after the collision. There are now n i electrons in the conduction band and n i holes in the valence bands. Kretschmer et al. simulated the time-evolution of these excitations using Ehrenfest dynamics These findings greatly simplify the calculation of E 0 . Given n i excitations, E 0 is just the energy of the pristine system with n i electrons and holes in the CBM and VBM respectively. In the large crystal limit, this amounts to adding the pristine band gap E g to the system's ground state energy n i times. In other words, E 0 (n i ) = E 0 (0) + n i E g . This approximation of course ignores any binding energy between the electron and hole. However, we believe that this formalism allows for an efficient treatment of the lowest order effects of excitation on E 0 . Assumption 2: the sputtered system is in its ground state. Finding the plateau energy E s can be a bit more involved. To calculate it properly, one must track how the excitations in the CBM and VBM evolve as the PKA moves away from the crystal. This would require Ehrenfest dynamics of a supercell over timescales of hundreds of femtoseconds, which is prohibitively expensive. Here we seek a much less costly set of DFT calculations that can still provide a reasonable approximation for E s . To this end, we draw upon another finding of Kretschmer et al. Furthermore, because the states that localize on the PKA converge to the same degenerate p-orbital, the PKA assumes its ground state after it has sputtered, regardless of how many electrons the beam excites. We call the energy of the isolated ground state atom E a . Meanwhile, the convergence of the bonding and antibonding states localized on the remaining vacancy during the displacement causes the excited electron and hole energy levels to cross multiples times. This means that there are plenty of chances for an excited electron to relax nonradiatively as the PKA separates from the material. Thus, we assume that the host crystal also relaxes to its ground state for most sputtering events. Lastly, the sputtering threshold is always larger than the vacancy formation energy, because some of the energy transferred to the PKA disperses to the neighboring atoms. For this reason, we calculate the energy of the vacant system without relaxing the structure, as it has been shown that the free energy gained by leaving the structure unrelaxed roughly matches the energy dissipated to the surrounding material Assumption 3: the PKA travels at a constant velocity. Each number of excitations creates its own energy surface. In this way, electronic excitation and relaxation cause the system to hop from surface to surface. In our problem, the initial beam-induced excitation perches the system on an elevated surface. Once there, electronic relaxation via spontaneous emission (SE) enables downward surface hopping at the cost of the emitted photon energy. In this framework, E d is the energy gained along all energy surfaces that the system traverses during sputtering. For example, suppose the system emits one photon as it sputters. E d is then the energy gained along the portion of the excited energy surface traversed before emission plus that gained along the relaxed surface after emission. This is how SE can change E d . However, the effect of SE on E d must diminish as the PKA moves further away from the crystal. This means there must be some distance d beyond which SE no longer affects the forces on the sputtered atom, leaving the energy surface unchanged. We take d = 4.5 Å in line with Kretschmer et al.'s study, though we acknowledge that the exact meaning of this distance is different in their work We wish to capture this idea while making the calculation of P f as intuitive as possible. We do this by assuming that each energy surface is constant except for a step when the PKA reaches a distance d away from its equilibrium site. This means that immediately after the collision that excites n i electrons, the surface assumes a constant energy E 0 (n i ). Each relaxation via SE causes the system to drop to the surface beneath it, decreasing its energy by E g . We define n f as the number of electronic excitations that survive the PKA's traversal of distance d to the energy step. Thus, the energy of the system just before the PKA reaches the step is E 0 (n f ), Beyond the step, all energy surfaces have energy E s , and SE no longer changes the energy surface. With this formalism, E d is simply the height of the step, Thus we have derived a simple relationship for how electronic excitations affect E d . However, before we show how this relationship affects the sputtering cross section, we must first point out an important caveat. Equation All positive displacement thresholds computed for this work are listed in table In hBN and MoS 2 , occupation of the antibonding state localized on the PKA does not affect the free energy of the sputtered system, since the antibonding and bonding states to converge to the same degenerate p-orbital in the limit that the PKA is isolated from the host material. Therefore, only the excitation lifetime of the host material needs be considered in calculating P f (n i , n f ), the probability that n f of the n i beam-induced excitations survive long enough to reduce the displacement threshold. We define the ratio of surviving excitations as where t s is the time it takes for the sputtered atom to travel a distance d, and the excitation lifetime τ is determined for each material by fitting the cross section to experimental data. Given n i beam-induced excitations, the probability that n f excitations survive is Equation ( Assumption 3 from the previous subsection again aids us here. Because the PKA travels at a constant velocity until it reaches the sputtering distance d, we can write t s from equation ( where we define and the function Ei is the exponential integral, Looking back at equation ( Electron beam irradiation has been shown to bore nanopores in monolayer hBN at beam energies far beneath the calculated ground state critical energy of c ∼ 80 keV In a pristine hBN layer, these beam-induced pores can be initialized from isolated boron and nitrogen vacancies. The atoms surrounding these vacancies have reduced coordination numbers, and thus, smaller displacement thresholds than those in the pristine material. Therefore, the atoms lining the defect are more likely to sputter than their surface counterparts for a given beam energy. As the edge atoms continue to sputter away at a high rate, the nanopore grows, eventually extending up to a few nm in diameter Fitting our cross section curves to the data of Cretu et al. yields an excellent agreement if the predicted excitation lifetime is set to τ ∼ 240 fs. This predicted lifetime is much shorter than the reported excitation lifetime of ∼0.75 ns in pristine hBN We also see that the sputtering cross section, and thus the growth rate of the nanopore, is minimized for beam energies between 30 and 60 keV. Below these energies, the sputtering cross section begins to grow as the beam energy decreases. This is due to a non-negligible probability of final excitation numbers n f > 3, for which E d (n f ) falls below E min (table Kretschmer et al. measured the sputtering cross section of sulfur from MoS 2 for several beam energies ranging from 20 to 80 keV The difference between the two materials' lifetimes leads to markedly dissimilar cross section behaviors at low beam energies. Below beam energies of 30 keV, the cross section of MoS 2 gradually drops to zero with decreasing b . In contrast, hBN's total cross section has a minimum at around 40 keV and begins to increase as b decreases. Eventually, hBN's sputtering cross section peaks before dropping quickly to zero as the beam energy goes to zero (figure We also plot the contributions of n f = 0, 1, and 2 excitations to MoS 2 's sputtering cross section separately. In doing so, we see that the contributions of n f = 1 or 2 would conceal the peak at 30 keV. Thus, it seems that the likelihoods of n f = 1 or 2 are somehow suppressed. This suggests that the individual beam-induced excitations and subsequent relaxation are in some cases correlated. That is, the excitation and/or relaxation rates of a given electronic transition are affected by the coinciding distribution of electronic excitations. Thus, a proper treatment of these excitations and their effect on the sputtering cross section requires that the excitation probabilities of every possible transition are calculated for every possible excitation configuration. Such a nonlinear calculation is beyond the scope of this work, but should certainly be pursued in a future study. Nonetheless, the methods laid out here demonstrate that the consideration of beam-induced excitation can provide a quantitative justification for the sulfur sputtering rate to peak at a beam energy well-below the expected ground state critical energy. In this paper, we developed a first-principles method to more accurately describe electron beam-induced sputtering cross sections in 2D insulating crystals by accounting for beam-induced electronic excitations and their subsequent relaxations. The method combines QED scattering theory with DFT electronic structure calculations to determine the likelihood of beam-induced excitation. The results show that the excitation probability is inversely proportional to both the material's band gap and beam electron's kinetic energy. We then show how these nonzero excitation probabilities increase the predicted sputtering cross sections of both hBN in MoS 2 . These cross sections can be made quantitatively similar to those obtained experimentally by treating the excitation lifetime as a fitting parameter. The methods laid out are computationally efficient, requiring only a few ground state electronic optimization calculations for each cross section curve. Thus, the formalism that we have developed can be easily applied to any 2D crystalline material to simulate the rates of atomic displacement under electron irradiation. With that said, several questions naturally arise from our study. For example, why is the excitation lifetime reduced so drastically during sputtering? How might excitation and relaxation rates of different transitions be correlated? How might preexisting defects affect those rates? These questions urge follow up work to address the full breadth of physical processes involved in beam-matter interactions. Future studies should also consider additional electronic relaxation pathways to determine their effect on P f . Correspondingly, other electronic responses such as ionization, core excitations, and second order electronic excitation effects such as Auger scattering can be incorporated into the calculation of P i Clearly, the combined QED-DFT approach to modeling beam-induced excitations and their effect on the sputtering cross section opens up a rich and diverse field of physics for both theoretical and experimental exploration. We hope that this work and the work it may stimulate can eventually enable the use of electron beams for precise atomic-scale engineering of crystalline materials. DFT Because equation ( Calculations were performed at the Center for Computational Innovations at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Livermore Computing Center at Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory (LLNL), and Compute and Data Environment for Science at Oak Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL), which is supported by the Office of Science of the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) under Contract No. DE-AC05-00OR22725. This work As the excitation amplitude in equation ( where The electron spinors in equation ( where a, b, c, and S ∞ are all fitting parameters that depend on b (figure where A, B, and C are fitting parameters. The parameters for hBN and MoS 2 are given in table To approximate E min , we use the Rutherford displacement cross section (S20) Using the Rutherford cross section instead of the McKinley-Feshbach cross section should be accurate for small beam energies for which β 1. This makes it well-suited for finding E min , since E d (n f ) < E min only for large n f , and large n i (and thus n f ) are much more likely for small beam energies (figure 