A one-dimensional boundary of a two-dimensional topological superconductor can host a number of topologically protected chiral modes. Combining two topological superconductors with different topological indices, it is possible to achieve a situation when only a given number of channels (m) are topologically protected, while others are not and therefore are subject to Anderson localization in the presence of disorder. We study transport properties of such quasi-one-dimensional quantum wires with broken time-reversal and spin-rotational symmetries (class D) and calculate the average conductance, its variance and the third cumulant, as well as the average shot noise power. The results are obtained for arbitrary wire length, tracing a crossover from the diffusive Drude regime to the regime of strong localization where only m protected channels conduct. Our approach is based on the non-perturbative treatment of the non-linear supersymmetric sigma model of symmetry class D with two replicas developed in our recent publication [D. S. Antonenko et al., Phys. Rev. B 102, 195152 (2020)]. The presence of topologically protected modes results in the appearance of a topological Wess-Zumino-Witten term in the sigma-model action, which leads to an additional subsidiary series of eigenstates of the transfer-matrix Hamiltonian. The developed formalism can be applied to study the interplay of Anderson localization and topological protection in quantum wires of other symmetry classes. Quantum localization is a fundamental phenomenon first introduced in the seminal paper by Anderson 1 over 60 years ago. Since then numerous types and forms of localization effects have been identified 2 ranging from the quantum Hall effect We study transport properties of the one-dimenstional (1D) boundary states of a two-dimensional (2D) topolog-ical superconductor of symmetry class D (broken timereversal and spin-rotational symmetries). According to the general classification of topological insulators and superconductors FIG. Probing quasiparticle edge transport is a challenging task in a topological superconductor since electrical transport measurements are compromised by the shunting effect of the superconducting bulk. Spin of edge excitations is also not conserved due to the lack of spinrotational symmetry making their spin conductance an ill-defined quantity. The only conserved physical property of the edge modes is their energy, hence it is only the thermal conductance that can reliably quantify edge transport. This is why topological effects in the superconductors of class D were dubbed as thermal quantum Hall effect (TQHE) One particular way to controllably create a quasi-1D system with both protected and unprotected modes is bringing into contact two 2D topological superconductors with different topological indexes n L and n R as shown in Fig. In the setup of Fig. To simplify the analysis we find it convenient to consider direction-averaged dimensionless conductance of the interface g. We decompose the overall conductance g tot into the contributions of outer edges and inner interface with both quantities averaged over the two possible di-rections of the current 10 : Here the first term corresponds to the direction-averaged contribution of the outer edges of the junction (see Fig. We use the formalism of the supersymmetric nonlinear sigma model The minimal one-replica sigma model of class D allows to calculate only the average conductance g . Higher moments of transport, such as conductance variance or shot noise power require averaging of more than two Green functions. Hence the sigma model with at least n = 2 replicas is required. Such a model was developed in our earlier work Anticipating detailed discussion of our results in Secs. V and VI, in Fig. ( It is worth noting that L loc (m) decreases with increasing m, as can be seen in Fig. The main technical achievement of this paper is the construction of the full set of eigenfunctions for the transfer-matrix Hamiltonian of the two-replica supersymmetric sigma model with the WZW term. This technique is closely connected with the Fourier analysis on the corresponding symmetric superspace (sigmamodel manifold). In our previous work, we have constructed a full set of eigenstates of the Laplace operator on this superspace The paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II we introduce the sigma model formalism in application to the two-replica version of class D and present the calculation scheme for the transport moments. We briefly outline the algorithm described in detail in Ref. 20 and explain the modifications introduced by the WZW term. In Sec. III we construct the radial eigenbasis of the Laplace operator on the sigma-model supermanifold and discuss its differences compared to the m = 0 case. We use the constructed eigenfunctions to build the heat kernel of the sigma model in Sec. IV and comment on the integration peculiarities in the momentum space. We present results of our study in Sec. V and draw conclusions in Sec. VI. An outline of the sigma-model derivation with the WZW term is given in Appendix A. Details of the gauge factor calculation for the vector potential induced by the WZW term can be found in Appendix B. In this Section we introduce the nonlinear sigma-model formalism and apply it to the calculation of the transport properties. In many aspects our analysis follows the simpler m = 0 case (disordered wire without protected modes) and we refer the reader to Ref. 20 for the details of such a calculation. In the present Section we will particularly focus on the points that are specific for the topologically nontrivial m = 0 case. We perform our study in the framework of the supersymmetric nonlinear sigma model By extracting low-energy properties via functional integration approach, we arrive at an effective description of soft electronic modes of the disordered system (diffusons and cooperons) in terms of a field theory for a super-matrix field Q, which belongs to a certain supermanifold. In our case, the supermatrix Q ∈ BF⊗PH⊗R belongs to the tensor product of the Bose-Fermi (BF), particle-hole (PH), and replica (R) spaces. Hence the overall size of Q is 4n. In addition, Q satisfies Q 2 = 1 and is subject to the charge conjugation constraint Q = C T Q T C = -Q. The latter reflects superconducting symmetry of the underlying Bogoliubov-de Gennes Hamiltonian. The matrix C, which defines charge conjugation, should satisfy C T C = 1 and C 2 = -k, where k = diag{1, -1} BF is a signature matrix in the BF space [explicit representation of the matrix C can be found in Appendix B, see Eq. (B2)]. In general, the matrix Q can be represented as The matrix Λ represents a certain point on the sigmamodel manifold satisfying Λ = -Λ, str Λ = 0, and Λ 2 = 1. The whole manifold is then generated by rotations of Λ with elements T from the corresponding supergroup G. Within G there are certain rotations that commute with Λ and hence do not change Q. They form a subgroup K ⊂ G. The sigma-model manifold is thus a symmetric superspace (coset) G/K with [K, Λ] = 0. The sigma-model action for the quasi-1D topological wire of symmetry class D has the form 10 Here ξ = (n L + n R )l is the correlation length and l is the mean free path. The second, Wess-Zumino-Witten (WZW) term in the action takes into account the imbalance between right-and left-propagating channels. Its prefactor m = |n R -n L | determines the number of topologically protected modes in the system. An outline of the derivation of Eq. ( For a supersymmetric sigma model of class D with n replicas, the target manifold is SpO(2n, R|2n)/U(n|n) In our earlier work, Ref. 20, we studied a critical regime between topological and trivial gapped states in a Majorana wire of class D. This problem corresponds to the case m = 0 and to the absence of jumps between two parts of the manifold. The latter condition is ensured by the fact that the statistical weight of such jumps changes sign at the transition between trivial and Majorana state 8 . In the present case of an imbalanced system with m = 0, the jumps of the matrix Q are also fully suppressed. Indeed, the WZW term introduces a random phase factor to the amplitude of every jump. Averaging over these phases completely cancels possible contribution of such discontinuous configurations of Q. This is quite natural since both in the critical regime with m = 0 studied earlier and for the topological edge transport with m = 0 considered here full localization does not occur. This means we can limit our study of the sigma model of class D only to the connected component of the manifold SO(2n)/U(n) in the compact sector. The WZW term in the action (4) is written in terms of the matrix T rather than Q. In order to ensure that the action depends only on the Q-matrix configuration, we should apply some additional constraint on the choice of T . First, let us point out that the sigma model is well defined only for closed trajectories in terms of Q. This is consistent with the fact that the theory is derived for edge modes of a 2D topological superconductor, hence they are automatically closed. Second, the manifold of the sigma model of class D is simply connected (since we have already ruled out a possibility of jumps between two disjoint parts of the manifold). This means that any closed trajectory in terms of Q can be continuously deformed into a single point. We will require that the corresponding trajectory in terms of T is also topologically trivial and can be shrunk into a single point within the group G. Note that the group G, unlike the coset space G/K, is not simply connected. Hence this condition on T is not trivial. The derivation of the action (4) in Appendix A explicitly employs this topological property and demonstrates the invariance of the action with respect to reparametrizations of the field trajectory in terms of T . All physical observables of a disordered system can be inferred from the partition function of the nonlinear sigma model. For a system of 1D geometry this partition function is given by the path integral with the sigmamodel action. The symmetry of the sigma-model manifold always allows us to bring the initial point of any trajectory to Λ. Hence we consider only path integrals for trajectories starting at Q = Λ: The end point of the path integral can be also brought to its simplest form by some rotation Q → U -1 ΛU with [Λ, U ] = 0. Such rotations with a constant matrix U do not shift the initial point and also preserve the form of the action. To take advantage of this symmetry we will use the Cartan decomposition of the group G and define Cartan-Efetov coordinates on the sigma-model manifold. Any matrix T ∈ G can be decomposed into the following product: Both matrices U 1 and U commute with Λ and thus belong to the subgroup K ⊂ G, while θ is taken from the maximal abelian subalgebra of group G whose generators anticommute with Λ: {Λ, θ} = 0. This representation is known as the Cartan decomposition of T and θ is an element of the Cartan subalgebra. With such a form of the matrix T , we have The matrix Q is independent of U 1 and belongs to the coset space G/K as was discussed above. We see that by a certain U rotation it is always possible to bring the final point of our path integral (5) to the form Q = Λe θ . Hence the partition function depends on the Cartan angles θ only. Since the Cartan subalgebra is abelian it is always possible to choose a representation that brings θ to explicitly diagonal form [see Eq. (B1)]. In class D with n = 2 replicas there are two Cartan angles in the non-compact boson sector and only one angle in the compact fermion sector. We will denote these angles as θ B1 , θ B2 , and θ F . Certain rotations U can lead to permutations of the diagonal elements of the matrix θ. Effectively this may lead to changing of the sign of any individual angle θ i or to the interchange θ B1 ↔ θ B2 . To remove the ensuing uncertainty in the definition of θ, we will assume The partition function ( Here every derivative is taken at the point θ = 0. Strictly speaking, in the evaluation of the partition function (5) we consider trajectories Q(x) starting at Λ and ending at Q with certain non-zero values of the Cartan angles θ. Such trajectories are not closed and the WZW term in the action is not well-defined for them as explained above. This issue can be resolved in the following way. We augment each trajectory going from Λ to Q with an additional segment that goes back from Q to Λ and makes the trajectory closed. The simplest choice is to take the shortest closing path along a geodesic line on the sigma-model manifold. We only need to add the value of the WZW term along this additional segment to the overall action. More detailed discussion of this closing procedure can be found in Ref. 10. In the subsequent analysis, we will use a special gauge choice [see Eq. ( This will allow us to disregard the contribution of outer edges and focus on the transport along inner interface only. The structure of the symmetric supermanifold of the sigma model can be further detailed by specifying the corresponding roots and root vectors Roots obey a set of remarkable geometrical properties that allows to fully classify all possible symmetric spaces by their root systems It is always possible to represent matrices t that generate the rotation T such that the abelian Cartan subalgebra corresponds to diagonal matrices. Furthermore, it is also possible to bring the matrices representing all positive root vectors to explicitly upper triangular form. Then negative root vectors will be given by lower triangular matrices. We list roots and root vectors for the sigma-model manifold of symmetry class D with n = 2 replicas in Table The knowledge of the root system gives us one important piece of information that will be extensively used below. Namely, it allows us to find the Jacobian of the Cartan parametrization This Jacobian is the square root of the superdeterminant of the metric tensor of the sigma-model manifold and hence defines the invariant integration measure in Cartan angles θ. Evaluation of the partition function ( The result of such an evolution is usually termed the heat kernel. Changing of Ψ with x is governed by the Schrödinger equation with the Hamiltonian derived from the action (4), The initial condition is Ψ(Q, x = 0) = δ(Q, Λ), with the delta function that fixes Q = Λ. The heat kernel can then be expressed as the spectral decomposition over the eigenfunctions φ ν of Ĥ: where ν are the eigenvalues and μ ν is a proper measure. In a given coordinate system X α on the sigma-model manifold, the transfer-matrix Hamiltonian for the action (4) has the form 29 : Here g αβ is the metric tensor related to the length element as The factor J = √ sdet g is the Jacobian [for Cartan coordinates it is given in Eq. ( As was already discussed earlier, this vector potential is written in terms of T rather than Q, and hence is not gauge invariant. Fixing the gauge means assigning a particular unique matrix T to every value of Q. This will allow to express A α as a function of Q. We will use the gauge It means that we fix the matrix U 1 = U -1 in the Cartan decomposition (6) of T . Substituting Eq. ( We can write explicitly the radial Hamiltonian that involves only the Cartan angles θ: where the radial Laplace operator is ) and the Jacobian is given by Eq. ( In the next section we will explicitly construct eigenfunctions of the Hamiltonian (18). In the limit of large noncompact angles θ B1 and θ B2 , the transfer-matrix Hamiltonian (18) greatly simplifies. Assuming θ B1 θ B2 1 [note how the domain (8) restricts possible values of θ], we reduce it to the form Since all the variables are decoupled, we can easily find the limiting form of an eigenfunction: with P being the Jacobi polynomial. The corresponding eigenvalue is The asymtotic plane waves in the noncompact angles are parametrized by momenta q 1,2 , while the dependence on the compact angle θ F is given by the Jacobi polynomial whose index is quantified by l. For brevity, we use the single index q to denote all three components of momentum. In order to ensure that √ Jφ does not exponentially grow at large values of θ, we assume q 1,2 real. At the same time, the eigenfunction has a well-defined single value on the segment 0 < θ F < π provided the Jacobi polynomial index l -m/2 is a non-negative integer. From this analysis of the asymptotic behavior we conclude that the presence of the WZW term in the action and hence the potential term in the transfer-matrix Hamiltonian (18) do not alter the spectrum of eigenvalues (23) in its general form. However, in the following we will show that there are additional families of eigenfunctions, which have m-dependent eigenvalues. Eigenfunctions of the radial Laplace operator (18) can be efficiently constructed by considering the full Laplace operator in Iwasawa coordinates Here V is a matrix that commutes with Λ, ǎ is an element of the Cartan subalgebra parametrized by three angles a B1 , a B2 , and a F , and N = e n is an exponential of a nilpotent matrix n that represents a linear combination of positive root vectors. It is known that in the m = 0 case this parametrization has the following important property. The radial Laplace operator in Iwasawa coordinates [part of the full Laplace operator ( It turns out The radial Laplace operator in the Iwasawa coordinates is not only independent of ǎ but also does not contain any potential whatsoever! Eigenfunctions of the radial Hamiltonian (25) in Iwasawa coordinates are plane waves Below we will also use a short-hand notation for this linear combination: φ q (ǎ) = e iq•a . The corresponding eigenvalue for this plane wave is given by Eq. ( We have thus established a set of radial eigenfunctions in the Iwasawa coordinates. In order to calculate the heat kernel (13), we will need radial eigenfunctions in the Cartan-Efetov coordinates. Let us first relate the two sets of coordinates to each other: This matrix identity allows us to express ǎ and V as functions of θ and U . In Ref. 20, we have discussed in detail how to resolve these equations for ǎ. Solution for the matrix V ( θ, U ) is explained in Appendix B. Let us note that we have chosen here T in the proper radial gauge (17) for the Cartan parametrization. However, this does not correspond to the proper gauge in Iwasawa coordinates since V = 1. We can account for this new gauge choice in the Iwasawa coordinates by multiplying the plane wave eigenfunction (26) with the proper phase factor [cf. Eq. (A25)]: Further steps in the derivation of radial wave functions follow Refs. 20 and 29. By construction, the new function (28) is automatically an eigenfunction of the full Hamiltonian (14) in Cartan coordinates θ and U with the gauge (17). However, this eigenfunction does explicitly depend on U . In order to obtain the corresponding radial eigenfunction that depends on θ only, one has to perform isotropization of (28) over the group K of all possible matrices U : Usually (for noncompact symmetric spaces) isotropization ( Radial eigenfunctions defined by Eq. ( In the m = 0 case 20 , we found that the radial eigenbasis of the Laplace-Beltrami operator on the n = 2 sigma-model supermanifold has a hierarchical structure and consists of three families: (i) the zero mode (just unity for m = 0), (ii) one-parameter family, and (iii) the most generic three-parameter family. While the latter is routinely obtained via the Iwasawa trick, identifying oneparameter family and the zero mode following the same approach is a non-trivial task. It requires modification of the standard procedure to avoid nullification of the integral (29) due to the lack of a complete set of Grassmann variables in each term of the integrand. Below we apply Eq. ( It can be checked by a direct computation that the following function is the zero mode of the Hamiltonian (18): This function can be derived from Eq. ( The one-parameter family of eigenfunctions appears when only the first Iwasawa angle a B1 is present in Eq. ( as follows from Eq. ( Acting with the Hamiltonian (18) on this function and expanding the result in small θ B2 and θ F , we obtain From this expression we see that a unique limiting value of the function at the bosonic line θ B2 = θ F = 0 exists only provided v = 2u. At the same time, the equation for ψ(θ B1 ) acquires a form of the transfer-matrix Hamiltonian of class D with only one replica acting on a function of only one Cartan angle θ B1 . Hence we can readily identify the eigenfunction in this limit Asymptotic expansion at large values of θ B1 yields a plane wave of the following form: The amplitude c q1 that appears here is called Harish-Chandra c-function. It can be derived directly from Eq. ( This expression allows us Generic radial eigenfunctions of the Hamiltonian (18) are parametrized by three components of momentum and are given by the general expression (29). The values of q 1 and q 2 are arbitrary real numbers and l -m/2 must be an integer. The corresponding eigenvalue is given by Eq. (23). It is not feasible to calculate the full integral over U in Eq. ( ( Then the limiting plane wave (22) exhibits some extra exponential growth and dominates at large θ B1 θ B2 1 over other terms. Calculation of the integral (29) under this assumptions yields the Harish-Chandra c-function which is just the prefactor for the asymptotic expression (22): For brevity we are again using a single index q to denote all three components of momentum q 1 , q 2 , and l. Now we remove the above assumption (38) and consider real values of q 1,2 . In this case the plane wave (39) is no longer the only dominant term for large θ. A full eigenfunction must be symmetric with respect to the Weyl group acting on momentum. That is, the function should be invariant under changing sign of q 1 and/or q 2 as well as under interchanging q 1 ↔ q 2 . Thus we can restore the full asymptotics of the eigenfunction by averaging Eq. ( (42) Here we use the following Dirac notations in the noncompact variables: q|θ = q 1 θ B1 + q 2 θ B2 and denote by wq the action of the Weyl group element w in the noncompact sector on the momentum q. Weyl group in the compact sector contains the only symmetry operation l → -1 -l. This symmetry is fulfilled by Eq. ( Besides the large-θ asymptotics, Eq. ( We will use this result later to infer 20 the small-θ expansion required in Eqs. (9). For large enough values of m some extra eigenfunctions appear with either one or both q 1,2 taking discrete imaginary values. We will discuss these cases in the next section. Now, once all the eigenstates of the transfer-matrix Hamiltonian are identified, we are in a position to write the heat kernel as a sum over these eigenstates. According to Eq. ( (44) Here the index ν enumerates all the eigenstates of the transfer-matrix Hamiltonian, ν are the corresponding eigenvalues, and μ ν is the proper weight factor yet to be established. Since the Hamiltonian has both discrete and continuous branches of eigenstates, summation over ν implies either a sum or an integral where appropriate. As discussed in Sec. III, there are in total three different families of eigenstates: the zero mode Ψ 0 , oneparameter family as in the model with one replica, and generic three-parameter family. We have indicated these contributions separately in the right-hand side of Eq. (44). The zero mode (30) enters the expansion (44) with the unit weight. This is the only eigenfunction that is nonzero at the origin θ = 0 and its weight is fixed by the initial condition for the evolution equation (13). Two remaining parts of the heat kernel are considered below. The main guiding principle of our construction is the following. We do know the correct expansion of the heat kernel in the case m = 0 from Ref. 20. The weights of the wave functions in the heat kernel expansion (44) are expressed through the Harish-Chandra c-function describing the large-θ asymptotics. We assume that a similar relation holds in the case of non-zero m with the functions (36) and (40). In order to account for all relevant discrete eigenstates of the Hamiltonian (18), which appear at non-zero m, we will construct the heat kernel by performing analytic continuation of the momentum integrals in Eq. ( The weights for the one-parameter family of eigenfunctions (34) can be deduced from the heat kernel on the "bosonic" line θ B2 = θ F = 0. This is equivalent to finding the heat kernel expansion for the one-replica model Here the eigenvalue is given by Eq. ( This weight function is even in q 1 since the eigenfunctions with momenta ±q 1 actually coincide. This is just a manifestation of the Weyl group symmetry for the model with one replica. Hence in the integral (46) we are supposed to retain only positive q 1 in order to count each eigenfunction once. This provides a correct heat kernel expansion on the line θ B2 = θ F = 0 in the case m = 0. For nonzero m, we should take into account possible localized states that correspond to some discrete imaginary values of q 1 , as was pointed out in the end of Sec. III B. We will achieve this by analytic continuation of the integral (46) in the parameter m starting at m = 0. We begin with "unfolding" the Weyl group symmetry and introduce the modified weight factor implying an integration over all real values of q 1 in Eq. ( [There is also a pair of poles at q 1 = ±im/4 from the denominator of Eq. ( If we deviate from m = 0 by assuming a small positive value of m, this pole acquires a finite residue but also shifts in the upper complex plane and lies now above the real axis. To maintain analyticity of the heat kernel as a function of m we first shift the integration contour in the lower complex plane of q 1 by -i/2 to stay away from the pole at q 1 = im/4 (we can as well shift by any other negative amount between 0 and -i). Then with increasing m we will simultaneously shift the integration contour upwards by im/4. This way we will avoid any possible crossing of the integration contour by the poles (49). With all these modifications, we can write the one-parameter part of the heat kernel as We have thus obtained an exact expression for the onereplica heat kernel in terms of the momentum integral with shifted integration contour. To extract the information about true eigenstates of the Hamiltonian we will now shift the contour back to the real axis collecting all the relevant pole contributions. After this backward shift we can also restore the Weyl group symmetry and "fold" the measure back to Eq. (47) keeping only positive real values of q 1 . This transformation yields We see that aside from the usual eigenfunctions with real positive q 1 there is also a finite set of discrete eigenstates corresponding to imaginary values of q 1 . They are the eigenstates of the Hamiltonian (18) localized by the potential term W . The first such localized eigenfunction appears when m exceeds 4. Let us now discuss the contribution Ψ q1-q2 , (52) where q = (q 1 , q 2 , l). Contribution of the generic eigenfunctions to the heat kernel is dq 1,2 μ q φ q e -2 q x/ξ . (55) Here the eigenvalues q are given by Eq. ( To find appropriate integration limits for q 1,2 we first "unfold" the Weyl group symmetry and extend the integration to all real values of q 1,2 . This is done in full analogy with the one-parameter eigenfunctions studied above. Using the symmetries of the measure, we can reduce the weight down to the following simple product of only two tanh factors: μq = 4ρ q tanh(πq 1 -πq 2 ) tanh(πq 1 -iπm/4). (56) It is straightforward to check that symmetrization of μq with respect to the Weyl group restores the full expression (52). Consider first the poles of this unfolded measure as a function of q 1 . We have a set of poles from the last tanh factor and also two pairs of poles due to the denominator of ρ q : In the second series of poles either n = l -m/2 or n = l -m/2 + 1 hence it is a non-negative integer. The first series of poles shifts only upwards with increasing m so we can avoid crossing with these poles shifting the integration contour in q 1 by the same amount im/4. In the second set, poles with positive imaginary part are moving upwards while negative poles are moving downwards. Hence we do not have any chance of crossing them except for the lowest one q 1 = im/4. This pole exists only in the very first term of the sum (56) with l = m/2. To avoid crossing this pole we will additionally shift our integration contour by an infinitely small amount -i0. Possible poles in the variable q 2 come from the factor tanh(πq 1 -πq 2 ) in Eq. ( We have thus established the following form of the three-parameter part of the heat kernel valid for any positive m: dq 1,2 μq φ q e -2 q x/ξ . (59) As was already done earlier for the one-parameter family, we can now shift integration contours for q 1,2 back to the real axis and collect residues in the poles crossed during this shift. This way we will identify all the relevant eigenstates of the Hamiltonian (18) in the threeparameter family. In order to do this, we first change q 2 to a new integration variable q 2 -q 1 which runs along the real axis. Then we shift the integration contour for q 1 picking residues at the poles (57). Then we restore the q 2 variable and in a similar way shift its integration contour to the real axis. In the end we also "fold" the double integral domain back to the region q 1 > q 2 > 0 and restore the proper integration measure μ q . This procedure yields with the following three terms: in Eq. ( = 16 (63) We see that aside from the standard continuous set of eigenfunctions with real values of q 1,2 there are two extra contributions: a subfamily of eigenfunctions with discrete imaginary q 1 and continuous positive real q 2 and a fully discrete set with both q 1 and q 2 taking imaginary values. The former subfamily of eigenfunctions is localized only in θ B1 while the latter functions are localized fully in both noncompact variables θ B1 and θ B2 . The first halflocalized eigenfunction appears when m exceeds 2 while the fully localized eigenstate is possible provided m ≥ 4. Once the expansion of the heat kernel (44) in eigenfunctions is fully established, we are in a position to evaluate all transport characteristics of the system from Eq. ( where q = (q 1 , q 2 , l) and the coefficients χ q are listed in Table The first term in (64) stems from the zero mode (Ψ 0 ) part of the heat kernel (44) and describes the contribution of m protected modes. The latter are unidirectional in class D, contributing m/2 to the mean conductance averaged over opposite current directions [see the definition (1)]. At the same time, there is no contribution from the zero mode to the Fano factor because protected modes provide a quantized conductance, which is not subject to the shot noise. Also, according to Table II threeparametric eigenfunctions (Ψ Equation (64) provides the main result of our paper in the integral form. It contains integrations/summations over Iwasawa momenta that are complicated and probably cannot be taken analytically in the general case. We thus restrict analytic investigation to the asymptotical regions of large/small wire lengths L and complement them with the numerical computation for intermediate L. The latter are presented graphically in Figs. In the long-wire limit, L ξ, the asymptotic behaviour of conductance moments is determined by eigen- functions with the lowest eigenvalue ν , since they contribute the slowest exponential to the heat kernel (44). The case with m = 0 was discussed in detail in Ref. 20. For m ≤ 4, the lowest exponential is provided by the one-parametric eigenfunction with nearly zero momentum q 1 ∼ 0. The corresponding asymptotics can be obtained via the steepest decent method. As long as m > 4, the lowest eigenvalue is provided by the bound state, which originates from the one-parameter family taken at an imaginary momentum q 1 = i(m/4 -1) [see Eq. ( where g L = 2ξ/πL and numerical coefficients α (m) s are given in Table The short-wire limit, L ξ, is most easily accessed via direct perturbative solution of the Schrödinger equation for the heat kernel In the process of var g calculation, two leading terms proportional to 1/L 2 and 1/L completely cancel, as expected for universal conductance fluctuations m(m -4) 2(m -4) m sis of one of the authors 29 ). In this graph one can clearly see the crossover from the Drude regime at L ξ to the peculiar regime at large lengths. The former demonstrates the behaviour typical for a diffusive metal, where the conductance scales as g ∼ ξ/L and no signatures of topological protection are visible. At very large lengths, only contribution of the topologically protected modes survives, as expected (m/2 for the direction-averaged conductance). Extra contribution of unprotected modes decays exponentially according to the localization scenario. To compare the exponents of this process at different m, we plot g -m/2 in the logarithmical scale in Fig. Results for the conductance variance for a broad range of system length L can be found in Fig. In Fig. The (pseudo)Fano factor for various lengths can be found in Fig. In the present paper we performed an extensive study of superconducting quasi-1D systems of symmetry class D with topologically protected modes. Such systems can arise at the boundary of 2D topological superconductors with broken time-reversal and spin-rotational symmetries. In the text, we suggested a particular way of constructing a system with both topological and regular modes by making an interface between two 2D samples with different values of Z-topological index (Fig. For wires of arbitrary length, we report on exact expressions for the average thermal conductance, its variance, and third cumulant, as well as the shot noise power. The average conductance was evaluated previously in Ref. 29, where a minimal one-replica version of the sigmamodel was used. In our work we resorted to the tworeplica nonlinear supersymmetric sigma-model, which allows to access higher moments of transport characteristics. As was argued in Ref. 20, in principle, one can extract the full counting statistics (FCS) from the two-replica sigma model in class D. Indeed, distribution of transmission probabilities is expressed via the heat kernel in the vicinity of the "supersymmetric line" θ B1 = θ B2 = -iθ F . There is no such line in one-replica model due to the degeneracy of the compact sector of the theory. However we did not present explicit results for FCS due to a very complicated structure of the integral representation (29) in the Iwasawa construction, which prevents us from writing the heat kernel in an analytic form on the supersymmetric line. Instead, we evaluated the heat kernel in the vicinity of the origin Q = Λ, which suffices to calculate a number of physical quantities mentioned above. Our findings illustrate in detail the crossover from the ohmic regime at small lengths to the regime of developed localization at large lengths. In particular, we showed that the presence of topologically protected modes enhances localization of unprotected modes. Results for the average conductance g coincide with the results obtained from a simpler (one-replica) sigma-model in Ref. 29. However, as we obtain them from a more complicated two-replica theory, such a coherence is an extra check for our construction. As we study a superconducting class without a spin-rotational symmetry, experimental verification of our results requires thermal transport measurements. That could be a challenging task, however, recent developments indicate that such measurements are possible at a mesoscopic scale We presented a scheme that allows to identify the bound states algorithmically based on analytic continuation of the heat kernel in the topological index m. This approach can be straightforwardly extended to sigma models with arbitrary number of replicas as well as to the sigma models of other symmetry classes. In particular, the scheme can explain the bound states that were found in Ref. 33 for the symplectic symmetry class. Our findings extend the theory of Fourier analysis on symmetric superspaces to the case of non-trivial topology and can be useful in a number of physical applications in systems of different symmetry. an auxiliary matrix field Q that acts in the replica and PH spaces only Now the action is again quadratic in ψ and the operator in square brackets is almost trivial in the space of channels. The only remaining dependence is in the sign of the kinetic term. Let us also point out that the charge conjugation relation between ψ and ψ effectively restricts the matrix Q as Gaussian integration over ψ with the action (A9) yields a square root of the determinant of the operator in brackets. The action is then At this stage we have completely eliminated the channel space. All remaining traces operate only in the PH and replica spaces. Saddle point analysis of the action (A11) yields Q = ±1. The infinitely small term i0Λ in the argument of the logarithm indicates a proper arrangement of signs on the diagonal of Q. We thus pick the saddle point solution Q = Λ and drop the term i0Λ from the action altogether. Other possible saddle points can be generated by rotations of Λ hence the sigma-model manifold is parametrized as such that the constraint (A10) is preserved [cf. Eq. ( The matrix T has the size 2n, with n being the number of replicas, and obeys T T = 1. The space of T is the group SO(2n). (We disregard matrices T with a negative determinant and consider only the connected part of the sigma-model manifold as explained in the main text.) The matrix Q does not change if we replace T → KT with any matrix K that commutes with Λ. Such matrices form a subgroup of SO(2n) that has the structure of U(n). We thus conclude that matrix Q belongs to the coset space SO(2n)/U(n) as it should be for class D. To derive the sigma-model action on the saddle manifold (A12), we expand the action (A11) in gradients assuming Q is slowly varying in space. Usually, this gradient expansion is done in terms of the matrix T . We will take an alternative approach and perform the gradient expansion directly in terms of Q to maintain an apparent gauge symmetry of the theory. In order to do so, we first extend the definition of the matrix Q in the auxiliary direction s such that The extended matrix Q is a smooth function of its both arguments s and x and interpolates between the physical value Q(x) for s = 1 and a chosen point Λ for s = 0. . (A14) Here p = -i∂/∂x is the standard momentum operator. Now, instead of the logarithm, we should expand an inverse operator in gradients of Q. This can be done with the help of the following identity: Here we have introduced the notation The operator g is diagonal in momentum representation and decays at the mean free path scale l = vτ in real space. The inverse operator in the integrand of Eq. ( that holds for any x-dependent function A. We see that commutation with g generates derivatives in x. Hence in the very last term of Eq. (A15), we can simply interchange the order of factors and neglect the commutator as long as we keep only terms with up to two derivatives in x. For the second to last term, we will apply the identity (A17) once and then rearrange the factors neglecting higher derivatives. This yields We substitute this result into Eq. (A14) and observe that the first and the last terms drop out under the trace since Q anticommutes with any derivative of Q. The first term in this result represents the standard kinetic term of the sigma-model action. It explicitly depends only on the physical value of Q at s = 1. The last term in Eq. (A19) is more subtle. It has the standard Wess-Zumino-Witten form defined in terms of the extended field Q(s, x). On the other hand, it also has the form of the Pruisken topological term for the sigma model of a quantum-Hall system in the (s, x) 2D plane. The physical 1D space with s = 1 represents a boundary to this fictitious 2D quantum-Hall system. In order to rewrite the WZW term as a function of only the physical field, we resort to the parametrization (A12). This allows us to write Let us comment on the gauge invariance of this result. The WZW term in the right-hand side of Eq. (A22) is written in terms of T rather than Q. It may seem that a transformation T → KT with [Λ, K] = 0, that does not alter Q, may change the action of the model. This is actually not the case provided the following two conditions are in place: (i) the coefficient in front of the WZW term is an integer multiple of 1/4, (ii) the field configuration T (x) is topologically trivial. The first condition is required to ensure that the topological term in Eq. (A19) is well-defined. For the same physical field Q(x) there are topologically distinct extensions (A13) to the second direction s. While the topological term is invariant with respect to small variations of Q, it can take different values for topologically different configurations of Q(s, x). When the prefactor of the topological term is properly quantized, the action for topologically distinct configurations will differ by an integer multiple of 2πi and hence the partition function of the model will not depend on the particular choice of extension. For our problem, this quantization condition is fulfilled automatically since the difference n R -n L is always integer. The second condition ensures that the transformation (A20) can be safely performed. Indeed, in Eq. (A20), we apply the parametrization (A12) to the whole extended field Q(s, x). The sigma-model manifold [coset space SO(2n)/U(n)] is simply connected, which allows to build the extension (A13) for any physical field Q(x). However, this is not the case for the group SO(2n) to which the matrix T belongs. This means that in order to have a smooth extended field T (s, x) we should require that the parametrization T (x) of the physical field Q(x) is chosen such that it can be continuously deformed to a single point, that is T (x) belongs to the trivial homotopy class of the group SO(2n). Then a continuous transformation of Q(x) at s = 1 to Q = Λ at s = 0 can be parametrized by the corresponding smooth transformation of T (x) at s = 1 to T = 1 at s = 0. With this condition fulfilled, the gauge symmetry of the action becomes obvious. Indeed, the WZW term is directly identified with the Pruisken topological term by Eq. (A20) while the latter is written explicitly in terms of Q and hence is gauge invariant. Let us also analyze how the action changes under a gauge transformation. Consider a transformation with a matrix U that obeys Ū U = 1 and commutes with Λ. The latter condition implies U is block-diagonal, while the former condition establishes a relation between the blocks: (A25) We assume that the trajectory T (x) is closed and hence U (x) also must be closed. Determinant of u can change its phase by any integer multiple of 2π along such a closed trajectory. If m is even, the action is also shifted by an integer multiple of 2πi under the gauge transformation and hence the theory is fully gauge invariant. For odd values of m, gauge invariance of the theory is enforced provided ln det u changes by a multiple of 4πi. Earlier, we have established an additional condition on the allowed trajectories of T (x): the closed path T (x) should be possible to continuously shrink to a single point. The fundamental group of the manifold of T is π 1 (SO(n)) = Z 2 . So there are only two topologically distinct classes of closed trajectories: those that can be shrunk to a point and those that cannot. It is straightforward to check that a gauge transformation (A23) with ln det u changing by an odd multiple of 2πi maps these two classes on to each other. Hence we conclude that our requirement on the trajectory of T to be topologically trivial rules out such odd gauge transformations and indeed enforces the gauge invariance of the theory. The gauge factor in Eq. ( (B11) To find sdet v, we will rewrite identity (B3) in the rotated basis and take a superdeterminant of its upper-left block. This yields sdet cosh( θ/2) = sdet v sdet(X + Y R + RZR) = sdet v sdet e ã/2 sdet(1 + RZ -1 RX + RZ -1 RY R). (B12) In the last expression we have singled out the factor sdet(RZR) = sdet e -ã/2 . We have thus related sdet v to the Iwasawa coordinates contained in X, Y , and Z. To express these parameters through Cartan coordinates, consider the matrix ΛQ in the original basis written in two alternative coordinate systems, We observe that the blocks in the upper row of this matrix are exactly those appearing in Eq. (B12). Taking these blocks from the matrix ΛQ in Cartan coordinates, we express sdet v as sdet v = sdet e ã/2 sdet cosh( θ/2) + uū sinh( θ/2) . (B14) This fully determines the phase factor in Eq. ( With this result, we can rewrite the integral representation (29) of a general eigenfunction of the transfermatrix Hamiltonian in the following form: 2 )aB2+i(l-m 2 )aF sdet m/2 cosh( θ/2) + uū sinh( θ/2) u . (B15) It remains to express the Iwasawa angles ǎ via Cartan coordinates in order to perform isotropization. This can be done by considering superdeterminants of square submatrices of ΛQ in the upper-left corner as was discussed in detail in Ref. 20. 