We propose a generalized Peierls substitution method in conjunction with the tight-binding model to explore the magnetic quantization and quantum Hall effect in twisted multilayer graphene under a magnetic field. The Bloch-basis tight-binding Hamiltonian is employed for large twist angle while an effective tight-binding model is constructed for the magic angle. We investigate extensively the band structures, Landau levels (LLs), and quantum Hall conductivity (QHC) of twisted bilayer graphene and twisted double bilayer graphene, as well as their dependence on the twist angle. Comparison between these crucial properties of monolayer graphene, Bernal bilayer graphene, and the twisted systems is carefully made to highlight the roles played by twisting. The unique selection rules of inter-LL transition, which is crucial for achieving a deep understanding of the step structures of QHC, are identified through the properties of LL wave functions. Our theoretical model opens up an opportunity for comprehension of the interplay between an applied magnetic field and the twisting effect associated with multilayer graphene. The proposed method is expected to be extendable for the calculation of magnetic quantization problems of other complex systems. In this paper, we comprehensively investigate the magneto-electronic and QHE of TMLG and their dependence on the twist angle by using the Bloch-basis TBM in conjunction with the generalized Peierls substitution. This method allows us not only to obtain accurate band structures in a wide energy range but also to solve the huge Hamiltonian matrix under a magnetic field. Specifically, the calculated LL wave functions enable a full analysis of transition-selection rules which are very useful for an extensive understanding of the QHE. We will present the band a T. Recently, twisted multilayer graphene (TMLG) has attracted widespread attention since it plays a key role in deciphering the nature of correlation phenomena in low-dimensional materials. Up to now, the most studied TMLG, namely twisted bilayer graphene (TBLG) and twisted double bilayer graphene (TDBLG), have been synthesized successfully by nanotechnology fabrication methods Many fundamental properties of TBLG and TDBLG have been investigated intensively by both theoretical and experimental approaches. Their band structures have been presented from a theoretical perspective by using densityfunctional theory (DFT) The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II, we first establish our theoretical model for executing numerical computations, including tight-binding formalism, application of a magnetic field, effective TBM and Kubo formula. In Sec. III, we present a detailed discussion on obtained numerical results for considered structures. Finally, conclusions drawn from this paper are summarized in Sec. IV. In this work, the π-electronic structure is calculated using the p z -orbital TBM. The Kubo formula is combined with the TBM to evaluate the Fermi energy-dependent QHC. Some details are presented below. For monolayer graphene, there are two equivalent sublattices designated as A and B. The primitive unit cell consists of two atoms, as illustrated in Fig. In Eq. ( The hopping interaction between two C atoms at lattice points R m and R j is calculated as where Here, e z is the unit vector in the z direction, V 0 ppπ is the nearest-neighbor transfer integral in monolayer graphene (t mj in Table Solving the Hamiltonian is of utmost importance for gaining an understanding of the essential physical properties of the materials. Due to the limitation of the numerical technique, constructing a sufficiently small tight-binding matrix Hamiltonian for the large systems is highly desirable. So far, several methods have been widely employed for reducing the size of the Hamiltonian matrix, such as the scalable TBM It is well known that the Wannier and Bloch function bases are commonly used to construct the TBMs of graphene and other condensed matter systems. The crucial difference between these two results from the geometric phases of interacting atoms. For the Wannier basis, the distance between two atoms is estimated based on their Cartesian coordinates. For the Bloch basis, on the other hand, a unit cell is viewed as a point so that the distance between any two atoms is just the distance between the two unit cells which they belong to. For monolayer graphene, three nearest-neighbor geometric phases (see Fig. ]. These vectors are associated with geometric phases of different lattice sites. Our numerical results of band structures for monolayer graphene and AB bilayer graphene by using TBMs based on Wannier and Bloch bases agree with each other. In general, the Bloch function basis is advantageous over the Wannier function one for large systems (with many atoms within a unit cell) since the former simplifies the Hamiltonian matrix by reducing the number of geometric phases. For TBLG, two graphene layers are relatively rotated by an angle called the "twist angle". Figure 2 ] and second [a and L 2 = R(π/3) L 1 , where m and n are certain integers satisfying θ(m, n) = arg[(me -iπ/6 + ne iπ/6 )/(ne -iπ/6 + me iπ/6 )], and R(θ) defines the rotation by an angle θ 2 ] and [a We note that TDBLG will acquire various stacking configurations since the BLG components can be AA or AB types. Here, we consider twisted double AB-AB bilayer graphene due to its special lattice symmetry. This system consists of a pair of Bernal BLG with a relative rotation between them. Each AB BLG contains the atomic interactions as quantified in Table As a graphene sheet is subjected to a uniform perpendicular magnetic field B = (0, 0, B), the field-induced Peierls phase G R needs to be included in the graphene Hamiltonian. The Peierls substitution (1) The substitution of -i ∇ -e c A for k in the energy function for a band in which φ 0 = hc/e is the flux quantum. Without loss of generality, we set c = 1 in our calculations. Within the Landau gauge, the vector potential is written as A = (0, Bx, 0). Accordingly, the period of the Peierls phase is defined as 2φ 0 /φ, in which φ = BS is the magnetic flux with S being the area of a unit cell. The applied magnetic field leads to the extension of a unit cell along the x direction (see Fig. The magnetic Hamiltonian matrix elements can be expressed as where , and j, m are layer and site indexes, respectively, and H.c. represents the Hermitian conjugate term. In the case of TBLG, the field-induced extension of a unit cell is along the direction of L 1 , as seen in Fig. where A j and B j are the subenvelope functions and represent the amplitudes of tight-binding wave functions for j-th A and B atoms in a unit cell, respectively, while |A j and |B j are their corresponding eigenstates. Physically, our proposed Bloch basis used in the TBM for calculating the LLs of TBLG can be extended to other twisted structures with arbitrary twist angle θ, e.g. TDBLG and twisted graphene on substrates. Technically, however, if the twist angle is sufficiently small, e.g. the magic angle, the primitive unit cell becomes sizable so that the fieldextended unit cell is too large for numerical computations. In addition, the smaller the twist angle is, the weaker the magnetic field is needed to quantize electronic states into LLs. As a result, a lower limit is expected for a twist angle in studying magnetic quantization with TBM. Here, we propose using an effective four-band TBM for exploring LL dynamics together with QHE in TBLG and TDBLG at the magic angle. We construct an effective four-band TBM for TMG based on the Wannier TBM for few-layer graphene (FLG) and continuum model, following the ref. where E k is the eigenvalue and ψ mk is the Bloch sum function. They can be obtained from the effective continuum model Here, Ĥ0 (k) is the Hamiltonian of the FLG in the top and bottom of a TMLG and ĤT describes the effective twisted interlayer coupling. The initial guess for the Bloch sum functions is in which, |Ψ mk is the Bloch state and |g n is the initial Wannier function (WF). For the low energy states, we have In this notation, ξ ≡ ξ ± = ±1 denotes the graphene valleys, τ = τ α , τ β is graphene sublattice degree of freedom, l stands for the layer index measured from the bottom to the top. (G) can be calculated by diagonalizing the effective continuum model. On the other hand, the Bloch sum functions can be written explicitly as Here, is the wave vector of graphene, where k is the TMLG wave vector, and K F LG ξ is the graphene valley. L stands for the emerged moiré pattern, R represents the graphene lattice; d = dd 0 ẑ denotes the layer stacking distance where d 0 is the distance between two graphene layers and d is the layer index measured from the bottom to the top. D[sign(d) θ 2 ] indicates a twist angle θ 2 for the top partition and -θ 2 for the bottom partition. The Hamiltonian matrix elements of the effective continuum model can be expressed as The matrices T 1,2,3 read as in which, ω = e 2πi/3 ; u = 0.0797 eV and u = 0.0975 eV describe the relaxation effect. The WFs of a TMLG can be constructed from the p z orbitals together with an envelope function. If the twisted interlayer coupling is negligible, the low-energy Bloch states can be regarded as the folded band structure of FLG. The WFs can be expressed as In this notation, e iK ξ .r is the a high frequency factor, |τ, l, L + R + d is the p z orbital. f (ξ,τ,l) n (r) is the smooth envelope function in moiré length scale, in which n stands for the index of the WFs. Note that, the system preserves the time-reversal symmetry for the two-valley TBM. We consider the real-value WFs by setting the limit f . The initial condition of WFs can be established by using the constraint f (r) = -G(r -r hex 1 ), and f (τα,-1) 4 (r) = -G(r -r hex 2 ) with G(r -r hex i ) being the Gaussian function localized at the hexagonal site. These initial WFs satisfy the orbital character (flat bands) and lattice symmetry (hexagonal site symmetry, sublattice equivalence, and C 2x symmetry). In order to select the realvalued WFs, we set the limit f , for which the equivalence of the two valleys is established. Then, Therefore, the initial guess for the Bloch sum functions is now obtained by inserting the Bloch states from Eq. ( where The Bloch sum functions can be obtained by projecting ψ nk onto the subspace spanned by flat bands as done for the Bloch bands in ref. with The number of k states is properly truncated so that it is sufficient to cover the main features of electronic property of TMLG. In fact, our effective TBM can reproduce well the band structures from the DFT method for arbitrary twist angles near the magic angle. Furthermore, the magnetic-field effect is considered by adding the Peierls phases to the effective Hamiltonian in the Bloch basis. In this way, the effective TBM enables to reduce significantly the computational cost, making the calculations of LLs at the magic angle practical. By assuming a weak applied DC electric field for electron transport, one can use a linear-response theory (or Kubo formula) to calculate conductivity. Here, we employ the Kubo formalism in our studies of the QHE in graphene-based twisted systems. The expression for the DC quantum Hall conductivity (QHC) can be written as In Eq. ( is the Fermi-Dirac distribution function at temperature T with Fermi energy E F , and Γ (∼ 1 meV) is the lifetime broadening of electrons. ux(y) is the velocity operator along the x(y) direction. The velocity matrix element α| ux(y) |β can be computed using the gradient approximation of the forms It is noted from Eq. ( The band structure of a monolayer graphene consists of six Dirac cones at the corner points (K and K ) the hexagonal first Brillouin zone. The valence and conduction bands meet at the Dirac points, making monolayer graphene a gapless semiconductor. Both the upward and downward cones are isotropic in k space and they are mostly symmetric in the vicinity of Fermi energy (E F = 0). However, these cones become anisotropic at sufficiently high energies, as seen in Fig. For AB BLG, the B 0 -dependent LL spectrum can be classified into two distinct groups, appearing as blue (n c,v 1 ) and red (n c,v 2 ) lines in Fig. AB BLG has a unique E F -dependent QHC spectra, whereby the plateaus appear at 4me 2 /h, as clearly demonstrated in Fig. The band structures of θ = 9.43 o and θ = 21.79 o TBLG present the Dirac-cone shape at the K point, as shown in Figs. The B 0 -dependence of LLs in TBLG is found similar to that of MLG because their low-lying bands can be viewed as two overlapped Dirac cones. Figures The probability distribution provides important clues for inter-LL transitions. Figures The E F -dependent QHC for θ = 9.43 o and 21.79 o TBLG exhibit the sequence of 8(m -1/2) e 2 /h (Figs. The low-lying band structures of TDBLG display two pairs of parabolic conduction and valence bands, as in Figs. 9(a) and 9(b) for θ = 9.43 o and 21.79 o , respectively. Here, each band is only doubly degenerate due to finite number of graphene layers in the system. Note that the couplings between two middle graphene layers are weak. Therefore, TDBLG can be regarded roughly as two Bernal BLG. For higher and deeper energy ranges, the degenerate bands split in the direction of M → Γ. Such band splitting occurs at lower energies for smaller θ. The zoom-in view of the band structure for θ = 9.43 o in the inset of Fig. The band structure of TBLG at the magic angle θ = 1.08 o , shown in Fig. The probability distributions for four sublattices present well-defined oscillation modes, as observed from Fig. In a nutshell, we have proposed an approach by combining the generalized Peierls substitution with TBM to reliably calculate the magnetic quantization and QHE in TMLG systems. We have demonstrated that this method can efficiently solve the huge Hamiltonian matrix of TBLG and TDBLG in the presence of an applied magnetic field. For hetero-structures with large twist angles, the Bloch-basis TBM has been employed in order to reduce significantly the size of Hamiltonian matrix. We have further developed a simplified four-band TBM for the twisted system at the magic angle. By properly substituting the generalized Peierls phases into the TBM, we have successfully calculated the field-dependent LLs, the LL distribution probability, and the QHC of TMLG for both large and small twist angles. We emphasize that our theoretical prediction of LL spectra and filling factors are in good agreement with the experimental results. A notable accomplishment of this work is that we are able to provide incontrovertible explanations for the occurrence of QHC step structures by means of the unique selection rule for the inter-LL transitions based on analyzing the node structure of LL wave functions. This work opens up an opportunity for deciphering the interplay between an external magnetic field and the twisting effect on multilayer graphene. Remarkably, our proposed theoretical method can be used to understand the magnetic quantization of other complex systems, such as twisted graphene and substrates, other twisted hetero-structures, topological materials with both bulk and surface states. A deep understanding of QHC of various condensed matter systems is expected to be established. . Hopping parameters of monolayer graphene and AB bilayer graphene Hopping parameters [eV] Monolayer AB bilayer