We studied anomalous Josephson effect (AJE) in Josephson trijunctions fabricated on Bi2Se3, and found that the AJE in T-shaped trijunctions significantly alters the Majorana phase diagram of the trijunctions, when an in-plane magnetic field is applied parallel to two of the three single junctions. Such a phenomenon in topological insulator-based Josephson trijunction provides unambiguous evidence for the existence of AJE in the system, and might provide an additional knob for controlling the Majorana bound states in the Fu-Kane scheme of topological quantum computation. With breaking both time-reversal symmetry and chiral symmetry, the Andreev reflection processes in a superconductor/normal-state metal/superconductor (S/N/S) type of Josephson junction will accumulate an additional phase From the experimental side, however, very limited investigations on AJE have been reported, so far only on two-terminal devices (i.e., single Josephson junctions) made of InAs-based quantum dots In this experiment, we study the AJE in Josephson trijunction based on topological insulators, and demonstrate that the anomalous phase shift alters the response of the trijunction in out-of-plane magnetic field, by which the happening of AJE can be unambiguously identified. Such an anomalous phase shift in Josephson trijunctions, which can be manipulated by turning the strength and direction of the in-plane magnetic field, may provide an additional knob for controlling the Majorana bound states (MBSs) in the Fu-Kane scheme of topological quantum computation The trijunctions used in this experiment were first proposed by L. Fu and C. L. Kane in 2008 for the purpose of hosting MBSs Illustrated in Fig. FIG. According to previous theoretical and experimental studies, the minigap at the center of the trijunction varies periodically in the phase space spanned by φ 1 and φ 2 . It is fully open in the white areas of the Fu-Kane's Majorana phase diagram (Fig. For obtaining the contact resistance of the Au electrode, we performed three-terminal electron transport measurements as described in Refs. 25 and 26, in which only the voltage drop across the electrode that shared by the voltage measurement loop and the current loop was detected, by using low-frequency lock-in amplifier technique. In order to lower the electron temperature of the device and to increase the energy resolution, all electric leads were equipped with π filters at room temperature, RC filters at ∼1 K, additional RC and copper powder filters at the base temperature in the dilution refrigerator. 0 1 0 02 0 03 0 04 0 0 1 6 0 0 1 8 0 0 2 0 0 0 2 2 0 0 -4 0 0-2 0 00 2 0 04 0 0 -4 . 8 -2 . 4 0 . 0 2 . 4 4 . 8 -4 0 0-2 0 00 2 0 04 0 0 -4 . 8 -2 . 4 0 . 0 2 . 4 4 . 8 Shown in Fig. The data of contact resistance can be quantitatively analyzed by using the Blonder-Tinkham-Klapwijk (BTK) formalism. The BTK theory was originally developed to describe the electron transport processes across the interface between a normal-state metal and a superconductor After understanding the basic features of the device, we then studied the contact resistance of the probe electrode as functions of B x and B z . The results are shown in Fig. Since the mean free path of electron in our junctions, as reported earlier It can be seen that there are two independent phase differences φ 1 and φ 2 controlled by φ 01 and the magnetic flux B z S in the superconducting loops. The parametric space spanned by φ 01 and B z S, as shown in Fig. The existence of an anomalous phase shift can also be clearly seen from the line cut of the 2D plot at B z =0, as shown in Fig. In the next, we measured the contact resistance of the probe electrode as functions of B y and B z . The results are shown in Fig. When the in-plane magnetic field is applied along the y direction, it generates an anomalous phase shift φ 03 in junction J3, leaving J1 and J2 untouched. The total phase shifts in the three single junctions are: In this case, J3 together with the superconducting loops form a φ 03 -loop rf SQUID, multiply connected with another φ 03 -loop formed by the other two single junctions. Spontaneous supercurrent will be generated in these loops by the anomalous phase shift in J3. Also, spontaneous magnetic flux will be created in these loops, and the magnetic flux will be significant if both the loop inductance and the critical Josephson supercurrents of the junctions are big enough. These spontaneous generated supercurrent and magnetic flux will cause normal phase shifts on J1 and J2. However, their effects will be exactly canceled out along the φ 1 -φ 2 direction in phase space. Therefore, sweeping B y does not cause horizontal shift of the trijunction's state in the new Majorana phase diagram (Fig. We have also studied the anomalous phase shift with rotating the direction of the in-plane magnetic field. Shown in Fig. To summarize, we have shown that the anomalous phase shift in "T"-shaped Josephson trijunction exhibits strong anisotropy with the direction of in-plane magnetic FIG. (2018).