The ability to rapidly manufacture building blocks with specific binding interactions is a key aspect of programmable assembly. Recent developments in DNA nanotechnology and colloidal particle synthesis have significantly advanced our ability to create particle sets with programmable interactions, based on DNA or shape complementarity. The increasing miniaturization underlying magnetic storage offers a new path for engineering programmable components for self assembly, by printing magnetic dipole patterns on substrates using nanotechnology. How to efficiently design dipole patterns for programmable assembly remains an open question as the design space is combinatorially large. Here, we present design rules for programming these magnetic interactions. By optimizing the structure of the dipole pattern, we demonstrate that the number of independent building blocks scales super linearly with the number of printed domains. We test these design rules using computational simulations of self assembled blocks, and experimental realizations of the blocks at the mm scale, demonstrating that the designed blocks give high yield assembly. In addition, our design rules indicate that with current printing technology, micron sized magnetic panels could easily achieve hundreds of different building blocks. A key feature of living materials is the inherent programmability of their parts. Complex assemblies require that components with low crosstalk bind to desired partners without binding to others The major goal of this paper is to elucidate the basic rules for programming building blocks from magnetic FIG. printing. For a given building block design, we need to determine the positions and strengths of the magnetic domains to maximize programmability. We find these programming rules by combining information theory Binding Pairs. The central design requirement for programmability is finding building blocks with low crosstalk. For a system in thermodynamic equilibrium, the yield of an undesired configuration decays exponentially with its energy gap ∆ from the desired configuration To formulate this optimization problem in terms of the basic building blocks, we consider a set of lock and key pairs, denoted as x 1 , x 2 , . . . , x M ∈ X for locks, and y 1 , y 2 , . . . , y M ∈ Y for keys, with the binding energy matrix E, where E ij ≡ E(x i , y j ). Assuming locks and keys have the same concentrations, the equilibrium probability of the lock i to bind the key j is p(x i , y j ) = e -βEij /Z, where β is the inverse temperature and Z is the partition function. A natural metric for quantifying cross talk is mutual information Maximizing the mutual information I(X; Y ) over the sets of locks and keys X, Y minimizes the cross talk. The set with the optimal information capacity I c = max(I) has effectively M c = exp(I c ) non-crosstalking lock-key pairs. For a system with a well-defined number of lock and key building blocks and binding energy matrix E, we can directly calculate M c from Eq. 1. For experimental systems without a set number of locks and keys, we can calculate M c by first computing the energy gap distribution ∆ based on binding energy matrices of random sampled components (see details in Supplementary Information (SI) ). We define ∆ as ∆ ij = E ij -s ii , where s ii is the strength of the on-target binding of lock i and key i and E ij is the off-target binding energy between lock i and key j. Denoting ρ(∆) as the distribution of gap energies between on target and off target binding, the maximal number of non-crosstalking pairs (M c ) is given by where • is the average with respect to ρ(∆). This formula is intuitive: if we consider the (exponentially weighted) average of the gap ∆ much larger than k B T so that β∆ 1, then M c increases exponentially with ∆ as Using this framework, we can directly formulate an optimization problem of how to encode dipole patterns for a set of magnetic building blocks to maximize programmability. Here, we measure programmability by evaluating M c of a set of magnetic patterns, the larger the M c , the better the programmability. Given a potential design for a set of magnetic dipoles on a substrate, we can compute the distribution of gap energies ρ(∆), and thus the effective number M c of programmable building blocks (Eq. 2). Magnetic Interaction Model. Magnetic interactions depend on the spatial configuration of their dipoles, and in particular the ratio d/a, where a is the center to center distance between adjacent dipoles on the same panel, and d is the distance between the centerlines of two panels (Fig. ) Here μ is vacuum permeability, m is the magnitude of the magnetic dipole moments, N is the number of dipoles on a single panel, k is the number of second-nearest neighbor aligned dipole pairs minus the anti-aligned dipole pairs, and F is the (negligible) effect of third or higher neighbor interactions. Eq. 4 implies that the second-nearest neighbor term vanishes when 2d 2 /a 2 = 1, corresponding to the case where a dipole's magnetic field is perpendicular to its next nearest neighbor (Fig. 1D Magnetic Strands. To test whether the separation ratio of d/a = √ 2/2 gives rise to a higher information capacity of magnetic panels, we first consider a one dimensional chain of magnetic dipoles, where we can systematically enumerate the entire configuration space of 2 N dipole strands with N dipoles. When generating the distinct dipole strand, we remove palindromic sequences corresponding to the same lock-key pair, such as NNNNSSSS and SSSSNNNN. We enumerate the number of non-palindromic strands for L ∈ Fig. 2D Magnetic Panels. We now turn to the design of dipole configurations on two dimensional panels. We fix the total on-target binding energy between any two building blocks to be 10k B T , so a panel with 3 dipoles has individual dipoles with a magnetic moment that is 10/3 the dipole moment in a 10-dipole panel. We consider placements of dipoles on the plane, keeping the constraint d/a = √ 2/2. We compute ρ(∆) by random sampling, over configurations where every dipole has at least one nearest neighbor of distance a, with no nearest neighbors smaller than a (Fig. Dimer Self-Assembly. To validate that the designed dipole patterns can accurately assemble, we carry out both molecular dynamics simulations and experiments comparing the yield of dimer assembly between designed and randomly generated 3-dipole patterns. In the simulations the total on-target binding energy was set to 10k B T . For the experiments, we used panels with N40 Neodymium magnets separated by a = 0.28cm and binding distance d = 0.2cm, and varied the shaker acceleration to control the effective temperature of the system. We find the best patterns of 3 dipoles by iterating through randomly generated patterns, selecting those with high information content. We then applied symmetry analysis by measuring the opening angle θ (Fig. We instantiate these designed configurations in both simulations and experiments, printing the lock-key pairs onto dimers. We carry out the simulations in HOOMDblue key dimers by putting a small interaction patch on a sphere with the computed binding energy (Fig. For the experiments, we followed a similar protocol. We super glued magnets into laser cut holders and made them into cylindrical panels following the theoretical designs. We placed these 4 copies of each lock-key pair into a shaker, and measured dimer assembly as a function of shaking amplitude. The shaking is analogous to the temperature of a thermal bath, providing uncorrelated noise to the individual panels. The number of pairs of each dipole pattern is determined to match the simulation area fraction of 0.2. To carry out the experiment, we start the shaker at high shaking acceleration to thermalize the panels, and slowly decrease the shaking acceleration to a target amplitude where we count the number of correctly and incorrectly assembled dimers (Fig. We note a decrease in yield at lower temperature and shaking acceleration for simulation and experiments respectively. This arises from the non-equilibrium nature of the dimer self-assembly process at low temperature, where the monomers do not have the chance to freely explore space to find the optimal binding pair, but would bind with anything nearby Finite Square Self-Assembly. To demonstrate the power of our designed interactions, we show how the magnetic panels can enable finite heterogeneous selfassembly. We aim to self-assemble a finite 3×3 square (Fig. ature to measure the yield. Fig. We also carried out experiments for assembling this configuration using panels with three dipole patterns and the shaker. Similar to simulation, we first performed the shaker experiment at different shaking acceleration to identify the optimal amplitude for square assembly (see experimental details in SI), and we repeated the experiment 100 times at the optimal shaking amplitude. These experiments yielded a correct bond rate of 80%, whereas 25 out of 100 runs led to perfectly assembled configurations. The correct bond rate is similar to that seen in the dimer experiment and the simulations, while the experimental yield is slightly lower. Discussion. We demonstrate in this paper a simple design rule for maximizing the mutual information between lock and key pairs. By fixing d/a = √ 2/2, we maximize the dipole density while minimizing both the cross talk between off-target binding pairs and the distribution width for on-target binding energy over the entire set of dipole patterns.Strikingly, our calculations demonstrate that for two dimensional panels, we increase the programmability by printing more magnetic dipoles, each of which has weaker binding strength. Magnetic handshake materials allow us to take full advantage of this design rule, as we can precisely control the strength and the location of the single dipole domains being printed. Moreover, by printing the dipole patterns on two dimensional surfaces -in contrast to one dimensional chains of e.g. DNA -we can increase the amount of information that can be encoded in a given building block (Fig. It is interesting to speculate about the number of potential lock-key pairs that can be created using state of the art nanofabrication technology. Fig. To effectively calculate the binding energy of different designed panel patterns, we approximate all the magnets as magnetic dipoles with a magnetic moment m, with the direction of the moment perpendicular to the panel face, either pointing into the plane or out of the plane (see Fig. The magnetic interactions between panels can be calculated directly by summing the well known dipolar interaction energy. While nearest neighbor interaction solely depends on d, the higher neighbor interactions also depend on a. We therefore more efficiently explore the design space of possible patterns by generating random dipole pattern with fixed nearest neighbor distance (see sample patterns in Fig. We perform dimer assembly to validate our panel designs and perform a finite square simulation to showcase the possibility in using our magnetic panels for heterogeneous assembly. For our simulation model, we coarse grain the dipole patterns into an attractive interaction patch To demonstrate self-assembly with experimental systems, we manufactured panels for dimer and panel assembly. The shaker frequency was set to 25 ± 1 Hz for all the experiments while the shaker amplitude was changed with a function generator and amplifier. The dimers are circular disks with diameter 1.27 cm were laser cut from acrylic and glued on top of each other to form a dimer panel with a height of 0.79 cm. For the square assembly experiment, squares with side length 1.52 cm and rounded corners were used. These panels are also cut from acrylic and glued on top of each other to form final panels with height 0.97 cm. A more detailed description can be found in the SI.