Conventional mechanical antennas provide a strategy in long-wave communication with a surprisingly compact size below 1/1,000 of the wavelength. However, the narrow bandwidth and weak field intensity seriously hamper its practical applications. Here, we present a mechanical antenna based on the electrostrictive effect of PMN-PT-based relaxor ferroelectric ceramic to improve radiation capacity and achieve ultra-wideband characteristics (10 kHz -1 MHz, the relative bandwidth is beyond 196%). Determined by the different underlying mechanism, the mechanical antenna based on the electrostrictive effect exhibits excellent communication properties from traditional mechanical antennas. The functions of signal coding, transmitting, receiving, and decoding were experimentally demonstrated. This approach offers a promising way of constructing mechanical antennas for long-wave communication. Electromagnetic radiation at very low frequency (VLF, 3 -30 kHz) exhibits relatively low propagation loss, enabling remote communication Mechanical antenna based on mechanical motion is a miniaturization antenna, its physical size can be smaller than 1/1,000 of the operating wavelength. Conventional electrically small antennas rely on oscillating charges to radiate electromagnetic (EM) waves, while mechanical antennas are driven by acoustic self-resonance to generate the mechanical motion of charge or magnetic dipole moment oscillations, thus generating time-varying EM field Here, we present a set of strategy and design concept to expand the bandwidth of mechanical antenna. Based on the electrostrictive effect of dielectric material, ceramic cylindrical resonator is expected to radiate EM waves under a periodic electric field. The detailed discussion about the difference between the electrostrictive effect and the inverse piezoelectric effect in mechanical antennas application can be found in Supplementary Information. The operating mechanism and ultra-band characteristics distinguish our work from the previously reported strategies. In this work, mechanical antennas based on the electrostrictive effect were fabricated using 2.5Sm-PMN-29PT relaxor ferroelectric ceramics. The ceramics cylindrical resonator showed superior property to radiate EM waves under a moderate periodic electric field. The feasibility of this design scheme was verified by demonstration experiments of the basic communication functions, i.e., signal modulation, transmission, and receiving within an ultra-band. It's believed that the characteristics of ultra-band and high radiation efficiency of this mechanical antenna must accelerate its practical process in long-wave communication. For a mechanical antenna, the signals are directly fed into the resonator without external matching network (Fig. Therefore, the electrostrictive mechanical antenna is proposed to enhance the bandwidth, radiation intensity, and stability. A 2.5Sm-PMN-29PT ceramic chip with a thickness of 3 mm and a diameter of 8 mm is selected as the cylindrical resonator of the proposed mechanical antenna. 2.5Sm-PMN-29PT ceramics were prepared by solid-state sintering, the detailed process can be found in the Methods and elsewhere From the unipolar strain curves of 2.5Sm-PMN-29PT ceramic shown in Fig. Mechanism of electrostriction based on the inverse piezoelectric effect and the electrostriction effect can be briefly described in Fig. Using the max hold function and segmental measurement method, the continuous peak power curve in the range of 10 kHz -1 MHz was measured. For the clear exhibition, the measured wireless spectrums with different frequencies equally distributed in all the bands were shown as examples. The displacement rate of the ions in the material increases with the frequency of feed signals under the unsaturation condition, thus enhancing the radiation intensity of the proposed antenna (Fig. To investigate the influence of polarization state on the radiation performance, the proposed mechanical antenna with poled material was fabricated, and the relative measurements were also performed. It should be mentioned that all 2.5Sm-PMN-29PT ceramics used in the proposed mechanical antenna have the same parameters in composition and preparation process except for the polarization. In this condition, the measured results (Fig. According to the equivalent model of the dipole current, the magnetic flux density follows an inverse square relation with the distance between the transmitting antenna and the receiver. Great attenuation occurs in the vicinity near the transmitter, while the attenuation in the far-field is close to zero (the measured results of poled materials are shown in Fig. In summary, we have designed an electrostrictive mechanical antenna for compact size, ultra-wide operating band, and high radiation intensity. Unlike traditional mechanical antennas which are based on inverse piezoelectric effect, the proposed mechanical antenna is mainly derived from the electrostrictive effect. Moreover, a wireless communication system was established to verify the practical performance of the proposed antenna in coding, transmitting, receiving, and decoding. Our experiment system successfully realized VLF wireless communication at the distance of 14 m. Besides, the fitting equation of magnetic flux density predicts the remote transmission ability (beyond 1 km) of the proposed mechanical antenna. Our design will contribute to the development of long-wave antennas that may greatly reduce the volume of VLF communication systems. Materials preparation. Pb0.9625Sm0.025[(Mg1/3Nb2/3)0.71Ti0.29]O3 (2.5Sm-PMN-29PT) ceramics were fabricated by using the conventional solid-state reaction method. Firstly, the MgNb2O6 powders were prepared at 1,000 °C for 6 h by using raw materials MgO (99.9%) and Nb2O5 (99.9%). Then, the Pb3O4 (99%), MgNb2O6, TiO2 (98%), and Sm2O3 (99.5%) powders were mixed by the planetary ball milling in ethanol for 24 h. The mixture was dried and calcined at 800 °C for 2 h and the synthesized powder was subjected to another round of ball milling. Before being pressed into pellets of 10 mm in diameter and 3.5 mm in thickness under 60 MPa, the obtained slurry was dried and mixed with an appropriate amount of PVA binder. Later, the PVA binder was burnout at 550 °C for 6 h. Finally, the green pellets were sintered in an alumina crucible at a temperature of 1200 °C for 3 h, buried in sacrificial powder. Material characterization. The phase structure of 2.5Sm-PMN-29PT ceramics was determined by a using high-resolution X-ray diffractometer (XRD, D/max-2500V; Rigaku, Japan) with Cu Kα radiation. The surface morphology of ceramic samples was examined by using field-emission scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM, Merlin VP compact Zeiss, Germany). A commercial atomic force microscope (MFP-3D, Asylum Research, USA) with the piezoresponse force microscopy (PFM) module was used to investigate the local ferroelectric/piezoelectric behavior of ceramic samples. Before electrical testing, both surfaces of the polished ceramic samples were painted with silver paste and then fired at 600 °C for 30 min to form electrodes. Strain S(E) hysteresis loop was measured by using a ferroelectric tester (aixACCT TF Analyzer 1000, Germany). Temperature-dependent permittivity and dielectric loss were measured by using an impedance analyzer (TH2827, Changzhou Tonghui Electronic Co, China), which is coupled with a temperature-regulated sample chamber. () where Q is the electrostriction coefficient, E is the applied electric intensity, ɛ r and ɛ 0 are relative dielectric constant and dielectric constant of vacuum respectively. Therefore, the relaxor ferroelectric materials tend to obtain a large electrostrictive strain near the phase transition temperature since they have a huge and stable ɛ r at this temperature range. Furthermore, the electrostrictive strain has no hysteresis effect and do not affected by the T c , because this strain does not come from the ferroelectric domain switching and the asymmetry of lattice. PMN-PT is a classical relaxor ferroelectric material, and its T c is lower than the room temperature. By doping with 2.5 mol% Sm, Li et al enhanced the T c of PMN-29PT ceramic to 80 -90 °C and obtained a huge d 33 (1,400 -1,500 pC/N) and ɛ r (13,000) around room temperature 