We present an inexpensive first-principles approach for describing quantum paraelectricity that combines density functional theory (DFT) treatment of the electronic subsystem with quantum mechanical treatment of the ions through solution of the single-particle Schrödinger equation with the DFT-calculated potential. Using BaTiO3, SrTiO3 and KTaO3 as model systems, we show that the approach can straightforwardly distinguish between ferroelectric, paraelectric and quantum paraelectric materials, based on simple quantities extracted from standard density functional and density functional perturbation theories. We calculate the influence of isotope substitution and strain on the quantum paraelectric behavior, and find that, while complete replacement of oxygen-16 by oxygen-18 has a surprisingly small effect, experimentally accessible strains can induce large changes. Finally, we collect the various choices for the phonon mass that have been introduced in the literature. We identify those that are most physically meaningful by comparing with our results that avoid such a choice through the use of mass-weighted coordinates. Quantum paraelectric materials, such as strontium titanate, SrTiO 3 (STO) and potassium tantalate, KTaO 3 (KTO), are incipient ferroelectrics whose ferroelectric phase transition on cooling is suppressed by quantum fluctuations From a theoretical perspective, the quantum paraelectric behavior is broadly understood to result from quantum fluctuations suppressing the softening of the polar phonon, which would otherwise drive a ferroelectric phase transition at low temperature. Indeed, extension of the classic Slater model of ferroelectricity Particularly important insights are provided by atomistic simulations using path-integral quantum Monte Carlo methods, in which the ionic motions are treated quantum mechanically. In such simulations, quantum effects are found to suppress the ferroelectric transition in STO completely as well as to strongly affect the behavior of the polar mode up to ∼100 K; in KTO, quantum effects cause local correlated polar nanoregions While many features of quantum paraelectricity are now established, major questions about the detailed nature of the quantum paraelectric state remain open. First, the existence or not of a zero-kelvin quantum crit-ical point. While susceptibility measurements have been interpreted in terms of a quantum critical point that is crossed by either strain or 18 O substitution In this work we use electronic structure calculations based on standard density functional theory (DFT), to explore the potential energy landscapes of a series of quantum paraelectrics and conventional ferroelectrics. Since conventional DFT does not treat the ions quantum mechanically, we then account for the quantum mechanical behavior of the ions in a second step by solving the Schrödinger equation explicitly for the ionic subspace using the calculated DFT potential. Our approach is similar to that used in Ref. Our primary scientific goal is to answer the question of how a ferroelectric emerges from a paraelectric as a function of an external (non-thermal) tuning parameter. In Fig. Illustration of two possible mechanisms for the crossover from the paraelectric (left) to ferroelectric (right) state. In each panel the vertical axis is internal energy, and the horizontal axis is the polarization (or relative displacements of the anionic and cationic sublattices) in massweighted coordinates q, with the curves centered around zero polarization. The green dashed lines represent the zero-point energy levels. The lower row shows a behavior analogous to the usual Landau model of displacive phase transitions as a function of temperature: The internal energy has a double well potential resulting in a ferroelectric state at low temperature (right panel) with the barrier height reducing as temperature increases, so that there is a single minimum corresponding to zero polarization above the Curie temperature. Such a crossover could also occur at zero kelvin as a function of an external parameter such as strain or pressure, in which case the middle panel, in which the potential has a pronounced quartic component but not yet a barrier, would correspond to the quantum paraelectric state. In the upper row, the free energy is unchanged as a function of tuning parameter, but the zero-point energy evolves from high (corresponding to the paraelectric state) to low (corresponding to the ferroelectric state). In this case, quantum paraelectric behavior would be expected when the zero-point energy is in the vicinity of the top of the barrier between the oppositely polarized states. This behavior could be achieved by changing the masses of the atoms through isotopic substitution, which changes the mass without changing the form of the potential energy. energy coincides with the top of the double well. A second, methodological goal is to explore whether simple, inexpensive standard DFT-based methods are appropriate for addressing questions that are explicitly related to quantum tunneling of ions. Such a finding would, in turn, allow easy determination of whether new hypothetical materials could exhibit quantum paraelectric behavior. In this section we describe our methodology for calculating the potential wells of the type shown in Fig. At first sight it is trivial to solve the 1D Schrödinger equation, given the calculated form of the potential, V , as a function of ionic displacements, ξ, and knowing the masses of the ions, m, contributing to the phonon eigenvector. In practice, however, for the lattice vibrations in periodic solids considered here, there is a subtlety, in that neither the mass nor the displacement of a phonon is well-defined. Many plausible choices have been made in the literature and we return to this point in sections IV A and IV B, where we provide a summary of the literature choices use our results to determine which are most appropriate. Here, we prefer to combine the mass and displacement into mass-weighted coordinates, q, defined as q = √ mξ, which are rigorously defined and avoid an arbitrary choice for the phonon mass and displacement. In mass-weighted coordinates, the 1D Schrödinger equation is reformulated as which we then solve using a finite-difference approach to obtain the zero-point and higher energy levels. B. Construction of the potential V(q) We write the double-well potential V (q) as a fourthorder polynomial where V 0 is the height of the barrier and σ is the halfwidth of one well, as shown in Fig. The height of the barrier, V 0 , is extracted straightforwardly from the energy difference per formula unit between the non-polar reference structure and the lowerenergy polar structure. The half-width of the barrier, σ, is obtained from the frequency, ω of the imaginary phonon at the Γ point as follows: By definition, for a harmonic potential ω 2 is related to the curvature by Sketch of the double-well construction in massweighted coordinates, indicating the parameters V0 and σ. The height of the double well barrier, V0, is calculated from the energy difference between the polar and non-polar structures. The half-width of the double well, σ, (defined here as the distance between the barrier top and the bottom on one side) is calculated from the imaginary phonon frequency of the non-polar structure at the Γ-point, ω, and the energy difference V0 as described in the text. (Note that in this case ω 2 is negative). Taking the second derivative of Eqn. 3 and setting q = 0 yields and equating Eqns. 4 and 5 we obtain We mention that this one-dimensional model corresponds physically to the case where the system inverts its polarization via the high-symmetry zero-polarization reference structure, rather than for example rotating the polarization into another orientation. As such, it provides an upper bound on the barrier height between the oppositely polarized states. To calculate the forces and total energies needed to construct our potentials, we use density functional theory within the generalized gradient approximation (GGA) as implemented in the Quantum Espresso 6.4.1 code In a first step, we calculate the lattice constants and internal coordinates of a non-polar reference structure for each material as follows: For BTO we fully relax the atomic positions and lattice parameters to obtain the known experimental low-temperature rhombohedral phase with polarization along the pseudocubic [111] direction; we then remove the polar distortion by hand while keeping the lattice parameters fixed. For STO, we construct a non-polar tetragonal unit cell containing the experimentally observed rotations of the oxygen octahedra around the [001] direction, then relax the atomic positions and cell parameters while constraining the symmetry to maintain the inversion center. For KTO we relax the lattice constants for the primitive cubic unit cell with the symmetry constraint that the atoms remain at their high-symmetry cubic perovskite positions and the unit cell remains cubic. We then calculate the ferroelectric soft-mode phonon frequencies at Γ for these non-polar reference structures using density functional perturbation theory (DFPT), as implemented in Quantum Espresso 6.4.1. In all cases these frequencies are imaginary (that is ω 2 is negative), indicating a doublewell potential. In a second step, we calculate the polar structures by manually adding a polarization to each material following the eigenvector of the imaginary phonon mode, then relaxing the internal coordinates, while keeping the shape and volume of the unit cells fixed. For BTO, the resulting structure is the original polar structure of the first step. The energy difference between each polar and corresponding non-polar structure gives us directly the V 0 parameter in each case. This is then combined with the calculated ω 2 value to obtain the well half-width, σ. Next, we present and analyze our calculated potential energy double wells, as well as the zero-point and higher energies obtained from solving the respective Schrödinger equations, for our example materials BTO, STO, and KTO, as well as for experimentally plausible generalized double wells. In Fig. We note first that all materials have a double-well potential, with both the height and width of the barrier decreasing from ferroelectric BTO to paraelectric KTO. The barrier height of BTO is ∼105 meV, which is high compared to k B T at room temperature, consistent with its ferroelectric ground state; likewise the lowest energy eigenvalue (dashed blue line) lies far below the top of the barrier, and its eigenfunction (solid blue line) is largely localized in one or other of the oppositely polarized wells. The energy of the first excited state (dashed green line) is indistinguishable from the zero-point energy at this scale. This small splitting suggests a low tunneling frequency for a system initially localized in one energy well to tunnel to the other, again consistent with the known ferroelectric ground state of BTO. Extracting a numerical "tunneling frequency", f , from f = E1-E0 h (see Table The barrier height of STO is more than one order of magnitude smaller than that of BTO, and its width in mass-weighted coordinates is approximately half. The zero-point energy lies close to the top of the barrier, and the ground-state eigenfunction has its maximum at q = 0; this corresponds to the "extreme quantum" regime of Ref. While KTO still has a double-well potential for our choice of computational parameters, the barrier is small. The zero-point energy is clearly above the barrier, indicating that KTO should behave more like a conventional paraelectric than STO. The splitting between the ground and first excited states is 12.71 meV corresponding to E1-E0 h = 3.07 THz. In this case, it is more appropriate to describe this value as an oscillation rather than a tunneling frequency, since the relevant energy levels are above the barrier. Ferroelectric double-well potentials of BTO, STO and KTO calculated in this work using density functional theory (solid black lines), and their respective zero-point (dashed blue) and first excited state (dashed green) energies obtained by subsequent solution of the Schrödinger equation. We note that the trend follows that of the lower panel of Fig. Our calculated double wells and low-energy eigenvalues and wavefunctions in 18 O-substituted STO (top row) and KTO (bottom row) are shown in the left column of Fig. Changes in lattice constant, introduced by applying uniaxial stress, or through biaxial coherent heteroepitaxy, have also been shown to have a substantial effect on both ferroelectric and superconducting behaviors of SrTiO 3 An increase in lattice constant (rather than volume) of 1%, which is accessible in biaxially strained coherent thin-film heterostructures, causes even larger changes (not shown in Figs. Since the lattice constants of complex oxides are strongly sensitive to oxygen stoichiometry . Double wells and lowest-energy eigenvalues and wavefunctions for 18 O-substituted (left column) and 1 %-volumeexpanded STO (top) and KTO (bottom). The middle column shows the reference calculations from Fig. also changes the oxygen vacancy concentration, it might be difficult to disentangle intrinsic isotopic effects from changes in behavior resulting from changes in the lattice constant. In Fig. Before analyzing our example materials, we first discuss some general trends. A narrow free energy barrier (left border) generally results in high oscillation frequencies, and the narrower the well, the higher the barrier required to reach the tunneling regime. Widening the well (by increasing σ) lowers the frequency, which can be reduced to the high-GHZ range, even for the smallest barrier heights, V 0 , shown. At any given barrier half-width σ, increasing the barrier height from close to zero first increases the frequency, until the barrier height reaches the zero-point energy; for larger barrier heights the frequency decreases with increasing barrier height. The point where the zero-point energy crosses the double-well barrier, indicated by the dashed line in the plot, therefore corresponds to the frequency maximum and marks the crossover between the oscillating and tunneling regimes. We propose that this crossover provides the best measure of the quantum critical point within the density functional theory formalism. The solid black symbols show the results of our calculations for BTO, STO, and KTO presented earlier, as well as for an isolated molecule of ammonia, NH 3 , using V 0 and σ values directly taken from ref. In this final section, we collect the many definitions that have been used in the literature for the mass of the phonon. We compare the predictions of the various choices with the results that we obtained above using mass-weighted coordinates, for which no arbitrary choice has to be made. Our main finding is that one has to take care when separating mass and displacement to obtain physically sensible results. In particular, the popular choice of the B-site ion off-centering as a measure of the polar displacement, while giving accidentally reasonable values for the titanates, is not generally physically appropriate. For the perovskite oxides, the combination of the mass of the oxygen ions in the unit cell for the effective mass, combined with the average displacement of an oxygen ion between para-and ferro-electric structures as the effective displacement is the most self-consistent choice. In Table The definitions in the first six columns in Table II use only the masses of the constituent atoms. Column 1 shows the ABO 3 atomic mass, which is just the sum of the individual atoms in one formula unit. STO is the lightest at 183.5 u, followed by BTO and KTO with 233.2 u and 268.0 u, respectively. A problem with this definition is that the effective mass is the same for each phonon mode; this is clearly unphysical since different phonons correspond to different patterns of atomic displacements. For example, the heavy barium atom in BTO and tantalum atom in KTO contribute strongly to their respective atomic masses, but do not displace much in the soft mode, which is dominated by motion of the lighter atoms. A popular choice in the ferroelectrics community is the mass of the B-site atom (column 2), that is titanium (47.9 u) for BTO, and STO The generalized, mode-independent reduced masses ) -1 , (column 5) is also dominated by the oxygen ions and gives almost the same value for all three materials considered. Recently, use of a "Wentzcovich-type" mass, defined as and first introduced in the context of moleculardynamics simulations with variable cell shape The definitions shown in columns 7 and 8 incorporate information about the phonon eigenvector as well as the masses of the atoms. In the PI-QMC simulations of refs. Finally, a phonon effective mass can be defined by analogy to the electronic effective mass, from the quadratic part of the phonon dispersion around the Γ point, using m * = 2 ∂ 2 E/∂k 2 . (Note that this can not be used for the acoustic modes, which are linear at Γ). We list our calculated values in the final column, noting that they are much smaller than those obtained from all other methods, and also that the precise values are strongly sensitive to the detailed numerics of the phonon calculation. Finally, we mention that an effective mass was extracted from experimental measurements of the domainwall motion near the ferroelectric quantum critical point in TTF-QBr 2 I 2 , using a simple Wentzel-Kramers-Brillouin approximation The preceding discussion clearly illustrates the difficulty with assigning a mass to a phonon, with the physically justifiable values given in Table The same argument that precludes an unambiguous definition of phonon mass also results in the phonon displacement not being unambiguously defined. Our results obtained with mass-weighted coordinates, however, allow us to extract the appropriate displacement within the double-well potential model corresponding to a particular choice of the mass. As reported in Table To summarize this section, if one is working with a model for polar quantum fluctuations that requires a separation into mass and displacement, then the best choice for the mass seems to be that of the lightest atoms. In addition to providing the best match with the calculations in mass-weighted coordinates, this choice is intuitive since the lightest atoms have the largest amplitude displacements in the soft polar mode. For perovskite titanates, the displacement of the B atom accidentally gives good results, since the mass of the titanium ion is equal to that of the three oxygens. It is not a good choice, however, for general non-titanate perovskites. This finding that the mass of the tunneling entity is best described by the oxygen mass implies that the mass shift on 16 O → 18 O substitution should take the largest possible value of 12.5%. Note, however, that this is still considerably smaller than the 100% change on deuteration of ammonia. In summary, we find that a simple one-dimensional quantum model, incorporating only two parameters -the energy difference between polar and non-polar structures and the frequency of the soft polar mode in the non-polar structure -can straightforwardly distinguish between ferroelectric, quantum-paraelectric and paraelectric materials. We illustrate the model using conventional DFT and DFPT calculations for the cases of ferroelectric BaTiO 3 , strongly quantum paraelectric SrTiO 3 and weakly quantum paraelectric KTaO 3 . In addition, we provide a chart that indicates the behavior of any material given the values of these two parameters. Within our model, we find that experimentally accessible changes in lattice parameter have a strong effect on the shape of the double-well potential and hence the zero-point and low-lying energy levels, and readily transform STO and KTO from quantum paraelectric to ferroelectric behavior, consistent with experimental observations Therefore, we suggest that care should be taken on interpreting changes in behavior after isotopic substitution in STO and KTO, and in particular that any possible changes in lattice parameters during the oxygen exchange process are accounted for. Finally, we summarize the various choices that have been made in the literature for phonon mass and use the results from our calculations in massweighted coordinates to determine the corresponding phonon displacement in each case. While we prefer the use of mass-weighted coordinates to avoid such an arbitrary and unphysical separation, we identify some choices which lead to reasonably sensible combinations of mass and displacement, particularly for BTO and STO.