High-entropy-alloy (HEA) superconductors are a new class of disordered superconductors. In this study, we investigate the robustness of superconducting states in HEA-type metal telluride (MTe; M = Ag, In, Sn, Pb, Bi) under high pressure. PbTe exhibits a structural transition from a NaCl-type to an orthorhombic Pnma structure at low pressures, and further transitions to a CsCl-type structure at high pressures. When the superconductivity of the CsCl-type PbTe is observed, it is found that its superconducting transition temperature (Tc) decreases with pressure. However, in the HEA-type AgInSnPbBiTe5, Tc is almost independent of pressure, for pressures ranging from 13.0 to 35.1 GPa. This trend is quite similar to that observed in an HEA superconductor (TaNb)0.67(HfZrTi)0.33, which shows that the robustness of superconductivity to external pressure is a universal feature in HEA-type superconductors. To clarify the effects of the modification of the configurational entropy of mixing on the crystal structure, superconducting states, and electronic structure of MTe, electrical resistance measurements, synchrotron X-ray diffraction, and synchrotron X-ray absorption spectroscopy with partial fluorescence mode (PFY-XAS) for three MTe polycrystalline samples of PbTe, AgPbBiTe3, and AgInSnPbBiTe5 with different configurational entropies of mixing at the M site were performed. Motivated by the discovery of the robustness of superconductivity to extremely high pressure in a high-entropy-ally (HEA) superconductor (TaNb)0.67(HfZrTi)0.33, we studied the external pressure effects on the crystal structure, superconducting properties, and electronic structure of HEA-type metal telluride AgInSnPbBiTe5. The robustness of superconductivity to external pressure was observed in the high-pressure phase (CsCl-type) of AgInSnPbBiTe5, which is similar to that observed in (TaNb)0.67(HfZrTi)0.33. Our findings suggest that the robustness of superconductivity to external pressure is a universal feature in HEA-type superconducting materials. The combination of the effects of high pressure and HEA properties is expected to open a pathway to the development of new disordered superconductors with exotic properties. The superconductivity of disordered materials has been extensively studied because of an observation made on the insulator-superconductor transition or disorder-induced superconductivity As a new category of disordered superconductors, high-entropy alloys (HEAs), which are alloys containing five or more elements with an atomic concentration between 5% and 35% We recently developed superconducting HEA-type compounds, in which one of the crystallographic sites is alloyed with the criterion similar to HEAs On the basis of the facts described above, we considered that the metal telluride system is suitable for the discussion of the effects of high ΔSmix on the crystal structure (phase stability) and superconducting properties under high pressure. Here, we studied the crystal structure, electronic structure, and superconducting properties of three tellurides (MTe; M = Ag, In, Sn, Pb, Bi) with different ΔSmix values at the M site: PbTe (ΔSmix = 0), AgPbBiTe3 (ΔSmix = 1.10R), and AgInSnPbBiTe5 (ΔSmix = 1.61R). The pressure evolutions of the crystal structure and electronic transport properties were reported in previous studies Figure Figure To compare the pressure evolution of Tc in AgInSnPbBiTe5 with that of PbTe and AgPbBiTe3, the pressure dependences of Tc onset for PbTe and AgPbBiTe3 were examined (Figs. Figures 3A-3C show the pressure-dependent synchrotron X-ray diffraction (SXRD) patterns for the PbTe, AgPbBiTe3, and AgInSnPbBiTe5 samples, respectively. For all the SXRD patterns, we performed the Rietveld refinement to confirm the structural type and to evaluate the lattice constant. See Tables S1-S3 and Figs. S4-S6 for details on refinements. On the basis of the refinement results, we established structural phase diagrams under high pressure (Figs. To examine the effects of pressure and HEA states on the electronic structure, we performed X-ray absorption spectroscopy with partial fluorescence mode (PFY-XAS) for PbTe and AgInSnPbBiTe5. See Fig. For PbTe with a NaCl-type structure, there is a narrow band gap, and the p orbitals of Pb and Te near the Fermi energy are hybridized. See Fig. The pressure dependences of the intensity and the energy of peak P1 in PbTe is shown in Fig. On the other hand, the energy of peak P1 shifts to a lower incident energy until it reaches a pressure level of 5 GPa. The incident energy and the intensity do not change in the middlepressure range of 5-17 GPa, and they start decreasing again for pressures above 18 GPa as shown in Fig. The intensity of P3 (Pb 6d DOS, eg) shows a trend which is similar to the intensity of P1. The intensity of P2 (Pb 6d DOS, t2g) on the other hand decreases with increasing pressure at P > 17 GPa (Fig. We also measured the PFY-XAS spectra at the Pb-L3 absorption edges for AgInSnPbBiTe5 as shown in Fig. From the structural viewpoint, the impact of the introduction of an HEA site is the suppression of the middle-pressure phase with a Pnma structure. In other words, the low-pressure phase with a NaCl-type structure is stabilized up to a higher pressure of P > 10 GPa in AgInSnPbBiTe5, whereas the NaCl-type phase disappears at ~5 GPa for PbTe. Interestingly, the trend of lattice constant in the CsCl-type structure under HP is quite similar for PbTe and AgInSnPbBiTe5. However, as revealed in Fig. The results show that the pressure phase diagram of the crystal structure is largely modified by the effect of ΔSmix. In contrast, the electronic structures are not sensitive to the effect of ΔSmix. To understand the HEA effects on structural and electronic properties for MTe under high pressure, further studies using various probes are needed. However, commonality on the robustness of superconductivity to external pressure in the superconducting HEA (TaNb)0.67(HfZrTi)0.33 The polycrystalline sample of PbTe was synthesized by the solid-state reaction of Pb (99.9%) and Te (99.999%) at 900 0C. To obtain a pellet for resistance measurements, pelletizing and second annealing were performed. The polycrystalline samples of AgPbBiTe3 and AgInSnPbBiTe5 were synthesized using an HP synthesis method where the pressure was kept below 3 GPa, and the temperature kept at 500 0C for 30 minutes as described in Ref. The electrical resistance measurements were performed at ambient pressure using the conventional four-probe method on a GM refrigerator system. Resistance measurements under high pressure were performed on polycrystalline powder on a Physical Property Measurement System (Quantum Design) using an originally designed diamond anvil cell (DAC) with boron-doped diamond electrodes Pressure dependences of the synchrotron X-ray powder diffraction (SXRD) patterns were measured at BL12B2, SPring-8, using a 3-pin plate diamond anvil cell (DAC, Almax easyLab Industries) with a CCD detection system at room temperature (~ 293 K). Culet size of the diamond anvil was 0.4 mm with a stainless-steel gasket. We took an arrangement of both incoming and outgoing x-ray beams passing through the diamonds with incident photon energy of 18 keV. A twodimensional image of the CCD system was integrated using the FIT2D program The pressure dependence of the high-resolution X-ray absorption spectra was measured at beamline BL12XU, SPring-8. Membrane-controlled DACs with a 0.3 mm culet and that with a 0.4 mm culet were used for PbTe and AgInSnPbBiTe5, respectively, and silicone oil was used as a pressure-transmitting medium. Beryllium gaskets with a 3 mm diameter were pre-indented at the center. The thickness was approximately 67 m for PbTe and 31 m for AgInSnPbBiTe5, and the diameters of the sample chamber in the gaskets were approximately 110 m for PbTe and 140 m for AgInSnPbBiTe5. We employed X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS) with a partial fluorescence mode (PFY-XAS), which has an advantage of a higher resolution as compared to that of normal XAS 