The chirality associated with broken time reversal symmetry in magnetically doped topological insulators have important implications to the quantum transport phenomena. Here we report the anomalous Hall effect studies in Mn-and Cr-doped Bi2Te3 topological insulators with varied thickness and doping content. By tracing the chirality of the Hall loops, we find that the Mn-type anomalous Hall effect with clockwise chirality is strengthened by the reduction of film thickness, which is opposite to that of the Cr-type anomalous Hall effect with counterclockwise chirality. We provide a phenomenological model to explain the evolution of magnetic order and anomalous Hall effect chirality in magnetically doped topological insulators. Chirality is defined as an asymmetric property that is used to describe a system that cannot be distinguished from its mirror image. It plays a crucial role in a wide range of systems, ranging from fundamental particles in high energy physics, to grand-scale objects like spiral galaxies in astrophysics. In condensed matter physics, chiral phenomena not only manifest itself in material structure but also in emergent electromagnetic responses Despite considerable efforts on magnetic TIs, particularly in pursuing the quantized AHE, there are still intriguing open questions. In previous studies, the AHE behaviors in magnetic TIs can be divided into two different groups. In the first group, exemplified by the Cr-and V-doped Bi2Te3 family TI films, the magnetic field dependent Hall traces display hysteresis loops with counterclockwise chirality Here, ρyx + and ρyx -denote the Hall resistivity ρyx profiles when magnetic field is swept back to zero from positive and negative polarizations respectively. The violet arrows represent the magnetization at corresponding magnetic field. At positive magnetization, the AH resistivity ρyx 0 (defined as ρyx + at zero magnetic field) has a positive value. For the quantized AHE such as in the Cr-doped (Bi,Sb)2Te3 TI system, ρyx 0 reaches h/e 2 , where h denotes the Plank constant and e is the electron charge, corresponding to the Chern number C = +1 Accompanied by the rise of chiral spintronics in topological matter Although there have been several experiments studying the AHE in Mn-and Cr-doped TIs It is difficult to switch between opposite chirality in one sample. Moreover, the different sample fabrication methods In this work, we report systematic transport studies of Cr-and Mn-doped (Bi0.9MnxCr0.1x)2Te3 magnetic TIs with various thickness d and doping level x at different temperature T and gate voltage Vg. We find that the Mn-type AHE with clockwise chirality is strengthened as d is reduced from 8 quintuple-layer (QL) to 6 QL, whereas the Cr-type AHE with counterclockwise chirality exhibits totally opposite behavior. The different response of AHE to film thickness are universally present in the x, T and Vg dependent measurements, consistent with the distinct mechanisms for FM order found in Mn-and Cr-doped TIs. We propose a simple model to explain the observed ambi-chiral AHE in magnetically doped TIs. The ten magnetically doped TI samples studied in this work are grown by molecular beam epitaxy on insulating SrTiO3(111) substrates following the similar method reported previously For transport measurement, standard four-probe AC lock-in method is carried out after the samples are manually scratched into Hall bar structures. Indium pieces are pressed directly on the top surface of the samples as electrical contacts. The magnetic field is applied perpendicular to the sample plane, and the Hall signals are antisymmetrized with respect to magnetic field to correct the errors caused by geometric misalignments. An excitation current of 0.2 μA is applied by a Keithley 6221 current source, and a Vg is applied by a Keithley 2400 source meter. We first study the magnetic field dependent ρyx at different Ts for five 8-QL (Bi0.9MnxCr0.1x)2Te3 samples, as shown in Figure In the next, we study ρyx in another set of samples but with d = 6 QL, where the contribution from bulk state is reduced. The overall behaviors are similar to that of the 8-QL samples, but there is an obvious difference in the x value when the ρyx 0 sign change occurs. As indicated by the data set enclosed by the red frames, it is reduced from x = 0.08 in the 8-QL samples to x = 0.07 in the 6-QL samples. To better visualize the thickness dependent chirality change, we plot the difference between ρyx + and ρyx -(defined as △ρyx = ρyx + -ρyx -) as a function of magnetic field for different x and d, as shown in Figures In the insets of Figure To visualize the Vg dependent ambi-chiral AHE more clearly, we display the magnetic field dependent △ρyx for varied Vg, as shown in Figures To further illustrate the distinct dimensionality dependence of Mn-and Cr-type AHE, in Figures Previous theories have proposed that the topologically protected surface states in TIs could be more susceptible to magnetic order than the insulating bulk states, thus is anticipated to give rise to distinct magnetic ordering phenomenon in Mn-doped Bi2Se3 TIs Finally, we discuss about the possible factors that lead to the opposite chirality in Mn-and Cr-doped TIs. Theoretically, the AHE in magnetic TIs is induced through the exchange coupling JMzSz between local moments Mz and electron spins Sz, where J denotes the coupling constant When the itinerant electron spins couple with Mn 2+ , only electron with opposite spin is allowed to virtually hop to the unoccupied orbits. However, in Cr-based TIs, each Cr 3+ has three singly occupied and two empty orbits. In this case, it is energetically more favorable for electrons with the same spin to hop to the empty orbits. Consequently, the exchange coupling and the resulting Dirac fermion mass in the two systems are expected to have opposite sign, which in turn leads to opposite chirality in their AHE. The above physical pictures are schematically illustrated in In summary, we perform systematic studies of the AHE in Mn-and Cr-codoped Bi2Te3 TI thin films. By varying the Cr/Mn doping levels and film thickness, we can actively control the chirality of the AHE. These results can be interpreted by the different mechanisms for FM order and AHE chirality in Mn-and Cr-doped TIs. Our experiments shed new light on manipulating the interplay between FM order and band topology in magnetic TIs. 