The amplitude of the ground-state superconducting energy gap (0) and relative jump in the electronic specific heat at the transition temperature ΔC γT c are the primary fundamental parameters of any superconductor. Several well-established techniques are available for measuring these values in the bulk samples. However, a limited number of techniques can be used to measure these parameters in atomically thin superconductors. Here, we propose a new approach for extracting (0) and ΔC γT c in atomically thin superconductors by utilizing the upper critical field data from perpendicular, Bc2,(T) (when a magnetic field is applied perpendicular to the film surface), and parallel, Bc2,||(T) (when a magnetic field is applied in the direction parallel to the film surface), external field directions. The deduced parameters for few-layer-thick Al, Sn, NbSe2, MoS2, magic angle twisted trilayer graphene (MATTG), and WTe2 are well-matched values expected for strong-and moderately strong-coupled electron-phonon-mediated superconductors. In many reports, the enhancement of Bc2,||(0) above the Pauli-Clogston-Chandrasekhar limiting field (i.e., magnetic field required to break the Cooper pair) in atomically thin superconductors has been explained based on the assumption of exotic pairing mechanisms, for instance, Ising-type pairing. Here, we explain the observed Bc2,||(0) enhancement based on the geometrical enhancement factor that originates from the sample geometry. This approach does not assume the existence of novel exotic pairing mechanisms in atomically thin superconductors. Recently, Cao et. al. where B CPP (0) was assumed to be Similar observations have been reported for atomically thin MoS2 MoTe2 Based on the observed violation of the Pauli-Clogston-Chandrasekhar limiting field (Eq. 2), and other research groups (see Ref. Here, we should point out that the first report a many-fold increase in B c2,∥ (T) vs. the decrease in film thickness, d sc (from 450 nm to 20 nm) was reported by Blumberg and Douglass In the first study, where the extrapolated B c2,∥ (0) exceeded the B CPP (0) (Eq. 3), was reported by B c2,|| (0) = 4.84 T > B CPP (0) = 1.86 × T c = 4.56 T. Later Considering that Tedrow et al. This implies that the key parameter for the observed B c2,|| (0) enhancement in atomically thin superconductors is the film thickness, d sc , because an identical effect is observed in pure elemental Al and Sn on the one hand, and in NbSe2, MoTe2, TTG, few-layer stanene, PdTe2, TaS2, electric-field-gated SrTiO3, WTe2, and MoS2; on the other hand, it cannot be classified as exhibiting any similarity except being atomically thin. Considering that proper equation for B PCC (0) where Δ(0) is the ground-state superconducting energy gap amplitude, μ B is the Bohr magneton, and g is the Lande factor. Also, it should be stressed, that Eq. 6 has been derived for the case of infinitely large isotropic 3D superconductor. To the best of the authors knowledge detailed theoretical consideration of the angular dependence of B PCC (0, θ) (where θ is an external field direction) for iso-and anisotropic superconductors with spatial confinement within several atomic layers has not been performed. Instead, in many reports on atomically thin superconductors, Eq. 6 is using to declare that because the observed upper critical field B c2,|| (0) exceeds B PCC (0) (calculated by Eq. 6), atomically thin superconductors exhibit exotic type of charge carrier pairing. By looking closer on Eq. 6, it can be concluded that Eq. 6 can be simplified into Eq. 3 only for clean s-wave weak-coupling superconductors that exhibit: and However, for many superconductors, even for s-wave lead, Eq. 8 is not satisfied: For pnictides, experimental data shows Based on multiple statements Thus, even in assumption that the Lande g-factor is unaltered (Eqs. 6,7) in MATBG and MATTG, Eq. 2 transforms in: Based on this, the observed B c2,|| (0) enhancement in MATTG Apart from the problem of the Lande g-factor in atomically thin superconductors, here we present a model to deduce the ground-state superconducting energy gap, Δ(0), in these superconductors to, at least partially, clarify one multiplicative term in primary Eq. 6 of the Pauli-Clogston-Chandrasekhar limiting field. The model is based on the analysis of both perpendicular, Bc2,(T) (when a magnetic field is applied in the direction perpendicular to the film surface), and parallel, Bc2,||(T), upper critical field data for atomically thin superconductors. It should be noted that the scanning tunnelling spectroscopy (STS) is the most widely used technique to measure the superconducting energy gap, (T), in atomically thin films For anisotropic superconductors in-plane, Bc2,(T), and out-of-plane, Bc2,||(T), the upper critical fields within the Ginzburg-Landau theory are given by where φ 0 is the superconducting quantum flux. Recently, Farrar et al The first mechanism is the orbital pair breaking, which originates from the Lorentz force act on the charge of the paired electrons/holes. The respectful upper critical field for this mechanism is designated as the orbital limiting upper critical field, B c2 orb (T), and equations for these field are given by Eqs. 13,14 (where we omitted the use of superscript orb to simplify Eqs. 13, 14 and several following equations). The second mechanism is the pairs break by the spin-paramagnetic effect explained above (Eq. 6), which is designated as B PCC (T). Due to in many superconductors B PCC (0) , introduced by Considering that in Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) theory of superconductivity where v F is the Fermi velocity and the ground-state out-of-plane upper critical field is: It should be noted that even in bulk elemental fcc superconductors, for instance, in classical BCS superconductor aluminium for given material. Surprisingly, this problem does not exist in atomically thin superconductors, because it was first shown by Tinkham and co-workers where d sc is the thickness of the superconducting layer, and Eq. 14 transforms in and, thus, one can conclude that Eq. 16 transforms in: As a result, B c2,∥ (0) values described by Eqs. 21,22 can be orders of magnitude larger than B c2,∥ (0) expected from Eq. 14, even if all fundamental parameters of the superconductor, such as ξ ab (0), ξ c (0), Δ ab (0) and Δ c (0), remain unchanged. Truly, considering the anisotropy, γ ξ (0), for atomically thin film: and typical values for ξ ab (0)~50 nm and d sc = 1 nm for MATBG It should be noted that any Type-II superconductor has three fundamental fields, i.e. the lower critical field, B c1 , the upper critical field, B c2 , and the Pauli-Clogston-Chandrasekhar field, B PCC . These fields are not independent from each other and they linked through primary superconducting parameters λ, ξ, Δ, etc, of the material. Eq. 23 demonstrates that atomically thin superconductors have additional parameter which is the film thickness, d sc . It should be stressed that Eq. 23 is not the only equation which utilizes the film thickness, d sc , to rescale one of the fundamental values (in this case, the upper critical field) for thin film superconductors. The approach to utilize d sc as an additional fundamental constant for the case of very thin superconductors was recognized nearly six decades ago, when Pearl Eq. 26 can be presented in the similar form to Eq. 23: The difference between Eqs. 23 and 27 is the multiplicative prefactor √3. However, these equations demonstrate general approach that different fundamental superconducting values in atomically thin superconductors depend on the ratio of the bulk sample value divided by the film thickness, d sc . We depicted the ratio by the square brackets in Eqs. 23 and 27. In flavor of this approach, the geometrical enhancement factor (with the respectful ratio) should apply for two other fundamental fields in Type-II superconductors, i.e. for the lower critical field, B c1 , and for the the Pauli-Clogston-Chandrasekhar limiting field, B PCC,|| (0). Based on a fact that the Pauli-Clogston-Chandrasekhar limiting field in many cases is close (by its value) to the upper critical field, here we propose to apply the same geometrical enhancement factor for B PCC,|| (0) as for the B c2,|| (0) field: d sc which by 2 orders of magnitude exceeds observed in the experiment It should be stressed that Eq. 29 originates from the GL theory Based on the above, one of the remaining tasks is to deduce Δ ab (0) in atomically thin films and to compare this value with its counterpart in bulk materials. One of the techniques available to achieve this was introduced by Talantsev et al who proposed an equation for the self-field critical current density, Jc(sf,T), in type-II thinfilm superconductors: where μ 0 = 4π × 10 -7 N A 2 ⁄ is the permeability of free space, λ ab (T) is the in-plane London penetration depth, and κ c (T) = λ ab (T) ξ ab (T) is temperature-dependent Ginzburg-Landau parameter. Later Considering that λ ab (T) can be calculated from Δ ab (T) (all expressions below are given for s-wave superconductors): where k B is the Boltzmann constant. The temperature-dependent superconducting gap can be expressed by the equation given by Gross et al where is the relative jump in electronic specific heat at Tc (where γ is so-called Sommerfeld constant), and  = 2/3 (for s-wave superconductors). Thus, primary parameters of the superconducting state of atomically thin superconductors: 1. Ground state superconducting energy gap, Δ ab (0); . can be deduced from the fit of the measured J c (sf, T) to Eqs. 22-25. Thus, the superconducting parameters of thin films of Ga [55], MoS2 The model is based on two primary ideas: 1. Superconducting coherence length, ξ ab (T), is linked to the London penetration depth, λ ab (T), through the Ginzburg-Landau parameter, κ c (T) = λ ab (T) ξ ab (T) , for which we adopted temperature dependence proposed by Gor'kov Based on Eq. 34, the temperature-dependent coherence length, ξ ab (T), can be represented as follows: where temperature dependent superconducting energy gap, Δ ab (T), is given by Eq. 34. By substituting of Eq. 35 in Eqs. 13,21, one can obtain a system of two equations which describe the upper critical field in atomically thin films (i.e. films for which conditions of Eqs. 19,20 are satisfied): Eq. 36 was used to fit B c2,⊥ (T) in MATBG 37 is proposed herein. 2. The second novelty of this approach (Eqs. 36,37) is that the two datasets, B c2,perp (T) and B c2,∥ (T), are simultaneously fitted to Eqs. 36,37. This type of fitting is also known as global data fit. As a result, a common set of free-fitting parameters, Δ ab (0), ΔC C , ξ ab (0), T c , 2Δ k B T c , and d sc can be deduced from the experimental B c2,perp (T) and B c2,∥ (T) datasets. For cases, when only B c2,∥ (T) datasets were reported, we used Eq. 37 with a fixed d sc to the reported layer thickness to extract the fundamental superconducting parameters for these films. In 1962 Blumberg and Douglass the decrease in the superconductor thickness, d sc , when they studied thin films of tin. In Fig. to its reported value of 1.68 for J c (sf, T) datasets, when fitted datasets do not contain enough raw data points to deduce Δ(0) with the required accuracy. In the result, deduced ξ(0) = 61.8 ± 1.1 nm satisfies the condition of d sc < ξ(0) and deduced k B T c = 3.7 ± 0.3 is in excellent agreement with the value of k B T c = 3.705 reported by Carbotte reported by Harper and Tinkham Δ(0) = 613 ± 58 μeV (Fig. A few-nanometre-thick aluminium film represents, perhaps, the most studied object of elemental metallic superconductors, owing to their prominent dependence of Tc, (0), and Bc2,||(0) on the film thickness, d sc In Figure This means that in this Al film, the Pauli-Clogston-Chandrasekhar limiting field was violated. However, if proper Eq. 6 and deduced Δ(0) = 522 μeV is used for calculations, then: Thus, this Al film complies with Pauli-Clogston-Chandrasekhar limiting field, because B c2,∥ (0) is significantly lower than B CPP (0). Practically identical values for Δ(0), ΔC γT c , and k B T c were deduced for the 4 nm thick Al film, for which raw B c2,∥ (0) data were reported by Tedrow and Meservey in their Figure datasets, only one dataset with d Pt = 0.1 nm has sufficient raw Bc2,||(0) data points to be fitted to Eq. 37 (Fig. appeared to be lower than that of the extrapolated B c2,∥ (0). One of the two possible interpretations of this result is that Pt overcoating can supress the Lande g-factor. However, it is much more natural to explain this result based on the geometrical field enhancement factor (Eqs. which by 22 times exceeds extrapolated B c2,∥ (0) = 7.8 T (Fig. Sajadi et al which by 18 times exceeds extrapolated B c2,∥ (0) = 3.1 T (Fig. Saito et al curves measured at gate voltage of 5.5 V (the original curves are shown in Figs. 4) by utilizing 50% of the normal state resistance, we deduced B c2,perp (T) and B c2,∥ (T) datasets, which are shown in Fig. 2Δ ab (0) k B T c = 8.1 ± 1.4 (at V gate = 5.5 V, Fig. k B T c = 6.1 ± 1.5 for electric-field gated MoS2 (with V gate = 2.2 V) which was extracted from the analysis of Jc(sf,T) measured by Costanzo et al is lower than extrapolated B c2,∥ (0). However, this result again can be explained based on geometrical enhancement factor (Eqs. 23,28): The magnetic flux density, B PCC,|| (0), indicated in Eq. 46 was created only several times on Earth during extraordinary pulsed magnetic field experiments de la Barrera et al Finally, we present an analysis of several magic-angle twisted trilayer graphene (MATTG) samples for which rawB c2,∥ (T) datasets were recently reported by Cao et al For our analysis, we used B c2,∥ (T) datasets, which were deduced from experimental R(T) curves by applying 10% of the normal state resistance criterion and this was clearly shown in recent precise experiments by Hirai et al Another issue is that only B c2,∥ (T) datasets were reported for MATTG In Figure Thus, there is the first concern within regard to the current interpretation In addition, as reported by Cao et al including single-layer graphene with deposited tin nanodisks It is interesting to mention that it is very likely that the first experimental observation of the emerge of the superconductivity in twisted atomically thin nanosheets was reported by Pan et al 6-8) in bulk samples of randomly restacked TaS2 monolayers. This is not a surprize, if we assume that the superconductivity in restacked TaS2 originates from the magic angle or the rhombohedral twisted bi-or tri-layers TaS2. There is a need to stress that if even MATTG and other atomically thin superconductors exhibited a violation of the Pauli-Clogston-Chandrasekhar limiting field, it is still not any extraordinary property of these materials because many bulk superconductors exhibit this violation. Truly, it can be mentioned the observation of the violation in bulk Ta2PdxS5 (x = 0. Thus, it can be concluded that the relation of B c2 (T → 0 K) > B PCC (0) (where the latter is calculated by Eq. 6-8) observes in many bulk ceramic materials, and this observation cannot be designated as unique extraordinal property of twisted graphene superlattices. A new model for deducing several primary superconducting parameters in atomically thin superconductors, that is in-plane ground state superconducting energy gap, Δ ab (0), relative jump in electronic specific heat at the transition temperature, . and demonstrated the model applicability for atomically thin superconductors Al, Sn, NbSe2, MoS2, TTG, and WTe2. ΔC C Figure 9.