Utilization of triplet excitons, which generally emit poorly, is always fundamental to realize highly efficient organic light-emitting diodes (LEDs). While triplet harvest and energy transfer via electron exchange between triplet donor and acceptor are fully understood in doped organic phosphorescence and delayed fluorescence systems, the utilization and energy transfer of triplet excitons in quasi-two-dimensional (quasi-2D) perovskite are still ambiguous. Here, we use an orange-phosphorescence-emitting ultrathin organic layer to probe triplet behavior in the skyblue-emitting quasi-2D perovskite. The delicate white LEDs architecture enables a carefully tailored Dexter-like energy-transfer mode that largely rescues the triplet excitons in quasi-2D perovskite. Our white organic-inorganic LEDs achieve maximum forward-viewing external quantum efficiency of 8.6% and luminance over 15000 cd m -2 , exhibiting a significant efficiency enhancement versus the corresponding sky-blue perovskite LED (4.6%). The efficient management of energy transfer between excitons in quasi-2D perovskite and Frenkel excitons in organic layer opens the door to fully utilizing excitons for white organic-inorganic LEDs. Lead-halide perovskite materials, which have advantages such as high carrier mobility, high photoluminescence quantum efficiency, adjustable band gap, and low manufacturing cost, Recently, triplet energy transfer (TET) across the lead halide perovskite nanocrystal/organic molecule interface with sufficient electronic coupling in hexane solution is reported, Here, we report a concept of energy transfer management between quasi-2D perovskite and organic emitter. Through the adjustment of triplet energy level (T1) and thickness of N-type spacer, Fӧrster and Dexter-like energy transfer from the quasi-2D perovskite to the organic emitter can be controlled precisely. It is found that a Dexter-like triplet-triplet energy transfer can harvest the triplet excitons that tend to experience non-radiative transition and maintain the potential for unity excitons utilization efficiency. Efficient white LEDs with EQE= 8.6% is achieved, which is higher than the best EQEs of previous reports using all-perovskites or combined organic-perovskite emitting layer without any external out-coupling structure (Note S1, Table The principle of excitons management in our white LEDs is illustrated in Figure To investigate the details of electroluminescence (EL) mechanism in the white LEDs, we should first determine the location of exciton recombination zone. We confirmed that a 7.5-nmthick TPBi inserted spacer can completely block the holes (Note S4, Supplemental Information), thus we could draw a conclusion that the exciton recombination zone in the white LED employing a 7.5-nm-thick TPBi inserted spacer is located in the perovskite layer. Figure As the driving voltage increases, the proportion of long wavelength orange-emitting component gradually reduces, indicating the gradual expansion of exciton recombination zone from perovskite/TPBi interface towards anode. The variation in EL spectra brings adjustable color temperature from a low color temperature of 2943 K, corresponding to Commission International de I'Eclairage (CIE) coordinates of (0.47, 0.48), to a high color temperature of 6013 K (CIE coordinates of (0.32, 0.39)) when varying the luminance from 100 to 10000 cd m -2 (Figure The corresponding sky-blue perovskite LEDs without ultrathin organic nanolayer were also fabricated to help understand our white LEDs. The forward-viewing peak EQEs of these blue perovskite LEDs employing TPBi, PO-T2T, and Bphen as ETL are 4.6%, 5.5%, and 0.1%, respectively (Note S6 and Figure To further understand the origin of triplet excitons in TPBi spacer, we prepared four film samples of CsPbBr2.2Cl0.8: PEABr (1:1) (perovskite), perovskite/PO-T2T, perovskite/TPBi, and perovskite/Bphen to investigate the exciton dynamics at the perovskite/organic interface. To enhance the contribution of interface excitons as similar in EL devices and still keep the smoothness of perovskite, the thickness of perovskite film is reduced to ~15 nm as much as possible. We carried out the transient PL and transient absorption (TA) measurements by using 400 nm excitation to ensure selective excitation of perovskite, in addition, Fӧrster-like energy transfer from perovskite to organic layer is disallowed due to the lack of overlap between the absorption spectra of organic films and the PL spectra of perovskite (Figure We prepared another four film samples of perovskite/LiF (20 nm), perovskite/LiF (12.5 nm)/PO-01 (0.5 nm)/LiF (7.5 nm), perovskite/LiF (7.5 nm)/PO-01 (0.5 nm)/LiF (12.5 nm), and perovskite/TPBi (12.5 nm)/PO-01 (0.5 nm)/TPBi (7.5 nm) for PL delay and TA kinetics measurements in order to further understand the energy transfer process in white LEDs. As shown in Figure Interestingly, the perovskite/TPBi (12.5 nm)/PO-01 (0.5 nm)/TPBi (7.5 nm) film with an ultrathin PO-01 layer shows a slightly faster PL delay than the perovskite/TPBi (20 nm) sample as shown in Figure The proposed triplet excitons management mechanism is presented in Figure In summary, we report a new white LEDs architecture that utilizes organic phosphorescence and fluorescence emitters to probe the triplet behavior in quasi-2D perovskite. Triplet excitons in the sky-blue-emitting perovskite are largely rescued via a carefully tailored triplet-triplet energy transfer, and our white organic-inorganic LEDs achieve maximum forward-viewing external quantum efficiency as high as 8.6%. We demonstrate that triplet management is quite essential for achieving high performance devices employing perovskite and organic emitters. Our work thus inspires an idea of fully utilizing excitons for white organic-inorganic LEDs with the efficient management of energy transfer between excitons in quasi-2D perovskite and Frenkel excitons.