Recent experimental utilization of liquid substrate in the production of two-dimensional crystals, such as graphene, together with a general interest in amorphous materials, raises the following question: is it beneficial to use a liquid substrate to optimize amorphous material production? Inspired by epitaxial growth, we use a two-dimensional coarse-grained model of interacting particles to show that introducing a motion for the substrate atoms improves the self-assembly process of particles that move on top of the substrate. We find that a specific amount of substrate liquidity (for a given sample temperature) is needed to achieve optimal self-assembly. Our results illustrate the opportunities that the combination of different degrees of freedom provides to the self-assembly processes. The rise of two-dimensional (2D) materials opens a variety of possibilities for materials science and nanotechnology Two-dimensional materials are frequently produced by bottom-up techniques like chemical vapor deposition (CVD), plasma-enhanced CVD , or physical vapor deposition The self-assembly is a generic name for a microscopic process that determines the spontaneous self-organization of the building blocks of the material. It can be naturally stimulated or modified by controlling experimental conditions On the level of a single particle, self-assembly occurs due to inter-particle interactions. In general, particles present in the vicinity of local energy minima are separated by significant energy barriers. From time to time, particles experience abrupt transitions between these local minima. These transitions occur due to random fluctuations that enable the system to escape from a metastable state In this paper, we first study the impact of uniform and local noise on the self-assembly of 2D amorphous clusters. Our results suggest that increasing the noise (local or uniform) up to some level has a beneficial effect on self-assembly. A specific non-zero noise must be present in the system for the self-assembly to create a large and uniform cluster. We show that while the energetic pathways (created by different noise types) are disparate on the single-particle level, the apparent result on the cluster formation is similar. Both noises can amplify the self-assembled cluster. We simulate two-dimensional, amorphous cluster growth on top of a liquid substrate. Our model consists of a substrate and particles that move and self-assemble on top of the substrate. The substrate is a set of atoms that can reorganize. Initially, the substrate atoms are randomly dispersed. To obtain more or less uniform substrate density, we divide the sample into equal squares and randomly introduce an atom into each square. The substrate atom number i interacts with substrate atom number j via Lennard-Jones potential V i,j : where = 100, σ = 10 4 and r i,j is the distance between atoms i and j. The surface is a square of size 20σ × 20σ, periodic boundary conditions are implied. To consider only the short-ranged repulsion interaction between atoms, we cut off the potentials at 1.1σ, i.e., WCA potential (see where D = 1.5 × 10 -7 σ 2 /δt is the diffusion coefficient, n is the number of particles that are closer than 1.1σ, δt = 0.005 is the time step size and pi,j is the unit vector in the direction r j -r i . η x and η y simulate Gaussian noise for each axis; where a x/y and b x/y are uniformly distributed random numbers ∈ (0, 1). The first four moments of η x/y coincide with corresponding moments of the Gaussian distribution. We use Voronoi tesselation So far, we have described the motion of substrate atoms. The substrate structure, i.e., Voronoi tessellation, defines the possible locations and dynamics of selfassembling particles that move on top of the substrate. Each Voronoi cell can be occupied by up to one self-assembling particle. Initially, all the particles are randomly dispersed among the Voronoi cells. We use the KMC model to determine the transitions between different substrate sites of the self-assembling particles. At each iteration of the KMC, one particle can hop from one Voronoi cell to one of the unoccupied neighboring Voronoi cells. The local geometry of a given Voronoi cell determines the interaction energy of two nearby particles, i.e., self-assembling particles located at neighbor Voronoi cells. This bonding interaction depends on the length of the mutual edge of the Voronoi cell; thus the total energy of a particle situated in Voronoi cell s is provided by the summation is over all the neighbours of cell s and f s,k is the length of the boundary between cells s and k. b k is 1 if cell k is occupied and 0 otherwise. This definition assumes that particle-particle interactions are linear with the distance between particles since the average distance between two randomly allocated particles in two adjacent Voronoi cells is proportional to the length of their mutual boundary where β = 1 k b T , T is the temperature and k B is the Boltzmann constant. If the attempt of the particle to leave its current cell s is successful, it will consider all the potential destinations (i.e., empty neighboring cells). For each of those potential destinations the transition probability p s→k is where ∆E s,k = E k -E s and the summation is over all the potential cells k. During the simulation, self-assembling particles locations are updated sequentially one after the other. Since the self-assembling particles are indistinguishable, it is possible to use sequential updating instead of random updating generally used in MC simulations The implementation of Voronoi tessellation as a substrate enables us to introduce the variations in the substrate during the self-assembly process. It allows studying the impact of substrate liquidity on the self-assembly process. It is worth noting that recently, a model describing ion transport processes used similar ideas of dividing the system into two coupled subsystems. MD represents one subsystem and the other by MC, see The main parameter that describes "successful" selfassembly is cluster compactness. To measure the cluster compactness, we sum over the lengths of the edges of all the cells. The measure is defined by; where s indicates different particles and k indicates the various neighbours of particle s. Due to the presence of |b s -b k | in Eq. 7, the order parameter U determined by the mutual edges of adjacent Voronoi cells, for situations where only one of the cells is occupied by a particle. Since the number of particles is fixed, small U describes situations when many particles are clumped together and form clusters. Large U may be caused by holes in the cluster or the emergence of many small clusters instead of a large one. Situations when U is large, are not desirable. Two types of noises are present in the model. The first noise is the thermal one that we term uniform. It is varied by controlling the temperature in Eqs. In the extreme cases when the duration of vibrations → measurement time, the improvement is negative, meaning that the obtained U is larger than U for the situation where no substrate variations are present. Enlargement of U for a short period of relaxation agrees with the naive assumption that adding more noise to the system damages the chances of creating a compact cluster. Since we search for improvement of cluster formation, we use ∼ 1/3 of the measurement time for the duration of vibrations. The two noises affect quite differently the immediate evolution of the system. While particles temperature increase leads to consistent small fluctuations, each substrate vibration violently destabilizes the system due to the reconfiguration of inter-substrate energetic bonds. When we eliminate substrate variations and consider only the effect of temperature, i.e., uniform noise, two distinct regimes appear. For low temperatures, the system is stuck in a metastable state (Fig. When the temperature is set to be constant, and the vibration frequency is modified, a quite similar effect is observed. Fig. To better characterize the differences and the similarities of the impact of the two noises, we explore the single- particle behavior. We define jump frequency as the total number of transitions between different Voronoi cells performed by the self-assembling particles, divided by the measurement, i.e., total number of KMC steps. Panel (a) of Fig. In Fig. balance between these noises to exist. Indeed, for temperatures below the optimal temperature of Fig. This study explored the self-assembly process on top of a 2D amorphous material that lacks periodicity. This lack of periodicity can soften some constraints that limit the self-assembly of crystals by imposing a variation of particle-particle interactions. Previous studies have shown that uniform The observed amplification of self-assembly can appear due to effective cooperation, like in the case of stochastic resonance When we compare the dynamical range of the effect for thermal fluctuations and substrate variations, we find that thermal fluctuations are superior. Nevertheless, the consistency of the effect suggests in favor of promoting and improving the idea of a search among different energy landscapes. It will be beneficial not only for designers of self-assembly on top of 2D amorphous materials but also for any search process driven by fluctuations on a constant energy landscape, such as Evolution 