Graphene moiré superlattices have emerged as a platform hosting an abundance of correlated insulating, topological, and superconducting phases. While the origins of strong correlations and non-trivial topology are shown to be directly linked to flat moiré bands While a rich phase diagram of quantum electronic phases has been realized in many graphene superlattice structures, robust superconductivity is so far exclusive to twisted bilayer graphene (TBG) We investigate twisted graphene multilayers where each successive layer is twisted by an angle ±θ relative to the previous one in an alternating sequence (Fig. In addition to the symmetry-breaking transitions previously reported in TTG The superconducting regions in all three structures extend over significantly larger filling factor ranges in comparison to TBG where superconductivity is typically observed within 2 < |ν| < 3. Moreover, as the layer number is increased, superconductivity on both electron and hole sides persists to progressively higher fillings, reaching ν ≈ +5 on the electron side for TPG (Fig. In addition to the pronounced ν-dependence, the observed superconducting pockets are highly tunable with electric displacement field D (Fig. Comparing the location of the superconducting regions with the evolution of the Hall density as a function of D and ν in TTG, TQG, and TPG provides further insight into the intricate relationship between the superconducting phase and the correlation-modified Fermi surface (Fig. At high D fields, signatures of the cascade vanish and instead van Hove singularities (vHs) become more prominent, reflecting qualitative changes in the band structure (see yellow lines in Fig. Pentalayer measurements provide additional signatures that point towards a close relation between superconducting phase boundaries and flavour symmetry-breaking cascades (Fig. As mentioned above, for low D fields in TPG, the superconducting pockets are extraordinarily large, spanning -4 ν < -2 for hole doping and +2 ν +5 for electron doping (Fig. Explanations for the enlarged superconducting intervals can generically be organized into three scenarios depending on the filling of the flat TBG-like bands ν flat , relative to the total filling ν max at which superconductivity terminates (ν max = +5 for electron-doped TPG and |ν max | = 4 for TQG and hole-doped TPG). In scenario (i), ν max corresponds to ν flat ≈ +3, the flat-band filling at which superconductivity is typically suppressed in TBG, whereas in scenario (ii), ν max coincides with ν flat ≈ +4, precluding any simple analogy with TBG. Finally, scenario (iii) assumes full filling of the flat bands before superconductivity is suppressed at ν max . This scenario includes the possibility that the distinction between the different TBG-and MLG-like bands breaks down even at D = 0 due to hybridization (for a more complete description of the three scenarios, see SI, section 5). From the perspective of the non-interacting band structure, scenarios (i) and (ii) are completely implausible. In particular, although the presence of the dispersive bands implies that δν = |ν| -|ν flat | > 0, this effect is much smaller than needed for these two scenarios. However, δν may nevertheless be significantly enhanced by Coulomb interactions. First, the Hartree correction accounts for the system's desire for a spatially uniform charge distribution. Since the flat bands are highly localized on the AA sites, the Hartree correction, so far primarily studied in TBG, manifests mainly as a band deformation and flattening A toy model for TPG incorporating these mechanisms (see SI, section 4e) suggests a minimal flat-band occupation ν flat +3.8 at ν ≈ +5, diminishing the plausibility of scenario (i) for electron-doped TPG which has ν max ≈ +5. The relevance of this scenario is further undermined by the observation of vHs at ν ≈ +6 (SI Fig. Both scenarios (ii) and (iii) are indicative of the non-trivial role of additional bands in stabilizing superconductivity. Assuming well-defined flat and dispersive bands, in scenario (iii) the former bands are completely filled, and superconductivity is supported fully by the latter non-flat bands. This assertion is at odds with the large dispersion of the remaining TBG-and MLG-like bands. However, while the exact mechanism underlying scenario (iii) is difficult to pin down, it is not without experimental support. For instance, a natural interpretation of the Hall density minimum around ν ≈ +4 for |D| 0.4 V nm -1 is that it marks the complete filling of the flat bands, ν flat ≈ +4 (Fig. One possible realization of scenario (iii) consistent with the experimental observations is that the division of the electronic states into simple TBG-and MLG-like bands fails completely-obviating our very definition of ν flat and potentially allowing flavour polarization, and accompanying superconductivity, to persist well beyond ν = +4. While such hybridization is expected for finite D fields, mixing between flat, dispersive TBG-and MLG-like bands for |ν| < |ν max | may occur even at D = 0. For example, hybridization could result from mirror symmetry breaking due to interactions or proximity to WSe 2 . Importantly, in TQG and TPG even terms that preserve mirror symmetry, such as layer-to-layer charge inhomogeneity or distant-layer coupling, allow for band hybridization (see SI, sections 4d and 4e). This feature distinguishes TPG and TQG structures from TTG and may therefore play a role in explaining extensive superconducting regions. Finally, we mention that other effects, such as strain Our measurements demonstrate the increasing predominance of superconductivity in twisted graphene multilayer structures as the number of layers is increased from three to five and highlight the close relationship between the flavour symmetry-breaking transitions and superconductivity. Moreover, our findings suggest a scenario in which the symmetry-broken ν = ±2 state strongly favours the formation of the superconducting state while the cascade corresponding to ν = ±3 suppresses it. Interestingly, this scenario is consistent not only with previous TBG observations but also in part with the recently investigated ABC trilayers Device fabrication: All devices were fabricated using a 'cut and stack' method, in which graphene flakes were separated into pieces using a sharp tip (made out Platinum-Iridium); this approach prevents unwanted twisting and strain during tearing while allowing more control over the flake size and shape. After cutting, stacking procedure was as follows: first, a thin hBN flake (10 -30 nm) is picked up using a propylene carbonate (PC) film previously placed on a polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) stamp. Then the hBN flake is used to pick up an exfoliated monolayer of WSe 2 (commercial source, HQ graphene) before approaching the graphene. After picking up the first piece of the graphene flake, the following layers are twisted by an angle ±θ relative to the previous one in an alternating sequence. Transfer stage rotation θ overshoots the target angle by 0.1 -0.2°to construct the measured angles. Care was taken to approach and pick up each stacking step slowly. In the last step, a thicker hBN (30 -70 nm) is picked up, and the whole stack is dropped on a predefined local gold back gate at 150°C while the PC is released at 170°C. The PC is then cleaned off with N-Methyl-2-Pyrrolidinone (NMP). The final geometry is defined by dry etching with a CHF 3 /O 2 plasma and deposition of ohmic edge contacts (Ti/Au, 5 nm/100 nm) and top gate. Measurements: All measurements were performed in a dilution refrigerator (Oxford Triton) with a base temperature of ∼ 25 mK, using standard low-frequency lock-in amplifier techniques. Unless otherwise specified, measurements are taken at the base temperature. Frequencies of the lock-in amplifiers (Stanford Research, models 830 and 865a) were kept in the range of 7 -20 Hz in order to measure the device's DC properties and the AC excitation was kept < 5 nA (most measurements were taken at 0.5 -1 nA to preserve the linearity of the system and avoid disturbing the fragile states at low temperatures). Each of the DC fridge lines pass through cold filters, including 4 Pi filters that filter out a range from ∼ 80 MHz to > 10 GHz, as well as a two-pole RC low-pass filter. Yiran Zhang, Robert Polski, Cyprian Lewandowski, Alex Thomson, Yang Peng, Youngjoon Choi, Hyunjin Kim, Kenji Watanabe, Takashi Taniguch, Jason Alicea, Felix von Oppen, Gil Refael, and Stevan Nadj-Perge 1 Device Uniformity and Twist Angle Assignment Device homogeneity and effect of WSe 2 : All devices investigated here show a high degree of twist angle homogeneity as characterized by four-point measurements between different pairs of contacts. SI Fig. We attribute the low level of disorder to the use of monolayer WSe 2 during device stacking, presumably originating from the increased lateral friction between WSe 2 and graphene (compared to the friction at the hBN-graphene interface). We note that this additional layer does not change the magic-angle condition Twist angle assignment in multilayers: Twist angles were determined from high B field data and corresponding Landau-fan diagrams in a similar way as in TBG. From the slope of the Landau fan at charge neutrality (which is directly proportional to the gate-sample capacitance) and the voltage difference between charge-neutrality point (CNP) and |ν| = 4 filling, the corresponding |ν| = 4 electron density is obtained. We used two separate criteria for the assignment of |ν| = 4. First, at high D fields, resistive features (peaks) emerge (Fig. 2 Determining T c and Hall density T c and the coherence length: T c is determined by the following procedures. First, the high temperature R xx data is fitted using a linear function R(T ) = AT + B. Then, T c is defined by the value where R xx (T ) is a certain fraction (typically 10% as in Fig. is the superconducting flux quantum and T c0 is the critical temperature at zero magnetic field. We get ξ GL from the T c vs. B linear fit, where the intercept at the B axis is equal to Φ 0 /(2πξ 2 GL ). Following Ref. 10, we use T c defined by 40% of the normal state resistance to evaluate the coherence length data in SI Fig. Hall density analysis: Hall density shown in Fig. 3 Insulating Behaviour in TTG and TQG ν = +2 correlated insulators in TTG: In our TTG device, we observed a previously unidentified ν = +2 correlated insulator state (Fig. Charge-neutrality gaps in TQG and conversion between U and D: SI Fig. In this section, we describe the non-interacting continuum model for multilayers and how symmetry considerations and various interaction terms affect the band structure of TTG, TQG, and TPG. a. Continuum model: Band structure calculations are performed using a straightforward generalization of the TBG continuum model It is appropriate to approximate the dispersion of the underlying graphene monolayers with the two Dirac cones about the valleys at K and K . Note that because of the twist, the Dirac cones are located at slightly different momenta depending on whether the layer is even or odd, and we have denoted the Dirac cones' momenta here as K and K . We thus define the spinors ψ ,K ( ) in terms of the microscopic graphene operators via f (r) = e iK •r ψ ,K (r) + e iK •r ψ ,K (r). Equivalently, in momentum space we can write In our definition of ψ (and f ) both an A/B sublattice index and a spin index have been suppressed. Importantly, the small twist angle only mediates a very small momentum exchange between the neighbouring layers so that states originating proximate to one valley do not mix with those originating proximate to the other. We thus focus for the moment on valley K and suppress the valley subscript until mentioned otherwise, ψ ,K → ψ . The band structure model can be separated into a sum of two parts: The first term, H D is the intralayer Dirac term: Here, v 0 ∼ 10 6 m/s is the Fermi velocity of the Dirac cones and σ x,y,z are Pauli matrices acting on the A/B sublattice indices of the spinors ψ . In our simulations, we assume that the Fermi velocity of the graphene monolayers does not differ layer to layer. Note that this assumption, specifically does not take into account effects such as graphene velocity renormalization that can occur in the top layer due to tunnelling between the graphene monolayer and the WSe 2 substrate, as we do not expect these effects to be large enough to have appreciable impact on the resulting band structure. We assume that tunnelling only occurs between adjacent layers and that it takes the form where e -(-1) iq j •r t j , Here, R(φ) = e -iφσ y is a 2 × 2 rotation matrix acting on vector indices, L M = a/[2 sin(θ/2)] is the moiré lattice constant, and σ ± = (σ x ± iσ y )/2 act on the sublattice indices. The parameters w and w set the interlayer tunnelling strength; we discuss their values below. It will be convenient to define the dimensionless ratios where k θ = 4π/(3L M ) = 2 sin(θ/2) • 4π/(3a). The total Hamiltonian may be written in matrix form as As currently written, the diagonal Dirac terms, h D, (r), as well as the off-diagonal tunnelling terms, T , (r), depend only on whether is even or odd. We can thus simplify the above expression by writing the Dirac terms as h D,2 -1 (r) = h D,1 (r), h D,2 (r) = h D,2 (r) and the tunnelling terms as It has been shown 8 that a block diagonal form exists for Hamiltonians of the form Eq. ( Twisted bilayer graphene Since the spectrum of the twisted multilayers breaks into independent sets of TBG-and MLG-like bands, we first briefly review the Hamiltonian of TBG. Thus, we start with Provided that inversion and time reversal symmetries are preserved, the Dirac cones described by h D, (r) at K are preserved even when the interlayer tunnelling is added. Nevertheless, this tunnelling term breaks the (effective) continuous translation symmetry of h D, . Consequently, the set of conserved momenta are confined to reduced moiré Brillouin zone (BZ). Like the original monolayer graphene BZ, the moiré BZ forms a hexagon with the Dirac cones located at the corners. Here, we define K 1 = κ and K 2 = κ (for the other valley, For small twist angles, the intralayer Dirac terms are nearly identical, h D, (r) ≈ h D (r) = v 0 (i∂ x σ x + i∂ y σ y )-namely, the rotation in Eq. ( The magic angle is defined The Hamiltonian for the three layer system is It maybe be transformed into a block diagonal form as First, we note that the TTG spectrum separated into independent sets of bands-a TBG-like set described by the two-layer Hamiltonian h √ 2α,η,θ (an 8 × 8 object when sublattice and spin are included) and an MLG-like Dirac cone described by h D,1 . Using the reasoning above, we expect a set of flat TBG-like bands to occur when √ 2α = 1/ √ 3. Equivalently, we can assign an effective TBG twist angle describing these bands, θ eff TBG = θ/ √ 2 where θ is the physical twist angle of the system. If θ eff TBG is expected to yield flat bands in TBG, then we would similarly expect √ 2θ eff TBG to yield a set of flat bands in TTG. Twisted quadrilayer graphene For four layers, we start with With the appropriate change of basis, we obtain where φ = (1 + √ 5)/2 is the golden ratio. In this case, we therefore expect the TQG spectrum to possess two sets of TBG-like bands characterized by effective TBG twist angles θ/φ and θ/φ -1 . Twisted pentalayer graphene The final system considered is the twisted pentalayer graphene. In the original layer basis, the Hamiltonian is Once more, independent, co-existing TBG-and MLG-like subsystems are revealed with the appropriate change of basis: There are now two independent TBG-like bands characterized by effective twist angles θ/ √ 3 and θ in addition to a MLG-like Dirac cone. Model Parameters As indicated in Eq. ( Similar reasoning can be applied to the TTG and TPG samples, although it is slightly more nebulous since a non-interacting gap is not expected to open in TTG and TPG for any D value at the CNP. Instead, when θ > √ 2θ magic TBG for TTG and θ > √ 3θ magic TBG for TPG, the system should become metallic with increasing D, whereas in the converse situation, the D field should immediately gap out all states except for a dispersive MLG-like Dirac cone. Following this line of reasoning, the results of SI Fig. The value of the interlayer AA hopping w is expected to be less than the interlayer AB hopping, as a result of lattice relaxation (see next section). We chose w = 60 meV for all three multilayers considered, which is in agreement with the estimates of Ref. 24 and similar to values used previously for TBG/WSe 2 structures We note that, while consistent with experiment in the fashion outlined about, other factors could be also at play, modifying the behaviour at CNP in ways not captured by our analysis. Ultimately, however, the choices made here are not expected to greatly influence any of the results in this section. b. Relative stacking: An important distinction between TBG and graphene moiré heterostructures containing additional layers is the band structure dependence of the relative layer displacement. Not only must the graphene sheets be stacked with alternating angles, as discussed in the main text and in the previous section, but moreover, the emergence of independent TBG-and Dirac-like bands only occurs when all odd (even) layers are AA stacked, i.e., stacked directly on top of one another. As stated above, we envision grouping the layers into odd and even sets, each stacked rigidly atop one another. The two sets are then twisted relative to one another by the twist angle θ. We have assumed that this stacking was realized in the previous presentation and now argue for the feasibility of this assumption. In TTG, it has been numerically shown that this situation is energetically preferable: the system naturally relaxes into the odd/even aligned stacking configuration diag(1, 1, -1). The TBG-like subsystem corresponds precisely to the even parity sector (i.e., has eigenvalue +1 under the action the mirror symmetry) whereas the dispersive MLG-like subsystem belongs to the odd parity sector (i.e., has eigenvalue -1 under the action the mirror symmetry). The TBG-and MLG-like bands thus cannot hybridize without breaking this symmetry. We can similarly rotate the TPG operator, U mirror to the subsystem basis mirror V TPG , yielding Ũ (5) mirror = diag(1, 1, 1, -1, -1). Comparing against Eq. ( A mirror-like symmetry also exists for even-layered systems like TBG and TQG, but it does not act in an onsite fashion and is therefore not useful for the analysis that follows. For TQG, hybridization between subsystems is therefore not prohibited by symmetry. d. Band mixing: In obtaining the independent TBG-and MLG-like bands (subsystems) listed above, a number of assumptions were made and one may be concerned about the relative robustness of these results. For TTG, at least, this question may be dismissed so long as mirror symmetry is present; above, we showed that this mirror symmetry protects the block diagonal subsystem form obtained for TTG. Similarly, mirror symmetry disallows mixing in TPG between certain (but not all) subsystems. However, the mirror symmetry is explicitly broken by the application of a displacement field as well as by the WSe 2 substrate used in the experiment. Below, we show that these modifications induce mixing between all subsystems. We additionally consider other mirror-preserving effects that may result in subsystem mixing in TQG and TPG. Besides the displacement field, we find that the subsystem-mixing energy scales discussed below are relatively small compared to the input parameters of the continuum model, i.e., compared to an interlayer tunnelling of w and w . More importantly, they are also smaller than the observed bandwidth of TBG, which spectroscopic measurements indicate is ∼ 40 meV for samples close to the magic angle In the main text, we allude to the fact that a finite displacement field mixes the TBG-and MLG-like subsystems obtained in the previous sections. This effect is included in the Hamiltonian through the addition of Parity-odd sector (17) We thus explicitly see the way in which the displacement field induces mixing between subsystems. Subsystem mixing is also a natural consequence of the displacement field in TQG. The Hamiltonian in Eq. ( in the subsystem basis. Proximity-induced spin-orbit coupling One of the exterior layers of the samples considered here is placed adjacent to WSe 2 . This type of construction was first shown to induce spin-orbit coupling in twisted bilayer graphene in Ref. 14. The presence of WSe 2 breaks not only the spin symmetry, but also the mirror symmetry in systems considered here and possibly induces subsystem mixing. The magnitude of the induced spin-orbit scale has been measured to be approximately 1 -5 meV in TBG, smaller than the other scales of the theory (e.g., the band width). In effect, in rotating to the subsystem basis, the spin-orbit terms are "spread" across an increasing number of layers by the unitary transformations V TTG , V TQG , V TPG . Mirror-symmetric, nonuniform charge distribution: The chemical potentials of the different layers may also differ in a way that is symmetric under onsite mirror actions U (4/5) mirror of Eq. ( where δμ = δμ 1 = -δμ 2 . Similarly, for TPG, a term like h μ-var = diag(δμ 1 , δμ 2 , δμ 3 , δμ 2 , δμ 1 ) also preserves the mirror operator U (5) mirror but can be shown to induce inter-subsystem mixing within the even parity sector. As we demonstrate in section 4e, such a term is naturally generated by the Coulomb interaction. We specify to TPG in that section, but the reasoning is analogous for TQG (and for TTG, although this term will not induce mixing between sectors because of the mirror symmetry). Although generically present, the Coulomb interaction-generated terms of this form are relatively small compared to the other terms present. The calculations presented below estimate that values of |δμ | < 5-10 meV for TPG are generated as one dopes away from charge neutrality. We expect the results for TQG to follow the same trend. Next-nearest layer tunnelling Our Hamiltonian so far only includes tunnelling between neighbouring layers. Generically, however, hopping between next-nearest neighbouring layers occurs as well. For TQG, we could therefore consider hopping between layers 1 (2) and 4 (3): Assuming for simplicity that T nnl. = T † nnl , in the subsystem basis, this term takes the form Note that because we assume next-nearest layers are stacked AA relative to one another, to first order, no spatial dependence is expected in T nnl . The subsystems are similarly mixid with the fivelayer analogue h nnl . Reference 44 computed the values of T nnl expected in TTG (where it will not induce subsystem mixing) and found that a typical scale |T nnl,ij | ∼ 5 -10 meV, which translates to |T nnl,ij |/ √ 5 ∼ 3 -5 meV (i and j are sublattice indices). Lattice relaxation As mentioned in section 4b, the moiré lattice relaxes in order to minimize AA regions and maximize AB/BA regions. As mentioned, this relaxation effect ultimately depresses the value of w (interlayer AA tunnelling) relative to w (interlayer AB/BA tunnelling) as a result of out-of-plane corrugation. For interior layers, which neighbour more than a single sheet, the effects of relaxation are naturally stronger than for exterior layers. Consequently, the value of η = w /w appropriate for tunnelling to and from interior layers is reduced. Our assumption below Eq. ( e. The role of interactions in TPG: The presence of flat-band subsystem in the low-energy theory of the multilayer graphene structures necessitates the consideration of interaction-driven band structure corrections. In the following, we focus specifically on the case of TPG as its phase diagram demonstrates the strongest deviation from the minimal paradigm that a multilayer structure maybe thought of as a TBG-like Hamiltonian with spectating additional bands. Rather, as we argue, the dispersive TBG-and MLG-like subsystems play a crucial role in extending the filling range of the superconducting pocket in accordance with scenario (ii) and (iii). Here, we consider three types of interaction corrections: (a) an in-plane Hartree correction; (b) a two-parameter effective model mimicking generic Hartree-Fock modifications of band structure; (c) an out-ofplane Hartree correction allowing for inhomogeneous charge distribution between the layers. We demonstrate that these effects generically lead to two consequences for the electronic spectrum: promoting charge redistribution to the non-flat bands and also leading to possible symmetry breaking between the non-flat and flat bands. We begin with an in-plane Hartree effect. As demonstrated experimentally in previous work on TBG The foundations of the Hartree calculation in TPG described below are identical to the analysis in Refs. 29 and 18. We reproduce them here for the convenience of the reader. We introduce the Coulomb interaction into the system through In section 4a, we introduced creation and annihilation operators, ψ † (r) and ψ(r), that correspond to the non-interacting eigenstates given by the Hamiltonian of Eq. ( We study the effect of the interacting continuum model of magic-angle TPG through a selfconsistent Hartree mean-field calculation. Instead of solving the many-body problem, we obtain the quadratic Hamiltonian that best approximates the full model when only the symmetric contributions of H C are included, i.e., the Fock term is neglected. Thus instead of H cont + H C , we study the Hamiltonian H is the Hartree term at filling ν, H and the last term in Eq. ( Typically, for a "jellium"-like model, the expectation value in Eq. ( where the prime above the summation over the moiré reciprocal lattice vectors indicates that G = 0 is excluded. The self-consistent procedure begins by assuming some initial value of H H and diagonalizing the corresponding mean-field Hamiltonian H Due to the accumulation of electronic density at the AA sites of the stacking sequence, the Hartree potential is dominated by the first 'star' of moiré reciprocal lattice vectors (1, 0) T for n = 1, . . . , 6, with R(φ) a rotation matrix. The restriction to the G n 's paired with the 2π/6 rotation symmetry of the continuum model greatly simplifies the calculation of the Hartree term. Notably, V (G) k ψ † (k + G)ψ(k ) ν must be the same for all G n , and, instead of Eq. ( The self-consistent procedure in this case is identical to that described in the previous paragraph, but due to the reduced number of reciprocal lattice vectors that are included in the summation, the calculation is computationally easier. Convergence is typically reached within ∼ 6 iterations. We now proceed to discuss the precise effect of the Hartree correction. Since the Hartree correction couples bare graphene states at momenta k and k + G, its effect is most pronounced for subsystems of the Hamiltonian whose eigenstates require multiple bare graphene states originating from multiple moiré BZs, e.g. k + G states with G extending beyond the second BZ. As such, Hartree affects the flat-band subsystem most severely since its eigenstates deviate the most from the bare graphene states, while the MLG-like subsystem is affected the least. As a result, this correction gives rise to an energy offset that shifts the flat bands upwards in energy with respect to the rest of the energy spectrum (technically the dispersive TBG-like subsystem is also shifted slightly with respect to the MLG-like subsystem). This effect has been seen both theoretically and experimentally in TTG We now discuss what happens when one starts from charge neutrality and electron dopes the system. Due to the shift of the flat band upwards in energy relative to the non-flat bands, more charge can enter the non-flat bands upon doping (increasing ν) than a naïve non-interacting model predicts. As a result, the filling range of the flat TBG-like band superconducting pocket may be extended since the filling of the flat bands ν flat can continue to lie in the range amenable to superconductivity, whilst the total filling ν increases by adding charge to the non-flat bands. This is the central idea behind the scenarios (i) and (ii) discussed in section 5. In the simulations for flat-band filling ν flat > +2, we consider two ways to fill the otherwise 4-fold degenerate bands: an uncascaded model where all 4-fold degenerate bands are filled equally, and a simple cascade model where two of the flat-band flavours (say spin ↑ for K, K ) are shifted down in energy such that the highest energy of the shifted bands falls on the Dirac point of the unshifted flat bands, c.f. SI Fig. The most crucial ones, including bandwidth broadening The cascade, as shown in SI Fig. To quantitatively estimate the fillings of the different subsystems, it is necessary to parametrize the strength of the Coulomb interaction, e.g., the dielectric constant that enters into Eq. (24). Although, in principle, the dielectric constant is fixed primarily by the substrate and any interaction corrections can be accounted for via a self-consistent treatment, in practice We note that due to the hybridization of different bands under a finite displacement field, the assignment of flat TBG-, dispersive TBG-and MLG-like subsystem becomes, to some degree, arbitrary as bands start to hybridize. For the purpose of qualitative discussion, however, we can evaluate the spectral overlap of each finite-field eigenstate with the zero-field basis and assign a label of "flat/dispersive TBG-like/MLG-like" based on the largest overlap. Within this convention, we find that the displacement field enables easier charge accumulation in the "flat" subsystem as opposed to the "non-flat" subsystems, thus suppressing the total filling range over which superconductivity can reach (see SI Fig. Constraining Hartree and Fock Preferential filling of the dispersive TBG-and MLG-like subsystems is also enabled by other interaction effects, for example, gap opening due to the Fock correction. This term, as mentioned previously, also plays a key part in the symmetry-breaking cascade as well as band broadening. While a careful microscopic analysis of Hartree and Fock effects in multilayer devices is necessary, here we introduce a simple phenomenological model intended to capture the qualitative effects of Hartree and Fock corrections on the filling of the nonflat subsystems. We hope that the simple parametrization of this model can be used as a benchmark for its validity against a more rigorous analysis. To mimic the effects of Hartree and Fock, we add two additional ingredients to the non-interacting model of Eq. ( A schematic of the effect of the two added terms on the band structure is shown in SI Fig. We present the result of this analysis in SI Fig. Interlayer screening effects In the above analysis of Hartree-induced band shifting and deformations, we only focused on the effect of the in-plane Hartree potential, assuming a homogeneous charge distribution across the layers. It is known, however, that in multilayer (untwisted) graphene, interlayer screening due to inhomogeneous charge distribution over different layers can be important We model the graphene layers as parallel plates with zero thickness and respective electron charge densities en i . The local displacement field between the ith and (i + 1)th layer is then given by F i,i+1 = e( i j=1 n j -N j=i+1 n j )/(2 ), where N is the total number of layers, and we take = 11.15, the same as the in-plane dielectric constant determined above. Here, we use the in-plane dielectric constant value because electron densities are delocalized over multiple layers and cannot be simply treated as some classical charge on a particular layer. Thus, the effective dielectric constant should be much larger than the vacuum's value. The above local displacement field produces the local potential difference between the ith and the (i + 1)th layer , where ν j is the filling fraction projected to the jth layer, d is the interlayer distance, and L M is the moiré lattice constant. The role of this mechanism is shown in SI Fig. Here we present several scenarios that can result in the superconductivity of TPG extending to ν ≈ +5, and discuss these scenarios in the context of experimental observations. We note that in the discussion below, ν denotes the total number of electrons per moiré site, and ν flat denotes the number of electrons per moiré site added to the flat TBG-like bands. Scenario (i): flat TBG-like bands are filled to ν flat = +3 at ν = +5 For TBG and TTG, the strongest superconducting pockets normally start from |ν| = 2 and end around |ν| = 3. Therefore, a conventional scenario would suggest that TPG could behave in a similar way, i.e., flat TBG-like bands are filled to ν flat = +3 when superconductivity is diminished at ν = +5. This scenario implies that the additional two electrons per moiré site are distributed in the dispersive TBG-and MLG-like bands due to the interaction effects discussed in section 4e, with a large portion of the charge carriers being hosted by the dispersive TBG-like bands. Since vHs of the dispersive TBGlike bands are normally found around half filling, the corresponding Hall density signatures are expected to occur at the same filling, i.e., ν = +5 in this scenario. However, in the experiment we observe vHs signatures originating from the dispersive TBG-like bands near ν ≈ +6 instead (see SI Fig. Scenario (ii): flat TBG-like bands are filled close to ν flat = +4 at ν = +5 As a result of interactions, a fraction of electrons are preferentially distributed in the dispersive TBG-and MLGlike bands. It is therefore possible that for total filling of ν ≈ +5, the flat TBG-like bands are filled close to ν flat ≈ +4, with the extra one electron per moiré site being distributed in the other bands. We explored this possibility in more detail in section 4e, which shows the filling correspondence between ν flat and ν for various interaction terms and dielectric constants (see SI Fig. Experimental signatures in electron-doped TPG Experimentally, starting from low D fields, we observe a drop in Hall density at ν ≈ +4 which surprisingly does not affect superconductivity in any abrupt way (superconductivity continuously evolves and is present until ν ≈ +5). As the D field is increased, this Hall density drop is gradually replaced by a transition where Hall density changes sign (SI Fig. 