Saturation magnetization values close to the bulk have been reported for coated magnetite nanoparticles with organic acids. The mechanism of this effect is not yet understood. Here we show that a previously proposed rationalization in Nano Letters 12 (2021) 2499-2503 was based on electronic structure properties that are not consistent with several existing density functional theory studies. Our study is based on a wide set of Hubbard-corrected density functional tight binding (DTFB+U) and hybrid density functional theory (HSE06) calculations on Fe3O4 nanocubes of more than 400 atoms. We provide a new explanation for the spin ordering in coated nanoparticles, through the investigation of spin-flipping phenomena. In particular, we show that the spin-flip of d electrons at octahedral Fe 3+ sites, which is confirmed to be more favorable near the surface, especially where atomic reorganization can take place such as at corner sites, can be hampered by the presence of adsorbed organic acids because they do not only limit the surface reconstruction but also allow for additional ferromagnetic superexchange interaction between octahedral Fe sites as a consequence of the carboxylates bridging binding mode. The proof-of-concept of this mechanism is given by a simplified model of the Fe(III) tert-butoxide dimer. Magnetic nanoparticles (NPs) have attracted much attention for diagnostic and theragnostic medical applications, due to their small size, which is comparable to cell length scales and allows the interaction and interference with biological processes, however minimizing adverse effects and, thus, paving the way to novel approaches Nanoparticles of different and controlled sizes and shapes have been prepared through a variety of synthetic routes The magnetic ordering in bulk magnetite derives from this structure organization of the Fe cations Since the Fe-Fe distances are too large for direct exchange, the superexchange through the O anions (Fe-O-Fe) is dominant and controls the magnetic interaction: being the Feoct-O-Fetet angle close to 125°, an antiferromagnetic alignment is expected between the Feoct and the Fetet sublattices, which leads to a net ferrimagnetic order since the Feoct ions are twice the Fetet ions. The superexchange interaction in the case of Feoct-O-Feoct is ferromagnetic because the angle is 90°. The magnetic moment per unit formulas is of 4.1 μB The magnetic properties of nanoparticles differ from those of bulk magnetite. Bulk materials are characterized by multidomains separated by domain walls, whereas nanoparticles present a single domain magnetic configuration. Progressively reducing the nanoparticle size increases the surface-to-bulk ratio. Due to spin canting at the surface layers, saturation magnetization is then largely reduced However, saturation magnetization values close to the bulk (96 emu/g) have been reported for coated magnetite nanoparticles with organic acids (84 emu/g vs 46 emu/g for naked NPs), with practically no canting of the magnetic moments at the surface In a combined experimental and theoretical work, the authors propose an explanation based on a set of density functional theory (DFT) calculations comparing electronic structure of bulk magnetite, unreconstructed bare (100) surface and capped surface with organic acids Certainly, quantum mechanics is the only viable way to unveil the fundamental mechanisms governing the behavior of magnetic materials, but only if accurate models and methods are used. For this reason, in the present study we investigate real cubic nanoparticles (not just flat surfaces) and we go beyond standard DFT using a higher level theory method, i.e. hybrid functional HSE06, which in the past has proven to be reliable to catch the proper structural, electronic, and magnetic properties of magnetite Our results strongly support the hypothesis that the high magnetism registered for coated nanoparticles, close to the bulk value, should not simply be accounted for by a higher crystallinity of the samples or by a reduced disorder at the surface but, instead, it is also the result of a deeper involvement of the ligands in the mechanism of magnetization. The atomic level understanding achieved in this study indicates that the adsorbed carboxylate ligands (here resulting from the dissociation of acetic acid) become involved in a ferromagnetic superexchange interaction with pairs of Feoct ions, which is the reason for the enhanced overall resulting magnetization. This hypothesis is also corroborated by analogous observations in several carboxylato-bridged transition metal compounds, where superexchange coupling mediated by the carboxylate group was evidenced by experimental magnetic measurements To investigate surfactant adsorption modes in terms of simulated annealing and final geometry optimization, SCC-DFTB (short for self-consistent charge density-functional tight-binding), calculations were carried out using the software DFTB+ where the first term is the sum of the one-electron energies εi coming from the diagonalization of the corresponding Kohn-Sham Hamiltonian matrix (where all three-center integrals are neglected), Δqα and Δqβ are the induced charges on the atoms α and β, respectively, and γ αβ is a Coulombic-like interaction potential. Erep is a short-range pairwise repulsive potential. The neglecting of three-center contributions from the Kohn-Sham Hamiltonian enables the use of integral tables. More details about the SCC-DFTB method can be found in Refs. For the Fe-Fe, Fe-H and Fe-C interactions, we used the "trans3d-0-1" set of parameters The total simulation time is 30 ps with a time step of 1 fs. The convergence threshold on the SCC procedure was set to be 5×10 -3 a.u.. Once a good minimum was obtained at this lower and cheaper level theory, hybrid density functional theory calculations (HSE06) were carried out using the CRYSTAL17 package Supporting Information, where we also analyzed the effect of reducing the fraction of the exact exchange, in comparison with B3LYP calculations and PBE+U calculations with different U values. The Kohn-Sham orbitals are expanded in Gaussian-type orbitals: the all-electron basis sets are H|511G(p1), C|6311G(d11), O|8411G(d1) (for NP oxygen atoms), O|8411G(d11) (for surfactant oxygen atoms) and Fe|86411G(d41), according to the scheme previously used for Fe3O4 The cubic NP model (429 atoms with edge length of 1.5 nm) used for this investigation (see Figure where Fe Oct 3+ and Fe Oct 2+ are Fe 3+ and Fe 2+ ions at octahedral sites, Fe Tet 3+ and Fe Tet 2+ are Fe 3+ and Fe 2+ ions at tetrahedral sites and N is the number of the corresponding ions. Similarly to what happens in bulk magnetite, for Fe Oct 3+ and Fe Tet 3+ the high-spin 3d 5 configuration gives an atomic magnetic moment of +5 and -5 μB, respectively; for Fe Oct 2+ and Fe Tet 2+ the high-spin 3d 6 electron configuration gives +4 and -4 μB, respectively. The total magnetic moment m tot was found to be 288 μB for the cubic NP under investigation. To mimic spin disorder phenomena, we have forced some Fe Oct 3+ to give an atomic magnetic moment of -5 μB instead of +5 μB, lowering the total magnetic moment. We named the energy difference between spin-up and spin-down solutions as ∆E Spin-Flip . After the spin-flip we allowed for a full atomic relaxation of the NP and we named the energetic gain associated to the relaxation ∆E Relaxation . We called the sum of these two contributions ∆E SF+Rel : We note that the spin-flip of one Fe Oct 3+ 6c -(3) and all (four) equivalent Fe Oct 3+ 6c -(3) ions reduces the overall total magnetic moment of the NP from 288 to 278 and 248 B, respectively. It affects the electronic structure according to the spin polarized projected density of states (PDOS) shown in Figure In order to verify the agreement with the Eq. ( For the toy model Fe(III) metoxide dimer we have computed both the ferromagnetic (FM) and antiferromagnetic (AFM) configurations. In the first configuration, both high-spin 3d 5 Fe 3+ ions give an atomic magnetic moment of +5 μB for an overall magnetic moment of +10 μB. In the second one, the high-spin 3d 5 Fe 3+ ions give an atomic magnetic moment of +5 and -5 μB for a null overall magnetic moment. The ∆E AFM-FM for this toy model is a quantity that corresponds to the ∆E SF+Rel for the magnetite nanoparticles and is defined as: where E AFM and E FM are the total energies of the antiferromagnetic and ferromagnetic configurations, respectively. The adsorption energy per acetic acid molecule (E ads ) was calculated as follows: where E total is the total energy of the whole system (NP and adsorbed acetic acid molecules), E NP is the energy of the Fe3O4 NP, N CH 3 COOH is the number of acetic acid molecules adsorbed and E CH 3 COOH is the energy of one isolated acetic molecule. This formula provides a value for the adsorption energy that is normalized by the total number of acetic acids. The band center of mass (COM) was computed using the formula where E is the energy, E F the Fermi energy (which is set to 0), and ρ(E) the electronic density of states. The cubic model used in this study (see Figure Spin-disorder phenomena may reduce this optimal magnetic moment per NP and can be simulated by forcing the spin-flipping of the 3d electrons (see Figure Fe3O4 units). The increasing energy cost associated to a lower density of the "spin-defect" suggests that the larger the number of Feoct and Fetet ions involved in the ferromagnetic and antiferromagnetic interactions, respectively, the larger the overall stabilization. We expect that a positive trend for increasing supercell sizes, which, however, are computationally too costly. The question is: what happens if we evaluate the same spinflip on Fe Oct 3+ sites at the NP surface? Considering that surface spin canting is often observe in experiments, one would expect that the energy cost for spin-flipping might drop. The next step in our study is to investigate the effect of organic acids adsorption on the surface to find an atomistic-level explanation of the reduced spin disorder observed in coated magnetite nanoparticles, with saturation magnetization values close to those of bulk samples. To this aim, we adsorbed acetic acid (AA) on the NP surface, starting with one isolated molecule and considering different adsorption modes We now more closely investigate what happens when one isolated acetic acid molecule is adsorbed at the corner of the NP, in particular on two Feoct sites directly bound the O ion at the corner. Because there are four corners of this type in the NP, we also put acetic acid molecules on the other three corners. We consider both situations (1AA and 4AA) as a low coverage regimes, since the acetic acid molecules are quite far apart from the other. The adsorption energy is -2.98 eV in 1AA and -3.23 eV per acetic acid molecule in 4AA. We must notice that the corner site undergoes a reconstruction with the O site moving away from the corner, breaking one of its bonds with one of the three Feoct ions and resulting to be a bridging O at one side of the corner (see details in Figure Since the cost for spin-flipping the Fe Oct 3+ 6c -(3) ion was found to be very low (only +0.01 eV), we decided to choose this site to investigate the effect of acetic acid adsorption on the spin-flip process. The aim is to understand the mechanism how the coating molecules can actually affect the energetics of spin-flipping. Actually, in the presence of one isolated acetic acid molecule (1AA), the spin-flip process costs +0.08 eV, but allowing for atomic relaxation in the new spin configuration, there is an energy gain of -0.13 eV, which reverses the sign of the overall energy release leading to an energy gain (∆E SF+Rel ) of -0.05 eV. Considering the 4AA model, we observe that the overall effect is additive since the ∆E SF+Rel is now -0.19 eV, which is almost exactly four times what computed for 1AA. These results suggest that spin disorder phenomena, which are already strongly favored at the surface of NPs, can be actually further promoted in the presence of low density of coating molecules at defects sites. The next question is then: do we observe a coverage effect? To answer this, we investigated a fully decorated NP (full coverage regime), where all the under-coordinated Feoct ions on the facets, edges and corners are saturated by adsorbing forty-eight bidentate dissociated acetic acid molecules (48AA, as shown in Figure The average adsorption energy per acetic acid molecule is -1.96 eV. It is noteworthy that at a full coverage, we observe a reduction of the atomic reconstruction only at corner sites, where the exposed O ion keeps its three bonds with the nearby Feoct ions (see Figure Then, we investigated the spin-flip processes for this fully decorated NP model. We considered two types of octahedral Fe sites, Fe Oct 3+ 6c -(3) and Fe Oct 3+ 5c -(5), because the first is near a corner site and is the one with a negligible energy cost for spin-flip (+0.01 eV per site) in the naked NP, whereas the second is on the flat facet, far from the corner, but still is characterized by a quite low energy cost for spin-flip (+0.14 eV) in the naked NP. As opposed to the low coverage (1AA) situation, in the presence of a full monolayer of acetic acid molecules, we observe that the spin-flip of both the octahedral Fe sites considered becomes unfavourable. In the case of Fe Oct 3+ 5c -(5) site, the energy change for the Spin-Flip+Relaxation process (∆E SF+Rel ) in the naked NP is +0.14 eV, whereas at full coverage (48AA) it becomes +0.28 eV. In the case of Fe Oct 3+ 6c -(3) site, the ∆E SF+Rel in the naked NP is +0.01 eV, at low coverage (1AA) is -0.05 eV, whereas at full coverage (48AA) it becomes +0.10 eV. Considering this process at full coverage for all the four structurally equivalent Fe Oct 3+ 6c -(3), we observe that the overall effect is additive since the ∆E SF+Rel becomes +0.40 eV, which is four times what computed for one Fe ion (+0.10 eV). This result indicates that the spin-flip process involves a single Fe ion and is independent from other Fe ions, with no long-range effects. We must provide an explanation why a full coverage adsorption of organic acids affects the spin-flip processes at Fe Oct 3+ sites in the surface layers and why it makes them unfavorable, similarly to what happens in bulk-like sites. One simple reason, which is often invoked, is that the presence of a full coating layer during the synthesis enhances the crystallinity of the NPs. To give ground to this statement, we have simulated and analyzed the EXAFS spectra of the naked and fully coating NPs and compared them (see Figure Therefore, we must find another reason why the presence of high density of adsorbed acetic acid affects the magnetic properties of the NPs. We propose that the reason is related to an induced extra superexchange ferromagnetic effect among Feoct sites in the surface layers, which counteracts the surface spin canting processes. Indeed, it is well recognized in the literature that carboxylate ligands bridging dinuclear transition metal ions mediate superexchange coupling where t pd is hopping integral between p and d orbitals, U d is the Coulomb repulsion between two electrons in a d orbital, and the charge transfer energy ∆ pd is the energy difference between O 2-p states eigenvalues and Fe Oct 3+ d states eigenvalues, respectively. In this work, the ∆ pd for the NP systems is estimated with the energy difference between the center of mass (COM) of the O 2-p-band and of the Fe Oct 3+ d-band, as detailed in the Methods section above. We obtain a ∆ pd of 2.18 eV for the naked NP and of 1.98 eV for the fully coated NP. According to the equation ( The effect of bridging carboxylate ligands on the magnetic properties of Fe atoms can be tested on a toy model, i.e. the Fe(III) metoxide dimer, which is a simplified system of the Fe(III) tert-butoxide dimer [62], shown in Figure To close the cycle and confirm the different behaviour of ethanol with respect to what obtained for acetic acid on the NP, we also adsorbed six ethanol molecules on the magnetite nanocube (Figure To conclude, we have first shown that previously proposed explanations for the high magnetization of coated magnetite NPs with organic acids are not always robust or satisfactory. One rationalization we confirm that full coordination plays an important role because it does not allow for surface reconstruction, which is found to be crucial in favoring spin-flipping. Besides this aspect, from our results another fundamental factor emerges: surface functionalization with carboxylic acids creates chemical bridges between Feoct sites for an additional ferromagnetic superexchange interaction, which is an effective mechanism enhancing the overall NP magnetization. We provide proof of this mechanism using a toy model of Fe(III) tert-butoxide dimer and reporting experimental evidences for other carboxylato-bridged transition metal compounds This interesting analogy between bimetallic complexes and the iron oxide compounds, as we mentioned in the introduction, proves that our study is a crossing point among several research fields, such as magnetic materials, molecular magnets and polymetallic sites in proteins, just to cite a few. Our results provide a rational basis for the understanding of spin ordering in magnetic nanoparticles by coating with organic acids. The approach proposed in this work is widely applicable to other nanosystems and can be used to explore different metals, different ligands, different system size, structure and spatial organization. The resulting insight will guide the design and optimization of such nanosystems for a broad range of biomedical and technological applications. The M -O -M angles are in all cases close to 90°. In particular, for the system capped with acetic acid the angles are slightly larger than for the naked, which is an opposite trend with respect to the FM-AFM energy difference, because larger angles are expected to stabilize the AFM configuration, not the FM one Regarding the M -O and M---M distances, they are longer in the NP capped with acetic acid than in the naked, again in opposite trend with what expected for a more efficient hopping favouring ferromagnetic superexchange. Moreover, we wish to note that the NP capped with ethanol molecules presents structural parameters very similar to those for the NP capped with acetic acid molecules, but the FM-AFM energy difference is of opposite sign. Therefore, as we stated above, no significant correlations are observed between the variation of the structural parameters and the FM-AFM energy difference in the absence/presence of the acetic acid and ethanol molecules. Indeed, we observe a reduction of the computed energy cost to spin-flip 3d 5 electrons at some specific Fe Oct 3+ ions in the surface layers, especially when we allow for a full atomic relaxation of the NP (∆E SF+Rel = ∆E Spin-Flip + ∆E Relaxation ). In particular, this is true for those Feoct ions that are characterized by a larger deficiency of Fetet ions in the next coordination sphere of the spin-flipped ion, such as