The past decade's discovery of topological excitations in nanoscale ferroelectrics has turned the prevailing view that the polar ground state in these materials is uniform. However, the systematic understanding of the topological polar structures in ferroelectrics is still on track. Here we study stable vortex-like textures of polarization in the nanocylinders of ferroelectric PbTiO 3 , arising due to the competition of the elastic and electrostatic interactions. Using the phase-field numerical modeling and analytical calculations, we show that the orientation of the vortex core with respect to the cylinder axis is tuned by the geometrical parameters and temperature of the system. The seminal discovery of vortex matter in nanostructured ferroelectrics has crucially changed our understanding of polarization behavior in these materials The objective of this paper is to give an insight into the emergence of vortices in nanocylinders of ferroelectric oxides with cubic crystal symmetry. We study lead titanate perovskite, PbTiO 3 (PTO) as an exemplary system. The basic idea of the polarization vortices formation is sketched in Fig. The basic vortex states were discovered in several cylindrical ferroelectrics. The c-vortex states in cylinders, first suggested in Although the emergence of polarization topological structures was cogently demonstrated in nanostructured ferroelectrics We model the free energy density functional in terms of the polarization components P i , elastic strains u ij , and electrostatic potential φ as: where the sum is taken over the circularly permutated indices {i, j, k, l} = {1, 2, 3}. The first term in square brackets stands for the Ginzburg-Landau (GL) energy written as in ), T c is the transition temperature to the ferroelectric state, and the 4 th -order zero-strain coefficients a u i j are calculated by the Legendre transformation from the stress-free coefficients a σ i j For analytical calculations, we use a simplified isotropic version of (1) without the 6 th -order terms, F u iso = a 1 (T )P 2 + āu 11 P 4 + Ḡrot 2 P -q12 u ii P j P j -q44 u i j P i P j + in which the averaged coefficients (denoted with the overbar) are selected to match the principal bulk properties of PTO and calculated by the tensor averaging of functional and the characteristic length scale is defined by the coherence length, The resulting phase diagram of vortex states in cylinders of different heights, h, and radii, R, is shown in Fig. In the uniformly polarized state, the topological requirement div P = 0 cannot be satisfied. The depolarization charges necessarily arise at the surface of the sample, in particular at the cylinder edges, where the polarization field terminates. The corresponding depolarization fields distort the uniformity of polarization at the edges, hence such state, depicted as state C in Fig. The depolarization field is zero or vanishingly small in the divergenceless aand c-oriented vortex states with flux-closure polarization texture that emerge in a vast range of cylinder geometries. The realization of the particular state depends on the delicate energy balance of the ferroelectric and elastic contributions, provided by the functional In the next section, we proceed with the discussion of the stability conditions of different topological states in PbTiO 3 cylinders on a quantitative level. We consider first the formation of the uniform state (c-phase) in a short-circuited cylinder with the polarization vector directed along the cylinder axis, see Fig. In a free-standing cylinder without electrodes, the total energy, includes also the terminal energy of two edges, 2E oe , arising due to the emergent depolarization field. As discussed in the previous section, it modifies the polarization distribution at the cylinder edges and forms the state of type C (Fig. Further, we consider the vortex states with a-(or b-) and with coriented axes that form to reduce the depolarization energy in the cylinders of moderate and short heights. The a-vortex state, arising in an elongated cylinder with h R (Fig. Close to the cylinder edges, the a-vortex polarization lines make the U-turn with the formation of two horizontal b-oriented domains at the top and bottom of the cylinder. These domains are separated from the vertical c-domains by the 90 • DWs, departing from the termination of the 180 • DW. The effective area of these DWs is proportional to the cylinder cross-section area, πR 2 , and their thickness is proportional to ξ 0 . Hence, the terminal energy acquires the form E ae πR 2 ξ 0 F ae , where factor F ae describes the effective density of the energy stored in the terminal region. Normally, E ae is smaller than E oe because the former does not contain any significant depolarization electrostatic contribution. We estimate the total energy of the a-vortex in the elongated cylinder as: where F a < 0 is the energy density within the bulk of cand b-domains. It is slightly smaller than |F 0 | in its absolute value because of the residual long-range elastic contribution produced by the polarization inhomogeneities in the DWs and the vortex core. The second and the third terms correspond to the DW and terminal energies, as described above. The fit of the phase-field simulation results for PTO cylinders (see Appendix A.3) gives the following numerical values of the parameters in Eq. ( The c-vortex states IV, V, and VI (Fig. To gain an insight into such peculiar behaviour, we consider the model isotropic situation described by functional Remarkably, the dependence P(r) has an exponential non-analytic form, unusual for the vortextype systems in which the order parameter saturates far from the core. The first term in With increasing disc size, the c-vortex patterns appear to be more complex than those observed in the cylinders with R 6-10 nm and h 6 nm. In particular, for R 10-14 nm at the same thickness, the vortex structure becomes deformed (state VI). The vortex-core region acquires the form of 180 • DW, whereas the circular curvature of polarization lines concentrates inside the four 90 • DWs, forming the rectangular flux-closure structure of polarization domains. For thicker discs, on approaching the transition to the a-vortex state at h ∼ R, the flat 180 • DW, stemming from the deformed vortex core, becomes screwed. It acquires the structure of a two-blade propeller with 90 • twist of the blades, see state IV in Fig. We present the energy of the c-vortex using the functional form similar to Eq. ( where the first negative term, scaled as the disc cross-sectional area, corresponds to the bulk energy of the system with energy density F c < 0. The absolute value of this parameter, |F c |, is usually smaller than that for the uniform state |F 0 |, and even than |F a |, due to the significant elastic contribution. It results from the bulk stresses produced by matching the flux-closure 90 • domains as well as by the long-range elastic energy of the deformed vortex core. The second term in Rotation of the vortex core axis from ato c-direction upon the cylinder height decreasing occurs when h becomes comparable to R. To estimate the critical geometrical parameters, we compare the aand c-vortex energies, plotted in Fig. Our simulations show that the c-vortex phase emerges on cooling from the paraelectric state in cylinders at a critical temperature T cc . This temperature is lower than the bulk PTO transition temperature T c = 752 K and depends on the cylinder radius, but not on its height. However, for cylinders with h R the a-vortex phase becomes stable (i.e. possesses the smaller energy than the c-vortex phase) at temperature T * ca < T cc . The exemplary temperature-height phase diagram illustrating the corresponding sequence of transitions is shown in Fig. Eq. ( Here, J 1 is the first-order Bessel function, λ 1 = 1.8412 is the first zero of the derivative ∂ x J 1 (x), and coefficients C c and C a are found by solving the nonlinear equations. The last term in T ca is included to account for the additional electrostatic energy and disturbance of the order parameter at the cylinder edges due to the emergence of the depolarization field. Such effect is absent in the case of c-vortex. Importantly, this electrostatics-driven contribution (scaled as ξ 0 , with material-dependent dimensionless coupling parameter κ a ) reduces T ca with respect to T cc , always stabilizing the c-vortex state just below the transition from the paraelectric phase. The emergence of the c-vortex before the a-vortex state either renormalizes the a-vortex transition temperature to T * ca < T ca or completely pushes it out, as shown in Fig. In the current work, we performed the complete study of the topological polarization states confined in free-standing cylindrical nanoparticles or nanorods of PTO for the extended range of geometry parameters and temperatures. Having revealed a large variety of swirling polarization textures, we demonstrate that, on the topological level, they can be all classified as vortex states with differently oriented vortex axes. Some of these textures are similar to domains and vortices, obtained by phase-field simulations for long cylinders and nanowires of BaTiO 3 embedded in the external media On a more general perspective, topological classification of the divergenceless fields in confined geometries, introduced by Arnold in relation to studies on incompressible liquid streams Both vortices Note, however, that although the appearance of the vortex states in the cylinder complies with the Arnold theorem, we did not observe the emergence of the Hopfion state in our simulations. This happens due to the strong anisotropy of PTO and is in line with other simulations in this material The parameter γ determines the time scale for computations. Its value is irrelevant for the calculation of the static structures and is taken equal to 1 ns. Discretization of computational space into tetrahedrons was performed with 3D mesh generator gmsh The variable time BDF2 stepper To reproduce analytically the features of the polarization distribution in a strain-coupled axisymmetric vortex state, we employ a simplified isotropic form of the free energy functional We derive now the structure of the axisymetric vortex in frame of the isotropic model. In the cylindrical coordinates (r, θ , z), the functional (2) with the axisymmetric polarization distribution, P (r) = (0, P, 0), corresponding to the c-vortex, is written as: where the strain tensor components are u r r = ∂ r u r , u θ θ = u r /r, u zz = ∂ z u z . The variation of the energy functional with respect to variables P, u r , u z provides three equations: and two boundary conditions: Here, ∇ 2 r = ∂ 2 r + r -1 ∂ r . To solve approximately equations where the constant P 0 is found from the boundary conditions: The numerical values of the constants are estimated as μ = 0.67 and P 0 = 0.56 Cm -2 . Note that the natural boundary condition (∂ r P) r=R = 0 is fulfilled in the long-range approximation since the polarization derivative at r = R scales as ∼ ξ 0 /R thus approaching zero. Now, we calculate P(r) from equations ( , where I ν (x) and L ν (x) are the modified Bessel and modified Struve functions of order ν, respectively, Γ (x) is the gamma function, and the following notations are used: ν = 2/ (μ + 1), β = ν P 0 -a * 11 /a 1 R/ξ 0 , and a * 11 = āu 11 -q2 12 / 2c 12 + 4c 44 . The asymptotic expansion of the special functions I ν (x) and L ν (x) 8 P 0 P 0 . Close to the vortex core, the polarization linearly depends on the distance as The comparison of the given by the Eq. ( The long-range asymptotic solution for the elastic tensor components obtained from (12) has the following form: u zz = C 1 (μ + 1) q2 12 -2c 12 āu 11 + q44 q12 P 2 -2C 2 a 1 c12 , in which P 2 is given by Eq.( Here, we find the numerical parameters in the approximate expressions for the energies of vortices, given in Section 4.2-4.3. The obtained from the phase-field simulations energies of vortex states in cylinders with different R are shown in Fig. Figures Linearized GL equations for the divergenceless polarization field, P = P θ (r) θ + P z (r, θ ) ẑ, are written in cylindrical coordinates as Ḡ ∇ 2 P θ -P θ r 2 = α 1 (T -T c )P θ , (16a) where ∇ 2 = r -1 ∂ r (r∂ r ) + r -2 ∂ 2 θ . We assume here that the polarization distribution is uniform along z-direction and look for the solution of Eqs. 