Solar photons possessing energy less than the band-gap of a single-junction solar cell can be utilized via the up-conversion (UC) of two or more photons, resulting in the emission of a single abovebandgap photon. Due to the non-linear nature of UC, highly concentrated light is required, which is typically much greater than the practical concentration limits of a solar cell. It has been proposed that concentrating up-conversion solar cells (UC-SC) with optical elements integrated into the device could help realize the high solar irradiance required. To avoid scattering problems arising from common UC materials based on micro-crystalline powders, in this work concentrators are investigated with monocrystalline up-converters in silicon-based tandem devices. An external quantum efficiency (EQE) of 6% with 1493 nm infrared illumination at 876 W/m 2 was obtained in upconverter device with concave integrated optics. At an irradiance higher than 90 W/m 2 (equivalent to 2.95× in the 1450-1600 nm range), the non-concentrating UC-SC exhibited 1.5× higher EQE than the UC-SC with CPC, while below 90 W/m 2 the CPC UC-SC exhibited 1.95× higher EQE than the non-concentrating reference device. Due to the negligible scattering of the UC layer, the distribution of localized irradiance is revealed along with its effect on the performance of devices. It is found that irradiance is accumulated within the first 1 mm of the UC layer with peaks at variable depths according to the concentrating scheme. These results suggest ample space for improved up-conversion devices by using integrated optics. Up-conversion (UC) is one of the emerging third generation photovoltaic (PV) approaches to improve the sub-bandgap response of single-junction solar cells. It involves the conversion of two or more low energy photons into one photon possessing energy greater than the bandgap. For crystalline silicon (c-Si) solar cells with an (indirect) bandgap of E g = 1.12 eV, such near infrared (NIR) transparency losses account for more than 20% of the energy in the solar spectrum The different configurations investigated within this work are shown in Figure The geometrical loss mechanisms occurring in the studied configurations were calculated using ray optics and Monte Carlo simulations (Optis, Optisworks) in three-dimensional models using >10 7 rays over an area of 100 mm 2 . Non-sequential ray tracing was used with 0.5 mm facet width used for tesselation of each optical element. The simulation included the refractive indices and absorption coefficients of the CPC optics (Schott B270) and the BaY 2 F 8 :30%Er 3+ material itself 2 -E , where λ is the wavelength and the Sellmeier coefficients A=1.04037, Β=1.12565, C=0.00686, D=0.2038 and E=66.043. The resultant fit is in good agreement with the dispersion of BaY 2 F 8 :30%Er 3+ recently determined by high accuracy variable angle spectroscopic ellipsometry , where z=0.233 cm, θconc=50 o , θCPC-25=67 ο , θCPC-45=35 ο . Specular planar reflectors based on thin films of gold (Au) of at at least 100 nm thickness were evaporated onto fused silica (SiO2) slides. A silver-coated concave mirror with f = 17.5 mm, R = 35 mm and average infrared reflectance higher than 95% was used in a 2f configuration replacing the planar back reflector. Two geometries of CPC fabricated from Schott B270 glass with acceptance angles 25 ο and 45 ο (Edmund Optics, USA) were utilised in the experiments. The dimensions for these were: entry aperture 9.01 mm and 5.39 mm, and length 19.93 mm and 7.52 mm, respectively, while the exit aperture for both was 2.5 mm. A tuneable laser (HP-Agilent, 8168-F) with a wavelength range of 1450-1590 nm, a typical output power of 6±1.4 mW, FWHM of 4 nm (spectral resolutionlimited), and a collimated beam width of 4.2 mm was employed for EQE measurements. The excitation power density was characterized using a calibrated germanium photodiode (Newport, 818-IR) and a NIR camera (Electrophysics, Micronviewer 7290A), while the photogenerated current was measured with a source-meter (Keithley Instruments, 2440-C). More experimental details on the experimental setup can be found in a previous work , where P exc is the excitation power density or irradiance at the respective wavelength, P AM1.5D the spectral irradiance of the air-mass 1.5 direct (AM1.5D) solar spectrum Therefore, there is a trade-off between increasing infrared photons for the upconverter, while reducing visible photons and finally the photo-current of the solar cell. In a practical solar cell with texture, a lower infrared transmission will result to reduced upconverted light. At 1 sun, the ΔJsc from the sacrificial move from texturized to planar solar cell is 42.86-34.15=8.71 mA/cm 2 . However, the record ΔJsc due to state-of-the-art upconverters was characterized at 94 suns. At this solar concentration the current density by the integral of the AM1.5D spectrum results to 357 mA/cm 2 . A device based on the planar solar cells with solar concentration atop of the solar cell should produce at least a ΔJsc of 357-42=315 mA/cm 2 in the infrared to break even the sacrifices in the visible. At 94 suns the benefit from the upconverter is more than one order of magnitude lower than the sacrifice of the texture-to-planar solar cell. Consequently, combinations of different technologies in addition to solar concentration are required to enhance the performance of upconverters Figure BaY 2 F 8 :30%Er 3+ crystals were prepared under high purity argon conditions via the Czochralski process. Fluoride powders of 99.999% purity were melted at 972 ο C in a custom-built furnace, evacuated to 10 - 7 mbar to minimize contamination The integrated optics concentrate light and locally change the distribution of the irradiance at the surface of the up-converter to improve the performance of the solar cell device The irradiance of emission at 970 nm at top of the up-converter interface that is directed to the solar cell (see Figure The emission can also be affected by the back reflector whether specular or Lambertian, however, for highly absorbing up-converters the contribution of this effect to EQE is expected to be negligible. Consequently, light emitted near the top of the up-converter and collected by the overlying solar cell should lead to a higher EQE which is presented in the next section. Figure The EQE is the ratio of photo-generated carriers to the incident NIR photons. The obtained spectra can be explained in relation to the wavelength-dependent infrared absorptance and the path-length of the up-converter, displayed in Figure At the band 1472-1542 nm, however, the absorptance is >90% and the path-length is equal in all cases. It can be seen that the EQE of each configuration is proportional to the depth Z from the CPC: crystal interface. In the devices with planar back reflectors, the closer these high intensity regions are to the solar cell, the higher the collection and therefore the EQE will be. Upconversion is emitted spontaneously in a 4π solid angle. Depending on the path-length, several re-absorption events will reduce the upconversion externally emitted from the sample. Consequently, the high intensity excitations occurring near the surface and close to the solar cell, will propagate a shorter pathlength before being absorbed by the solar cell, resulting to a higher EQE. Consequently, the performance of mono-crystalline up-converter solar cells can be higher when the excitation is accumulated near the top surface of the up-converter. The absorptance of the concave mirror is also >90% at 1472-1542 nm, while lower than the CPC-25 and higher than the CPC-45 and reference outside this band. Contrary to the CPC, the focus of the concave mirror can be adjusted for higher performance near the top surface of the up-converter and is presented in the next section. The quantum efficiency was further characterized at the peak wavelength of 1493 nm as a function of power density and solar concentration. , absorptance at 1493 nm is higher than 99% in all devices and aligns with a large fraction of absorbed pump power Several device effects are incorporated in the quantum efficiency in addition to a photoluminescence intensity measurement. These effects are: i) the spectral response of the solar cell absorbing upconversion from all energy levels despite that higher than 90% is from the 4 I 11/2 level, ii) the transmission of the solar cell at 1400-1600 nm, iii) a double path-length through the up-converter, and iv) the angular extent of the concentrators leading to variable local irradiance in the up-converter as presented in section 3.1 and further peripheral losses. The losses around the edges of the up-converter can be minimized by peripheral reflectors, as implemented with aluminized mylar Imaging optics would be able to concentrate to a focal spot near the diffraction limit, however, require high throughput and improved collection efficiency The performance of mono-crystalline up-converter solar cell device tandems with integrated optics was presented in this paper. Solar cell devices coupled to a CPC with a lower acceptance angle (CPC-25 o ) exhibit higher IQE than the planar and CPC-45 o below 1493 nm excitation at 90 W/m 2 . At higher power density the CPC devices exhibit lower performance affected by the focal length of the CPC, which is shorter for the CPC-25 o compared to the CPC-45 o . In the CPC the local irradiance is accumulated 370 μm -720 μm deeper in the up-converter, while in the planar device the irradiance is distributed near the top surface of the up-converter which is optically coupled to the solar cell, peaking at 30 μm. The highest IQE of 7.2% was measured with a concave reflector at 876 W/m 2 concentrating transmitted excitation and emission from the up-converter back to the solar cell. By knowing the irradiance distribution in the mono-crystalline up-converter and how this affects the performance of upconversion solar cells, further improvements can be achieved by microspheric tailored optics as recently reported 