Organic semiconductors are disordered molecular solids and as a result, their internal charge dynamics and ultimately, the performance of the optoelectronic devices they constitute, are governed by energetic disorder. To ascertain how energetic disorder impacts charge generation, exciton transport, charge transport, and the performance of organic semiconductor devices, an accurate approach is first required to measure this critical parameter. In this work, we show that the static disorder has no relation with the so-called Urbach energy in organic semiconductors. Instead, it can be obtained from photovoltaic external quantum efficiency spectra at wavelengths near the absorption onset. We then present a detailed methodology, alongside a computational framework, for quantifying the static energetic disorder associated with singlet excitons. Moreover, the role of optical interference in this analysis is considered to achieve a high-accuracy quantification. Finally, the excitonic static disorder was quantified in several technologically-relevant donor-acceptor blends, including high-efficiency PM6:Y6. Organic semiconductors combine the electronic advantages of semiconducting materials, including the ability to conduct electricity and absorb or emit light, with the chemical and mechanical benefits of organic compounds such as flexibility, ease of processing, and tailorable optical properties. Energetic disorder in organic semiconductors is typically quantified using one of a few different methodologies. These include Kelvin probe and temperature-dependent charge carrier mobility measurements to probe the disorder of charges, and temperature-dependent photovoltaic external quantum efficiency (EQE PV ) measurements to estimate the static disorder of CT states. In the work described here, we quantified the static energetic disorder associated with excitons, σ S , by applying a model for the sub-gap singlet exciton (SE) absorption coefficient (α SE ) to the spectral regime characterised by SE absorption. In D:A blends, α SE is characterised by excitons in the component with the narrower gap; hence, the relevant optical gap (E opt ) can be expressed as E opt = min(E D , E A ), where E D and E A are the SE energies of the donor and acceptor, respectively. In the model, we assume the sub-gap absorption coefficient to be of the form the absorption coefficient of a singlet exciton mode at energy E SE ′ , while g DOS describes the excitonic density of states. In the case of a Gaussian distribution, this DOS is centred around the mean optical gap (E opt ), has a standard deviation σ S that quantifies the excitonic static disorder, and is given by where N SE is the number density of excitonic states in the active layer. The absorption of CT states of a single energy mode has generally been described as a Marcus charge-transfer process or with related extensions including molecular vibrations. where k B is the Boltzmann constant, T is the temperature, and α sat is a pre-factor that holds a weak photon energy-dependence. Such a dependence can also be justified in terms of a generalised nonadiabatic Marcus theory, assuming the electronic transfer to be between a localised ground state and a diffuse excited state (in the weak-coupling limit). where erf denotes the error function. where EQE 0 is a pre-factor that, in general, holds an energy dependence. PM6: The methodology for accurately quantifying the excitonic static disorder is summarised in two steps: Firstly, the lower limit of the application of equations (3) and (4) to an EQE PV spectrum is identified using the apparent Urbach energy. This lower limit is specified as the point where the lineshape ceases to be SE-characterised, whether that be due to the effects of CT states, trap states, or optical interference. Secondly, equations (3) and (4) are not applied beyond the first saturation peak due to the weak energy-dependence of the pre-factor, α sat , playing a more pivotal role. Both of these criteria were applied when applying the SE absorption model as neglecting them would result in an inaccurate quantification of the excitonic static disorder. With the methodology for quantifying energetic disorder established, it was applied to the EQE PV in the Supplementary Information). Although slight variations could be expected in the static disorder values extracted for two BHJs of a given blend of differing active layer thickness (e.g., due to thicknessdependent variations in the fabrication techniques), it is unlikely that the excitonic static disorder would vary to the extent it appears to in Figure To determine the effects of optical interference using the optical transfer-matrix model, it was necessary to control the excitonic static disorder that characterised the active layer. Therefore, we employed two artificial sub-gap tails (shown in Following this, the absorption tails were converted to extinction tails using α(E) = 4πκ(E) ∕ λ, then appended to the experimental above-gap data. Secondly, as optical interference effects were taken into account in the optical transfer-matrix model, conclusions could be drawn as to whether or not the apparent thickness-dependence was a result of the organic solar cells behaving as low-finesse optical cavities. To explore and overcome the effects of optical interference effects, the methodology for quantifying the excitonic static disorder was applied to the simulated EQE PV spectra of devices of three hypothetical architectures. The first architecture, shown in Figure Finally, the third architecture that was investigated (shown in Figure Alongside the minimal number of interfaces that lateral structures possess, the use of small metallic electrodes at opposite ends of the device minimises the amount of back-reflection, culminating in negligible optical interference inside the active layer. Using the optical transfer-matrix model, the EQE PV spectra shown in Figure Comparing Figure To demonstrate the utility of devices with a lateral structure for quantifying disorder, the technique was Through the application of a model for the SE absorption coefficient, α SE , we have presented a detailed methodology and an associated computational tool for the determination of the excitonic static disorder, σ S , in organic semiconductors. Utilising an optical transfer-matrix model, we have also investigated the adverse effects of optical interference on the methodology. To overcome the limitations presented by optical interference, we have proposed the use of two high-transparency device architectures and employed the lateral structure to quantify the energetic disorder of five systems-of-interest to the community. Using the methodology outlined in this work, alongside the MATLAB script that has been provided as supporting material, the static disorder can be quantified in several systems using roomtemperature EQE PV measurements. Then, by comparing the excitonic static disorder in these systems with important parameters such as the exciton lifetime, or figures-of-merit such as the fill factor or the non-radiative V OC loss, any potential correlations between the two could be identified and investigated further. Substrate preparation: Commercially-patterned ITO coated glass and ultra-flat quartz-coated glass from Ossila were used for all devices in this work. All the substrates were sonicated in deionised water, acetone, and 2-propanol for 10 minutes each. The cleaned substrates were first dried by nitrogen and 110 o C hotplate and then treated in UV-Ozone cleaner (Ossila, L2002A2-UK) for 20 minutes. The thicknesses of all the following films were determined using ellipsometry. PM6:BTP-eC9 and PM6:Y6 thickness-dependent devices were fabricated with a conventional architecture (ITO/PEDOT:PSS/Active Layer/PDINO/Ag). The PEDOT: PSS solution was first diluted with the same volume of water, then cast at 4000 rpm onto the ITO substrate, followed by thermal annealing at 155 o C for 15 minutes to produce a 10 nm film. To fabricate devices with a PM6:BTP-eC9 active layer, PM6:BTP-eC9 with a D:A ratio of 1:1.2 by weight was dissolved in a CF:DIO (99.5:0.5) solution to give various total concentrations. On the other hand, to fabricate devices with a PM6:Y6 active layer, PM6:Y6 with a D:A ratio of 1:1.2 by weight was dissolved in a CF:CN (99.5:0.5) solution to give a variety of total concentrations. The exact concentrations and spin-coating speeds required to form the PM6:BTP-eC9 and PM6:Y6 active layers (of varied thickness) considered in this work are given in Table Different to the traditional organic solar cell architecture, devices with a lateral structure were fabricated to avoid the optical interference effects that arise inside conventionally-structured OSCs. Devices with a lateral structure were fabricated by spin-coating the active layer onto a pre-cleaned glass substrate before evaporating 100 nm Ag to form a cathode and an anode separated by a distance of 30 μm. The exact D:A ratios, solvents, concentrations, and spin-coating speeds used to fabricate the PBDB-T:ITIC, PBDB-T:O-IDTBR, PTB7-Th:COi8DFIC, PTB7-Th:PC71BM, and PM6:Y6 lateral structures are given in Table Photovoltaic external quantum efficiency (EQEPV): Sensitive photovoltaic external quantum efficiency (EQE PV ) measurements were conducted using a high-performance spectrophotometer (PerkinElmer, Lambda950) as a light source. The probe light beam was physically chopped at 273 Hz (Thorlabs, MC2000B) prior focusing on the device under test (DUT). The DUT photocurrent signal was measured by a lock-in amplifier (Stanford Research, SR860) in combination with a current preamplifier with an integrated, low-noise voltage source (FEMTO, DHPCA-200). For DUTs with conventional (lateral) device architecture, a bias voltage of 0 V (10 V) was applied. A detailed description of the EQE PV apparatus is provided elsewhere. Once the technique for quantifying the excitonic static disorder was established, it was applied to the experimentally-determined EQE PV spectra of four systems where the devices had a variety of active layer thicknesses, d AL . In where the shaded region indicated the statistical uncertainty obtained through the fittings. To investigate the effects of optical interference, and to test the benefits of using the transparent device architectures described in the main text, EQE PV spectra were simulated using an optical transfer-matrix model. Having demonstrated that the excitonic static disorder is most accurately quantified for devices with a lateral structure, the energetic disorder of five technologically-relevant donor/acceptor blends was quantified. The fitted EQE PV spectra for each system (PBDB-T:ITIC, PBDB-T:O-IDTBR, PM6:Y6, PTB7-Th:COi8DFIC, and PTB7-Th:PC71BM) are shown in Figure Moreover, the value given in Table sensitive The MATLAB Script