Using a fully automated cryogenic wafer prober, we measured superconductor fabrication process control monitors and simple integrated circuits on 200 mm wafers at 4.4 K, including SQIF-based magnetic field sensors, SQUID-based circuits for measuring inductors, Nb/Al-AlOx/Nb Josephson junctions, test structures for measuring critical current of superconducting wires and vias, resistors, etc., to demonstrate the feasibility of using the system for characterizing niobium superconducting devices and integrated circuits on a wafer scale. Data on the wafer-scale distributions of the residual magnetic field, junction tunnel resistance, energy gap, inductance of multiple Nb layers, critical currents of interlayer vias are presented. Comparison with existing models is made. The wafers were fabricated in the SFQ5ee process, the fully planarized process with eight niobium layers and a layer of kinetic inductors, developed for superconductor electronics at MIT Lincoln Laboratory. The cryogenic wafer prober was developed at HPD/ FormFactor, Inc. abrication process development of advanced nodes of superconductor electronics has reached stages when very large scale integration (VLSI) is possible and integrated digital circuits with millions of Josephson junctions and other components can be fabricated with high yield The interest in probing Josephson devices at cryogenic temperatures is long-standing, starting from the early development on 2-inch wafers The goals of this work were to demonstrate fully automatic testing of 200 mm wafers with superconductor integrated circuits and process control monitors (PCM) containing many tens of thousands of test structures, using a cryogenic wafer prober developed at Formfactor, Inc. Each PCM group comprised sixteen 5 mm × 5 mm chips printed 49 times on 200-mm wafers, using a 7 × 7 square grid with 22 mm step size. Each PCM group has about two thousand test structures which can be tested individually by contacting 100 μm × 100 μm contact pads with Nb/Pt/Au metallization, on 200 μm pitch. These test structures were designed for fourpoint measurements to allow for extraction of all basic process parameters and statistics, e.g., properties of Josephson junctions, inductors, resistors, critical currents of Nb wires and interlayer vias, etc. The cryogenic wafer prober is designed for testing 150 mm or 200 mm wafers at 4 K. The wafer is loaded using a standard Brooks wafer loading system Electrical contacts to the wafer are made using a replaceable probe card. For the series of tests described here, a DC probe card with 20 flexible tungsten probes (two rows of 10) was used. The pin-to-pin spacing was 200 μm and the two rows were separated by 200 μm (unstaggered) in order to match the design of the PCM chips. The probe card is mounted on a kinematic holder allowing for the adjustment of tip (θx), tilt (θ y ), and zz-height such that the probe pins may be planarized to the surface of the wafer. Slotted mounting holes in the probe card allow for rotation (θ z ) to align the probe pins to the axes of motion for the motion stages. The probe card holder is attached to the static cooling stage via flexible thermal links. The chamber is wired with up to 500 twisted-pair DC wires and 56 RF coaxial lines with bandwidth up to 18 GHz. The cables are wired and heat sunk from 300 K to 4 K, allowing the operator to configure the probe card with the desired array of I/O signals. RF signals are terminated with SMA connectors at 300 K and SMP connectors at 4 K. DC wires are twisted pairs and terminated in D-Sub 25 connectors at 300 K and micro-D 25 connectors at 4 K. Suppression of the Earth's magnetic field by more than two orders of magnitude is achieved with two layers of mu-metal shielding. A magnetic field is applied in all three axes using an external set of coils mounted on a cage structure as seen in Fig. A camera system with <3 μm resolution is used for imaging, navigation, automatic alignment routines, and precision die stepping. The camera is mounted on a three-axis positioning system (50 mm range) with a pneumatic lift stage for elevating the system when opening the probe chamber. The camera and positioning system are mounted on an ultra-rigid frame that allows the camera arm to be rotated out of the way for easy access to the probe chamber during probe card installation and maintenance. Cooling of the wafer chuck and the static radiation shields is achieved with liquid cryogens. The system is pre-cooled with liquid nitrogen before it is purged and switched to liquid helium. Total cooldown time is less than 8 hours. Separate cooling loops are used for the static and motion stages. A binary gas analyzer monitors the helium purity of the exhaust gas and, if it meets a pre-set level, the exhaust may be diverted automatically to a helium reliquefication plant. To accommodate testing of 150 mm and 200 mm wafers, the wafer chuck is mounted to the probe chamber with a single fastener locking mechanism that allows the entire wafer chuck to be replaced with one of a different size. The room temperature vacuum wafer handling system is equipped with two VCEs and two aligners (one for each wafer size), so no setup is required when changing wafer sizes. A wafer zz-height map is created after clamping to the chuck. Actual contact to the wafer is used to determine the contact height and a user-specified overdrive distance is input to ensure solid electrical contact with the device contact pads. A minimum separation distance is also set to ensure that no lateral motion is allowed unless the prober pins are at a safe distance from the wafer. The wafer prober software handles all of the automation routines (pump down, cooldown, wafer loading/unloading, alignment, and die-to-die stepping). A wafer map is created showing the location of all testable dies. When an automated probing sequence is started, the prober moves to the first die and then sends a message to the user's test program that it is ready for measurement. The device is then tested, and a message is sent to the tester with a test/fail message and command to move to the next die or sub-die, if required. This sequence repeats until the entire wafer is tested. Die-to-die movement is typically less than 1 s. The pass/fail (or other binning criterion) is displayed in real time on the wafer map to give the user a visual representation of the status of the wafer testing. Electrical measurements were specified using a user-built Matlab-based software "Measurement Manager" (MM). The software reads-in an xlsx-formatted file that specifies the location of each test structure on the wafer, the test to perform, and additional test-specific input fields. The MM software was run from a laptop computer, and interfaced with the test equipment through Ethernet and USB-GPIB controller. All electrical connections were made by automated control of a Keithley 708B switch matrix with low-offset relays. Voltage measurements were made by a Keithley 2182a nanovoltmeter, and Yokogawa GS200 current sources were used to supply all input currents. Automation of the full testing procedure included switching, motion control, and electrical measurements. Multiple types of tests, including I-V measurements and SQUID-and SQIF modulation measurements were programmed in sequence via xlsxformatted specification sheet, and full-wafer testing was performed with minimal need for human intervention. In conventional chip-scale testing, a wafer is firstly diced into individual 5 mm × 5 mm chips, which are then wirebonded, loaded onto a test probe, and immersed in liquid helium for testing. Wafer dicing, cleaning, and chip picking alone accounts for several hours of overhead time caused by scheduling and execution, estimated at 4 hours per wafer. Delays due to wafer queuing for dicing availability can increase this time to several days in practice. Wire-bonding carries similar overheads, on the order of 1 hour per chip. Chip testing in a helium dunk probe is typically done in batches of 6 chips per load. Loading and cooldown takes about 15 minutes per 6 chips, although overheads due to testing in a dry cryostat are considerably higher. After cooldown, measurement time for a typical SQUID test structure, is about 1 minute. Overall, conventional testing of 24 SQUID-based test circuits for extracting inductance of Nb layers at 22 different locations across a full wafer would require about 4 hours of dicing, plus 22 hours of wirebonding, plus 1 hour of loading, and about 5 hours of actual electrical testing, for a total of 32 hours. In practice, the calendar time may extend to a week or more due to queuing. For a comparison, at wafer-scale testing, the loading is done once per wafer, with a cooldown time of about 10 minutes, measurement time is identical (performed by the same hardware), and chip-to-chip movement is the only additional contributor, and can be neglected in this example, at approximately 1 second per typical move. For the same 24 SQUID structures at 22 die locations, the total test time is approximately 5 hours, with the bulk of this limited by the actual electrical testing time. Hence, wafer-scale testing provides a dramatic reduction in the overhead time associated with chip-scale testing. Because of the overhead, the time savings with respect to the chip-level testing linearly increases with the number of chips requiring testing, while electric testing time in both methods is approximately the same. Low residual magnetic field, below about 100 nT, is critical requirement to any system that is going to be used for testing superconductor digital electronics. For cryogenic test equipment intended to test diced chips, typically on the order of 1 cm × 1 cm, the requirement of low residual field is managed using a multilayer shield of high permeability metal such as cryoperm-10, annealed and assembled in low ambient field. For larger systems, achieving a sufficient aspect ratio of the shields would greatly increase the overall system size, weight and cost. Additionally, with locally varying magnetic elements such as the components within a motion stage, static cancellation of external fields is insufficient to manage local perturbations. With these considerations, the cryogenic wafer prober was designed to combine passive magnetic shields, as well as active cancellation from the set of external coils assembled on the cage structure visible in Fig. To evaluate the performance of the shielding system with respect to circuits under test, we measured SQIF magnetometers integrated into the test wafer as a component of the PCM chips. Each chip had 4 different nine-loop SQIFs in order to cover a wide range of possible magnetic fields. The SQIFs design was similar to the one described in With active compensation on, all test sites showed a consistent offset field (between measured by the fluxgate magnetometers and the SQIFs) of about 80 nT. Higher fields were observed at the edge of the wafer when the center of the chuck is closer to walls of the test chamber and mu-metal shields in Fig. Stability of the field cancelation system during a 6-hour period was tested and demonstrated in Fig. We used wafers with superconductor circuits and process control monitors (PCMs) fabricated in the SFQ5ee process developed for superconductor electronics at MIT Lincoln Laboratory. It is a planarized process with eight Nb layers and Nb/Al-AlOx/Nb Josephson junctions With the ambient field in the system well characterized, the system was used for rapid evaluation of several important process parameters. Inductors are the second most important component, after Josephson junctions, for all superconductor electronic circuits. However, they are one of the very few circuit elements for which room-temperature measurements cannot provide input regarding parameter targeting or variation. There are nine superconducting layers in the SFQ5ee process, allowing circuit designers to form a few dozen of different types of inductors comprising two superconducting layers (microstrip types) or three layers (striplines). Knowledge and control of linear inductance of multiple combinations of niobium layers and their dependence on the linewidth are essential for the stable fabrication process and circuit design. Therefore, ability to measure large numbers of inductor structures at 4 K is a critical enabling capability. To measure inductors we used integrated circuits which require NN + 2 contact pads to extract inductance of NN inductors from the periods of voltage-flux characteristics of differential SQUIDs fed by a common modulation current; the SQUID volt- age is measured with respect to the common ground The typical voltage-flux (magnetic bias current) characteristic of one of the SQUIDs (#12) in the integrated circuit is shown in Fig. The wafermaps of the extracted inductance of different microstrip inductors with signal traces on the layers M5 and M6 are shown in Fig. where the first term is magnetic inductance and the second term is kinetic inductance, tt is the signal trace thickness that is 135 nm for the M5 layer and 200 nm for all other layers; μ and μμ 0 are the relative and vacuum permeability. We use the same penetration depth in Nb of the signal traces, λλ 1 as in the ground planes, λλ = λλ 1 = 90 nm to be consistent with the data in The expected inductances from (1) are shown in Table To access the wafer-scale uniformity, we compared the average inductance of the four central dies (C3, C5, E3, E5) and of the wafer periphery dies (B1, B7, D1, D7, F1, F7). More signal traces on the M5 layers there is no statistical difference between the center of the wafer and the periphery. The inductance difference is less than 1%, which is lower than the error of the measurements, estimated as 1.5% in On the other hand, for signal traces on the M6 layer, there is a statistically significant difference of about 3.3% between the central dies and the dies at the periphery of the wafer. Regardless of the linewidth, inductance in the central part of the wafer is higher. This wafer-scale variation of circuit inductors is similar to the one reported in Wafermaps of the inductance per unit length of stripline inductors M5aM4bM7 are shown in Fig. where r eq is the equivalent radius of a cylindrical wire producing the same far field as the rectangular strip; see the expression , where ⟨LL ll mmmmmmss ⟩ is the measured wafer mean value of inductance per unit length, and LL ll tthmmeeee is the expected value from (1) with nominal process parameters. Penetration depth λλ = λλ 1 = 90 nm was used in ( In the SFQ5ee process the nominal distance between M4 and M7 ground planes is 1015 nm; see Vias between superconducting layers are the second component for which no information about their critical current in the superconducting state can be obtained based on room-temperature characterization. Critical current of vias between all metal layers was measured on the cryogenic prober. The measurements were done using chains of 1848 vias connected in series. Since voltage is measured across the entire chain, this method measures the smallest critical current of vias in the chain, II cc,vvssmm but does not characterize the distribution of the critical currents within the chain. This distribution is actually not important because this is a pass/fail test for the critical current which must exceed a certain level, typically 15 mA per square via with size of 700 nm. Six 1848-via chains per site were measured for each via type, and the mean critical current was calculated. The typical wafermaps for all types of vias show radially symmetric distribution of the mean critical current: the critical currents are higher near the center of the wafer and lower near the edges; see Fig. Tunnel barrier resistance of Nb/Al-AlOx/Nb junctions at room temperatures, RR 300 is directly related to the tunnel barrier resistance at cryogenic temperatures to the critical current of Josephson junctions via an II cc RR NN product, a parameter specific for the fabrication process, where II cc is the critical current and RR NN is the normal-state resistance (above the critical temperature) of the Josephson junctions. This allows extracting the basic characteristics of JJs, e.g., resistance wafermaps and statistics on a very large number of JJs from room-temperature measurements using a conventional wafer prober; see Measurements of JJs of different sizes on the cryogenic wafer prober allow us to obtain current-voltage (I-V) characteristics of the JJs to a) determine the critical current II cc , normal state resistance, RR NN , II cc RR NN product, the Josephson critical current density JJ cc , and also the gap voltage VV gg = 2Δ mm ⁄ , where Δ is the energy gap in the spectrum of single-particle excitations in superconductors In this work, to obtain the wafermaps, we measured six Josephson junctions of each of the four different sizes: 500 nm, 700 nm, 1000 nm, and 1400 nm in diameter. Fig. Wafermaps of the average normal state determined as an average slope of I-V characteristics above 3.5 mV are shown in Fig. Similar data for another wafer fabricated in a completely different fabrication process run are presented in Fig. Another important characteristic of the process uniformity is the gap voltage VV gg of the Josephson tunnel junctions, which characterizes local properties of niobium base and counter electrodes of the junctions. Wafersmaps of the gap voltage for circular Nb/Al-AlO x /Nb junctions with diameters 1000 nm and 1400 nm are shown in Fig. All obtained distributions of the fabrication process parameters have nearly the same wafermaps showing elevated values in the central part of the wafer, decreasing values towards the wafer edge, and nearly cylindrical symmetry. This is certainly caused by the processing equipment used which all has similar distribution of plasma properties, mainly, a dc magnetron sputtering of niobium and high density plasma etching of Nb and SiO2 interlayer dielectric. For instance, distribution of RR NN in Fig. Current-voltage (II-VV) characteristics of the junctions fabricated in the SFQ5ee process were studied in Obviously, the heat removal from the junctions is much better when the chip (or the wafer) is submerged in LHe than on the wafer chuck in vacuum. Even with a perfect thermal contact of the wafer backside with the chuck surface (which can never happen due to wafer bow and surface imperfections), the thermal pass from the junction to the chuck through the 750 μm thick wafer with multiple layers of SiO2 with total thickness of about 3 μm is much longer than through the 0.4 μm thin oxide to the front surface to LHe. Hence, heating effects on the wafer prober should be more pronounced. Junction internal temperature TT JJ after switching to the gap voltage can be estimated using the temperature dependence of the energy gap Δ(TT) in the BSC theory The measured value of Nb films critical temperature is TT cc =9.1 K, the independently determined zero temperature gap voltage in our junctions is VV gg (0) =2.87 mV; see also data in Thermal resistance between junction and the wafer is RR tth = ∆TT PP ⁄ , where ∆TT = TT JJ -TT wwmmwwmmee and TT wwmmwwmmee is the temperature of the wafer clamped to the chuck of the wafer prober. Then, using the above temperatures and heat powers, the wafer temperature during the measurements can be estimated as TT wwmmwwmmee = 4.4 K. At this temperature, if junction self-heating were negligible, i.e., TT JJ = TT wwmmwwmmee , the expected gap voltage from (3) should be 2.76 mV. This value was indeed observed in the smallest junctions used (500 nm in diameter) at dissipated power PP ≈ 50 nW, providing additional credence to our estimate of the wafer temperature on the chuck of the wafer prober. Radial distribution of inductance of Nb layer M6 in Fig. The inductance enhancement appears to take place in about the same region where RR NN of Josephson junctions is increased, but is less pronounced. In microscopic theory of superconductivity, the penetration depth in superconductors with short mean free path of electrons is given by where ρρ the normal state resistivity, ħ is the reduced Planck's constant. Hence, λλ at 4.2 K and inductance of various structures should be larger in those parts of the wafer where resistivity of Nb films is higher than in other parts and/or the energy gap is smaller. According to the wafermaps in Distribution of the critical current of vias in Fig. We performed the first 200-mm wafer-scale testing of superconductor electronics wafers on a cryogenic wafer prober. The testing included all fabrication process control monitors and small integrated circuits for inductance extraction. Using the gap voltage measurements on junctions with different sizes and different power dissipation, we estimated the actual wafer temperature during the measurements as 4.4 K. This value is very close to liquid helium temperature and, thus, all the obtained results can be directly compared with chip-level testing done in LHe. The wafer prober testing revealed distributions of the process parameters (wafermaps) which previously were either unknown or known only qualitatively, and gives indispensable information for process engineers and circuit designers into the process. The next and more challenging step should be demonstration of wafer-scale testing of complex integrated circuits. We see the main challenges in removing heat from the circuits with substantial power dissipation, e.g., in bias resistors of the standard RSFQ circuits, as well as in providing sufficient suppression of electromagnetic noise. Results of this work clearly demonstrate advantages of the wafer-scale testing compared to the conventional chip-scale testing involving wafer dicing, individual chip packaging, and cryogenic testing in liquid helium. There is no doubt that full implementation of cryogenic wafer-scale probing in the superconductor fabs will dramatically help advancing superconductor electronics for various applications from traditional sensors and microwave devices to advanced classical computing, to quantum optimization and quantum computing. We are thankful to Jeff Wang and Xi Lin for assisting with the probe card modification that enabled the testing in this paper. We are grateful to Vlad Bolkhovsky, Ravi Rastogi, and Scott Zarr for overseeing the SFQ5ee process runs and to the entire MIT LL fab team for wafer processing. a ∆LL ll = ⟨LL ll mmmmmmss ⟩ -LL ll tthmmeeee