Hole doping into a correlated antiferromagnet leads to topological stripe correlations, involving charge stripes that separate antiferromagnetic spin stripes of opposite phase. Topological spin stripe order causes the spin degrees of freedom within the charge stripes to feel a geometric frustration with their environment. In the case of cuprates, where the charge stripes have the character of a holedoped two-leg spin ladder, with corresponding pairing correlations. Anti-phase Josephson coupling across the spin stripes can lead to pair-density-wave order, in which broken translation symmetry of the superconducting wave function is accommodated by pairs with finite momentum. This scenario has now been experimentally verified by recently reported measurements on La2-xBaxCuO4 with x = 1/8. While pair-density-wave order is not common as a cuprate ground state, it provides a basis for understanding the uniform d-wave order that is more typical in superconducting cuprates. Charge order has now been observed in virtually all hole-doped cuprate superconductor families In 214 cuprates such as La 2-x Sr x CuO 4 (LSCO) and La 2-x Ba x CuO 4 (LBCO), charge-stripe order is generally accompanied by spin-stripe order The topological character of stripes in cuprates is distinct from that of the topological insulators that have dominated attention more recently It has taken quite some time to appreciate the significance of the topological order associated with spin stripes. Experimentally, the same antiphase relationship of spin stripes seen in superconducting cuprates also occurs in the case of insulating behavior in La 2-x Sr x NiO 4 . A theoretical analysis of interaction requirements for topological doping came to no firm conclusions I have argued recently To obtain superconducting order in the CuO 2 planes, it is necessary to establish phase coherence, via Josephson coupling, between neighboring charge stripes While the initial case for PDW order was circumstantial, direct phase-sensitive evidence of PDW order in LBCO x = 1/8 has now been reported Of course, the superconducting ground state of most cuprates is spatially-uniform d wave, not PDW. This is still compatible with pairing correlations developing within charge stripes, but it requires disordered spin stripes with an energy gap In the following, I fill in details that provide support for the story laid out above. The holes doped into the CuO 2 planes tend to go into O 2p states Initially, the holes form diagonal stripes In 214 cuprates, the stripe orientation rotates from diagonal to bond-parallel, and superconductivity appears, for x 0.05 We can reconcile the variations in the magnetic spectra through the model indicated schematically in Fig. If the charge stripes are centered on a row of bridging O atoms, then the charge stripes are effectively 2-leg spin ladders that are decoupled from the neighboring spin stripes due to frustration of the AF coupling Note that the RVB state of the 2-leg ladder is a gapped spin liquid, in contrast to the gapless quantum spin liquid of Anderson's proposed RVB for the 2D square lattice The distinction between the spin stripes and the doped ladders breaks down for excitations above the pairing scale. Such high-energy excitations can occur anywhere in the plane, and at such energies the holes are no longer confined to pairs within charge stripes. The strong scattering between spins and holes leads to the short correlation length at high energies. It is recognized that superconducting and chargedensity-wave correlations compete with one another in 1D repulsion and possibly other effects not considered in the calculations. Furthermore, superconducting order requires Josephson coupling between the charge stripes In the case of optimal stripe order, LBCO with x = 1/8, 2D superconducting correlations were observed to set in together with the spin-stripe order at ∼ 40 K To explain the 2D superconductivity, a novel superconducting state was proposed: pair-density-wave order The PDW order is characterized by a finite wave vector that matches that of the spin stripe order. This finitemomentum of pairs is shared with the concept of superconductivity in a strong uniform magnetic field proposed by Fulde and Farrel The evidence of 2D superconductivity in LBCO, together with the PDW proposal, supported the alternative concept of intertwined order While the proposed PDW state can explain the 2D superconductivity in LBCO, the story would be more compelling with direct evidence for PDW order in LBCO. Phase-sensitive evidence has now been reported Further evidence of the last conclusion comes from transport measurements in a large magnetic field applied perpendicular to the planes. Such measurements on LBCO x = 1/8 revealed, beyond a reentrant 2D superconducting phase at a field of 20 T, an ultraquantum metal phase, with a very large sheet resistance (twice the quantum of resistance for pairs) that appears to saturate at low temperature Incoherent stripe correlations are also present in the normal state of LSCO Dynamic topological doping, in the form of incommensurate spin excitations, is a common feature of underdoped cuprates The difference between the PDW and uniform superconducting states is associated with the presence or absence of static spin-stripe order. In the PDW state, static spin-stripe order is essential for the pair correlations to develop (anti-)phase coherence between neighboring charge stripes; purely fluctuating spin stripes oppose superconducting phase order. We should take a moment to acknowledge that it is surprising that we can have such spin order at all. There is already a large tendency toward spin fluctuations in the undoped CuO 2 planes While the spin stripes are good for isolating the doped spin ladders that yield pairing, they stand in the way of spatially-uniform superconducting order. If they can be gapped, then it should be possible to develop a uniform superconducting phase among electronic states at energies below the spin gap. Indeed, an analysis of the available experimental results on cuprate families indicates that the energy gap for incommensurate spin excitations is an upper limit for the superconducting gap associated with long-range coherence The close relationship between the PDW and uniform superconducting orders is illustrated by a study of the phase transitions in LBCO x = 0.115 as a function of uniaxial strain Another connection is seen through the impact of proton irradiation on LBCO x = 1/8 Lee Another distinction between different cuprates concerns the magnitude of the wave vector Q co for the charge order and its variation with doping. In 214 cuprates, Q co grows linearly with hole density p up to p ≈ 1/8, where it saturates at ≈ 1/8 reciprocal lattice unit (rlu) A new study of the doping and temperature dependence of the charge-stripe order in La 1.8-x Eu 0.2 Sr x CuO 4 brings new insight to this issue Scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) experiments have provided evidence for a local coexistence of PDW and uniform superconducting orders around defects in the superconducting order, such as magnetic vortex cores The absence of spin-stripe order removes the conflict between PDW and uniform superconducting orders discussed above. At the same time, the PDW order detected by STM appears to be induced by local defects, which is distinct from the PDW ground state detected in LBCO, where spin-stripe order appears to be an intrinsic component. A defect such as a magnetic vortex or a Zn atom substituted for Cu causes the superconducting order to go to zero This line of reasoning provides an interesting connection to the LBCO system. A crystal with x = 0.095 shows a bulk T c = 32 K in zero magnetic field, along with weakened stripe order relative to x = 1/8 If Zn defects act like magnetic vortices in terms of locally favoring PDW order, then enough Zn should, like the magnetic field, cause a decoupling of superconducting planes. Indeed, this effect was confirmed in a crystal of LBCO x = 0.095 with 1% Zn Topological doping is important in cuprates because it establishes regions of reduced dimensionality where pair-ing can develop in the presence of repulsive interactions. There is a natural connection with systems in which the lattice is formed from a coupling of lower-dimensional components. One example is alkali-doped C 60 The situation is different if we compare with other layered superconductors. In electron-doped cuprates such as Nd 2-x Ce x CuO 4 , the carriers and the Cu moments do not spatially segregate. As a result, commensurate antiferromagnetic order survives to a higher carrier concentration, and superconductivity appears only when static order disappears 