Topological superconductors have attracted tremendous excitement as they are predicted to host Majorana zero modes that can be utilized for topological quantum computing. Candidate topological superconductor Sn1-xInxTe thin films (0<x<0.3) grown by molecular beam epitaxy and strained in the (111) plane are shown to host three coexisting quantum effects: localization, antilocalization and superconducting fluctuations above the critical temperature Tc. An analysis of the normal state magnetoresistance reveals these effects. Weak localization is consistently observed in superconducting samples, indicating that superconductivity originates dominantly from trivial valence band states that may be strongly spin-orbit split. A large enhancement of the conductivity is observed above Tc, indicating that quantum coherent quasiparticle effects coexist with superconducting fluctuations. Our results motivate a reexamination of the debated pairing symmetry of this material when subjected to quantum confinement and lattice strain. Non-trivial topology can arise in electronic band structures and lead to unique properties in various materials that include insulators, semimetals, magnets and superconductors. applications in quantum computing, Most previous research on Sn1-xInxTe was focused on single crystals. The growth and analysis of Sn1-xInxTe thin films are necessary to search for boundary Majorana modes using device-based schemes. Thin films also allow to manipulate the properties of the material using tuning knobs beyond those possible for single crystals such as confinement, strain and interfacial effects. In thin films, quantum coherent corrections to the conductivity that are useful to quantity spin-orbit splitting effects are enhanced. Moreover, in the case of superconductors, confinement enhances quantum coherent corrections due to superconducting fluctuations above the critical temperature Tc, which could provide a novel route to put to test the order parameter symmetry. The MBE of Sn1-xInxTe Here, we report structural and electrical measurements on strained thin films of Sn1-xInxTe(0.04<x<0.3) grown by MBE on BaF2 (111) that reveal remarkable differences compared to single crystals. The films host rhombohedral lattice strain along the (111) plans that alters the crystal symmetry. They are all superconducting for x>0.04 but also exhibit strongly enhanced quantum coherent corrections to the conductivity that unravel important properties of the normal state. In the normal state, weak localization (WL), weak antilocalization (WAL) and superconducting fluctuations coexist. The WL only occurs in superconducting samples, indicating that electrons from trivial bulk states may play a dominant role in the superconducting state. However, the observation of antilocalization at low magnetic field indicates the presence of bulk spin-orbit splitting possibly resulting from a Rashba splitting whose origin is debated. Close to but above Tc, a significant enhancement of the conductivity and enhanced strong negative magnetoconductance indicate the presence of superconducting fluctuations of Maki-Thompson type. The absence of a signature of fluctuations in the Meissner effect corroborates this interpretation. Our realization of Sn1-xInxTe thin films and the observation of the WAL and fluctuations shed a new light on the properties of this material, likely to change under the impact of quantum confinement and lattice strain. Interestingly, strain in the (111) plane breaks cubic symmetry and introduces a rhombohedral lattice deformation whose impact on the superconducting properties and pairing symmetry has not yet been studied in Sn1-xInxTe. Thin film of Sn1-xInxTe(0.04<x<0.3) are grown by molecular-beam epitaxy (MBE) on BaF2(111) substrate. We initially deposit a buffer layer of SnTe (<40nm) to start the nucleation of the layer. We then co-deposit Sn, In and Te from elemental cells. Throughout the growth, we vary the cell temperature as well as the relative growth time of SnTe and Sn1-xInxTe layers to control composition (see supplementary information). Layers of Sn1-xInxTe of various concentration varying from 0 to 0.3 are obtained. The In atoms are found to diffuse into the SnTe buffer almost regardless of composition and buffer layer thickness. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) measurements performed at room temperature on a sample having x=0.18 confirm this. A TEM image of the layer is shown in Fig. Electrical transport measurement are performed from 1.5K to 15K using the standard 5-probe method. Gold wires are attached to the film using conducting silver paste. All In-containing samples exhibit a superconducting regime at low temperature. As we increase the In concentration, the critical temperature Tc gradually rises from 1.5K to 3.5K, as shown in Fig. Where H c2 i (0) = H c2 ⊥,|| (0) are the critical field at T=0K, found to be H c2 ⊥ (0) = 1.92T and H c2 || (0) = 3.27T. This is below the Pauli limit B P ≈ 1.85(TK -1 ) • T C ≈ 6.5T. Using the relation is the flux quantum, we can estimate the superconducting coherence length ξ ab (in plane) and ξ c (out of plane). The extracted values are 12.9nm and 7.6nm separately. Their value is smaller than the thickness of the film (100nm), meaning the order parameter is well confined in the film, leading to quasi-3D superconductivity. Fig. Where n h , n e is the carrier density of electrons and holes and B is the magnetic field. Thus, the effective carrier density calculated from Hall slope can be unreasonably high if n h -n e is small. As we increase In, ne increases, thus gradually lower the Hall coefficient. From this, we conclude that the In acts as an electron donor, possibly generating an impurity band near the Fermi level. Several recent works also report similar observation ) ) However, the absolute value of the negative magnetoconductance cusp is high and can reach 10e 2 /h, as shown in figure β L ( ) is Larkin's electron-electron interaction strength parameter tabulated in Ref. Our fitting formula is obtained by combining all possible contributions from fluctuations with WL: Note that the Larkin expression for the MT term is limited to temperatures much higher than Tc and not-too-large fields (2πk B (T -T C ) ≫ ħ/τ φ and 2πk B (T -T C ) ≫ 4eDH ). This limits our fitting range of the data, especially at low temperature close to Tc. The fit parameters N and L φ are plotted versus temperature in Fig. Ref. We further corroborate the interpretation of the quantum coherent corrections by carrying a similar analysis to the resistance versus temperature R(T) curve of x=0.3 near Tc. The detailed expression of weak localization and terms describing superconducting fluctuations are shown in the supplement. The R(T) correction due other fluctuation terms can be calculated from parameters already determined previously (see Supplement S3). (3) are however not expected to appear in measurements of the magnetization as they are related to coherent electron scattering corrections that only influence the conductivity. This spin-orbit splitting could originate from several possible sources. For instance, in a recent work on Pb1-xSnxSe quantum well, the origin of spin-orbit coupling and weak antilocalization is attributed to surface inversion symmetry breaking that introduces a Rashba-like term in the Hamiltonian describing the system. In strongly spin-orbit-coupled systems, such as CuxBi2Se3, Sn1-xInxTe, and various transition metal dichalcogenides, parity-mixed superconductivity can naturally exist on symmetry grounds. In summary, we have grown SnxIn1-xTe (0<x<0.3) thin films by MBE and measured their structural, quantum coherent and superconducting transport properties. Samples can maintain superconductivity up to 3.5K with x=0.3. In the normal state, we have observed the coexistence of quantum coherent corrections from WAL, WL and superconducting fluctuations. Their analysis of the coherence length indicates yields a short spin-orbit scattering length consistent with strong spin-orbit splitting. The latter is a necessary but not sufficient ingredient to realize topological superconductivity. To the best of our knowledge, superconducting fluctuations have not been observed in a topological insulator that goes superconducting. Our results thus raise several interesting questions about the superconductivity of SnxIn1-xTe thin films. First, they motivate further theoretical studies of Sn1-xInxTe with the distorted crystal structure to elucidate the nature of its superconductivity. Second, they raise the question of whether superconducting fluctuations and their response to magnetic field and impurities can shed light on the pairing symmetry. At the very least, the synthesis of such thin films provides a superconducting material that one can use to grow in-situ proximity effect bilayers with epitaxial interfaces based on TCIs. 