-wave infrared (MIR, 3-5 μm) optical frequency combs (OFC) are of critical importance for spectroscopy of fundamental molecular transitions in space and terrestrial applications. Although in this band OFCs can be obtained via supercontinuum or difference frequency generation using optical pumping schemes, unprecedented source miniaturization and monolithic design are unique to electrically-pumped semiconductor laser structures. To date, high-brightness OFC generation in this region has been demonstrated in quantum-and interband cascade lasers (QCL/ICL), yet with sub-optimal spectral properties. Here, we show a MIR quantum well diode laser (QWDL) OFC, whose excellent spectral uniformity, narrow optical linewidths, and milliwatt optical power are obtained at a fraction of a watt of power consumption. The continuously tunable source offers ∼1 THz of optical span centered at 3.04 μm, and a repetition rate of 10 GHz. As a proofof-principle, a directly-battery-operated MIR dual-comb source is shown with almost 0.5 THz of optical coverage accessible in the electrical domain in microseconds. These results indicate the high suitability of QWDL OFCs for future chip-based real-time sensing systems in the mid-infrared. Access to the MIR spectral region (3-5 μm) plays a vital role for molecular spectroscopy due to the presence of strong ro-vibrational transitions of many environmentallyimportant species in this band. High sensitivity and selectivity makes trace gas monitoring, breath analysis, and industrial quality control particularly attractive in the MIR. While spectrally-broadband emission in this region can be obtained using thermal incoherent sources such as globars Despite many technological challenges, the importance of the MIR region has driven extensive research on OFC generation. In principle, many novel platforms offer octave-wide coverages, yet they still require bulky external pump lasers. This is in stark contrast to emerging battery-operated fully-integrated systems at telecom wavelengths To date, MIR OFC generation in semiconductor lasers has been demonstrated in quantum cascade lasers (QCL) Here, we address this demand and present a monolithic MIR OFC platform exploiting a GaSb-based type-I quantum well diode laser (QWDL) medium, whose comb operation was previously restricted only to the near-infrared Device design: The MIR QWDLs grown on a n-GaSb substrate employ type-I InGaAsSb/AlInGaAsSb quantum well active regions (see Experimental Section for structure and fabrication details). The QWDL is a typical single-section Fabry-Pérot (FP) device, where the quasicontinuous-wave FM comb formation mechanism relies on the inherent gain nonlinearity Comb properties: To assess the frequency comb characteristics of MIR QWDLs, we mounted a 4 mm long single-section device onto a radio-frequency (RF) compatible submount (Figure The results of the analysis are plotted in Figure A minimum in the SWIFTS quadratures (X/Y ) where the normal (DC) IFG has a maximum (Figure Suitability for free-running DCS: Whereas SWIFTS gives direct access to relative phase coherence, it does not provide information about absolute comb stability i.e. optical linewidth. This is because accurate (∼MHz) offset frequency retrieval f 0 would require an interferometer with a sub-kilometer optical path difference, which is impractical. Instead, to prove the excellent suitability of the MIR QWDL OFCs for demanding heterodyne measurements, we optically beat a pair of free-running, lengthmismatched sources (several μm) with a repetition rate mismatch of ∆f rep = 38.3 MHz. The light from the devices was spatially and spectrally overlapped onto a fast 3 μm photodetector, and next the resulting DCS beating signal was recorded with an oscilloscope (see Experimental Section). Along with the lower-frequency DCS beating signal, we measured its high-frequency portion (near f rep ) using an RF spectrum analyzer to quantify the timing stability. At injection currents of approximately ∼360 mA and bias voltages of ∼1.3 V, the devices developed 6 mW of optical power with ∼0.5 THz 10 dB bandwidths (Figure Because the DCS technique gives access to the crosscorrelation of the combs' electric fields, some of the temporal characteristics can be retrieved directly from the beating signal. To achieve that, we analyzed the time-domain electrical IFG shown in Figure The free-running dual-comb spectrum measured within 1 ms shows beat notes with signal-to-noise ratios (SNRs) reaching up to 25 dB (Figure The symmetric broadening around the comb's center wavelength suggests the existence of a fixed point Spectral properties and tunability: For future application in spectroscopy, it is of practical relevance to characterize the spectral characteristics at different injection currents. This is because semiconductor microcombs often exhibit complex nonlinear dynamics that give rise to highly modulated optical spectra at some biases. Another motivation stems from the attractive perspective of going beyond the coarse GHz mode spacing to perform interleaved gap-less spectroscopy Unlike in many other comb platforms at MIR wavelengths, the spectral evolution exhibited by the QWDLs (Figure The so-called carrier grating formed inside the cavity periodically depletes the gain due to standing wave effects, with the period directly proportional to the modal wavelength. However, when the period is too long while carrier diffusion is too slow (i.e. at high injection currents when stimulated emission decreases the carrier lifetime), the laser cannot sustain single-mode lasing. Intuitively, at longer wavelengths this effect will trigger multi-mode lasing more easily, which is a prerequisite for an FP diode laser to become an OFC. To quantify this effect, we have employed a numerical SHB model proposed by Dong et al., which includes carrier saturation effects and a shortening of the carrier lifetime due to stimulated emission 21 (see Experimental Section for parameters used in the simulation). Although it is difficult to exactly predict the multimode emission threshold triggered by SHB, we can compare thresholds for devices employing the same QW medium but operating at different wavelengths One of the key spectral characteristics of the presented MIR QWDL is the lack of spectral gaps or multi-lobed envelopes that often arise due to severe (uncontrolled) modal leakage into the substrate In the proof-of-principle experiment, each QWDL was biased directly from an AA battery without any control circuitry (also thermal) or microwave generators. Except for slightly lowering the spectral overlap and optical bandwidths due to the lower injection currents, other comb parameters remained virtually the same (Figure Gain and dispersion: Another important aspect of the MIR QWDLs combs is their GVD, as it governs the ability to phase-lock the longitudinal modes via FWM Incorporation of this vertical dispersion compensation scheme requires a careful (empirical) choice of clad thickness. Prior works on leaky mode GaSb ICLs have shown that an insufficiently thick clad layer yields a strongly modulated gain spectrum (as well as gaininduced GVD) In conclusion, we have demonstrated a mid-infrared chip-scale frequency comb platform exploiting the type-I quantum well interband laser medium. The free-running stability exhibited by the lasers allows us to perform mode-resolved sub-THz-wide DCS around 3.04 μm. The devices develop single-lobed smooth spectra with excellent tunability and show the potential for future gap-less interleaved spectroscopic measurements of spectrally-narrow molecular absorbers like acetylene (C 2 H 2 ) or hydrogen cyanide (HCN). Particularly attractive is the low compliance voltage accompanied by low power consumption (< 1 W), which was used to demonstrate the first batteryoperated MIR dual-comb source. When merged with room-temperature interband cascade photodetectors Although in this DCS demonstration we used two physical laser chips, two combs on the same chip are also possible. They would constitute a battery-operated MIR dual-comb generator with significant common-mode noise suppression Dual-comb beating: A pair of QWDL devices cleaved from the same wafer but different bars was slightly detuned temperature by using thermoelectric coolers (∆T = 3 K) to increase the repetition rate difference ∆frep and maximize spectral overlap. In the first experiment, the injection currents and temperatures were controlled by a pair of D2-105 drivers (Vescent Photonics). In the batteryoperated demonstration, however, no injection current control was used at all -the diodes were supplied directly from the AA battery's terminals. The optical beams from the two combs were first guided through optical isolators, next attenuated using irises, and finally focused onto a fast thermoelectrically-cooled photodetector (PVI-4TE-3.4, VIGO) equipped with a 2.2 GHz-bandwidth transimpedance preamplifier. Excellent match between the detector responsivity characteristics and the source wavelength ensured high signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) of the electrical beating signal captured by a Lecroy WavePro7Zi-A oscilloscope configured in oversampling 11-bit resolution mode. Because of its limited 1.5 GHz electrical bandwidth, the microwave dual-comb spectra possess a rapid roll-off above 1500 MHz. Spatial hole burning modeling: The multimode operation threshold was estimated from the SHB model developed by Dong et al. The device labeled as SIG was biased below threshold at 30 • C. The collimated ASE light was guided into the step-scan Fourier Transform spectrometer in the same configuration as in the SWIFTS experiment. A low-bandwidth lock-in amplifier (SRS830, Stanford Instruments) was used to measure the interferometrically-modulated light (100 ms time constant). The GVD was retrieved from the second derivative of the roundtrip IFG burst phase spectrum. It should be noted that while the modal leakage effect shows high reproducibility of the modulation period (due to the same substrate thickness and modal indices), it displays lower in the location of peaks and troughs. Therefore, devices from the same wafer may possess low-GVD region slightly detuned from one another.