Simulations of complex-valued Hopfield networks based on spin-torque oscillators can recover phase-encoded images. Sequences of memristor-augmented inverters provide tunable delay elements that implement complex weights by phase shifting the oscillatory output of the oscillators. Pseudo-inverse training suffices to store at least 12 images in a set of 192 oscillators, representing 16 × 12 pixel images. The energy required to recover an image depends on the desired error level. For the oscillators and circuitry considered here, 5 % root mean square deviations from the ideal image require approximately 5 μs and consume roughly 130 nJ. Simulations show that the network functions well when the resonant frequency of the oscillators can be tuned to have a fractional spread less than 10 -3 , depending on the strength of the feedback. The need to realize energy-efficient, high-density, and high-speed computing is driven by the explosive emergence of big data Neural activity in the brain has inspired a variety of ways to encode information to make processing it more efficient. Mimicking spiking behavior has led to spike-based neural networks that encode and process information based on the strength, rate, and timing of spiking signals One approach to synchronized-oscillator-based artificial associative memories is to physically realize binary Hopfield networks There have been several advances in the computational power of Hopfield networks since their original proposal Physically realizing oscillators can be done with CMOS technology alone Spin-torque oscillators based on magnetic tunnel junctions (MTJs) consist of a stack of two ferromagnetic layers separated by a thin tunnel barrier insulator For memory applications, tunnel junctions are formed so that the parallel and antiparallel configurations of the free layer are energetically favored. Any perturbations of these states give rise to oscillations in the magnetization of the free layer, which decay after the external perturbations are removed Computing with oscillators typically involves coupling them together with controllable interactions. There is significant research into physically coupling spintronic oscillators through magnetostatic or exchange interactions In addition to the spin-torque oscillator, efficient implementations of Hopfield networks require local memory. We implement such memory with memristors, which are programmable two-terminal nonvolatile resistors with history-dependent resistances We model a continuous-time Hopfield network using specific models for these two emerging technologies. We implement the neurons with spin-torque oscillators based on CoFeB/MgO/CoFeB magnetic tunnel junctions The Hopfield network proposed in Ref. Here, we implement a complex Hopfield network with a physical model of frequency-synchronized coupled oscillators, specifically vortex-based spin-torque oscillators, as depicted in Fig. Training a coupled-oscillator-based complex Hopfield network to store a set of vectors requires setting the complex weights in the feedback loop. Then, the trained network is used to recover stored images from distorted versions of those images. We start by describing the retrieval of stored images using an already trained complex Hopfield oscillator network and return to a discussion of training at the end of this section. The retrieval procedure consists of two stages, a preparation stage, which uses the circuit schematically illustrated in Fig. Ignoring small changes in the amplitude of the oscillations, the voltage oscillations of the ith oscillator can be parameterized by a unit complex number âi , as shown in Fig. After each oscillator individually phase locks to its input signal with a phase encoding the trial image, the external AC drives are turned off while the feedback circuit is turned on to start the recognition stage. The feedback circuit used in the recognition phase, implemented by delay-and-scaling networks, is schematically illustrated in Fig. The feedback causes the phases of the oscillators to adjust relative to each other and to settle into the relative phases corresponding to the stored image that is closest to the noisy input image.The oscillator state âi evolves continuously towards the instantaneous values of sgn(z i ) with a rate d âi /dt dependent on âi and z i , as depicted in Fig. The feedback circuit used in the recognition phase is shown schematically in Fig. We demonstrate the two-stage retrieval process by simulating an array of N = 192 vortex-based spintorque oscillators. The complex weight elements encode K = 12 images, each with 16 × 12 pixels, shown in Fig. The complex-valued weights w ij are set so that when the network of oscillators is connected in the feedback configuration, the original vectors stored on the oscillator array correspond to fixed points of the oscillator dynamics. A wide selection of learning rules is available. Non-iterative rules such as Hebbian Here, xk i are unit complex-numbers encoding the ith pixel of the kth image to be stored on the oscillator array. Ref. When the oscillator network is connected in the feedback configuration using the weights, w ij , the phases, described by âi , continuously evolve toward the steady-state phase-locked condition, as shown in Fig. We simulate the performance of the network described in Sec. 2 assuming ideal performance of the feedback network for the synapses and the behavior of the spin-torque oscillators described in Appendix A. The total current injected into each oscillator j is a sum of the DC bias current I DC Here κ is a coupling constant that controls the strength of the injected feedback current. Figs. 4(a) and (b) show representative snapshots at various labeled time intervals during the two stages of the retrieval cycle, preparation and recognition. In Fig. Similarly, when presented with an incomplete image, the network can retrieve the complete image. The recognition stage of such a retrieval cycle is shown in Fig. We characterize the error between a retrieved image and the kth stored image as where φ j is the phase of the jth pixel in the retrieved image and φ k j is the corresponding phase in the stored image. This complicated expression is simply describing the root mean square difference in the phases between the stored and retrieved images. The complications arise from the facts that the relative phases must be between -π and π and that the overall relative phase does not matter as shown in Fig. The primary assumption used in the analysis thus far is that all oscillators run at a set fixed frequency. While it is possible to achieve phase and frequency locking of oscillators in the presence of small frequency variations between the oscillators, large variations cause desynchronization resulting in a failed retrieval process. Fig. The simulations thus far assume perfect implementation of offline-trained weights. In the presence of nonideal writing, layout-related delay differences between synapses, and device-to-device variations, the synapses may produce a different value of delay and scaling than intended. These errors can be iteratively corrected to ensure proper storage of images on the oscillator array. A typical iterative procedure to correct the implemented weights is shown in Fig. where η is the learning rate. The weight update is carried out at the end of each iteration provided the total accumulated error is greater than the acceptable tolerance. An example of the reduction of error with every weight update iteration is shown in Fig. This section describes the detailed circuitry required to realize a complex Hopfield network using spin torque oscillators. The network is composed of neuron and synapse circuits which are recurrently connected as shown in Fig. Detailed versions of the neuron circuits are shown in Fig. The output signal is converted into a square wave by a preamplifier circuit shown in Fig. (e) connected and increased in size relative to the minimum at the chosen technology node to setup a bias current, which is mirrored into the second branch. The second branch uses this bias current to generate the appropriate bias voltage for the next two branches which form a two-stage amplifier. The third and fourth branches are connected in a common source topology, in which the n-channel MOSFET behaves as the input gain element, while the p-channel MOSFET behaves like a current source. The last branch, which is an inverter, produces a full-swing (0 V to V DDH ) square wave output. In order to achieve sufficiently high gains, the transistors forming the gain stages of the preamplifier are sized to be twice the minimum length for the particular technology model we use to simulate the circuits. The final part of the preamplifier consists of two appropriately sized inverters operating at a reduced supply voltage V DDL = 0.35 V to match the synaptic circuit. The output is fanned out to the synaptic elements. The output of the preamplifier, denoted by V Amp i , is shown in Fig. A key feature of this network is the energy efficiency of the synaptic circuits that allow the implementation of complex weights for the feedback currents. The synaptic circuits consist of a time delay network and an amplitude scaling network as shown in Figs. Additional parasitics in the time delay network, such the capacitance of the memristor, would increase the energy cost of producing delays while also affecting the range of achievable delays. However, typical memristor parasitic capacitances are a fraction of the gate capacitances used in this study The scaled synaptic current is generated by feeding the inverted and non-inverted outputs of the delay cells to a differential transconductance amplifier, as shown in Fig. The oscillator phases are most affected by frequency components of I AC i that are close to the oscillator's set frequency. Feedback components not in the range of the oscillator's locking frequencies, in particular, higher harmonics, have a weaker effect on the oscillator dynamics as long as their amplitude is low. We have tested the oscillator model we use by simulating the injection of sine waves, triangle waves, and square waves. All give similar locking ranges. We conclude from these simulations that for the size of the input currents we consider, I Syn ij in Fig. Representative waveform outputs measured at various nodes labeled in Fig. The synaptic weights are stored in memristors that control the phase shifting and the scaling of the feedback current. Fig. For the technology we simulate, Fig. We have theoretically demonstrated inference on a spin-torque-oscillator-based complex Hopfield network with 192 oscillators. The goal of this paper is to establish the requirements on device performance and reproducibility that would enable the implementation of this and related networks. While the CMOS circuitry we use can be readily fabricated, the spin-torque oscillators and memristors we simulate are beyond the current state of the art. In this section, we discuss some of the current limitations that need to be ‡ Certain commercial products or company names are identified here to describe our study adequately. Such identification is not intended to imply recommendation or endorsement by the National Institute of Standards and Technology, nor is it intended to imply that the products or names identified are necessarily the best available for the purpose. addressed. Hopefully, this discussion can guide future development efforts designed at taking advantage of spin-torque oscillators and memristors. There are several obstacles to the immediate implementation of this approach. The first is the ability to synchronize a large number of spin-torque oscillators. Current experimental demonstrations of electrically synchronizing spin-torque oscillators are limited to a few oscillators with synchronization times limited to a few milliseconds One aspect that is important to investigate before realizing oscillator networks in practice is noise. Spin-torque oscillators operating at finite temperatures have phase noise The CMOS components used in the feedback circuitry also introduce noise. This contribution can be particularly significant to the feedback currents that are in the range of a few nanoamperes. We performed SPICE simulations including thermal noise arising from the CMOS scaling network and determined that the thermal noise amplitudes have an root mean square value of 15 nA, thus being comparable to the feedback currents arising from the scaling network. However, because the oscillator locking range is restricted to a megahertz or less depending on the strength of the feedback, the presence of a broadband noise such as that arising from thermal sources has little effect on its frequency locking behavior, as we have checked in simulations of the oscillators. Consequently, we expect that CMOS noise has little impact on the network performance provided feedback currents are not made too small. Another obstacle is programming the memristors used to provide local memory in the network. We require analog control of memristor resistances to encode the complex weights and to control the bias currents of the individual oscillators in the case that oscillators need to be individually tuned to match their frequencies. Local analog memory using memristors is an active area of research We have not included memristor programming and control circuitry in Fig. If it were possible to fabricate oscillators with a sufficiently low frequency spread, this paper shows that low power CMOS circuitry can be used to couple them in ways to enable energy-efficient processing. Identifying paths to increase the efficiency of this approach is complicated by the combination of technologies involved. The power shown in Fig. Power consumed by the spin-torque oscillators could be reduced further by scaling down the dimensions of the oscillators. Again, the scaling arguments are not simple for several reasons. Larger current densities are required to sustain oscillations as spin-torque oscillators are scaled down Non-linear oscillators could be implemented using alternative technologies such as spin-Hall oscillators There has been significant recent progress in developing more powerful Hopfield networks by implementing energy functions with terms with higher powers of the neuron states than quadratic The all-to-all connections in this type of network make it most suitable for storing information in which each "pixel" is strongly correlated with each other one. One possible way to improve the performance of Hopfield networks for image processing could be to take advantage of the locality of information in images. In existing implementations, each pixel is connected equally strongly to all other pixels no matter how close they are spatially. Neural networks This section discusses several different lines of development needed for the hardware implementations of Hopfield networks proposed here. A key enabler will be advances in manufacturing uniformity and reliability for both spin-torque oscillators and memristors as these technologies transition from laboratories to fabrication facilities. Our results show that it is possible for hardware implementations of Hopfield networks to encode multilevel or continuous information, the possibility of which greatly increases the types of data that could be usefully stored in such an array. The authors thank Jabez McClelland, Matthew Daniels, Matthew Pufall, and William Borders for critical readings of the paper. Nitin Prasad designed the network and performed the simulations of the circuit and is supported by Quantum Materials for Energy Efficient Neuromorphic Computing, an Energy Frontier Research Center funded by the U.S. DOE, Office of Science, Basic Energy Sciences, under Award DE-SC0019273. Advait Madhavan, who acknowledges support under the Cooperative Research Agreement Award No. 70NANB14H209, through the University of Maryland, and Prashansa Mukim designed and simulated the CMOS circuitry. All authors discussed the results and wrote the paper. There have been several types of spin-torque oscillators that have been experimentally characterized We model the zero-temperature dynamics of the free-layer of the vortex-based spin-torque oscillator using a Thiele approach where The description and values corresponding to the geometry-and material-dependent parameters that appear in Eq. (A.2) are given in Table ) is set to 80 μA so that the spin-torque oscillator produces self-sustained oscillations at 248 MHz. The total injected current I i = I AC i + I DC i (and the corresponding total current densities J i = J AC i + J DC i ), where I AC i is the sum total AC feedback from all synaptic connections. In the network simulations in Sec. 3, we integrate these equations to obtain the time evolution of the vortex cores of the oscillators. The oscillators evolve to a synchronized state determined by their AC feedback currents. To connect Eq. (A.1) to the formulation used in the main text in terms of the complex number âi = e iφi encoding the phase, we write θ i = ωt + φ i . The time dependence of âi is then The DC current is adjusted for each oscillator so that in the absence of an AC current, ω = ω 0 + ω 1 a/b is the chosen operating frequency, where for each oscillator ω 0 , ω 1 , a, and b take values in the DC limit. The time evolution of âi depends on the instantaneous values of θ and ρ and the input AC component of the current through a complicated function determined by Eq. (A.1). Unfortunately, we have not been able to identify a limit in which this function becomes physically transparent. We can gain insight into the phase-locking process by focusing on low order effects. First, consider the case with no AC current so that all parameters in Eq. (A.1) are time independent. Neglecting higher harmonic behaviors, we assume ρ = ρ 0 + ρ 1 cos(ωt + χ) θ = ωt + φ + φ 1 cos(ωt + ζ). The steady state contributions in Eq. (A.1) lead to where a 0 is the part of a due to just the DC current. There are additional contributions to this equation from the static part of quantities like ρ 2 1 cos 2 (ωt + ζ), but they can be neglected because φ 1 and ρ 1 are small. The equation of motion for ρ becomes -ωρ 1 sin(ωt + χ) = a 0 ρ 1 cos(ωt + χ) -3bρ 2 0 ρ 1 cos(ωt + χ) -c cos(ωt + φ), (A.4) where we neglect the φ 1 cos(ωt+ζ) inside the cos because it leads to higher harmonics and static contributions that are higher order in φ 1 . Using the static results and noting that a 0 ω gives ρ 1 ≈ c/ω, which is small because c ω, and χ ≈ φ + π/2. After cancelling the static parts and neglecting higher harmonics, the equation of motion for θ becomes -ωφ 1 sin(ωt + ζ) = 2ω 1 ρ 0 ρ 1 cos(ωt + χ) + c ρ 0 sin(ωt + φ). Substituting π/2+φ for χ and c/ω for ρ 1 , collecting terms, and simplifying gives φ 1 ≈ c/(ωρ 0 ) and ζ = φ+π. This fixes all parameters of steady precession in the absence of AC currents except for the arbitrary phase φ. Adding in the AC current fixes φ relative to the phase of the AC input. Numerical simulations consistently give φ = π/2 in the phase-locked state. The small values we find for δ 1 and θ 1 mean that the precession is very circular in this regime and the AC voltage output very sinusoidal. These results indicate which parameters in Eq. (A.1) determine different aspects of the motion. The steady state results, Eq. (A.3) show that the damping-like torque, through a, and the damping, primarily through b, determine the steady state radius of gyration, ρ 0 and the frequency ω. The frequency-dependent contribution, which distorts the circular orbit, as seen in ρ 1 and φ 1 in Eq. (A.4), enters through the field-like torque parameter, c. With no AC current present, the overall phase of the oscillation, φ is undetermined. Introducing an AC current adds an AC driving term through a into Eq. (A.1). The only terms in Eq. (A.1) that depend on the phase of the gyration are those derived from the field-like torque. Thus, the strength of the field-like torque determines how quickly the phase locks to the phase of the AC driving current. Assuming that the fixed layer is magnetized in-plane along the x-direction, the variation resistance of the spin-torque oscillator as a function of the oscillating core coordinates is ∆R = λξ∆R 0 ρ sin(θ). (A.5) Here, λ is the average magnetization to vortex displacement ratio, taken to be 2/3, ξ = ±1 depending on the helicity and the direction of oscillation of the vortex core. ∆R 0 = (R AP -R P )/2, with R AP and R P being the resistance of the MTJ when the free layer is magnetized entirely antiparallel and parallel, respectively, with respect to the fixed layer.