Measurements of the thermal Hall conductivity in hole-doped cuprates have shown that phonons acquire chirality in a magnetic field, both in the pseudogap phase and in the Mott insulator state. The microscopic mechanism at play is still unclear. A number of theoretical proposals are being considered, including skew scattering of phonons by various defects, the coupling of phonons to spins, and a state of loop-current order with the appropriate symmetries, but more experimental information is required to constrain theoretical scenarios. Here we present our study of the thermal Hall conductivity κxy in the electron-doped cuprates Nd2-xCexCuO4 and Pr2-xCexCuO4, for dopings across the phase diagram, from x = 0, in the insulating antiferromagnetic phase, up to x = 0.17, in the metallic phase above optimal doping. We observe a large negative thermal Hall conductivity at all dopings, in both materials. Since heat conduction perpendicular to the CuO2 planes is dominated by phonons, the large thermal Hall conductivity we observe in electron-doped cuprates for a heat current in that direction must also be due to phonons, as in hole-doped cuprates. However, the degree of chirality, measured as the ratio |κxy/κxx|, where κxx is the longitudinal thermal conductivity, is much larger in the electron-doped cuprates. We discuss various factors that may be involved in the mechanism that confers chirality to phonons in cuprates, including short-range spin correlations. The thermal Hall effect is a promising tool for obtaining information on the nature of excitations in quantum materials. The thermal Hall conductivity κ xy is obtained by measuring the transverse temperature difference (along the y axis) produced by a magnetic field applied along the z axis, perpendicular to the heat current (along the x axis). Electrons give rise to a thermal Hall signal in metals, due to the Lorentz force, for the same reason they produce an electrical Hall effect. In recent years, it has become clear that insulators can also give rise to a thermal Hall signal, even though their excitations are charge neutral. Magnons can produce a thermal Hall effect under certain conditions Phonons can also give rise to a thermal Hall signal, even if they are charge neutral excitations. The first observation of a phonon thermal Hall effect was in the paramagnetic insulator Tb 3 Ga 5 O 12 In hole-doped cuprates, a large negative κ xy signal was observed in the pseudogap phase below the critical doping p In La 2 CuO 4 , phonons were shown to be responsible for the thermal Hall effect by applying a heat current normal to the CuO 2 planes, a direction in which only phonons can move easily, which revealed that the c-axis thermal Hall conductivity, κ zy , is comparable in magnitude to the in-plane conductivity, κ xy The question is this: by what mechanism can a magnetic field confer chirality -here defined as handedness in a magnetic field -to phonons, and thus produce a thermal Hall effect, in cuprates, and more generally in insulators? A number of theoretical proposals have recently been made, including the scattering of phonons by defects tries To shed new light on the thermal Hall effect in cuprates, we have conducted a systematic study of the thermal Hall conductivity in the electron-doped cuprates Nd 2-x Ce x CuO 4 (NCCO) and Pr 2-x Ce x CuO 4 (PCCO). There are two important differences between electrondoped and hole-doped cuprates: the mysterious pseudogap phase of the latter, characterized by a partial spectral weight depletion in the antinodal region of the Fermi surface In this paper, we show that there is a large negative thermal Hall conductivity in the electron-doped cuprates that persists up to the highest doping we have investigated (x = 0.17). Because a large thermal Hall signal is still observed when the heat current is applied normal to the CuO 2 planes, we conclude that phonons are responsible for it. Indeed, all other heat-carring excitations (of electronic or magnetic origin) are expected to be much more mobile within the CuO 2 planes than across planes Single crystals of Nd 2-x Ce x CuO 4 with x = 0.04, 0.10, 0.11 and 0.17 were grown at Stanford University by the traveling-solvent floating-zone method in O 2 and annealed in flowing argon for 48 hours at 900 • C. A single crystal of Pr 2-x Ce x CuO 4 with x = 0.15 was grown at the University of Maryland using the flux growth method with flowing argon and a titanium getter at 900 • for 4 days Samples were cut into rectangular platelets and contacts were made with silver epoxy, diffused at 500°C under oxygen for 1 h. The in-plane samples have their lengths (and current direction) along the a axis (J a x), i.e. parallel to the CuO 2 planes of the tetragonal structure. Sample dimensions are roughly (500 -1000) × (500 -1000) × (50 -200) (length between contacts × width × thickness, in μm). We also studied thermal transport for heat current applied along the c-axis (J c z), for NCCO at x = 0.04 and x = 0.17. To do so, we cut two samples from the same single crystal (distinct from the crystal used for the in-plane transport study): one with the longest direction along the c axis and the other along the a axis. In addition to the annealed samples mentioned above, we also measured two as-grown (unannealed) samples, with x = 0.04 and 0.10, respectively -to investigate the effect of oxygen reduction on the thermal transport properties of NCCO. The dimensions are (1320 × 1250 × 150) μm and (700 × 550 × 670) μm for x = 0.04 and x = 0.10 respectively. For x < 0.13, the reduction process removes some of the non-stoichiometric excess oxygen atoms that lie naturally in apical positions of the structure in asgrown samples The thermal conductivity κ xx is measured by applying a heat current J x along the x axis of the sample (longest direction), which generates a longitudinal temperature difference ∆T x = T + -T -. The thermal conductivity κ xx is given by where J x is the heat current, w is the sample width, t its thickness and L the distance between T + and T -. When a magnetic field is applied parallel to z, a transverse temperature difference ∆T y can develop along the y axis. The thermal Hall conductivity κ xy is then defined as In a tetragonal system (like NCCO and PCCO), we can take κ yy = κ xx . The temperature differences ∆T x and ∆T y were measured using type-E thermocouples (chromel-constantan), in a steady-state method at fixed magnetic field H (see refs. 12, 13, 27), since such thermocouples have a weak field dependence in the regime of T and H values explored here, and they have a better sensitivity than resistive Cernox sensors at high temperature. (Note that in a previous test we found no difference between a κ xy measurement using thermocouples and a κ xy measurement on the same sample using Cernox sensors -see Appendix C in ref. For the measurements of κ zy presented here, the heat current J was sent along the c axis of the single crystal (along z), perpendicular to the CuO 2 planes. By applying a magnetic field H along the a axis (along x), parallel to the CuO 2 planes, a transverse temperature difference is generated along y. The longitudinal thermal conductivity along the c axis is then given by κ zz = (J z /∆T z ) (L/wt). The out-of-plane thermal Hall conductivity is defined as κ zy = -κ yy (∆T y /∆T z ) (L/w), where κ yy is the longitudinal thermal conductivity along the y axis, again taken to be equal to κ xx for a tetragonal system. More details can be found in ref. The longitudinal thermal conductivity κ xx and the thermal Hall conductivity κ xy of our samples are displayed in Fig. The data in Figs. pared to the measured κ xx and κ xy , especially at low temperature, being less than 10 % at T < 40 K. It is instructive to look at the ratio κ xy /κ xx , plotted as a function of temperature in Fig. In order to confirm that phonons are indeed the heat carriers responsible for the negative thermal Hall effect in NCCO and PCCO, we investigated the thermal Hall response for a heat current sent along the c axis, normal to the CuO 2 planes. In such a direction, the only excitations in the material that have non-negligible mobility are the phonons, as argued in Ref. The thermal transport data for this comparative study are displayed in Fig. Surprisingly, this enhanced conductivity is accompanied by a decrease of |κ xy | (Fig. Corresponding data for the sample with x = 0.10 (Fig. We observe a large negative thermal Hall conductivity κ xy in the electron-doped cuprates NCCO and PCCO, for all dopings from the insulator at x = 0 to the metal at x = 0.17. After summarizing the arguments for why phonons are the heat carriers responsible for this κ xy signal, we discuss the implications of our findings regarding the underlying mechanism that makes phonons chiral in cuprates -by which we simply mean that they produce a thermal Hall effect in the presence of a magnetic field perpendicular to the heat current. The similarity of κ xy data at the various dopings strongly suggests a single unified scenario -the same heat carriers and the same microscopic mechanism at all dopings. The negative κ xy signal we detect is certainly not due to electrons at low doping, for our sample with x = 0.04 is electrically insulating. Nor is it due to magnons at high doping, for our samples at x = 0.15 and x = 0.17 are outside the phase of long-range AF order. So we can rule out electrons and magnons as the heat carriers responsible for the thermal Hall effect in electron-doped cuprates across the full doping range.This leaves phonons as the only obvious candidate. The fact that the curve of κ xy vs T peaks at the same temperature as the phonon-dominated κ xx vs T certainly suggests that phonons are responsible for κ xy . (Note that in holedoped cuprates (LSCO, EU-LSCO), κ xy vs T also peaks at T ∼ 20 K, which is typically the temperature at which the phonon thermal conductivity κ xx peaks What essentially proves that it is phonons that carry the thermal Hall effect is our study of heat transport along the c axis, a direction in which only phonons can carry heat with significant mobility, where we also observe a large degree of chirality (Figs. It is likely that the phonon thermal Hall effect in cuprates is due to the skew scattering of phonons off some impurities or defects. The original observation of a phonon Hall effect, in the insulator Tb 3 Ga 5 O 12 The first point to stress is that there are no structural domains in NCCO or PCCO, as these materials retain their tetragonal structure at all temperatures. So scattering of phonons off structural domain boundaries is ruled out (including those associated with the AF order, as there is no long-range order in our samples with x = 0.15 and 0.17.) The next observation is the striking similarity between κ xy data on NCCO and PCCO (Figs. The larger degree of chirality in NCCO with x > 0 compared to Nd 2 CuO 4 (x = 0) suggests that adding Ce ions into the structure favours phonon chirality. Could it be that the scattering of phonons by Ce impurities enhances the κ xy signal in cuprates? This possibilitythat Ce atoms are effective skew scatterers of phonons in cuprates -should be tested deliberately, in future work. Note that κ xx does decrease with increasing Ce content (Fig. Our study of the effect of annealing revealed that excess oxygen atoms on apical locations in the lattice scatter phonons (decrease κ xx ) and enhance the degree of chirality (increase |κ xy /κ xx |)-at least at x = 0.04 (Fig. Of course, there are other impurities and defects in NCCO and PCCO beyond Ce ions and apical oxygens. The question is what types of defects -and in what environment -will produce the necessary skew scattering. This is being explored theoretically (e.g. We propose that the mechanism of phonon chirality might involve the combination of local defects and local spins, or short-range magnetic correlations. The defects would locally distort the spin environment and generate a local spin chirality that would result in skew scattering of phonons when a field is applied. This would imply that non-magnetic insulators would not have a phonon Hall effect. (An immediate counter example is SrTiO 3 , and so for this particular quantum paraelectric material, another mechanism would need to be invoked -presumably involving high electric polarizability and structural domain boundaries.) Electron-doped vs hole-doped cuprates It is instructive to compare electron-doped cuprates with hole-doped cuprates. Both exhibit a negative phonon thermal Hall effect, which is independent of whether the sample is inside or outside the regime of long-range AF order. The temperature dependence of κ xy is very similar in the two families of cuprates, as illustrated in Fig. There are two important differences. First, a quantitative difference: the magnitude of |κ xy /κ xx | is significantly larger in electron-doped cuprates, by a factor 4 or so (Table I). We see three possible ingredients that may be relevant. Electron-doped cuprates contain Ce atoms, which may act as skew scatterers. Also, they do not have apical oxygens in their pristine structure, so impurity atoms in those locations -present even in annealed samplesact as scattering centers, which, as argued above, appear to increase the degree of phonon chirality. Finally, antiferromagnetism is more pronounced in electron-doped cuprates, in the sense that the phase of long-range AF order extends to much higher doping -up to x 0.13 in NCCO vs p 0.02 in LSCO -and short-range AF correlations in NCCO persist beyond that limit, up to x = 0.17 Note that another difference between electron-doped and hole-doped cuprates is the field dependence of κ xx and κ xy , shown for NCCO in Fig. The second important difference is qualitative. In NCCO, a sizable negative κ xy signal persists up to the highest doping (x = 0.17), but this is not the case in the hole-doped materials Nd-LSCO and Eu-LSCO: at a doping p = 0.24, just above the pseudogap critical point at p = 0.23 Considering all aspects of this discussion, we are led to propose that the mechanism of phonon chirality in cuprates, responsible for the phonon thermal Hall effect in both hole-doped and electron-doped materials, relies on the combination of scattering by defects and shortrange AF correlations. In other words, the scattering of phonons by defects becomes skew scattering (in a field) when there are local spins at or near the defect location. This would imply that short-range AF correlations are present in the pseudogap phase of hole-doped cuprates but absent (or weak) outside, as indeed found in recent experimental studies of LSCO We have measured the thermal conductivity κ xx and the thermal Hall conductivity κ xy of the electron-doped cuprates NCCO and PCCO across their phase diagram. We observe a large negative thermal Hall conductivity over the whole doping range, from x = 0 in the Mott insulating state up to at least x = 0.17 in the metallic state. We show that this negative signal is carried by phonons. We find that the degree of chirality, measured by the ratio |κ xy /κ xx |, is enhanced by addition of Ce to Nd 2 CuO 4 and by having excess oxygen atoms at apical locations of the NCCO lattice. Both of these defects therefore appear to be effective skew scatterers. In comparison to hole-doped cuprates, electron-doped cuprates have a significantly larger ratio |κ xy /κ xx |, perhaps because neither of the two skew scattering processes just mentioned are present in the former. The fact that a sizable phonon κ xy signal persists up to the highest measured doping in electron-doped NCCO (x = 0.17) but vanishes above the critical doping p in hole-doped Nd-LSCO points to an intrinsic property of the pseudogap phase in the latter, only present below p . We suggest that this property could be short-range AF correlations. a (J c) b (as grown)