Empty liquids represent a wide class of materials whose constituents arrange in a random network through reversible bonds. Many key insights on the physical properties of empty liquids have originated almost independently from the study of colloidal patchy particles on one side, and a large body of theoretical and experimental research on water on the other side. Patchy particles represent a family of coarse-grained potentials that allows for a precise control of both the geometric and the energetic aspects of bonding, while water has arguably the most complex phase diagram of any pure substance, and a puzzling amorphous phase behavior. It was only recently that the exchange of ideas from both fields has made it possible to solve long-standing problems and shed new light on the behavior of empty liquids. Here we highlight the connections between patchy particles and water, focusing on the modelling principles that make an empty liquid behave like water, including the factors that control the appearance of thermodynamic and dynamic anomalies, the possibility of liquid-liquid phase transitions, and the crystallization of open crystalline structures. In contrast to simple liquids, whose properties are determined by hard-core repulsive interactions (and which find in the hard-sphere model From a physics point of view, the renewed interest in patchy colloids has brought to the attention of the scientific community several unexpected phenomena. Without trying to be exhaustive we mention: (i) the effect of tuning the valence (the number of possible patch-patch bonds) on the gas-liquid (colloidal poor -colloidal rich) phase separation (vii) The possibility to design quasicrystal and open ordered structures through a proper selection of the number of patches and their angular position Many of the new ideas developed in the study of patchy particle models have then found their way back to the study of water Accurate descriptions of these properties can only be obtained by resorting to computationally expensive models of water Here we will review some of the key design principles of patchy particles models that have successfully been applied to understand the strange behaviour of water. We first introduce some general properties of patchy parti-FIG. cles, highlighting what are the minimal ingredients that are needed to make a fluid behaving like water. In particular we will characterize water as an empty liquid, and study the conditions that give rise to a liquid-liquid transition, a transition between two liquid forms differing in their density. We will then study the connection with water's thermodynamic anomalies, and see how they also emerge naturally from the properties of the underlying tetrahedral network. We will then focus on the crystal phase, and see how the solid-liquid phase transition is affected by the parameters of patchy particles potentials. We will also highlight the conditions that disfavor the crystalline state, and illustrate two important properties that emerge from this suppression, i.e. ultra-stable liquids The property that first comes to mind when thinking about the uncommon behaviour of water is the density maximum at 4 • C at ambient pressure. The maximum density is around ρ m = 1 g/cm 3 , and it is not as high as the name would suggest. To compare this density with that of other liquids it is convenient to express the number density ρ in non-dimensional units, selecting as unit of length the nearest neighbour distance σ (the position of the first peak in the radial distribution function) The choice σ = 0.28 nm, gives for water ρσ 3 0.73. Typical values for simple liquids are instead of the order of ρσ 3 1. For example, ρσ 3 1.05 for liquid argon at T = 87K, ρσ 3 1.37 for benzene, ρσ 3 0.95 for methanol at ambient conditions. In the following we will use non-dimensional units for temperature T * (T * = k B T / , where is the typical interaction energy) and scaled number density (ρ * = ρσ 3 ). How hard it is to have liquids with low densities? For particles interacting with spherically symmetric attractive interactions (in addition to the hard core repulsion), the width of the liquid-gas phase separation at sufficiently low temperatures is quite wide in the T -ρ plane, precluding the possibility of having a low-density stable liquid phase. To illustrate this point, in Fig. Thus Fig. The structure of liquid water is that of a tetrahedral network held together by short-range directional interactions, i.e. hydrogen bonds. From a statistical mechanics point of view, the bonding between two particles can be viewed as a competition between the energy gained from the formation of the bond and the entropy loss due to the reduction in configurational volume that occurs when the FIG. two particles are constrained to stay close relative to each other. With we will denote the typical bonding energy between two objects. We also define the bonding volume V b as the volume available for bonding between two particles. For example, in the case of spherical particles of diameter σ interacting with a square well potential of width δ, the bonding volume is is the depth of the potential well. The bonding energy in unit of k B T controls the lifetime of bonds (τ ) with an Arrhenius law τ ∼ exp( /k B T ). The bonding volume instead controls the entropy loss per particle after bonding ∆s ∼ k B ln V b /(V /N ) = k B ln ρV b , where V /N = ρ -1 is the volume per-particle. The establishment of an extended network occurs when the competition between energy and entropy is balanced For short range attractions, the bonding volume V b is much smaller than the total volume per particle, which means that an extended network will only form at low values of k B T / . The original definition of patchy particles is that of a colloidal particle with attractive spots decorating its surface. Over the years patchy particles have extended beyond the colloidal realm, and have encompassed physical systems where short-range directional interactions play a major role. Patchy particles models are now being used to offer a coarse-grained description of systems as differ-ent as proteins In Figure where r ij is the distance between particle i and j, rα,i is the unit vector which points from the center of particle i to the center of patch α, and V SW (r ij ) is a square well interaction of range σ + δ and depth . The orientationdependent modulation term is described by Thus, this modulation term is different from zero only when the center-to-center distance between two patchy particles intersects the volume of a patch on both particles, as schematically shown in Fig. We already introduced the concept of bonding volume V b as one of the key parameters that controls the aggregation of particles. In the one-patch Kern-Frenkel model the patch bonding volume has a simple expression with parameters describing the width of the angular interaction (cos θ max ) and the range of the attraction (δ). We will show that (in the single bond per patch condition) V b is the only parameter controlling the thermodynamics of amorphous phases at the mean-field level. This means that two patchy particles having different geometries of the patch interactions but the same V b will have the same free energy. Associating fluids are those whose molecules can aggregate to form long-lived structures thanks to intramolecular forces that are stronger than typical dispersion interactions but weaker than covalent bonds. We review here the basic steps to derive a mean-field theory of associating fluids The first assumption is that the aggregating units associate into clusters that do not interact with each other and are in thermodynamic equilibrium. This approximation is called the ideal gas of cluster approximation and allows us to write the pressure of the system as that of an ideal gas in which the number of atoms is substituted by the number of clusters where N c is the total number of clusters. Since clusters of any size are in thermodynamic equilibrium with each other, they can be thought of different species whose composing monomers have the same chemical potential. The chemical potential of a cluster of size n is thus nμ, where μ is the chemical potential of the isolated (not-bonded) monomer, whose value is (assuming for simplicity that the de Broglie thermal wavelength is one) with ρ 1 being the number density of isolated monomers. The second approximation is that every bond in the system reduces the number of clusters by one. In other words a new bond cannot form inside a cluster, but only between two different clusters. This condition is met with the following two requirements: i) two particles cannot be doubly bonded (the one-bond-per-patch condition); ii) bonds within a cluster do not form loops. This is equivalent to an aggregation process on the Bethe lattice, which is a loop-less infinite-dimensional lattice. Both the number of clusters N c and the density of monomers can be expressed in terms of the probability that a bond is formed p b . Let's consider a system of N particles all having the same number of patches M (valence). The maximum number of possible bonds is given by N max = M N/2, and thus p b = N b /N max where N b is the total number of bonds in the system. Within the mean-field approximation, the number of clusters is the total number of particles minus the number of bonds The number density of monomers (clusters of size one) is proportional to the probability that all M sites of the particle are unbounded Putting together the equations above we arrive at an expression for the free energy per particle f = F/N in terms of the bonding probability This free energy can be divided in ideal and bonding contributions The bonding probability is obtained through a massbalance equation, i.e. the ratio between the probability of a formed bond, p b , and an open bond, (1 -p b ) 2 , is expressed as an activation function Identifying where V b is the expression in Eq. 4, and M V b is the bonding volume corresponding to M patches. Equations 10, 11, 13 are the basic equations for a meanfield theory of bonding. While this treatment is of limited accuracy due to the assumptions involved, it provides the correct low-density limit to the free energy. We now briefly describe some improvements that, while retaining the same conditions we introduced for the mean-field model, considerably improve on the accuracy of the results. Wertheim where φ = ρσ 3 π/6 is the packing fraction. The bonding free energy is the same as in the mean-field treatment (Eq. 11), but the bonding probability in Eq. 13 is replaced by where g ref (r) is the radial distribution function of the reference fluid (in this case hard spheres), V (r) is the patch-patch interaction potential, and the integration domain is the bonding volume and ..... indicates a spherical average. It is easily shown that Wertheim's expression (Eq. 15) in the limits of low density (g ref (r) 1) and low temperature (exp (β ) 1) reduces to the mean-field expression in Eq. 13. Wertheim's perturbation theory was originally developed to model associated liquids. Several modeling choices are possible for water. The simplest one is to have particles with four identical patches so that each particle can have up to four bonds: this choice corresponds to putting M = 4 in Eq. 11 and Eq. 15. Another possibility is to model the water molecule as a particle having four bonds of two different colors (see Fig. We note for completeness that recently there have been attempt to extend the Wertheim theory to relax the assumption of single bond per patch conditions and multiple inter-particle bondings Fig. To ease calculations, we have approximated the integral in Eq. 15 by the value of the pair correlation at contact (that for hard spheres is proportional to the pressure of the reference system) The first noticeable effect of reducing the valence is to shift the coexistence curve to lower temperatures and to lower densities. Moreover, differently from the isotropic potentials shown in Fig. In Fig. The possibility of reaching liquids with vanishingly small densities by decreasing the average valence of the system has spurred a lot of research on so-called Empty Liquids In the previous section we have seen that bonding can give rise to a gas-liquid phase transition In the following we will focus on the supercooled behaviour of water, for which several possible scenarios have been proposed The location of the LLCP depends sensibly on the parameters of the model, and can be moved quite arbitrarily by tuning these parameters. What distinguishes the different scenarios for the supercooled water behaviour is the relative location of the LLCP with respect to the liquid-gas phase transition lines. For example, moving the LLCP inside the gas-liquid spinodal region (black shaded region) gives origin to the critical point free scenario In the following we will look for conditions that promote liquid-liquid phase separation. Due to their equivalence, we will not focus on the different scenarios, and instead look for models that in an appropriate range of temperatures give rise to two separate regions of instability (grey and pink shaded regions in Fig. We briefly review here some basic thermodynamic ideas in the context of the Van der Waals fluid, and later see how to extend them to fluids with bonding. The Van der Waals fluid is a mean-field model for the liquid-gas phase separation in simple fluids. The Helmoltz free energy per particle f = F/N is where we have decomposed the free energy in its ideal, repulsive, and attractive contributions in each line respectively. As done previously, here and in the following we assume the thermal length λ = 1. The repulsive contribution is the same (up to the second virial coefficient) as that of hard spheres of volume b, and the attractive contribution is a perturbative correction whose intensity is controlled by a > 0. The Van der Waals model has a critical temperature of T c = 8a 27b and a critical volume v c = 3b. The emergence of liquid-gas phase separation at any T < T c is apparent when plotting the density dependence of the isothermal compressibility Thermodynamic stability requires the Helmoltz free energy to be a convex function of the volume, and thus κ T > 0. In Fig. The free energy of the Wertheim fluid is also divided into ideal (Eq. 10) and hard-sphere (Eq. 14) terms that are purely entropic, and a bonding term which has mixed character and is given by Eq. 11. The contributions of these terms to the isothermal bulk modulus are plotted in Fig. What differentiates the Wertheim fluid from the isotropic potentials like the Van der Waals fluid is the property of the bonding term. Instead of being constant with density, the bonding term has a maximum towards low values of ρ. This causes the bulk modulus to become negative first in this low density region, and it is the reason why phase separation occurs at lower density in patchy models compared to isotropic models. The second important property of Wertheim's bonding term is its low-temperature dependence. Instead of becoming increasingly negative with decreasing temperature, the bonding term converges to a constant profile. This is shown in the blue lines in Fig. These two properties, i.e. the shift to small ρ of the spinodal points and their temperature-independence at low T , explain the empty liquid behaviour of bonded liquids described before. Since both isotropic attractive terms and bonding terms give rise to a liquid-gas phase separation, the former at higher densities than the latter, it would be tempting to describe the second liquid-liquid critical point scenario by combining both terms, i.e. by looking at the phase behaviour of patchy particles that also have an isotropic attraction in addition to a patchy contribution, a modification often employed to describe proteins via coarse-grained approaches In the following we will introduce a mechanism that quite generally allows for the formation of a second region of instability (i.e. a liquid-liquid transition) in bonded liquids that is not encompassed by the previously discussed mean-field or Wertheim approaches. The mean-field theory of bonding and the Wertheim's perturbation approach do not contain information on the geometrical arrangement of patches on the surface of the particle. These approaches give reasonable results when the density is low and the fraction of possible bonds is far from one. But the formation of a tetrahedral network is severely hindered at high densities by geometrical constraints, where packing is not compatible with the tetrahedral bonding geometry. Indeed, increasing the density beyond an optimal value can be achieved only at the expense of breaking some of the bonds. We thus expect the bonding energy to be a non-monotonous function of density. We call the density where, at any given temperature, the bonding energy has a minimum the optimal network forming density We now show that if the optimal density is beyond the liquid-gas coexistence region (which in empty liquids does not extend to high densities) it can give rise to a separate instability region (a liquid-liquid phase separation). We start by taking the expression for the isothermal bulk modulus, Eq. 18, and split the free energy in its energy and entropy contributions. where u = U/N and s = S/N are the internal energy and entropy per particle. At low temperatures the contribution of the entropic term becomes negligible, and the behaviour of the bulk modulus is dominated by the shape of the energy function For example, the steep decrease in energy near the minimum u (ρ 0 ) < 0 or the change of curvature after the minimum u (ρ 0 ) < 0 can destabilize the liquid and promote a second phase separation at sufficiently low temperatures. Energy minima have been found in a variety of tetrahedral patchy models, including the primitive model for water Patchy models allow us also to study the dependence of the energy minimum on the width of the angular interaction. In particular, in the Kern-Frenkel model of Eq. 2 and 3 it is observed that the minimum becomes more and more pronounced as the width of the angular interaction (θ max ) is reduced It was shown To give a concrete example of the previous discussion, we build here a zeroth-order optimal network model by modulating the bonding volume of Eq. 16 with a rapidly decaying function of density where ρ on is the optimal network density and σ on expresses how steep the bonding is suppressed with increasing ρ. The choice of the logistic function in Eq. 21 is in itself arbitrary, and chosen to qualitatively represent the effects of the progressive bond disruption induced by an increase in the packing fraction beyond the optimal packing. In Fig. In order of increasing density, the gas, the low-density liquid, and of the high-density liquid are all delimited by spinodal points. The low-density liquid region is delimited by two spinodal points, and this property is connected with the existence of thermodynamic anomalies. In fact, at the spinodal points the isothermal compressibility β T = 1/κ T diverges, so that between the spinodal points there must be a isothermal compressibility minimum (or a bulk modulus maxima as seen in the bottom panel of Fig. In this section we review what are the general properties of a pair potential that control the location and strength of the energy minimum and the presence of an optimal network density. The general dependence of the liquid-liquid critical parameters on potential softness can be summarized as follows The second potential property that controls liquidliquid phase separation is bond angular flexibility. In the Kern-Frenkel model of Eq. 3, for example, it is controlled by the parameter cos θ max : the higher θ max , the higher is the flexibility in the network. Several simulations studies have shown Bond flexibility appears also at the level of density fluctuations: it was shown that decreasing bond flexibility is accompanied with the emergence of the first diffraction peak (FSDP), with a concurrent increase in the isothermal bulk modulus of the liquid The same network properties have been considered in water. A complete network inter-penetration is seen in ice VI/XV, which structure is composed of two interpenetrating open zeolite-like frameworks, in ice VII/VIII/X, which consist of two interpenetrating cubic ice lattices The concept of network interpenetration could possibly be also of relevance in the description of the dense amorphous form of water, both liquid and glass. In this case, interpenetration should not be identified as completely independent bonding networks (as in the crystal phases) but as two networks close-by in space which are distinct only within a finite distance From the discussions above, we could conclude that the best conditions for the observation of a liquid-liquid transition are obtained with potentials that have a low amount of flexibility. But there is one aspect that we haven't touched so far, and it's the interference of the liquid-crystal transition. We will show that flexibility is also the key factor controlling the crystal-forming ability of reduced valence models, which affects indirectly the possibility of observing a liquid-liquid transition. By liquid anomalies we refer to thermodynamic anomalies, i.e. the anomalous behaviour of the thermodynamic response functions of a fluid that show a non-monotonous change when varying some thermodynamic parameter. The location of maxima or minima in a response function can be used to trace thermodynamic lines on the phase diagram • βT defined as the extremum line of the isothermal compressibility along isobars β T , where ∂β T ∂T P = 0 • cP defined as the extremum line of the specific heat c P along isotherms, where ∂c P ∂P T = 0 Anomalies are usually (but not necessarily) associated with the presence of a critical point, from which lines of maximum compressibility and specific heat emanate Since the LDL liquid is bounded at low and high ρ by two spinodals, it has to develop a specific heat minimum (which corresponds to the cP line in Fig. The cP line is also linked to the ρ line by the following thermodynamic relation cP is thus also the line where the density changes concavity with temperature, and the intersection between the cP and ρ lines is where the density maxima becomes a density minima, as shown schematically in Fig. In summary, liquid anomalies are strongly connected We now look for a connection between the existence of an optimal networks density (a non-monotonous energy function u(ρ)) and the presence of anomalies. Starting from the thermodynamic definition of pressure we write the free energy per particle as f = u -T s, and use the Maxwell relation ∂s ∂v T = ∂P ∂T V to rewrite the previous equation as Re-writing the left hand side as a derivative with respect to density, ρ = 1/v, and remembering that ∂P ∂T V = -∂V ∂T P ∂P ∂V T the first term on the right hand side can be identified with the thermal pressure ∂P/∂T = ακ T ρ 2 ∂u ∂ρ T = -T ακ T + P At each temperature, density extrema are identified by the condition that the thermal expansion coefficient is zero (α = 0), so a density anomaly arises if a density value ρ ext exists for which ρ 2 ∂u ∂ρ T becomes identical to P , i.e. The existence of a line of density anomalies at positive pressure then requires that ∂u/∂ρ > 0 at ρ ext , i.e. a nonmonotonic dependence of the energy vs density curve. Note that for all models a region of ∂u/∂ρ > 0 is expected to exist, when density has increased so much that the repulsive part of the potential has become the dominant contribution to u. But the region of density where ∂u/∂ρ > 0 is commonly embedded inside the glass (or crystal) regions. In the case of empty liquids, ∂u/∂ρ > 0 may instead appear for a density ρ ext well before dynamic arrest takes place. Because α > 0 in a normal liquid, this condition corresponds to the density maximum anomaly. It is an observable density maximum as long as the (ρ, T ) location of the maximum is outside the spinodal region, e.g. for temperatures above the critical point. Eq. 26 can also be satisfied at negative pressures, with the solution usually corresponding to a density minimum. The possibility of measuring a density minimum is subject to the condition that it is not pre-empted by gas cavitation or crystallization of the liquid. To illustrate the connection between the energy minimum and the density anomaly we run simulations of the TIP4P/2005 model of water So far we have entirely focused on the thermodynamic properties of water from the perspective of network fluids, and in particular of tetrahedral networks. Alternative models of the liquid-liquid transition and of thermodynamic anomalies have been built from different, and sometimes complementary, perspectives. Without any pretense to being exhaustive, we briefly summarize some of the most popular approaches. It has long been known that water-like anomalies also appear in particles interacting with isotropic potentials that have two lengthscales, comprising a short-range hard-core repulsion and an intermediate range soft-core repulsion An intermediate approach between the isotropic potentials and the network-based approach is given by the Hydrogen-bond model, where a bonding free energy is added to the var der Waals free energy A pivotal role in the understanding of the different water scenarios has been played by lattice models. We mention here the Sastry's model A different and more microscopic approach to the description of water anomalies is taken by two-state models. The focus of these models is on the structural change that occurs locally to the network of hydrogen-bonded molecules Tetrahedral systems exhibit puzzling crystallization behaviour. For example, water and silica both form tetrahedral networks, but the first one is a crystal-former while the second one is the prototypical glass former. Even before being applied to the liquid-liquid transition in water, tetrahedral patchy models were popular models to study the crystallization of limited-valence colloidal particles. A lot of attention was put in understanding the conditions for successful nucleation of open crystalline structures, with particular emphasis on the diamond cubic crystal. In this section we briefly review what are the most important geometric factors that control the crystallization of patchy particles, and we then highlight how these affect our ability to observe liquid-liquid transitions. The crystalline structures that are most prominent in the phase diagram of tetrahedral patchy particles are: diamond cubic (dc) it is isostructural to cubic ice, ice I c . In the dc structure the bond angles (angles formed by triplets of nearest neighbours) are perfectly tetrahedral (∼ 109.5 • ), which allows this structure to be stable even at very low patch widths. hexagonal diamond (dh) it is isostructural to hexagonal ice, ice I h . It is a polytype of the dc structure, meaning that the two crystal can stack along the basal plane of the dh structure with very low free energy penalty. From a free-energy standpoint, the dh structure is virtually indistinguishable from the dc structure, and nucleation always results in a mixture of both polytypes. For brevity in the following we will refer exclusively to the dc phase. Avoiding stacking faults to obtain a pure colloidal dc crystal is currently one of the major challenges of nanotechnology body-centered cubic (bcc) it is isostructural to ice VII/VIII/X. The bcc structure can be seen as the sum of two interpenetrating dc lattices. For this reason, its bonding angles are tetrahedral, and the density is roughly twice as that of the dc crystal. face-centered cubic (fcc) it is isostructural to ice XVIII At small pressures P , the dominant phases are the dc and the dh phases, because of their low density and high entropy. The dc phase is stable only around a small range of densities, which is usually close to the energy u(ρ) minima We now consider the crystallization of open-crystalline structures, the dc and dh crystals, as they are the most relevant for water crystallization at ordinary pressures. We will focus on the Kern-Frenkel model (Eq. 2-3), as it allows to consider independently the effects of the radial extent of the attraction (through the parameter δ) and the effects of the width of the angular interaction (through the parameter θ max ). Open crystalline structures are stabilized by entropy where z = 4 is the number of bonded neighbours in the dc crystal, is the interaction strength, and v f is the free volume that a patchy particle can explore while being bonded in the crystalline configuration. Thanks to the decoupling of translational and rotational degrees of freedom of the Kern-Frenkel model, v f can be written as the product of translational v t f and orientational v r f contributions. The rotational term v r f has the same scaling as found in the bonding volume (Eq. 4) In a close packed structure, like the fcc crystal, the translational volume would scale as the cube of the interaction range δ, but in the Kern-Frenkel model for open crystalline structures it is instead found that it scales as Substituting these expressions in Eq. 27 the expression for the chemical potential of the dc (or equivalently dh) crystal can be expressed as While only approximate, these expressions allow for an understanding of the parameter dependence of the liquidsolid transition in tetrahedral patchy models. In Fig. where h = u + P/ρ is the enthalpy per particle. At low temperatures the liquid forms a fully bonded network with an enthalpy very similar to that of the solid: i.e. the liquid and solid lines have similar slopes. With increasing T the liquid curve becomes progressively less steep as the number of broken bonds increases, eventually becoming flat at high T . Crystal-forming ability is thus obtained only if the melting temperature (crossing between liquid and solid line) occurs in the region where the liquid has a significant fraction of defects, i.e. for small values of θ max . As we increase the bond angle θ max the crossing of the two curves moves in the region where the liquid has few defects, and in which the slope of the liquid and crystal lines is almost identical, meaning that there will be no thermodynamic driving force with decreasing temperature below freezing. These conclusions have been confirmed with a full analysis of the nucleation barriers in tetrahedral Kern-Frenkel models The strong dependence of the crystal-forming ability of patchy particles on the bond angle parameter helps explaining the crystal-forming behaviour of molecular models of water. It has long been known that nucleation in molecular models like TIP4P/2005 and ST2 is strongly suppressed compared to the popular mW model (a coarse-grained model with three-body interactions). This difference in crystal-forming ability is usually explained by the lack of orientational degrees of freedom of the mW model. But a comparative study of the structural properties of these water models Another interesting observation is that at very narrow patch width tetrahedral patchy particles often nucleate clathrate structures The origin of the stabilization of the liquid phase with respect to the crystal with increasing θ max that we observed in Fig. While not directly relevant for water, these ultra-stable liquids have been experimentally realized in aqueous solutions of DNA-tetramers In Fig. On top of its usual thermodynamic anomalies, water displays also dynamic anomalies The dynamical behaviour of tetrahedral networks changes with temperature, as the system goes from an ideal gas of clusters at high temperatures to a fully bonded tetrahedral network at low temperatures. These two regimes are separated by percolation, which is the establishment of a spanning network in the system. Several studies where E a is the activation energy that is related to the microscopic process that controls diffusion. Supercooled liquids that follow the Arrhenius behaviour are also called strong glass formers. The activation energy of the high-T regime is smaller than the one for the fully bonded network at T, and so the system undergoes a transition between two strong regimes (a strong-to-strong transition). The same behaviour is found in molecular The low-T scaling of the activation energy can be predicted within the mean-field theory of bonding. In this regime, the dynamics is controlled by defects, i.e. by the probability of having a broken bond, 1 -p b . Starting from Eq. 13 we see that this quantity scales as It is found that this prediction is followed only for systems with wide bond angles The relation between the diffusion coefficient and the population of broken bonds in tetrahedral networks has been found very generally to scale as In the mean-field theory of bonding (1 -p b ) 4 is the population of particles with four broken bonds, i.e. monomers. It would then be natural to interpret Eq. 34 as a relaxation process dominated by monomers, whose mobility is the highest because of the lack of energetic constraints. But it is found Despite bond-independence not holding at low-T , it is found that Eq. 34 remains valid. Eq. 34 tells that all bonded-networks are strong glass formers, a fact well known in silica and water. It also explains dynamic anomalies. A non-monotonous dependence of p b in fact will cause a non-monotonous change in D. As we saw, optimal networks are characterized by an optimal density where the energy u(ρ) has a minimum. This is where most bonds in the network are formed and will correspond to a diffusion minima; decreasing or increasing the density from its optimal value will then cause an acceleration of the dynamics. It is interesting to note that bond breaking is not the only possible relaxation mechanism. In ultra-stable liquid systems, where the bond angle is very wide and where the condition of one-bond-per-patch is enforced, a more effective relaxation mechanism is given by bond switching, which causes the diffusion coefficient to scale as D ∼ (1 -p b ). Patchy particles are the ideal model to capture the general behaviour of tetrahedral networks, thanks to simple and physically motivated parameters that encode the geometric and energetic aspects of bonding. Here we have attempted to elucidate some of the strange properties of water from the point of view of tetrahedral patchyparticle networks. In particular, with simple theories of bonding we have highlighted some key design principles of patchy particle models that help us to understand the behaviour of water. We started with the observation that water is indeed an empty liquid, i.e. a system with a liquid-gas coexistence confined to (relatively) low densities. This opens up the space in phase diagram where the anomalous properties of water can emerge. We have shown that a general mechanism for the existence of a second region of instability at high density is the optimal network condition, i.e. when geometrical constraints in the bonds do not allow a disordered network system to be arbitrarily compressed without sacrificing some of its bonding energy. Tuning this condition allows the instability to move relatively to the liquid-gas phase transition, giving rise to the popular water scenarios, including the two liquid critical points scenario, the stability-limit scenario, and the singularity-free and critical-point free scenarios. We then considered water's thermodynamic anomalies, and saw how they also emerge naturally from the properties of the underlying tetrahedral network. The observation of water's anomalous behaviour is limited at high density by the nucleation of open crystalline structures. We have thus reviewed how the solid-liquid phase transition is affected by the parameters of patchy particle potentials, and shown that the bond angular width (θ max ) is the key factor controlling the crystal-forming ability of these systems. We have also highlighted the conditions that disfavor the crystalline state, and illustrated two important properties that emerge from this suppression, i.e. ultra-stable liquids and crystal-clear liquid-liquid phase transitions. We concluded with a discussion of the dynamical behaviour of patchy particle models, focusing on their glass-forming properties such as the transition from two strong regimes and the appearance of dynamic heterogeneities. All dynamical properties can be explained in terms of the underlying network, whose dynamics is controlled by bond-breaking events. In conclusion, empty liquids represent a broad category of fluids that derive their general properties from the existence of an underlying network of bonds, and that has found in water one of its prototypical and most inspiring members. Our knowledge of the number of systems that behave like empty liquids is constantly increasing and the study of their general properties is the subject of intense research.