Proton-conducting oxides are potential materials for electrochemical devices such as fuel cells, hydrogen pumps, hydrogen sensors, and the tritium purification and recovery system in nuclear fusion reactors. The hydrogen concentration in oxide materials is important, but its precise measurement is difficult. In this study, thermal desorption spectroscopy (TDS) was used to investigate hydrogen dissolution and release behavior in protonconducting oxides, yttrium (Y), and cobalt (Co) doped barium-zirconates in the temperature range of 673-1273 K using deuterium (D2) and heavy water (D2O). Specimens were prepared with conventional powder metallurgy: the powder of three zirconates, BaZr0.9Y0.1O3-α (BZY), BaZr0.955Y0.03Co0.015O3-α (BZYC), and CaZr0.9In0.1O2.95 (CZI) was pressed into discs and fired in the air at 1873 K for 20 h. The densities of the sintered BZY, BZYC, and CZI specimens were 98%, 99.7%, and 99.5% of the theoretical densities respectively. XRD, SEM, and EDX were performed for the structural and morphological analysis of the sintered samples. From TDS measurement, a similar trend of temperature-dependent hydrogen solubility was obtained for all samples compared to the tritium imaging plate (TIP) method's literature data of HT-and DTO-exposed samples. To compare the experimental results of the deuterium desorption profile derived by TDS analysis, the simulation code of the tritium migration analysis program, version 4 (TMAP4) was employed. Hydrogen has been a promising clean energy resource for mitigating global climate issues and the demand is increasing gradually to ensure energy security and less air pollution. Hydrogen is going to be a good alternative to traditional fossil fuels due to the development of fuel cells for mitigating global climate change Perovskite proton-conducting oxides ceramic membrane has drawn considerable attention for hydrogen separation applications Owing to their proton-conducting properties at high temperatures (500 °C to 1000 °C) and high irradiation, perovskite-based ceramics have emerged as being useful in fusion reactor fuel purification systems, hydrogen pump flow systems, as well as fuel cells for energy generation The requirements of being a good protonic conductor include-high proton conductivity with reliability and should have practical durability against steam or CO2. As protons are not intrinsic to oxide lattices, they can be formed through positively charged hydroxide defects which requires a considerable concentration of oxygen vacancies in the oxides. Such observation is the key reason for zirconate-based perovskites' being highperformance proton conductors since the zirconium has a unique ability to create oxygen vacancies when doping with a trivalent cation (Y 3+ , In 3+ , Yb 3+ , Gd 3+ , etc.) Therefore it is crucial to understand hydrogen isotope behaviors, especially the solubility and diffusivity of hydrogen in oxide materials, to use them as functional materials in fusion reactors Tritium concentration (i.e., dissolution or solubility of hydrogen) has been estimated to be approximately 1.8 mol% in our prior works on barium cerate protonic conductor using tritium imaging plate technique Therefore, to achieve the above-mentioned objectives, the Y-and Co-doped barium zirconates (i.e., BZY and BZYC) and In-doped calcium zirconate (i.e., CZI) proton conductors were selected as the zirconate specimens in this study. Then, the following initiatives have been taken for these specimens, and the results with discussions are reported in this paper: I. Two different deuterium sources (D2 gas and D2O vapor) were exposed to the specimens for TDS experiments. Hydrogen dissolution and release behavior, along with hydrogen solubility, were analyzed using the TDS method. The hydrogen solubility data of the zirconates were obtained using the thermal desorption spectroscopy (TDS) method Using the simulation code of the TMAP4, the experimental results of tritium diffusivity from the TIP method and deuterium desorption profile derived from the TDS method were compared V. The behavior of hydrogen isotopes in barium and calcium zirconates is compared in detail. The raw zirconate materials were calcined powders of BaZr0.9Y0.1O2.95 (BZY), BaZr0.955Y0.03Co0.015O2.97 (BZYC), and CaZr0.9In0.1O2.95 (CZI) collected from TYK Corporation in Japan, to prepare sintered pellets of BZY, BZYC, and CZI. The details of sample preparation and polishing procedure are discussed in our previous reported papers, where samples were sintered at 1650 °C for 20 h in an air atmosphere The sintered materials' bulk density and relative density (kg/m 3 ) were calculated using Archimedes' technique The sintered disc zirconate specimens (BZY, BZYC, and CZI) were cut using a diamond saw into parallelepiped pieces (~7.7 × 2.2 × 0.5 mm 3 ) for D2 or D2O exposure. For the TDS experiment, we used the following two sets (Sets 1-2) of samples for D2 or D2O exposure: Set 1: BZY, BZYC, and CZI samples exposed to D2 gas (or D2). Set 2: BZY, BZYC, and CZI samples exposed to heavy water (or D2O). A schematic of the D2-or D2O-exposure apparatus is shown in Figure After a predetermined exposure duration (1-4 h), deuterium was dissolved in the sample. After the D2 exposure, the quartz tube containing the samples was quenched with room-temperature water to allow deuterium to dissolve in the samples. The D2 gas that remained in the line was recovered, and the sample was subsequently removed. The dissolution and release of hydrogen were then analyzed using the TDS study. The exposure of D2O in the samples was the same as that of D2 exposure in Set 1, but the exposure conditions were different. The exposure conditions of all samples of Set 2 are given in Table Figure Mass spectrometry is one of the most popular instrumental analyzers that ionizes and separates chemical substances, such as atoms and molecules, and measures ionized ions by their mass. The major parts of a mass spectrometer are ionization (ion source), mass analysis (analyzer), detection (detector), vacuum exhaust (vacuum pump), data processing (data system), and device control. There are various types of analyzers, one of which is a quadrupole type. A mass spectrometer with a quadrupole analyzer is known as the Q-MAS. Some advantages of Q-MAS are low vacuum (usually ~10 -5 Torr), miniaturization, high-speed scanning (latest is 10000 u/s or more, u = unified atomic mass unit), low cost, ease of maintenance and operation, and robustness A Q-MAS consists of four parallel rod-shaped electrodes (Figure In the electron-amplifier tube, a small number of incident ions hit the metal surface and emit many secondary electrons. By repeating this process, secondary electrons are multiplied, and a small number of ions can be detected with high sensitivity Figure Based on the values of the lattice constants of each axis and corresponding angles obtained by refining each diffraction pattern, it was confirmed that both the powder and sintered bodies of BZY and BZYC were a single phase of cubic crystals; however, CZI has an orthorhombic structure for both powder and sintered body. The results of density measurements using the Archimedes method for the BZY, BZYC, and CZY samples are also shown in Table Following the density measurement, it was established that all samples had a very high relative density, and BZYC had a higher density than BZY. In Figure There were distinct and dense grain boundaries seen in the SEM images of all samples. Cleared grain boundaries and rounded tiny particles are also visible. As can be seen from the fractured surface, it appears that the surface grains were stick together. This means that all chemical components were consistently distributed across its surface, according to EDX mapping (Figure The quantity of hydrogen emitted from D2-or D2O-exposed samples could be calculated using the Q-MAS measured electric current value. To convert the observed current value obtained from Q-MAS data into the amount of emission, a conventional He leak experiment was done. At ambient temperature, the leak rate of the He standard leak (Model CL-6-He-4FVCR-500DOT-MFV, Vacuum Technology Inc.) ṅ was 2.8 × 10 -8 Pa m 3 •s -1 . Because the inside of the device was evacuated, it was thought that the gas atmosphere was near to an ideal gas environment. The He standard leak rate n was calculated using the ideal gas equation (Eq. 1) and found to be 1.13 × 10 -11 mol/s. (1) If Ileak (A) is the current created by the He standard leak, na (mol/s) is the release rate of the molecule from the sample, Ia (A) is the current generated by the release of the molecule a, and Ra/He is the ratio of ionization rates of a and He, then n a ̇ may be calculated using Eq (2): Eqs. ( In this experiment, Eqs. ( The ion currents obtained from the Q-MAS data for the BZY samples exposed to D2 gas and D2O vapor are shown in Figure Deuterium from D2O and HDO (H/M) 3.6 x 10 -3 5.2 x 10 -3 1.7 x 10 -3 1.3 x 10 -4 1.4 x 10 -3 4.3 x 10 -4 0.6 x 10 -6 0.4 x 10 -5 3.1 x 10 -5 Total deuterium (H/M) 3.8 x 10 -3 5.4 x 10 -3 1.8 x 10 -3 1.7 x 10 -4 1.7 x 10 -3 5.4 x 10 -4 7.8 x 10 -6 1.2 x 10 -5 5.3 x 10 -5 Fraction of hydrogen gas (%) The deuterium amounts released from all samples (BZY, BZYC, and CZI) for D2 and D2O exposure are given in Table The proportions of hydrogen gas (D2 + HD) and water vapor (D2O + HDO) are shown in the red and blue parts of the pie chart in Figure On the other hand, for both D2-and D2O-exposed CZI samples, an almost similar order of hydrogen dissolution was observed, but this amount was consistently lower than that of BZY and BZYC (Figure The TMAP4 simulated data was compared to the TDS experimental data as well as our previous reported experimental TIP data The diffusivity was in the TMAP4 simulation to replicate the hydrogen release behavior, which was similar to the experimental results. Eq. ( Here D0 = interstitial diffusion (m 2 /s), Q = activation energy (eV), k B = Boltzmann constant (8.617 × 10 -5 eV K -1 ), and T = sample temperature (K). Eq. ( Here, a0 = jump distance (m), and γ = hydrogen vibration frequency (/s). In the equation Eq. ( In this experiment, BZY, BZYC, and CZI samples were exposed to D2 or D2O vapor for the TDS experiment. In the D2O-exposed BZY sample, the dissolution of hydrogen was one order of magnitude higher than that of the D2-exposure case in the temperature range of 673-1073 K. For the D2O-exposure cases, most of the dissolved hydrogen was released as water vapor (D2O + HDO) as compared to hydrogen gas (D2 + HD) release, but opposite results were found for the D2-exposed samples. In the case of the BZYC sample, a similar trend of hydrogen dissolution was observed. A higher amount of hydrogen was dissolved in both BZY and BZYC under D2O exposure at 873 K, but the highest amount was found for BZYC. For both D2-and D2O-exposed CZI samples, a similar order of hydrogen dissolution (~10 -5 H mol/1 mol of oxides) was observed at lower exposure temperature (673 K). However, at higher exposure temperature (≥873 K) D2O-exposed sample shows almost one order higher solubility than the D2-exposure case. The amount of dissolved hydrogen in CZI was consistently lower than that in BZY and BZYC. In addition, in most cases, the dissolved hydrogen is released as water vapor (D2O + HDO) from the CZI samples. These TDS results suggest that, because of low hydrogen dissolution, CZI is not preferable for electrochemical applications as compared to BZY and BZYC. Under D2O exposure at 873 K, Y, and Co co-doped barium zirconate, that is, BZYC might be preferable for electrochemical applications owing to its higher hydrogen dissolution. In most of the cases, the hydrogen diffusion activation energies and diffusivities calculated by TMAP4 were higher than the experimental values, because oxygen is not considered a diffusion species in TMAP4. From the Arrhenius plot of hydrogen solubility obtained from the TDS study, in the temperature range of 673 K to 1073 K for D2-and D2O-exposed BZY, BZYC, and CZI samples, a similar trend of temperature-dependent hydrogen solubility was obtained, similar to the HT-and DTO-exposure cases. Therefore, it could be said that the hydrogen solubility data obtained in these studies from D2, D2O, HT, and DTO exposure are consistent.