Lead halide perovskites show remarkable performance when used in photovoltaic and optoelectronic devices. However, the peculiarities of light-matter interactions in these materials in general are far from being fully explored experimentally and theoretically. Here we specifically address the energy level order of optical transitions and demonstrate photon echos in a methylammonium lead triiodide single crystal, thereby determining the optical coherence times T 2 for excitons and biexcitons at cryogenic temperature to be 0.79 ps and 0.67 ps, respectively. Most importantly, we have developed an experimental photon-echo polarimetry method that not only identifies the contributions from exciton and biexciton complexes, but also allows accurate determination of the biexciton binding energy of 2.4 meV, even though the period of quantum beats between excitons and biexcitons is much longer than the coherence times of the resonances. Our experimental and theoretical analysis methods contribute to the understanding of the complex mechanism of quasiparticle interactions at moderate pump density and show that even in high-quality perovskite crystals and at very low temperatures, inhomogeneous broad-ening of excitonic transitions due to local crystal potential fluctuations is a source of optical dephasing. Recently, the exceptional characteristics of lead halide perovskite materials essential for photovoltaics, The exact picture of the excitonic structure of bulk hybrid lead-halide perovskites that underlies properties of low-dimensional systems is unclear. In methylammonium lead triiodide (CH 3 NH 3 PbI 3 / MAPbI 3 ) and other hybrid perovskites, despite 25 years of research history, Coherent optical spectroscopy methods allow one to overcome inhomogeneous broadening. For example, time-integrated four-wave mixing (TIFWM) gives ε B = 13 meV in MAPbI 3 Degenerate transient FWM is a powerful experimental technique to gain insight into the nature and characteristics of optical excitations in semiconductors. Figure Figure An important degree of freedom in our experiments is the polarization configuration. Hereafter, we use the two-or three-letter notation like HH and HHH for the polarization configuration, in which the first two letters describe the polarization of the first and second pulses. H and V correspond to horizontal and vertical linear polarizations, respectively. D and A are linear polarizations in the basis rotated by 45 • with respect to H and V. σ + and σ -mark circular polarizations. The third letter corresponds to the detection polarization given by the polarization of the reference beam. an ensemble with inhomogeneous broadening Γ inh = 8 ln (2) /T * 2 = 4.1 ± 0.6 meV, which is larger than the homogeneous broadening Γ hom = 2 /T 2 = 1.67 meV. Our result directly shows that at low temperature, the inhomogeneous broadening exceeds the homogeneous broadening induced by scattering on characteristic phonons, impurities or resident carriers remarkable for MAPbI 3 crystals. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first direct experimental observation of a photon echo in lead halide perovskite bulk crystals. In previous FWM studies of lead halide perovskite thin films, As a next step we identify the origin of the exciton complexes contributing the PE signal. The recently developed photon echo polarimetry is a powerful technique to distinguish different exciton complexes In the studied MAPbI 3 crystal we found different types of rosettes at different τ 12 values. To study this effect in detail, we measure polar rosettes continuosly as a function of τ ref = 2τ 12 . In this way, we expand the polarimetry technique by a further degree of freedom and arrive at two-dimensional data sets as visualized by the color map in Figure We have performed a theoretical analysis for exciton-biexciton system to predict its behaviour in transient PE polarimetry (see details in Sects. I and II of SI). The analytical expressions (Eqs. (S22,S23) in SI) for transient PE in the HHH and HVH polarization configurations predict no oscillations in the HVH and damped oscillations in HHH polarization configuration. Here, T X 2 and T XX 2 are the exciton and biexciton coherence times, ω QB = ε XX / is the quantum beat frequency. Figure (3) The second term on the right side yields a four-leaves polar rosette, while the first term of greater amplitude corresponds to the two-leaves polar rosette. It oscillates in time giving rise to the transient conversion between the four-leave polar rosette for ω QB τ ref /4 = πn, and the twoleave polar rosette for ω QB τ ref /4 = π/2 + πn, where n ≥ 0 is an integer number. Because linearly polarized light at an angle φ can be represented as a superposition of circularly polarized components e -iφ σ + + e iφ σ -, the angle φ defines the phase between different quantum paths The exciton-biexciton quantum beats manifest themselves in the discussed PE experiment with linearly polarized pulses as amplitude oscillations in the HHH polarization configuration. Because of the very short coherence times, the experimental data presented above do not allow us to prove the presence of quantum beats and to estimate the biexciton binding energy from the PE amplitude beats (Eqs. ( where the L i and M i are pairs H/V, D/A and σ + /σ -of detection polarizations for i = 1, 2 and 3. A detailed study of the PE polarization state dynamics with correctly chosen polarization configuration of the incident pulses can provide additional information. Here, the polarization contrast values obtained with using a small FWM signal amplitude comparable with the noise level are set to zero (dark blue color). As one can see, the τ ref position of the central minimum of the FWM polarizations contrast oscillation (green area between two yellow areas) is parallel to the τ ref = τ 12 (red dashed line) dependence. This behaviour points to the effect of quantum beats and excludes the possibility of interference of polarizations of two independent systems (e.g. exciton and trion) for which one can expect the dependence τ ref = 2τ 12 (blue dashed line). We developed a transient polarimetry PE technique that allows us to reveal the biexciton optical resonance independently and measure its binding energy. The technique is based on the detailed analysis of the transient polarization state of the PE that is modulated by excton biexciton quantum beats. We analyze the temporal behaviour and orientation of the polar rosettes in the σ ± RH polarization configuration with circularly polarized first pulse . To explain the technique's principle, we simulate the dynamics of the polarization state of the PE excited with a circularly polarized first pulse and a linearly polarized second pulse, namely for the σ + H configuration. Figure Here φ is the angle of linear polarization of the second pulse, and φ is the angle of linear polarization of the detection. As one can see in Eq. ( In many cases, it is experimentally easier to vary the polarization of the second pulse than the detection polarization. Thereby the study of the polar rosettes behaviour in the σ ± RH polarization configuration is advantageous. In contrast to the case of linearly polarized first pulse shown in Figures To quantify the rotational behaviour of the σ ± RH rosettes we analyse the experimental data in Figures The best fit of the experimental data in Figure Figures The developed transient PE polarimetry technique is a powerful tool for biexciton identification and ε XX measurement. It has several important advantages. First, the technique allows one to overcome the inhomogeneous broadening of the optical transitions in the system under study. Second, the PE polarization state measurements are free of the impact of the PE amplitude decay. Here, special interest is attracted by the case when the coherence times are shorter than the beat period. The oscillations of the σ ± RH polar rosettes orientation decay with rate the 1/T ∆ = 1/T XX 2 -1/T X 2 (see Eq. ( MAPbI 3 crystals. MAPbI 3 single crystals were low temperature solution grown in a reactive inverse temperature crystallization (ITC) process. Supplementary Information The detailed description of the theoretical model; results of analytical calculations for exciton-biexciton system; documentation of fitting procedure; additional modelling results. with the density matrix of the system ρ. The density matrix behaves in time according to with the Hamilton operator H, which itself can be written as the sum Here, H 0 is the Hamilton operator of the unperturbed system, whereas V accounts for the lightmatter interaction. All operators are represented by N ×N matrices in the eigenbasis of the system, determined by H 0 with eigenvalues ε 1 , . . . ε N . To model the photon echo signal, we have to evaluate how ρ changes under the action of the first and second pulses and how it evolves freely between the pulses. In particular, we arrive at an expression for the photon echo signal by pursuing the following steps: 1. Let ρ b1 be the initial state of the crystal before arrival of the first laser pulse. We assume short pulse durations t p and all optical frequencies to be much higher than the eigenfrequencies of the system. Therefore, we can neglect the effect of H 0 during the action of the laser pulses and calculate the density matrix after the action of the first pulse ρ a1 in second order as We set t p ≡ 1 in the following. 2. Between the pulses, we neglect the action of V on the system. The free evolution of the system can then be obtained by solving the equation Since H 0 is diagonal, the entries of the density matrix before the second pulse, after time be written in a closed form as with the matrix of ones 1 (1 ij = 1 ∀i, j). 3. The action of the second pulse is similar to the action of the first pulse in equation (S4) 4. Another application of equation (S6) gives the density matrix at the temporal position of the photon echo 2τ 12 5. Finally, we have to extract the components of the density matrix that fulfil the phase matching 6. Optionally, we can expand the model to account for decay of the non-diagonal components of the density matrix, i.e. the optical coherences. For that purpose, we introduce phenomenological Where Γ is the operator that describes the decoherence of the system. To automate the modeling procedure described in this Section, we used the Python library SymPy, which resembles other computer algebra systems like Mathematica. The source code is available on reasonable request. As an example for the procedure described above, we consider the exciton-biexciton system with a diamond-like level scheme, see Figure with the exciton transition energy ε and the biexciton binding energy ε XX . Taking into account the dipole selection rules as indicated by the arrows in Figure with the right-(left-)handed component of the i-th pulse's electric field E +,i (E -,i ). For simplicity, we assumed a constant, real dipole matrix element d for all transitions. An arbitrary polarization can be expressed in terms of E +,i and E -,i . For that, we introduce the following definitions In the most general case of elliptically polarized light, δ i measures the ellipticity and φ i the angle between the main principle axis of the ellipse and the x-axis (horizontal polarization). In the following, we consider the polarization configuration σ + RH, for which δ 1 = 0, φ 1 = 0 and δ 2 = π /4. The angle φ 2 ≡ φ remains a variable of the calculation. Before the action of first pulse, the system is completely in the ground state, hence Following the steps described above, we calculate the density matrix ρ P E According to equation (S1), the density matrix (S14) causes right-and left-handed components P ± of the photon echo signal. These are (S15) The final signal in the σ + RH configuration can be obtained by projection on the horizontal axis which is the special case of the projection on some arbitrary detection axis tilted by an angle φ to the x-axis P ∼ P + e -iφ + P -e +iφ . (S17) Inserting the expressions (S15) into (S16) delivers Here, it becomes clear that the signal from a biexciton shows oscillations in the amplitude (second, red underlined term) and also a rotation of the polar rosettes as a function of time (third, blue). Both are manifestations of quantum beats between the exciton and biexciton states. The function In the same manner as for the configuration σ + RH, we model the signal from the exciton-biexciton system in the configurations σ -RH and HRH, Figures Four-leaves (S20) The expressions for σ + and σ -excitation only differ by the sign of the third term, marked in red. In this Section we collect further analytical expressions that were calculated for the excitonbiexciton model. Here we also took into account the decoherence time of the exciton and biexciton polarizations. In this way, we obtain expressions for the photon echo that serve as fitting functions to our experimental data. This enables us to formulate a fitting procedure for estimation of the biexciton binding energy and the decoherence times of exciton and biexciton (Section 3.1). Following step 6 on page 15, we expand equation (S20) to account for decoherence of the exciton and biexciton states (decoherence times are denoted as T X 2 and T XX 2 , respectively) Two special cases of this equation are the configurations HHH (φ = 0) and HVH (φ = π /2) (S22) Following step 6 on page 15, we expand equation (S18) to account for decoherence of the exciton and biexciton states (decoherence times are denoted as T X 2 and T XX 2 , respectively) In this Section, we discuss the role of the polarization of the second pulse on the dynamics on the Poincaré sphere. For that purpose, it is illuminating to calculate the photon echo signal as a function of the polarization angle of the second pulse φ and the detection angle φ Here it becomes clear, that the polarization of the second pulse and the detection angle are completely exchangeable. For example, the configurations σ + RH and σ + HR result in the same signal, as we observe in experiment (Figure To understand the effect of the second pulse's polarization on the dynamics on the Poincaré sphere, we show in Figure where and are the Stokes parameters in the configuration σ + H (φ = 0). In this Section we describe in detail how we obtained values for the biexciton binding energy, decoherence times of exciton and biexciton, and the (in)homogeneous linewidth of the studied ensemble from fits to our experimental data. As mentioned earlier, quantum beats between exciton and biexciton can be observed in the polarization configuration σ + RH. In contrast to the polarization configuration HRH, the quantum beats not only modulate the amplitude of the photon echo signal, but also the orientation of polar rosettes (a direct manifestation of polarizations beats). As will be become clear below, the polarization beating offers us the possibility to extract the biexciton binding energy with high significance although the decoherence times of exciton and biexciton are too short to observe amplitude beats. To quantify the rotation of the rosettes, we introduced in the main text the parameter θ that measures the angle between the principle axis of the rosette and the H-axis (see definition in Figure Therefore, the envelope of the function (S32) decays proportionally to exp(- In particular, the first two data points (colorized in gray) deviate from the linear trend of the modeled functions. This effect can be caused by two contributions. First, our model neglects the temporal overlap of the optical pulses that takes place in the range τ ref < 0.8 ps (see figure To obtain a value for ε XX , we combine the data for θ σ + (τ ref ) and θ σ -(τ ref ) by fitting (θ σ + -θ σ -)/2 for τ ref > 0.8 ps to equation (S34). Additionally, the fit gives us a value for the difference of decay rates T Next, we use the experimental curve of the photon echo decay in the configuration HHH to extract the exciton decoherence time T 2 (Figure obtained values for ε XX and T -1 ∆ and leave only T X 2 as free fitting parameter. Therefore, we write the function (S22) in terms of T -1 ∆ , ε XX and T X 2 : The fit gives ) with a temporal width σ XX . This effect could be related to an inhomogeneity of the decoherence time T XX 2 . The homogeneous spectral broadening of exciton and biexciton Γ X hom and Γ XX hom are determined by the decoherence times T X 2 and T XX 2 that we extracted in the previous Section. Therefore, we assume that the spectral lineshape corresponding to the temporal signal exp(τ ref /T 2 ) is given by the real part of its Fourier transform Next, we want to quantify the inhomogeneous broadening that gives rise to the PE effect. Therefore, we analyze the time-resolved measurements of the PE signal in Figure Here, the amplitude A, and the temporal shift τ 0 are fitting parameters. In the last step, we substituted the standard deviation σ by the full width at half maximum (FWHM) f = 2 2ln(2)σ ≈ 2.355 • σ, which is more commonly used for the discussion of spectral or temporal widths. The fit delivers the following width of the cross correlation Since the cross correlation of two Gaussians with variances σ which corresponds to an intensity width of roughly 0.18 ps. To extract the inhomogeneous linewidth, we analyze the temporal width of the PE shown above. A fit of the data for τ ref > 1 ps gives a temporal width of (0.92 ± 0.12) ps. Taking into account that the measured signal is the cross correlation of the pure PE signal and the reference pulse, we arrive at a temporal width of T * 2 = (0.88 ± 0.12) ps, (S43) which corresponds to the inhomogeneous linewidth This value is by (2.9 ± 0.8) meV smaller than the FWHM 8 meV that we observe in the spectral measurement, Figure First, we supposed that the transformation between energy-and time-domain is fully determined by the Fourier transform. This assumption may be oversimplified for non-ideal, i.e. non-bandwidthlimited, laser pulses. Second, we assumed that the laser spectrum for the time-domain measurements is significantly broader than the inhomogeneous broadening. In this ideal case, the whole ensemble is excited equally. However, in our experiment the width of the amplitude spectrum of the laser Γ L is limited by As additional information, we measured the reflectivity spectrum of the MAPbI 3 sample, shown together with the FWM spectrum in figure In this paper, the comparison between the outcome of our theoretical model (as presented in Section 1.1) with experimental observations for various polarization configurations allowed us to unambiguously identify the presence of biexcitons in the studied MAPbI 3 sample. We have shown that the measurement of polar rosettes as a function of the delay time between first and second pulse places stringent constraints on an excitonic model that gives rise to quantum beats. As an outlook, we use in the following our model to predict the behaviour of other exciton systems in similar experiments. First, we discuss the polarization interference between excitons and trions in Section 4.1. Here we point out how time-resolved FWM can distinguish between quantum beats and polarization interference. Second, we show the results of the application of our model to a variety of excitonic systems that exhibit any kind of energy splitting giving rise to quantum beats. Here, we present our measurement protocol as an illuminating tool to characterize systems that are not well understood in terms of their energy level structure and polarization selection rules. In Figures = (4.1 ± 0.6) meV.(S44)As a final step, we want to estimate the overall spectral width associated with the exciton ensemble.This enables us to compare the results from time-domain with the spectral measurements that we present in FigureS8(b). The overall spectrum is given by the convolution between the homogeneous line (Lorentzian) and the inhomogeneous line (Gaussian), which results in a Voigt lineshape. Given the width of the Lorentzian and Gaussian line (Γ X hom and Γ inh ), the FWHM of the resulting Voigt