The current density in a superconductor with turnarounds or constrictions is non-uniform due to a geometrical current crowding effect. This effect reduces the critical current in the superconducting structure compared to a straight segment and is of importance when designing superconducting devices. We investigate the current crowding effect in numerical simulations within the generalized time-dependent Ginzburg-Landau (GTDGL) model. The results are validated experimentally by measuring the magnetic field dependence of the critical current in superconducting nanowire structures, similar to those employed in single-photon detector devices. Comparing the results with London theory, we conclude that the reduction in critical current is significantly smaller in the GTDGL model. This difference is attributed to the current redistribution effect, which reduces the current density in weak points of the superconductor and counteracts the current crowding effect. We numerically investigate the effect of fill factor on the critical current in a meander and conclude that the reduction of critical current is low enough to justify fill factors higher than 33 % for applications where detection efficiency is critical. Finally, we propose a novel meander design which can combine high fill factor and low current crowding. Mesoscale and nanoscale superconductors play a central role in contemporary device configurations applied in various research fields. Inhomogeneous current density distributions, often termed current crowding, can occur at geometrical features such as corners, bends and constrictions, and severely impact the device properties of microwave resonators, filters and waveguides. Another prominent example is superconducting nanowire structures, which is the crucial building block for realizing devices capable of detecting light at the single-photon level The paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II the current crowding effect in the Ginzburg-Landau model is studied for the simple case of an annulus disk geometry and compared with the London model. In Sec. III the theoretical model and the numerical methods used to simulate various hairpin geometries are described. In Sec. IV the fabrication and experimental setup are presented. In Sec. V A simulations and experimental results for the critical current dependency on the applied magnetic field are presented. In Sec. V B the current crowding effect in the GTDGL and London models are compared for various hairpin geometries. In Sec. V C the critical current dependency on fill factor is studied, and in Sec. V D we suggest a novel meander geometry to mitigate current crowding. Finally, Sec. VI gives a summary and discussion of the results. The supercurrent density is given by J ∝ |ψ| 2 (∇θ-A), where ψ = |ψ|e iθ is the complex order parameter. In the London limit the amplitude |ψ| is assumed constant, and in the absence of vortices the phase θ is single valued. If magnetic field fluctuations are neglected, formally by letting the London penetration depth λ → ∞, the current pattern is described by an incompressible potential flow J ∝ ∇θ, with ∇ • J ∝ ∇ 2 θ = 0. The current crowding effect has been thoroughly studied in Ref. In Ref. be separated by a distance of 2W in order to use this design. The optimal turnaround geometry is thus ideal in terms of current crowding. A drawback is that the fill factor, defined as the fraction of area covered by the superconducting film, is limited to 33 %. The validity of the London model is limited to small currents well below I c . Currents close to the critical current are outside this regime and hence results from the London model do not necessarily apply. This motivates study of the current crowding effect in the Ginzburg-Landau model, which remains valid close to the critical current. To clearly demonstrate the differences in the current crowding effect in the Ginzburg-Landau model compared to the London model we consider a superconducting disk geometry given by the annulus between two concentric circles. The width is W , thickness d, inner radius a, and coherence length ξ, as depicted in Fig. into a non-linear ordinary differential equation by assuming that the superconducting order parameter ψ = |ψ|(r)e iθ(φ) , where r and φ are cylindrical coordinates. Dimensionless units are used, as defined in Sec. III. The resulting ordinary differential equation is where θ(φ) = nφ. A circulating current may be induced by threading a thin flux tube through the ring, or by setting a nonzero winding number n of the phase, so that k = n -Φ/Φ 0 , where Φ 0 is the flux quantum. Isolating boundary conditions are used on the superconductor to vacuum interface, i.e. ∂|ψ|/∂r = 0. From the numerical solution of Eq. ( where the superfluid velocity v s ∝ k and k 0 is a normalization factor that sets the maximal current at k = k 0 / √ 3. For a smaller ratio of a/W the critical current is less than the deparing current I dep , and thus demonstrates a non-negligible current crowding effect. In Fig. To study the current crowding effect in a general geometry we consider a superconductor with thickness d To simulate the superconductor we employ the GTDGL model where ψ is the superconducting order parameter, A is the vector potential, and μ is the electric potential. We make a conventional choice for the material parameter u = 5.79 We simulate the GTDGL model for geometries such as the turnaround presented in Fig. We solve the GTDGL equations ( This formulation of the covariant derivative preserves the gauge invariance when discretized on a lattice Device fabrication was performed on silicon substrates covered with thermal SiO 2 , relying on a roomtemperature reactive sputtering process of NbTiN with stoichiometry optimized for single-photon detectors V. RESULTS An applied perpendicular magnetic field will, depending on direction, either increase or decrease the amount of current crowding at the inner bend of a turn. This will then change the energy barrier for vortex crossings and lead to a lower or higher critical current of the structure, and will show up as an asymmetry in I c (B) about zero field. For practical applications with both left and right bends, a homogeneous magnetic field could reduce the current crowding only at one type of bend. Still, from an experimental point, this is a useful diagnostic of current crowding in hairpin geometries as studied here, since it relies on comparing the critical current in the same device at different fields, rather than different devices with varying geometries, which are susceptible to sample-tosample variations. The critical current dependence on the applied magnetic field is investigated in both experiment and simulation by extracting critical currents from IV curves for different constant applied fields. The results from experimental devices with fitted simulation data for the square turnaround and the optimal turnaround are presented in Fig. The simulation results in Fig. Figure For sufficiently strong negative magnetic fields, the critical current of the turnaround geometries coincide with the straight geometry, which is explained by the weakest point being located on the legs. This is shown in Fig. In Sec. II we showed that the current crowding effect in the Ginzburg-Landau model is qualitatively different compared to the London model when considering a system of concentric circles. The difference between the models is that Ginzburg-Landau takes the suppression of the superconducting order parameter into account, which results in a redistribution of the current density. The current redistribution effect depends on the turnaround geometry and we therefore investigate different geometries. In GTDGL model, we define the critical current as the current at which vortices start to flow across the wire, since the vortex motion will generate a voltage. In the London model, we define the critical current at which the vortex barrier for crossings is zero. For a bend with radius of curvature R much larger than ξ, this will coincide with the current when the critical current density is locally reached somewhere In Fig. Figure As shown in Sec. V C, the GTDGL simulations indicate that the critical current of the structure is not as sensitive to the geometry as previously reported. However, for high fill factors the current crowding effect still leads to a considerable reduction of the critical current. In the case of a standard meander composed of straight lines connected with 180°turnarounds, there is a tradeoff between having high critical current and a high fill factor. One possible solution is to increase the thickness of the superconducting film at the bends in order to locally reduce current density We propose a new meander design that eliminates the tradeoff between critical current and fill factor while avoiding the need for variable film thickness. The concept uses L-bends, which are turnarounds consisting of an extra 90°turn before the 180°turnaround, as depicted in Fig. The ratio b/a may for a large number of lines be approximated as a ratio between the pitch in the L-bend P B and the pitch in the meander lines P M . Alternatively it can also be approximated using the fill factor of the L-bend ff B , the meander ff M and the ratio between the width of the superconducting wire in the bend and in the meander line k = W B /W M . Thus In order to estimate the elongation of a L-bend meander, we consider the limiting case where the meander lines have width W M = W and 100 % fill factor, while the L-bends have width W B = 2W to reduce dark counts and allow for a 33 % fill factor. These dimensions gives b = 6a and the meander area would increase by about a factor of 3 to cover the same circular area as a traditional meander. During the manuscript review process, the authors became aware of the successful experimental implementation of a similar design in high-fill-factor superconducting microwire single-photon detectors, resulting in high detection efficiency combined with low polarization sensitivity We used the GTDGL model to explore the current crowding effect in superconducting nanostructures. Theoretical predictions are tested experimentally by comparing how the critical current varies with the applied magnetic field for two distinct nanowire turnaround geometries. In comparison to the previously used London model, we show that current crowding is substantially less pronounced in the GTDGL model. This finding is explained by the suppression of the superconducting order parameter near bends, which causes current redistribution close to sharp turns. Within London theory it is possible to design optimal turnarounds without current crowding, but this restricts the fill factor to 33 %. Using the more accurate description provided by the GTDGL model it is possible to achieve less than one percent reduction for 50 % fill factor. We propose that this marked difference in predicted critical currents considerably loosens the design restrictions for a large range of superconducting nanodevices and circuits. Hence, our results pave the way towards devices with improved performance and current carrying capabilities approaching the material limits.