Dense and efficient circuits with component sizes approaching the physical limit is the hallmark of high performance integration. Ultimately, these features and their pursuit enabled the multi-decade lasting exponential growth of components on integrated electronic chips according to Moore's law, which culminated with the high performance electronics we know today. However, current fabrication technology is mostly constraint to 2D lithography, and thermal energy dissipation induced by switching electronic signal lines presents a fundamental challenge for truly 3D electronic integration. Photonics reduces this problem, and 3D photonic integration is therefore a highly sought after technology that strongly gains in relevance due to the need for scalable application-specific integrated circuits for neural networks. Direct laser writing of a photoresin is a promising high-resolution tool for 3D photonic integration. Here, we combine one and two-photon polymerization (TPP) for waveguide integration for the first time, dramatically accelerating the fabrication process and increasing optical confinement. 3D additive printing is based on femtosecond TPP, while blanket irradiation with a UV lamp induces one-photon polymerization (OPP) throughout the entire 3D chip. We locally and dynamically adjust writing conditions to implement (3+1)D flash-TPP: waveguide cores are printed with a small distance between neighboring writing voxels to ensure smooth interfaces, mechanical support structures are printed at maximal distance between the voxels to speed up the process. Finally, the entire chip's passive volume not part of waveguide cores or mechanical support is polymerized in a single instance by UV blanket irradiation. This decouples fabrication time from the passive volume's size. We succeed in printing vertical single-mode waveguides of 6 mm length that reach up to NA = 0.16. Noteworthy, we achieve exceptionally low -0.26 dB injection and very low propagation losses of -1.36 dB/mm, which is within one order of magnitude of standard integrated silicon photonics. Finally, the optical performance of our waveguides does not deteriorate during 120 days within our measurement uncertainty. Additive manufacturing based on 3D printing is an innovative tool to create complex 3D devices. Direct laser writing (DLW) associated with two-photon polymerization (TPP) allows the creation of micron to submicrometer three-dimensional (3D) structures in diverse fields, such as micromechanical systems 1 , microrobotics components 2 or biosciences Photonic waveguides are of fundamental importance for many optical components and to realize their implementation in day-to-day technologies In standard photonic waveguides, light confinement is caused by total internal reflection at the interface between core and cladding. The main condition for this is that the refractive index of the core n core is larger than the one of the cladding n cladding . For polymer waveguides in which the surrounding media is air, the core-cladding refractive index difference ∆n = n core -n cladding ≈ 0.5, is large and easily leads to multi-mode propagation at the feature sizes achievable with TPP for visible or near infrared (NIR) wavelengths In this article, we significantly advance our (3+1)D fabrication methodology, here based on the commercially available IP-S photoresist One-photon polymerization (OPP) is often employed to process thin material layers such as in standard semiconductor photo-lithography. The process is based on polymerizing a photosensitive resin using blue or UV light. The surface of the thin resin-layer is scanned or irradiated through a photomask, and the liquid resin solidifies in the light-exposed regions. Repeating this process layer-by-layer enables the fabrication of 3D structures. However, to achieve complex and truly 3D-circuits this process requires a large number of photo masks and results in challenges like intra-layer alignment. Unlike OPP, the photocurable resin that is transparent for a NIR femtosecond (fs) laser allows directly printing deep inside the resin's volume via TPP. The basic principle of TPP relies on transforming monomer molecules located within the femtosecond writing laser's focus into macromolecules in a solid state. For the commercially available IP family thermosetting photoresists, i.e. IP-S, IP-Dip, IP-L and IP-G, the resin is essentially transparent from ∼633 nm until 2400 nm. The Nanoscribe GmhH (Photonic Professional GT) TPP system used for printing our structures is equipped with a fs-laser operating at 780 nm, and galvanometer mirrors for rapid beam movement in the lateral directions. The femtosecond laser is tightly focused into the resin through an objective lens of high numerical aperture (25X magnification and NA = 0.8). TPP leads to the formation of a rugby-ball-shaped polymer within the focal spot, the writing voxel, and the monomer resin in its surrounding remains unmodified. The voxel-size depends mainly on the laser exposure dose, which is linked to the laser power and the scanning speed One challenge of 3D TPP following the classical approach is that printing circuits with mm 3 volumes quickly results in unfeasible fabrication time in excess of 20h. However, 3D waveguide circuits are defined via the trajectories of waveguide cores, while waveguide claddings are inherently realized through the surrounding, 'unstructured' volume of a lower refractive index. One can therefore constrain the high-resolution and slow TPP process to creating the waveguide cores, and use indiscriminate, hence fast single-step blanket exposure above the resin photo-initiator's absorption energy to develop the entire remaining chip in one flash. The working principle of flash-TPP is illustrated in Fig. We further accelerate the fabrication process by locally and dynamically adjusting TPP writing conditions according to the functionality of each circuit's component. Minimizing propagation losses requires minimizing the roughness at the core-cladding interface and we use a small spacing between voxels in the (x,y)-plane, i.e. with a small hatching distance h. At the same time, we can maximize the vertical distance between consecutive slices, or slicing distance s, which we found not to significantly affect the core-cladding interface roughness and equally accelerates the printing process. Crucially, the writing power needs to be adjusted in order not to overexpose the TPP-written voxels, which results in micro-explosions and high propagation losses. Other sections, such as the outer cladding of a 3D chip or internal columns for support do not interact with the optical signals, and hence they simply need to be mechanically sturdy. We therefore maximally increase the hatching distance, and since printing time scales ∝ (h 2 s) -1 this has a significant impact. The structure in Fig. We printed a set of five free-standing waveguide cores with 20 μm height and d = 5 μm diameter using a range of TPP laser powers (LP) and a constant hatching distance of h = 0.4 μm on a fused silica substrate. As globally fixed parameters in all our fabrications reported in this article we use a scanning speed of 10 mm/s and a slicing distance of s = 1 μm. A SEM micrograph after development is shown in Fig. Finally, to carry out an initial evaluation of the propagation losses on the hatching distance h, we have characterized five printed waveguides with length of 300 μm at λ 0 = 660 nm wavelength with identical parameters as in Fig. We 3D-printed cuboids embedding 16 waveguides with diameters ranging from d ∈ {1.3 : 0.4 : 7.3} μm and height of 300 μm. We use UV exposure times for the OPP of 0, 5, 20 and 60s, which results in irradiation doses D of 0, 750, 3000 and 9000 mJ/cm 2 , respectively. By fitting the experimental output intensities for different diameters, we extract the waveguide's normalized frequency V = π λ0 d NA, where NA = n 2 1 -n 2 2 is the numerical aperture and n 1 ≈ 1.51 and n 2 are the refractive indices of core and cladding, respectively. Each waveguide output intensity is fitted to the fundamental LP 01 mode for diameters below the cut-off condition for a second propagating mode, as shown in Fig. As it can be seen in Fig. Finally, Fig. To evaluate losses we fabricated a set of waveguides with lengths spanning from 0.1 to 6 mm. The diameter is d = 3.7 μm and the UV expose dose D = 3000 mJ/cm 2 , which provide high NA while remaining single-mode. Minimizing injection losses requires adiabatically modifying the waveguide core diameter to transition the mode size of the free-space input to the one of the waveguide. The angle of such tapers, i.e. the taperrate, needs to be sufficiently small to not excite higher order modes and hence to satisfy the adiabatic transition. We minimized the optical losses of a set of tapers with lengths ∈ {10 : 10 : 50} μm and waveguide core diameters d ∈ {3.7 : 0.4 : 5.7} μm in order to determine the best taper-rate for efficient mode coupling. These we found to be tapering from an taper-input diameter of 4.9 μm to the target waveguide diameter of 3.7 μm during a taper-length of 40 μm. Figure Propagation losses do not yet reach the bulk absorption of the IP-S photoresist, which is ≈ 0.055 dB/mm 26 , and for now are around one order of magnitude above the current state-of-the-art for standard silicon photonic waveguides As a final study, we investigated aging of the 3Dprinted waveguides, as temporal stability naturally is of vital importance for reliability. Aging could originate from such effects as thermal diffusion The flash-TPP concept relies on incomplete polymerization of the areas corresponding to waveguide cladding, hence some photo-initiators could remain after development. If unintended post-development optical exposure is sufficient to initiate the photo-initiator's reactions, the waveguide cladding could in principle be polymerized towards a higher degree, i.e. increasing its refractive index. Consequently, ∆n and the related optical properties would be altered in time. To explore the temporal stability we measured the waveguide's NA over time. All structures have been kept under standard irradiation intensity of our lab and have not been shielded from room light. As depicted in Fig. Printing time is generally proportional to a circuit's volume, and the relative time that can be saved due to flash-TPP depends on the ratio between the areas requiring TPP and OPP exposure. Here we assume that this ratio remains constant along a circuit's z-positions. In previous work on (3+1)D printing we found that waveg- uides with a radius of r ≈ 2.5 μm need to be separated by l ≈ 6 μm of cladding in order to have negligible interaction which is also the filling factor of waveguide cores within a 3D integrated photonic chip. Therefore, even for a circuit volume with maximal density of waveguide cores, the usual objective of circuit integration, using l and r defined above the fabrication time is reduced to Γ ≈ 16% compared to using TPP alone. This agrees with our experience, where using flash-TPP reduces the printing time to only Γ ≈ 10% compared to classical TPP. As a clear example, printing our 6 mm macroscopic structure exclusively using TPP only takes ∼24 hours, whereas this decreased to ∼3 hours (Γ = 12%) using flash-TPP. We have developed a simple and fast (3+1)D lithography configuration called flash-TPP. This novel manufacturing methodology is based on combining DLW-TPP and OPP, here demonstrated with the commercially available IP-S photoresist, for the fabrication of polymercladded single-mode 3D optical waveguides. The flash-TPP concept synergistically combines three princples. First, waveguide cores are printed via DLW-TPP using a precisely calibrated TPP laser power and with high horizontal resolution by minimizing the hatching distances between voxels (h = 0.4 μm), ensuring low propagation losses due to smooth interfaces. Second, areas purely serving as mechanical support do not interact with the guided wave and no special control of the spacing between TPP-voxels is needed. These are consequently printed with a large hatching distance (h = 0.8 μm). Finally, instead of building the entire cladding by DLW-TPP, we polymerize in a single instance the integrated photonic circuit via OPP using UV blanket irradiation. Combining these three aspects we are able to reduce the printing time by ≈ 90% compared to classical TPP only fabrication. Furthermore, we show that for integrated photonic chips, where the packing density is adjusted to obtain small cross-talk, one can generally expect an acceleration of fabrication on this order. We demonstrated the high-quality of our (3+1)D flash-TPP fabrication technique. We achieved precise control over the refractive index difference ∆n between waveguide core and cladding by precisely adjusting the UV exposure dose during our blanket OPP illumination, here ranging from 0 to 9000 mJ/cm 2 . We fitted the waveguide's output intensities to the LP 01 mode of waveguides for variety of UV exposure doses and diameters below the cut-off condition of the second LP mode. From these fits we obtain a robust characterization of a waveguide's NA as a function of the UV dosage, and our data shows an excellent agreement with the exponential trend expected for saturation processes. This confirmed that we can accurately tune the refractive index of the cladding via adjusting the OPP dosage, obtaining numerical aperture values ranging between NA = 0.10 and NA = 0.16. We finally determined low propagation losses of -1.36 dB/mm and a continuous characterization of our 3D-printed waveguides spanning 120 days demonstrated their temporal stability. In DLW of waveguides in fused silica, post fabrication thermal annealing reduced losses from similar levels down to ∼ 0.08 dB/cm, which could be a promising avenue for approaching the material's absorption limit. Overall, we have established the (3+1)D flash-TPP proof of concept as a powerful manufacturing technique towards the fabrication of polymer-based 3D integrated photonic circuits. Our new concept can be particularly advantageous in applications requiring integrated photonics circuits of complex 3D topology that render a standard 2D integration impossible. On this line, our approach presents a very promising concept for future scalable integrations of parallel optical interconnects. S. Maruo, K. Ikuta, and H. Korogi, "Force-controllable, optically driven micromachines fabricated by single-step two-photon microstereolithography," Journal of Microelectromechanical Systems, vol. 12, no. 5, pp. 533- 539, 2003. 