Many thixo-viscoelastic materials have been reported to undergo enhancement in elastic modulus with time and decrease in the same under application of deformation field. Incorporation of this feature in a viscoelastic structural kinetic model has an apparent possibility of violating the second law of thermodynamics. Furthermore, in a related experimental observation, stress has been reported to undergo a non-monotonic change as a function of time under the application of constant strain. We analyze both these scenarios through a structural kinetic model that shows viscoelastic aging but undergoes rejuvenation only due to the viscous rate of strain. We observe that such formalism does not violate the second law. Interestingly, the proposed simple formalism predicts the experimental observation of the non-monotonic stress relaxation very well. Thixotropy concerns the microstructural evolution of a soft material under quiescent or weak flow conditions causing a time-dependent increase in the viscosity and destruction of the evolved microstructure under strong flow conditions leading to a time-dependent decrease in the viscosity Furthermore, if such a material remains under quiescent conditions for a long time, the material may show yield stress causing the viscosity to tend to infinity The thermodynamically out of equilibrium soft materials, wherein constituents of the same get structurally arrested in physical or energetic cages formed by their neighbors, render them limited access to the phase space Consequently, the application of the deformation field causes a time-dependent decrease in viscosity, elastic modulus, and relaxation time. However, more complex situations have been reported in the literature, wherein application of moderateintensity of deformation field alters the relaxation time distribution in an intricate fashion, causing a time-dependent increase in mean relaxation time. This phenomenon has been represented as overaging In a seminal review on modeling thixotropic materials, Larson where k + and k -are the parameters associated with, respectively, the structural growth (physical aging) and breakdown (rejuvenation) terms, t * is the time and g *  is the second invariant of the rate of the strain tensor. The structure parameter L , which represents the extent of microstructural evolution, varies between two limits: 0 (the state devoid of structure) and 1 (the state with a fully developed structure). Eq. ( where s * and g are respectively the second invariant of stress and strain tensor. In Eq. (2) thixotropic modulus ( ) G L always depends monotonically on L . Larson In the literature, different kinds of structural kinetic models have been proposed. The variety of system-specific as well as generic expressions of structural buildup and breakdown terms used in the kinetic expressions of the structure parameter, which is equivalent to Eq. ( The majority of models employ two kinds of constitutive relations, either generalized Newtonian fluid that characterizes inelastic behavior or linear Maxwell model that represents viscoelastic behavior. In the Maxwell model, a limiting case of viscosity tending to infinity leads to Hooke's law represented by Eq. ( Another important aspect that needs evaluation is the nature of the rejuvenation term in Eq. ( In this work, we consider a structural kinetic model that is viscoelastic in nature. We independently consider two types of rejuvenation contributions, total strain rate, and viscous strain rate. We then test the validity of the second law of thermodynamics by applying series of deformation fields to the models. We also explore the possibility of non-monotonic stress relaxation subsequent to steady shear using the proposed formalism. The structural kinetic models are the most straightforward mathematical representations of the thixotropic behavior. Typically, structural kinetic models have three ingredients: a kinetic equation of the structure parameter, a constitutive relation, and a relationship between the parameters of the constitutive equations (viscosity, modulus, etc.) and the structure parameter where the first term on the right suggests structure formation with 0 T being the thixotropic timescale, the second term represents structure breakdown, wherein b is a parameter. In this paper, as a convention, we describe the dimensional variables with superscript * . Eq. ( The corresponding elastic strain induced in material, however, can be completely recovered upon removal of stress. Consequently, in an independent proposal, we assume that the rejuvenation or the microstructural break-down due to the applied deformation field cannot be associated with the elastic strain rate. Therefore, we propose an alternate form of kinetic expression wherein the rejuvenation term in Eq. (3) is dependent only on the viscous strain rate ( v g *  , or the second invariant of the rate of strain tensor associated with the viscous flow) and is given by: In both Eqs. (3) and (4), l varies from 0 (devoid of structure) to ¥ (fully developed structure). In addition, we use the time-dependent linear Maxwell model as a constitutive equation, given by: , where m is the power-law exponent where 0 t is the relaxation time associated with a completely rejuvenated state In a soft glassy material, wherein elements constituting the same are trapped in energy well having depth U , the relaxation time of the same is considered to show Arrhenius dependence on U as Suppose in a completely rejuvenated state, if an energy well depth of an element is 0 U , the relationship between 0 t and t ¢ is given by: ( ) . On the other hand, if b is the characteristic length-scale associated with a soft glassy material, the elastic modulus of the same is related to U as . Both these relationships lead to a natural dependence of modulus on the relaxation time given by: ( ) ( ) where 0 G is the modulus associated with a completely rejuvenated state. The parameter ( ) controls the growth of modulus as a function of l . Since in a completely rejuvenated or shear melted state, a material is devoid of any structure, we consider the barrier height 0 U to be typically of the order of thermal energy 0 (1) In the present work, we solve two types of structural kinetic models. In the first formalism, which is termed as total strain rate (TSR) model, we use Eqs ( . The conventional expression for the evolution of l , given by Eq. ( On the other hand, the newly proposed expression for the evolution of l associated with VSR model, wherein rejuvenation depends on the viscous strain rate is given by Eq. ( where s is the second invariant of the stress tensor. Finally, the time dependent Maxwell model given by Eq. ( In Eqs. ( is the dimensionless variable describing the ratio of the thixotropic timescale to the relaxation time associated with the completely rejuvenated state. Consequently, 0 a  is the purely elastic limit of the Maxwell model. The model has four parameters: b , g , m and a . In this work, we always consider b =1 and 1 g = . We also consider 1.2 m = unless otherwise specified. Furthermore, in this work, we consider only the shear flow, wherein the velocity is in direction 1, and the gradient is in the orthogonal direction 2. In the present paper, we analyze the energy required to deform the structural kinetic model under the application of constant strain rate and compare the same with the work that can be recovered from it when kept under constant strain conditions as a function of time. This flow field allows us to assess the models with respect to Planck's statement of the second law. We also investigate the evolution of the stress as a function of time under constant strain conditions. We first discuss the steady-state behavior of the model. In a limit of the steady-state, the time-dependent Maxwell model represented by Eq. ( On the other hand, the kinetic equation related to the TSR model given by Eq. ( reduces to 1 , while that of given by Eq. ( . The subscript SS denotes the steady state. However, since in a limit of steady state, the elastic strain associated with the Maxwell model remains constant leading to 0 Ess g =  , we have: Relationship between Eqs. ( However, beyond a specific value of m , which depends on the value of g (in this work, we use g =1), the steady-state flow curve shows a non-monotonic behavior. The nonmonotonic flow curve in a structural kinetic model suggests the presence of timedependent yield stress Fig. ). In this work, we consider i l =100 and 0 10 g =  . The inset shows a schematic of the time (or l ) dependent Maxwell model. For a single-mode Maxwell model, the work done per unit volume on the same (in a dimensionless form) while deforming it from state 1 to 2 is given by: where v E is the energy dissipated in deforming the dashpot while e E is the energy required to deform the spring. In Eq. ( We use Planck's statement of the second law (please note strain rate is applied in the opposite direction but since g  is the second invariant of the rate of strain tensor, it is always positive), which ensures no change in l . On the other hand, for the VSR model with l evolution given by Eq. ( Consequently, in both the cases ( ) G l  remains constant, and the work recovered is given by: Interestingly for the VSR model, wherein l evolution given by Eq. ( represents the maximum work that can be recovered for a given value of l and e g . This is because any process of strain reversal of spring slower than instantaneous retraction will induce nonzero v g  that will cause a decrease in l according to Eq. ( = , the work recovered will always be less than that given by Eq. ( The rest of this section is arranged as follows. In the following subsection, we carry out energy analysis of the proposed structural kinetic models with both the types of structure factor evolution expressions Eqs. ( To begin with, we consider the TSR model with the structure factor evolution equation given by Eq. ( . In Fig. However since 0 g =  , according to Eq. ( Eventually W crosses E and continues to increase further. At a certain time, l reaches the initial value. If at this state, work is recovered from the spring as represented by Eq. ( It is important to note that, as discussed before, in a rejuvenated (structureless) state of a material, l undergoes spontaneous increase as a function of time under quiescent conditions. Consequently, free energy is a monotonically decreasing function of l . Therefore, a mere higher value of extracted work than work done on the system will not necessarily violate the second law. As clearly mentioned in Planck's statement, the cycle must get completed, wherein the initial state of the free energy (initial value of l ) must be achieved, and the corresponding extracted work needs to be greater than the work done on the system for the second law to get violated. As mentioned before, work recovered represented by Eq. ( In Fig. decreases with time at the cost of an increase in v g , so that their sum remains constant In Fig. We next consider the case of TSR model for 1 a = that represents further lower viscosity of the dashpot (or lower relaxation time of the system) compared to what is considered in Figs. however, the increase in e g is much stronger than that of v g . This is because, although lower than that considered for the case of 0.1 a = shown in Fig In order to understand the effect of a and m on violation of the second law for the TSR model for the studied flow field and the expression of W given by Eq. ( Since W E > 1 represents a recovery of more work that whet is done on the system at the end of the cycle, it suggests a violation of the second law. In general, It can be seen that, W E increases with for increase in m and decrease in a . For a =0 and for the non-zero values of m ( m =0 represents non-aging equilibrium material), we observe W E > 1 suggesting clear violation of the second law, emphasizing ideal thixoelastic material is indeed unrealistic. For higher values of a , violation of the second law depends on the value of m . Overall the TSR formulation represnted by l -evolution given by Eq. ( The analysis of the TSR model reported in Figs 4 to 6 consider rejuvenation in the structural kinetic model is caused by the total shear rate as per Eq. ( Consequently, l increases linearly as a function of time irrespective of the value of g  . Therefore, for this specific case, we take 0 t =10, such that for 0 t t < the model is subjected to 0 g  =10 while for 0 t t 3 the strain is kept constant ( g  =0). In Fig. Furthermore, as expected, the elastic strain, which is equal to the total strain, shows a linear increase with time for 0 t t < . For 0 t t 3 , the strain is kept constant ( and because there is no dashpot, l continues to increase linearly with time, causing modulus to increase. However, although strain is constant, since the stress is a product of modulus and elastic strain, it can be seen to be increasing with time. The ratio of the work recovered from the to the system to the energy input W E at the point of completion of cycle (when the original value of l is achieved as per Figure In Fig. . In Fig. behavior, according to Eq. ( However, as time progresses, the rate of viscous strain increases with time so that v lg  increases above unity, and eventually l decreases and reaches a value of unity. Subsequently, the strain is kept constant ( 0 t t 3 ). Although the total strain rate is zero, the viscous strain rate remains high. Therefore, for a very short period of time beyond 0 t t = , l continues to decrease, reaches a value close to 0.1, and then starts increasing again as v lg  becomes less than unity. The stress for 0 t t < goes on increasing, and at the point of decrease in l , undergoes a sharp decrease, thereby showing an overshoot. For 0 t t 3 , e g decreases at the cost of v g keeping the total strain constant. Interestingly, l increases in this region, causing an increase in modulus while e g decreases. Consequently, the stress continues to decrease for a certain period, which is dominated by a decrease in e g . However, beyond a particular point, a decrease in e g (as well as increase in v g ) slows down. This enhances the rate of increase in l and hence the modulus. As a result, the enhancement in modulus dominates, and the stress starts increasing with time, thereby showing a non-monotonic relaxation of stress under the application of constant strain. In Fig. W E at the point of completion of the cycle (when the original value of l is achieved as per Figure We also investigate an effect of a and m on W E at the point of completion of thermodynamic cycle (when the initial value of l is achieved during constant strain step) for 1-510, we plot W E at the point of completion of the thermodynamic cycle as a function of m for different values of a . Contrary to what was observed for the TSR model, W E shows a non-monotonic dependence on m for the VSR model. Furthermore, for lower values of m , a decrease in a causes increase in W E . However, after the maximum, a decrease in W E becomes sharper with a decrease in a . Such behavior primarily occurs because of the following dependencies of E and W on a and m . Firstly E increases with increase in m such that enhancement becomes stronger at higher values of m and lower values of a . On the other hand, an increase in W gets weaker with an increase in m leading to the observed behavior. To further understand behavior shown in Figs. 9 and 10, let us consider a case wherein the viscosity of the dashpot is suitably large ( a is sufficiently small) such that v g  for most of the time domain 0 t t < will be so small that l is expected to be higher than i l before suddenly decreasing to any pre-assigned value. Consequently, the work done on the system would be large. For 0 t t 3 , on the other hand, owing to the high viscosity of the dashpot, l is expected to increase at a faster rate to reach i l , and hence work recovered will never be greater than that of work done. For higher values of a , dissipation associated with the dashpot will not allow the recovered work to be more than work done on the system, as shown in Fig 10 . Consequently, with l evolution given by Eq. ( It should be mentioned that, although we use evolution equation proposed by Coussot and co-workers On a broader note, the analysis presented in this work is not limited to any particular model but should be applicable for any structural kinetic model, wherein rejuvenation is due to the strain rate associated with the dissipative processes. For a time-dependent Maxwell model, the stress is a product of modulus and strain in the spring. During stress relaxation, the total strain associated with the Maxwell model is held constant. Consequently, strain in the spring decreases at the cost of strain in the dashpot with an increase in time. However, under application of constant strain, given that viscosity of dashpot is not too low so that 1 v lg <  , l (and hence the modulus) increases with time. This behavior eventually produces an increase in stress leading to non-monotonic stress relaxation, as shown in Fig. In the structural kinetic model proposed in section II, we consider l to increase indefinitely and the corresponding relaxation time and modulus are given by Eqs. ( on the other hand, show structure formation with time after cessation of shear flow. However, these systems eventually attain equilibrium as suggested by the complete relaxation of the stress. To model this behavior, we consider the l -evolution expression given by Eq. ( ( ) where t l is the threshold value of structure parameter such that for 1 t l l >> , relaxation time as well modulus become constant. Eqs. ( of the interparticle bond may occur even under the strained state. Strengthening of a bond that is under tension (owing to finite strain) may cause an increase in the well depth and hence enhancement in the modulus. However, since the strain is constant, it can lead to an increase in stress. Such enhancement of modulus (and therefore stress) is solely at the cost of free energy of the system, and hence it does not violate the second law. As discussed in the introduction, under constant T and P conditions, in the process of physical aging, the Gibbs free energy reduces as a function of time. Under quiescent (stress-free) conditions with constant T and P , thermodynamically, the lowering of free energy (specific Gibbs free energy f ) with time can simply be represented as: where out q is the rate of heat transfer from the system to the surrounding. We are also assuming that the volume of the system changes negligibly, so a change in Gibbs free energy is also equal to a change in Helmholtz free energy. To have validation of the second law, out q must always be positive Let us now discuss a limiting case of a material wherein viscosity is so high that it only undergoes elastic deformation. We discussed the behavior of such a system in Fig. where out q ¢ is the heat transferred from the system to the surrounding and is always positive. If the exact extent of physical aging (decrease in Gibbs free energy from i f to f f ) is to be carried out under the quiescent conditions such that out q heat transfers from the system to the surrounding, we have: Comparing Eq. ( Figure Physical aging under constant strain (top right), the particle gains elastic energy (middle right). However, in such a strained state as well, the particle undergoes physical aging wherein it lowers its energy (bottom right). Eq. ( In order to analyze how the viscous dissipation causes an increase in free energy, we consider an opposite limit dominated by viscous flow (suggesting physical aging to be negligible under the applied flow field). The rate of viscous dissipation per unit volume under flow is given by : v s g      . However, part of this energy will be used for breaking the structure (rejuvenation or causing an increase in free energy) while the remaining part will dissipate as heat ( , out VD q ). Consequently, in a limit of negligible aging and viscous flow the energy balance is given by: , : v o u tV D df q dt s g The above energy balance also reiterates that unless breakage of structure occurs, rejuvenation cannot take place. The elastic strain, while can indeed stretch the material and take the system closer to the point of break, only the breakage of structure, which is dissipative in nature, can increase the structure parameter and hence the free energy. The objective of the present work is to propose a structural kinetic model framework for a thixotropic viscoelastic material, wherein modulus does increase with time without violating the second law of thermodynamics. However, there is a necessity to come up with a comprehensive thermodynamic framework, wherein structure factor l can be explicitly related to the free energy along with its dependence on time, It is important to understand if such material show non-monotonic stress relaxation, as demonstrated in Fig. Furthermore, it is also important to understand how the flow history affects the stress relaxation in materials that show physical aging and rejuvenation, particularly with respect to the elastic modulus. In this work, we address the issue of violation of the second law of thermodynamics for a thixotropic system, wherein elastic modulus increases as a function of time and decreases under an application of the deformation field. We propose a simple structural kinetic model with time-dependent single mode linear Maxwell fluid as a constitutive equation. We show that the second law does not get violated if the rejuvenation is considered to be occurring solely due to the viscous rate of strain in a structural kinetic model. We also show that, for a certain parameter range, leading to time-dependent relaxation time and modulus, along with rejuvenation term depending only on the viscous rate of strain, the model demonstrates nonmonotonic stress relaxation as recently reported experimentally. However, the model clearly suggests that the concept of thixo-elasticity is non-existent, and no real material can be termed as thixo-elastic. increases beyond E . Ultimately, l reaches the initial value, and at that state, W is greater than E , suggesting violation of the second law. It should be noted that in this cycle, the l as well as e g reach the initial state (initial and final value of e g = 0, as work is extracted by reversing the deformation completely while keeping l constant).