Additive manufacturing (AM) by laser powder bed fusion (L-PBF) leads to the formation of a rich, hierarchical microstructure, including dislocation cell structures and elemental segregation. This structure has profound impacts on the corrosion behavior and mechanical properties of printed materials. In this study, we use in situ liquid cell scanning transmission electron microscope (STEM) to directly characterize the nanoscale origins of corrosion initiation in AM 316L stainless steel. Under applied anodic potentials, we found that the dislocation cellular boundaries were preferentially corroded and that pit-like features formed along the cellular boundaries. We directly observed the earliest stages of corrosion by controlling the biasing parameters to decelerate the corrosion processes. The results show that highly localized corrosion occurs via inclusion dissolution along dislocation cell boundaries. More widespread corrosion initiates at the dislocation cell boundaries and spreads throughout the dislocation networks. Research into and applications of additive manufacturing (AM) for metals and alloys has grown at an increasingly rapid pace in recent years. Along with the geometric flexibility inherent to AM processes, metals and alloys processed by laser powder bed fusion (L-PBF) AM have also been found to have exceptional mechanical properties and unusual corrosion behavior. Corrosion studies of L-PBF AM stainless steel are still in the early stage They also found that oxide and sulfide particles decreased the corrosion resistance in the AM steel parts. Nie et al. In situ liquid cell transmission electron microscopy (LC-TEM) provides an avenue for directly resolving corrosion of pit formation processes in real time and at the nanoscale AM 316L stainless steel cubes [10cm × 10cm × 8cm (height)] used in this work were produced with a Concept M2 (54μm beam size) laser powder bed fusion machine. The powder source was CL20 ES (Concept, Germany). The key laser parameters include laser power of 350 W, scan speeds 1700-1900 mm/s, a hatch spacing of 105 μm, and a build layer thickness of 30 μm. An island scan strategy was used. The as-built samples all have density >99.4%. The corrosion results reported in this study was obtained from the build-plane microstructures. The TEM sample was fabricated using a FEI Nova Nanolab 200 dual beam FIB/SEM. The TEM lamella was thinned down to 100 nm-200 nm thickness by FIB, and then transferred onto the working electrode of the chip. To avoid ion beam damage on the SiNx membrane, e-beam deposition was used for Pt deposition and welding the lamella onto the SiNx membrane. After the lamella was firmly attached to the membrane, a small trench (100nm in width) was cut on the lamella to separate it from the manipulator. To avoid possible leakage from this trench, Pt was deposited via e-beam deposition to seal the region with a controlled height slightly higher than the electrode. The manipulator was maintained in contact with the chip to reduce the charging effect during e-beam deposition In situ TEM tests were performed in an FEI Tecnai F30 transmission electron microscope operated at 300kV using a Protochip Poseidon select holder. This TEM is equipped with an Oxford X-ray energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) detector. Ex situ EDS mapping was conducted in a Hitach HD2700 aberration corrected STEM operated at 200 kV with a Bruker detector with ~0.3 steradian solid angle. The samples used for electrochemical experiments are epoxy mounted with screws embedded at the rear of the samples for electrical connections. Prior to the experiments, the sample was polished using 800-4000 grit paper followed by diamond suspensions from 9μm to 1μm and a final polish using colloidal silica. Cyclic polarization scans were conducted using a three-electrode system with Pt as the counter electrode, saturated calomel electrode as the reference electrode, and the AM steel sample as the working electrode. Polarization scans were performed at a scan rate of 10 mV/s with the scan ranging from -0.2 V to +1.2 V with respect to the open circuit potential (OCP). The electrolyte used was 1 wt.% HCl solution, identical to the one used for the in situ experiments. Tescan Mira3 XM scanning electron microscope (SEM) was used to observe the microstructure of the sample post polarization scans to characterize the corrosion attack. Figs. The STEM-ADF image shows that the sample is composed of dislocation cellular structures, with each cell having an average diameter of approximately 700 nm. There are also multiple inclusions in the sample, ranging from 20-100 nm, which appear dark in the STEM-ADF image. Although we were not able to resolve the elemental composition of these inclusions, prior analysis on this same material showed that they are transition-metal-rich silicates with varying levels of Mn. Before in situ LC-TEM testing, the chips were cleaned using a Hitachi Zone cleaner for 3 minutes to make them hydrophilic. The electrolyte used was a 1 wt.% HCl solution in deionized (DI) water. The electrochemical tests including OCP measurements and biasing were performed using a Gamry 600 potentiostat. Low dose imaging was used, with a dose rate of approximately 0.025 electron/(nm 2 •s). To minimize the electron beam induced damage while applying potential, all STEM images were recorded after applying voltage and after rinsing the lamella using DI water for 10 minutes with the maximum allowed flow rate and the beam was blanked between image acquisitions. The STEM-ADF images were acquired over a ~10μmx10μm field of view with 0.7 μs integration time per pixel. No noticeable electron beam effects were observed even during 70 minutes continuous integration time. However, we noticed that if the integration time of each pixel is more than the order of 1 second in the EDS mapping acquisition, the sample will be damaged right after applying biasing. Even flushing the sample for 10 minutes, slight beam damage can be seen when performing EDS-mapping with pixel time >1s. Therefore, to minimize the beam effect on the sample, all the EDS-mapping were performed without any HCl solution. Fig. Two representative pit-like features are indicated by a red circle (cell boundary pit) and a yellow circle (cell interior) in Fig. To decelerate the corrosion process and investigate the local corrosion mechanism, we adjusted the biasing potential and duration. Fig. To verify the observed behavior, bulk electro-chemical tests were run on the AM stainless steel sample. In agreement with the in situ TEM experiments, these tests showed that at high scan rates, 10mV/s, cellular attack was observed to dominate the response (Fig. Here we take advantage of the unique liquid cell TEM capabilities to focus on the initial stages of attack. In conclusion, we directly observed the earliest stages of corrosion attack in AM 316L stainless steel in 1wt.% HCl solution under biasing conditions using in situ liquid cell TEM. The results show that corrosion attack first takes place by dissolution of transition-metal-rich silicate inclusions, but does not spread beyond the inclusion sites and develop into pits which was further confirmed by the bulk corrosion test. The attacked inclusions were mostly located along dislocation cell boundaries, suggesting that either the localized strain fields or the elemental segregation to the boundaries increased the susceptibility to attack. After dissolution of the inclusions, we observed more widespread corrosion attack along the dislocation cell networks. These dislocation cells networks are rich in Cr and Mo relative to the surrounding matrix, suggesting that microgalvanic effects play an important role in the initial stages of corrosive attack in AM stainless steel.