Osmotic energy (or salinity-gradient energy) is the energy released when water with different salinities is mixed, such as rivers and oceans. By employing a semipermeable membrane to control the mixing process, the osmotic pressure gradient energy can be generated in terms of electrical power via pressure retarded osmosis (PRO) without causing adverse environmental impacts. This work presents the fabrication of thin film nanocomposite (TFN) membranes which are customized to offer high flux in forward osmosis (FO) and high osmotic power in PRO. In this study, the TFN membrane was fabricated by forming a polyamide thin film on the polysulfone substrate through the interfacial polymerization process. One of the challenges in this process is the fouling of PRO membranes. Fouling is one of the major characteristics that results in the decline in the water flux of the membrane. The hydraulic pressure during PRO processes is less than RO processes so membranes that are used for PRO are less likely to foul. Experiments show that TFN membranes are more tolerant of fouling than TFC membranes because of the nanomaterials which has higher surface hydrophilicity. The structure of the membrane is a very significant characteristic that has an influence on fouling. Especially, the structure of porosity that is coherent to the thickness. Membrane adjustment plays a key role in the trend of fouling. Zeolite loading in the polyamide layer was in the range of 0.05-0.3 wt%. Field emission scanning electron microscope (FESEM) and atomic force spectroscopy (AFM) studies 2 indicated that zeolite was successfully embedded in the polyamide layer of the membrane. The lowest contact angle was obtained at 61.08° when 0.1wt% of zeolite was used. Similarly, after the certain cleaning strategies the 0.1wt% zeolite modified membrane resulted in higher water flux in both RO (9.66 L/m 2 h) and FO (5.8 L/m 2 h) experiments. TFN membrane incorporated with zeolite exhibits power density of 1.73 W/m 2 and retains its desired resilience to foulants for osmotic power generation. Pressure retarded osmosis (PRO) is an emerging membrane process uses for harvesting energy and desalination applications. According to osmotic pressure, river water crosses in the same way as osmotic pressure due to dilution of draw solution. In addition, the low concentration solution will be depressurized in a turbine for energy production. Some of the advantages of PRO are as follows: First, the operation of PRO can function 24 hours a day. Secondly, the speed of the wind and the radiation of the sun has no influence on PRO. The third benefit is having a minor footprint and the last is the facilitated scale-up. In addition, if PRO and RO brine matches with each other then it will be good for RO brine because RO brine can be used as both solutions with high concentration and low concentration such as river water and seawater Due to high salinity in draw region leads to lower water flux which in turn reduce the production of power density. It is mainly due to the adsorption of solutes on the membrane surface. Thus, the PRO membrane should be of thin, hydrophilic and resistant to salt adsorption One of the challenges is the fouling of PRO membranes. Fouling is one of the major characteristics that results in the decline in the water flux of the membrane Especially, the structure of porosity that is coherent to the thickness. Membrane adjustment plays a key role in the trend of fouling The improvement of the osmotic characterization of the semi-permeable membrane is still one of the significant obstacles through PRO. One of the major issues is related to the low water flux that has consequently resulted in unpromising osmotic power The method to improve TFN membrane fabrication can be achieved modification of hydrophilic nanofillers During the period of osmosis process, permeate water rapidly diluted draw solution, when the feed solution is being concentrated. The pressure which is hydrostatic is entitled to osmotic pressure such as water transportation passing through the membrane while it is functionalized to draw solution. At any step while ∆P can be between zero to Δπ (Osmotic pressure), water can flow into the saline water because Δπ is still larger than the pressure which is ∆P. This process is entitled to PRO In this equation Aw is membrane permeability coefficient (L/m 2 h.bar) and ∆P is differential feed pressure (bar) and Δπ is the osmotic pressure (bar). The chemicals and materials utilized in this research are as follows: A commercial UF PS membrane support (PS35, Nanostone Flat Sheet Membrane) was purchased from Sterlitech Corporation. N-Hexane was obtained from Fisher Scientific. TMC, MPD, Zeolite (Molecular Sieves, 3Å), Sodium Chloride were purchased from Sigma Aldrich. Prior to TFC membrane preparation, commercial polysulfone membrane was soaked in RO water for an overnight. Interfacial polymerization technique was adopted for the fabrication of polyamide layer membrane fabrication. The schematic of interfacial polymerization is shown in Figure Subsequently, 0.1 wt% of TMC solution in n-hexane solution was poured onto the amine-catalyzed PSF membrane. It was allowed to react for 50 sec to form a thin polyamide layer over the commercial PSF membrane. Immediately, the thin film was allowed to get bound in substrate by keeping in an oven at a temperature of 60 ̊C for 5 min Hydrophilicity is an important membrane parameter for having higher flux and more power density. Table PRO is one of the most promising applications for power generation and membranes are the heart of this method. To improve this process, there are a variety of nanoparticles that are somehow promising to be incorporated with composite membranes. In addition, the recent results have shown that they are more promising to use in the PRO process in comparison with the control TFC membrane. Improving the performance of TFN membranes through PRO process is mostly rely on the nanomaterials using in the substrate or active layer (polyamide layer). It has been observed that using nanomaterials in TFN membranes has led into having higher water flux and consequently to have a higher power density and less fouling compared to the control TFC membrane. Working under different testing conditions will result in having various performance ranges which are between the 1.7 -38.0 W/m 2 . In addition, achieving better performance through the PRO process relies on the parameters such as different concentrations in the draw and feed solution and operation pressure. In this study, molecular sieves incorporated PA layer TFN membrane was fabricated successfully by an interfacial polymerization method. Molecular sieves have good compatibility with thin film PA layer. This result has good agreement with morphology analysis. The main required hydrophilic property of the membrane improved in molecular sieves incorporated TFN membranes. 0.1 Zeolite 3Å incorporated TFN membrane exhibits a lower contact angle and higher permeability of 61.08 and 0.64 L/m 2 h.bar. Moreover, the higher water flux with better salt rejection was observed in 0.1 wt% molecular sieves incorporated TFN membranes. The optimal loading of molecular sieves is found to 0.1 wt%. Also, the higher water flux with minimal reverse solute flux was noticed in FO experiments for TFN membranes. The maximum flux of 5.6 L/m 2 h noticed in AL-DS mode for 0.1 Zeolite 3Å incorporated TFN membrane. This phenomenon is mainly due to molecular sieves, which improves the hydrophilicity of the membranes. Moreover, a higher power density of 1.73 w/m 2 observed in TFN membranes. These studies may be insight for other researchers and industrialist to the utilization of novel molecular sieves incorporated TFN membrane for desalination and membrane-based energy harvesting methods.