The ∆-Self-Consistent-Field (∆SCF) method has been established as an accurate and computationally efficient approach for calculating absolute core electron binding energies for light elements up to chlorine, but relatively little is known about the performance of this method for heavier elements. In this work, we present ∆SCF calculations of transition metal (TM) 2p core electron binding energies for a series of 60 molecular compounds containing the first row transition metals Ti, V, Cr, Mn, Fe and Co. We find that the calculated TM 2p 3/2 binding energies are less accurate than the results for the lighter elements with a mean absolute error (MAE) of 0.73 eV compared to experimental gas phase photoelectron spectroscopy results. However, our results suggest that the error depends mostly on the element and is rather insensitive to the chemical environment. By applying an element-specific correction to the binding energies the MAE is reduced to 0.20 eV, similar to the accuracy obtained for the lighter elements. Theoretical calculations of core electron binding energies are important for aiding the interpretation of experimental core level X-ray photoelectron spectra. In recent years, it has been shown that the all-electron ∆-Self-Consistent-Field (∆SCF) method However, thus far, almost all theoretical studies of core electron binding energies have focused on a narrow subset of elements in the periodic table. In particular, the prediction of 1s core electron binding energies in the elements carbon to fluorine has attracted the most attention . In addition, a few studies have considered the 2p core levels of elements of the third row of the periodic table Much less work has been carried out for systems containing transition metal atoms. A few studies applied the ∆SCF approach to atomic systems: all subshells of neutral atoms with Z between 2 and 106 were considered in In this work, we examine the performance of the all-electron ∆SCF method based on density functional theory (DFT) for predicting 2p 3/2 binding energies in molecules containing first row transition metals. In particular, we carry out calculations for 60 different molecules containing Ti, V, Cr, Mn, Fe and Co using the formalism introduced in All core electron binding energies reported in this work have been calculated using the ∆SCF method, in which arXiv:2112.04200v1 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci] 8 Dec 2021 the binding energy is obtained as the total energy difference between the N-electron ground state and the N-1 electron state with a core hole. The total energy of the N-1 electron state is calculated by converging the selfconsistent field in the presence of an explicit core hole, which is achieved by imposing a non-Aufbau-principle occupation of the Kohn-Sham eigenstates at each SCF iteration. The Maximum Overlap Method (MOM) is used to keep track of the core hole, in case the energy ordering of the core orbitals changes between successive SCF iterations DFT calculations were carried out using the allelectron electronic structure program FHI-aims, in which the Kohn-Sham eigenstates are represented in terms of atom-centered basis functions defined on a numerical grid A comparison of the calculated and experimental core electron binding energies for a dataset of 60 molecular transition metal compounds containing Ti, V, Cr, Mn, Fe, and Co is presented in Figures Figure A closer look at the results for each individual element, see Figure The accuracy of the calculated binding energies with and without the element-specific systematic corrections is analyzed in Table In light of the excellent agreement of the calculated absolute core electron binding energies for the 2p levels in lighter elements and the 1s levels in the elements lithium to magnesium, one naturally wonders why significant element-specific corrections are needed to obtain accurate absolute binding energies for the 2p 3/2 core levels of first row transition metals. We have carefully considered the dependence of the calculated binding energies on the basis set used in the calculation, and found that basis set incompleteness cannot account for the ob-served systematic errors (see Supplementary Information for details). † Therefore, we can say that the two most important sources of error are the treatment of relativistic effects and the choice of the exchange-correlation functional. Our treatment of relativistic effects using scalarrelativistic DFT (followed by subtracting one third of the atomic spin-orbit splitting to obtain 2p 3/2 binding energies) is well justified for the 1s levels in elements of the second period of the periodic table and also for the 2p levels of the elements silicon to chlorine even though the magnitude of the spin-orbit splittings are already significant in these systems (ranging from 0.4 eV for Si to 1.6 eV for Cl). In contrast, for the 2p levels of the elements titanium to cobalt, the spin-orbit splittings are much greater, ranging from 6.4 eV for Ti to 15.1 eV for Co and therefore the applied spin-orbit correction shifts the binding energies by several eV. It is possible that for shifts of this magnitude, including the effects of spinorbit coupling via a post-SCF correction is no longer reliable. In future studies, it would be interesting to examine whether fully relativistic ∆SCF calculations, in which the energy of the final state with a 2p 3/2 core hole can be calculated directly, yield more accurate absolute core electron binding energies. Of course, the influence of the exchange-correlation functional on the accuracy of the calculated binding energies should also be investigated. Previous studies have established the ∆SCF method as a highly accurate and computationally affordable method for calculating core-electron binding energies. However, thus far, the vast majority of theoretical work has focused on elements of the 2nd and 3rd periods of the periodic table, whereas experimentally, core level spectra of all stable elements, except for H and He, are studied. In this work, we have evaluated the suitability of the ∆SCF method for predicting 2p 3/2 core electron binding energies in compounds of the first row transition metals Ti, V, Cr, Mn, Fe, and Co. We have found that a formalism based on scalarrelativistic DFT calculations using the SCAN functional systematically underestimates absolute TM 2p 3/2 binding energies in these compounds, and that the errors in the calculated absolute core electron binding energies are significantly larger than the errors found for lighter elements using the same method Together with the recent work on extending the ∆SCF method to periodic solids There are no conflicts to declare. FIG. 3. Histograms showing the distribution of errors in the calculated binding energies with and without the element-specific corrections. † Electronic Supplementary Information (ESI) available: full numerical results, core-enhanced numerical basis sets used for the atoms with a core hole, an evaluation of the basis sets used in this work, relative to uncontracted gaussian basis sets, sample control.in files, and the relaxed structures of all molecules.