In this work, we demonstrate that cutting diamond crystals with a laser (532 nm wavelength, 0.5 mJ energy, 200 ns pulse duration at 15 kHz) produces a 20 nm thick surface layer with magnetic order at room temperature. We have measured the magnetic moment of five natural and six CVD diamond crystals of different size, nitrogen content and surface orientations with a SQUID magnetometer. A robust ferromagnetic response at 300 K is observed only for crystals that were cut with the laser along the (100) surface orientation. The magnetic signals are much weaker for the (110) and negligible for the (111) orientations. We attribute the magnetic order to the disordered graphite layer produced by the laser at the diamond surface. The ferromagnetic signal vanished after chemical etching or after moderate temperature annealing. The obtained results indicate that laser treatment of diamond may pave the way to create ferromagnetic spots at its surface. Since the first studies on the magnetic order found in pure graphite-based samples were reported, see In this work, in contrast to the above mentioned studies about triggering magnetic order in the diamond structure, we are mainly interested to study the possible development of magnetic order through a graphitization of the diamond surface via laser pulses. Several experimental and theoretical studies on the origin of ferromagnetism in graphite without magnetic impurities have been published over the last 20 years, for reviews see Refs. It has been known for almost 20 years, see A single crystal of diamond is glued to the base surface of a mandrel, so that a large face is orientated perpendicular to the axis of the mandrel. Next, the mandrel (with the diamond crystal) is fixed in a device for the precise positioning in the laser-cut system. The system is equipped with a video camera that allows to adjust the face of the crystal to be cut along the axis of the laser beam to achieve the shortest laser cut length. The marking of the cut line on the selected face of the diamond single crystal is carried out on the computer monitor with the help of optical devices. Before cutting, the laser beam was focused on the surface of the diamond at the level of the upper point of the cut. Then the laser beam was moved along the cut line, where the material was burned on the surface of the diamond with a width nearly the diameter of the laser beam focus. Thus, the working pass was performed at a certain depth in the crystal. After leaving the diamond sample, the laser beam was moved by a step (specified in the software) in the transverse direction and then moved in the opposite direction performing the next working pass. By selecting the wavelength, power, and the duration of the laser radiation pulses, we can control the volume of material removal. After performing several working steps, the laser beam reached half depth of the crystal to be cut. The shape of the cutting groove is wedge due to a conical shape of the focused laser beam. Thus, to reduce the amount of the ablated (burned) material, the mandrel with crystal is rotated 180 • and the cutting process continued from the back part of the crystal to cut its rest half of the thickness. To reduce the loss of diamond material during cutting, the cutting angle and the cutting width at the output are as small as possible. On the other hand, the laser beam must have a relatively large convergence angle to ensure high-quality focusing. With a significant reduction of the cutting angle, most of the laser power is reflected, which slows down the cutting process. There-fore, in order to optimize this process, we do a counter cut, which in turn helps to reduce the cutting depth and material losses. A SEM image of the obtained surface can be seen in Fig. After cutting, a polishing on the cut face was performed. The laser beam with the specified parameters was focused directly on the surface of the sample in order to burn off part of the surface material produced by the cutting. A SEM image of the obtained surface can be seen in Fig. In order to remove the graphitic-like nanometers thick ferromagnetic surface region formed after laser treatment we used two methods: (1) Chemical etching of the laser cut samples with a mixture of 30 mL concentrated sulphuric acid (H 2 SO 4 ), 10 mL fuming salpetric acid (HNO 3 ) and 10 mL 70 vol% perchloric acid (HClO 4 ). This mixture was heated at 120 C for 4 h. under reflux. After cooling to room temperature, the acids were decanted and the diamond was intensively washed with distilled water and dried with nitrogen gas. In comparison to literature (2) The other method we used is annealing the diamond sample in air at temperatures T ≤ 650 C for a couple of hours. Table As we will demonstrate below in this paper, the orientation of the laser cut surface plays a main role to produce the robust ferromagnetic nanometer thick surface region at room temperature. To support the results obtained from the natural diamond crystals, we have cut 6 CVD diamond samples at three orientations (100), ( Confocal Raman measurements were performed with the WiTec Alpha 300 System. A Laser wavelength of 532 nm (UHT S 300) was selected. A 50X objective (Zeiss, Germany) with a numerical aperture of 0.8, a laser power at the sample surface of ca. 35 mW and a 1800 grating on the CCD detector with spectral resolution of ca. 0.8 cm -1 were used. The measurements of the magnetic moment of the diamond samples have been done with a Superconducting Quantum Interferometer Device (SQUID) from Quantum Design. Magnetic field loops and temperature hysteresis were obtained after demagnetizing the samples at 380 K. The time between two consecutive measurements at different fields or temperatures was 5 min or longer with similar results. No time dependence was detected within experimental resolution. From the characterization of the impurities with PIXE we conclude that the maximum magnetic impurity concentration was 2.6 ppm of Fe in sample 164. The sample 354, which shows the largest magnetization at saturation, has a total concentration of magnetic impurities below 0.5 ppm, see Table As example, let us estimate how large would be the contribution of 0.17 ppm Fe in sample 354 to the mag- netization at saturation. We assume that this small concentration of Fe or most likely magnetite, Fe 3 O 4 , behaves as a bulk ferromagnet with a saturation magnetization of about 100 emu/g. The measured concentration of Fe in sample 354 would imply a ferromagnetic total mass of 76 ng, which in the unrealistic largest case could contribute with a magnetic moment of 4.8 μemu. This value is 4.2 times smaller than the magnetic moment at saturation measured at 300 K (see Section III C 1 below). Raman measurements were done on the "virgin", i.e. a region of the same sample without any laser treatment, and on the laser cut surfaces of all samples. As example, we show in Fig. We observed some differences in the Raman patterns between the cut surfaces of the CVD "a" and "b" samples: whereas in the "b" samples only Raman peaks corresponding to disordered graphite were observed, the "a" cut surfaces also showed a weak signal coming from the diamond main Raman peak. Apparently, the polishing procedure transforms the rest of diamond-like regions left after the first laser treatment, leaving only disordered graphite regions. Within the experimentally observed broadening of the Raman peaks, it is not possible to recognize systematic differences between the Raman spectra of the different cut surface orientations. Clearly, Raman characterization helps to identify the presence of graphite-like regions (after the laser treatment) but it does not provide clear hints for the presence of certain defects that can be correlated with the magnetic response. With the magnetic impurity concentration of our samples, the natural diamond crystals in the virgin state (before any laser treatment) do not show any sign of magnetic order at 300 K within the resolution of our SQUID magnetometer (∼ 5×10 -8 emu at an applied field of 1 T). Figure To further demonstrate the large difference in the ferromagnetic response between the cut sample before and after etching, the difference between the FC and ZFC states relative to the value in the ZFC state given by 100[m FC (T ) -m ZF C (T )]/|m ZF C (T )| at different applied magnetic fields is shown in Fig. Fig. Nitrogen doping with the concentrations measured in our samples, or lower, see Table Figure We observe that the saturation magnetic moment of sample #1b obtained after laser polishing the cut surface, is about 10% smaller than of sample #1a. The ferromagnetic behavior is clearly observed in the difference Fig. between ZFC and FC states, as shown by the temperature dependence of the susceptibility, see Fig. Independently of the origin of the diamond sample, natural or CVD, we found that under the selected conditions, the laser pulses produced a robust magnetically ordered graphite film at 300 K in samples cut along the diamond (100) surface orientation. Assuming a maximum thickness of 20 nm for the magnetic layer, the magnetization value at saturation varies from ∼ 10 emu/g to 20 emu/g at 300 K, similar to the magnetization values obtained for defect-induced ferromagnetic graphite C. Methods: PIXE, Raman and SQUID characterization