We investigate theoretically and demonstrate experimentally, the effect of material and geometric periodicity in face sheets on the overall dynamics of sandwich beams. By treating the two face sheets and core as separate entities using the classic sandwich plate theory (CPT), in conjunction with Bloch's theorem, and solving the governing equations with the transfer matrix method (TMM) and the generalized differential quadrature method (GDQM), we obtain a low-frequency total bandgap in which both transverse and longitudinal waves are blocked in sandwich beams with glide-reflected (GR) face sheets. On the other hand, only partial bandgaps blocking either transverse or longitudinal waves are present in the ones with mirror-reflected (MR) face sheets. Furthermore, a combination of full-scale finite element method (FEM) simulations and experimental characterization provide unequivocal evidence of these phenomenal wave features, as well as the accuracy of our theoretical results via defining separate displacement fields in comparison with effective periodic Timoshenko beam models. Our study indicates new mechanisms to suppress low-frequency elastic waves by tuning face sheet symmetry. Our explanation of wave behaviors from a structural symmetry point of view also provides a more comprehensive understanding of the symmetry effect on wave propagation in quasi-one-dimensional structures at large. Vibration is prevalent in engineering applications, such as civil, transportation, aerospace, and marine industries. Isolating or filtering vibrational waves has been a great challenge and has attracted significant attention. Among the various vibration reduction and filtering approaches, using sandwich structures to mitigate vibration is a popular choice due to their high specific stiffness and strength, exceptional energy absorption capability, and low structural weight In this paper, we shift our attention to the effect of face sheets with material and geometric periodicity on the overall dynamic behaviors of sandwich beams. Inspired by the study of periodic flexural beams Consider an infinitely long three-layer sandwich beam in the Cartesian coordinate system, as shown in Fig. The updated form of displacement fields by enforcing the displacement compatibility conditions at the layer interfaces, i.e., U c (x, hc Total potential (V ) and kinetic (T ) energies of the sandwich beam are expressed as where V cN ,V tN , and V bN are the normal strain energy at the core and top and bottom face sheets, respectively, and V cS is the shear strain energy at the core. Kinetic energy at core and top and bottom layers are defined as T c , T t , and T b , respectively. Detailed strain and kinetic energy expressions including the strain-displacement relationship are presented in Appendix A. We can then plug the above expressions of V and T into the governing equations of motion derived using Hamilton's principle where δ is the first variation operator, and τ 1 and τ 2 are time instances. The governing equations can then be expanded as follows where coefficients A i α , B j α , and M T α , in which i = 1, 2, ..., 6 and j = 1, 2, ..., 8, can be found in Appendix B. Here, α is the nominator for subunit cells and α = 1, 2, .., β, in which β is the total number of the subunit cells in each unit cell. From Hamilton's principle we can also obtain the axial forces P t α and P b α , shear force S α , and bending moment M α as follows In this section, we present our solutions of wave propagation in periodic sandwich beams using the transfer matrix method (TMM). Consider harmonic wave motions in a sandwich beam containing two subunit cells, the longitudinal displacements of mid-planes of top and bottom face sheets (u t and u b ) and transverse displacement (w) can be expressed as where α = I, II, denoting the first and second subunit cells, respectively, q is the wave number, and ω is frequency. Substituting the above displacement variables into the governing equation, i.e., Eqs. where u t (x), u b (x), and w(x) are the spatial terms (amplitude), and e -iωt is the temporal term of the wave vectors. Now, let's focus on the spatial terms only. By substituting Eq. ( where Derivation of the matrix Φ α components is presented in Appendix D. Let's now apply the continuity boundary conditions at the interfaces between unit cells and subunit cells to Eq. ( The first continuity boundary condition on state vector Ψ is applied at the interface between unit cells n and n + 1. Since this boundary is the interface between subunit II in unit cell n and subunit I in unit cell n + 1, we can obtain the following relationship between the two-state vectors in these two adjacent subunit cells Combining Eqs. ( where q is the Bloch wave number in the x-direction and d is the lattice constant. Substituting Eq. ( We can then obtain the solutions for q's at a certain frequency, ω, by solving the eigenvalues of the above equation where λ = e iqd . Band diagram can be obtained by calculating the values of λ for a frequency range. Detailed expressions of the matrices Γ , Π , Θ, and ∆ are presented in Appendix E. In addition to the TMM, in this paper, we are also presenting a numerical method for a broader application of problems. Among the various numerical methods, GDQM is among the most widely used for both free and forced vibration analysis of sandwich structures due to its effectiveness in solving partial differential equations via transformation into algebraic equations. Here, we will demonstrate the accuracy of GDQM in band diagram calculation of sandwich beams with periodic face sheets by comparing them with those obtained by TMM. We can achieve the transformation by approximating each variable at a given grid point as the linear weighted summation of its values at all of the discrete points in the domain of that variable. Let us consider function f = f (x) in the normalized domain x = x-xα Lα where x α is the location of left edge of subunit cell α with length L α . where C (n) pq are the weighting coefficients for the nth order derivative (n = 0, 1, ..., 4) and N is the total number of domain points. The weighting coefficients, their derivatives, and grid point arrangement are presented in Appendix F. The discretized form of Eq. ( The other two discretized equations of motion [Eqs. ( where In order to separate the equations that only include the nodes inside the domain of the subunit cells (the nodes except those that are in the boundaries of subunit cells) from the nodes that satisfy continuity conditions and the nodes that satisfy periodic boundary conditions, Eq. ( where Continuity conditions on variables u t , u b , w, and w between the subsequent subunit cells α and α + 1 (α = 1, .., β), in which β is the total number of subunit cells, are as follows The continuity conditions on P t , P b , M , S are presented in Appendix F. The total discretized continuity conditions can be written in a matrix form as follows where K C is a 8(β -1) × 3βN matrix. Eq. (37) can be decomposed as the following form where Periodic boundary conditions on variables u t , u b , w, and w between the left side of first subunit cell I and right side of the last subunit cell β are as L I (w) Periodic boundary conditions on P t , P b , M , and V , between the left side of first subunit cell I and right side of the last subunit cell β are presented in Appendix F. The total discretized periodic equations are written in a matrix form as where K P is a 8 × 3βN matrix. Eq. ( where K P D is a 8 × (3N -8)β matrix, K P C is a 8 × 8(β -1) matrix, and K P P is a 8 × 8 matrix. Combining Eqs.( We can obtain the solutions for λ at a certain frequency, ω, by solving the eigenvalues of the above equation. Band diagrams for sandwich beams with material periodicity shown in Fig. We should also note that even though sandwich beams with an MR symmetry appear to be also approachable via a more commonly used Timoshenko beam theory with equivalent properties (as presented in Table In this work, we investigate dynamic behaviors of sandwich beams with materially and geometrically periodic face sheets with MR and GR symmetries using CPT, which is more advantageous compared to the traditionally applied equivalent Timoshenko beam models. Numerical simulation and experimental measurements are performed to validate the accuracy of our theoretical results. We find that the sandwich beams with an MR symmetry can only open partial bandgaps with decoupled transverse or longitudinal phonon modes. On the other hand, we obtain total bandgaps that can effectively stop both transverse and longitudinal phonons from propagation in sandwich beams with a GR symmetry, which can be achieved without using a curved beam. We attribute this total bandgap opening mechanism to the symmetry of structures, which offers a more general explanation of the dynamic behaviors of structures with similar symmetry profiles. Moreover, parametric studies suggest that both the existence and the magnitude of the total (as well as partial) bandgaps can be further tuned by adjusting the glide magnitude and/or differences in materials/geometry of the periodic face sheets, which provides more interesting approaches to wave manipulation mechanisms at large. All data is stored on a secured hard drive at the Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of Vermont. The code, simulation and experimental data required to reproduce these findings are available from the corresponding author on reasonable request. where ε c xx , ε t xx , and ε b xx are the normal strains in x-direction, respectively, and γ c xy is the shear strain. The normal strain energy at the core and top and bottom face sheets are defined as V cN , V tN , and V bN respectively as The shear strain energy at the core is defined as follows kinetic energy at core and top and bottom layers, T cN , T tN , and T bN , respectively, are obtained as follows where m c , m t , and m b are the mass per unit length at core and top and bottom layers, respectively. Coefficients associated with equations of motions [Eqs. where, Γ denotes the relation between shear force S and transverse displacement w. [Υ ] Ψ where e iq (II) where d is the lattice constant. By applying continuity conditions at the interface between subunit cells I and II from unit cell n + 1 (Fig. [Θ] Ψ where where, L is the length of each subunit cell (L1 = L2 = L). -A3 α ω 2 -B4 α (ut N q (ut) α q + -A5 α ω 2 + B4 α (u b ) α N + N q (u b ) α q N q (w) α q + N q (w) α q = -A α+1 N q (ut) N q (u b ) N q (w) β q (F 11) 1q (w N q (ut) N q (w) N q (w) β q (F 13) N q (ut) N q (u b ) N q (w) β q (F 14) (α) 7H (α) 8 Γ (α) 1 Γ (α) 2 Γ (α) 3 Γ (α) 4 Γ (α) 5 (I) 7 H (I) 8 Γ (I) 1 Γ (I) 2 Γ (I) 3 Γ (I) 4 Γ (I) 5 (II) 7H (II) 8 Γ (II) 1 Γ (II) 2 Γ (II) 3 Γ (I) 4 Γ (II) 5 (II) 7H (II) 8 Γ (II) 1 Γ (II) 2 Γ (II) 3 Γ (II) 4 Γ (II) 5