Structural-property relationship, the connection between materials' structures and their properties, is central to the materials research. Especially at reduced dimensions, novel structural motifs often generate unique physical properties. Motivated by a recent work reporting a novel half auxetic effect in monolayer PdB4 with a hypercoordinated structure, here, we extensively explore similar 2D transition metal boride structures MB4 with M covering 3d and 4d elements. Our investigation screens out one stable candidate, the monolayer RhB4. We find that monolayer RhB4 also shows half auxeticity, i.e., the material always expands in a lateral in-plane direction in response to an applied strain in the other direction, regardless of whether the strain is positive or negative. We show that this special mechanical character is intimately tied to the hypercoordinated structure with the M©B8 structural motif. Furthermore, regarding electronic properties, monolayer RhB4 is found to be the first example of an almost ideal 2D spin-orbit Dirac point semimetal. The low-energy band structure is clean, with a pair of fourfold degenerate Dirac points robust under spin-orbit coupling located close to the Fermi level. These Dirac points are enforced by the nonsymmorphic space group symmetry which is also determined by the lattice structure. Our work deepens the fundamental understanding of structural-property relationship in reduced dimensions. The half auxeticity and the spin-orbit Dirac points will make monolayer RhB4 a promising platform for nanomechanics and nanoelectronics applications. The connection between structures and their properties, the structure-property relationship, is fundamental to multiple fields, ranging from mathematics, chemistry, physics, engineering product design, to social sciences. It is particularly appreciated in the study of solid materials Like carbon, boron is a light element that also features rich polymorphism due to its capability to form various types of hybridized bonding To address these questions, in this work, we extensively explore the possibility of forming 2D transition metal boride structures with the M©B8 structural motifs, where M covers the 3d and 4d elements. Based on the density functional theory (DFT) calculations, we screen out one stable candidate, the monolayer RhB4. We show that the material also exhibits half auxeticity, for which the connection to the Rh©B8 structural motif is carefully analyzed and exposed. Furthermore, the hypercoordinated structure with corrugation endows the lattice with nonsymmorphic symmetries, i.e., crystal symmetries involving fractional lattice translations. We show that the nonsymmorphic symmetries enforce pairs of fourfold degenerate Dirac points in the electronic band structure, which are robust under spin-orbit coupling (SOC). In monolayer RhB4, two such Dirac points are located very close to the Fermi level, making the material the first example of an almost ideal 2D spin-orbit Dirac point semimetal. Our work not only reveals fascinating consequences of the hypercoordinated structural motifs in 2D boron compounds, but also predicts a promising platform for studying half auxeticity and spin-orbit Dirac points. The Vienna ab initio simulation package (VASP) As mentioned, we have explored 2D MB4 compounds with lattice structures similar to that of PdB4. For M running over the 3d and 4d elements and considering non-magnetic compounds with the symmetry of PdB4, we find that only RhB4 can be stable in this 2D structure. The crystal structure of monolayer RhB4 is shown in Fig. The crystal belongs to the Cmma space group (No. 67). The optimized lattice parameters are a = b =5.487 Å, and the thickness of layer is 1.38 Å, as indicated in Fig. where x and y indicate the number of corresponding atom in a unit cell, E(Rh x B y ) is the total energy of the RhB4 monolayer, E(Rh) and E(B) are the energies of isolated Rh and B atoms, respectively. We find that E co for RhB4 monolayer is -6.71 eV per atom, which is comparable with that of graphene (-7.85 eV per atom), and is lower than FeB2 (-4.87 eV per atom), FeB3 (-5.93 eV per atom) and FeB6 (-5.56 to -5.79 eV per atom) According to the elastic stability criteria For monolayer RhB4, the calculated values of these constants are C 11 = 146.8 N/m, C 22 = 129.9 N/m and C 66 = 65.0 N/m. One confirms that the criteria are satisfied, indicating the mechanical stability of the material. The dynamically stability can be inferred from the phonon dispersions. The calculation result is shown in Fig. In elasticity theory, 2D Young's moduli along x and y directions are defined by the elastic constants as 146.8 and 129.9 GPa • nm for monolayer RhB4, respectively. These values are about 39 -44% of that in 2D MoS2 (330 GPa • nm) The half auxeticity of PdB4 was discussed in Ref. First, let's consider the negative PR when strain εx is applied (see Fig. In the Supplemental Material, we further plot the evolutions of some key structural parameters under strain, which support our above analysis (Fig. The crystal structure of monolayer RhB4 belongs to the Cmma space group. This group contains the following important elements: the inversion P, the glide mirror 0}, and the time reversal symmetry T is also preserved. Note that the glide mirror M ̃z is a nonsymmorphic symmetry, which involves a half lattice translation along both a and b directions. The presence of M ̃z is due to the corrugation in the wheel structure, because if the wheel were completely flat, M ̃z would reduce to a conventional mirror M z without the glide. In the following, we will see that the nonsymmorphic character of the symmetry is critical to the electronic state in the presence of SOC. Let's first consider the band structure of monolayer RhB4 without SOC. The result is presented in Fig. Here, each line is protected by the glide mirror symmetry M ̃z, as the two crossing bands have opposite M ̃z eigenvalues. And the two lines are connected by the P or T symmetry. When SOC is included, most points on the nodal lines will be gapped out. For example, a gap opening of 78.8 meV for Point 3 can be observed. However, one notes that Points 1 and 2 are still preserved under SOC (Fig. The existence of the spin-orbit Dirac points is enforced by the three symmetries P, T, and M ̃z. Note that each Bloch state can be chosen as an eigenstate of M ̃z. The eigenvalue of M ̃z is given by g z = ±ie -i(k 1 +k 2 )/2 , since M ̃z2 = T 110 E ̅ = -e -i(k 1 +k 2 ) where T 110 denotes the translation by one unit cell along both a and b directions, and E ̅ = -1 is from the 2π rotation on spin. Here, we use (k 1 , k 2 ) to represent a wave vector with respect to the reciprocal lattice axis and (k x , k y ) to denote the Cartesian coordinate. To prove that the spin-orbit Dirac points are enforced at X and Y, it is important to notice two facts. First, the inversion does not commute with the glide mirror, instead, one finds M ̃zP = T 110 PM ̃z = e -i(k 1 +k 2 ) PM ̃z Thus, for an eigenstate |g z ⟩ of M ̃z with eigenvalue g z , the following relation holds: M ̃zPT|g z ⟩ = -e -i(k 1 +k 2 ) (PT)M ̃z|g z ⟩ = -g z (PT)|g z ⟩, which means the Kramers pair |g z ⟩ and (PT)|g z ⟩ are degenerate with opposite M ̃z eigenvalues at each k point. Second, since the points X (π, 0) and Y (0, π) are both time-reversal-invariant-momentum (TRIM) point, any state |g z ⟩ at X or Y must has another degenerate Kramers partner T|g z ⟩ with the same eigenvalue g z (because g z = ±1 is real at X/Y). The above two points ensure fourfold degeneracy at X and Y, with the linearly independent states {|g z ⟩, T|g z ⟩,(PT)|g z ⟩, P|g z ⟩}. Away from X and Y, T is no longer preserved, and the fourfold degeneracy will generally split into two doubly degenerate bands. Hence, this leads to a fourfold degenerate crossing points at X and Y, which are the 2D spin-orbit Dirac points. We can further derive a k • p Hamiltonian to characterize these spin-orbit Dirac points. Based on the quartet basis {|1⟩,T|1⟩,(PT)|1⟩, P|1⟩} with g z = 1, one can write down the matrix representations of symmetry operations as M ̃z = σ z ⨂σ 0 , P = σ x ⨂σ x , T = iσ z ⨂σ y K where K is the complex conjugation and σ i are the Pauli matrices. Constrained by these symmetries, the k • p model to the first order in k can be derived as H(k) = (c 1 k x + c 2 k y )σ z ⊗ σ x + (c 3 k x + c 4 k y )σ 0 ⊗ σ y + (c 5 k x + c 6 k y )σ 0 ⊗ σ z where the wave vector k = (k x , k y ) and the energy are measured from the Dirac point, and the c i 's are real model parameters. This effective model confirms the existence of spin-orbit Dirac points with linear band splitting at X and Y. In addition, we have also constructed a minimal lattice model, which captures the spin-orbit Dirac points in monolayer RhB4. The details can be found in the Supplemental Material (Fig. We have a few remarks before closing. First, previously, 2D spin-orbit Dirac points were only found in monolayer HfGeTe family materials Second, 2D spin-orbit Dirac points typically are not associated with topological edge states Finally, it is clear from our analysis that the special structure with hyper-coordination is a key factor underlying the formation of spin-orbit Dirac points in monolayer RhB4. We have checked the possibility to replace Rh with other elements in this structure. It is important that the element should have the right valence to dope electrons to the B network, meanwhile, the element should also have the right size to fit into the voids in the B network. For example, Ir and Co are in the same column as Rh in the periodic table. However, the structure of IrB4 is found to be unstable. And CoB4 turns out to be antiferromagnetic, which breaks the time reversal symmetry required for the spin-orbit Dirac point. By screening through all 3d and 4d elements, RhB4 is found to be only suitable candidate with the target structure and with spin-orbit Dirac points. In conclusion, we have investigated the structural, mechanical and electronic properties of the monolayer RhB4 by means of DFT computations. Our discovered half auxeticity in monolayer RhB4, i.e., the sheet always expands in one lateral direction when strained in the other in-plane direction, regardless of the sign of the applied strain. Our analysis attributes this exotic behavior to the corrugated Rh©B8 wheel structure. Together with the finding in monolayer PdB4, our work corroborates the structure-property relationship for the unusual mechanical properties in these hypercoordinated 2D materials. Furthermore, we show that the corrugated Rh©B8 wheel structure leads to a nonsymmorphic symmetry that underlies the spin-orbit Dirac points in the electronic band structure. The clean band structure around Fermi level makes monolayer RhB4 the first almost ideal 2D spin-orbit Dirac point semimetal. Our result reveals the significance of hypercoordinated structural motifs in physical properties and predicts a new system, the monolayer RhB4, for studying novel mechanical properties and topological electronic states. ), respectively. The in-plane negative PR is mainly attributed to the change of lattice constants lx and ly, which can be expressed as: l x = 4b 2 sin ( θ 2 2 ), and l y = 4b 1 sin( θ 1 2 ). When εy is applied (Fig. College of Physics, Hebei Key Laboratory of Photophysics Research and Application, Hebei Normal University, Shijiazhuang 050024, China Research Laboratory for Quantum Materials, Singapore University of Technology and Design, Singapore 487372, Singapore Division of Physics and Applied Physics, School of Physical and Mathematical Sciences, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 637371, Singapore Faculty for Chemistry and Food Chemistry, TU Dresden, Bergstraße 66c, Dresden 01069, Germany *E-mail: weikang.wu@ntu.edu.sg, fengxianma@hebtu.edu.cn