Recent advances in the processing of thin-film lithium niobate (LiNbO 3 ) on insulator (LNOI) have enabled low-loss photonic integrated circuits Lithium niobate is an attractive material for electrooptic devices, and has been widely used for many decades. It exhibits a transparency window from ultravi-olet to mid-infrared wavelengths and has a large Pockels coefficient Beyond application for electro-optical modulators, an integrated photonics platform with a large Pockels coefficient and low propagation loss fulfils all the requirements for realizing integrated frequency-agile laser sources, which feature fast, linear and mode-hop-free tuning. Specifically, such frequency-agile electro-optical lasers can be realized by self-injection locking of a III-V diode laser to an high-Q optical cavity Here, we demonstrate for the first time a self-injectionlocked narrow-linewidth frequency-agile laser based on a lithium niobate integrated photonic circuit. This is achieved on a heterogeneous integrated lithium niobate platform combining low-loss silicon nitride photonic waveguides with lithium niobate by wafer-scale bonding Heterogeneous integration of lithium niobate on silicon nitride. Our fabrication method combines the processes of photonic Damascene waveguide fabrication with wafer-scale bonding The laser diode is forced to oscillate at the frequency of the cavity resonance in the self-injection-locked regime. Assuming that the frequency noise of the laser is white, the frequency noise suppression ratio is where δω free is the linewidth of the free-running DFB laser; δω is the linewidth of self-injection-locked DFB laser; Q DFB and Q = ω/κ are the quality factors of the laser diode cavity and of the microresonator mode, respectively (with κ = κ ex + κ 0 , where κ 0 and κ ex are the intrinsic cavity decay rate and bus-waveguide coupling rate); and α g is the phase-amplitude coupling factor Self-injection locking occurs within a finite frequency interval around the cavity resonance. The locking bandwidth ∆ω lock is given, assuming large intermodal interaction strength and high coupling efficiency, by: In order to strongly reduce the laser linewidth and increase the frequency locking range, a high-Q resonance and strong reflection are desirable. The device used in our experiments features a 102-GHz free spectral range (FSR) and a resonance linewidth of 100 MHz (see Fig. (b) False-colour SEM image of an LNOD waveguide cross-section (the original SEM image data is shown in Supplementary Figure 2(a,b)) operated close to critical coupling. The intrinsic loss of the microresonator indicates a linear propagation loss of our LNOD waveguide platform of 8.5 dB/m. The power reflection of the device reaches 3% (see Fig. The self-injection-locked DFB emission spectrum (Fig. Frequency-agile laser tuning. In order to measure the voltage-to-frequency response of the LNOD microresonator, the signal from a network analyser was applied to the electrodes and the laser frequency (Toptica CTL) was fixed on the slope of the cavity resonance. This measurement reveals an important advantage of the LNOD platform: the modulation response function for the 102 GHz FSR microresonator is flat up to 100 MHz (see Fig. Optical coherent ranging demonstration. In order to demonstrate the application potential of our laser, we perform a proof-of-concept optical ranging experiment inside a lab environment. The FMCW LiDAR method In summary, we have demonstrated a novel heterogeneous platform for electro-optical photonic circuits using heterogeneous integration of photonic Damascene silicon nitride and thin-film lithium niobate with good fibre-tochip coupling (3.9 dB per facet) and linear propagation losses as low as 8.5 dB/m. We have further demonstrated optical microresonators with 100 MHz loaded linewidth, wideband uniform bus-waveguide coupling and flat modulation response up to 100 MHz. Using the combination of ultra-low-loss silicon nitride photonic circuits, and endowing them with lithium niobate electro-optical modulation enables to create hybrid integrated injection locked lasers with simultaneously narrow linewidth and fast on chip tuning of 12 PHz/second. This laser source enables frequency-modulated continuous-wave optical ranging without the need for signal pre-distortion or active feedback, with a resolution of around 15 cm. With improvements in PIC design, such as a reduction of the interlayer silicon dioxide thickness and electrode-position optimization, we believe that our platform will form the basis of very fast tunable lasers with 10-ns level switching time, mode-hop-free tuning over tens of GHz, and fundamental linewidths below 100 Hz and km-level coherence length. Beyond integrated lasers, the platform can also be used to realise other devices, such as photonic switching networks for photonic computing Device fabrication. First, we produce a photonic Damascene silicon nitride integrated circuit. We start with a 4" silicon (Si) wafer with 4 μm thermal oxide (SiO 2 ) that we then process as follows Authors Contributions: V.S. and G.L. performed experiments with the help of J.R. and A.S.. R.N.W., A.R., C.M., and J.L. developed the processes and fabricated the samples with assistance from S.H.. M.C. designed the lithography masks and performed PIC simulations. U.D., Y.P., A.R., R.N.W., and J.L. performed the CMP for bonding. D.C. performed the wafer bonding. V.S., G.L., and J.R. analysed the data. V.S. and G.H. performed thermorefractive noise limit simulations. V.S., G.L., J.R., and T.J.K. wrote the manuscript with input from A.R., A.S., and P.S. P.S. and T.J.K. supervised the project. The first row represents the heterodyne beatnote evolution for the repetition frequency values of 1 kHz, 10 kHz, 100 kHz and 1MHz, and its fit with a perfect triangular ramp. The second row is the same data, but mirrored with respect to a horizontal axis of 0 MHz. In the third row, there is the next transformation step when the data is moved on a half a period to the left, so that what has been an up-slide in the first row becomes down-slide in the third and vice versa. In the last row, adding the data patterns of the first and the third row and subtracting the mean value from the sum, one observes the hysteresis-induced deviations between the up-slide and down-slide fragment of the ramps. 