The structure of the double-layer formed at the surface of carbon electrodes is governed by the interactions between the electrode and the electrolyte species. However, carbon is notoriously difficult to simulate accurately, even with well-established methods such as electronic Density Functional Theory and Molecular Dynamics. Here we focus on the important case of a lithium ion in contact with the surface of graphite, and we perform a series of reference Quantum Monte Carlo calculations that allow us to benchmark various electronic Density Functional Theory functionals. We then fit an accurate carbon-lithium pair potential, which is used in molecular Density Functional Theory calculations to determine the free energy of the adsorption of the ion on the surface in the presence of water. The adsorption profile in solution differs markedly from the gas phase results, which emphasize the role of the solvent on the properties of the double-layer. Carbon materials play a very important role in many chemistry fields, ranging from catalysis to electrochemistry. In energy storage applications, carbon is used as an electrode in the form of graphite for Li-ion batteries, Over the years, a large number of electronic density functional theory (eDFT) and molecular dynamics (MD) simulations were devoted to the study of electrochemical interfaces between carbon and ions or liquid electrolytes. Although they provide qualitatively similar results, some discrepancies may be observed when analyzing quantitative properties, such as adsorption energies, preferential "binding" distances or adsorption profiles. For example, as reported by Valencia et al. surface. Yet, the adsorption energy may differ by more than 0.5 eV when changing the exchange-correlation functional. Important discrepancies were already reported in the case of the adsorption of water molecules on carbon surfaces. In this work we follow a similar approach for the adsorption of lithium on graphite. The choice of the system was made based on its relevance for energy applications and because the lithium ions has a small number of valence electrons, thus allowing the cost of the reference DMC calculations. We computed the adsorption profiles on hollow, top and bridge sites by varying the distance between the lithium and the carbon material. DMC results are then compared with several XC approximations. Yet, knowing the adsorption energy of a single ion may not be enough. Indeed, the solvent molecules within the electrolyte will also interact strongly both with the surface and with the ions, which can result in large variations of the adsorption properties under realistic conditions. A. Quantum Monte Carlo QMC simulations are a set of stochastic computational methods for the evaluation of observables of quantum systems. The fundamental idea behind these techniques is that expectation values of physical quantities of quantum systems can be written as where Â is a generic observable, Ψ(R) is the (normalized) wave function for the quantum system under analysis , and R represents the 3N -dimensional electronic coordinate. The integral in Equation 1 can then be evaluated using a Monte Carlo sampling In order to obtain meaningful information on the physical system it is important to use a proper wave function. Since the exact ground state for physical systems of interest is unknown it is necessary to guess the form of the ground state wave functions. A large variety of QMC methods exists, implementing different strategies. In this study two QMC techniques were used: Variational Monte Carlo (VMC) and DMC, using the fixed-node approximation. In VMC we approximate the ground state of the system by defining a trial wave function Ψ T (p; R), which is then plugged in Equation where we used the local energy E loc (p; R) defined as By varying the parameters p we can minimize the energy E p , thus finding an approximation of the exact ground state within the chosen class the trial functions. Another property that is used in wave function optimization is the zero-variance principle: for a given Hamiltonian, the energy variance of each energy eigenstate is zero. In order to use both the variational and the zero-variance principles the quantity that is optimized in practice is a linear combination of the energy and its variance. While VMC allows estimates of ground state properties starting from a relatively simple trial wave function, VMC results are typically not realistically accurate. In order to improve these results projection methods have to be used. Projection methods are a class of QMC methods that use imaginary time evolution to filter out excited states contribution from the trial wave function, allowing accurate computation of ground state properties. While in principle projection techniques are exact, the fermionic sign problem in practice prevents the exact evaluation of quantum observables; to avoid the sign problem the fixednode approximation is used. With this approximation the results will still be approximate, but they will remain variational, and significantly more accurate than the ones obtained with VMC (i.e. the computed energies and energy variance will be lower). Several different projection QMC methods exist. Among those, one of the most commonly used in electronic structure calculations is DMC. If we consider a wave function Ψ(R), a Hamiltonian with a potential energy term U (R) and we define the imaginary time as τ = it in atomic unit we have the basic idea at the foundation of DMC is that there is a strong analogy between the imaginary time Schrödinger equation and a diffusion equation (coming from the kinetic part of Ĥ) with an additional branching term (from U (R)). It is thus possible to simulate the imaginary time propagation by using the process of diffusion and branching of classical random walkers, initially distributed according to a trial wave function (obtained via the optimization procedure described above). The practical details of the implementation of DMC can be found in literature All QMC computations in the present work were performed using the QMCpack software where E Li+C (z) is the energy of a system made of a graphite substrate with a Li atom at a distance z and E Li and E C are the energy of the isolated atom and graphite respectively. The latter is modeled using two graphene layers made of 50 C atoms each, with an AB stacking, at a distance of 3.47 Å. The energy profile was computed for three different setups: with the Li atom lying above the centre of a C hexagon (hollow site), above a C atom (top site) and above a C-C bond (bridge site). All simulations were done using a simulation box with cell parameters (in Å)   12.336 0.000 0.000 6.168 10.683 0.000 0.000 0.000 30.000 The height of the simulation box was selected after systematically testing the convergence of the total energy as a function of the amount of vacuum between periodic images in the z direction of the graphite bi-layer using eDFT (Supplementary Figure where J(p; R) is a Jastrow term describing electronic correlation, with one and two body terms, and D(R) is a Slater determinant, ensuring the correct fermionic antisymmetry. The single particle orbitals used in the Slater determinant were evaluated using DFT with a PBE 20 functional. The orbital calculations were performed using the Quantum ESPRESSO software Electronic DFT calculations were performed using the Quantum ESPRESSO electronic structure code. We compared the adsorption energy profiles for two series of XC functionals. In the first series we used the LDA, 28 PBE 20 and BLYP Several uniform Monkhorst-Pack grids of 1×1×1, 2×2×1, 3×3×1 and 5×5×1 k-points were tested for a single Li distance of 2.4 Å from the graphite surface (see Supporting Information Section S3). The difference between the total energy of the 1×1×1 and 2×2×1 grids is roughly 26 meV and thus the 1×1×1 grid was used for the calculations throughout this work. Additionally, an extended system consisting in four carbon layers instead of two was simulated to check the effect of the number of graphite layers; almost no difference was observed for the free energy profile as shown in Supplementary Section 4. Like for the QMC calculations, the lithium atom was systematically above the three adsorption sites. The energies were converged at each step to an accuracy of 1 × 10 -6 Ry. To align the various curves, the noninteracting systems (i.e. graphite and lithium atom separately) were computed for each XC functional, and the binding energy was obtained according to Equation Solvation free energies were computed with MDFT According to the cDFT principles In Equation Exact expressions exist for the ideal and external functionals that can be computed numerically. The excess In Equation The electrode charges are represented with Gaussian charge distributions with a width of 0.40 Å. These partial charges are calculated by enforcing a uniform potential within the whole carbon electrode, with an overall electroneutrality constraint (hence forcing the total charge on the carbon to be equal to -1). In the first step, the functional of Equation 7 is minimized with no charges on the lithium and the carbon atoms. Then, carbon charges are optimized in the presence of the inhomogeneous water charge density and of the lithium cation. The functional is minimized again but in the presence of lithium charge and the previously determined electrode charges. The process is repeated until it converges, with a convergence criterion of 5 × 10 -4 on the relative change in solvation free energy between two consecutive steps. MDFT calculations were performed using an in-house Fortran code and electrode charges are optimized using the constant potential molecular dynamics software MetalWalls We first discuss the QMC results for the three adsorption sites. QMC total energies and adsorption energies are reported in Table From Table The adsorption profiles obtained for the hollow site for the LDA, BLYP, PBE, BLYP+D2, PBE+D2 and dW-DF-C09 functionals are compared with the DMC benchmark on Figure where E b (Li + ) is the binding energy of the lithium ion, IP its ionization potential and W f the work function of graphite. The observed variation may be linked to compensation errors between the various terms. In the present work, we are mostly interested in the adsorption of the lithium ion. Consequently, we performed a second comparison of the various functionals in which the energy at z = 3 Å is substracted. The results are shown on Figure In order to incorporate solvent effects, it is necessary to develop accurate classical interaction potentials. It is not possible to fit them directly on the QMC calculations due to the limited number of data. Instead, we pick the most accurate functional, vdW-DF-C09, and calculate the Ligraphite binding energy for a large number of distances. The intermolecular interaction should in principle account for four different effects: electrostatics, polarization, shortrange repulsion and dispersion. In our electrostatic model, the two former effects are explicitly introduced through the use of a +1 point charge on the lithium and of the calculation of partial (Gaussian) charges on the carbon Li-C distance (Å) atoms. These partial charges are calculated for each lithium-carbon distance using the same methodology as described in II C. Concerning the short-range repulsion and the dispersion effects, the two main potentials used in the literature are the Lennard-Jones and the Born-Huggins-Mayer (BHM) ones. However, it appears that the electrostatic interaction was sufficient to account for the attractive part of the binding energy, as shown on Figure where A, b are the parameters describing the intensity and the range of the repulsion interaction, while C 6 is the dipole-dipole dispersion interactions. In principle higher order terms could be included for dispersion, but as discussed above this term is almost negligible in the case of the lithium ion. The fitted potential reproduces with a very high accuracy the vdW-DF-C09 as well as the QMC results (on which it was not fitted) for the three types of adsorption sites as shown on Figure C. Adsorption of the lithium ion in the presence of water The fitted potential can directly be used in any classical molecular simulation, such as MD. Since we focus here on the adsorption free energy of the lithium ion on the carbon surface we prefer to use MDFT which is a computationally more efficient alternative. The solvation free energy of a single system can be computed within a few minutes on a single CPU while it would require tens of CPU hours with MD. The free energy profile obtained for the three adsorption sites in the presence of liquid water are shown on Figure This result is in qualitative agreement with a recent MD study on the adsorption of hydrated ions on graphene, The effect of the solvent can be further analyzed by plotting the density profiles for various distances between the ion and the surface (Figure Two main results were obtained in this work. Firstly, we provide an accurate set of benchmark energies for the adsorption of lithium on a graphite surface, using an accurate QMC approach. This data can be used in future works to test the accuracy of XC functionals for such important problems in surface science, or to parameterize new force fields between the two species. Here we obtained a very good agreement using a BHM potential, but different approaches may be proposed in the future. Secondly, we used the parameterized force field in order to compute the free energy profile for the adsorption of a lithium ion at the graphite surface in the presence of water as a solvent. MDFT was preferred over classical MD for this calculation due to its much lower computational cost. We showed that the low energy minimum obtained in the gas phase completely vanishes, resulting in an overall repulsive profile over the whole range of studied lithium-carbon distances. This is due to the screening of the attractive Coulombic term by the water molecules on the one hand, and on the other hand to the interferences between the densities corresponding to the first adsorbed layer on carbon and to the first solvation shell of the cation. The proposed multi-scale approach may be extended to a large variety of systems in the future. In particular, it would be interesting to study how adsorption varies within the alkali and alkali-earth cationic series. The study of larger organic ions would be very useful for the scope supercapacitors devices, but this would require additional work to account accurately for the flexibility of the ion. Finally, the study of more polarizable electrode materials such as gold or platinum would be relevant in the context of catalysis. Changing metal would lead to very different adsorption properties for the solvent, so that one can expect large differences in the adsorption free-energy profiles of ions at electrodes.