Ultraviolet-C light-emitting diodes (UVC-LEDs) have great application in pathogen inactivation under various kinds of situations, especially in the fight against the COVID-19. Unfortunately, its epitaxial wafers are so far limited to 2-inch size, which greatly increases the cost of massive production. In this work, we report the 4-inch crack-free high-power UVC-LED wafer. This achievement relies on a proposed strain-tailored strategy, where a threedimensional to two-dimensional (3D-2D) transition layer is introduced during the homoepitaxy of AlN on high temperature annealed (HTA)-AlN template, which successfully drives the original compressive strain into tensile one and thus solves the challenge of realizing high quality Al0.6Ga0.4N layer with a flat surface. This smooth Al0.6Ga0.4N layer is nearly pseudomorphically grown on the strain-tailored HTA-AlN template, leading to 4-inch UVC-LED wafers with outstanding performances. Our strategy succeeds in compromising the bottlenecked contradictory in producing large-sized UVC-LED wafer on pronounced crystalline AlN template: The compressive strain in HTA-AlN allows for crack-free 4-inch wafer, but at the same time leads to a deterioration of the AlGaN morphology and crystal quality. The launch of 4-inch wafers makes the chip fabrication process of UVC-LEDs matches the mature blue one, and will definitely speed up the universal of UVC-LED in daily life. The explosion of COVID-19 has been greatly impacting the world and intensively activated the development of light-emitting diodes (LEDs) at the ultraviolet-C (wavelength ≤ 280 nm) emission range. It has been confirmed encouragingly perspective for the ultra-fast sterilization towards SARS-CoV-2 within one second Therefore, exploring a strategy solving crystalline quality, cracks, and surface roughening by controlling strain is of significant importance, especially for driving the high-performance UVC-LED into 4-inch size era which has never been approached in the field. In this work, we initialize the high-performance 4-inch crack-free UVC-LED wafer. Through a strain-tailored strategy, i.e. introducing a three-dimensional to two-dimensional (3D-2D) transition layer on a 4-inch high-crystal-quality HTA-AlN template, the original compressive strain is successfully tuned into tensile one without sacrificing crystalline quality in the epitaxy process. As a result, crack and surface roughness are simultaneously suppressed. This work will promote the universalization of UVC-LED by utilizing low-cost 4-inch HTA-AlN templates particularly in terms of its compatibility with the current GaN-based blue LED process. The 4-inch HTA-AlN template was prepared via an ex-situ high temperature recrystallization process of 500-nm-thick AlN film deposited by physical vapor deposition (PVD). For comparison, a 4-inch AlN template on NPSS (AlN/NPSS) with hole-type pattern was grown by metal-organic chemical vapor deposition (MOCVD) through performing the ELOG technique presented in our previous work According to the Bragg rule, Qx is in reverse proportion of the in-plane lattice constant a [Qx = λ / (√3a), where λ=0.15406 nm is the wavelength of X-ray]. It is observed that the mapping peak position of HTA-AlN has larger Qx and smaller Qz values than those of strainfree AlN, indicating the existence of compressive strain. On the contrary, the AlN/NPSS presents smaller Qx and larger Qz values in comparison with those of strain-free AlN, suggesting the presence of tensile strain. As mentioned, homo-epitaxial AlN layer was grown on HTA-AlN template by MOCVD and the morphology is recorded by atomic force microscopy (AFM). As shown in Fig. AlGaN layer is the dominant factor to influence the quality of subsequent epitaxy. On one hand, the island-growth mode introduces tremendous dislocations into the n-AlGaN layer whose crystalline quality is continuously deteriorated upon increasing thickness. The freshly generated dislocations are harmful to the radiative recombination in multiple quantum wells (MQWs) From the above discussion, we can conclude that strain control is the key point to solve the trade-off between crack generation and morphology degeneration of n-AlGaN. We then propose a 3D-2D transition layer on the HTA-AlN template to smoothen the surface of n-AlGaN epilayer as well as upper UVC-LED structure, i.e. a strain-tailored strategy. The 3D-2D transition layer growth process is schematically shown in Fig. During the subsequent 2D recovery process, the AlN crystal grains introduced in the 3D growth procedure tend to interconnect to reduce the effective area of surface, because the tensile strain energy created by the coalescing is smaller than the surface free energy of 3D island-like surface To confirm the crystal merging induced strain-modification, the (105) RSM of the straintailored HTA-AlN is performed as shown in Fig. Hence tensile strain is induced without obviously deteriorating the crystal quality at the 2D coalescing stage. Thanks to the strain modulation, a UVC-LED wafer with smooth surface is achieved, as shown in Fig. To demonstrate the following epitaxy quality, the high-angle annular dark-field scanning transmission electron microscopy (HAADF-STEM) was performed and the result is shown in Fig. Despite the strain-tailored HTA-AlN based 4-inch UVC-LED displays promising prospects, it exists shortage. Due to the strong compressive strain and large lattice and thermocoefficient mismatch between epitaxial AlGaN/AlN and sapphire substrate, there exists a serious bow with a value as large as ~200 μm. The bowing results in an inhomogeneous temperature and flow field over the wafer during epitaxy in MOCVD, acting as a challenge to obtain homogeneous layer especially when wafer size is scaled up To demonstrate the uniformity of our UVC-LED wafer quantitatively, the sheet resistance and photoluminescence (PL) mapping were measured. As shown in Fig. In conclusion, we initiated the crack-free 4-inch high power UVC-LED on HTA-AlN template through setting up a 3D-2D strain-tailor transition AlN layer. This transition layer solves the most challenging issue of HTA-AlN based LED epilayer: surface roughening induced by compressive strain. Moreover, the intensive wafer bowing induced by thermomismatch between the AlGaN and sapphire substrate is reduced by 25% through the strategy of "backside scratch". Our 4-inch UVC-LED will promote UVC-LED popularization by both reducing cost and enhancing productivity. Preparation of AlN templates: The preparation of 4-inch high-quality AlN template was carried out by combing sputtering with high temperature face-to-face annealing. C-plane sapphire with miscut angles of c to m 0.2±0.1o and c to a 0±0.1o was used as the substrate. During the sputtering process, pure aluminium (99.999%) was used as the sputtering target. The sputtering power and temperature were set as 3000 W and 550 °C, respectively. The mixture of argon and nitrogen was the sputtering atmosphere with the volume ratio of 1:4. Calibrated by ellipsometry, the thickness of the obtained layer was determined as 500 nm. During the annealing operation, a specific face-to-face operation was used, and the annealing ambient was set as nitrogen (99.99%). The annealing condition was set as 1700 °C for five hours. Subsequently, the sample was cooling down to room temperature under nitrogen ambient. The AlN films on NPSS are epitaxially grown in Prismo HiT3 TM MOCVD system. H2 and N2 were used as the carrier gas for the epitaxial process. Trimethyl-aluminum (TMAl) and ammonia (NH3) were used as Al and N precursors, respectively. Prior to the epitaxy of AlN films, a 15-nm-thick AlN layer was deposited on NPSS by magnetron sputtering as a nucleation layer. The AlN epitaxy growth on NPSS is consisted of three stages: (i) a 200-nm-thick layer growth in three-dimensional (3D) mode (temperature = 1100 °C, pressure = 100 Torr); (ii) the lateral overgrowth with a thickness We propose a strain-tailoring strategy in AlN epitaxy on high temperature annealed AlN 