Photoinduced phase transition (PIPT) is always treated as a coherent process, but ultrafast disordering in PIPT is observed in recent experiments. Utilizing the real-time time-dependent density functional theory (rt-TDDFT) method, here, we track the motion of individual vanadium (V) ions during PIPT in VO2 and uncover that their coherent or disordered dynamics can be manipulated by tuning the laser fluence. We find that the photoexcited holes generate a force on each V-V dimer to drive their collective coherent motion, in competing with the thermal-induced vibrations. If the laser fluence is so weak that the photoexcited hole density is too low to drive the phase transition alone, the PIPT is a disordered process due to the interference of thermal phonons. We also reveal that the photoexcited holes populated by the V-V dimerized bonding states will become saturated if the laser fluence is too strong, limiting the timescale of photoinduced phase transition. Photoexcitation using ultrafast laser pulses provides a powerful approach to manipulate the material properties with a timescale in the limit of atomic motion Besides the debate of atomic ordering or disordering in the phase transition, the timescale of M1-to-R phase transition in VO2 also has a major controversy. Early experiments reported the timescale of PIPT being gradually reduced from 100 fs to 40 fs In this work, to investigate the coherent or disordered manner of atomic motion, we have utilized our newly developed rt-TDDFT algorithm We show that the phase transition is in atomic disordering with a timescale of about 200 fs at low laser fluence and, at high laser fluence, becomes a coherent manner with a fluencedependent timescale below 100 fs. The disordering phase transition is driven by a combination of the atomic driving forces caused by photoexcitation and thermal phonon vibration. On the other hand, the coherent phase transition is only controlled by the photoexcited atomic driving forces, and the thermal phonon is only a small perturbation. We also demonstrate that, with increasing the laser fluence, the smallest timescale of phase transition is indeed saturated to a minimum value of ~ 55 fs, which is due to the saturation of the population of the V-V bonding states by the photoexcited holes. Our findings provide a unified theory for understanding the atomic coherent and disordering motion in PIPT, uniting different experimental results. Results: Atomic structures and electronic orbital properties. In high temperature, the VO2 is stabilized in a high-symmetry R phase (P42/mnm) with a vanadium atom surrounded by six oxygen atoms forming an octahedron. When the temperature is below the transition temperature Tc ~ 340 K to simulate the laser pulse. Here, t0 = 17.5 fs, the pulse width √2 = 7 fs, and the photon energy  = 1.55 eV, which are consistent with experimental parameters Besides, we use E0 to tune the laser fluence. With increasing E0 from 0.1 to 0.5, the photoexcited electrons from the valence band to conduction band gradually increase from 1.0% to 6.3% of valence electrons (Supplementary Fig. We show the evolution of V-V bonds to track the M1-to-R phase transition in Fig. To describe the degree of disorder in atomic motion, we define a disorder parameter (L ) The summation runs over V atoms, and n represents the number of V-V bonds. The xi, yi, and zi represent V-V bond length in x, y, z directions. The xave, yave and zave represent the average V-V bond length in x, y, z directions. Fig. At 1.0% electronic excitation, the disordered degree has rapidly reached 0.2 Å before the M1-to-R phase transition. However, the disorder degrees are less than 0.1 Å in other higher excitations. Remarkably, the higher electronic excitation does not increase the disorder at the phase transition point, it decreases it a little bit. We can thus conclude that the electron excitation does not induce disorder. We next proceed with the fast Fourier transform (FFT) for V-V bonds to obtain phonon modes of V atomic motion. Three low-frequency phonon modes from atomic vibrations are discovered at 0.7, 1.8, and 2.9 THz at 1.0% excitation (Fig. The driving force induced by photoexcitation can create a coherent atomic motion. However, we observe a disordering behavior in M1-to-R phase transition in 1.0% excitations. To distinct the different factors, we re-done the rt-TDDFT calculations with the same excitation but at the lattice temperature (T = 1 K) to exclude the interference of thermal phonons. In 1.0% excitations, the long bonds (dI) and short bonds (dII) scarcely change (no M1-to-R phase transition) within 1.0 ps because the coherent driving forces induced by the lower excitation are not enough to create the phase transition by themselves (Supplementary Fig. Saturation of hole excitations on V-V bonding states. Our simulations also show the disordered phase transition needs a longer timescale (~ 187 fs), which agrees with the experiment results in disordered PIPT The bottleneck timescale observed at higher fluence is known as half of the period of the coherent mode in some previous experiments For 1.0% and 2.3% excitations, photoexcited holes occupying on V-V bonding states basically. But for 3.7%, 5.1%, and 6.3% excitations, the situations are different. The numbers of total photoexcited holes (or electrons) are 30, 41, and 50, respectively. Whereas the numbers of photoexcited holes occupying on V-V bonding states are 17.4, 19.1, and 19.3 in the simulated supercell (Fig. In the work, we have observed the coherent and disordered phase transition for the M1-to-R phase transition which strongly depends on the number of photoexcited carriers. The disordered process happens within 190 fs in a lower photoexcited density where the thermal phonons are an important factor to make the phase transition possible. During the disordered process, the force direction on vanadium atoms has changed with time due to the effect of thermal phonons (Fig. Method: Computational details. We do the static calculations and rt-TDDFT simulations by the ab-initio package (PWmat) Here, R(t) represents the nuclear positions and ρ(t) represents the charge density. In equation ( To mimic the photoexcitation, we introduce a uniform A field in reciprocal space The time-space external field can be described as a Gaussian shape in equation (1). 