Recent experiments [V. Grinenko et al. Nat. Phys. 17, 1254 (2021)] reported the observation of a condensate of four-fermion composites. This is a resistive state that spontaneously breaks the time-reversal symmetry, leading to unconventional magnetic properties, detected in muon spin rotation experiments and by the appearance of a spontaneous Nernst effect. In this work, we derive an effective model for the four-fermion order parameter that describes the observed spontaneous magnetic fields in this state. We show that this model, which is alike to the Faddeev-Skyrme model can host skyrmions: magnetic-flux-carrying topological excitations. Recent experiments An effective model can describe the properties of condensates at large length scales. For a pair condensate, the effective model is the celebrated Ginzburg-Landau theory which has been extensively studied since the second half of the last century. The question of effective models describing the fermion quadruplet quartic metal is more subtle. In this paper, we derive an effective longwavelength model for the resistive quartic state reported in Ba 1-x K x Fe 2 As 2 . Based on this, we report the key properties of that state: Namely its magnetic properties and the nature of the topological excitations it supports. At low temperatures, the compound is a superconductor characterized by Cooper pair condensates ∆ a , forming in the different bands labeled by a. Importantly this superconductor breaks the time-reversal symmetry The mechanism responsible for the appearance of the quartic metal is the following: The standard assumption of the Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer theory is a mean-field approximation for the fields quadratic in fermions: This assumption eliminates, by construction, the possibility for fermion quadrupling. The resulting theory yields the phase diagram of such a superconductor, which is typically a dome of the s+is state between two different superconducting states Below we derive such an effective theory, based on the mean-field approximation for the four-fermion order parameter. We demonstrate that, in an inhomogeneous sample, the model supports spontaneous magnetic fields, consistently with the experimental results We derive our effective model for a state with composite order, from a generic model of a superconductor with a two-component order parameter Ψ, with Ψ † := (ψ * 1 , ψ * 2 ). The detailed derivation from the microscopic theory can be found in Supplemental Material where V (Ψ † , Ψ) is the potential energy term. The repeated indices are implicitly summed over, and the indices i, j denote the spatial coordinates while a, b label arXiv:2112.01286v2 [cond-mat.supr-con] 17 Aug 2022 the different components. The individual condensates are coupled to the vector potential A, of the magnetic field B = ∇×A, via the gauge derivative D = ∇+ieA in the kinetic term. In this work, we focus on two-component models that break multiple symmetries. The symmetry breaking is encoded in the potential term V (Ψ † , Ψ) which explicitly reduces the global SU(2) symmetry of a doublet of complex order parameters down to a smaller symmetry group. For example, the SU(2) symmetry is broken down to U(1)×Z 2 , for a superconductor that breaks timereversal symmetry such as s+is, s+id, d+ig, p+ip, or down to U(1)×Z 3 symmetry as was suggested for some nematic superconductors At the microscopic level, the minimal model features three distinct superconducting gaps ∆ 1,2,3 in three different bands, and the pairing that leads to the timereversal symmetry breaking states is dominated by the competition between different interband repulsion channels To account for the four-fermion state, the Ginzburg-Landau theory (2) is first mapped onto a model that couples the supercurrent J = eIm Ψ † DΨ to a real 3-vector m. It is defined as the projection of the superconducting degrees of freedom Ψ onto spin-1/2 Pauli matrices σ: m = Ψ † σΨ; hence this is an order parameter which is fourth order in the fermionic fields. This order parameter depends on the relative phase between the original complex fields, and does not depend on the superconducting degree of freedom: the phase sum. The norm of m is related to the total density squared m ≡ 2 = Ψ † Ψ. In terms of J and m, the free energy reads as [16] where is the rank-3 Levi-Civita symbol. The term in the square brackets in (3) is the magnetic field expressed through gradients of the matter fields. The first term there, is the contribution of the Meissner current J to the magnetic field, while the second term accounts for the interband counterflow The second term is particularly important: It is related to the counterflow of two components, since it has a form of gradients of the composite field ψ * a ψ b , i.e. it depends on gradients of the relative phase between components. A counterflow of two identical charged components results in no charge transfer and hence does not couple to the magnetic field. However, if the densities of the components are locally imbalanced, the charge transport occurs. Thus the coupling to the magnetic field involves a dependence of the relative density gradients. Next, the low-temperature model ( where Here the component m 0 stands for the magnitude of m, m 0 := m (see details of the microscopic expressions for the coefficients in This means that the states that break the time-reversal symmetry must have m y = 0. This is, for example, enforced by β m xx > 0, since it penalizes m 2 x . The other details of the analysis of the potential can be found in the Supplemental Material x + α m 2 z , and also β m 00 , β m zz > 0. The quadrupling phase appears when the mean-field approximation for the pairing fields is relaxed. The model ( In two spatial dimensions, the topological invariant, which is associated with the degree of the maps m/ m : S 2 → S 2 m , reads as The integrand is obviously ill defined when m = 0. However, whenever m = 0, the corresponding configuration has an integer topological charge Q(m) ∈ Z; this suggests that the model can host skyrmion topological excitations. Note that in three dimensions the model is characterized by another invariant, the Hopf invariant, which is associated with the maps S 3 → S 2 m . This suggests the existence of hopfions, but it is beyond the scope of the current discussion. The model describing the resistive fermion quadrupling state is alike to the Faddeev-Skyrme model The experiments First note that because the time-reversal symmetry (Z 2 ) is broken, the model has domain-wall excitations. These are similar, in a way, to the domain walls found in a three-component model We performed numerical simulation by minimizing the energy (5) from various initial states. When the initial guess has a nontrivial topological charge, the minimization procedure leads, after convergence of the algorithm, to stable skyrmion configurations. Figure Furthermore we find that the interskyrmion forces are attractive. Hence, single quanta skyrmions attract each other to form skyrmions with higher topological charge. Thus in general one would not expect the formation of regular skyrmion lattices but rather skyrmion lumps formed by the competition between the attractive forces and pinning landscape. Interestingly, in a single quantum skyrmion, the time-reversed state is realized at a zero measure area inside the skyrmion. On the other hand, skyrmions carrying more than one quantum feature in-ner regions of the time-reversed state. The enclosed area of the time-reversed state increases with the topological charge. This suggests that if the Z 2 symmetry associated with the relative phase locking is strongly broken, the formation of skyrmions is strongly inhibited. Note that unlike in Fig. The recent experiment reported a fermion quadrupling phase in Ba 1-x K x Fe 2 As 2 We derived an effective model of that resistive state, starting from a microscopic three-band model with dominant interband interaction for Ba 1-x K x Fe 2 As 2 and by implementing a mean-field approximation for the fields that are fourth order in fermions. The effective field theory has a structure similar to the Faddeev-Skyrme model, but for a soft modulus vector field that represents the fermion quadrupling order parameter. If spatial inhomogeneities are present the model accounts for spontaneous magnetic fields, consistently with the experimental observations We would like to remind the reader that, similarly to skyrmions that appear in other contexts, such as magnetism, their existence also depends on factors that are beyond the effective long-wavelength field-theoretic model. Namely, in contrast to vortices, the skyrmionic topological charge is obtained through a surface integral. Consequently, if the terms that break the O(3) symmetry are very strong, the localization of the skyrmionic topological charge can shrink down to scales where the effective theory is ill defined, thereby destroying the topological protection. When the effective field theory is applicable, the potential barrier preventing the collapse of a skyrmion in a film can be roughly estimated as follows: the condensation energy density (F c ) multiplied by the coherence volume F c ξ 2 Z2 L, where ξ Z2 is the coherence length associated with the broken time-reversal symme-try and L is the film thickness. Finally, within the range of applicability of the effective theory, the skyrmions can be induced by taking advantage of the Kibble-Zurek mechanism Supplemental Material: Skyrmions and magnetic properties of the resistive electron quadrupling state In the Supplemental Material, we discuss the details of the derivation of the effective theory for the fermion quadrupling state. In particular, we start from the microscopic model of a three band superconductor with interband dominated pairing. This yields a two-component Ginzburg-Landau theory with inter-component mixed gradient terms which are then eliminated by a reparametrization of the superconducting degrees of freedom. Next, the theory is mapped to a model that couples the fermion quadrupling order parameter to the Meissner current. In the resistive state, the Meissner screening is absent, and the theory reduces to a model that depends only on the four-fermion order parameter. We also discuss details of the numerical methods, and present additional results. These include additional skyrmion solutions, the effect of material inhomogeneities on skyrmions, and domain-wall solutions. The first part starts with the microscopic derivation of the two-component Ginzburg-Landau theory that is relevant to describe a three-band superconductor with interband dominated repulsive pairing. See We consider the microscopic model of a clean superconductor with three overlapping bands at the Fermi level. Within the quasiclassical approximation, the band parameters that characterize the different cylindrical sheets of the Fermi surface are the partial densities of states (DOS) ν a , and the Fermi velocities v where ω n = (2n + 1)πT , with n ∈ Z, are the fermionic Matsubara frequencies and T is the temperature. The gauge derivative is D ≡ ∇ + ieA, where A is the vector potential, and the gauge coupling is related to the flux quantum Φ 0 by e = -2π/Φ 0 . The quasi-classical propagators f a and g a are respectively, the anomalous and the normal Green's functions in each band; they obey the normalization condition Here, the parameters p run over the Fermi surfaces, and λ ab are the components of the coupling potential matrix. For simplicity the pairing states are assumed to be isotropic on each of the Fermi surfaces, so that λ ab (p, p ) = const, see details in where ν a is the partial density of state, and g a = sign(ω n ) 1 -f a f + a . The Ginzburg-Landau functional, is obtained by expressing the solutions of the Eilenberger equations (S1) as an expansion by powers of the gap functions ampli-tudes ∆ a and of their gradients: The summation over the Matsubara frequencies gives 2πT where ∆ = (∆ 1 , ∆ 2 , ∆ 3 ) T , and the anisotropy tensor is c . The indices i, j stand for the x, y coordinates, and the average is taken over the a-th Fermi surface. The current reads as The critical temperature is given by the smallest positive eigenvalue of the inverse coupling matrix Λ-1 . Namely, if λ -1 n denote the positive eigenvalues of the inverse coupling matrix Λ-1 , the critical temperature is determined by the equation G 0 = min n (λ -1 n ). Provided that all the eigenvalues are positive, the number of components of the effective field theory coincide with the number of bands. In this case, the Ginzburg-Landau equations for the three-component system read as where While the precise microscopic physics behind the superconductivity in Ba 1-x K x Fe 2 As 2 is still unknown, we focus on the scenario of a three-band model with interband dominated repulsive pairing. In this case, the eigenvalues of the inverse coupling matrix are not all positive. This implies, as detailed below, that the three-band theory is described by a two-component order parameter. B. Two-component Ginzburg-Landau theory for the s+is superconducting state Our principal interest here, is the time-reversal symmetry breaking s+is state in a three-band superconductor. We consider an interband dominated repulsive pairing, suggested to be relevant for iron-based superconductors Thus the fields ∆ 1,2 correspond to the gap functions at the hole Fermi surfaces while ∆ 3 is the gap at the electron pockets sketched in Fig. The associated eigenvectors are ∆ 1 = (-1, 1, 0) T and ∆ 2 = (x, x, 1) T , where x = (u hh -u 2 hh + 8u 2 eh )/4u eh . Since the only fields that can nucleate are those associated with positive eigenvalues, the Ginzburg-Landau theory (S6) has to be reduced to a two-component one. This reduction is obtained by expressing the general order parameter as the linear combination Here η 1 and η 2 are the order parameter of the s ± pairing channels respectively between the two concentric hole surfaces and between the hole and electron surfaces. The substitution of the linear combination (S12) into the Ginzburg-Landau equations (S6), after projection onto the eigenvectors ∆ 1,2 , yields the system of two Ginzburg-Landau equations The parameters on the left hand side of the Ginzburg-Landau equations (S13) are expressed, in terms of the coefficients of the coupling matrix (S10) as where |∆ 1 | 2 = 2 and |∆ 2 | 2 = 2x 2 + 1. The s + is state is symmetric under the C 4 transformations, thus the coefficients satisfy K . As a results, the coefficients of the gradient terms in (S13) read as The total superconducting current (S7), is the superposition of the partial currents J (a) of the different components of the order parameters, as J = a J (a) ; and the partial currents read as The two-component free energy functional that corresponds to the Ginzburg-Landau equations (S13), and whose variations with respect to A give the supercurrent (S16), reads as (in dimensionless units): where Here, the complex fields η 1,2 are the components of the superconducting order parameter. They are electromagnetically coupled by the vector potential A of the magnetic field B = ∇ × A, through the gauge derivative D ≡ ∇ + ieA. There, the coupling constant e is used to parametrize the London penetration length. Note that for the energy to be positive definite, the coefficients of the kinetic terms should satisfy the relation det k = k 11 k 22 -k 2 12 > 0. Also, for the free energy functional to be bounded from below, the coefficients of the terms that are fourth order in the condensates should satisfy the condition b 11 b 22 -(b 12 + c 12 ) 2 > 0. Finally, the condition for having a nonzero ground-state density is det â = a 11 a 22 -a 2 12 < 0. These conditions are of course satisfied by the microscopically calculated value (S14) and (S15). Within the current basis for the superconducting degrees of freedom, it is quite complicated to deal with the kinetic terms. It is thus worth rewriting the model using a linear combination of the components of the order parameter, that diagonalize the kinetic term: Here η † = (η * 1 , η * 2 ), and k is the matrix whose elements are k ab . The positive definiteness of the free energy implies that det k > 0. So, k is a positive definite square matrix whose square root is This determines a natural linear combination of the superconducting degrees of freedom, where the kinetic term (S18) is diagonal: and . The original superconducting degrees of freedom η are restored via the reverse transformation η = R -1 Ψ, where Using the relations (S19) and (S21) to parametrize the superconducting degrees of freedom with Ψ instead of η, greatly simplifies the kinetic term (S20). Thus, the potential term in the free energy (S17) has to be rewritten in terms Ψ. In all generality, the potential energy reads as with the summation over the repeated indices. Note that for the energy to be a real quantity, the tensor coefficients a ij , and b ijkl should obey some symmetry relations: Similarly, in terms of Ψ the potential energy reads as where the tensor coefficients α ij and β ijkl obey the same symmetry relations (S23) as a ij , and b ijkl . They are obtained via the transformation η = R -1 Ψ, and the relations are A simple, yet lengthy algebraic manipulations thus yield the free energy in terms of the superconducting degrees of freedom Ψ and and β ij := β ijkl δ ki δ jl , γ ik = β ijkl δ j1 δ l2 . Moreover, all the coefficients are symmetric, for example β 21 = β 12 . Using the relations (S25), and collecting the various terms yields the relation for the coefficients of the bilinear terms Similarly, the coefficients for the fourth order terms are and Note that the elimination of the mixed gradient terms via the decomposition of the matrix k in terms of the square root matrix R is not unique. Indeed, there exist different possibilities, see for example [S1, S32]. The total Meissner current J is defined by the variation of the free energy (S26) with respect to the vector potential: It follows that the gauge field can be explicitly eliminated by expressing A in terms of the condensate Ψ, and the Meissner current: Indeed, the kinetic term can be written as and that the magnetic field where Hence, the magnetic field features a contribution from the Meissner current J , together with a contribution from the interband counterflow Z ij . Note that since Z * ij = Z ji , the magnetic field can be written as It follows that the free energy (S26) can be rewritten as where Z ij is defined in (S33b). Here, we use an alternative mapping to a model that couples the massive U(1) vector field (the current J ) to the fermion quadrupling order parameter in the form of a 3-vector m. The fermion quadrupling field is defined as the projection of the superconducting degrees of freedom Ψ onto the spin-1/2 Pauli matrices σ: Unlike the pseudo-spin n, which a unit vector, the norm of m is not fixed. Thus n and m are related to each other according to m = 2 n, and we sometime refer to m as a soft modulus vector field. The projection (S36) determines the following relations where, for the product of Pauli matrices, we used the Fierz identity where δ ab is the Kronecker symbol. It follows that The kinetic term (S32) can thus be written as Similarly, the projection (S36) determines the relation where, for the triple product of Pauli matrices, we used the identity There δ ab is the Kronecker symbol, and αβγ is the rank-3 Levi-Civita symbol. It follows that Hence, the magnetic field reads as As a result, where the density is The effective model of the fermion quadrupling resistive state is deduced by removing the superconducting degrees of freedom from (S45), since their prefactors are renormalized to zero. Namely, in that resistive state the Meissner current vanishes (J = 0), while the currents associated with the gradients of the fermion quadrupling order parameter m do not. Assuming that the critical temperatures of Z 2 and U(1) transitions are well separated, and assuming a mean-field approximation for the fields that are fourth-order in fermions the free energy of the fermion quadrupling state reads as Similarly, the magnetic field in the fermion quadrupling resistive state becomes Equivalently, component-wise, the magnetic field is Finally, the potential term reads as and Topological properties in two-dimensions The soft modulus vector field m (S36) can be associated with non-trivial topological properties, by considering the properties of the corresponding unit vector field n := m/ m . Indeed, the unit vector n is a map from the one-point compactification of the plane (R 2 ∪ {∞} ∼ = S 2 ) onto the two-sphere target space spanned by n. That is n : S 2 → S 2 n , which is classified by the homotopy class π 2 (S 2 n ) ∈ Z, thus defining the topological invariant, i.e. the degree of the map, as Note that n is ill-defined when m = 0. On the other hand, whenever m = 0, the corresponding configuration have an integer topological charge Q(n) ∈ Z. In a way, Q(n) counts the number of times the pseudo-spin texture of n wraps the target two-sphere. The topological invariant (S53), the index of the map n, can be expressed directly in terms of the soft modulus vector field m. This is easily done by replacing n with its actual definition n := m/ m . The topological invariant thus reads as Here again, the integrand is obviously ill-defined when m = 0. Whenever m = 0, the corresponding configuration have an integer topological charge Q(m) ∈ Z. The quantization of Q(m) implies that the magnetic flux is quantized as well according to B z = Φ 0 Q, where Φ 0 = -2π/e is the flux quantum. It should be emphasized that unlike the flux quantization condition for the superconducting states, which is related to the U(1) topological invariant, the condition (S54) is also valid in the non-superconducting phase. Indeed, the quantization in the superconducting state is given by the U(1) topological invariant, which is related to the total phase winding at spatial infinity (the usual winding number). In the fermion quadrupling resistive state, the total phase of Ψ is disordered and the U(1) invariant does not exist. On the other, since it is associated only with the relative phases, Q(m) is the quantity that defines the flux quantization. It is worth emphasizing that the topological charge (S53) is an integer, when integrated over the infinite plane R 2 , or at least an large enough domain Ω ⊂ R 2 . The essential features can be qualitatively summarized as follows: First, all the coefficients involving a y index vanish: α m y = β m ay = β m ya = 0. Moreover, the criterion for the condensation is z , and also β m 00 , β m zz > 0. The effect of the time-reversal symmetry operation for the soft modulus vector is a reflection of m on the xz-plane of the target space: A typical value of the parameter set, when obtained from the microscopic model, is given in the Table Inhomogeneities in a sample typically result in spatially varying parameters of the Ginzburg-Landau model. In the system with broken time-reversal symmetry this can result in gradients of both densities and relative phases. This can in principle produce spontaneous magnetic fields. As emphasized in the main body, the material has slight inhomogeneity in the doping level, and this results in relatively small local modulation of the superconducting critical temperature. This can be accounted for by implementing spatial modulation of the prefactors of the quadratic terms of the Ginzburg-Landau theory. For example, the parameters of the quadratic term of the original Ginzburg-Landau theory (S17) formally depend on the temperature, a ii ≡ a ii (τ ) = a 0 ii [τ -1]. Hence, it may be possible to model the effect of temperature inhomogeneities by requiring a spatial dependence of the parameters a ii ≡ a ii (τ, x) = a 0 ii [τ (x) -1]. Different areas of an inhomogeneous sample indeed can have different local critical temperatures. Such a local modification of the parameter was demonstrated to be responsible for the existence of spontaneous magnetic fields, in different models with time-reversal symmetry breaking states. These include the responses to linear thermal gradients [S7, S8], hotspot created by a laser pulse At the level of the effective model, implementing smoothly spatially varying amplitudes of the individual components, can be modelled by small spatial variations of the coupling constants α m 0 and α m z accordingly, given the relations (S27) and (S50). In the main body, we considered random modulations in the form of τ (x) = τ 0 [1 + δτ ran(x)] where ran(x) is a smooth random surface. Here τ 0 is the nominal reduced temperature, δτ is the amplitude of the thermal variation. The idea to construct a random, smoothly varying quantity is to represent it as a Fourier series with random coefficients: were L x and L y are the dimensions of the box that bounds the numerical domain. N x and N y are cut-off in the Fourier expansion, and the coefficients c ij and s ij are random numbers ∈ [-0.5 : 0.5]. In the numerical investigations in the main body of the paper, we use Finite-Element Methods (FEM) (see e.g. We consider the domain Ω which a bounded open subset of R 2 and denote ∂Ω its boundary. H(Ω) stands for the Hilbert space, such that a function belonging to H(Ω), and its weak derivatives have a finite L 2 -norm. Furthermore. The Hilbert spaces of real-valued functions is equipped with the inner product •, • , defined as: The spatial domain Ω is discretized as a mesh of triangles using for the Delaunay-Voronoi algorithm, and the regular partition T h of Ω refers to the family of the triangles that compose the mesh. Given a spatial discretization, the functions are approximated to belong to a finiteelement space whose properties correspond to the details of the Hilbert spaces to which the functions belong. We define P h as the 2-nd order Lagrange finite-element subspace of H(Ω). Now, the physical degrees of freedom can be discretized in their finite element subspaces. And we define the finite-element description of the degrees of freedom as m i → m (h) i ∈ P Here M is the dimension of V h (the number of vertices), the w k are called the degrees of freedom of w and M the number of the degrees of freedom. To summarize, a given function is approximated as its decomposition: w(x) = M k=1 w k φ k (x), on a given basis of shape functions φ k (x) of the polynomial functions P (2) for the triangle T i k . The finite element space V h (T h , P (2) ) hence denotes the space of continuous, piecewise quadratic functions of x, y on each triangle of T h . The skyrmions and the domain-walls are field configurations for the two-dimensional system. More precisely, either for the true two-dimensional system, or for a threedimensional system with a translational invariance along the third direction z. The initial guess is defined, such that the ground state would be m z = ±1. The configuration is then rotated using the rotation matrices R i and scaled to match the actual ground state m: m = r 0 R z (-φ 0 )R y (-θ 0 )S (sk) n (dw) . (S59) On each block, the panels on the top row display the texture of the four-fermion order parameter m. The panels on the middle row show the associated magnetic field B (S47), and the bottom row display the corresponding charge transferring counter-currents j counter according to the Ampère's law. The parameters are the same as in the main body. Note that as can be seen from the densities of arrows, the configurations for Q(m)=7-10 are zoomed out, as compared to those for Q(m)=1-4. The skyrmions displayed in the main body, as well as in Fig. The fermion quadrupling resistive state, which precedes the s+is state, spontaneously breaks the timereversal symmetry. For the fermion quadrupling order parameter m, the time-reversal operation (S55) implies that a state that breaks the time-reversal symmetry has m y = 0. In such a situation, there exist domain-wall excitations between both s ± is states, as illustrated in Fig. 