We present a two-dimensional mesoscopic model of a yield stress material that includes the possibility of local volume fluctuations coupled to shear, in such a way that the shear strength of the material decreases as the local density decreases. The model reproduces a number of effects well known in the phenomenology of this kind of materials. Particularly, we find that: the volume of the sample increases as the deformation rate increases; shear bands are no longer oriented at 45 • with respect to the principal axis of the applied stress (as in the absence of volume-shear coupling); homogeneous deformation becomes unstable at low enough deformation rates if volume-shear coupling is strong enough. We also analyze the implications of this coupling in the context of out of equilibrium shear bands appearing for instance in metallic glasses. Dilatancy The paper is organized as follows. In the next section we consider a prototypical one variable, mean field model of the yielding behavior and add to it an additional variable describing density changes. We obtain in this simple model the basic properties of the dilatancy effect, particularly, the increase in system volume with the increase of strain rate in the system. Then in Section III we show how this behavior justifies that in spatially extended models the geometric orientation of plastically deformed regions, or shear bands, is rotated with respect to the case in which there is no such volumetric effect. The orientation we observe departs from the one predicted by the classical Mohr-Coulomb failure criterion, instead it is consistent with the orientation predicted by a recently proposed theory. In section IV we show that volume-shear coupling can produce a flowing state in the material in which parts of the sample yield and acquire a lower density, while other parts remain essentially rigid, and with a higher density. While all previously mentioned results correspond to equilibrium and reversible situations, in Section V we investigate the important case in applications of samples prepared by some sort of annealing, which are then submitted to a shear deformation until they fail, typically by nucleating a non-equilibrium shear band, as it occurs in metallic glasses. Finally, in Section VI, we summarize and conclude. We start by considering a very simple model with two degrees of freedom (representing the shear and volume state of a sample) and study the appearance of a dilatancy effect. We take as a starting point the well known Prandtl-Tomlinson model of friction for the shear degree of freedom e 2 and it describes the situation depicted in Fig. and the model equation must be written with the explicit inclusion of the externally applied stress σ in the form In any case, the difference between using Eqs. ( Note first of all that we isolated the term Be 2 1 /2 that corresponds to a sample with bulk modulus B. In the second term, U 2 (e 2 ) will be an oscillatory potential with many minima along the e 2 axis. In the case in which the factor U 1 (e 1 ) is a constant, this potential will provide the decoupled model in which e 1 and e 2 evolve separately. However, if the value of U 1 (e 1 ) decreases as e 1 increases a dilatancy effect will be obtained. To lowest order we may consider that the change of U 1 is linear with e 1 . We can conveniently model it by choosing This form provides a corrugated potential on e 2 with an amplitude that tends to 0 when e 1 is positive and large, whereas saturating to an e 1 -independent values for large negative e 1 . Therefore α quantifies the coupling between e 1 and e 2 . Coupling vanishes when α = 0. In the next Section dealing with an extended system we will consider some stochastic form of the function U 2 . Here, it suffices to consider a single periodic expression. In the past we have considered two particular forms of the U 2 term, described as the "cuspy" and "smooth" potential forms, defined as (the square brackets in the first expression indicates the integer part function). It is seen that the cuspy case consists of a concatenation of parabolic pieces. Driving along the e 2 direction will produce the effect of modifying the value of e 1 . We simulated Eqs. (6), using expressions (8), The dilatancy effect in the PT model is the germ of a couple of interesting features that we will encounter in the spatially extended model, and that are analyzed in the next two sections. In a spatially extended system, and in the absence of volume-shear coupling, correlated slips occur at 45 • with respect to the principal axis of the stress tensor, as this is the orientation in which the maximum shear stress occurs. However, in the presence of volume-shear coupling, this angle changes. The one-site modeling of the previous section is the base for a spatially extended model in which each site is characterized by its strain and its volume degree of freedom. Details of the model have been presented elsewhere The functions U 2 , U 3 will be taken to be of the "smooth" type, but with a stochastic ingredient, this stochasticity being totally uncorrelated in different spatial positions. We proceed as follows. We define a value e 0 (either e 20 or e 30 for e 2 or e 3 ) and define the corresponding U to be given by U = 1 -cos (e -e 0 )π ∆ that however must be solved taking into account that there is a constrain among e 1 , e 2 , and e 2 that must be fulfilled (the so called St Venant constrain The orientation correlation of plastic activity (and ultimately the orientations of shear bands) with respect to principal stress directions is an important feature in many practical situations, so the reason for this reorientation is worth to be explored in more detail. When α = 0 the failure planes are determined by the condition of maximum shear stress, and this always occur at 45 • with respect to the principal axis (in the present simulations they being the x and y axis, we will take σ x > σ y ). However, if α = 0 the stress normal to the failure plane plays a role as a reduction in normal stress favors slip by reducing the critical stress. Therefore there is rotation of the slip planes with a normal that tends to align with the axis in which the compressive stress is minimum. The standard way to quantitatively calculate this rotation is the Mohr-Coulomb approach where p ≡ (σ x + σ y )/2, and σ ≡ (σ x -σ y )/2. The Mohr-Coulomb theory considers that a sample is in static equilibrium as long as the frictional equilibrium condition is satisfied for all θ, with μ and c being sample parameters named the internal friction coefficient and cohesion, respectively. Inserting Eqs. . Blue line is the result of the theory in can be written as The Mohr-Coulomb criterion states that actual slips will occur at the angle θ for which this condition first becomes an equality. It is clear that this will occur at a value of θ for which (sin(2θ) + μ cos(2θ)) is a minimum, predicting a slip angle given by Introducing the internal friction angle of the sample φ such that μ = tan φ, θ can be written as In order to calculate the value of φ for a given sample, the failure envelope of the sample must be determined. By replacing back Eq. ( Therefore, a determination of the stability region in the p, σ plane allows to determine the values of φ and c, and calculate the slip angle θ. A compressive stress p can be easily added in our numerical model, and the critical value of σ, namely σ c calculated as a function of p for different values α. The results (shown in Fig. which is the Mohr-Coulomb prediction for the angle of plastic slips in terms of the volume-shear coupling parameter α. This linear function is plotted in red on top of the numerical results in Fig. Recently, Karimi and Barrat or approximately in cases in which φ 0 is not too large This means that in our model, and within the numerical precision, the value of φ 0 coincides with the macroscopic value φ (Eq. ( An important phenomenon that may occur in the flowing of amorphous materials is localization of the deformation. In some cases (as it occurs in metallic glasses, see next section) this localization is a non-equilibrium phenomenon typically associated to the preparation of the sample. In other cases, this localization occurs at equilibrium and this is the situation that is addressed here. In Ref. In addition to this kind of mechanical instability, it was found We have observed this kind of instability in the present model, in the case in which α is large enough. The numerical evidence is contained in Fig. The effects of volume-shear coupling that have been discussed so far all correspond to situations of dynamical equilibrium in the system, or in other words, they all describe stationary situations. There are other situation however, in which we are interested in transient (although probably long-lived) properties of the system. In many cases this occurs when we do an experiment on a sample prepared by some ad-hoc protocol, that leaves it in an out of equilibrium configuration. In concrete we want to refer to the case of metallic glasses. The key to mimic the behavior of a metallic glass under shear is to start with an initial configuration that appropriately incorporates the annealed nature of the experimental initial state. In our model we can produce a starting configuration that is more stable than the stationary one after long deformation by adjusting the local disorder potentials at different sites The possibility that we will implement here is to anneal the sample (before strain is applied) by allowing the values of e 20 and e 30 to relax towards more stable configurations. This is the scheme that was originally used in Ref. The results obtained are shown in Fig. The case α = 0 serves as a reference, and is similar to that studied in Ref. The case of a finite shear-volume coupling (α > 0) produces some quantitative differences and also some quali- tative new phenomena. First of all, in Fig. We think the most remarkable effect of a finite α man-ifests on the spatial distribution of the e 1 variable (Fig. In this work, we have introduced a mesoscopic model for the yielding behavior of amorphous materials incorporating the possibility of volume-shear coupling. This ingredient is acknowledged to have important experimental consequences, but has only rarely 