Light trapping photonic crystal (PhC) patterns on the surface of Si solar cells provides a novel opportunity to approach the theoretical efficiency limit of 32.3%, for light-to-electrical power conversion with a single junction cell. This is beyond the efficiency limit implied by the Lambertian limit of ray trapping ∼29%. The interference and slow light effects are harnessed for collecting light even at the long wavelengths near the Si band-gap. We compare two different methods for surface patterning, that can be extended to large area surface patterning: 1) laser direct write and 2) step-&-repeat 5 × reduction projection lithography. Large area throughput limitations of these methods are compared with the established electron beam lithography (EBL) route, which is conventionally utilised but much slower than the presented methods. Spectral characterisation of the PhC light trapping is compared for samples fabricated by different methods. Reflectance of Si etched via laser patterned mask was ∼ 7% at visible wavelengths and was comparable with Si patterned via EBL made mask. The later pattern showed a stronger absorbance than the Lambertian limit. Solar installations will soon provide 1 TW of power from ∼ 16 TW we consume per year now with an annual uptake of solar increasing by ∼ 35% suffers from Auger recombination losses. The ray optics picture of light trapping suggests that solar absorption cannot exceed the so-called Lambertian limit. To go beyond the ray optics limit, a wave-interference-based light trapping solution needs to be engineered It was recently shown that photonic crystals (PhC) made via surface texturing and targeting the 0.9-1.2 μm spectral range is the key to surpassing the light trapping Lambertian limit Interdigitated back contacts (IBC) solar cells are currently the most efficient, breaking through the long-held 25% efficiency and performing above 26%, closing the gap to the Lambertian limit In this study, we compare two different methods to define and fabricate PhC light trapping on Si using etch mask patterning by: 1) direct laser writing by ablation and 2) stepper photo-lithography. For comparison, electron beam lithography (EBL) (as in ref. Laser ablation of etch mask. The simplest method to define a mask for plasmabased reactive ion etching (RIE) and/or wet etch of Si is direct laser ablation of sub-1 μm diameter holes in a film (Figure The diameter of the ablated hole D is defined by the pulse energy density (fluence), which for the Gaussian beam F (r) = F 0 exp(-2(r/w 0 ) 2 ) follows the D 2 = 2w 2 0 ln(E p ) dependence plotted in Figure A detailed summary of the width W evolution during etch time for different diameter holes in Cr-mask ablated by correspondingly different single laser pulses of energy E p are presented in Figure Finally, to show capability to process thin Si wafers of 10 μm thickness which is the target for a PhC enhanced light trapping, the same laser processing of Cr mask and plasma etching was carried out (Figure Stepper patterning of etch mask. Steppers reduce and project patterns from a reticle onto a silicon wafer. A 5 × reduction means that the reticle does not require highresolution electron beam lithography for it's fabrication, even when the resultant pattern is sub-micrometer. The smallest size on the reticle was a 2-μm-diameter disc, which will produce a 400 nm pillar (ideal conditions) on the etch mask for the Si solar cell. We used Sumiresist PFI-38 photoresist spin coated over 30-50 nm thickness Cr coatings (e-beam evaporated) for mask fabrication. After fabrication (a wet etch) the diameters of the holes in Cr-mask ranged from 180 nm to 245 nm with uncertainty ∼ 10 nm (Figure Electron beam definition of etch mask. We used conventional Si-wafers since IBC cell geometry is not compatible with SOI layer stacks. Cr masks were patterned by EBL to define PhC pattern with subsequent wet KOH etching. Figure Figure With optical the R(λ) and T (λ) measured experimentally, the absorbed part A(λ) = 1 -R(λ) -T (λ) can be accessed. Then, the maximum achievable photo current density (MAPD) of the solar cell under AM1.5 (Figure where the constants are: e is the electron charge, h is the Plank constant, c is the speed of light. It is assumed that each absorbed photon creates a single electron-hole pair. Consequently, the short-circuit current J SC = J M AP D for an ideal solar cell without losses due to surface and bulk recombination.How to achieve the latest conditions is an another wide field of research, which is already well matured and achieved world record efficiency in Si solar cell performance. Addition of PhC light trapping is a natural next step to improve light-to-electrical power conversion. Laser patterning of a Cr or Al 2 O 3 mask has the fundamental advantage of not using vacuum chambers for the lithography step for pattern definition and can be up-scaled for large area fabrication. By combining high stage scanning speeds (10 cm/s and faster) with high repetition rates (200-600 kHz), it was possible to efficiently pattern 1 × 1 cm 2 surface areas within a reasonable ∼ 2 hours time. Beam travel speeds of meters per second are in reach using galvano and polygon scanners. Synchronising the stage movement with laser repetition rate results in good alignment of the ablated sites between neighbouring lines, at expense of a slightly longer writing time. Different Cr thicknesses necessitate different pulse energies to open holes in the mask, but 20-60 nm Cr film can be ablated with good control of hole diameter with sub-20 nJ single pulses. Such pulse energies are now available from fs-laser oscillators and regenerative amplifiers are not required. Due to the almost 2 × sized holes ablated by laser writing as compared with stepper photo-lithography defined mask, approximately 2 × faster plasma etching was observed. Indeed, 4 mins was all that was needed to achieve optimal ridge conditions R → 0 nm with the same optimised etching recipe for mask made by laser ablation. In areas where there were missing holes at the laser ablation sites (missed pulse, slight change in spatial laser mode, etc.), an interesting pattern developed after under etch (Figure Future studies will focus on changing the ratio of SF 6 to CHF 3 to affect the anisotropy (difference in etch rate between in x-y and z) during the dry etching With RIE, varying the bias power greatly influences the etch anisotropy, which is important since the under-etch and aspect ratio H/W can be controlled. Anisotropic etching at a larger bias creates deeper patterns, while isotoropic sideways etching is enhanced by a larger inductively coupled plasma (ICP) power. It was found that the bias voltage had little effect on the aspect ratio of inverted pyramids. The H W ≈ 1 was observed (0.71 expected from Si lattice) and anisotropy of the Si etching was the defining property regardless bias used. Two different fabrication methods for large-area (2 × 2 cm 2 ) PhC patterns on Si for light trapping are demonstrated: 1) direct laser write and 2) stepper photo-lithography. They can scale up for light trapping solutions on order of magnitude larger surfaces and were compared with EBL, which recently showed close to the Lambertian limit performance over the visible spectral range and exceed it over 950-1200 nm wavelengths when an antireflection coating was applied on SOI samples Holes of 350-400 nm were opened in a Cr or Al 2 O 3 mask by single laser pulse irradiation, with writing speeds of 10 cm/s. Smaller holes with 180-245 nm diameter were fabricated in the Cr mask by the second method, stepper projection photo-lithography and lift-off. The plasma etching rate of Si vs hole diameter, W , in Cr mask was sub-linear. Larger holes are vital for faster KOH etching, which is considerably longer ∼ 10 h as compared with ∼ 10 min for similar PhC patterns with RIE. Pulses of only 2-5 nJ (515 nm/230 fs) on the sample focused by a N A -0.9 dry objective lenses are required for laser printing of ∼ 400 nm diameter nano-holes in the Cr-mask; approximately double the pulse energy was required for opening holes in the Al 2 O 3 mask. Due to strong under etch, the surface of Si where damage occurred during hole ablation is removed by plasma etch. A subsequent KOH or TMAH Future improvement of large area fs-laser pattering could employ Bessel-like beams to increase tolerance to surface tracking The energy balance of the absorbed, reflected, and transmitted parts of light energy A+R+T = 1 was calculated from the refractive index ñ of solar cell material (Si in this study . These expressions are valid for light incidence from air nair = 1. The Beer -Lambert law defines the transmitted part T = e -αd in a single pass through thickness d; αd ≡ ln(10)OD, where the optical density (absorbance A) is calculated from the transmittance as OD = -lg T . From the known spectrum of Silicon permittivity ε(λ) = ñ(λ) 2 , the efficiency of light harvesting by different Si solar cell thickness was estimated and compared with with the corresponding Lambertian limit. Three different methods to define a light trapping PhC pattern on Si solar cell surface are described next. Direct writing by ablation of Cr-on-Si mask was carried out with a solid state Yb:KGW laser (Pharos, Light Conversion, Ltd. Vilnius, Lithuania) at the λ = 515 nm wavelength with tp = 230 fs pulses at repetition rate f = 200 kHz. High precision mechanical stages with write speed up to 25 cm/s (Aerotech, GmbH. Pittsburgh, USA.) were used for the lateral in-plane (xy) translation of the sample during laser write. Axial (z) positioning of the focal spot onto Si surface was made by a high-precision stage mount of the objective lens. A software-hardware integration solution of the entire fs-fabrication unit was made by Altechna Ltd. Ablation was carried out with focusing using objective lens with numerical aperture N A = 0.9 (Mitutoyo) at a low pulse energy Ep = 2 -15 nJ (on the sample) with pulse-to-pulse separation for specified period of PhC from Λ = 1 μm to 3.1 μm. The laser beam profile was measured utilising a Ophir Spiricon SP928 beam profiling camera. Laser fabrication was carried out in air (cleanroom, class 1000). Crystalline c-Si (n-type; Phosphorus-doped) 100 and intrinsic samples (University wafer)The conductivity and its type of Si was determined by the van der Pauw method with an Ecopia HMS-3000. There was no difference observed for the tested low conductivity intrinsic n-and p-type Si in terms of formation of the laser ablation patterns and PhC plasma etching. All samples were cleaned in acetone and isopropyl alcohol (IPA) prior and post etching to minimise surface contamination. A Cr thin film deposition on Si was made by an electron beam evaporation (Kurt J. Lesker AXXIS system)A reactive ion etching (RIE) was carrier out with RIE-101iPH (Samco)equipped with a load-lock system. Structural and optical characterisation of laser ablated regions and PhC structures were carried out by the SEM operation mode of EBL writer (Raith EBL 150 TWO ). An i-line (365 nm) stepper NIKON NSR-2205i12D at Nano-Processing Facility (NPF) AIST, Tsukuba, Japan was used for this study. A reticle mask (inset in Figure An adhesion promoter for photoresist Hexamethyldisilazane (HMDS) was applied on Si wafers by dip coating after which 700 nm of positive resist (PFI-38) was spin coated onto the 6-inch Si substrate.After pre-baking at 90 • for one minute, an exposure of 25 regions over 6-inch Si wafer was carried automatically (step & repeat; inset in (b)). Different exposure time (sub-1 s) was programmed for each step to optimise the exposure dose (∼ 200 mJ/cm 2 is required to expose the resist). Post-exposure bake at 110 • for 60 seconds was implemented. Development of resist after exposure was carried out for 10 seconds in NMD-3 2.38% tetramethylammonium hydroxide (TMAH). The unexposed regions were retained on Si after development and the wafer was diced into 2 × 2 cm 2 chips after development (Figure A Vistec EBPG5000plusES EBL writer was used for definition of the KOH wet-etch masks. Two approaches were used, the first produced a Si3N4 mask, the second produced a Cr mask. The first approach used a combination of LPCVD of Si3N4, E-Beam Lithography (EBL) and Deep Reactive Ion Etching (DRIE) to transfer the patterns into the Si3N4. The fabrication started from growing 250 nm Si3N4 on both sides of an SOI substrate with 10 μm-thick device layer (inset of Figure In the second approach, a Cr mask was made by EBL, Cr e-beam evaporation and lift-off. This approach was carried out on 4-inch Si 100 n-type Phosphorous-doped wafers with a resistivity of 1-10 Ω cm (111.75 Ω/ sheet resistance measured by 4-probe method (Jandel RM3000)). The outline of the squares was defined by exposing a 300 nm-thick layer of PMMA resist, leaving after resist development an array of regularly spaced PMMA squares. The patterned grid was oriented to align with the wafer flat. The spaces between the PMMA square patterns were filled with Cr by e-beam evaporation. The excess Cr and unexposed resist was removed during lift-off process with acetone. The result was a grid mask of Cr outlining the exposed Si square areas. After KOH etching, the Cr mask was removed using Cr etchant solution. The final device was cleaned with Piranha solution. For potassium hydroxide (KOH) etch, a solution was prepared using 2 litres of 30% KOH which was then saturated with isopropyl alcohol (IPA) (2 cm surface layer). Etching was carried out at 40 • C. The etch time was evaluated using an online calculator 39 for the known pattern to be etched. Level of p-doping strongly affected the etch time. The depth of the inverted pyramids was dependent on the period Λ of the light trapping texture. For the base-angle of pyramid β = 54.7 • , the depth H = (Λ/2) × tan β and the side-length at the central cross section of a pyramid s = Λ 2 / cos β. For the used Λ = 0.8, 1.3, 2.5, 3, 1 μm, the corresponding depth (for ridgeless inverted pyramids pattern) is h = 0.57, 0.92, 1.77, 2.19 μm (the aspect ratios H Λ = 0.71). After etching the light trapping pyramidal texture, the front-side was protected by a Protek coating 40 before a back-side etch step through the SOI substrate. For thicker silicon (∼ 300 μm), the KOH solution was heated between 60-70 • C to reduce etch time. Characterisation of fabricated structures was carried out using scanning electron microscopy (SEM), Fourier transform IR microspectroscopy (VERTEX 70 Burker), and UV/Vis/NIR spectrometer (PerkinElmer Lambda 1050). Plasma etching of tee-pee patterns was carried out with SF6 50 sccm, CHF3 10 sccm, O2 10 sccm for 5 to 30 minutes (etch time dictated different structures); the RF ICP was 180 W, bias 0 W, He pressure 2.70 kPa at a process pressure of 2.5 Pa. Etching of black-Si was made by process: SF6 77 sccm, O2 100 sccm for 5 minutes at RF ICP 300 W, bias 5 W, He pressure 2.70 kPa and process pressure of 2 Pa. (MCN) in the Victorian Node of the Australian National Fabrication Facility (ANFF). We thank Workshop-of-Photonics (WOP) Ltd., Lithuania for patent licence and technology transfer project by which the industrial fs-laser fabrication setup was acquired for Nanolab, Swinburne. We are grateful to Dan Kapsaskis and An Lee for the training at the characterisation facility. etching (RIE) protocols were tested with a Cr mask with ∼ 200 nm holes obtained using a stepper lithography followed by lift-off (Figure Figure 