The co-occurrence of phase transitions with local and global order parameters, such as the entangled magnetization and topological invariant, is attractive but has been seldom realized experimentally. Here, by using high-pressure in-situ X-ray diffraction, high-pressure electric transport measurements and high-pressure first-principles calculations, we report a magneto-topological phase transition, i.e., the phenomenon of magnetic materials undergoing different magnetic and topological phases during the process of pressure loading, in a recently discovered magnetic Weyl semimetal Co3Sn2S2. By considering both out-of-plane ferromagnetic and in-plane anti-ferromagnetic components, the calculated results can well fit the experimental data. The calculation results furtherly reveal a pristine Weyl phase with four more pairs of Weyl nodes under low pressures, and a generally-defined Z2 topological insulator phase after the restoration of time-reversal symmetry. Remarkably, the present magneto-topological phase transition involves a pair of crossing bands of two spin channels becoming degenerate. Thus, all the chiral Weyl nodes annihilate with their counterparts from another spin channel, in contrast to the typical annihilation of Weyl pairs from the same bands in inversionasymmetric systems. Our experiments and theoretical calculations uncover a manner to modulate the diverse topological states by controlling the internal exchange splitting via external physical knobs in topological magnets. The topological phase transition (TPT) is a class of phase transition beyond the Landau paradigm, which cannot be described by spontaneous breaking of a local symmetry We here consider the emerging Weyl-TI phase transition, which contains two distinct topological nontrivial phases as well as metal-insulator transition. If TRS is preserved, the chiral Weyl nodes annihilate in pairs with each other upon phase transition (see Figure In this work, we focus on the TPT and apply high pressure to study the evolution of the topological states in the Weyl magnet Co3Sn2S2. Since its discovery Combining transport measurements and first-principles calculations, we find that with increasing pressure, the out-of-plane ferromagnetic (FM) ordering is suppressed while in-plane antiferromagnetic (AFM) components arises in Co3Sn2S2, with a concurrent decreased intrinsic anomalous Hall conductivity (AHC). From ambient pressure up to ~40 GPa, the system evolves from a low-pressure Weyl phase to a high-pressure Weyl phase, and finally to a general TI phase with Pauli paramagnetism (PM), accompanied with vanishing spin polarization and AHC. Unlike the pressure-induced TPT in nonmagnetic materials where the pressure triggers band inversion Weyl-TI TPT with the intraband annihilation of chiral Weyl nodes in a nonmagnetic system (in this case the inversion symmetry should be broken, e.g., TaAs). (b) Weyl-TI TPT driven by temperature or pressure with the interband annihilation of chiral Weyl nodes in a magnetic system. The dashed arrows denote the trajectory of the Weyl-node annihilation (in this case the inversion symmetry is preserved, e.g., Co3Sn2S2). For generality, we assume that the phase transition preserves the crystal symmetry. (c). Magneto-topological phase diagram of Co3Sn2S2 in the space of pressure (P) and temperature (T). The Kagome lattices with and without ferromagnetic order correspond to the magnetic Weyl semimetal and topological insulator phase, respectively. TC is the Curie temperature. Pc1 and Pc2 stand for the critical pressures of the first and second TPTs, respectively. Low-pressure (LP) Weyl phase contains 6 Weyl nodes (purple spots), while high-pressure (HP) Weyl phase contains 8 more, including 6 connected by inversion and C3z-rotation symmetries (blue spots), and 2 located at the kz axis of the Brillouin zone (kx = ky = 0, green spots). The Shandite Co3Sn2S2 adopts a rhombohedral structure with the R-3m space group. The unit cell in a hexagonal representation is shown in Figure We measured the temperature dependence of longitudinal resistance (R-T) of Co3Sn2S2 under high pressures, which are shown in Figure Figure Figure We further notice that there are pronounced kinks around 3 GPa in both pressure dependence of the TC, Hc and AHC curves, after which the values of all above-mentioned magnetic related parameters decrease fast. According to the magnetic measurements (see Supplemental Materials Note 1) about Co3Sn2S2 at ambient pressure, there is a magnetic transition below Curie temperature, which is also reported in previous researches Nevertheless, we here prefer to stress that no matter how the magnetic order varies during the pressure loading, the studied sample approaches near non-magnetic state above 40 GPa, which can be recognized from the nearly vanished Hc and AHC. Hence, one can expect a magnetic phase transition from the FM state to PM state above 40 GPa at low temperatures in Co3Sn2S2. This means that the TRS-broken Weyl fermions would annihilate at high pressures due to the restoration of TRS in a space-inversion protected system. A TPT could thus be expected along with the magnetic phase transition. In order to study the possible pressure-induced magnetic and TPTs, we investigated the magnetic and electronic properties of Co3Sn2S2 under pressures by using density function theory (DFT) calculations (See details in Methods). DFT results show that under ambient pressure, Co3Sn2S2 is a FM nodal-line semimetal without spin-orbital coupling (SOC) To confirm the Pauli PM is a stable magnetic state under high pressures, we performed further calculations based on six magnetic structures. All results show a consistent convergence to Pauli PM for all considered AFM components under the high pressure of 40.4 GPa. Moreover, all the AFM systems possess higher energy (Figure We now turn to the expected pressure-induced TPT. At relatively low pressures, we observe a Weyl phase transition with another two types of Weyl nodes (additional 4 pairs, denoted as W2 and W3) appear near pressure Pc1 = 20 GPa, which is similar to the previous report We furtherly show more details about the TPT. Figure It is known that a strict TI contains two important ingredients, i.e., TRS and Fermi level lying inside the inverted bands gap. However, in an itinerant ferromagnetism system such as Co3Sn2S2 we do not expect a global band gap. When the high pressure or temperature leads to a Pauli PM phase To summarize, a magneto-TPT from ferromagnetic Weyl phase to paramagnetic TI phase by external pressure was studied in a magnetic Weyl semimetal. Pressure drives the ground FM Weyl state to a new in-plane AFM and out-of-plane FM state with more Weyl nodes, and finally to the TRS preserved Z2 TI phase. This coupling of magnetic-order and TPT offers an ideal arena for the emergent topological quantum phenomena. It will inspire more studies related to magneto-TPT in other material systems, e.g., with an intrinsic global gap in its nonmagnetic phase. We expect these evolutions of topological states in magnetic Weyl semimetals to extend the investigations of topological electronic states that manifest the exotic quantum states and suggest the potential for advancing topological electronics. Growth and characterizations of single-crystalline microflakes. All chemicals were of reagentgrade quality and used as received from commercial sources. The single crystal microflakes of Co3Sn2S2 were grown by chemical vapor transport (CVT) method. We used the polycrystalline powders of Co3Sn2S2 as source material and I2 as a transport agent. In order to reduce the nucleation points during the growth process, a reverse temperature gradient was utilized before the crystal growth. The temperatures of the source and growth zones were first stabilized at 800 and 900°C, respectively, for 48 hours. Then the sample growth was initiated by setting the source and growth zones at 850 and 800°C, respectively, for two weeks. Hexagonal single-crystalline microflakes with dimension of 2-4 mm and thickness of around 10 μm were obtained. The magnetism, electric resistivity, and chemical composition of the microflakes were characterized, which confirmed the high-quality Co3Sn2S2 samples. More details can be found in Supplemental Materials Note 1. In situ high-pressure X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurements. For the in situ high pressure XRD measurements, a symmetrical DAC with a pair of 400 μm diameter culet sized anvils was employed to generate high pressure. A Re gasket was pre-indented to 40 μm in thickness followed by laserdrilling to form a 150 μm diameter hole serving as the sample chamber. A well-grinded and pressed Co3Sn2S2 pellet was loaded in the sample chamber. Silicone oil was used as the pressuretransmitting medium and the pressure was calibrated by using the ruby fluorescence shift at room temperature. The in situ synchrotron XRD experiments were carried out at the 4W1 High Pressure Station in the Beijing Synchrotron Radiation Facility (BSRF). The diffraction data were recorded by a Pilatus detector, and high purity CeO2 powder was used for calibration. High-pressure electric transport measurements. The high-pressure electric transport measurements were conducted on a Co3Sn2S2 single crystal using the Quantum Design PPMS-9. A Be/Cu DAC with 300 μm culet anvils and a c-BN gasket were used. Four Pt wires were adhered to a Co3Sn2S2 single crystal using the silver epoxy. Silicone oil was used as the pressure-transmitting medium and the pressure was calibrated by using the ruby fluorescence shift at room temperature. For the Hall measurements, magnetic fields were along the crystallographic c direction. The pressure was applied up to 40.3 GPa until the ferromagnetic order disappeared. Analysis of electric transport. The longitudinal resistivity was calculated by Van der Pauw method Density functional theory (DFT) calculations. We applied DFT method by using the projectoraugmented wave (PAW) pseudopotentials with the exchange-correlation of Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof revised for solids (PBEsol) form and GGA approach as implemented in the Vienna abinitio Simulation Package (VASP) 