Flat optics has demonstrated great advances in miniaturizing conventional, bulky optical elements due to the recent developments in metasurface design. Specific applications of such designs include spatial differentiation and the compression of free space. However, metasurfaces designed for such applications are often polarization-dependent and are designed for a single functionality. In this work, we introduce a polarization-independent metasurface structure by designing guided resonances with degenerate band curvatures in a photonic crystal slab. Our device can perform both free-space compression and spatial differentiation when operated at different frequencies at normal incidence. This work demonstrates the promise of dispersion engineering in metasurface design to create ultrathin devices with polarization-independent functionality. There has been significant recent interests in flat optics and metasurfaces, which allow for arbitrary manipulation of the phase and amplitude of optical wavefronts using ultrathin optical elements at sub-wavelength scales For the applications mentioned above, it is desirable for the devices to process both polarizations and to have polarization-independent responses. Existing designs of nonlocal metasurfaces for Laplacian operators In this work, we present a polarization-independent, photonic crystal slab design that can be used as both a space compressor and a differentiator when operated at different frequencies. Our nonlocal metasurface features the use of guided resonances with degenerate band curvatures. Moreover, our device operates in transmission mode at normal incidence, allowing for ease of integration into optical systems. The rest of the paper is organized as follows: we first briefly review the physics of guided mode resonances in photonic crystal slabs and how to employ such resonances for our applications. Then, we describe the design of our device in light of the necessary conditions for each application. Finally, we numerically demonstrate the multifunctionality of our structure and assess its performance. In this section, we briefly review the operation principle of a spatial compressor and a differentiator designed using photonic crystal slabs. Photonic crystal slabs can support guided resonances where E(k x , k y ) is the Fourier transform of the field E(x, y). The transmission coefficient t(ω, k) at an operating frequency ω and as a function of the in-plane wave vector k = (k x , k y ) is given by the equation: where t d and r d are the direct transmission and reflection coefficients, and ω 0 (k) and γ(k) are the resonant frequency and linewidth of a guided resonance at the wave vector k. The plus or minus sign corresponds to the case where the guided resonance has even or odd symmetry with respect to the transverse plane of the slab, respectively. The resulting transmission spectrum near a resonant frequency exhibits a Fano lineshape, which finds many applications in photonics due to its rapid variation between total transmission and reflection With this knowledge of transmission through a photonic crystal slab, we will now briefly review the general conditions needed to achieve the two functionalities studied in this work: free-space compression and isotropic, second-order differentiation. For these applications, since we will mostly be focusing on the operation of the slab at a single frequency ω = ω op , for the rest of the paper we will denote t(ω op , k) as the transfer function t(k) of our device. In this paper, we consider a light beam normally incident upon the slab. Thus, we are particularly interested in the response of the structure near k = 0. Both functionalities that we consider in this work require an isotropic transfer function t(|k|). Therefore, from Eq. 2, both ω 0 (k) and γ(k) should be isotropic, i.e. they should depend only on |k|, which is the length of the wave vector k. Thus, the slab should exhibit an isotropic band structure. An illustration of a space-compression device is shown in Figure Using the same device, we can also perform differentiation, as shown schematically in Figure To satisfy the two conditions above, we choose ω op = ω 0 (k = 0) (Figure Operating principle of (a) space compressor and (b) spatial differentiator applications using the same photonic crystal slab. Band diagram schematics showing the operating conditions of the (c) space compressor and the (d) differentiator. Operating frequencies are denoted by the dashed lines, and the black brackets denote the operating wave vector range. t(k) near k = 0 is given by the relation: Thus, when the dispersion relation ω 0 (k) ∝ |k| 2 , t(k) ∝ |k| 2 as well The operating principles as outlined in the previous section have been implemented using photonic crystal slab structures. To obtain the necessary isotropic band structure, one can use a photonic crystal slab with C 6v symmetry To overcome the issue associated with polarization dependency, we modify the photonic crystal slab structures previously considered. Our photonic crystal slab consists of a hexagonal lattice of air holes in a dielectric slab with lattice constant a, thickness d = 0.32a, and relative permittivity = 12, as illustrated in Figure In Figure In the frequency range near ω 0 = 0.7902 × 2πc/a, we calculate the transmission as a function of the frequency detuning from ω 0 and the in-plane wave vector k || using the rigorous coupled-wave analysis (RCWA) method We note that in our design, the same structure can perform two different functionalities by simply operating at different frequencies. Thus, the structure operates as a multifunctional metasurface. Previous works on multifunctional metasurfaces include multiwavelength achromatic metalenses Based on the discussion in the previous section, we now consider in more details the operation of the photonic crystal slab shown in Fig. The phases of t ss and t pp have quadratic dependence on the magnitude of k, as confirmed in Figures We numerically demonstrate our space-compression device on an input Gaussian beam in Figure For the purpose of comparison, we plot the output in- tensity profile of the equivalent free-space propagation over a distance of 50d eff ≈ 621a for LP and LCP/RCP light in Figure The slight distortion from the ideal Gaussian beam shape is due to the slight difference in magnitude of the transfer functions for the s and p polarizations, the effect of which becomes more pronounced as more devices are cascaded. To mitigate the distortion effects, the structure can be further tuned to achieve better agreement between the transfer functions of the s and p polarizations. Note that we are able to employ a Gaussian beam in our demonstration due to the similar phase responses of both s and p polarizations. In contrast, the operations of the previous photonic crystal slab design are limited to cylindrical vector input beams For our spatial differentiation functionality, we plot the transfer functions of each polarization at the operating frequency ω op = 0.7902 × 2πc/a in Figure In We numerically demonstrate our isotropic, secondorder differentiator in Figure In summary, we have designed a photonic crystal slab that can nonlocally perform polarization-independent, isotropic differentiation and free-space compression when operated at different frequencies at normal incidence. By introducing daisy-shaped air holes, we can achieve guided resonances with band curvatures that are neardegenerate for the two polarizations near k = 0. Note that only the real parts of the band dispersions were near-degenerate, while the imaginary parts or the quality factors of the modes differed. Future directions include optimizing the Q factors to be degenerate as well to achieve polarization-independence over a wider wave vector range. This work demonstrates the potential of using dispersion engineering in photonic crystal slabs to achieve desired polarization-independent functionalities in ultrathin devices.