A general technique for synthesizing both planar and conformal beamforming metasurfaces is presented that utilizes full-wave modeling techniques and rapid optimization methods. The synthesized metasurfaces consist of a patterned metallic cladding supported by a finite-size grounded dielectric substrate. The metasurfaces are modeled using integral equations which accurately account for mutual coupling and the metasurface's finite dimensions. The synthesis technique consists of three-phases: a direct solve phase to obtain an initial metasurface design with complex-valued impedances satisfying the desired far-field beam specifications, a subsequent optimization phase that converts the complex-valued impedances to purely reactive ones, and a final patterning phase to realize the purely reactive impedances as a patterned metallic cladding. The optimization phase introduces surface waves which facilitate passivity. The metasurface is optimized using gradient descent with a semi-analytic gradient obtained using the adjoint variable method. Three examples are presented: a low-profile directly-fed metasurface antenna with near perfect aperture efficiency, a scanned-beam reflectarray design with controlled sidelobes, and a conformal metasurface reflectarray. The far-field and near-field performance of the metasurfaces are verified and the bandwidth and loss tolerance of the metasurfaces are investigated. ETASURFACES are thin subwavelength textured surfaces (see Fig. the metasurface from places where local loss is needed to places where local gain is needed, a concept first introduced in When employing surface waves in metasurface beamformer design, however, care must be taken to ensure that the realized prototype can support the same surface waves as the homogenized sheets used in design. For example, a homogenized sheet may theoretically be able to support a surface wave with a large tangential wavenumber, while a discretized, patterned metallic cladding has a tangential wavenumber cutoff. Further, a realizable metasurface consisting of a patterned metallic cladding (electric impedance sheet) over a conductor-backed RF substrate has a finite thickness. The finite thickness introduces spatial dispersion which gives rise to a set of surface wave modes different from those supported by an idealized GSTC boundary. Not limiting the maximum tangential wavenumber and/or not considering spatial dispersion in design can lead to disagreement between realized/measured and homogenized metasurfaces. The effects of not modeling spatial dispersion are explained in The baffle approach was also adopted in the optimization variables can be chosen as any one of the three quantities. For example, in There are many advantages to optimizing over the sheet impedances directly rather than the surface currents or surfacewave field amplitudes. Optimizing the impedances allows for a more direct connection to realized prototypes. Furthermore, optimizing the impedances does not require an a priori guess on which surface wave modes or which wavenumbers to include. The discretization simply determines the highest evanescent spectrum excited. In addition, the lossless property is enforced by making the impedances imaginary. However, two distinct disadvantages arise. Setting the discretization limits the range of realizable impedances. Second, as the metasurface grows in size, the number of unit cells can grow rapidly, and the optimization can become impractical. We have tackled both of these problems in this work. The maximum transverse wavenumber supported by the surface impedance is found based on its discretization. Using the dispersion relation for surface waves supported by an impedance sheet, the maximum impedance that can be realized is then related to this maximum transverse wavenumber. The maximum sheet impedance is used as a bound on the allowable sheet impedances used during optimization. In this way, the tangential wavenumber supported by the homogenized sheet in early phases of design can never exceed the maximum tangential wavenumber supported by the patterned metallic cladding of the metasurface. Consequently, a one-to-one correspondence is established between the homogenized design and its patterned metallic cladding realization. Second, we have accelerated our gradient descent optimization with a semi-analytic gradient calculation using the adjoint variable method. This allows the computational effort of the optimization to be independent of the number of unknown sheet impedances included in the optimization apart from the larger impedance matrix which must be inverted. These two innovations allow our models to more closely represent the realized structures, making the designs simple to realize. This in turn leads to designs which produce good agreement between measured or simulated and theoretical results. The metasurface beamformers will be designed using a threephase design strategy (see Fig. Three metasurface beamformer designs will be presented in section VI including a directly-fed compact metasurface antenna with nearly perfect aperture efficiency, a metasurface reflectarray designed for a scanned far-field beam with a -20 dB sidelobe level, and finally a conformal metasurface reflectarray. A study on the approximate losses and bandwidth of the beamforming metasurfaces is presented in section VII. The paper concludes with section VIII. Three appendices are provided. In the first appendix, derivations of the semi-analytic gradient of the adjoint variable method used in the gradient descent optimization of the metasurface beamformers is provided. In the second appendix, the adaptation of the method of moments (MoM) to the conformal metasurface design is presented. In the third appendix, geometrical parameters of the patterned metallic cladding are provided for the phase 3 realization of the directlyfed metasurface antenna. Finally, it should be noted that the presented examples in this paper include both reflective and directly-fed metasurfaces. Recently, the approach has been applied to the case of transmissive metasurfaces The design of the metasurface is broken down into three design phases (see Fig. In phase 2, the complex-valued sheet is converted into a purely reactive sheet by way of gradient descent optimization accelerated by the adjoint variable method (see section IV). The reactances of the complex-valued sheet obtained in phase 1 serve as the critical initial optimization point required for convergence in local optimization-based techniques. The optimization varies the reactances until the normalized far-field amplitude scattered by the reactive sheet agrees with the normalized far-field amplitude scattered by the complex-valued sheet from phase 1. The optimization adds surface waves (evanescent fields) to the total field on the metasurface in order to satisfy a passive and lossless boundary condition. In phase 3, the optimized reactive sheet impedances are realized as patterned metallic claddings. In phase 3, the optimized reactive sheet impedances are realized as patterned metallic claddings. Note, in this work, an e time convention is assumed and suppressed throughout. Bold face letters correspond to matrices (which may be matrices of dimension N 1) and arrow accents correspond to coordinate position vectors. The electromagnetics problem considered is 2-dimensional (with out-of-plane wavenumber k =0) with transverse electric (TE) polarization. Hence, all electric field and current density quantities are z-directed, and all magnetic field quantities considered in the formulations are x -directed. The geometry that is considered is illustrated in Fig. The task of design phase 1 is to design layer 1, the complexvalued inhomogeneous impedance sheet, to produce a desired field transformation. To that end, an electric field integral equation (EFIE) is written to model the response of the metasurface to the exciting field where ω is the angular frequency of operation, μ is the magnetic permeability of free space, and G is the free space Green's function for two-dimensional TE problems H is the Hankel function of the second kind of order 0, and the indices p and q denote the layer numbers (see Fig. The incident field is that radiated by an infinite z-directed electric line source placed F meters above (or below) the metasurface along the y-axis. It is given by In (4), I is the line current strength in Amperes, η is the free space wave impedance, and k is the free space wavenumber. The desired scattered aperture field amplitude distribution is defined based on the desired far-field pattern. The amplitude level in V/m of the desired scattered aperture field is chosen to ensure global power conservation across the metasurface where P is the power incident on the metasurface in Watts per unit length in z. From the desired scattered electric field, E , the associated magnetic field is found by first computing the plane-wave spectrum of E , namely E , and then dividing the spectrum through by the TE wave impedance (η η k /k ) to obtain the spectrum of the magnetic field, H . Finally, an inverse Fourier transform is taken to obtain the magnetic field, H . With E and H defined, the scattered power is found. The scattered electric field amplitude, E , is scaled to satisfy With both E and E defined, (2) is solved for the unknown currents and noting that η jωε ε 1 according to volume equivalence, and η 0 for the ground plane. The substitution in (6) linearizes the system, allowing for its direct solution using the MoM. Pulse basis functions and the Galerkin testing scheme are used in the MoM implementation (see the Appendix of The obtained sheet impedances are, in general, complex-valued given that the desired total field may not satisfy a reactive impedance boundary condition. This is because the non-zero points of the normal component of the Poynting vector gives rise to local loss and gain It is the non-zero local power density of S S S S which manifests itself locally as positive and negative resistances in the sheet impedances. Surface waves can be added to the scattered field to redistribute power transversally along the metasurface from places where local loss is needed to places where local gain is needed. According to To introduce the surface waves through optimization, the following parameters of the optimizer are needed a) Optimization variables and initial point: The reactances of the complex-valued impedance sheets of phase 1 are retained to form the initial point. b) Optimization domain boundaries: The optimization domain limits are derived by limiting the capacitive sheet reactances such that the patterned metallic cladding supports the same surface waves as the homogenized impedance sheets. c) Cost function: The cost function is defined to be the Mean-Square-Error (MSE) between the far-fields of the metasurface resulting from phase 1 (taken to be the optimization goal) and that of phase 2. d) Gradient computation: The gradient is computed using the adjoint variable method. The optimization parameters are detailed in the following subsections. In gradient-based optimization methods, convergence strongly depends on obtaining a good initial point. A good initial point for the reactance of the impedance sheet can be obtained from the complex-valued impedance sheet from phase 1. This is accomplished by discarding the real parts of the complex-valued sheet impedances and retaining the reactances. These N total unknown reactances are arranged in an N-dimensional space, where each reactance varies along an orthogonal axis. Since only reactances are retained in the optimization, the design is passive and lossless. This N-dimensional space defines the optimization domain. Here, we derive bounds on the N reactances that comprise the optimization domain. Since the optimization step introduces surface waves with tangential wavenumbers, β , outside the light cone, the surface-wave fields can vary across the patterned metallic cladding. The homogenized impedance sheet used to represent the patterned metallic cladding can theoretically support surface waves with large tangential wavenumbers (see Fig. (11) In ( To exclude the reactances from the optimization domain, the optimization domain is bounded to the set A surface is defined within the bounded optimization domain as g X s g X , X , X , ... . , X and represents the response of the metasurface as a function of its reactances. This surface is called the cost function. The cost function g is designed such that its minimum represents the optimal solution. The cost function, g X s , is defined as where † denotes Hermitian transpose and 1 20 log 20 log In ) In The gradient descent optimization used to optimize the sheets is accelerated by a semi-analytic gradient calculation using the adjoint variable method. The adjoint variable method formulation was adapted from that in where I represents the current density expansion coefficients obtained from the solution of the linear system in In The entire gradient is calculated by solving only 2 linear systems (( The optimization results in purely reactive sheets which can be realized as a patterned metallic cladding using standard printed-circuit fabrication techniques. Now that phases 1 and 2 have been completed, the patterning phase, phase 3, can be applied. In this phase, the optimized, reactive metasurface from phase 2 is realized as a patterned metallic cladding of printed-circuit elements. Several printed-circuit elements were analyzed in order to extract the homogenized sheet impedance of the element This completes the description of the three-phase design strategy. Three metasurface beamformer examples designed using this design strategy are presented next. The first example is a directly-fed metasurface antenna with nearly perfect aperture efficiency. This concept was first demonstrated in where In The purely reactive sheet impedances, resulting from phase 2, are shown in Fig. As part of phase 3, the optimized reactances from phase 2, shown in Fig. The next metasurface considered is illustrated in Fig. The results of phase 1 and phase 2 are shown in Figs. 15 through Fig. Layer 3: Ground Plane Line Source Feed back-projected field, the metasurface reshapes the power density as per Fig. In the next example, we show complete control of the scattered near and far-field from a metasurface that is conformal. The final example involves the conformal metasurface shown in Fig. where δ is the Kronecker delta function equal to unity when p q and zero otherwise. Note, p 1 or 3 only as this metasurface has no dielectric spacer support. The curve in ( The parameter space (x-axis) is divided up into N=80 cells of equal width that are each λ /10 wide, hence w 8λ . For the metasurface layer (layer 1), each cell contains an impedance sheet ∆ 0.9λ /10. For the ground plane (layer 3), the cells are completely filled with PEC. The cells project conformally onto the metasurface using the parameterization in (21). Hence, for example, the lth impedance sheet on layer 1 has an dx. The metasurface is designed to generate a uniform amplitude and phase aperture field. The metasurface is fed by a line source placed F 2λ above its center, as depicted in Fig. The figure shows planar wavefronts scattered from the conformal metasurface. In Fig. In order to characterize the performance of metasurfaces realized with practical materials, there are two sources of loss that need to be considered: (1) dielectric losses and (2) metal losses. The dielectric losses are modeled with a complex permittivity in the volumetric impedance η of The bandwidth of the metasurface beamformer example is calculated by performing frequency sweep simulations of the metasurface considered in section VI.A using COMSOL Multiphysics. The optimized reactances in Fig. The directivity of the far-field radiation pattern was calculated at each frequency. The same sweeps were performed for the complex-valued sheet design from phase 1 of Fig. An approach for the design of beamforming metasurfaces was presented. The metasurfaces considered consist of a spatially-varying array of homogenized impedance sheets supported by a finite, truncated grounded dielectric substrate. They are modeled using integral equations. The design approach consists of three phases, an initial direct solve phase that solves for a complex-valued impedance sheet, a subsequent optimization phase to remove real parts of the sheet impedances obtained as a result of step 1, and a final patterning phase. The three-phase design approach results in passive and lossless metasurfaces which can easily be realized with patterned metallic claddings. The key to realizing passive and lossless metasurfaces capable of arbitrary field transformation is the optimization phase. In this phase, surface waves are introduced that transfer power transversally from places where loss is needed to places where gain is needed. This leads to a passive design which reshapes the power density upon reflection. The optimizations of the sheet reactances were performed using gradient descent accelerated by supplying a semi-analytic gradient obtained using the adjoint variable method. Examples of both planar and conformal beamforming metasurface reflectarrays were reported. In addition, a directly-fed metasurface antenna with near-perfect aperture efficiency was reported. Finally, the bandwidth and sensitivity to losses was investigated. The range of allowable reactances were limited in the optimization, avoiding printed circuit elements in the patterned metallic cladding which were associated with high metallic losses. This resulted in beamformers less sensitive to ohmic losses. It was also found that the metasurface beamformers exhibited bandwidths exceeding 2.59%, making them viable candidates for communications links or for electromagnetic illusions, and camouflaging. Future work includes extending the design concepts to 3D designs and increasing the bandwidth of the beamformers. The adjoint variable optimization expressions are derived in this appendix. The optimization variables are the reactances of the metasurface elements The cost function is defined in If the cost function is to compare un-normalized complex-valued far electric fields, then where E is found from where the last equality follows from the linearity of T. Next, we formulate an expression for ∂J/∂X . Using the solution to the linear system in ( where B b |b | ... |b , and b are the basis functions (in our cases simple pulse basis functions). Note, the '|' symbol means to juxtapose the basis functions, b, into a row vector, and hence, the product of BI is an element wise product. Since B is not a function of X , (A.7) becomes By the rule for differentiation of the inverse of a matrix Since Z Z c η Z c jX, (A.9) becomes ,(A.10) where we have explicitly factored out the j from the reactive impedances in the diagonal matrix η. Substituting back into (A.6), The result (A.11) is for the k component of the gradient. For the full gradient, we form a matrix with (A.11) as the k column Since T in (A.12) is a linear operator, its action can be represented with a matrix. By combining T and B, a matrix R can be formulated with the m observation point appearing along the m row and the n basis function appearing on the n column as (and hence R is of size M N) The matrix R is defined such that E ff sca RI. Equation (A.13) allows (A.12) to be written as The adjoint equation is therefore The quantity ∆E in (A.15) is called the adjoint field ∆E adj . The linear system of the adjoint problem in (A.15) can be solved leading to the final form for the gradient of the cost function Only the first N components of the vector in (A. When the cost function is formulated to compare the normalized far-field amplitude in dB scale as in (14) rather than the complex-valued far field as in (A.3), the derivation is the same except the adjoint field ∆E in the right hand side of (A.15) becomes with itself P-1 times. Note, ⊙ and ⊘ are the Hadamard (element-wise) multiplication and division operators, respectively. In the work presented in this paper, a value of P=250 was chosen. The unknown induced current density in ( ,(B.5) where γ 1.781 is Euler's constant. The remaining integration in (B.5) is non-singular and can be done numerically. The vectors and matrices of (B.4) and (B.5) can be inserted into This appendix lists the dimensions of the printed circuit elements comprising the patterned metallic cladding of Metasurface Design A in Fig. 