We demonstrate that the permeability of the cell wall of microalga C. reinhardtii can be enhanced in controlled microstreaming flow conditions using single bubbles adherent to a wall and driven by ultrasound near their resonance frequency. We find that microstreaming flow is effective at acoustic pressures as low as tens of kPa, at least one order of magnitude lower than those used in bulk ultrasonication. We quantify the increase in number of fluorescent cells for different acoustic pressure amplitudes and ultrasound exposure times. We interpret the increase in dye uptake after microstreaming flow as an indication of enhanced permeability of the cell wall. We perform microscopic visualizations to verify the occurrence of non-spherical shape oscillations of the bubbles, and to identify the optimal conditions for dye uptake. In our experimental conditions, with acoustic pressures in the range 20-40 kPa and frequencies in the range 25-70 kHz, we obtained spherical oscillations of bare microbubbles and non-spherical shape oscillations in microbubbles with algae attached to their surface. Only the latter were able to generate a non-linear microstreaming flow with sufficiently large viscous stresses to induce algae permeabilization. The results demonstrate that controlled microbubble streaming flow can enhance cell wall permeability in energy-efficient conditions. The transport of molecules across the cell wall of microorganisms is central to biotechnology and bioseparations: in biotechnology, genetic material is delivered to microorganisms Ultrasound-based methods to enhance the permeability of cell walls are considered to be attractive because they can be operated continuously and they can be scaled up. They share with other mechanical methods the advantage that they do not involve the use of aggressive solvents, but also the limitation of being energy intensive. Estimates of the specific energy input for cell wall disruption based on single-cell measurements In this Letter we demonstrate that microbubble streaming flow can be used to enhance the uptake of a lipid-soluble fluorescent dye in unicellular microalga Chlamydomonas reinhardtii in energy-efficient conditions. Microbubble streaming flow is a much less violent regime of ultrasound-driven bubble dynamics, which can be obtained using low acoustic pressure amplitudes on the order of 10-100 kPa, and bubbles positioned in controlled geometries. This flow regime offers tuneable flow conditions at the microscale We test the proposed method on unicellular eukaryotic green alga Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, a widely studied model organism for biofluid dynamics Wild-type C. reinhardtii strain cc-124 cells (kindly provided by Prof. P. Nixon, Department of Life Sciences, Imperial College London) were cultured in nitrogen starvation as described in Supporting Information, so as to increase the lipid content. To detect cell wall permeabilization of microalgae induced by acoustic microstreaming flow, we then use changes in uptake of a fluorescent dye, BODIPY, that accumulates into the lipid bodies. The protocol for fluorescent cell staining is described in Supporting Information. Figures After initial staining with BODIPY, the algal cell suspension was transferred into a quartz cuvette. Air microbubbles of 30-120 μm in radius were formed with a syringe. Adhesion of the bubbles to the cuvette walls was promoted by making the quartz surface hydrophobic by surface treatment where R 0 is the equilibrium radius of the bubble, α the contact angle (measured in the aqueous phase), κ is the polytropic exponent, ρ is the liquid density, and p 0 is the atmospheric pressure. We observe that during activation by ultrasound the bubbles sometime decrease in radius by up to 5%, due to gas diffusion, but their resonance frequency remains sufficiently close to the driving frequency that they continue to oscillate and generate a microstreaming flow. Since the gas compression can be approximated as being isothermal for the bubble radii and frequencies used The characteristic microstreaming flow profile, with closed streamlines around the bubble, is shown in Figure Microscopy images and videos at a frame rate of 10 frames per second were acquired using a camera (DCC3240M, Thorlabs) both in bright field and green fluorescence channel before and after the microstreaming flow was applied. After each experiment the sample was discarded, the cuvette was filled with fresh cell suspension, and a new bubble was generated. In Figure with ρ w the water density and c the speed of sound in water. We report our experimental data as a function of the acoustic energy exposure for direct comparison with bulk ultrasonication experiments of the same cells These values are between 10 and 100 times lower than those reported for bulk ultrasonication Bright-field video microscopy provides additional insights in the mechanism of occurrence of shape oscillations in this system [Figure All microbubbles showing algae on their surface developed non-spherical shape oscillations, whereas those without algae on the surface (see Figure The mechanism for enhanced cell wall permeability under the action of microbubble streaming flow remains to be elucidated; in our experiments we could not visualize pore polarity and, being fluorescent also in water, the free dye in the aqueous cell suspension produces a background signal, which however does not affect our image analysis method (see below). BODIPY and dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) were purchased from Sigma Aldrich and used as received. Staining of the intracellular lipid bodies of C. reinhardtii was performed according to the method described by Velmurugan et al. 