Modeling the microstructural evolution of metal and alloys, specifically under irradiation, is essential to predict the aging properties of materials. Many models are based on a transition rate matrix describing the jump frequencies of defects and involve a master equation governing the time evolution of a state probability vector. Here, we present non-stochastic numerical techniques to characterize the motion of individual defects migrating over long distances prior to recombining or being absorbed by another defect, resorting to the theory of absorbing Markov chains. These important events are fully determined by their first-passage time distribution to distant locations, no-passage distribution ,and walker fluxes to the sinks. We show that these functions can be efficiently computed using a method combining Krylov subspace projection and eigenvalue deflation. For a model system describing the absorption of a vacancy by a cavity in aluminum, the use of a small Krylov subspace deflated by the unique eigenmode corresponding to the quasi-stationary distribution is sufficient to capture the kinetics of the defect absorption faithfully. This method can be used in kinetic Monte Carlo simulations to perform stochastic non-local moves or in cluster dynamics simulations to compute sink strengths. Master equations are used extensively to describe many dynamical systems in natural and engineering sciences, in domains ranging from sociology, neuroscience, signal processing, and biochemistry to condensed matter physics. They involve a transition rate matrix and govern the evolution of a high dimensional state probability vector. Introductory examples for processes governed by a master equation are the random walk on an integer line with possible steps in forward, and backward directions, Brownian motion, the path of a diffusing particle until it gets absorbed Several KMC methods are available and are implemented depending on the investigated time and space scales. Atomistic kinetic Monte Carlo (AKMC) methods monitor the positions of all atoms on the lattice The class of OKMC methods encompasses event Kinetic Monte Carlo (EKMC) methods Historically, FPKMC algorithms have been developed to speed up KMC simulations. Indeed, the traditional KMC method may become inefficient when employed to simulate all the hops of defects on a lattice The no-passage distribution is the conditional probability distribution of the defect on the transient states knowing that it has not been absorbed yet: the sum of probabilities over the transient states is one. Note that master equations associated with absorbing Markov chains also play a crucial role in the formulation and calculation of sink strengths Sink strengths are important input parameters controlling the reaction rates in cluster dynamics (CD) simulations There exist several ways to characterize absorbing Markov chains numerically. The essential goal is to compute the first-passage and no-passage distributions. These two distributions serve to draw the first passage times and moves for a defect to reach the absorbing sink. To achieve these tasks, one implements one of the two following randomization procedures: kinetic path sampling or reverse sampling, based on the factorization The original Markov chain describing the defect evolution is assumed to be reversible. This means that the transport of defects obeys detailed balance; the transition probability flux between any two states is invariant under Markov chain reversal. The transition rate matrix of the Markov chain can therefore be symmetrized using similarity transformation, which ensures the matrix to be symmetric negative semi-definite. The survival probability of the defect before getting absorbed is obtained from the transient evolution operator, a matrix exponential, which is the sum of decaying exponentials. The eigenspectrum of the matrix is real and strictly negative. In this work, the survival probability distribution is estimated using the eigenvalue decomposition method. In practice, it is unfortunately difficult to entirely factorize or diagonalize large sparse matrices using dense solvers based on Gaussian elimination, Givens rotations, or Householder reflections due to memory limitations. Krylov subspace projection (KSP) methods are commonly used to obtain solutions for sparse high-dimensional linear systems. The approximations to these solutions are estimated by minimizing the residual over the subspace formed. A well-known KSP method is the conjugate gradient (CG) For symmetric and possibly indefinite system, iterative method like minimum residual (MINRES) method is rather used The eigenvector associated with the smallest eigenvalue is proportional to the quasi-stationary distribution (QSD). It corresponds to the eigenmode exhibiting the slowest decay and limiting the no-passage distribution in the asymptotic time limit The article is organized as follows. In Section 2.1, we introduce the theory of absorbing Markov chains and then formalize the generalized eigenvalue problem. We next describe model order reduction techniques combining Krylov subspace projection and eigenvalue deflation in Section 2.3. In Section 3, we assess the efficiency of the developed methods by applying them to two problems, a toy model for two-dimensional defect absorption and a realistic model describing the absorption of a distant single vacancy by a cavity in Aluminum A master equation (ME) is the set of ordinary differential equations describing the evolution of the state probability vector p(t) and writes where K is the Markov matrix. Its elements K ij are the transition rates from state i to state j and superscript T stands for the transposition. Here, transition rates are assumed to be time independent Matrix element P ij (t, t ) represents the probability to find a system in state j at time t given that it was previously in state i at time t. For the models with large number of states, it is not possible to directly compute the solution from the matrix exponential. Nevertheless, this can be done for the absorbing Markov process coinciding with the original process on a subset of N states called transient states and herein indexed from 1 to N . States connected to the transient states are pooled together into a single state labeled as N +1 and called absorbing state. The mathematical derivation below follows from Ref. where A a is the N ×N matrix such that A a ij = -K ij . We define 1 = (1, • • • , 1) T as the N -dimensional column vector whose components all equal one and similarly 0 = (0, • • • , 0) T . For the absorbing transition rate matrix K a as well, the sum of the elements of each row is equal to 0. The associated evolution operator is defined as, P a (t) = exp[K a t]. Being a stochastic matrix, it satisfies the following relationship ∀i ∈ 1, N + 1 : Because the absorbing state N + 1 is taken into account, Eq.( the probability to find the walker in one of the N + 1 states is also conserved: State labeled N +1, the absorbing state, is the only recurrent state of the system, while all the other states are transient. Starting from initial state labeled i ≤ N , the probability that the system is in transient state j ≤ N is given by: where e i and e j are the standard basis vectors. We refer the reader to Ref. Here, we assume that the original Markov process is reversible, i.e. obeys the principle of detailed balance which implies that the forward and backward fluxes between any two states, labeled by i and j, are equal: where ρ i and ρ j denote the equilibrium stationary probabilities of the two involved states. When the condition given by Eq.( For the two transient states i and j, the condition of detailed balance entails From Eq.( where s i and 1/ √ ρ i are strictly positive scaling factors. For the sake of concision, we express the two scaling factors using diagonal definite positive matrices Matrices S, R and B = S 2 commute and are invertible enabling one to define Matrix B is used as a preconditioner, i.e. it aims at decreasing the condition number of A B . Matrix SR serves to define a similarity transformation between A B and BA a and to formulate a generalized symmetric eigenvalue problem. A similarity transformation preserving spectral properties, the eigenvalues of BA a are real and definite positive. This is true in particular for A a when B is set to the identity I. The spectrum of A a can be obtained by solving the following generalized eigenvalue problem: where φ k denotes the kth eigenvector associated with λ k , the kth eigenvalue. We assume that eigenvalues are sorted in ascending order: 0 < λ 1 ≤ λ 2 ≤ • • • λ N and that eigenvectors are normalized. Hence, Φ = (φ 1 , φ 2 , ..., φ N ) is an orthonormal basis of eigenvectors. From Eq.( where Λ is a diagonal matrix with eigenvalues as its diagonal elements (Λ ii = λ i ). Multiplying both the left and right sides by Φ T results in, where the B orthogonality of Φ has been taken into account Now, the absorbing transition rate matrix can be obtained from Eq.( From the matrix decomposition We know introduce s and r, the scaling and re-scaling vectors consisting of diagonal elements of matrices S and R, respectively. We have r = R 1 and s = S 1 and also define two additional sets of re-scaled basis vectors g i = e i s r and d j = e j s r, where and denote component-wise multiplication and division. Plugging the scalar products g h i = φ T h g i and d h j = φ T h d j into the evolution operator, Eq. where (i, j) ≤ N . The survival probability of a system that has evolved from the initial state i at time t = 0 is the probability that the system has not been absorbed yet, or equivalently, is still located in one of the transient state. From Eq. where In Section 3, the survival probability is simply denoted by S(t) = π T p s (t), omitting the dependence on the initial state π. The mean first-passage time (MFPT) vector, τ (N ) = RSA -1 SR -1 1, corresponds to the solution of a linear system of N equations. Besides, the MFPT from initial state i exhibits a simple expression in the eigen basis: The no-passage probability distribution is defined by P np ij (t) = P a ij (t)/p s i (t) for i, j ∈ 1, N . Likewise, the QSD is defined as the probability vector q j that behaves asymptotically in time as the no-passage distributions. This is independent of initial state i The MFPT is obtained by integrating over time: where the quantity p a i (t) = 1p s i (t) corresponds to the probability that the walker has been absorbed at t. The absorption probability p a i increases from 0 at t = 0 to 1 at t = ∞. The time derivative of p a i (t) corresponds to the probability distribution of first-passage times. As mentioned in the introduction, it is not possible to compute the entire eigenspectrum of huge sparse matrices using standard dense solvers based on Givens rotation or Householder reflections for memory limitations. Instead, sparse and iterative eigenvalue solvers and the evolution operator is approximated by In the following, we will refer to this approach as the Eigenvector Subspace Model Projection (ESMP) method. Assessing the convergence as a function of the eigenvalue number k can be done by calculating the survival probability on the reduced eigenvector space and comparing the result with the one obtained using a standard solver computing the matrix exponential function with a builtin convergence criteria to the exact one, i.e., to the value τ (N ) i defined in Eq. ( In the following subsections, we present additional model reduction approaches based on Krylov subspace projection methods: refer to Evaluating matrix functions via eigenvalue decomposition becomes extremely costly for large sparse matrices whenever many eigenpairs are needed. A solution to this problem is to restrict the computation to the product of a vector a matrix function of A ∈ R N ×N an a vector b ∈ R N : This task is efficiently accomplished using a Krylov subspace projection (KSP) method which amounts to setting f (A) = A -1 [35, Ch. 9]. The Krylov subspace is characterized by its dimension , matrix A, and vector b and is denoted by Its construction proceeds as follows: vector b is left multiplied by A, which results in a new vector Ab. The new vector is multiplied again with matrix A to find A 2 b, and this goes on -1 times, vector b being included in the subspace: Gram-Schmidt algorithm is also used on the fly to construct an orthogonal basis of K (A, b) whose dimension is always equal to . If it happens that , the subspace construction is resumed and is set to l. The basis of K (A, b) is denoted by V . Using the definition of Krylov subspace from Section 2.3.2, the standard scheme involving matrix-vector multiplications is recalled. In practice, the problem of computing the exponential of a huge sparse matrix A ∈ R N,N is reduced to the one of computing the exponential of a small matrix T of dimension where T ∈ R , is a symmetric tri-diagonal matrix. Since the vectors from V basis are orthonormal, we have V T V = I where I ∈ R , is the identity matrix. T corresponds to the projection of A onto V , and e T denotes the th unit coordinate vector of R . The reduced tridiagonal matrix is obtained by leftmultiplying both sides of Eq.( while the Arnoldi approximation of A is V T V T . This last matrix is then used to approximate f (A)b using the following vector where e 1 stands for the first unit coordinate vector of R , β for b , the Euclidean norm of b, and where we plugged the relation b = βV e 1 . This approach is another example of model order reduction. For a sparse matrix, the complexity is O(N ) for storage and O(N 2 ) for the steps of iteration In this section, we describe a third approach, referred to as eigenvector and Krylov subspace projection method (EKSMP), consisting in projecting the model both on eigenvector and Krylov subspaces. It is based on the standard deflation technique of linear algebra The deflation approach is usually implemented for solving linear systems but we consider it here for evaluating the application of any matrix function on a vector, i.e. f (A)b. As previously, function f will be either the inverse or scaled exponential functions. The main objective of this scheme is to obtain a deflated matrix A ⊥ whose condition number will be smaller than that of A. This is done by discarding the contribution of a few smallest eigenvalues from the system, and focusing on a deflated matrix. Hence, the first subspace is generated by the k eigenvectors of A associated with the lowest eigenvalues as in Section 2.3.1 and is denoted by E k (A). The deflated subspace is the orthogonal component of the eigenvector subspace and is denoted by E k (A) ⊥ . The Krylov subspace is then constructed in the deflated space. The goal is to accelerate the convergence of the projected dynamics towards the exact solution as the dimension of the Krylov subspace increases. k and I -P are the orthogonal projection operators on E k (A) and E k (A) ⊥ . A general property of projection operators is that they are involution, i.e. P n = P. A particular property of P and I-P is that they commute with A, as a result of the spectral theorem. Hence, any power of A can be decomposed as where A = PA, A ⊥ = A -A . Consequently, the desired quantity can be decomposed as the sum of the following two terms: where b and b ⊥ stands for Pb and (I -P)b, respectively. Note that the Krylov subspace in the deflated space can be simply generated from the projected initial vector (I -P)b, which is formally stated by As a result, the approximation subspace is the sum of two subspaces: which are orthogonal to each other. Note that ESMP method considers the first subspace only [Section 2.3.1], while KSMP method the second one only [Section 2.3.3]. The second term in Eq.( where V ⊥ is the standard orthogonal basis of K A ⊥ , b ⊥ . The accuracy of the model order reduction method can be verified by checking the convergence of survival probability distribution and estimation of MFPTs as a function of given k. The survival probability of a system that has evolved from initial probability vector π at time t = 0 evaluated using EKSMP method is where λ ⊥ h is the hth eigenvavalue of T and the weighting coefficient α h i involves the corresponding hth eigenvector φ h in the Krylov subspace. After projecting with operator φ T h V T , we obtain Note that assuming exact arithmetic, the survival probability S(t) = π T p s (t) defined from Eq.( To later monitor the convergence of the methods as a function of k and , we will first inspect the estimated survival probability at t = 0 and additionally evaluate the following reduced MFPT: where the denominator in Eq.( The methods described above have been coded in PETSC/SLEPc environments resorting to the matrix function (MFN) object In our case, the application of vector b on the matrix exponential is computed for a predetermined set of times t n 0≤n≤L : The operation must be repeated at each considered time. For this purpose, R-KSP method is much more expensive than EKSMP method, because it is not able to provide the entire first-passage law at once. In this section, we first discuss the scalability and efficiency of the four different solvers used to extract eigenvalues. We set up a simple absorption model in two dimensions in Section 3.1. Next, we illustrate the three computational methods discussed in Section 2.3 by applying them to a realistic problem, the absorption of a single vacancy in a cavity in aluminum in Section 3.2. The model describing thermally activated jumps of aluminum atoms into a next nearest-neighbor vacancy is detailed in Ref. We characterize the absorption kinetics of the vacancy around the cavity and quantify the effect of the elastic interactions on the vacancy flux towards the cavity in Sec. 3.3.1, and on sink strengths (Sec. 3.3.2). The simple absorption model describes the motion of a defect on a periodically replicated square lattice of size L and coordination number Z = 4. The defect hops from any site to any of its four nearest neighboring sites with reduced frequency of 1. The number of transient states is N = L 2 . In addition, the defect can reach the absorbing sink from a singularized site with an absorbing frequency equal to 10 -2 . In this particular application, the considered transition rate matrix A is thus a modified Laplacian matrix: diagonal elements are equal to 4, but one element is set to value 4.01, while the 4N off-diagonal elements corresponding to transitions are all equal to -1. The matrix A is thus symmetric positive definite by construction. We herein evaluate the cost of extracting the linear system using the various sparse iterative solvers from SLEPC library We use an in-house cluster composed of 36 processing nodes, each node consisting of a dual-processor Intel(R) Xeon(R) Gold 6132 CPU running at 2.60GHz with 2×14 cores. As for the sparse iterative solvers, we tested methods like Krylov-Schur (KS), locally optimal block preconditioned conjugate gradient (LOBPCG), generalized Davidson (GD), and Jacobi Davidson (JD). In this first series of computations, the lattice size L is set to the value of 10 2 , so the number of transient states is N = 10 4 . The eigenvalues to be considered sufficiently accurate and converged, the tolerance value to 10 -10 . The maximum number of iterations was set to 6×10 4 . KS and LOBPCG solvers are implemented without preconditioning, while block Jacobi preconditioning is used by GD solver and also JD solver within its built-in MINRES routine. Figure The performance of KS, LOBPCG, JD, and GD solvers are all expected to be positively impacted through preconditioning. We study the impact of preconditioning resorting to the very efficient sparse Cholesky solver from MUMPS, and report results for KS solver only in the following. Unfortunately, MUMPS preconditioner could not be enabled within LOBPCG in SLEPC, or sub-performed with JD and GD solvers. For extracting the lowest eigenvalues using the preconditioned KS solver, the inverse spectral transform is enabled and the linear system arising at each reversed iteration is solved using the Cholesky method of MUMPS. Cholesky factorization As the number of transient states N increases, it gets computationally more expensive to perform a sequential simulation to extract the eigenvalues. To check the scalability of the Krylov-Schur method, we performed parallel computations with 28 cores to extract the first smallest 100 eigenvectors and corresponding eigenvalues for the transient states N increasing from 10 2 to 10 6 . In Fig. In addition to this, we also calculated the speedup ratio and efficiency, de-100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 900 1000 Lattice Size (L) fined respectively by where N c corresponds to the number of cores. Again, the tolerance parameter was set to 10 -10 to provide a reasonable trade-off between accuracy and performance. We display in Fig. In the following, we found a similar scalability for the more realistic model discussed next and that a sequential implementation of the preconditioned KS solver was sufficient to solve our eigenvalue problems. We further assess the efficiency of the various subspace projection algorithms in computations involving the absorption of a vacancy by a cavity in aluminum. As in the previous two-dimensional model system, the tri-dimensional lattice cell is periodically replicated, entailing that an array of cavities is indeed involved. The cavity concentration is determined by the cell lengths of the lattice. This second model is more realistic as it accounts for the deformation field created by the spherical cavity whose radius is 20.7 Å. Temperature is 60 K. The evolution operator given by Eq.( The survival probability distribution are computed using both setups of initial distributions, resorting to Eq.( We display in Fig. for up to the 3500 eigenvalues. For the ESMP method, we extracted the lowest eigenvalues by implementing the Krylov-Schur method with the tolerance parameter set to 10 -12 . For the R-KSP method, the tolerance parameter set to 10 -10 for better convergence. We extracted these lowest eigenvalues by implementing the Krylov-Schur method. The displayed distributions are scaled using the MFPT, estimated independently using the two standard linear solvers (sparse Cholesky and conjugate gradient). As it is observed from Fig. This discrepancy is attributed to the fact that a substantial number of eigenmodes, higher than 3500, significantly contributes to the short time kinetics. The cost of extracting a huge portion of the eigen spectrum limits the applicability of the ESMP method. As for the R-KSP method, the survival probability is equal to one, but one needs to specify the Krylov subspace dimension. Typi-cally, the value for the dimension of the Krylov subspace should not be less than 100. The number of restarted iterations to converge depends on the subspace dimension. We display in Fig. It requires four more orders of magnitude of CPU time to converge at times larger than MFPT. It entails that R-KSP can be practically implemented for the evaluation of survival probabilities at short times only. We now investigate the range of applicability of KSMP and EKSMP methods and check whether they exhibit the same limitations as the ESMP method. The R-KSP method provides the reference data to support the EKSMP and KSMP algorithms. The survival probability distributions estimated using KSMP and EKSMP methods for localized initial distribution are displayed in Fig. The dependence on initial conditions is the main limitation of EKSMP and KSMP methods, compared with the ESMP method that is less sensitive to the initial probability distribution. The significant number of non-local eigenmodes that must be computed contribute to the short time kinetics for a whole range of initial conditions. ESMP is, however, much more costly in terms of memory and CPU, as shown hereafter. The CPU time taken by the three methods to calculate the survival probability distributions for the absorption problem are reported in Table We quantified the reduced MFPT T k, and survival probability S k, (0) esti- To sample the MFPT starting from a uniform initial distribution, we used the EKSMP method. The quantity T k, was computed with k = 1, and the results are displayed in Fig. To visualize the absorption kinetics, we compute and display the probability fluxes to the cavity and the sink strengths from the initial sites of the mobile vacancy. The goal is to investigate the effect of the elastic deformation on the vacancy pathway to cavity. We first computed the mean residence time vector θ defined by for initial distribution π by casting this equation in the form of Eq. ( where θ j K jθ K j are the mean probability currents between both the transient and absorbing states, θ is the mean residence time vector and v represents the unit cell volume assumed to be uniform over the simulation box. All panels in Fig. ́ μ ́μ ́ μ Replacing the reduced residence time vector θ/θ T 1 with the quasi-stationary probability vector q in Eq.( The results are displayed in Fig. ́ μ ́μ ́ μ Fig. We next quantify the sink strengths defined by ́ μ ́ μ ́μ ́ μ We used Laplace and Wiedersich theoretical models where r cv = r ca + r va is the sum of the cavity radius and the vacancy radius. The Wiedersich model depends on the sink concentration and is given by where η is r cv /R and R is the average half distance between sinks (cavity). The distance R is calculated by R = 3 √ C c /2 -1 , a quantity depending on the initial probability vector π. The number of transient jumps from any state being equal to the product of the residence time and the jump frequency, the total number of jumps is obtained by summing over all transit and writes i θ i A a ii . Multiplying by a √ 2/2, the nearest neigbour distance between lattice site yeilds the distance traveled by the vacancy prior absorption. The later distance scaled by minimum distance separating the cavities, i.e. the period length, has been displayed in Fig. ́ μ This means that there is no need to account for elasticity to compute sink strengths of small cavities with respect to vacancies in aluminium under irradiation. Note that the size of the simulation box is restricted to 3 × 10 6 sites due to memory constraints, and that the cavity sizes is also modest. We however expect a higher effect of the elastic field created by interstitial loops on the absorbing/emitting fluxes of point defects in aluminum In this work, we have developed several algorithms for characterizing a mobile defect's absorption kinetics by a periodic array of sinks, resorting to the theory of absorbing Markov chains. The sink concentration is determined by the cell size and the absorbing transition rate matrix is deduced from the transition rates between transient states. The initial probability vector is defined by the defect's initial distribution over the transient states. The goal is to predict the time evolution of the state probability vector of the defect until absorption. This entails computing the exponential of the constructed rate matrix, a task ideally accomplished via its full diagonalization. The standard eigensolvers that are used routinely to extract the entire eigenspectrum of low-dimensional matrices fail in high-dimensions due to memory constraints. Fortunately, in many diffusion problems, the involved transition matrices are extremely sparse. The usual approach for sparse high-dimensional matrices is to repeatedly extract portions of the eigenspectrum using iterative solvers based on deflation techniques. However, this still requires a substantial amount of computational time, restricting the range of applicability of this technique for simulating aging kinetics and microstructural evolution in materials science. We have succeeded in overcoming this issue by applying Krylov subspace projection techniques. This approach involves vector-matrix multiplications only and reduces the computational complexity by calculating the exponential of a much lower-dimensional transition rate matrix. Two algorithms have been developed, dubbed KSMP (Krylov Subspace Model Projection) and EKSMP (Eigenvalue and Krylov Subspace Model Projection). KSMP is based on constructing a Krylov basis starting from the initial probability vector and aiming at capturing its subsequent evolution. As the KSMP approach introduces a dependence on the initial vector, we have also developed and tested the additional EKSMP method to deflate the Krylov subspace using the slowest eigenmodes. EKSMP and KSMP methods were implemented to study the absorption kinetics of a vacancy by a cavity in Aluminium. The correctness of the two algorithms was assessed by comparing the results obtained for a subset of times using the Restarted Krylov subspace projection (R-KSP) method as a reference: survival probabilities and first-passage distributions could be accurately reproduced using EKSMP and KSMP methods. Noticeably, an important simplification of the problem to solve stems from the fact that the diffusion process is reversible The crucial parameter controlling the convergence of KSMP and EKSMP methods is the dimension of the Krylov subspace. We found that the KSMP method yields accurate results with a Krylov basis whose dimension is five times the cubic root of the matrix dimension (the size of the three-dimensional lattice). Such a dimension for the Krylov basis (KB) makes it possible to capture long sequences of defect hops through the entire cell until absorption, and hence to account for the contribution of the QSD mode. We also observed that for our typical sink problem using the EKSMP method, the KB dimension is considerably reduced, by a factor of 10, even when only the QSD mode is included. This trend results from the fact that the QSD regime is reached very quickly and only involves the local diffusion of the defect. Besides, the extra cost associated with the QSD calculation being less or similar to the cost that is spared by reducing the Krylov subspace dimension, EKSMP method is more advantageous than KSMP method. This is especially true when more than one initial defect distribution is considered, a typical situation occurring in KMC and mean-field applications. Because the eigenvalues are often degenerate and eigenmodes occur in bundles, it was practically inconvenient and computationally expensive to include additional eigenmodes in EKSMP method. The working space dimension must be determined in the Krylov-Schur solver previously selected in our applications for its superior performance compared to other iterative solvers. Overall, we show that it is unnecessary to extract several eigenmodes to characterize the absorbing kinetics fully. Concerning sink strength calculations in which the initial defect distribution is homogeneous in space, the convergence with respect to the KB dimension is observed to be faster, as compared to situations with an initially localized vacancy. Overall, we show that Krylov subspace projection methods enable us to study the diffusion of a mobile defect around a sink in model system accounting for elastic dipole interactions and comprising up to million lattice sites. To compute the sink strengths at lower sink densities, the developed Krylov subspace projection technique should be implemented in combination with KMC simulations and conditioning techniques to recall the restarted setup using two Lanczos decomposition where V 1 and V 2 are the orthornormal bases of K (A, v 1 ) and K (A, v +1 ). where the subscript of the last term in Eq.(A.8) represents the vector with the last components of f (T m )e 1 CPU time (CPU) taken by ESMP, KSMP, and EKSMP methods to compute the first passage distributions for the single vacancy absorption. Processor A is Intel(R) Xeon(R) Gold 6132 CPU running, each node running at 2.60GHz with 2 × 14 cores. Processor B is Intel i5-8400H running at 2.5GhZ with eight cores. CP stands for Cholesky preconditioning using MUMPS package and Nc is the used number of cores.