Searching for low-power-consuming and high-efficient methods for well controllable driving of skyrmion motion is one of the most concerned issues for future spintronic applications, raising high concern with an appreciated choice of magnetic media and driving scenario. In this work, we propose a novel scenario of spin wave driven skyrmion motion in a ferrimagnetic (FiM) lattice with the net angular momentum δs. We investigate theoretically the effect of both δs and the circular polarization of spin wave on the skyrmion dynamics. It is revealed that the momentum onto the skyrmion imposed by the excited spin wave can be partitioned into a ferromagnetic term plus an antiferromagnetic term. The ratio of these two terms and consequently the Hall angle of skyrmion motion can be formulated as the functions of δs, demonstrating the key role of δs as an effective control-parameter for the skyrmion motion. Moreover, the spin wave frequency dependent skyrmion motion is discussed, predicting the frequency enhanced skyrmion Hall motion. This work thus represents an essential contribution to understand the skyrmion dynamics in a FiM lattice. Magnetic skyrmions are particle-like spin textures which are often observed in chiral magnets with Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction (DMI) due to the broken inversion symmetry. Owing to the topologically protected property, skyrmions are rather stable with nanoscale in size Recently, a number of theoretical and experimental studies on skyrmions creation and annihilation For ultra-low power consumption, one promising choice is utilization of spin wave or socalled magnon While the spin wave driven motion of skyrmions in FM and AFM systems has been demonstrated, the as-raised technical issues are also discussed. The strong stray field and relatively slow spin dynamics are the disadvantages for a FM system, while effective detection and controllability of an AFM texture are still quite challenging in practice due to the zero net magnetic moment although its high-speed spin dynamics and negligible stray field are highly appreciated. Along this line, a compromise is going to ferrimagnetic (FiM) systems which are under intensive discussion for their preference in future spintronic devices. A FiM lattice has a nonzero net moment even around the angular momentum compensation temperature (TA). While the spin dynamics comparable to antiferromagnets can be reserved if the net angular momentum δs is small, the net moment, generally weak in the vicinity of TA In fact, skyrmion generation and its motion in FiM materials were observed recently In this work, we study the skyrmion motion in a FiM lattice under the stimulation of a circularly polarized spin wave, using rigorous treatment and numerical methods. Net angular momentum δs used as the control parameter of the skyrmion motion and the effect of circular polarization (left-and right-circularly) of the spin wave on the skyrmion motion will be discussed in details. It is revealed that the motion momentum onto a skyrmion, acted by an excited spin wave, may be rationally partitioned into two separate terms. One is equivalent to the term existing in a FM lattice and the other is similar to the term existing in an AFM lattice, an expectable outcome. Moreover, it is demonstrated that δs as the control parameter determines the ratio of the two terms, which in turn controls the skyrmion Hall motion behavior. These rigorous treatments can be further evidenced by the atomistic spin simulations based on solving the two coupled Landau-Lifshitz-Gilbert (LLG) equations, illustrating the dependence of the Hall angle on δs. In this section, we first present a full set of definitions on magnetic structure for a FiM system where two sublattices are usually assumed, and then derive the equations of motion for a skyrmion. In the continuum framework, the local spin densities are denoted by s1 = s1n1 and s2 = s2n2, where n1 and n2 are unit vectors of each of the two FiM sublattices, si = Mi/γi is the magnitude of the spin density, Mi is the magnetization and γi = giμB/ħ is the gyromagnetic ratio of sublattice i. For clarity, both s1 and s2 are defined to be positive, s = (s1 + s2)/2 is the spin density average of the two sublattices and thus the net angle momentum δs = s1  s2. Furthermore, one may introduce the staggered vectors n = (n1  n2)/2 and m = (n1 + n2)/2 to deal with the dynamic equations of ferrimagnets. With this set of definitions, one can formulate the dynamic equation of the matter under study. Following earlier work, the FiM dynamic equations can be written in terms of the Néel vector n, whose Lagrangian density is given by where LB is the spin Berry phase and U is the free energy density. The spin Berry phase, which governs the magnetic dynamics, is given by: where  = s 2 /a is the constant of inertia is the vector potential for the assumed magnetic monopole The free energy density U including the exchange interaction, interfacial Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction (DMI), and uniaxial anisotropy energy, is defined as: where A, K and D are the approached exchange, anisotropy and interfacial DMI coefficients, respectively. In proceeding, one considers the excitation of spin wave in such a FiM system. Usually, this excitation is described by the Néel vector n that can be divided into two parts where j = iA(ψ * ψ  ψψ * )/2 is the flux of spin waves and  = ψ * ψ/2 is the local intensity of spin waves, u0 = u(n0) is the local texture energy associated with the moving texture n0 as the background, atotal = a0 + aD is the total vector potential, including the inhomogeneous magnetization and DMI, a 0 t is the scalar potential associated with the dynamics of spin texture Given the FiM dynamic equations, now one can focus on the skyrmion formation and its motion, as driven by spin wave. Since the issue to be discussed is on the moving objects, and both skyrmion and spin wave can be treated as rigid texture and quasi-particles moving in the lattice, one needs to construct the collective coordinates for the issue to be discussed. Generally, a skyrmion can be expressed in the collective coordinates n0(t) = n0[{Xμ(t)}]. For the spin wave, the collective coordinates ψ(t) = ψ[{xi(t)}] are usually employed, as done in wave packet theory where ρsw = ∫dV is the total intensity of spin waves, denotes the total texture energy with A 0 μ and U0 being the vector potential and energy of the spin texture (no spin wave component), respectively, and ẋ is the velocity vector of spin wave packet. Ω± = 2ρω  (δs), where Ω+ (Ω) corresponds to the right-(left-) handed spin wave. Given the Lagrangian formulation, one needs to consider the resistance to the motion of objects, i.e. the friction force against the motion which should be proportional linearly to the motion velocity, described as the Rayleigh term R for the dissipation in the collective coordinates: where  = (s11 + s22)/s, s = (s1 + s2)/2. Subsequently, the motion equations of the skyrmion and spin wave packet in the collective coordinates using the Euler-Lagrangian rule are expressed as: motion equation for spin wave packet: where Here, it is noted that the two equations are inter-correlated because Eq. (7a) contains term with the collective coordinates xi(t) of spin wave and Eq. (7b) contains term with the collective coordinates Xμ(t) of skyrmion. Particularly, the first and second terms in the right side of Eq. (7a) are associated with the effective electric and magnetic forces acting on the skyrmion respectively, the third term is the drag force, and the last term is the acting force imposed by the excited spin wave. Similarly, the motion of a single spin wave packet is also equivalent to the classical motion of a massive particle, which is determined by the effective forces acting on the wave packet expressed in the right side of Eq. (7b). Certainly, it would be very useful if one can obtain a set of rigorous solutions to Eq. ( Given this assumption, one can update Eq. ( where B 0 and b are the equivalent fields acting on the skyrmion and spin wave packet, respectively. Ẋ and Ẍ are the velocity and acceleration of the skyrmion, respectively, and ẍ is the acceleration of spin wave packet. Eq. ( Subsequently, we present some qualitative discussion on these motions and the details of numerical calculations will be presented in Sec. III. As stated above, the motions of skyrmion and spin wave packet are inter-correlated. The spin wave driven motion of skyrmion can be discussed from two aspects. One is to check the scattering of spin wave packet from the skyrmion, and of course such scattering can be viewed as the counter-resistance of moving skyrmion against the spin wave as the driving force. The other is to check the skyrmion momentum imposed by the spin wave. Discussing the two aspects respectively allows us to understand the whole landscape of dynamics of the spin wave driven skyrmion motion. As a result, unless the net angular momentum δs is extremely large in magnitude, corresponding to the case of FM system, the spin wave scattering by the skyrmion in a FiM system would be hardly affected by δs. The scattering would be likely similar to the case in an AFM system, as reported in recent literature. However, the skyrmion momentum imposed by the spin wave in a FiM system is rather different from those in FM and AFM systems, as revealed in the following section. It is well known that for spin wave driven skyrmion motion in FM and AFM systems, the skyrmion motion is much slower than the propagation of spin wave packet. This fact applies to the present FiM system, and thus we first discuss the momentum onto the skyrmion imposed by the spin wave packet. Given the spin Berry phase term LB defined in Eq. ( The two terms constituting momentum P are similar to those derived for FM lattice and AFM lattice, which are referred to FM term and AFM term, respectively. Notably, the skyrmion momentum in a FiM system depends on δs and this dependence does not exist in FM or AFM system. Obviously, the first term is linearly related to δs and symmetric about the X-axis, due to the mirror symmetry Consequently, parameter δs can be used as an effective control of the relative weight of the two momentum terms (i.e. their ratio), and eventually it becomes a critical parameter to determine the skyrmion dynamics. For the two limitations δs   and δs = 0, skyrmion dynamics should be similar to those in FM system and AFM one, respectively. Importantly, the skyrmion Hall angle can be modulated via tuning δs, which is very essential for future applications because the issue of Hall motion has been a highly concerned issue and detrimental for successful applications. Details of these behaviors will be presented below by the numerical calculations. The rigorous treatment presented above unveils quite a few of major characters of the skyrmion motion as driven by spin wave of circular polarization (right-or left-handedness). In order to check these predictions on one hand, and more importantly in order to apply this theory to a realistic system, one needs to comprehend our understanding of this theory by comparing the theoretical analysis with the numerical simulations based on the standard Heisenberg spin model using the LLG equation. The consistence of the proposed theory with the simulation results would be the criterion for the validity of the dynamic theory. Based on Eq. ( However, the rigorous solutions to Eq. ( s. The numerical calculations are performed on a 400 nm × 400 nm system, in which the spin wave is excited at the left boundary and moves towards the skyrmion locating in the center of the system. As discussed previously, the skyrmion is pinned at this stage, considering the fact that the spin wave travels much faster than the skyrmion. The velocity of spin wave can be calculated from the spin wave dispersion. Following the earlier work where ω+ (ω) corresponds to the right-(left-) handed spin wave, k is the wave vector of spin wave. Then, the speed of spin wave vsw is obtained from vsw = ∂ω±/∂k. Subsequently, the scattering of spin wave packet is calculated numerically by solving Eq. ( We check and solidify our conclusion by micromagnetic simulations. For the present case, the model Hamiltonian on a generalized spin lattice may be given by with the exchange coupling J = Ad/4 with the lattice constant d, the interfacial DMI magnitude D * = Dd 2 /8, the unit vector uij connecting the nearest neighbors, and the anisotropy constant K * =Kd 2 dz/2 with the thickness dz where Heff,i = Mi 1 H/si is the effective field with the magnetic moment Mi at site i, the gyromagnetic ratio γi = giμB/ħ with the g-factors For practical simulations based on the LLG equation, we start from a discrete lattice with the size of 400 nm × 400 nm × 7 nm and cell size of 2 nm × 2 nm × 7 nm, and set the time step to 10 13 s. The used magnetic moments Mi for nine different cases are shown in Table 1 and they correspond to nine different δs. Here, the spin waves are excited by applying the AC magnetic field in the region of 70 nm < x < 80 nm and 0 < y < 400 nm, which propagate along the x-direction. Specifically, we generate right-/left-handed spin waves by applying AC magnetic field hR/hL = h[cos(ωht)ex +/ sin(ωht)ey] with amplitude h and the frequency ωh = 300 GHz Subsequently, we check the consistence of the numerical calculations based on Eq. ( Therefore, it is necessary to formulate the scattering process and then to discuss the underlying physics. The Eq. ( Undoubtedly, the simulations are well consistent with the numerical calculations, confirming the validity of theoretical analysis above. While parameter δs only weakly affects the spin wave scattering, its effect on the spin wave intensity is relatively remarkable and depends on the spin wave handedness, as shown in Fig. Obviously, as the frequency of excitation field ωh gets close to the resonant frequency, high-intensity spin wave is excited. Here,  c + is estimated to be ~22.5 GHz and further increases with increasing δs, resulting in the enhancement of spin wave intensity. Reversely, for the lefthanded spin wave,  c  decreases and gets far away from ωh with the increase of δs, resulting in the suppression of the spin wave intensity, as shown in Figs. As a matter of fact, the scattering of spin wave by skyrmion in FM The consistence of the micromagnetic simulations with the numerical calculations allows one to uncover clearly the effect of δs on the skyrmion dynamics using simulations, noting that a rigorous derivation of the skyrmion velocity is quite challenging. As predicted in Section II. D, δs can effectively modulate the ratio between the FM momentum term and the AFM term, which in turn tunes the skyrmion Hall motion. This prediction is verified in our micromagnetic simulations, and interesting dynamic behaviors of the skyrmion are revealed. Fig. With the increase of positive δs, the FM term enhances significantly with the suppression of the AFM term. Moreover, the two terms contribute to the transverse motion along the +y direction, while compete with each other to the longitudinal motion. As a result, the Hall angle increases gradually, and the skyrmion moves toward the spin wave source for δs > 0.3 (×10 7 Js/m 3 ). When δs increases to ~ 1.24 where the FM term dominates, the skyrmion dynamics approaches to that of ferromagnetic skyrmion with topological number Q = 1 (depicted by blue dashed arrow). On the other hand, for negative δs, the two terms compete with each other to both the longitudinal and transverse motion components, contributing to the decrease of the skyrmion speed with the increasing |δs|. Similarly, with the increase of |δs|, the skyrmion motion gradually approaches to that of ferromagnetic skyrmion with opposite charge Q = +1. The skyrmion Hall angle as a function of δs is summarized in Fig. From the symmetry of the two sublattice system, opposite Hall angles are expected for two ferrimagnetic skyrmions with opposite δs driven by the left-handed and right-handed spin waves, respectively, which has been confirmed in our simulations. In Fig. At last, we check the effect of spin wave frequency h on the skyrmion Hall motion. As a matter of fact, earlier work has reported that in ferromagnets and antiferromagnets, the increase of spin wave frequency at low wave number enhances the wave group velocity Actually, one may estimate the speed of the skyrmion to provide more guidance for experiments, noting that the parameters considered in this work are comparable with those in GdFeCo. Specifically, a speed of ~320 m/s is obtained for δs = 0.31 (10 7 Js/m 3 ), comparable with that driven by electric current In conclusion, we have studied theoretically and numerically the skyrmion dynamics in ferrimagnets driven by circularly polarized spin waves. The spin wave scattering highly depends on its chirality, and the scattering direction hardly be affect by the net angle momentum δs. Interestingly, δs determines the ratio between the two spin-wave induced momentum terms acting on the skyrmion, which in turn significantly affects the skyrmion Hall motion. The dependence of the Hall angle on δs and spin wave frequency is unveiled by numerical simulations, which demonstrate antiferromagnetic dynamics at δs = 0 and ferromagnetic-like dynamics for large δs. More importantly, the gradual transition in Hall angle on δs allowing one to select suitable materials to better control the skyrmion motion, which is very meaningful for future spintronic applications. 