Majorana bound states (MBS) and Andreev bound states (ABS) in realistic Majorana nanowires setups have similar experimental signatures which make them hard to distinguishing one from the other. Here, we characterize the continuous Majorana/Andreev crossover interpolating between fully-separated, partially-separated, and fully-overlapping Majorana modes, in terms of global and local topological invariants, fermion parity, quasiparticle densities, Majorana pseudospin and spin polarizations, density overlaps and transition probabilities between opposite Majorana components. We found that in inhomogeneous wires, the transition between fullyoverlapping trivial ABS and nontrivial MBS does not necessarily mandate the closing of the bulk gap of quasiparticle excitations, but a simple parity crossing of partially-separated Majorana modes (ps-MM) from trivial to nontrivial regimes. We demonstrate that fully-separated and fully-overlapping Majorana modes correspond to the two limiting cases at the opposite sides of a continuous crossover: the only distinction between the two can be obtained by estimating the degree of separations of the Majorana components. This result does not contradict the bulk-edge correspondence: Indeed, the field inhomogeneities driving the Majorana/Andreev crossover have a length scale comparable with the nanowire length, and therefore correspond to a nonlocal perturbation which breaks the topological protection of the MBS. Majorana bound states (MBS) can emerge as topologically protected and spatially-separated zero-energy excitations localized at the opposite ends of a one-dimensional (1D) topological superconductor Quite a few experiments observed signatures compatible with the existence of MBSs in Majorana nanowires, e.g., zerobias conductance peaks (ZBCP) in extended regions of the phase diagram There are several physical mechanisms leading to the emergence of these trivial ABS in Majorana nanowires In a single-band, infinitely long, clean and homogenous Majorana nanowire (i.e., with uniform chemical potential μ, Zeeman field b, and superconducting pairing ∆), the presence/absence of MBS correspond to the realization of the nontrivial/trivial topological phase, separated by a sharp topological quantum phase transition (TQPT) Unfortunately, in the laboratory everything is finite, and spatial inhomogeneities, disorder, and impurities are practically unavoidable. These effects produce a rich variety of physical regimes which cannot be described in terms of a "black and white" dichotomy. For instance, the properties of ABS induced by random disorder or localized impurities differ qualitatively from ABS induced by spatial inhomogeneities. Disorder-induced and impurity-induced ABS have small or nearly-zero energy, are localized away from the wire edges, and with ZBCP G 2e 2 /h in an extended window of the parameter space, typically without end-to-end correlations The distinction between MBS and ABS can be understood in terms of spatial separation of the Majorana components. It is a well-known fact that any fermionic mode d can be decomposed as a sum of two Majorana modes d = γ A + iγ B . The case where the two modes γ A and γ B are localized at the opposite edges of topologically nontrivial wire of infinite length correspond to topologically protected MBS. On the other hand, the case where the two modes γ A and γ B are fully or partially overlapping correspond to subgap ABS or overlapping MBS in short wires. The mutual overlap between the Majorana modes and their susceptibility against local perturbations can be quantified by spatial integrals To answer these questions, we consider single-band clean Majorana nanowires of finite length L described by the Oreg-Lutchyn model We find that the Majorana/Andreev crossover from impurity-induced ABS to quasi-MBS We consider a Majorana nanowire, i.e., a semiconducting nanowire with strong spin-orbit coupling (e.g., InAs, InSb) in a magnetic field, and proximitized superconductivity induced by a conventional s-wave superconductor (e.g. Al), described by the Oreg-Lutchyn model where p = -i ∂ x is the momentum operator, σ i and τ i with i = x, y, z the Pauli matrices in spin space and particlehole space, m the effective mass of the wire, α the spinorbit coupling strength, μ(x) the chemical potential, b(x) = (g/2)μ B B(x) the Zeeman field in the z-direction (perpendicular to the spin-orbit coupling), and ∆(x) ≥ 0 the superconducting pairing due to proximization. A more realistic nanowire model can be obtained via a self-energy term describing the proximitized superconductivity in the wire Notice that the Hamiltonian is real, and consequently its eigenstates have real wavefunctions (up to a global phase). The Hamiltonian is indeed in the BDI symmetry class To determine the localization of Majorana modes along the wire, we discretize the Hamiltonian in Eq. ( ( We then calculate the quasiparticle density ρ(x) as the sum of the densities of the particle and hole sectors, i.e., To disentangle the Majorana/Andreev nature of subgap states, we need to look to the quasiparticle density in the Majorana basis. Any fermionic state c can be decomposed into two Majorana modes c = (γ Hence, the fermionic states in Eq. ( We then calculate the densities of the two Majorana components as which can be thought as the "partial" quasiparticle density with respect to the two Majorana flavors A and B, with For fs-MM, we expect two density peaks localized at the opposite ends of the wire, with the two Majorana components fully separated, i.e., with The expectation values of the x, y components of the Majorana pseudospin coincide with the Majorana polarization introduced in Ref. in Eq. ( For fs-MM, we expect T z (x) = 0 and T x (x) = 0 at the edges of the wire, with T x (x) > 0 and T x (x) < 0 at opposite edges. Conversely, for fo-MM, we expect T x (x) = 0 and T z (x) > 0 for particle-like excitations, and T z (x) < 0 for hole-like excitations. Hence, Dirac-fermion excitations (i.e., non Majorana) have Majorana pseudospin on the z axis, while Majorana-like excitations have pseudospin perpendicular to the z axis. Since for fs-MM one has that T x (x) > 0 and T x (x) < 0 at opposite edges, the average pseudospin along the wire is zero. However, the average of the square of the pseudospin, defined as with i = x, y, z, is expected to be nonzero for a fs-MM. For comparison, we also calculate the expectation values of the spin S(x) = ψ(x)| S |ψ(x) with cartesian components given by To characterize the overall spin polarization of subgap modes, we consider the quantities with i = x, y, z. We can characterize the mutual overlaps of the Majorana modes in terms of the overlaps of the quasiparticle densities and the matrix elements of the Hamiltonian between the Majorana components. Assuming a single subgap energy level, the overlaps between quasiparticle densities of the Majorana components are introduced in Ref. The matrix elements allows one to construct the effective Hamiltonian which describes the low-energy spectra of the Majorana wire in the limit where the energy of the subgap modes are small compared with the bulk gap W/∆E ≈ 0. For fs-MM, there is no overlap of the quasiparticle densities, which mandates Ω = W/∆E = 0. For fo-MM instead, one has |ψ A (x)| = |ψ B (x)| which gives Ω = 1 and W/∆E ≈ 1. In the case of uniform fields, the Z 2 topological invariant of the Majorana wire is P = sgn M, where M = μ 2 + ∆ 2 -|b| is the Majorana mass. Topologically trivial and nontrivial phases are realized respectively for M > 0 and M < 0 where the H is the matrix obtained by discretizing the continuous Hamiltonian H on a discrete lattice. We will calculate the Pfaffian in Eq. ( For a finite wire with ps-MM with a finite overlap W > 0, the fermion parity of the PBC groundstate is also equal to the sign of the Pfaffian As a consequence, the transition between trivial and nontrivial topological phase coincide with the fermion parity crossing of the ps-MM (calculated for PBC). In the presence of inhomogeneous fields, it makes sense to define a local Majorana mass and a local topological invariant as p(x) = sgn m(x). The local topological invariant of an inhomogeneous system p(x) can be defined in general as the topological invariant of a homogeneous system where all fields are uniform and equal to the values of the fields at the point x. It can be equivalently defined as the topological invariant of a subsystem However, if spatial variations are large, the local topological invariant may be not constant. In particular, the local Majorana mass may assume alternatively positive and negative values: Segments with m(x) > 0 and m(x) < 0 realize topologically trivial and nontrivial phases with p(x) = ±1 respectively. Hence, we distinguish three phases: the homogeneous topologically trivial phase (TTP) where m(x) > 0 along the whole wire, the homogeneous topologically nontrivial phase (TNP) where m(x) < 0 along the whole wire, and the topologically inhomogeneous phase (TIP) where m(x) changes its sign along the whole wire. A simple criterium to distinguish the homogeneous and inhomogeneous phases is The fermion parity of the PBC groundstate is even and odd respectively in the TTP and TNP. Consequently, on the intermediate TIP, the subgap levels must exhibit an odd number (at least one) of fermion parity crossings of the PBC groundstate. In the TIP, assuming that the lengths of the trivial and nontrivial segments are larger than the Majorana localization length ξ M , we expect that Majorana modes localize at the boundaries between trivial and nontrivial segments, i.e., at the nodes of the local Majorana mass m(x) = 0. If the transition between positive and negative mass m(x) is sufficiently sharp, one may expect that the localization length of the Majorana modes close to the nominal Majorana localization length ξ M , which is ξ ≈ α/∆ or ξ ≈ (b/E SO )α/∆ respectively for strong and weak spin-orbit coupling regimes ∆ and ∆ One may be tempted to identify the fermion parity of the PBC groundstate as the topological invariant even in the TIP. However, this may not be consistent with the bulk-edge correspondence. To illustrate this, one can consider a simple counterexample of a wire with μ = 0 near the edges x < L/2 and x > 3L/4 and μ = ∆ near the center L/4 < x < 3L/4. Therefore, in the TIP, the existence of MM at the edges does not depend on the fermion parity of the PBC groundstate, but only on the value of the local topological invariant near the edges of the wire. Potential fluctuation at the end of the nanowire may create inhomogeneous potential barriers. The precise spatial dependence of the resulting potential is usually not known, but can be reasonably approximated as a generic Gaussian-shaped function We consider a linear variation of the potential (linear slope) In the present case, the peaks of the quasiparticle density localized at the nodes of the Majorana mass are very broad if compared with the results obtained for the smooth potential barriers in the previous section. This is justified by the fact that the potential slope is now linear, and does not exhibit any step-like features. This is compatible with the results of the previous section, where slower variations of the Majorana mass lead to a broader localization peak of the ps-MM. Moreover, we notice that the bulk gap does not close for any value of the Zeeman field, and the ps-MM simply detaches from the bulk spectra and become gradually pinned at zero energy as the Zeeman field increases. We consider a potential given by the combination of a constant term and a spatially-varying term, as with μ = 1.5∆ and where S(x) is the cubic Hermite interpolator defined by The potential V (x) is the sum of two smooth step function at a distance d, and interpolates between a localized impurity potential for d = 0, w → 0 and a hard wall potential V (x) → δV (Θ(x) + Θ(L -x)) for d = L, w → 0. To obtain a smooth and continuous crossover between these two opposite limits, we vary the parameter δV, w, d as a function of a control parameter r as The evolution of the potential V (x) as a function of the control parameter r and the resulting Majorana mass for b = 1.5∆ are shown in Fig. To understand better what happens, we show in Fig. We characterized the different physical regimes in terms of topology and localization properties of the subgap states. To characterize topology, we defined and calculated both the global and local topological invariants in the presence of inhomogeneities and impurities, and show how these two quantities differ from the topological invariant of a uniform wire. In particular, three different phases appear: the homogeneous topologically trivial phase (TTP), the homogeneous topologically nontrivial phase (TNP), and a topologically inhomogeneous phase (TIP) separating the first two phases. In the two homogenous phases, the local topological invariant is uniform along the wire, and coincides with the global topological invariant, being either trivial (TTP) or nontrivial (TNP). In the TIP, the local topological invariant is nonuniform along the wire, Majorana modes localize near the points where the local topological invariant changes sign, i.e., at the nodes of the local Majorana mass m(x). Since the fermion parity of the PBC groundstate is even and odd respectively in the TTP and in the TNP, the subgap levels must exhibit an odd number of fermion parity crossing in the TIP. However, the topological transition does not necessarily correspond to the condition |b| ≡ |b c | = μ 2 + ∆ 2 , and does not necessarily coincide with the closing and reopening of the bulk gap, but only to a parity crossing of the LE subgap state. To characterize the localization properties of the subgap state, we define and calculate the wavefunctions, quasiparticle densities, Majorana pseudospin and spin polarizations, density overlaps and transition probabilities between the Majorana components. This lead us to distinguish between fullyseparated Majorana modes (fs-MM) with Ω = W = 0, partially-separated Majorana modes (ps-MM) with 0 < Ω < 1 and W > 0, and fully-overlapping Majorana modes (fo-MM) with Ω = 1 and W ≈ ∆E. Notice that these definitions are not based on topology, but only on the intrinsic properties of the subgap wavefunctions, and well-defined both for infinite and finite wires. In this context, topologically protected MBS can be unambiguously defined as a couple of fs-MM localized at the opposite ends of an infinite wire in the homogeneous topologically nontrivial phase, or in the inhomogeneous phase with nontrivial global topological invariant, as long as the nodes of the Majorana mass are restricted in a finite segment at a finite distance from the wire edges. Thus, strictly speaking fs-MM are a limiting case which only exists in infinite-size systems. In finite-size wires, only ps-MM and fo-MM can exist. Any occurrence of Majorana/Andreev crossover can be described as a transition along the continuous interval Ω ∈ [0, 1] between the two limiting cases of fs-MM (Ω = 0) and fo-MM (Ω = 1). This crossover can be described as the fusion of two Majorana modes (fs-MM, Ω = 0) localized at the nodes of the Majorana mass m(x) ≡ 0 (or at the edges of the wire) into a single Dirac fermion (fo-MM, Ω = 1) when the two nodes become close together, merge, and disappear. The crossover from impurity-induced ABS to quasi-MBS The presence of a continuous crossover between trivial and nontrivial subgap modes without a TQPT suggests that it may be not physically possible to univocally and unambiguously distinguish between "true" MBS, and other varieties of subgap modes. In fact, any subgap mode is characterized by the mutual overlap X of its Majorana components, on a continuous crossover X ∈ [0, 1] of ps-MM, with the limiting cases of fo-MM with overlap X = 1 and fs-MM with X = 0. Pragmatically, however, it is still relevant to determine the extent of the spatial separation of the MM, i.e., how well separated are the Majorana components γ A and γ B along the wire, where are these components localized, and how robust they are against disorder. The degree of spatial separation between MM and their localization with respect to the wire edges can be determined by nonlocal experiments For brevity, we considered in this work only configurations with only two MM localized inside the wire, corresponding to the presence of only two nodes of the Majorana mass m(x), and we only considered spatial variations of the chemical potential. The results presented here can be easily generalized to cases where both the chemical potential, Zeeman field, and superconducting pairing are spatially modulated along the wire, and to configurations where the Majorana mass exhibit more than two nodes within the wire. The description of subgap states as partially separated modes localized at the nodes of the Majorana mass is wellsuited only for inhomogeneous fields having variations on length scales comparable with the Majorana localization length, and such that the nodes of the Majorana mass correspond to the presence of a few, well-separated subgap modes. This description breaks down, e.g., in the regime of strong disorder In summary, we characterized the continuous crossover between Andreev and Majorana bound states in terms of their Majorana components, showing how the crossover between impurity-induced to inhomogeneities-induced subgap modes and to Majorana bound states can be described as the crossover between fully-overlapping to partially-separated and fully-separated Majorana modes. The localization of the Majorana modes have been characterized via their quasiparticle density, mutual overlap, transition probability, Majorana pseudospin, and spin polarizations along the wire. We showed that these partially-separated modes localize at the nodes of the Majorana mass, being either exponentially or smoothly localized respectively in the case of sharp and smooth variations of the Majorana mass near the node. In particular, Majorana bound states localized at the wire edges correspond to the limiting case of fully-separated Majorana modes realized when the distance between the Majorana modes is infinite. We discussed the presence of a topological inhomogeneous phase which is intermediate between the topologically trivial and nontrivial phases, and is characterized by a local topological invariant spatially-varying along the wire. We evidenced the absence of a global topological phase transition: Different regimes are still characterized by a different fermion parity. However, changes of the fermion parity do not correspond necessarily to the closing of the particlehole gap, but may occur via the parity crossing of the lowest energy subgap state. This work suggests that there may be no sharp distinction between "true" Majorana bound states and other varieties of zero-energy or near-zero-energy subgap modes in the presence of spatially-varying potentials and impurities. Indeed, subgap modes in Majorana wires interpolate continuously between fully-overlapping, partially-separated, and fully-separated Majorana modes.