We investigate the structure of quasiparticle states localized in a core of an Abrikosov vortex in a clean layered superconductor in the presence of planar defects. It is shown that even a highly transparent defect opens a minigap at the Fermi energy. Its magnitude, Eg ∼ ∆ √ R, exceeds the mean level spacing for the chiral branch, ω0 ∼ ∆ 2 /EF , already for very small values of the reflection coefficient off the defect, R 1 (∆ is the bulk gap). For R ∆/EF , formation of the minigap is accompanied by the appearance of subgap states localized along the defect, in accordance with [A. V. Samokhvalov et al., Phys. Rev. B 102, 174501 (2020)]. The minigap takes its maximal value for the vortex located right at the defect, decreases with increasing the distance b from the defect, and closes when kF b ∼ (∆/ω0) √ R. We also study various configurations of several planar defects (few crossing planes, stars, periodic structures). Although the minigap remains, a strong commensurability effect is observed. For two crossing planar defects, the magnitude of the minigap strongly depends on how close the intersection angle is to a rational fraction of π. Vortices are responsible for low-frequency dissipation in the mixed state of s-wave superconductors at low temperatures with the level spacing ω 0 ∼ ∆ 2 /E F ∆ and half-integer μ (E F is the Fermi energy and we set = 1). Equation The parameter μ in Eq. ( Disorder typically modeled by point-like impurities breaks the axial symmetry of the problem and leads to mixing of the chiral states. That calls for a statistical description, which has been extensively studied in the clean (1/τ ω 0 ) When a vortex starts moving driven by an electric current, impurity potential in its core is being changed with time. This is the origin of the spectral flow along the chiral branch, leading to the heating of the vortex core and eventually to the energy dissipation. On a quasiclassical level, the theory of flux-flow conductivity has been developed in Refs. A different type of imperfections is provided by extended defects, such as columnar defects In a recent paper, Samokhvalov et al. Although quasiclassical approximation is a standard tool in vortex physics In this paper we consider the effect of weak planar defects on the quasiparticle excitations localized in the vortex core in a clean superconductor (no impurities). Instead of relying on the quasiclassical approach, we develop a fully quantum-mechanical approach based on the one-dimensional (1D) nature of the chiral branch. Then the knowledge of exact clean wave functions In order to simplify the analysis, we consider the case of layered superconductors. Then the problem of a vortex near a planar defect reduces to the 2D problem of a pancake vortex near a linear defect. Assuming such a 2D geometry, hereinafter planar defects are referred to as linear ones. For a single linear defect passing through the vortex center, we reproduce and clarify the results obtained by the semiclassical trajectory approach In this case the whole spectrum can be determined analytically. • For stronger defects with α √ k F ξ, the main part of the spectrum is gapped with E g ≈ αω 0 , but a number of subgap states appear at energies E n < E g . Those are the "soft-gap" states of Ref. Inset to Fig. We also analyze a number of more complicated configurations of linear defects in the vortex core, assuming α √ k F ξ, where a simple quantum-mechanical description can be developed. In order to study the robustness of the minigap, we consider a vortex displaced from the linear defect at a finite distance b. We obtain that the minigap E g (α, b) ≈ (α-k F b)ω 0 exists as long as k F b < α. For several intersecting linear defects, we report on a pronounced commensurability effect, with the magnitude of the minigap being highly sensitive to the angle between the defects and the fraction it constitutes with π. The maximal value the minigap can take is again E g ∼ αω 0 , whereas for incommensurate angles it still survives and is bounded from below by E g ∼ √ αω 0 . Finally, we demonstrate that the minigap persists also for periodic structure of linear defects, though its value decreases with decreasing the period of the defect lattice. The paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II we map the problem of the excitation spectrum in the core of a 2D pancake vortex placed near a linear defect to a simple 1D quantum mechanics, demonstrate gap opening, and determine its dependence on the defect strength and the distance between the vortex center and the defect. Peculiar incommensurability effects arising at intersecting multiple defects configurations are analyzed in Sec. III. Periodic structures of defects are studied in Sec. IV. While all the above results were obtained for α √ k F ξ, in Sec. V we discuss the appearance of the subgap states at α √ k F ξ and relation to Ref. In this section we consider the case of a linear defect, passing at a distance of b from the vortex center. The defect is assumed to be weak enough, such that it does not break the superconductor into two weakly coupled pieces and cannot be described by the tunneling Hamiltonian approximation. Instead, we model it by a delta-function potential where r = (r 1 , r 2 ) and m is the electron's mass (we assume parabolic dispersion). The strength of the defect specified by the parameter κ can be conveniently characterized by the normal-incidence reflection coefficient: ( The defect is weak provided κ k F and hence R 1. Below the influence of the defect on the chiral states will be described by the dimensionless parameter α introduced in Eq. Here, we summarize relevant information about quasiparticle states localized in the vortex core in a clean 2D superconductor for a two-component (particle/hole) wave function Ψ(r). Choosing the vortex order parameter in the form ∆(r) = |∆(r)|e -iφ , where r and φ are polar coordinates, the BdG Hamiltonian can be written as where ∆(r) is the superconducting order parameter and H is the single-particle Hamiltonian: Here E F is the Fermi energy and A is the vector potential (that will be neglected assuming strong type-II superconductivity). The low-lying spectral branch of this equation given by Eq. ( decays exponentially at r ξ, and A is the normalization factor: Strictly speaking, the factor A also depends on μ, but this dependence can be neglected for E μ ∆. The level spacing ω 0 ∼ ∆ 2 /E F ∆ is determined by the profile of the order parameter ∆(r): Recognition that all low-energy states in the vortex core are exhausted by the CdGM chiral branch is vital for describing of quasiparticle rearrangement by a weak potential perturbation. For a finite V (r), it makes it possible to reduce a complicated BdG equation (4), which is a matrix differential equation in 2D, to a much simpler 1D problem by projecting it onto the states of the chiral branch. In such an approach pioneered in Ref. where V μν is the matrix element of the potential V (r) in the chiral basis Knowledge of the wave functions in an explicit form with wave functions depending on an angular variable x. In physical terms, this angle describes Andreev precession of a quasiclassical trajectory in the vortex core Since angular momenta are half-integer, wave functions in the angular representation must be 2π antiperiodic: In the dual representation, the Hamiltonian given by acquires the form Here the first term is due to the abovementioned Andreev precession, whereas the second term is the integral kernel describing quasiparticle scattering from the potential V (r). For the linear defect with the potential given by Eq. ( In the limit α √ k F ξ it has the following form: s(x) = e 2ik F b sin x sign(sin x). Here we introduced a convenient dimensionless defect strength α defined as where R is the normal-incidence reflection coefficient of the defect [see Eq. (3)]. In the limit α √ k F ξ the width of the delta function in Eq. ( In the angular representation, the eigenvalue equation is generally of an integrodifferential form. However, the fact that the kernel V (x, y) given by Eq. ( where the effect of nonlocality is the admixture of ψ(-x) to the chiral evolution of ψ(x). Such a structure of the Schrödinger equation suggests that it can be reduced to a truly local form by combining ψ(x) and ψ(-x) into a single 2-vector (spinor) a procedure resembling the Bogoliubov transformation. Hence, one can rewrite Eq. ( for a certain differential matrix operator. Due to 2π antiperiodicity of ψ(x) it is sufficient to consider Eq. ( with Isolating the first derivative, one can rewrite Eq. ( with the x-dependent matrix The solution of the first-order differential equation ( where S E (x) is a time-ordered matrix exponent: Now using the boundary conditions which determines the eigenvalues E for the quasiparticle states in the core of the vortex located near the planar defect. Unfortunately, for a finite distance between the vortex and the defect (b = 0) an explicit x dependence of the matrix M E (x) does not allow the T exponent in Eq. ( FIG. Opening of the minigap Eg(α) ≈ αω0 is clearly seen for α 1. Redistribution of the states of the chiral branch is described by the BCS-type coarse-grained DOS In this section we provide an explicit expression for the spectrum and wave functions in the case of the linear defect passing exactly through the center of the vortex. Although our analysis will be based on the Schrödinger equation where h μν = 1 for odd μ + ν and h μν = 0 for even μ + ν. The matrix μν can be considered as a generalization of the Hilbert matrix H ij = 1/(i + j -1) with i, j = 1, . . . , n to two-side infinite case i, j = -∞, . . . , ∞. At b = 0 the matrix M E (x) defined in Eq. ( where k is a real number satisfying the following transcendental equation: The number k has the physical meaning of momentum, as it becomes clear from the explicit form of the wave function Equation In the absence of a defect, k n (0) = n + 1 2 is half-integer, thus reproducing the CdGM equidistant spectrum The main feature of Eqs. ( According to Eq. ( This linear gap growth can be distinctly seen in Fig. The opening of the gap is accompanied by redistribution of many levels. In the limit α 1, approximately α states are strongly perturbed by the defect, and Fig. (see inset to Fig. The procedure described in Sec. II C allows us to immediately write an expression for the eigenfunctions. Working for simplicity with positive-energy states (k n > 0) and using Eq. ( (38) The value of the overall factor ψ n (0) should be determined from the normalization condition π -π |ψ n (x)| 2 dx/2π = 1. Using the spectral equation (the last term in the denominator can typically be safely neglected). One can show that the wave function acquires a phase shift π(n + 1 2 ) when x is increased by π: generalizing the same property in the clean case [with plane-wave functions ψ n (x) = e i(n+1/2)x ] to arbitrary values of α. The two-wave structure of the eigenfunction (37) has a simple physical interpretation. In a clean vortex, a lowenergy quasiparticle trapped in its core exhibits Andreev precession With the obtained structure of wave functions. one can easily compute the overlap of the nth eigenstate in the presence of the defect, |n , with the momentum eigenstate |μ for a clean vortex: The state |n has the largest overlap with the clean state with the same ordinal number n and momentum μ n = n + 1 2 . One can see that this overlap is always large, bounded by μ n |n > 2/π. For the lowest-energy state, lim α→∞ μ 0 |0 = 8/3π. It means that for all α the exact state |n is very close to the corresponding clean state |μ n , with a small admixture of satellites. It is instructive to visualize reogranization of the quasiparticle states induced by the defect by looking at their wave functions Ψ n (r) in real space. The wave function of the state |n is obtained by expanding over the clean chiral basis: where the overlap is given by Eq. (41). Figure In Fig. In this case, the general approach described in Sec. II C is also formally applicable, but since the matrix M E in Eq. ( The phenomenon of the minigap reduction illustrated in Fig. 1. In this case it is more convenient not to use the spinor representation with the potential and the boundary conditions following from 2π antiperiodicity of g(x). Here we introduced the dimensionless parameters t = k F b/α and ε = E/αω 0 . Equation (43) describes quantum-mechanical motion of a particle of mass m = 1 2 in the potential U (x) at zero energy. The spectrum of the original problem (ε) is determined by the requirement that such a zero-energy state exists. In the limit of large α, the last term in the potential (44) can be neglected: and the boundary conditions (45) dictate vanishing of g: g(0) = g(π) = 0. The necessary condition for the existence of a zero-energy state in the potential U (x) is evidently min x U (x) < 0. Right at the defect, it gives ε > 1, defining the position of the minigap E g ≈ α. At finite t, the potential U (x) becomes x-dependent, with the minimal value achieved at x = π, so we expand around it: Vanishing of min x U (x) implies ε > 1 -t, thus defining the leading b dependence of the minigap: ε g = 1-t. This quasi-classical estimate can be improved by taking into account quantum motion that requires min x U (x) < 0 for the zero-energy ground state to exist. In the limit α → ∞, the potential U (x) is sharp and the size of the ground state is small, justifying the expansion (47). Hence, we have a harmonic oscillator problem with the frequency ω = 2α √ t (our mass is 1 2 ). However due to the rigid-wall boundary condition, g(π) = 0, the ground state energy is not ω/2 but rather 3ω/2. This gives ε g = 1 -t + 3ω/4α 2 , improving the above quasiclassical estimate estimate. In dimensional units, This formula perfectly explains why the minigap goes slightly above the dashed line α-k F b in Fig. In the previous section we have considered the case of a single linear defect crossing the vortex core. Now we are going to generalize the problem and consider a number of different configurations with several linear defects crossing at the vortex center (see Fig. We start with the simplest case of two linear defects intersecting at an angle of φ at the vortex center, as shown in Fig. μν e i(μ-ν)φ . In the dual angular representation, this translates to the argument shift: V (φ) (x, y) = V (0) (x + φ, y + φ). Using Eq. ( where here s(x) = sign(sin x). As a result, the two-line version of the Schrödinger equation ( where we assumed different defect strengths for generality. The main difference from the original single-line problem Whether and where this sequence terminates (mod 2π) depends on commensurability of φ and π: • If φ is an irrational fraction of π then Eq. (50) cannot be brought to a local form. The simplest is the case of two perpendicular lines (φ = π/2), when the Schrödinger equation reduces to a local form in terms of a 4-component vector Ψ. Its analysis performed in Appendix B 1 allows us to determine the spectrum at arbitrary α 1 and α 2 by solving the transcendental equation (B7) similar to Eq. (32). In the limit of strong defects, the minigap is given by Although the same analysis can be formally done for any rational φ/π = m/n, the transcendental spectral equation becomes more and more complicated. However, the asymptotic behavior of the minigap at large α i can be obtained in a closed form, as it does not rely on the knowledge of momenta. We calculate it in Appendix B 2, arriving at the following asymptotic expression: which depends only on the denominator n of φ/π. For an arbitrary crossing angle φ, Eq. ( (i) The appearance of peaks at commensurate angles φ = (m/n)π, which become more pronounced and sharper with increasing α. (ii) The presence of a nearly constant nonzero background for "not very rational" angles well described by the empirical formula E bg g /αω 0 ≈ 2/ √ α. (iii) Independence of the peak height (once resolved) on the numerator m. This picture is consistent with the minigap asymptotics (52) with the the following limiting dependence: Here popcorn(x) is the Thomae's function (also referred to as the popcorn function), which takes zero value for irrational x and 1/n for rational x = m/n (with m and n coprime). Dashed lines in Fig. In order to qualitatively understand the origin of the background minigap energy E bg g and its α dependence, we recall that the minigap at a commensurate angle φ = (m/n)π can be written as E g = λ 2 min + k 2 0 ω 0 . In physical terms, λ min and k 0 (which both are functions of α and n) provide the contributions of the potential and kinetic energy to the minigap, respectively. Here λ min = λ(q 1 ) is the minimal positive eigenvalue of the matrix iR in Appendix B 2, which determines the gap asymptotics via E g = λ min ω 0 [cf. Eq. ( For completeness, we also discuss the case of the most symmetric configuration of n identical lines of strength α intersecting at the vortex center at the angle of φ = π/n [see Fig. Surprisingly, the minigap remains of the order of αω 0 regardless of the number of intersecting lines. The fact that it does not scale with a naive estimate of "the overall defect strength" nα is a consequence of destructive interference of waves multiply scattered from different defects. At the same time, periodicity of the structure ensures that the minigap is not destroyed completely but remains finite with E g ≈ αω 0 . Addition of any imperfections would spoil this picture and suppress E g , presumably not completely but at least to the level of √ αω 0 . Finally we address the three-ray configuration depicted in Fig. We consider two configurations, symmetric with the angles between the rays equal 2π/3 and distorted with the angles 2π/3 and 2π/3 ± 0.2, and study the spectrum as a function of the defect strength α. The results for the corresponding minigaps are shown in Fig. Keeping in mind connection to granular systems, we consider here a square grid of potential lines with the period a and the vortex center at one of the grid nodes. One can ask whether destructive interference from different lines can suppress and/or totally destroy the minigap. The matrix elements of the grid V μν can be calculated following the procedure described in Secs. II B and III A. The resulting minigap obtained numerically is shown in Fig. It was mentioned in the Introduction that the minigap does not appear in the presence of point-like impurities. On the other hand, a linear defect can be formally considered as a dense pack of weak point-like impurities. To study a crossover from the linear defect to such an array of point-like defects, we consider the following model potential: When its period a vanishes, it reproduces the linear defect potential V. REGION α √ kF ξ: SUBGAP STATES AND "SOFT GAP" OF REF. A mechanism responsible for the breakdown of a simple picture discussed in Sec. II is smearing of the delta function δ(x + y) in Eq. ( x * , where x * = 1/ √ k F ξ. Hence, at x, y ∼ x * the matrix element V (x, y) should be considered as an integral kernel, while outside of this interval it can be approximated by the delta-function form Sequential splitting off the subgap state taking place at α √ k F ξ corresponds to the appearance of new types of eigenstates of the Hamiltonian -i∂ x + V , which are localized either at x ∼ x * or at |x -π| ∼ x * . The fact that their energy is smaller than αω 0 indicates that the wave functions of these states have an imaginary momentum and decay exponentially away from the mentioned vicinities of 0 and π. The exponentially small energy difference between these states seen in the inset to Fig. Figures To conclude this section, we emphasize that though our fully microscopic quantum-mechanical analysis confirmed the existence of subgap states propagating along the defect at α √ k F ξ, their description in terms of the developed formalism is rather complicated. We believe the trajectory-based approach In our consideration above, the profile of the order parameter, ∆(r), was assumed to be unchanged by the linear defect. The same approximation was used in Ref. Assuming this is also the case for our problem with a linear defect, we can treat the effect of ∆(r) distortion perturbatively. We take the quasiparticle states obtained above for the clean order parameter ∆ 0 (r) and substitute them to the self-consistency equation to obtain the next iteration for the order parameter, ∆ 1 (r). Then the difference δ∆(r) = ∆ 1 (r) -∆ 0 (r) is considered as a perturbation in the BdG equation ( This procedure is performed in Appendix C. We obtain that for α > 10 the minigap shift nearly saturates at ∆E g ≈ 0.1 × 4πgA 4 /k 2 F , where g is the BCS coupling constant. Using a model dependence of the vortex order parameter, ∆(r) = ∆ 0 r/ r 2 + ξ 2 , we obtain for α > 10 where ν 0 is the normal-state DOS at the Fermi level. In the BCS theory, the dimensionless coupling constant ν 0 g < 1. Since the minigap grows with α as E g = αω 0 , we conclude that the distortion of the order parameter does not have a significant effect on the quasiparticle excitation spectrum. In this publication, we report on extensive studies of the quasiparticle states localized in the pancake vortex in a clean 2D superconductor in the presence of one or several linear defects (that corresponds to a vortex in a layered 3D superconductor with planar defects). In the configuration with one linear defect passing through the vortex center, we identify two different regimes separated by α ∼ √ k F ξ. For sufficiently weak defects with α √ k F ξ, the spectral problem can be solved exactly. The spectrum is characterized by a minigap growing as E g = αω 0 for α 1 and the BCS-type DOS We also analyzed reorganization of the chiral states in a number of more complicated geometries with linear defects. Here we assumed α √ k F ξ, such that complications due to formation of subgap states do not appear and the problem can be mapped onto a sufficiently simple quantum mechanics. We considered a configuration with the vortex center located at a finite distance b from the linear defect. Such a configuration cannot be realized at equilibrium since the vortex prefers to minimize its potential energy and chooses to sit right at the defect. However, such a situation can take place in the presence of a depinning force or as a dynamic state under microwave absorption. We find that the minigap decreases with the growth of b and closes at b ≈ α/k F . A vortex pinned at the intersection of two linear defects demonstrates a peculiar commensurability effect, when the minigap essentially depends on how close is the angle φ between the defects to a rational of π. For perfect matching, the minigap E g ≈ αω 0 , while in the most frustrated case the minigap still exists but at a smaller background level of E g ≈ √ αω 0 (see Fig. Having considered various types of linear defects, we conclude that the effect of gap opening is quite robust. This observation has obvious consequences for vortex be-havior in a granular media. Vortices pinned at grain boundaries are expected to have a minigap typically scaling with the boundary strength α as E g ≈ αω 0 . This effect will manifest itself at low temperatures T < E g in the exponential suppression of heat capacity and fluxflow conductivity, as well as in a threshold behavior of optical conductivity. Low-temperature anomalies in fluxflow conductivity have been recently reported in granular aluminum Our analysis of the electronic states in the vortex core is applicable for highly transparent defects with the reflection coefficient R 1, corresponding to the inequalities α k F ξ and E g ∆. In this limit the defect perturbation effectively redistributes only α lowest states, without admixing the states of continuous spectrum. Therefore, we can access neither the Josephson vortex regime (realized in the tunneling limit with T 1) nor the crossover from the Abrikosov to the Josephson vortex. Nevertheless, one can argue that the subgap states localized along the defect are presumably important for the transition from the Abrikosov to the Josephson vortex Finally, we mention that the developed theory can be easily generalized to the case of linear defects in clean p-wave superconductors. We expect the zero-energy Majorana bound state where (A2) Now we transform the matrix V μν to the angular representation according to Eq. leading to μν e i(ν-μ)φ w μν (k F r)e ixμ-iyν = 2i sin x -y 2 e ik F Rxy(r) , (A4) where In terms of the Descartes coordinates, r 1 = r cos φ and r 2 = r sin φ, R(r) is given by Hence, the general expression for the kernel V (x, y) valid for any potential V (r) takes the form V (x, y) = 2iA 2 sin x -y 2 d 2 r e -2K(r) e ik F Rxy(r) V (r). (A7) The factor sin[(x -y)/2] reflects 2π antiperiodicity of wave functions in the angular representation [see Eq. ( For the linear defect with V (r) given by Eq. ( 2 +b 2 e ik F r2(cos x-cos y) , (A8) where we expressed the prefactor in terms of the dimensionless defect strength α introduced in Eq. The first term in the right-hand side does not contribute due to vanishing of the factor sin[(x -y)/2] in Eq. (A8), while the second term yields the matrix element (17). In this Appendix we calculate the matrix element in the angular representation, V (x, y), for a half-line terminating at the vortex center and specified by the potential V (r) = ( 2 κ/m)δ(r 1 )θ(r 2 ), with θ(r 2 ) being the step function. The matrix element V (x, y) can be written as V line (x, y)/2 + δV (x, y), where V line (x, y) is the matrix element of the linear defect given by Eq. ( dr 2 sign r 2 e -2K(r2) e ik F r2(cos x-cos y) . (A10) Neglecting the factor e -2K(r2) as it was done for the linear defect in Appendix A 2, one gets 1/[k F (cos x -cos y)] for the integral in the second line of Eq. (A10). Hence we obtain the the matrix element of the half-line: . (A11) Making Fourier transform, we obtain matrix elements in the original momentum representation [cf. Eq. ( It is sufficient to consider the evolution of Ψ(x) at the interval x ∈ [0, π/2], since its various components then span the whole circle [0, 2π]. The 2π antiperiodicity of the wavefunction imposes the following constraints on Ψ at the beginning and at the end of the interval [0, π/2]: Here ψ(0) = a, ψ(π) = b, ψ(π/2) = c and ψ(-π/2) = d. The evolution of Ψ can be written as with The vectors at the edges of the interval are related by the transfer matrix: which becomes just a trivial matrix exponent since M E is x independent: S E (π/2) = exp(M E π/2). After some algebra, we obtain where k = (E/ω 0 ) 2 -α 2 1 -α 2 2 . Processing now the constraints (B2), we arrive at the following equation for the allowed momenta k: (B7) This equation generalizes Eq. ( where k n are defined by Eq. (B7). In the limit of strong defects (α 2 1 + α 2 2 1), k 0 ≈ 2 and the minigap takes the form (B9) A common feature of the one-line case considered in Sec. II D and the two-perpendicular-line case analyzed in Appendix B 1 is that finding the asymptotic behavior of the minigap is much easier than determination of the whole spectrum. While the latter requires calculating discrete momenta by solving a transcendental spectral equation, those are not needed to compute the asymptotics. This observation immediately leads to the following criterion for the minigap determination: It is the first positive solution of det M E = 0, (B10) where the matrix M E governs chiral evolution of Ψ [see Eqs. ( In the case φ = π/n, the vector Ψ has 2n components. We arrange them according to Eq. ( Using determinant properties, the minigap equation (B10) can be equivalently written as det(ε1 1 + iR) = 0, (B11) where 1 1 is a unit matrix and This matrix is diagonalized in the momentum representation by a two-site modulated plane wave u a = w (-1) a e iqsa with a = 1, . . . , 2n. Solving for the modulation depth w, we obtain the spectrum of the matrix iR: Momentum quantization is influenced by a "wrong sign" of the top-right matrix element of R that results in q s = (s-1/2)(π/n) with s = 1, . . . , 2n. Thus, Eq. (B11) yields The minimal positive solution of this equation is evidently E = λ(q 1 ), leading to the minigap asymptotics (52). The same analysis can be repeated for angles φ = (m/n)π with m = 1. Position of plus and minus signs in front of α 1 and α 2 in the matrix M E will be different, but the matrix R will be exactly the same. The integrals above can be calculated numerically for different values of the parameter α. It turns out that the m = 0 contribution (C9) converges at small distances, therefore, the factor e -4K(r) can be omitted and ∆E 0 g appears to be independent of k F ξ: where the coefficient c 0 (α) should be determined numerically. On the other hand, Eq. (C10) has a logarithmic divergency at large distances, and the factor e -4K(r) provides an infrared cutoff at z ∼ k F ξ: where the coefficient c 1 (α) should be determined numerically. Figure 