Waals (vdW) stacking interfaces can be trapped in ordered moiré potential arrays giving rise to attractive phenomenons of quantum optics and bosonic many-body effects. Compare to the prevalent transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) systems, due to the wide bandgap and low dielectric constant, excitons in twist-stacked hexagonal boron nitride (hBN) are anticipated trapped in deeper moiré potential, which enhances the strength of interactions. However, constrained by the common low detectivity of weak light-emitting in the deep-ultraviolet (DUV) bands, the moire excitons in twist-hBN remain elusive. Here, we report that a remarkable DUV emitting band (peak located at ~260 nm) only emerges at the twisted stacking area of hBN, which is performed by a high collection efficiency and spatially-resolved cathodoluminescence (CL) at room temperature. Significant peak redshifting contrast to defect-bound excitons of bulk hBN indicates the giant trapping effects of moiré potential for excitons. The observation of deeply trapped excitons motivates further studies of bosonic strongly correlation physics based on the twist-hBN system. Moiré superlattices with a nanoscale periodic trapping potential arising from lattice mismatch or twist-angle between stacked monolayers have triggered a boom in research of condensed matter quantum simulators Mott insulators Hexagonal boron nitride (hBN), acting as an ideal encapsulator or spacer for twodimensional (2D) materials heterostructures, also has abundant optoelectronic properties from deep-ultraviolet (DUV) to mid-infrared range Herein, we report an emerging DUV emitting peak located around 260 nm in twisted-hBN structures via advanced cathodoluminescence (CL) measurement. High spatial-resolved hyperspectral imaging demonstrates that this new peak only existed in the stacking area. This kind of large energy difference to defect-bound excitons is improbable from phonon-replicas. Moreover, charging and strain effect inducing peak redshifting have been excluded by measuring the carbon-coated and wrinkle sample. These findings support giant potential trapping of excitons in twisted-hBN, which is up to 807 meV based on emission spectrum. Our work motivates further studies of moiré physics in hBN systems, for instance, bosonic many-body, flat-bands, moiré ferroelectricity, etc. The few-layers hBN mechanical exfoliated on the polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) stamps by standard Scotch-tape method from bulk hBN (HQ graphene, Netherlands). Targeted layered areas and tearing edges were identified by optical microscopy. Twisted-hBN was obtained by stacking each layer on sapphire substrate in turn via heating PDMS at 85 o C 20 mins. A clean interface was achieved in our dry transfer approach by avoiding excessive use of polymers as well as solution cleaning processes. The twist-angle between hBN sheets was determined by both edges-aligned and oriented-wrinkles (along armchair direction) For achieving the higher collection efficiency and spatial resolution in DUV range from moiré excitons emission, an upgraded CL measurement (Attolight AG., Switzerland) was carried out. The CL system makes a high numerical aperture (NA=0.72) achromatic reflective integrated within the objective lens of a scanning electron microscope (SEM). The focal plane of the optical lens is matched with the optimal working distance of SEM, so that matches the field of view of both optical and electron microscopy. It works in the energy of low electron beam (3 keV) meets higher spatial resolution CL hyperspectral images. Emissions was coupled to the free space, wavelength resolved by a monochromator (Czerny-Turner configuration), measured with a UV/Vis detector. Figure Among the origin of these peaks, S4 to S7 may be derived carbon and oxygen incorporation, still controversial Firstly, to confirm the distribution area of S3, a highly spatial-resolved electron beam scanning mode of CL has been utilized. The twisted area of stacked hBN has been surrounded by a red dotted line in the image of SEM, as shown in Fig. Charging effects induced by the electron beam of CL may impact emission peak position. Here, we have reduced it further by surface treatment of carbon-coating after initial measurement. The carbon has conductivity, avoiding the surface charges accumulation, while with no emission signals in the wavelength range of DUV. As shown in Fig. Consistently, the S3 emission band is still only emerged in the twist area, definitely. The results show that the arising of S3 does not derive from the surface charging effect. Charging effects induced by the electron beam of CL may impact emission peak position. Here, we have reduced it further by surface treatment of carbon-coating after initial measurement. The carbon has conductivity, avoiding the surface charges accumulation, while with no emission signals in the wavelength range of DUV. As shown in Fig. Consistently, the S3 emission band is still only emerged in the twist area, definitely. The results show that the arising of S3 does not derive from the surface charging effect. On account of the flexibility of PDMS, there have several unintentionally produced wrinkles of top-layer hBN during the stacking process, as shown in SEM images of Fig. Moreover, there are no clear S3 related bands in fold areas, owing to interlayer decoupling results of distance enlarge between stacked layers at this area, which are further support that S3 comes from the interlayer coupling of twisted stacking. Finally, the CL peaks influence by electron beam current density have been studied via adjusting the field of view (FOV). Under the same beam energy (3 keV), a smaller FOV corresponds to a larger beam current density. As shown in Fig. In conclusion, by utilizing the high collection efficiency and spatially-resolved CL, we found an emerging S3 emission band only located twisted area hBN at room temperature. Through comprehensive studies of charging effect, strain, pump intensity, and layer thickness, the energy redshift between S1 and S3 is nontrivial. All experimental evidence supports that the S3 related band is coming from the giant trapping of moiré potential (about 807 meV) of excitons in twisted layered hBN. Our findings motivate the future studies of excitonic moiré physics based on twisted hBN at higher temperatures, such as moiré array quantum emission, bosonic many-body models, chirality, and so on. 