We present the end-to-end design of compact passive and lossless metasurface (MTS) antennas with integrated feeds. The complete low-profile system consists of a single-layered reactive impedance MTS printed on top of a grounded dielectric substrate, and is fed by sources which are embedded inside the substrate. An accurate and efficient volume-surface integral equation-based model of the device is developed, and used as the basis for the rapid optimization of its performance. The optimized designs leverage tailored auxiliary surface waves supported by the impedance MTS to distribute the localized source power across their apertures. This facilitates the realization of extreme field transformations such as wide-angle beam-forming or sharedaperture beam-forming, with nearly 100% aperture efficiencies. The procedure also allows for arbitrary beam-shaping with complete main beam and side lobe control. We also derive several feasibility-related constraints, which can significantly enhance the power efficiency as well as the bandwidth of the MTS antennas when they are implemented in practice. Full-wave numerical simulations confirm the effectiveness of the presented approach, as well as the extreme field transformation capabilities of the synthesized designs. The research and development of antennas with extraordinary beam-forming capabilities have seen a resurgence owing to the advent of electromagnetic metasurfaces (MTSs) The strong and efficient interaction between radio frequency electromagnetic waves with metals has led to the development of printed circuit board (PCB) metasurfaces whose constituent meta-atoms are fabricated by etching designed conductive patterns on dielectric substrates. Due to their compact form factor and their unprecedented ability to precisely control various aspects of the electromagnetic waves, such as the phase To further reduce the overall profile of the system without compromising its performance, metasurfaces with integrated sources have been investigated. Periodically modulated impedance MTSs based on the extended principles of holography have been successfully designed to transform the surface waves from embedded dipoles into directive radiation A class of embedded-source-fed passive beam-forming MTSs leveraging non-local electromagnetic interactions have been recently proposed Passive and lossless MTSs leveraging auxiliary SWs benefit from a more rigorous design process than conventional ones, due to their reliance on tailored mutual interactions between meta-atoms. To address this, various approaches based on integral equations (IEs) have been developed In this paper, we present the complete end-to-end design of compact passive and lossless ground-plane-backed impedance MTSs featuring embedded sources. Along with an accurate analysis technique based on a set of coupled volume-surface integral equations (VSIE), we develop an efficient and versatile accompanying optimization-based design method that can realize arbitrary beam-forming through exploitation of tailored auxiliary surface waves. Despite its simplicity, the proposed method can synthesize devices capable of extreme feats such as wide-angle or shared-aperture beam-forming while maintaining near-perfect aperture efficiency. We also derive optimization constraints based on practical considerations. Fullwave simulations with realistic devices confirm that, not only can the synthesized impedance MTSs form arbitrarily shaped beams, but they also exhibit significantly improved bandwidth and power efficiency, owing to the proposed constraints. The proposed architecture for the embedded-source-fed impedance metasurface is shown in Fig. To facilitate the efficient analysis and design of the device under consideration, we model the cross sections of its N meta-wires using hypothetical narrow homogeneous strips residing on the curve C w , as labeled in Fig. The 2D model in Fig. Fig. According to the VSIE formulation, the total field radiated by the MTS antenna, E, is ascribed to the following four contributions: 1) The source (incident) field E i , radiated by the feed as if it was in free space; 2) The scattered field E s g radiated by the induced conduction currents J g on the ground plane; 3) The scattered field E s w radiated by the induced conduction currents J w on the meta-wires; 4) The scattered field E s v radiated by the induced polarization currents J v in the dielectric. Computation of the total field amounts to solving for the unknown currents induced by E i . To that end, a coupled system of integral equations for J g , J w , J v can be written. It can be solved numerically using the method of moments. The fields radiated by the unknown surface conduction currents can be written as with ι ∈ {g, w}, ρ = ŷy+ẑz and ρ = ŷy +ẑz . Here, H 0 (•) is the zeroth order Hankel function of the second kind, and k = ω/c o is the free space wave number. The fields radiated by the unknown volume polarization current in the dielectric can be written as The total tangentional field must vanish on the ground plane, meaning Furthermore, on meta-wire i, the total field must be proportional to J w by Z i , according to Ohm's law. In other words, The electric field inside the dielectric must be proportional to the induced polarization current according to Together, (3)-( As illustrated in Fig. where The vector Ēi ι contains the incident (source) field sampled at the discretization points ρ ι , while Jι contains the sampled conduction or polarization currents. The blocks of the matrix G represent the self and mutual interaction between the various components of the impedance MTS antenna. They can be populated with (1) and (8) Recall that r o is the radius of a circle that has the same area as one rectangular dielectric cell. The matrix Z w is diagonal, with entries corresponding to the effective impedances of the meta-wire segments: The matrix P is also a diagonal matrix, whose elements are proportional to the electric susceptibility of the substrate: Here, 1 Nv×Nv is the N v × N v identity matrix. Equation ( 2j πk e -jk e jk(yιn sin θm+zιn cos θm) . Here, F = ∆ ι for ι ∈ {g, w}, and The m th entry of Ēff and Ēfi correspond to the total and the source far-field measured at the elevation angle θ m 2πm/N θ . To complete the analytical model, one can calculate the radiation intensity pattern of the antenna using the total farzone electric field amplitude, according to where denotes element-wise product between vectors, and {•} * denotes complex conjugation. This then can be used to calculate various key antenna parameters such as the 2D directivity, defined as In this work, the main purpose for developing the VSIE framework is to enable the optimization of the radiation intensity pattern Ū , with the meta-wire loadings Zw as the tunable variables. Such a procedure necessitates the frequent computation of Ū with updated values of Zw . The most direct way to do so is to first find the induced currents in the updated device using Ēi Ēi Rearranging ( where S ∈ C Nw×Nw is the Schur complement of A, given by Additionally, The far-field can be rewritten as Evidently, each evaluation of the cost function using the reduced system requires only the inversion of a single N w × N w matrix, S. The only other matrix inverse (A -1 ) is static throughout the entire optimization process, because it does not contain Z w . Therefore, it can be stored and reused. Furthermore, With the method proposed in this section, the optimization process becomes extremely efficient, regardless of the exact algorithm used. This opens up the opportunity to explore more computationally expensive methods such as global optimization, which may yield better performing designs. Furthermore, one can discretize the dielectric substrate and the ground plane with very fine resolution in order to improve the accuracy of the results, without incurring too much additional computational cost during optimization. The closed-form expressions presented in Sec. II-B as well as the acceleration method proposed in Sec. II-C enable the rapid optimization of antenna characteristics. In this work, as a proof of concept, we demonstrate the ability for the compact MTS system to realize arbitrary beam-forming by shaping Ū ( Zw ) to match stipulated radiation patterns. Different optimization methods can be used to determine the effective impedances of the meta-wires Zw that produce a desired far-field radiation, based on ( For the examples presented in this work, we mainly rely on gradient-descent optimization, as implemented by the built-in function fmincon in MATLAB. This function is capable of locally minimizing a cost function while adhering to multiple linear and/or nonlinear constraints on the solution. In order to provide a starting point Z(0) w in the gradientdescent optimization, a preliminary step needs to be performed. This preparatory step helped the optimizer converge to solutions with better pattern matching in the vast majority of the studied design examples. Specifically, following previously proposed methods For some designs that have more demanding specifications, this method may not be able to supply a good starting Z(0) w . Such scenarios demand more specialized treatments, which will be discussed as they arise. The aim of the optimization is to match the radiation pattern Ū (θ m ) produced from the metasurface with a desired radiation pattern Ūdes (θ m ). Since it is not clear what the total power contained in Ūdes (θ m ) should be, we choose to define the cost function in terms of normalized radiation patterns, as Due to the normalization, It should be noted that choosing to form the cost function this way, as we have done in this study, clearly puts the focus on the main beam compared to the side lobe values. However, even the shape of the side lobes will eventually match the expected one, if the algorithm converges to a low value of F . The choice to match the normalized radiation pattern also means that the converged solution may not have the highest possible radiation efficiency. Indeed, there can be an infinite set of solutions satisfying the same constraints, but having different capacities for near-field reactive energy storage. There are multiple methods to deal with poorly radiating solutions. One way is to design a simple matching network for the input. Alternatively, in Sec. III-C, we introduce a constraint which can help guide the optimizer towards solutions with inherently high radiation efficiency. In order for the optimizer to converge to solutions with desired characteristics, we introduce a set of linear and nonlinear constraints on the wire impedances. First, we require that the metasurface is passive and lossless. Therefore, the impedances should be purely imaginary, i.e. Re{Z n } = 0, ∀n. This constraint implies that the optimized device does not rely on engineered ohmic loss or power gain, both of which are difficult to control in practice. We also demand that the impedances be practically realizable with printed, periodically loaded copper traces which adhere to standard fabrication tolerances. By varying the width of a printed loading capacitor, an impedance range of [-j90, -j25] was acquired, as described in Appendix A. It is noted that interdigitated capacitors or other types of scatterers can increase this range. However, no significant improvements were observed in terms of the pattern matching for the designs considered in this paper. Therefore, the aforementioned impedance range was deemed sufficient. A few more optional constraints can be introduced to converge to solutions with higher bandwidth and lower sensitivity. Having the currents Jw at each iteration allows us to calculate the fields anywhere in the near-field region of the metasurface (including in the dielectric), as well as the radiated power. In general, it is advantageous to have as much radiated power as possible, while maintaining the field amplitudes and the stored energy close to the antenna at a relatively low level. With this in mind, we place a constraint on the quality factor (Q-factor) of the structure, calculated as: where serves as an estimate of the stored energy and P rad is the total radiated power as calculated from the radiation intensity Ū . It is noted that the integration in ( The inverse S -1 is already calculated in each iteration, while the remaining derivative (dS/dZ n ) reduces, from Having derived d Ēff (θ m )/dZ n , the constraint on sensitivity can be stated as As a strategy, the constraints on the passivity (Re{Z n } = 0) and the impedance range are always present during optimization. The other two nonlinear constraints, if desired, can be introduced in an additional step, after an initial round of optimization without them. The converged result of the first step is fed to the second, more stringent step, as the new starting point. We verify the proposed embedded-source-fed impedance MTS and the developed design scheme with several numerical examples. The optimized devices are simulated in Ansys HFSS. Since they are x-invariant, we can predict their performance by taking a subwavelength-thin slice and placing it inside a parallel plate waveguide with perfectly matched terminations on all open sides. In this section, for simplicity, the meta-wires are modeled using thin strips with uniform surface impedances. We consider realistic devices with printed metallic wires in Sec. V. In this subsection, we demonstrate the ability of the proposed MTS topology to perform wide-angle beam-forming with near unity aperture efficiency. The size of the device is 7λ at the design frequency of 10 GHz. The impedance MTS on top of the grounded substrate (h = 2.54 mm, r = 3) only has 28 meta-wires, leading to a relatively large interelement spacing of λ/4. Each meta-wire is modeled using a narrow impedance strip with width 0.7 mm. The embedded source is chosen to be a single uniform line current located at The proposed device can be seen as a simplified version of the previously presented cavity-excited antennas To begin the design, we first note that the incident field is simply a cylindrical wave centered at the source location ρ o = ŷy o + ẑz o . Hence the incident near-field vectors Ēi ι can be easily populated following where I o is an arbitrarily chosen source current amplitude. The far-field radiated by the source is given by 2j πk e -jk e jk(yo sin θn+zo cos θn) ∀n. where J o is some arbitrary complex constant which will be dropped upon normalization in A more quantitative study on the MTS designs is conducted through an examination of their simulated 2D directivity D(θ), which are plotted in Fig. The dotted blue curve in Fig. Since the directivity of all simulated beams follow this envelope exactly, one can conclude that each of the designs presented in this section exhibits near-unity aperture efficiency (ξ apt ), which is defined as Calculations using To verify the contribution of surface waves to the performance of the impedance MTS antennas, we plot the Fourier spectrum of the electric field ( Ẽx (k y )) for the θ o = 0 • design in Fig. In this section, we demonstrate a multi-input multi-output (MIMO) beam-forming MTS which is capable of generating two independent beams when one of its two designated embedded sources are excited. Unlike single-input multi-beam systems, the MIMO MTSs are capable of distinguishing the signals picked up by different beams For illustrative purposes, we focus our attention on a dualinput dual-output system. Since the two output beams must share the same physical aperture, it is expected that they each suffer from degraded directivity. However, as we will show, it is possible to obtain significantly higher aperture efficiency for each beam with the proposed optimization-based method, as compared to that achievable with physical aperture partitioning. The design of the MIMO MTS requires some simple reformulation of the optimization problem. All derived formulae as well as the Kron reduction technique discussed in Sec. II are still valid. However, we now have a set of two independent input fields Ēi {1,2} , which give rise to two different output radiation patterns Ū{1,2} . If we denote the desired output pattern corresponding to input {1, 2} as Ūdes,{1,2} , then a new cost function can be formulated as Here, α i is a weight that allows the designer to place emphasis on pattern matching for one of the two input-output (I/O) pairs. In this study, we use equal weight for both I/O pairs. The main difficulty for the present optimization problem is the identification of a good starting point. A reasonable strategy is to first treat the MIMO MTS as a single-input single-output device whose input is Ēi 1 + Ēi 2 , and whose desired output is Ūdes,1 + Ūdes,2 . This enables the use of the strategy discussed in Sec. III to obtain a rational starting point. However, we found that this method, while serviceable, does not guarantee the best results. On the other hand, a twostep optimization process, consisting of a global optimization which generates a starting point for a subsequent local search, produced much better performing designs. In this study, the global optimization is performed using the built-in particle swarm optimization (PSO) routine in MATLAB, while the local search is done with gradient descent (f mincon). To demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed approach, we design a 7λ-wide impedance MTS (h = 2.54 mm, r = 3) consisting of 42 meta-wires (each λ/40 wide), operating at 10 GHz. The sparse λ/6 spacing between meta-wires means that the device can be easily implemented using realistic PCB MTSs. The two inputs are assumed to be two line sources located at (y o , z o ) = (±3λ, h/2). The corresponding desired outputs are two beams directed at ±20 • with 100% aperture efficiency. Their far-zone electric fields can be obtained via Since the device is symmetric, only 21 optimization variables need to be considered. To accommodate the more de- manding design specifications, we extend the impedance limit of the meta-wires to [-j200, -j25]. This range is still easily obtainable using physical meta-wires, as one simply needs to increase the gap between the printed capacitor plates in order to realize more negative values of reactance. Fig. The synthesized device is simulated in HFSS, giving the near-field distributions in Fig. The above assertion is quantitatively verified via an examination of the simulated 2D directivity patterns, plotted in Fig. The aperture electric field spectrum corresponding to the second output beam (20 • ) is plotted in Fig. In this section, we examine the physical realization of impedance MTSs featuring embedded sources and investigate their performance in terms of power efficiency and bandwidth. In order to converge to solutions that manifest higher bandwidth and milder sensitivity with respect to the wire impedances, we utilize all the constraints described in Sec. III-C. After the optimization has been performed, the impedance loadings of each meta-wire are implemented with printed capacitors that are characterized in an aperiodic simulation, as detailed in App. A. These steps complete the endto-end design of the embedded-source-fed impedance MTSs. Two design examples are presented, namely, an impedance MTS realizing a Chebyshev pattern with -20 dB side lobe level and impedance MTSs which radiate two distinct beams in two different directions. In this design example, we realize a Chebyshev pattern with a constant side lobe level of -20 dB using a metasurface of width W = 7λ. The metasurface consists of 42 wires placed on top of a grounded dielectric substrate with height h = 3.04mm and dielectric constant r = 3, while the is located at (y o , z o ) = (0, h/2). The geometrical parameters have been chosen so that two Rogers RO3003 substrates of 1.52 mm thickness bonded together could realize the device. To determine the required far-field radiation, 14 omnidirectional virtual sources are assumed with their currents calculated based on the Chebyshev design method. The optimization is performed in two steps. In the first step, the impedances are constrained only by their passivity (Re{Z n } = 0) and range ([-j90, -j25]). The converged solution is then used as the starting point of a second step that includes constraints on the Q-factor and sensitivity based on Q max = 40 and T max = 40 in ( One half of a slice of the final optimized device implemented using realistic printed meta-wires is shown in Fig. From the HFSS simulation results, we also extract the spectrum of the electric field in a plane 0.1λ above the wires. We repeat this for the converged solutions of both optimization steps, and plot the resultant spectra normalized E x (Normalized) Fi g. 12. (a) Right half of one slice of the optimized Chebyshev beam-forming impedance MTS implemented using printed metallic wires, (b) Simulated near-field profile Re{Ex}, and (c) Spectrum of the total electric field at a plane 0.1λ above the meta-wires (invisible region is shaded in red). with respect to Ẽx (k y = 0) in Fig. To assess the fidelity of the formed beam, we plot the simulated radiation pattern in Fig. Notably, the excellent pattern matching was realized without any additional geometrical tuning of the printed capacitors. This is because the design curve of Fig. The realistic design allows for the investigation of the losses θ (deg) Fig. and the bandwidth. Specifically, losses are estimated to be around 7.4% (3.3% ohmic losses in the wires and the ground plane and 4.1% in the dielectric). This constitutes a promising result, as multi-layer transmissive metasurfaces using auxiliary surface waves for similar functionality exhibit significantly higher losses In this example, we examine metasurfaces, fed by a single embedded source, that realize two beams in two predefined directions. As in the previous example, the frequency is set to 10 GHz and the metasurface consists of 42 wires extending along an aperture size of W = 7λ. The substrate has a height of h = 3.04 mm and dielectric constant e r = 3, while the source is placed at (y 0 , z 0 ) = (0, h/2). The desired radiation pattern is obtained by superimposing two uniform phased current sheets following Here, A 1 , A 2 dictate the directivity of the two beams, θ 1 , θ 2 are the two output angles, and ξ is a constant phase that slightly modifies the side lobes of the total pattern by affecting the interference of the two beams. For our examples, we use A 1 = A 2 = 1 resulting in desired patterns with two equally directive beams. It is emphasized that both beams originate from a single source, unlike the MIMO example presented in Sec. IV-B. In a sense, the present MTSs can be perceived as single-input multiple-output (SIMO) systems, as two spatially separated receivers could receive the same transmitted signal. With that in mind, we present two design examples with the specifications shown in Table Simulations using realistic wires and losses are performed in HFSS. To assess the beam-forming accuracy, the realized far-field patterns for both designs are plotted in Fig. The nonlinear constraint on the Q-factor helped us obtain power efficiencies of 92.3% for Design A and 91.0% for Design B. The power efficiency is limited by dielectric losses (4.2% for A and 4.5% for B) and ohmic losses in copper (3.5% for A and 4.5% for B). For each design, we examine its worst case 3-dB bandwidth, i.e. the bandwidth of its more narrow band beam. For Design A and Design B, these are evaluated to be 4.5% and 3.9% respectively. We presented the design of a complete low-profile beamforming platform consisting of a single-layered ground-planebacked impedance MTS fed by embedded sources. Through the use of an efficient optimization-based design strategy derived from volume-surface integral equations, several devices with extreme beam-forming capabilities were synthesized. By harnessing tailored auxiliary surface waves, they were able to realize optimal aperture illumination regardless of their physical size or the source type, while demonstrating useful functionalities such as wide-angle or MIMO beam-forming. To bring the proposed devices one step closer to physical realization, we derived several feasibility-related constraints which serve to enhance their bandwidths and robustness against fabrication errors, while reducing ohmic and dielectric losses. With the help of a simple mapping procedure between theoretical MTS models and realistic PCB-compatible devices, we constructed several designs capable of arbitrary beamshaping or SIMO beam-forming using simple capacitively loaded printed copper traces. Full-wave simulations corroborates the exceptional theoretically predicted beam-forming capabilities, while confirming the effectiveness of the feasibility constraints. The meta-wires comprising the unit-cells of our MTSs are periodically loaded in longitudinal direction (every λ/8) with printed capacitors, as seen in the inset of Fig. To characterize the impedance of a particular wire design, we employ a modified version of a method previously used to characterize meta-wires suspended in air Aiming at the realistic implementation of the design example in Sec. V-A, we characterize the loaded wires above a dielectric of height h = 3.04mm and r = 3. The ground plane is also present and the whole structure has a finite width of 7λ. The extracted effective impedances for various values of capacitor width W c is plotted in Fig. 