Majorana zero modes in condensed matter systems have been the subject of much interest in recent years. Their non-Abelian exchange statistics, making them a unique state of matter, and their potential applications in topological quantum computation, earned them attention from both theorists and experimentalists. It is generally understood that in order to form Majorana zero modes in quasi-one-dimensional topological insulators, time-reversal symmetry must be broken. The straightforward mechanisms for doing so-applying magnetic fields or coupling to ferromagnets-turned out to have many unwanted side effects, such as degradation of superconductivity and the formation of sub-gap states, which is part of the reason Majorana zero modes have been eluding direct experimental detection for a long time. Here we review several proposal that rely on controlling the phase of the superconducting order parameter, either as the sole mechanism for time-reversal-symmetry breaking, or as an additional handy knob used to reduce the applied magnetic field. These proposals hold practical promise to improve Majorana formation, and they shed light on the physics underlying the formation of the topological superconducting state. Topology in condensed matter systems has been a major theme of research in the past decades The fact that topology even appears in electronic systems has to do with the intrinsic geometry of quantum particles in a periodic potential: the Brillouin zone itself is a topologically non-trivial manifold, possibly with a large genus This inherent topology, and also the topology of the Hilbert space associated with certain Hamiltonians Apart from its effects on transport properties, topology has implications with regard to the allowed quasiparticle excitations. In basic quantum mechanics we learn that there is a clear dichotomy between bosons and fermions, based on their exchange statistics. That is because when a particle moves around a particle identical to it, their two-body wavefunction must return to its original value. This, in turn, stems from the fact that the trajectory can be shrunk into a point, by taking it out of the plane. However, in two dimensions that is not the case, and therefore other types of exchange statistics are possible One type of non Abelian anyon, perhaps the simplest one, is the Majorana zero mode (MZM) A Majorana fermion is essentially half of an ordinary fermion. This can be formulated using the language of second quantization: a fermion annihilation operator c can be written as c = α + iβ, where α = α † , β = β † . The self-adjoint operators α, β are Majorana fermions. But there is more to it than just a formal basis transformation. In a seminal papers, Kitaev The phase of matter realized in the Kitaev chain is called a topological superconductor As we mentioned, time-reversal symmetry must be broken to realize isolated MZMs. Naturally, this has led the idea of applying an external magnetic field The purpose of this review is to highlight an additional option for breaking time-reversal symmetry, which is biasing the SC phase. The fact that the SC order parameter is a complex number The rest of this review is organized as follows. In Sec. 2, we review the early proposals for combining topological insulators and ordinary phasebiased superconductors to create MZMs. In Sec. 3 we describe proposals for using phase bias to reduce the Zeeman field required to drive various semiconductorsuperconductor hybrid systems into a topological phase. In Sec. 4, we review several suggestions for eliminating the Zeeman field altogether, and realizing topological superconductivity using only phase bias. We briefly touch upon the practical aspects of phase biasing a superconductor in Sec. 5. We conclude and discuss avenues for future research in Sec. 6. One of the first ideas on realizing topological superconductivity in a feasible system is due to Fu and Kane The analysis begins with the 2D surface states of a 3D topological insulator. These are described by the Dirac Hamiltonian H TI = v σ • p, where v is the Fermi velocity, σ is the vector of spin Pauli matrices, and p = -i∇ is the 2D momentum. The TI is proximity coupled to an s-wave superconductor with a space-dependent phase, i.e., the pair potential is ∆ ( r) = ∆e iφ( r) , as shown in Fig. + ∆ [τ x cos φ( r) + τ y sin φ( r)] . Here, the τ Pauli matrices act on the particle-hole degree of freedom, and the Nambu spinor takes the form Like any BdG Hamiltonian, H FK respects particlehole symmetry, as evident by {H FK , Ξ} = 0 where the particle-hole operator is Ξ = iτ y σ y K. Moreover and importantly, the TI itself does not break time-reversal symmetry: H TI commutes with the time-reversal operator T = iσ y K. The s-wave superconductor also does not break time-reversal symmetry, as long as it is not phase biased, i.e., if φ ( r) is spatially uniform. In this time-reversal-symmetric case, the low-energy spectrum of the Fu-Kane Hamiltonian is similar to that of a spinless p x + ip y superconductor At this point we stress an important issue that is often confusing with regard to the Fu-Kane model. As we mentioned in the previous paragraph, and as Fu and Kane showed by a simple canonical transformation, the analogy between the TI-SC system and the p x + ip y SC is correct without phase biasing. In other words, the TI-SC system is inherently a topological superconductor. However, due to TRS it cannot have chiral edge modes. Moreover, in 2D, unlike in 1D, the formation of a topological superconducting state is not in one-to-one correspondence with the appearance of a Majorana zero mode. Therefore, the vortex is necessary in order to probe the topological nature of the TI-SC system, but it is not the one responsible for inducing it in the first place. It is the unique band structure of the TI that endows the hybrid system its topological nature. A vortex may be introduced continuously, e.g. in polar coordinates φ (r, θ) = nθ (here the integer n is the vorticity). Another possibility is inducing a discrete vortex, as demonstrated in Fig. the origin sets a lower bound on the energy of bound states, prohibiting the existence of zero modes Despite the apparent simplicity of the Fu-Kane model, its experimental realization turns out to be challenging. A main problem is that one needs a strong superconducting proximity effect at the surface states of the 3DTI, whereas in practice the bulk states tend to get better proximizited. The prominence of the bulk states, which are assumed in the theoretical model to be fully gapped and irrelevant, is adverse to the formation of a topological superconducting state. Another source of complication is the need of a very clean interface between the 3DTI and the SC, which is generally very hard to obtain. The cleanest 3DTIs are single crystal, but they are not as topologically robust as compounds (e.g. involving bismuth). Despite these major challenges, there have been some promising recent developments in inducing superconductivity in compound topological insulator In this section, we review ideas proposed to utilize the SC phase degree of freedom to lower the critical magnetic field needed for topological superconductivity. Although the magnetic field in these systems cannot go all the way to zero, its significant reduction makes them intriguing. Driving a constant current through at SC causes its phase to increase linearly Consider a semiconducting spin-orbit-coupled wire, which is placed in proximity to an s-wave SC, with a magnetic field applied along the wire. The BdG Hamiltonian describing the system is where the Nambu spinor is the same as in Eq. ( In the case of two Fermi points, introducing ∆ = 0 opens an inverted superconducting gap, making the system a topological superconductor. In terms of the model parameters, the topological region appears at E Z > ∆, i.e., the Zeeman energy must exceed the pair potential Let us now add current into the mix. The only change in the Hamiltonian compared to Eq. ( To make progress, it is very useful to introduce the gauge transformation This transformation eliminates the phase variation from the pairing terms, at the cost of shifting the momentum in the normal-state terms, p → p-τ z ∇φ/2. This seemingly innocent gauge transformation actually plays a very important role in understanding the mechanism by which phase variation changes the picture, as it establishes the similarity between a phase gradient and a vector potential. Notice that, as in the case of a real vector potential, the momentum shift is opposite for electrons and holes. For the case of a constant current we get a constant phase gradient, and therefore the momentum shift is position independent. Then, the Hamiltonian may still be analyzed in momentum space (translation invariance is restored), and the topological phase boundaries are found by the closing of the gap at p = 0. The topological phase diagram is shown in Fig. Rather than applying a current to continuously vary the SC phase, it is possible to phase bias several SCs such that a discrete collection of phases is formed. The properties of the Josephson junctions formed between two such SCs strongly depend on the phase bias. As we show below, this dependence can greatly assist in engineering topological SC. The first idea for utilizing Josephson junctions as Majorana platforms is due to Fu and Kane where φ is the phase difference between the SCs. Crucially, at φ = π the system becomes gapless, which motivates the study of a low-energy effective theory near φ = π, k = 0. The effective Hamiltonian reads where the effective Fermi velocity ṽ depends on the chemical potential μ and the junction's width W , and the renormalized pair potential ∆ = ∆ cos(φ/2). The Pauli matrices ν act in the two-dimensional low-energy subspace. The effective Hamiltonian has the same form as the Su-Schrieffer-Heeger (SSH) model The STIS junction scheme is remarkably simple and elegant, but it is very challenging to realize experimentally, due to the difficulty in establishing a stable superconducting proximity effect in a 3DTI surface. To overcome this difficulty, two theoretical works Consider the setup depicted in Fig. Here α is the Rashba SOC strength, and E Z = gμ B B /2 is the Zeeman energy, where g is the gfactor, μ B is the Bohr magneton, and B is the in-plane magnetic field, which we take to be in the x direction. The SC pairing amplitude is ∆(y) = ∆Θ(|y| -W/2) and the phase is Some insight into the topological behavior of the system may be gained by analyzing the Hamiltonian (8) using the scattering formalism at k x = 0 and the expression for the electrons and holes transmission in the normal region, Here E Z,S , E Z,N are the Zeeman energies in the superconducting and normal regions, respectively (these differ in general due to different g-factors in the different regions), and W is the junction's width. In the absence of normal reflection at the NS interface, the condition for a bound state at energy E is t e (E)t h (E)r 2 A (E) = 1. For E Z,S = 0, a zero-energy state, signaling a topological phase transition (since we are looking at k x = 0), appears for where E T = πv F /2W is the Thouless energy. This diamond-like phase diagram is shown in Fig. Including also normal reflection and E Z,S = 0 smears the sharp edges of the diamonds. Notice that even though the SOC does not appear in Eq. ( Two experiments attempting to realize this planar proposal are worth mentioning at this point. Ren et al The two experiments reported zero-bias conductance peaks consistent with topological superconductivity. Curiously, the experiments were performed with different material platforms and at quite different length regimes (narrow vs. wide junction, narrow vs. wide SC leads compared to the SC coherence length), but they both showed encouraging signatures of MZMs. As a closing remark, we touch upon a delicate issue which is of primary importance in experiments. The model of Refs. Having reviewed proposals on reducing the critical magnetic field, we now move to ideas on eliminating the Zeeman field altogether. The systems surveyed in this section aim to use just the SC phase to obtain topological superconductivity, but they do so in rather different ways. We note that early ideas along these lines appeared in the work of Kotetes The original models of semiconducting nanowires Consider a cylindrical nanowire (e.g. InAs) fully coated by a superconductor (e.g. Al), see Fig. Here A is the vector potential, α is the Rashba spinorbit coupling strength, and σ is the vector of Pauli matrices acting in spin space. We assume a magnetic field B = B ẑ is applied along the nanowire's axis, so a reasonable gauge choice is A = 1 2 B × r. Semiconductor Superconductor Full-shell nanowire scheme for topological superconductivity On top of this normal-state Hamiltonian, we add the superconducting pairing, which is modulated in space due to the presence of the magnetic field: ∆ ( r) = ∆e -inφ , where φ is the angular coordinate. The winding n is strictly an integer, due to the wavefunction being single valued. An important observation of Vaitiekėnas et al The first two terms are not surprising-they are nothing but the orbital and spin angular momenta. The last term, however, is special: the phase winding alters the angular momentum and adds a contribution that is opposite for particles and holes. This is yet another manifestation of the notion (that has hopefully become more transparent at this point) that SC phase gradient can be thought of as a special type of orbital field. Inspecting Eq. ( Following this line of reasoning, the authors of Ref. where R is the cylinder's radius (assuming a thin superconductor) and Φ = πR 2 B is the flux threaded through the cylinder. It is thus straightforward to derive the criterion for a topological phase in this description, and indeed the authors found large topological regions in parameter space. We stress again that no Zeeman field was assumed to be present in the original Hamiltonian, and it is indeed the SC phase winding that gives rise to the effective Zeeman field. The relevant magnetic field scale for a topological transition is determined by Φ ≈ Φ 0 , i.e., by the geometry of the nanowire. Notice again that this is a purely orbital effect (no g factors involved). In practice, for the Al-coated InAs nanowire studied in Ref. We note that a similar phenomenon of orbitally driven topological superconductivity has been pointed out in carbon nanotubes The realization that phase bias can be an alternative to applying a Zeeman field was also adopted in the context of planar Josephson junctions (see Sec. 3.2 and Refs. The first step taken by Melo et al is applying supercurrents to the two SCs, generally with different gradients: Notice that the effective unit cell of the junction is now enlarged: it is the least common multiple of λ L and λ R . While these supercurrents lift the degeneracy at k x = 0, the spectrum turns out to be gapless due to a gap closing at finite k x . This gap closing is a result of a symmetry dubbed "charge-momentum parity", which reflects the fact that Andreev reflections in this system are always accompanied by a momentum shift of ±2π/λ L or ±2π/λ R . This symmetry, O = (-1) n τ z (where n is the number of unit cells in reciprocal space), which commutes with the Hamiltonian and anticommutes with the particle-hole operator, prohibits a gapped topological phase. Several mechanisms are proposed to break the charge-momentum parity: (i) Adding a periodic potential, which scatters states of different wavevectors inside the electron and hole sectors separately. (ii) Deforming the junction to a non-straight shape such as zig-zag. Here, the geometry makes the Andreev reflection change k x in a way that breaks O. (iii) Adding a third SC without supercurrent in the middle of the junction (creating a SNSNS junction). The additional SC couples states at k x and -k x without any momentum transfer. Interestingly, in cases (i)-(ii), modulations commensurate with λ L and λ R are favorable for breaking O and opening a topological gap, whereas incommensurate modulations facilitate a gapless state. This is because in the commensurate case-and always in case (iii) above if λ R = λ L -inversion symmetry is maintained. When inversion symmetry is broken, the spectrum gets tilted and can easily become gapless, and thus retaining inversion symmetry is beneficial in this setup. An important lesson to learn from Ref. A different approach to phase-only Majorana realization, introduced in Refs. The analysis begins with a spin-orbit-coupled quantum ring, where each site is coupled to a superconductor which has a different phase, see Fig. The Hamiltonian describing the ring is Here n enumerates the three sites of the ring, c n = (c n↑ , c n↓ ) T and the phases λ n characterize the spin-orbit coupling strength at each bond. The reader might be concerned about the SOC being always related with the σ z operator and not the other spin operators; a seemingly more appropriate operator might be σ θ = -σ x sin θ + σ y cos θ, where θ is the angular polar coordinate. The two representations are actually related by the local transformation U = exp i 2 θ + π 2 σ z (see also Ref. Let us first consider the simple case of uniform SOC, λ 1 = λ 2 = λ 3 ≡ λ, and equal SC phase differences, φ n = 2π 3 mn where m = ±1. In this case the model has translation invariance and it is conveniently analyzed in Fourier space, using the momentum around the ring k as a conserved quantum number. The Bloch-BdG Hamiltonian is where kσ = -μ + 2t cos k + πm 3 + λσ and as usual the Nambu spinor takes the form To find zero-energy states, we demand that for some value of k, There are many ways to fulfil this equation. Let us focus on a case that simplifies the calculation: kσ = --k,-σ = ∆ for some specific choice of k, σ. This leads to two equations (see Ref. where N is an integer. For example, the choice k = 0, σ =↑ leads to λ = -π 2 + 2πN . We therefore conclude that it is possible to induce zero-energy states, which are delocalized Majorana states, using just three phases. Notice the interplay between λ, the Aharonov-Casher phase The analysis may be generalized to a ring without translation invariance and Λ = cos (λ 1 + λ 2 + λ 3 ). To find zero-energy states, we look for solutions of the equation detH = 0; notice that these only depend on the total spin-orbit phase (characterized by Λ), and the SC phases enter through a single gauge-invariant parameter f . Treating Eq. ( At this point, we would like to extend this ring to a 1D system, building on the observations above. One can think of two ways to do that, which can be regarded as different ways to concatenate rings. The first way we describe amounts to coupling the rings out of the plane, forming a cylinder-like structure, as described in Ref. Consider promoting each site of the ring of Fig. An important consideration we need to account for is the topological gap. The system can only be topological if it has a finite gap, and the larger the gap the better: it provides the protection of the MZMs and determines their localization length. One may expect the gap to be largest when the phases form a perfect vortex (f = -3/2). However, it turns out that this is not the case: for such a configuration, the system has C 3 rotation symmetry, which manifests itself as a gap closing at finite k . Therefore, besides optimizing the topological region in parameter space, one should also be concerned with the non-trivial evolution of the gap. The optimal topological gap is numerically found to be about a third of the induced SC gap This non-planar construction may be extended to a more realistic setup. Consider smoothly deforming the cylinder into a rectangular box, which we model as a bilayer, see Fig. The second approach to this phase-only setup is concatenating the rings of Fig. As in the case of the non-planar model, this planar construction may also be adopted to a more experimentally feasible setup In this section we briefly discuss the practical question of how one can achieve SC phase control. The basic theory has been well understood for a long time The basic setup where the integer n is the fluxoid number and φ = (Φ ext +Φ ind )/Φ 0 . This integer is related to the presence of vortices in the SC: changing it requires the SC order parameter to go to zero in some region, through a phase-slip process. Since the phase difference also obeys γ = 2πL K I/Φ 0 where L K is the loop's kinetic inductance, we find that ( This immediately gives the Φ ext -dependent energy of the ring for each n, This is a family of parabolas that intersect at halfinteger value of Φ ext /Φ 0 , which is when a vortex is able to enter the system. It is possible to concentrate the phase drop across the ring to a short segment, by lowering the SC order parameter in this segment. Such "weak link" configurations are often used in superconducting quantum interference devices We therefore find two ways to achieve phase bias between two superconductors: threading magnetic flux and applying an external current. In experiments involving a single phase difference where A( r) is the vector potential and r 0 is some arbitrary reference point. Crucially, the relevant area to determine phase of each SC depends on its height, and this allows sensitive phase biasing. In the literature, this effect is usually seen via its influence on the supercurrent: the gradient of the SC phase, k S = ∇φ, induces a diamagnetic current. This in turn means that the total momentum of a pair of quasiparticles undergoing Andreev reflection is k 1 + k 2 = k S , rather than zero. The energy of the quasiparticles is therefore Doppler-shifted from zero, which is readily observed in experiments As an example, consider a 2D structure in the xy plane, contacted by a SC from the top (height L z along the z direction). Applying a magnetic field B along x induces a SC phase gradient along y, dφ dy Assuming B is uniform (thin SC, screening), we can then modulate the phase gradient by controlling the height L z as a function of x, y. This way allows one to induce patterns of supercurrents and phase gradients in the system. The theoretical proposals we reviewed establish the SC phase difference as a powerful experimental knob for realizing topological superconductivity. By utilizing the simple fact that the SC order parameter is a complex number, various options exist for either reducing the required magnetic field for establishing topological superconductivity, or eliminating it altogether. The most appealing aspect of this is just how non-invasive phase biasing can be to the parent SC and even to the proximity-induced SC gap. We close this review by pointing out some intriguing future directions related to this field. A major player that was only briefly touched upon in this review is disorder. Due to the prominence and very advanced experimental status of nanowirebased Majorana devices, there is a massive body of literature on the effect of disorder on them These finite-momentum trajectories have a very small energy gap, which in turn causes the localization length to be large, and therefore eliminating them is beneficial. Too strong disorder, with a typical scattering rate comparable to the induced superconducting gap, eventually suppresses completely the p-wave superconductor, in a way which is analogous to the way magnetic impurities suppress convectional superconductivity So far we have focused on MZMs arising in effectively non-interacting systems (the interactions involved in forming the SC state are well described by mean-field theory). In the presence of electronelectron interactions, a rich variety of additional excitations become available The effect of electron-electron interactions on phase-induced Majorana systems is still widely unexplored, and it holds great promise, both for deepening our understanding of interacting topological phases and for practical applications. Finally, we comment on the possible extensions of 1D phase-induced MZM platforms to two dimensions. The prototypical example of a 2D topological SC is the p x + ip y SC 