Reentrant superconductivity has been observed in the candidate spin-triplet superconductor UTe2 as a function of the magnetic field applied along the hard axis. Resistivity measurements have shown, a broadened superconducting transition appears near the minimal Tc, highlighting the importance of superconducting fluctuations in this regime. We present a phenomenological study assuming a field-driven first-order transition between two superconducting states. We show that with quenched randomness, inhomogeneity-enhanced superconducting fluctuations near the transition could naturally account for both the reentrant superconductivity as well as the broadened superconducting transition. Magnetic fields are often detrimental to superconductivity. Spin singlet superconductors are destroyed by magnetic fields both by the Zeeman effect and through the orbital motion of charge carriers. Spin triplet superconductors can be more robust since the Zeeman effect does not break apart triplet pairs for certain field orientations. Nevertheless, they are not immune to the orbital depairing effects in a generic three-dimensional system. In striking contrast to these expectations, field-induced reentrant behavior, where superconductivity strengthens and even emerges with a magnetic field, has been observed in several heavy fermion systems CeRh 2 As 2 In the case of UGe 2 , URhGe, and UCoGe superconductivity directly coexists with ferromagnetism and reentrant behavior is associated with a spin-triplet condensate with magnetically ordered cooper pairs. In these systems, the conjectured source of reentrance is that the field tunes the system towards a quantum phase transition We provide here an alternate mechanism for reentrance in UTe 2 which does not involve quantum critical ferromagnetic fluctuations. Indeed, predominantly incommensurate antiferromagnetic fluctuations have been observed in this system We postulate that in the absence of disorder, the magnetic field drives the system across a first-order transition separating two distinct superconducting ground states (Fig Our scenario is inspired by recent experimental studies, which have revealed the sharpness of the superconducting transition as a function of the field. These studies conclude that the resistive transition remains sharp for small and large fields, but for intermediate fields, the resistive transition is broadened, indicating enhanced thermal fluctuations. Our scenario naturally leads to reentrance and has several sharp testable experimental consequences. In this section, we propose a mean-field phase diagram for the clean system (Fig. Below the mean-field T c , and far away from the firstorder transition, the system is mainly occupied by the dominant order. Due to the disorder, the subdominant order can appear as rare superconducting regions. The superconducting T c here is determined primarily by the long-range ordering of the dominant order, therefore, is similar to the mean-field T c in the clean system. The resistive transitions in these regions would therefore remain sharp, and the effects of fluctuations weak. By contrast, closer to the first-order transition, patches of the subdominant order are more prevalent. Superconducting fluctuations are enhanced by the resulting spatial inhomogeneity, resulting in a substantial lowering of T c (thick red line) relative to the mean-field value. The mean-field critical temperature now characterizes the local ordering within superconducting regions of the dominant order. In this region, therefore, the resistivity deviates from its normal state value at this cross-over temperature T onset (black dotted line), which would appear as a broadened superconducting transition. The broadest transition and T c minimum, therefore, appear at the same magnetic field H = H * . As a function of the magnetic field, the increase in T c from its minimum to the maximum is smaller or equal to the broadened transition ∆T = T onset -T c at H = H * . From the resistivity data, these two quantities are both around 0.5K. The possibility of additional transitions in this picture within the superconducting phases will be discussed in the next section. The discussion above made no explicit reference to a particular set of phases; our only assumption was the existence of a first-order transition and a bicritical point separating two distinct superconducting phases in the absence of disorder. The effect of disorder then enhances thermal fluctuations near the bicritical point. In this section, we discuss the possible choices for phases A and B. The simplest scenario is one in which the two phases have different pairing symmetries (Fig. A second scenario is one in which phases A and B in the clean system correspond to distinct vortex lattice structures (Fig. In the third scenario, the two phases have the same symmetry (Fig. We next invoke the fact that the reentrant behavior in UTe 2 occurs as a function of the magnetic field. Since the magnetic field suppresses pairing both via the Zeeman and orbital effects, we consider each case separately. Studies of magnetic field angle dependence If the transition is driven by the orbital effect, we would require different coherence lengths for phases A and B. For phase A, it needs to have a smaller critical field, thus a longer coherence length. For phase B, it needs to have a shorter coherence length. If the transition is driven by the Pauli effect, we would require a difference in the orientation of the d-vector. Phase A needs to have a d-vector, that is more parallel to the field. d-vector of phase B needs to be more perpendicular to the field. For completeness, both Pauli and orbital-driven transitions will be described in the next section in the classical Monte Carlo simulation. For UTe 2 , orbital suppression is more relevant, since the initial drop in T c under small magnetic field is linear in terms of the field strength, while that drop is quadratic within the Pauli-limited theory. In this section, we will apply classical Monte Carlo simulation to investigate the thermal fluctuations enhanced by spatial inhomogeneity. For simplicity, and purpose of illustration, we will first consider the case where the magnetic field couples solely to the spin of the condensate, resulting in Pauli suppression. We then consider the complementary case where the field couples via the vector potential and induces orbital motion of charges. We would like to compare the correlations of the superconducting order parameters in the neighborhood of the orange square and triangle points in the phase diagram in Fig. In the following Monte Carlo simulations, fluctuation effect is purely from phase fluctuation in A and B patches, while T c is governed by Josephson couplings. Fluctuation of magnetic field, which may be crucial to suppress T c , is not included in the calculation. We first consider the phase transition driven by purely Pauli paramagnetism effect. We consider a toy model under tetragonal symmetry, with (A, B) identified as (p y , p x ) states. The analysis for other symmetries is similar. The free energy density is In the Landau theory without the disorder, fluctuation, magnetic field, or competition, the quadratic coefficients can be related to the bare critical temperature of the two order parameters by u = a(T c -T ). Under strong competition, the dominant order needs to have a larger quadratic coefficient. We now drop the temperaturedependence since we are focusing on the two points at the same temperature. Pauli paramagnetism effect suppresses orderings by reducing u A and u B : ( Random T c disorder δu x,y (r) is taken from independently uniformly distributed interval [-∆u, ∆u]. L x × L y × L z = 100 × 100 × 2 square lattice with periodic boundary condition is considered. In order to describe the long-range ordering, we compute the in-plane correlation function along the diagonal direction: where ... is the thermal average in Monte Carlo simulation. For the square point, we take u A = 3.97 and u B = 4. The similar value of u A and u B ensures that this point is close to H = H * . For the triangle point, we take u A = 2 and u B = 4, where we assumed that the magnetic field strongly suppresses order A but not order B. Other parameters are: 0.37 is used in the Monte-Carlo simulation. 5000000 sweeps with Metropolis algorithm is applied. The system size is already sufficiently large, such that different disorder realizations have a small difference in the correlation function. The results are summarized in Fig. We now consider the phase transition driven by a purely orbital effect. In Landau gauge A = (Hy, 0), the free energy density is We consider a toy model on a finite 2-dimensional plane. The presence of the third dimensionality hardly affects our conclusions and we neglect it below for simplicity. The assumption that phase A occurs at small fields, whereas phase B occurs at higher fields (i.e. has a higher upper critical field or shorter correlation length), requires u A > u B , and We study a system on a L × L = 100 × 100 square lattice with periodic boundary conditions. For the square point in Fig. Note that the periodic boundary condition restricts the choice of the magnetic field strength. In numerical calculations, specific gauge may further restrict the choice. For the Landau gauge, H needs to be a multiple of 2π L . Other parameters are: Proper value of u A is tuned such that the square point is close to H = H * . This tuning is unnecessary, if one instead wants to scan over multiple magnetic fields in a much larger system. 2 × 10 8 sweeps with Metropolis algorithm and over-relaxation algorithm are applied. The result is averaged over 20 disordered samples. We compute the pair correlation function along the diagonal direction: Note that the absolute magnitude is taken before adding up correlators, since correlators are complex when including the vector potential. The final overline denotes disorder-average. The results are summarized in Fig. For H ≈ H * (black solid line), the correlation function is small due to imhomogeneity. By increasing magnetic field to H > H * (red solid line), the correlation function of superconducting order parameters increases dramatically. The correlation function of the subdominant order is also included as dashed-dotted lines. Due to the absolute value in Eq.6, the resulted correlation function cannot be used to distinguish the ordered and disordered phase. Instead, we now compute the superfluid stiffness along the Y-direction: x,y (i∆ * A,B (x, y)∆ A,B (x, y + 1) + c.c.) For H ≈ H * , we get J s A = 0.03 ± 0.05 and J s B = 0.01 ± 0.02. For H > H * , we get J s A = 0.0002 ± 0.004 and J s B = 0.11±0.03, which shows the re-entrant superconductivity. The average and standard deviation is computed from 20 disordered samples. The spatial dependence of the order parameter can be found in the appendix. In this work, we discussed the effect of inhomogeneity near a field-driven first-order transition. Inhomogeneity in UTe 2 has been observed in NMR In the above sections, we have assumed that the chiral phase is not relevant near H = H * . The proposal of chiral phase (1)Kerr effect where time-reversal symmetry is found to be broken; (2) split transitions in specific heat, which are strictly required for the chiral phase in the orthorhombic system. However, the split transitions are observed in some samples with α > 0. In our analysis, we assumed that the suppression in the chiral phase is strong enough, such that it is irrelevant for the reentrant superconductivity. This assumption requires a sufficiently large α. For smaller α, the mean-field phase diagram is shown in the bottom panel. Our analysis on reentrant superconductivity still applies to the first-order transition line between the A and B phases. With disorder, we proposed three possible fates for the field-driven transition. If the two phases belong to the irreducible representations for the chiral phase (Fig. Our study has potential applications to other superconduting systems with a first-order transition. For example, CeRh 2 As 2 1 is shown to have a first-order phase transition under magnetic field, between an even-parity superconducting phase and an odd-parity superconducting phase. Superconducting T c is slightly reduced near the phase transition. In the magic-angle twisted trilayer graphene 6 , field-driven reentrant superconductivity is also observed. Extra broadening of the superconducting transition is found near the minimal superconducting T c , and the onset T c is a monotonically decreasing function of the magnetic field. These findings match with our study.