Dispersion decomposes compound light into monochromatic components at different spatial locations, which needs to be eliminated in imaging but utilized in spectral detection. Metasurfaces provide a unique path to modulate the dispersion only by adjusting the structural parameters without changing the material as required for refractive elements. However, the common linear phase compensation does not conform to the dispersion characteristics of the meta-unit limiting dispersion modulation in broader wavelength bands, which is desired for ultra-broadband or multiband imaging. Here, we propose a nonlinear dispersive phase compensation method to design polarization-insensitive achromatic metalenses from 400 nm to 1000 nm constructed with single-layer high aspect ratio nanostructures. This band matches the response spectrum of a typical CMOS sensor for both visible and near-infrared imaging applications without additional lens replacement. Moreover, the capability of the method in achieving arbitrary dispersion modulation is demonstrated for applications such as chromatography imaging and spectral detection. Dispersion is a fundamental property of materials, i.e., the refractive index of material with normal dispersion (e.g., glass) decreases with increasing wavelength. As a result, the prism deflects light at a longer wavelength by a smaller angle, and the focal lengths at a longer wavelength of refractive lenses are larger than for a shorter wavelength (i.e., chromatic aberration). The opposite is true for dispersion in diffractive optical elements. The manipulation of dispersion has been of wide interest and has numerous important applications. On the one hand, the chromatic aberration in lens imaging Metasurfaces provide an attractive platform to design ultra-thin planar optical elements by constructing subwavelength scatters (metaunits) in a two-dimensional plane Meanwhile, with structural dispersion design freedom of different sub-wavelength structures, the dispersion regulation at discrete wavelengths In this work, we propose and demonstrate ultra-broadband dispersion-manipulated dielectric metalenses from 400 nm to 1000 nm by nonlinear dispersive phase compensation method. By constructing high-aspect-ratio TiO2 nanostructures (height of 1000 nm and minimum width of 50 nm) with different cross-sectional shapes to form a large meta-atoms library, whose phase dispersion exhibits stronger nonlinear properties over a broader band. Then, the wavefront at each wavelength to precisely match with the arbitrary nonlinear dispersion of meta-atoms is independently constructed to achieve an ultra-broadband dispersion manipulation. The method is also utilized in the demonstration of the realization of customized dispersion (positive dispersion, super-negative dispersion, arbitrary dispersion). The operating band of the proposed metalenses is well matched to the response band of commonly used CMOS sensors for dual-band imaging in the visible and near-infrared. Moreover, the proposed method enables more accurate phase matching in dispersion modulation designs, making it possible to extend to ultra-wideband and multi-spectrum dispersion modulation applications. Achieving arbitrary manipulation of the dispersion of an optical element requires the design of independent phase profiles at all design wavelengths. The phase profiles in spectral space (phase dispersion) of the subwavelength structures, i.e. meta-units, are highly correlated with their cross-sectional shapes, providing new degrees of freedom to the dispersion manipulation with metasurfaces. Designing meta-units with the unique phase dispersion at specific locations of the element to meet the requirement of each wavelength is expected to achieve dispersion manipulation. In order to understand the structural dispersion mechanism of the dielectric subwavelength meta-units, we consider the meta-units as vertical waveguides, whose phase response can be expressed as where H is the height of the meta-unit. λ is the wavelength. n eff (λ) is the effective refractive index (ERI) related with the intrinsic refractive index and cross-section shape of the meta-unit. From Eq. (1), for a fixed height meta-unit, the phase is positively correlated with the wavenumber ( 2π λ ) and the exact relationship is determined by the ERI and is linear if ERI is independent of wavelength. However, according to the onedimensional equivalent medium theory, the ERI generally varies with wavelength (see section 1 in the Supporting Information). The two-dimensional structures of meta-units are similar, as different waveguide modes lead to different ERI at different wavelengths. Eventually the phase dispersion will show nonlinear characteristics, which will be elaborated in detail subsequently. It can also be seen that the dispersion compensation range by the meta-units is proportional to the height of the structure. Therefore higher structures help achieve wider bandwidth, larger area dispersion modulation designs, which require structures with larger aspect ratios. Δλ/λ min achromatic metalens with the largest absolute and relative bandwidth. A broadband achromatic metalens is the most typical form of dispersion manipulation. In order to focus all wavelengths of light to the same focal point, the wavefront constructive interferenced by each light path from the interface should be a hemisphere with the same spherical center. So the wavelength-dependent phase profile at the interface needs to be designed to construct such wavefront by accumulated with the propagating phase in free space, i.e., φ = -k λ d, where d is the physical distance between the wavefront and the interface at a specific location. As shown in Figure where f is the focal length. The dispersion relationship is shown in the embedded figure where wavelength of red line is the largest. For a certain position of the lens, the phase is negatively correlated with the wavenumber as shown in Figure . The dispersion relationship in the embedded figure shows that the phase profiles are translated upward and intersected at position r 0 . In this way, the phase dispersion sign is flipped at positions smaller than r 0 as shown in Figure To better match with the nonlinear structural dispersion, we propose a new phase dispersion construction method as shown in Figure r λ introduced here is a wavelength dependent value. This means that different d λ are achieved for different wavefront translations at each wavelength, resulting in the same focus at each wavelength even though the wavefront do not overlap. So the dispersion relationship in Fig. (2) into two parts φ(r, λ) = φ(r, λ max ) + Δφ(r, λ), where the first term is the phase at the maximum wavelength of the achromatic band λ max (reference phase) and the second term is the phase difference between wavelength λ and λ max . Therefore, in the design, we need to construct the appropriate r λ so that the appropriate meta-unit chosen for each position can satisfy the phase and phase difference. To acquire a sufficient number of meta-units to achieve the desired dispersion compensation, a large database of polarization-insensitive dielectric meta-units with different cross-sectional shapes and parameters should be built. TiO2 material is chosen to achieve the visible to near-IR design due to its optical constant measurement result in Figure Using the established database, for comparison, we designed ultra-broadband achromatic metalenses with different numerical apertures (NA) in the 400 nm to 1000 nm band by linear and nonlinear dispersive phase compensation methods, respectively. The chosen band covers the spectral response range of a general CMOS image sensor and enables multi-band imaging in the visible and near infrared. Figure The linear matching metalens can achieve achromatic focusing in a certain bandwidth (e.g., 700-900 nm), but the large matching error makes its focusing poor in the visible range. While the metalens designed with nonlinear dispersive phase compensation can achieve good chromatic aberration elimination from 400 to 1000 nm. The shift of the focus in the experiment is due to the processing error. Figure The imaging of element 2 in group 5 on the resolution target are measured. It can be seen that high contrast imaging can be achieved at most wavelengths demonstrating the function of the metalens in ultra-broadband achromatic imaging. A decrease in focusing efficiency results in a decrease in contrast at the blue wavelengths. Note that the different resolution of the visible and near-infrared band detectors lead to differences in the imaging under the two bands. Our proposed nonlinear dispersive phase compensation method provides a powerful tool for dispersion modulation in ultra-broadband enabling chromatic aberration cancellation in even larger bandwidths, such as from near ultraviolet to nearinfrared (see Figure In summary, we proposed a nonlinear dispersive phase compensation scheme that better matches the intrinsic phase dispersion response of nanostructures to address the obstacle of large errors in dispersion manipulation designs with linear matching at wider bandwidths. With this scheme, we have demonstrated ultra-broadband achromatic and customized dispersive dielectric metalenses spanning the visible to near-infrared band from 400 to 1000 nm composed of carefully fabricated high aspect ratio nanostructures. This is the widest bandwidth of dispersion manipulation achieved by a metalens so far, which covers the response band of general CMOS image sensors enabling the achromatic imaging in both day and night environments with the same extremely miniaturized optical system. In addition, this scheme provides great freedom to achieve various types of customized dispersion modulation for applications such as color holography, and spectral detection. Numerical simulation. The ERIs of 14 kinds of meta-units are simulated by the Lumerical MODE Solutions. The period of meta-atoms were set as 500 nm. Considering the constraints of experimental conditions and period size, we set the minimum and maximum size constraints of the nanofins to be 50 nm and 450 nm, fixed it in the IPA solution for 1 minute at room temperature. Later, we used the atomic layer deposition (ALD) system to fill the exposed area with 230 nm TiO2. After this process, there will be a layer of 230 nm TiO2 on the top of the entire sample, we removed it by ion beam etching (IBE) in the next process. After removing the TiO2 on the top layer, we used reactive ion etching (RIE) to remove the resist. Finally, the TiO2 nanostructures with a high aspect ratio are obtained. Optical characterization. In order to verify the performance of ultra-broadband achromatic metalens and arbitrary dispersion control metalenses, we design two optical setups to characterize the focal length and imaging effect, respectively. Details of the optical experimental setup for characterizing the ultra-broadband achromatic metalens are shown in supplementary information.