We use an atomistic approach to study the electronic properties of monolayer and bilayer black phosphorus in the vicinity of a charged defect. In particular, we combine screened defect potentials obtained from first-principles linear response theory with large-scale tight-binding simulations to calculate the wavefunctions and energies of bound acceptor and donor states. As a consequence of the anisotropic band structure, the defect states in these systems form distorted hydrogenic orbitals with a different ordering than in isotropic materials. For the monolayer, we study the dependence of the binding energies of charged adsorbates on the defect height and the dielectric constant of a substrate in an experimental setup. We also compare our results to an anisotropic effective mass model and find quantitative and qualitative differences when the charged defect is close to the black phosphorus or when the screening from the substrate is weak. For the bilayer, we compare results for charged adsorbates and charged intercalants and find that intercalants induce more prominent secondary peaks in the local density of states because they interact strongly with electronic states on both layers. These new insights can be directly tested in scanning tunneling spectroscopy measurements and enable a detailed understanding of the role of Coulomb impurities in electronic devices. Black phosphorus (BP) is a semiconductor consisting of two-dimensional (2D) layers held together by van der Waals interactions. Its intrinsic properties, such as the direct band gap, a highly anisotropic electronic dispersion near the band extrema A detailed understanding of defects in monolayer and few-layer BP is crucial for improving devices. Defects can alter the material in a variety of ways, such as carrier doping, modifying carrier lifetimes and tuning the optical spectrum Valuable insights into the properties of charged defects in 2D materials can be obtained from simulations. However, modelling such defects is highly challenging because the slow decay of the screened defect potential requires the use of extremely large supercells containing thousands of atoms. As a consequence, standard first-principles techniques, such as density-functional theory (DFT), become unfeasible for these systems. To overcome these limitations of atomistic approaches, electronic continuum theories based on the effective mass approximation are often used In this paper, we carry out atomistic tight-binding calculations to study the properties of charged defects in monolayer and bilayer BP. In the presence of a charged defect, bound states are formed with energies that lie in the band gap A top view of the atomic structure of the BP monolayer is shown in Fig. The total defect potential V ± mono experienced by an electron localized in one of the sublayers (with V + mono referring to the top sublayer and V - mono referring to the bottom one) can be expressed as the sum of the unscreened defect potential V ± 0 and the induced potential V ± ind . The unscreened defect potential is given by where v q = 2π/q is the 2D Fourier transform of the Coulomb potential, h s = 2.013 Å is the thickness of the monolayer defined as the distance between the two sublayers and bg = (1 + sub )/2 is the average dielectric constant of the substrate beneath and the vacuum above the monolayer. The induced potential can be calculated from the induced electron density δn ind (q). To calculate the induced density, we employ the approach that was previously used for transition-metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) Within linear response theory, the induced density can be expressed as where V 0 (q) = v q e -q(d+ hs 2 ) /ε bg is the unscreened defect potential in the effective sheet and χ(q) denotes the interacting response function which can be expressed in terms of the non-interacting response function χ 0 (q) as where χ 0 (q) is obtained from first-principles calculations (see discussion below). Note that we have assumed isotropic screening in the above. This is justified by our explicit first-principles calculations and in agreement with recent experiments Combining Eqs. ( 1 -v q χ 0 (q)e -q( hs 2 ± hs 2 ) ε bg -v q χ 0 (q)(1 -e -q( hs 2 ± hs 2 ) ) -1 V ± 0 (q). ( Finally, the screened defect potential in real space can be calculated where J 0 is the zeroth Bessel function of the second kind. To evaluate the screened defect potential, we determine χ 0 (q) using the first-principles random-phase approximation (RPA). For this, we first calculate Kohn-Sham wavefunctions {|φ nk } and energies {E nk } of all occupied states and 1490 unoccupied states on a 13 × 13 k-point mesh for a defect-free BP monolayer using planewave pseudopotential density-functional theory (DFT) as implemented in the Quantum Espresso (v6.5) software package , Ω is the crystal volume (given by the unit cell volume times the number of k-points) and v tr (q) is the 3D Fourier transform of the slab-truncated Coulomb interaction The anisotropic 2D inverse dielectric function and the anisotropic non-interacting response function χ ani 0 (q) are then given by where L z = 18 Å is the distance between periodically repeated BP monolayers. We find that χ ani 0 (q) only varies by less than three percent as function of the azimuthal angle justifying our assumption of isotropic screening above. Finally, the isotropic effective response function χ 0 (q), which is used to calculate the screened defect potential in Eq. ( Next, we discuss the calculation of the screened defect potential in the BP bilayer. Again, we express this potential as the sum of an unscreened potential and an induced potential. The induced potential is obtained from the induced densities δn (l) ind (q) in the two monolayers, with l = 1, 2 denoting the monolayer. Again, we assume that these induced densities are located in the effective sheets located between the sublayers of each monolayer, indicated by the red dashed lines in the inset of Fig. where h = 5.24 Å is the distance between the two effective sheets and V (l) 0 is the unscreened defect potential experienced by the effective sheets. The total potential is then given by where V (l),± 0 (q) is the unscreened defect potential (with ± denoting the two sublayers of monolayer l), z l denotes the z-coordinate of the effective sheet associated with monolayer l and h ± l is the z-coordinate of the top (+) or bottom (-) sublayer of monolayer l. To determine χ0 (q), we compare the screened potential between two charges located in the same effective sheet from our screening model, where V (l) 0 = v q e -qh(l-1) , to the result of a first-principles calculation. According to Eq. ( To calculate this potential from first principles, we follow the same steps as in the monolayer case 1 to determine ε -1 2D (q) for the bilayer. Solving ε -1 2D (q)v q = V scr (q) 1 For the DFT calculations, ONCV pseudopotentials for phosphorus are used, but we instead use a plane-wave cutoff of 90 Ry, an out-of-plane periodicity of 20 Å, and a 13 × 13 k-grid. Then for Eq. 10 we use a cutoff of 11 Ry and include approximately 1200 states. for χ-1 0 (q) then yields Figures In addition to adsorbates, we also model charged defects that are intercalated between the two monolayers of bilayer BP. In particular, we consider a charge placed equidistant from two P atoms in the top layer and two P atoms in the bottom layer, see Fig. To study the behaviour of electrons in the presence of a charged defect, we use the tight-binding model of Rudenko et al. Next, the screened defect potential is included as an additional on-site potential in the tight-binding Hamiltonian. To describe the slow decay of the screened defect potential, a 60 × 60 supercell is used containing 14,400 P atoms for the monolayer and 28,800 P atoms in the We compare the results of our atomistic calculations to a variational calculation based on the effective mass approximation. In this method, the following ansatz is made for the most strongly bound defect state where r = (x, y) and α, β are parameters that describe the decay of the defect state. Note that this form of the wavefunction does not describe the sublayer structure of the BP monolayer. To enable a quantitative comparison between the binding energies of defect states obtained from the atomistic calculations and the effective mass approach, the position of the plane in which the wavefunction in Eq. ( The expectation value of the effective mass Hamiltonian is then given by V def (r) = e 2 4πε 0 dq J 0 (qr)e -qd where V def is the defect potential. Figure Figure This failure of the effective mass approximation can be understood by analyzing the projection of the defect state onto bulk monolayer states. As discussed above (see Fig. To quantitatively assess the validity of the effective mass approximation, we calculate which measures the importance of deviations from a parabolic dispersion for the defect state binding energies. In this equation, nk|Ψ 1s denotes the projection of the most strongly bound 1s defect state (from the atomistic calculation) onto the pristine monolayer state |nk (where the band index n refers to the highest valence band for acceptor states and the lowest conduction band for donor states). Also, k denotes a crystal momentum and E nk is the tight-binding band structure of the monolayer. Figures Figure Figure The defect wavefunctions of a negatively charged intercalant are shown in Fig. Figure In contrast, the binding energies of the other states (with only the exception of the 2s state which is also strongly localized) are less sensitive to the defect height as their wavefunctions are much more delocalized. Again, the monolayer states behave similarly but their binding energies are about 0.5 eV larger than for the bilayer. Figures For the donor case, shown in Fig. The LDOS of charged intercalants are shown in Figs. The different electronic properties of charged adsorbates and charged intercalants in bilayer BP can be understood from an analysis of the band structure, see Fig. In this paper, we have used large-scale tight-binding simulations to study the electronic structure of monolayer and bilayer black phosphorus (BP) with charged defects. The screened potential induced by the defect is obtained from first-principles linear-response theory and decays slowly necessitating the use of large supercells containing thousands of atoms. The presence of the defect potential gives rise to the formation of bound states that resemble anisotropically distorted hydrogenic orbitals. We have studied the binding energies of these states as a function of the defect position and also of the dielectric constant of the substrate. In the monolayer, the binding energy of acceptor states is larger than that of donor states as a consequence of the different effective masses in the conduction and valence bands. We compare the results of our atomistic calculations to an effective mass model and find significant differences for small defect heights. When the defect is close to the BP layer, its wavefunction contains contributions from states in a large region around the Γ-point of the Brillouin zone of the pristine system and the bands in this region are not well described by an effective mass approximation. We have also computed the local density of states in the vicinity of the charged defects, which is directly accessible in scanning tunneling spectroscopy measurements. Finally, we have studied charged defects in bilayer BP and found that charged adsorbates behave similarly as in the monolayer (but with lower binding energies), while charged intercalants give rise to stronger additional peaks in the local density of states. In conclusion, our calculations provide a detailed understanding of the electronic properties of charged impurities in monolayer and bilayer black phosphorus, which will help realize potential device applications of these materials. 