We investigate the thermal Hall effect in a Kitaev-Heisenberg system, a model for Kitaev candidate α-RuCl3, in the presence of the coupling between spin and phonon arising from chlorine atoms' vibration. We observe that the coupling modifies the relative stability between different magnetic states under a magnetic field, especially stabilizing a canted zigzag antiferromagnetic state. Remarkably, the spin-phonon interaction has distinct effects on the thermal Hall conductivity in different magnetically ordered states. For the canted zigzag state, which is relevant to α-RuCl3, the spinphonon interaction enhances the energy gap that is induced by a magnetic field and suppresses the thermal Hall conductivity at low temperatures. Importantly, we find that the spin-phonon interaction destabilizes the quantized thermal Hall effect in the spin liquid state. Our results demonstrate a crucial role of phonon degrees of freedom to the thermal Hall effect in Kitaev materials. Introduction. Phonons play an essential role in shaping electronic and magnetic properties in materials Recently, a significant interplay between phonons and spins was observed in the Kitaev material α-RuCl 3 To gain insight into the novel magnetic behavior in α-RuCl 3 , various theoretical models were developed by using the density-functional theory (DFT) or fitting to inelastic neutron scattering spectra In this work, we develop a microscopic model with a spin-phonon interaction to study the thermal Hall conductivity in α-RuCl 3 . We consider the optical phonon, which originates from the vibration of the Cl-Cl bond (shown in Fig. Model Hamiltonian. The optical mode of the chlorine atom's motion in α-RuCl 3 is shown in Fig. , where d 0 is the distance at the equilibrium position, and the spin-phonon coupling g = -1 J(d0) ∂J(d) ∂d . In this case, the proposed extended-Kitaev-Heisenberg model Here, J and K are the nearest-neighbor Heisenberg and Kitaev couplings. ij γ denotes the nearest-neighbor γ bond, with γ = x, y, z. (α, β, γ) = (y, z, x), (z, x, y), and (x, y, z) for the x, y, and z bonds, respectively. We follow Ref. . ûij denotes the variation of the distance between two chlorine atoms, and ûij = d ij -d 0 . M and K are the mass of the chlorine atom and the elastic constant between chlorine atoms, respectively. Here, we assume that spin-phonon couplings for the Kitaev and Heisenberg interactions are the same. This assumption does not change our conclusions on the effect of the spin-phonon interaction in the canted zigzag state (see details in the supplementary material The ground state is obtained using the mean-field approach f BE ( nk ) is the Bose distribution function, and BZ denotes the Brillouin zone. Ω nk is the Berry curvature at the momentum k for the nth band. 2L is the number of bands, and N is the number of the magnetic unit cell, which is labeled as a dashed-rectangular in the inset of Fig. Results. Considering a recent experiment on α-RuCl 3 We now analyze the effect of the spin-phonon interaction on the magnetization M and the thermal Hall conductivity κ xy in the parameter region of the zigzag state that exists at zero field. If not stated otherwise, we set α = 0.65π and g L μ B |H| = 0.4A in this work. The results for other parameters are shown in the supplementary material To better visualize the change in κ xy /T at low temperatures, we plot κ xy /T in Figs. ) and plotted in Figs. Finally, we turn our attention to the spin-phonon interaction in the spin liquid state. We consider the pure Kitaev model coupled with phonons, which is given by Here, c i is the Majorana fermion operator at site i, and h is an effective magnetic field. We set K = 1, h = 0.3, and phonon frequency Ω = 1 in our calculations and use the second-order perturbation theory to study this model (see details in the supplementary material [54]). Figure The nonzero Chern number implies a quantized thermal Hall conductivity at low temperatures. However, when the thermal energy is close to or larger than the energy gap, the quantized thermal Hall effect disappears Summary. In this work, we studied the effect of the spin-phonon interaction on the magnetic ground state and the thermal Hall conductivity in the Kitaev-Heisenberg system. We observed that a large spinphonon interaction stabilizes the canted zigzag state under a magnetic field. Further, the spin-phonon interaction has distinct effects on the thermal Hall conductivity in different magnetic states. In the zigzag state, the spin-phonon interaction increases the energy gap and suppresses the low temperature thermal Hall conductivity. This effect is independent of parameters in the canted zigzag state for the Kitaev-Heisenberg model In this work, we consider optical phonons arising from the displacement of chlorine atoms. It would be important to study acoustic phonons, which involve the displacement of Ruthenium atoms, and examine how these phonons modify the magnetic properties in α-RuCl 3 .