We report the effects of low-temperature postannealing on the structural and superconducting properties of the recently discovered Ca-free double-layered cuprate, Sr2SrCu2O4+yF2-y. Although the as-synthesized sample prepared under high pressure has a tetragonal structure with a rock-salt-type blocking layer (the so-called T-phase), we found that the symmetry of the structure lowered to that of an orthorhombic system when annealed with CuF2. The structural refinements reveal that such a topochemical reaction leads not only to the removal of excess O 2-from the apical site but also to the intercalation of extra F -into the interstitial site. The orthorhombic phase exhibits bulk superconductivity at a critical temperature of 107 K, which is significantly higher than that of the T-phase (~50 K). Meanwhile, the T-phase turns into another structure possessing a fluorite-type blocking layer without apical fluorine (known as the T ́-phase) by annealing without CuF2. Density functional theory calculations show that the T ́-phase is more stable than the T-phase. This is the first report on the formation of a T ́-type double-layered cuprate. Furthermore, structural stability of the three phases of Sr2SrCu2O4+yF2-y is discussed in terms of lattice matching between the blocking and conducting layers. Cuprate superconductors, whose structure contains two-dimensional CuO2 layers, have maintained the highest superconducting critical temperature (Tc) under ambient pressures for more than 30 years since their discovery. The Ca-free cuprate Sr2SrCu2O4+yF2-y is a double-layered version of the known single-layered cuprate Sr2CuO2F2+ with Tc = 46 K. Herein, we elucidate the effects of two postannealing processes, namely, low-temperature annealing with and without a fluorinating agent, on Sr2SrCu2O4+yF2-y. For this purpose, we first examined the composition (y) dependence of the structural parameters and the critical temperature of the sample before annealing. Second, we investigated the evolution of the structure and superconductivity in the different postannealed samples and compared them with the results of the as-synthesized sample. Third, we conducted structural analyses on each sample using the Rietveld method based on density functional theory (DFT) structural optimization and molecular dynamics (MD) simulations. Finally, we discuss the structural stability of this material and compare its structural parameters with those of other single-and multilayered oxyfluoride cuprates. Polycrystalline Sr2SrCu2O4+yF2-y samples were prepared using an HP synthesis technique. As described in Ref. 5, to obtain the target phase predominantly, we added hydrogen to the starting composition using Sr(OH)2. The nominal composition, Sr2SrCu2O4.6F1.4H0.2 (y = 0.2, 0.4, and 0.6), was sintered at 1173 K for 1 h and at a pressure of 3.4 GPa. For the posttreatment, copper (II) difluoride (CuF2) was used as the fluorinating agent. The as-synthesized samples were powdered and pressed into pellets in a N2-filled glovebox. The pellet was sealed in a quartz tube with a CuF2 pellet. The typical weight ratio of the sample to CuF2 was 1:3. The ampoule was heated to 453 K and this temperature was maintained for 12 h. The annealing without CuF2 was performed in an evacuated quartz tube at 533-548 K for approximately 2 days. The obtained samples were characterized by powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) at a temperature of approximately 293 K with Cu-K radiation using a diffractometer (Rigaku, Ultima IV) equipped with a high-speed detector system (Rigaku, D/teX Ultra). Intensity (I) data were collected over the 5-80° range in 0.02° steps. The lattice constants of the samples with each y were calculated using the least-squares method. For the structure analysis data, we performed measurements over the 5-140° range in 0.01° steps. The crystallographic parameters of the fluorinated samples were refined by Rietveld analysis using BIOVIA Materials Studio (MS) Reflex software (version 2018 R2). The temperature (T) dependence of the magnetic susceptibilities () was measured using a SQUID magnetometer (Quantum Design, MPMS-XL) in an applied magnetic field (H) of 10 Oe. The sample was sealed in a plastic capsule, and these experiments were performed using both zerofield cooling (ZFC) and field cooling (FC) processes. Because the structure of the T-phase gradually changes with time, the XRD and -T measurements were carried out immediately after the synthesis. Figure Figure The topochemical fluorination of the as-synthesized sample, i.e., low-temperature annealing with CuF2, lowered its structural symmetry from tetragonal to orthorhombic, which led to the removal of excess O and the possible insertion of F. In the single-layered Sr2CuO2F2 case, Al-Mamouri et al. reported The critical structural difference between the fluorinated and as-synthesized samples is that, in the former, the F atom was inserted into the interstitial 8f site through fluorination. When this site was excluded from the refined structure, the blocking layer could be regarded as T-type. Conversely, when the 32p site, corresponding to the apical fluorine, was eliminated, and the 8f site was filled, the blocking layer could be regarded as a T ́-type structure. Therefore, it can be understood that the blocking layer of the fluorinated sample has a structure in which an F atom with Occ. = 0.25 was intercalated into the T-type blocking layer. The atomic displacement parameter, Uiso, was set to the same value for all atoms and converged to 0.025(1) Å 2 . The occupancies were fixed for all crystallographic sites. The Sr2-F1 distance was treated as a rigid body and fixed at the DFT-optimized value. Selected interatomic distances: dSr1-O1 = 2.627(2) Å, dSr2-O1 = 2.611(2) Å, dSr2-F1 = 2.535 Å, and dCu1-F1 = 2.391(2) Å. When the as-synthesized sample was annealed without CuF2, the crystal structure exhibited anisotropic lattice deformation while maintaining tetragonal symmetry. In particular, the a-axis length significantly increased to over 3.9 Å, as mentioned in Section 3.1. Such a long in-plane Cu-Cu distance is characteristic of the T ́-type blocking layer without F/O atoms at the apical site, as reported for T ́-Sr2CuO2F2 (a ~ 3.97 Å) We demonstrated that Sr2SrCu2O4+yF2-y exhibits three types of blocking layers: T-type, Fintercalated T-type, and T ́-type. Figure • T c = 30-60 K • high-pressure phase • Fmmm (orthorhombic) • T c = 107 K • stable in air • I4/mmm (tetragonal) • Non-superconducting • stable in air equivalent. Accordingly, the variation in the size of the anions and cations forming the blocking layer directly affects the Cu-O bonding state in the CuO2 layer. Based on the aforementioned considerations, we plotted the relationship between the in-plane Cu-Cu distance (dCu-Cu) and the radius ratio of the anion/cation in the blocking layer (rc/ra) in typical oxyfluoride cuprates, as depicted in Figure We studied various types of crystal structures and the evolution of superconductivity appearing in the Ca-free double-layered oxyfluoride cuprate, Sr2SrCu2O4+yF2-y. The results suggested that the carrier concentration of the as-synthesized sample (with the tetragonal T-phase) can be regulated in the overdoped region by varying the nominal y value. The topochemical fluorination resulted in the removal of excess apical O 2-, insertion of F -, and a remarkable enhancement of Tc to 107 K. We found that the fluorinated phase exhibited orthorhombic Fmmm symmetry, whose blocking layer formed a T-type structure where the F atom (Occ. = 0.25) was intercalated into the interstitial 8f site. Meanwhile, the low-temperature annealing without fluorinating agents altered the blocking layer to the T ́-phase with a significantly long a-axis length of ~3.95 Å. The structural stability of the oxyfluoride cuprates was organized from the viewpoint of lattice matching between the conducting and blocking layers. We found that the relation between the in-plane Cu-Cu distance and the anion/cation combination in the blocking layer is one of the key factors in determining the stability of the crystal structure. Powder X-ray diffraction data of the as-synthesized sample after two weeks at ambient pressure and in air. The main phase is indexed by body-centered tetragonal symmetry, as is the case with the fresh sample shown in Figure Because the structure and superconducting nature of the as-synthesized sample is unstable at the ambient pressure, we performed the resistivity measurements of the fluorinated sample. However, it is difficult to evaluate the transport properties quantitatively, because the lowtemperature fluorination was performed using the powdered samples to ensure good chemical homogeneity. In order to solidify the samples after fluorination, they were pressed at 180 °C under 3.4 GPa. The resistivity () data were measured between 5-300 K using the standard four-probe method. As depicted in Figure a The lattice constants were fixed to the experimentally obtained values.