The optical response of hierarchical materials is convoluted, which hinders their direct study and property control. Transparent wood (TW) is an emerging biocomposite in this category, which adds optical function to the structural properties of wood. Nano-and microscale inhomogeneities in composition, structure and at interfaces strongly affect light transmission and haze. While interface manipulation can tailor TW properties, the realization of optically clear wood requires detailed understanding of light-TW interaction mechanisms. Here we show how material scattering and absorption coefficients can be extracted from a combination of experimental spectroscopic measurements and a photon diffusion model. Contributions from different length scales can thus be deciphered and quantified. It is shown that forward scattering dominates haze in TW, primarily caused by refractive index mismatch between the wood substrate and the polymer phase. Rayleigh scattering from the wood cell wall and absorption from residual lignin have minor effects on transmittance, but the former affects haze. Results provide guidance for material design of transparent hierarchical composites towards desired optical functionality; we demonstrate experimentally how transmittance and haze of TW can be controlled over a broad range. Turbid media, from aerosols The scattering mechanisms are related to its hierarchical structure, where both micro-and nanoscale features are present. An additional complication is that the spatial structure of wood is neither periodic nor purely random. Thus the very concept of size-independent average quantities, such as scattering and absorption coefficients, may not be applicable to TW, while those are widely used in studying turbid air, Previously, attempts were made to describe light propagation in single wood fibers and paper by combining simulations, such as Monte Carlo, and ray-optics. Wood fibers are nearly cylindrical, irregular tubular cells, and consist of a cell wall (few microns in thickness) and an empty central lumen space (tens of microns in diameter), see The cell wall itself is highly porous and is made of aligned cellulose nano-fibrils in a lignin/hemicellulose matrix, manifesting a hierarchical wood structure. The interface between cell wall and lumen polymer will vary depending on the nature of the wood-polymer interaction. When wood-polymer adhesion is weak, the presence of micro-and nanoscale air gaps can be identified at the cell wall-lumen interface. This distribution is shown in Figure At nanoscale, nano-voids and the typical distance between cellulose nanofibrils inside the cell wall is much smaller than the wavelength, Figure So the narrow angle forward scattering due to RI mismatch is clearly not the only mechanism responsible for light-TW interaction. Depending on details of the native material structure and TW preparation conditions, the amount of all these scattering centers will vary from sample to sample. Experimentally measurable quantities of the photon budget, are illustrated in Figure First, BT was measured with a very small numerical aperture detector (Figure In Figure we show high resolution Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) images of typical interfaces for PMMA-and PLIMA-based TW biocomposites. This experimentally illustrates effects from differences in wood-polymer chemical interaction, as was schematically introduced in Figure To better understand linear dependence in Figure Vf. So, both the linear density of wood-polymer interfaces and of the cell wall material are proportional to Vf (Figure We developed an analytical model, which relates elementary constants of light-TW interaction to measurable photon budget quantities (cf. Figure for a sample with thickness [cm], where SR is specular reflectance, is the Rayleigh (random angle) scattering coefficient, is the forward scattering coefficient, is the absorption coefficient of the TW material, all in [cm -1 ] units. The sum of the three is the extinction coefficient μ for SA-PLIMA. Next, we note that the forward scattered photons in a narrow angle ( ) do not introduce sizable dispersions in the optical path. Then, another measurable quantity from the photon budget, total transmittance (TT), can be expressed as (see derivations in Supplementary, S2.6): where is the diffused transmittance for Rayleigh scattered photons. Finally, backscattering for small RI mismatch interfaces was estimated to be negligible ~ 10 -5 at a single interface. Even hundreds of such interfaces, corresponding to several mm thick TW samples used here, will not accumulate to a measurable signal (< 1%). Therefore, we can assume that the diffusely reflected light originates solely from the Rayleigh scattering: (4) Thus, there are three Equations ( where , , is a spatial probability density to find a photon at a point with coordinates (x, These are general expressions relating measurable photon budget quantities to elementary scattering and absorption constants in a material. This should allow us to quantify the relative contributions from mechanisms in Figure To apply this theory to TW, spectrally-resolved TT and total reflectance TR, which is a sum of SR and DR, were measured in the set-up shown in Figure An example of photon budget for a SA-PLIMA sample is shown in Figure Results, as averaged values for all sample thicknesses, are presented in Figure The origin of the minor absorption in TW samples can be assigned to residual lignin content. Its value was estimated to be low for the delignified template (≈ 2 wt. % vs. 24.9% lignin for native wood So, to obtain TW with optical characteristics close to pristine polymer or glass, such as low haze, the problem of wood-polymer RI mismatch should be addressed first. It can be accomplished by adding cellulose nanofibrils to a monomer, or by utilizing a two-component polymer, such as OSTE, The nanoporosity or heterogeneity of the cell wall, however, cannot be completely ignored. Although the absolute value of the Rayleigh (random) scattering coefficient appears to be 20-30 times lower than μsf, it is still an order of magnitude higher than for a pristine polymer. More importantly, this random angle scattering contributes to haze already after a single event, while multiple events are required for the forward scattering to achieve beam deviation >2.5 o , as per haze definition. Therefore, reduction of small-scale heterogeneities in the wood cell wall (nanopores, interfibril voids etc.) will further reduce haze towards an optically clear wood. The main factor influencing light scattering in transparent wood (TW) is forward scattering caused by refractive index (RI) mismatch between the cell wall and the polymer. In this investigation, we also explain in detail how light-TW interaction is influenced by sample thickness and volume fraction of cellulose, linear density of interfaces, interface compatibility (wood-polymer interface debond gaps), lignin content, and the RI of the polymer matrix. Photon budget measurements were combined with photon diffusion theory for repeated scattering events to estimate extinction coefficients, Rayleigh (random) scattering, forward scattering, and absorption coefficients of TW. The results show that the lignin residue causes only minor absorption. Rayleigh (random) scattering is low and mainly due to small scale defects in the wood cell wall phase in TW. Light scattering in TW is indeed dominated by forward scattering from RI mismatch between the cell wall and the polymer. If air voids, i.e. debonding air gaps between cell wall and polymer, are not minimized at the fabrication stage they will completely dominate scattering in TW. These quantitative results for TW are essential for understanding the light-TW interaction and provide a guideline to future TW fabrications strategies. For example, decreasing the lignin content in order to lower the light absorption, modifying the wood substrate in order to improve the compatibility between cell wall and polymer, finding a proper polymer with suitable RI to improve the transmittance, etc. The method applied in this study could also be used for extracting scattering and absorption coefficients for other types of turbid composites from photon budget measurements. Fabrication of TW: In the present work, TW with various thicknesses made from various densities of balsa wood were fabricated on the basis of our previous methods Then the delignified wood (DW) samples were washed with deionized water, ethanol, and finally acetone, each step repeated for 5 times. DW substrates were immersed in succinic anhydride (SA, ≥99%) under 130 ̊C for 30 minutes following our previous method. was prepared according to our previous method. Specular reflectance (SR) was measured using the setup shown in Figure Specular reflectance was obtained using the setup as shown in Fig. Total transmittance and diffused transmittance were measured using the setups as shown in Fig. Total reflectance was measured using the setup as shown in Fig. , over time, instead of space, gives spatial distribution along the interface: Total fraction of the transmitted photons can be obtained by integrating , over the time and space, which yields a simple and well-known result used previously exp ∆ / Quantities , , and can be measured by a streak-camera, a fiber placed close to the sample at different points, and by an integrating sphere, correspondingly. Then first term is a probability density to leave through interfaces. Through one interface we get: