We study the lattice dynamics effects on the phase stability and magnetocrystalline anisotropy (MCA) energy of CaCu5-type YCo5 at finite temperatures using first-principles calculations based on density functional theory (DFT). Harmonic lattice dynamics (HLD) calculations indicate that YCo5 with 56 full valance electrons is dynamically unstable and this instability can be cured by reducing the number of electrons (Ne). Crystal orbital Hamilton population analysis reveals that the observed phonon instability originates from the large population of antibonding states near the Fermi level, which is dominated by the Co atoms in the honeycomb layer. The antibonding state depopulates with decreasing Ne, resulting in stable phonons for hole-doped YCo5 with Ne ≤ 55. We then evaluate the temperature-dependent MCA energy using both HLD and ab initio molecular dynamics (AIMD) methods. For the pristine YCo5, we observe a very weak temperature decay of the MCA energy, indicating little effect of lattice dynamics. Also, the MCA energies evaluated with AIMD at all target temperatures are larger than that of the static hexagonal lattice at 0 K, which is mainly attributed to the structural distortion driven by soft phonon modes. In the hole-doped YCo5, where the distortion is suppressed, a considerable temperature decay in MCA energy is obtained both in HLD and AIMD methods, showing that lattice dynamics effects on MCA energy are non-negligible. The intermetallic compound CaCu 5 -type RECo 5 (RE= rare earth) has been extensively studied in the past, both experimentally and theoretically, due to its superior magnetic properties such as high Curie temperature, saturation magnetization, and strong coercivity A theoretical study of the temperature effect on MCA energy is crucial since permanent magnets are usually used in a high-temperature environment. An important physical factor affecting MAC at finite temperature is the thermal fluctuation of the spin moment. This effect has approximately been included in density functional theory (DFT) calculations with disordered local moment (DLM) approach Lattice dynamics is another important factor that can affect the MCA energy at finite temperature In this work, we theoretically investigate the lattice dynamics and its effect on the MCA energy of YCo 5-x at finite temperature to study the MCA energy originating from the itinerant states. By performing phonon calculations of YCo 5 within the harmonic approximation, we show that the experimentally-reported CaCu 5 structure is dynamically unstable. This phonon instability originates from the presence of large antibonding states near the Fermi level, which can be removed by reducing the number of electrons (N e ). We find that at least one electron needs to be removed from the system to stabilize phonons of YCo 5-x . For the hole-doped YCo 5-x , we then evaluate the lattice dynamics effect on the MCA energy from the difference of the vibrational free energies computed with different spin orientations. In the high-temperature region, the phonon contribution to the MCA energy becomes significant and comparable to the MCA energy at 0 K obtained from DFT calculation. To evaluate the lattice dynamics effect in the undoped YCo 5 , we also perform ab initio molecular dynamics (AIMD) simulations and find that the MCA energy hardly changes with increasing temperature. We attribute this weak temperature dependence mainly to structural distortion. The structure of this paper is organized as follows. In the next section, we describe our theoretical methods in detail. The MCA energy both at 0 K and finite temperatures, and computational details are described in Secs. II A, II B, and II C, respectively. In Sec. III, we show our main results. The dynamical instability of the CaCu 5 -type YCo 5 with 56 full valance electrons and the microscopic origin of stabilization by reducing N e , or hole-doping, are discussed in Sec. III A. In Sec. III B, we evaluate the MCA energy both at 0 K and finite temperatures using different approaches and discuss the role of lattice dynamics in the temperature dependence of the MCA energy. Finally, we summarize this study in Sec. IV. We perform a noncollinear spin-orbit interaction calculation using the well-known force theorem where E DFT ⊥ and E DFT are the sum of the occupied Kohn-Sham eigenenergies with the magnetic moment (m) being aligned along the hard ([100] direction, m ⊥ c) and easy ([001] direction, m c) axes, respectively. The positive K DFT u indicates that the energetically favorable m is parallel to the crystallographic c-axis. In order to understand the atomic site-dependent MCA energy, we carry out the second-order perturbation calculation. In the tight-binding regime, the Hamiltonian for spin-obit coupling is given by the sum of the contributions from each atomic site, H SO = i ξ i L i • S i , where L i (S i ) is the single-electron angular (spin) momentum operator, and ξ i is the spin-orbit coupling constant of atom i. Compared with 3d bandwidth, ξ i (ξ Co = 69.4 meV) is relatively small, which can be treated as a perturbation term. The second-order perturbation energy is expressed as where |knσ is the unperturbed state with energy (0) knσ . k, n, and σ represent the wave vector, band index, and spin, respectively. The index "occ" and "unocc" means the sum over the occupied and unoccupied states. |knσ can be expanded as a sum of atomic orbitals, |knσ = iμ c kn iμσ |iμσ , where the atomic orbitals labeled as μ and the coefficient c kn iμσ can be obtained by DFT calculations. Therefore, the site-dependent second-order contribution to the total energy with different spin processes and atomic orbitals can be calculated using first-principles calculations. The MCA energy at 0 K, K PT u , within the second-order perturbation is defined as , where E (2) ) are total energies calculated by Eq. ( The first two terms in Eq. ( The MCA energy at finite temperatures, K u , can be evaluated by the difference of Helmholtz free energies computed with two different spin orientations, which is defined as where V is the volume of YCo 5 . According to adiabatic approximation, K u is considered as the sum of the following terms where K DFT u (V 0 ) is the MCA energy obtained from the DFT calculation with the optimized volume V 0 , K el u (V 0 , T ) and K phon u (V 0 , T ) represent the electronic and vibrational contribution to K u , respectively. K mag u (V 0 , T ) is the magnon contribution, which is not considered in the current study. K el u for the present system is very small and thus can be ignored. We roughly evaluated the thermal expansion term, , using the measured temperature-dependent lattice constants of YCo 5 from Ref. The vibrational MCA energy K phon u is computed from the difference between the vibrational free energies at different magnetic orientations. In the HA, it becomes where β = (k B T ) -1 is the inverse temperature with k B being the Boltzmann constant, and Z 0,m is the partition function of the harmonic oscillator at the magnetic state m defined as with being the reduced Planck constant. ω qν,m is the harmonic phonon frequency of the νth branch at crystal momentum q in the magnetic state m, which can be obtained by diagonalizing the dynamical matrix constructed from the secondorder interatomic force constants (IFCs) calculated in the same magnetic state m. If the difference of ∆ω qν = ω qν,⊥ω qν, is small, Eq. ( where n(ω) = (e β ω -1) -1 is the Bose-Einstein distribution function. Since ∆ω qν is very small in many cases, Eq. ( where K DFT u ({R i } s ) is the MCA energy computed at the sth structure snapshot {R i } s sampled from the AIMD trajectory at the target temperature T , and N is the number of structures sampled at each T . This approach can be used even for the systems where an unstable phonon mode (ω 2 qν < 0) exits. Besides, contributions from the anharmonic terms of the potential energy surface and the effect of structural distortion are included automatically. First-principle calculations in this study were performed by using the projector augmented wave (PAW) method The harmonic phonon calculations were conducted by using the finite-displacement method, as implemented in - CaCu 5 -type YCo 5 displays a layered hexagonal structure (space group: P 6/mmm) shown in Fig. The harmonic phonon dispersion curves of the CaCu 5 -type YCo 5 are shown in Fig. The soft modes at the L point and M point involve the inplane displacements of Co 2c atoms accompanied by relatively small displacements of other atoms, as shown in Fig. The large antibonding population at the Fermi level may be reduced by hole doping, which is expected to improve the stability of the CaCu 5 structure. To see the effect of hole doping, we gradually reduced the number of valence electrons, N e , from the original value of the pristine YCo 5 (N e = 56) and computed the -COHP values for the relevant Co 2c -Co 2c bond. As shown in Fig. On the basis of the above analyses, we now discuss possible scenarios explaining the inconsistency between our computational result and experiments about the stability of the CaCu 5 -type YCo 5 . First, since the detailed structure analyses using XRD measurement have been reported only at room temperature so far, there could be a lower-symmetry phase of pristine YCo 5 in the low-temperature region which is left to be discovered. Should there be a structural phase transition, it would be second-order because no anomaly has been observed in the lattice parameters down to 5 K It is interesting to see that, in the case of N e = 56, the K u MD values were larger than K DFT u = 0.383 meV/f.u. both in low-and high-temperature ranges. Also, the K u MD value is almost temperature independent. To obtain deeper insights into the mechanism behind them, we calculated the K DFT u value as a function of the normal coordinate amplitude Q L of the L-point soft mode. As shown in Fig. where P T (Q L ) is the probability distribution of Q L at temperature T . In the low-temperature region, P T (Q L ) has a peak around either side of the double-well minima, where K DFT u (Q L ) becomes ∼1.0 meV/f.u. This value is in good agreement with K u MD at 10 K. In the high-temperature limit, P T (Q L ) has a peak around Q L = 0, i.e., Q L ≈ 0, but the variance of the distribution Q 2 L becomes large. Thus, the K u MD value became larger than We note that, for N e = 55 and 54, the sign of L is negative (see Fig. We also show K u MD+TE = K u MD + K TE u (see Fig. Figure To summarize, we theoretically studied the structural stability and lattice dynamics effects on the MCA energy for pristine and hole-doped YCo 5 using first-principles methods based on DFT. The CaCu 5 -type (P 6/mmm) structure of pristine YCo 5 is predicted to be dynamically unstable at 0 K, and the soft phonon modes appear at L and M points. This phonon instability originates from the large population of antibonding states near the Fermi level which is formed by the nearest Co atoms in the honeycomb layer. We demonstrated that the phonon instability can be removed by hole doping, 