Improved approach to obtain atmospheric temperature from cosmic-ray data by introducing a pair of detection stations and angular information • Results show a significant retrieval improvement over earlier methods with high accuracy up to 20 km of height • The use of affordable and small-scale cosmic-ray telescopes is suggested as a possible complement to satellite temperature measurements Since its discovery in 1912, cosmic-ray radiation has offered an exceptional way to observe the world around us from different points of view. Cosmic rays (c.r.) consist of high energy particles whose origin lies in outer space, traveling at nearly the speed of light. Chiefly composed of charged particles (protons), they are continuously reaching the Earth from all directions. As soon as this radiation arrives at our planet, it stumbles upon two shields: the Earth's magnetic field and the atmosphere. The first one deflects the less energetic particles preventing them from entering the atmosphere. However, if they are able to pass this barrier they will eventually collide with the atmospheric nuclei, thus starting a cascade of secondary particles. A chain reaction gets underway, generating more secondary particles until they reach the ground. This cascade (often dubbed "air shower") encompasses common subatomic particles such as protons, neutrons, pi-ons, kaons, muons, electrons, positrons, gamma-rays and neutrinos. Muons (μ +/-), highly penetrating lepton-particles similar to electrons but heavier, are among the most numerous secondary particles at sea level and they can be measured using detectors on the surface and even at great underground depths of several hundred meters. This radiation traverses long distances in the atmosphere, analogously to what X-rays do in low-Z materials, providing integrated information about its internal structure (equivalently, its mass density as a function of depth). The essential aspects of the process can be found, for instance, in L. I. Major factors influencing c.r. rates at ground are surface pressure and the temperature profile of the atmosphere The well-established aforementioned phenomena are known as the "negative effect" (dominant at ground level) and the "positive effect" (dominant in underground stations). Since the temperature profile of the atmosphere has a complex behavior, and the impact on c.r. rates is accumulative along the particles trajectories, it is customary to describe these effects through the so-called temperature coefficients, W T (h, θ, E th ). They are given as a function of the atmospheric height (h), depending on the angle of incidence (θ) and the threshold energy (E th ) of the muons (equivalently, the underground depth at which observations are made, see Figure The temperature coefficients (given in units of %/K atm) indicate how much rates at observation level X vary for each degree of temperature change at the specific atmospheric depth h. The coefficients are the sum of two terms: the positive effect related to mesons and the negative effect associated with muons.The sign of the coefficient gives information about the net value of the total effect for each for each layer, which depends ) at several threshold energies corresponding to different underground depths Coefficients for vertical muons observed at ground, tagged respectively by passage or absorption in 10 cm-lead and labelled as "hard" (E th = 0.4 GeV) and "soft" (E < 0.4 GeV) are shown by continuous lines (black and red, respectively). The latter have been obtained from (L. I. Therefore, an analogy can be drawn between satellite and cosmic-ray measurements when targeting atmospheric temperature retrieval. Weather satellites employ the observations of electromagnetic radiations emitted by the atmosphere, that depend on its state. Temperature-dependent weighting functions, based on competing emission and absorption processes, need to be established before-hand for each atmospheric layer. Besides, they depend on the energy of the measured radiation One of the first attempts to estimate the atmospheric temperature profile using c.r. measurements with multiple detectors was carried out by Clearly one early limitation was detector complexity, as measurements were done over large areas by resorting to large scintillator tiles. However, multi-directional muon detectors (sometimes called hodoscopes) are nowadays common-place and available as part of the Global Muon Detector Network (GMDN) Even for a perfect detector, cosmic-ray rates are subject to variations of diverse origins: those due to changes in the solar activity and in the atmosphere thermodynamic state are the most important. The former act as a potential systematic bias to the atmospheric temperature estimate, and in the remainder of this work we will assume implicitly that they can be isolated and eliminated. Although a natural way to perform this task is through the complementary use of neutron detectors (highly insensitive to atmospheric temperature variations), underground muon detectors (as the one proposed in text) may be sufficient, as solar and interplanetary events have less influence at underground depths. This occurs because interplanetary phenomena affect low-energy primary cosmic rays (in the range of a few MeV and GeV), which in turn are responsible for originating the low-energy secondary muons at sea level Here ∆R/R 0 is the relative variation of c.r. rates at zenith angle θ and for a muon threshold energy E th , with R 0 representing the average rate over a particular period of time; W T (E th , θ, h i ) are the temperature coefficients, specific for a certain atmospheric layer i at height (pressure) h i ; ∆T i = T i -T i,0 represent the temperature variations of a layer with respect to its mean value T i,0 ; ∆h i = h i-1 -h i refers to the layer thickness (in units of pressure). 3 Methods For a mid-latitude location around 40 • , the intensity of vertical muons at ground is typically I g ≈ 70 m -2 s -1 sr -1 In the case of underground measurements, where I u = 2.15 × 10 -6 cm -2 s -1 sr -1 , η=1.93 and X 0 =1155 mwe In addition, the threshold energy as a function of X is given by where ∼ 500 GeV and b ∼ 2.5×10 5 g/cm 2 for muons in rock. For the simulation of underground muons we have assumed in the following an isotropic distribution impinging on a homogeneous soil slab, with rates and threshold energies for each angle obtained from eqs. 2 and 3. For a given detector with a fixed detection area (A), the number of counts (N ) measured over a period of time (∆t) and solid angle (∆Ω) is: and, for simplicity, the detection efficiency and acceptance have been assumed to be angleindependent and close to 1. The statistical fluctuations associated to N are then given by √ N . On account of that, the variations of c.r. rates can be re-expressed as: where (∆R/R 0 ) obs are the experimental c.r. rate variations, (∆R/R 0 ) T the changes due to the temperature effect (Eq. 1), and (∆R/R 0 ) err the associated statistical fluctuations of the measurement. Specially underground, the detector area and measuring time become critical variables. Based on a preliminary analysis, and practical considerations, we set for a detector area of 4 m 2 , and a time interval of 6 h, although the impact of these choices in our analysis is evaluated at the end of the work. In sum, the procedure followed for the simulation of c.r. variations over a specific period of time can be sketched as: • For underground detectors, c.r. intensity and threshold energy are estimated using Eq. 2 and 3, respectively, for a certain slab thickness over the detector (depth). The approximation of • Variations in c.r. rates due to the temperature effect are calculated with Eq. 1 using the temperature time series from ERA5 and the temperature coefficients for the corresponding energy, E th , and angle, θ (linearly interpolated when needed). A more detailed discussion of the estimation of these coefficients is presented below in Section 3.3. • Poisson noise with a mean value of N was added. Vertical profiles of atmospheric temperatures were retrieved from ECMWF reanalysis, using the ERA5 dataset which offers 37 isobaric levels The distributions of temperature coefficients (W T ) have been calculated before by several authors. Dorman supplied the most extensive calculations for a wide variety of threshold energies and zenith angles (L. The inverse problem of estimating the vertical distribution of atmospheric temperature from c.r. observations will be performed in this work through a simple linear regression. Thus, the temperature at the i-th layer of the atmosphere can be estimated from the c.r. rate variations as: where c jki are the coefficients of the least squares minimization and ∆R R0 (E th,jk , θ j ) k are the relative variations of c.r. rates for a certain detector station k (if several assumed) and angular bin j, with the threshold energy taken to be different for each station and angular bin (for stations detecting soft muons the threshold energy must be understood as a maximum energy). Rates have been simulated according to the procedure described in subsection 3.1. It must be noted before the start that, to date, various underground experiments have attempted to retrieve the temperature of the stratosphere from c.r. data, a particularly attractive possibility as the underground component is strongly influenced by the temperature of the upper atmospheric layers The above facts highlight the main limitations of a single-channel (single-angle) analysis, therefore an alternative approach to the inversion of cosmic-ray data is proposed in this work, based on eq. 6. First, three detector stations of small area are considered (two could be indeed part of the same one, sitting at ground level, devoted to hard and soft muon reconstruction), all around 2×2 m 2 in size, following The root-mean-square error for each layer i (RMSE i ) is introduced in order to quantify the deviations of the estimated values from the real ones, and used hereafter: where Ti is the estimated (retrieved) temperature, T i the corresponding temperature data from ERA5, and the l index runs in the temporal data series up to the number of measurements n t . Similarly, the intrinsic time spread of the layer is defined as the standard deviation from its mean value T i,0 : 4 Results In order to compare with previous studies, we estimate the temperature of the 37 available pressure levels using eq. 6 for j=1, i.e., single-channel (only vertical direction, θ = 0-10 • ) and k =1-3 stations. Expression 6 becomes: Figure The temperature estimate from the inversion of underground rates is now shown in Figure In all three analyses, a peak around the tropopause region is noticeable. Here the estimates are generally poor because the variations of temperatures in this part of the atmosphere are strongly anti-correlated with the surface variations, whose contribution to the observed rates is dominant. In addition, the temperatures of the upper stratosphere (< 50 hPa) are also particularly difficult to capture. The reason is that this region corresponds to few percent of the total atmospheric mass. So unless the temperature coefficients would peak at that specific region and become essentially zero in the rest of the atmosphere, the effect of the remaining layers will always be dominant (i.e. they will have more weight in eq. 6). Finally, Figure As muon stations can be easily built nowadays with a high angular resolution of the order of a degree, and given the strong dependence of atmospheric weights with zenith angle, a vast amount of additional information can be made in principle available to the inverse problem (eq. 6). For simplicity, we chose to bin the zenith angle in 10 degreesteps (channels) ranging from 0 • to 70 • . Clearly, there must exist more optimal ways to use the angular information, ideally keeping a reasonable statistics for each angular channel for each depth and detector area considered. Realistically, an angle-averaged W T for each channel should be used too. The straightforward binning and linear regression model chosen here aims at merely illustrating the potential (and intrinsic limits) of combining angular information with an optimal depth, hinting at which depth that is, and for which detector size. First of all, the results for muons reconstructed in the ground station (tagged as before as hard (E > 0.4 GeV) and soft (E < 0.4 GeV)) are shown in Figures Figure going from positive to negative values in the tropopause region. This can be used beneficially in the regression to minimize the correlation/anti-correlation effects in the tropospheretropopause-stratosphere regions. At the same time, the relatively shallow depth of the station is compatible with a moderate statistical noise in counting, even for angles far from the vertical. The combined analysis of the different muon components/stations is shown in Figure At first glance, the optimum depth derived from this analysis would seem to be in agreement with that chosen in the three-station/single-channel simulation of The grey dashed line represents the intrinsic spread of the temperatures for each atmospheric layer. Within the relatively simple inversion algorithm proposed in this work, the width of the optimal-depth plateau in Figure Once the existence of an optimal depth-plateau has been established, it is important to understand how the performance of the inversion algorithm depends on the size of the detection area and the presence of systematic errors in particle counting (that we have simulated getting random samples from a Gaussian distribution with the width being a certain percentage of the average rate and subsequently adding them to the data series). To make the latter more realistic, we follow the typical procedure of adding extra noise to the data in different levels (low, medium, and high) to analyze the performance of the technique. It was observed that larger areas present just marginal gains compared to a 4 m 2 detector and, at the same time, the performance of the proposed configuration deteriorates severely above 0.3% systematic variations (see Figures Results presented here are difficult to interpret from an atmospheric physics perspective, so in order to get a better grasp of how the minimization process works, a close examination of what we define here as "combined temperature coefficients" will show to be useful. For that we rewrite equation 6 taking into account expression 1: Rearranging the terms for the same pressure level p we obtain: from where we define the combined temperature coefficient as: When solving the inverse problem for the temperature of a certain pressure layer, one may expect that the coefficients c jki of the regression should in principle have values such that in eq. 11 the combined coefficients are able to enhance the p-term of the same temperature layer (i), minimizing the contribution from the rest. As the shapes of the temperature coefficients are not flexible enough to accommodate this condition for any arbitrary layer, the correlation between atmospheric layers becomes an essential ingredient. Figure The purpose of the present study was to determine the best configuration of a monitoring station integrated by cosmic-ray telescopes. One of the most significant findings to emerge from this study is the possibility to retrieve the temperature of the atmosphere from the surface with good accuracy up to a considerable height (∼ 20 km). An implication of this is that atmospheric muon detectors can be used in scientific research beyond the field of astrophysics. Returning to the question posed at the beginning of this paper, it is now possible to state that multi-directional telescopes can enhance the estimate of atmospheric temperatures. Our results have shown that one can achieve a high degree of accuracy with error margins between 0.8 and 2.2 K that could be improved in practice applying more advanced statistical techniques such as those employed in satellite observations On the other hand, the current work was limited by the use of simulated c.r. data and further work needs to be done in the area of experimentation to evaluate the actual limits of the estimates. In spite of this, our findings establish several courses of action for future research. A good line for future work would be to contrast the retrieved temperatures from real cosmic-ray data against temperature data from balloon measurements. Additionally, we have found evidence of an optimal depth to place one of the detectors. Depths of 19-20 m seem feasible and affordable, with no need to go deep into a mountain as is done for other c.r. research. Such an underground station could be easily located in dams, tunnels or subway stations for instance. Moreover, continuous measurements of vertical temperature provide in this way would no doubt complement satellite measurements, as this technology would be much more affordable and easy to assemble and maintain.