We propose a three-step periodic drive protocol to engineer two-dimensional (2D) Floquet quadrupole superconductors and three-dimensional (3D) Floquet octupole superconductors hosting zero-dimensional Majorana corner modes (MCMs), based on unconventional d-wave superconductivity. Remarkably, the driven system conceives four phases with only 0 MCMs, no MCMs, only anomalous π MCMs, and both regular 0 and anomalous π MCMs. To circumvent the subtle issue of characterizing 0 and π MCMs separately, we employ the periodized evolution operator to architect the dynamical invariants, namely quadrupole and octupole motion in 2D and 3D, respectively, that can distinguish different higher order topological phases unambiguously. Our study paves the way for the realization of dynamical quadrupolar and octupolar topological superconductors. Topological superconductors (TSCs) hosting Majorana zero modes (MZMs) have been the corner stone for the last two decades due to their potential application in topological quantum computations utilising non-Abelian statistics To this end, we focus on the periodically driven quantum systems, exhibiting non-trivial properties compared to their static counterparts such as dynamical localization Till date, there exist a very few proposals, based on step-like protocol, to realize the FHOTI phase hosting both 0-and anomalous π-mode In this manuscript, we employ a periodic step-drive protocol to systematically formulate the 2D quadrupolar Floquet second-order TSC (FSOTSC) and the 3D octupolar Floquet third-order TSC (FTOTSC), based on unconventional d-wave superconductor. This driving protocol allows us to realize and characterize both the 0and π-Majorana corner modes (MCMs), and serves as the primary motivation of the current work. We extensively study the dynamical octupolar motion in 3D, which adds significant merit to the problem we are dealing with. The remainder of the article is organized as follows. We discuss the generation of anomalous Majorana modes in Sec. II. We topologically characterize the 2D FSOTSC and 3D FTOTSC phase using dynamical quadrupole moment and dynamical octupole moment, respectively in Sec. III. Finally, we summarize and conclude our paper in Sec. IV. Considering the d-wave superconductor, we prescribe the following three-step drive protocol to foster the 2D FSOTSC and 3D FTOTSC Here, J i h i,dD (k) denotes the Hamiltonian of the system at the i th step in d-dimension (dD); while J 1 and J 2 carry the dimensions of energy. We define the dimensionless parameters (J 1 , J 2 ) = (J 1 T, J 2 T ) where, T (Ω = 2π/T ) represents the time-period (frequency) of the drive. We set = c = 1. In particular, to generate a 2D FSOTSC, we choose h Here, dD (k) and Λ dD (k) encapsulate all the hoppings and spin-orbit coupling terms in dD, respectively. In 2D, we use the d x 2 -y 2 -pairing, given by ∆ 2D (k) The Floquet operator U (k, T ), following the timeordered (TO) notation, is given as [84] Using the eigenvalue equation for U dD (k, T ): (k) . We invoke the band-gap closing across E(k) = 0, ±π at (k x , k y ) = (0, 0) or (π, π) for 2D and at (k x , k y , k z ) = (0, 0, 0) or (π, π, π) for 3D to acquire the generalized topological phase boundary akin to our driving protocol in ddimension as where, n ∈ Z. We show the topological phase diagram in the J 1 -J 2 plane for 2D (3D) in Fig. Having perceived the problem analytically, we anchor our findings with numerical results. The 2D FSOTSC and 3D FTOTSC can be identified by the presence of zero-dimensional (0D) MCMs for both regular and anomalous modes while diagonalizing the Floquet operator (Eq. ( For the anomalous Floquet phase, the main challenge is to topologically characterize both the 0-and π-MCMs distinctively. We first pursue the appropriate Wannier sector polarization for 2D FSOTSC and 3D FTOTSC, employing nested Wilson loop techniques phase hosting both 0 and π-mode in R4. Inadequacy of the topological invariant, computed from the quasi-static Floquet operator, motivates us to hunt for a dynamical topological invariant (both in 2D and 3D) that cannot only extricate R2 from R4 but also unmistakably yields distinct signatures of 0 and π-modes. We consider the full time evolution operator U dD (k, t), embodying an anomalous periodized part U dD, (k, t) and a normal quasi-static part [U (k, T )] t/T , such that here, the subscript denotes the 0 and π-gap and enables us to keep track of the origin of the MCMs in these quasi-energies. We use the periodized evolution operator (PEO) U dD, (k, t) = U dD (k, t) [U dD (k, T )] -t/T to calculate the pertinent topological invariant. However, unlike U dD (k, T ) the PEO does not possess any conventional band physics and can be gapless at certain timeinstants In order to capture the non-triviality of the anomalous Floquet modes, we define the dynamical mean polarization as relative motion of a particle at two instants here, x(0) = x = im ĉ † im |0 e -i∆xxi 0| ĉim exemplify the static polarization ) and ĉ's being the quasiparticle creation operators. The eigenvalue of x(t) is related to the dynamical Wilson loop operator W x, ,k (t) in the following way: , and the unit vector along p th direction is represented by e p . From the eigenvalue equation for W x, ,k (t) : W x, ,k (t) |ν x, ,μ (k, t) = e -2πiνx, ,μ (k j =x ,t) |ν x, ,μ (k, t) , one obtains the dynamical first-order branches ν x, ,μ (k j =x , t). Here, ν x, ,μ (k j =x , t) refers to a relative motion of a particle along x-direction with respect to . This dynamical first-order branches can characterize anomalous Floquet first-order topological phase. In order to conceive the higher-order moments, one needs to incorporate the nested structure while constructing the Wilson loop, as executed for the static systems with appropriate Q p,k To accommodate the FHOTSC phase, the eigenvalues ν x, ,μ (k j =x , t) remain gapped during the full cycle t ∈ [0, T ] and can be grouped into two separable sets ±ν x, . The dynamical second-order polarization is computed by evaluating a relative motion of particle along y-direction by projecting onto the set ±ν x, with projector P ±νx, (t) [84]: ŷ±νx, (t) = P ±νx, (t) ŷ(t)P ±νx, (t). Similar to the earlier case, we can obtain dynamical first-order nested Wilson loop operator W ±νx, y, ,k (t) from ŷ±νx, (t): ŷ±νx, (t) where γ's are constituted from |ν x, ,μ (k, t) according the projection rule The dynamical second-order quadrupolar branches ν ±νx, y, ,μ (k j =y , t) can be obtained from the eigenvalue equation : This quadrupolar branches can topologically characterize the anomalous 2D FSOTSC, which we illustrate in Fig. Proceeding further, the octupolar phase guarantees gapped quadrupolar branches during time t ∈ [0, T ] and thus, can be grouped into two dissociable sets ±ν ±νx, y, The dynamical third-order polarization can be portrayed as the relative motion of particle along the remaining z-direction using the projector P ±ν where η's are comprised from |ν x, ,μ (k, t) and y, ,μ (t) for R1, R2, R3, and R4 (see Fig. we procure the dynamical third-order octupolar branch as ν ±ν ±νx, y, z, ,μ (k j =z , t) that is adopted to topologically characterize the 3D FTOTSC as demonstrated in Fig. Limited to 2D, the mirror symmetry M x enforces ν x, ,μ (k y , t) to appear in pairs: ν x, ,μ1 (k y , t) = -ν x, ,μ2 (k y , t), with μ 1 ∈ +ν x, ,μ and μ 2 ∈ -ν x, ,μ . Moreover, M y compels ν x, ,μ (k y , t) = ν x, ,μ (-k y , t) within each branch μ The average quadrupolar motion ν In 3D, M x seeks ν x, ,μ1 (k y , k z , t) = -ν x, ,μ2 (k y , k z , t), with μ 1 ∈ +ν x, ,μ and μ 2 ∈ -ν x, ,μ . While, M y and M z set the shape of the branch such that ν x, ,μ (k y , k z , t) = ν x, ,μ (-k y , k z , t) and ν x, ,μ (k y , k z , t) = ν x, ,μ (k y , -k z , t) within each branch μ. We demonstrate the dynamical first-order branch in Figs. y, ,μ (-k z , k x , t). We depict the dynamical second-order branch in Figs. , for [trivial] topological case. We emphasize that the topological characterization of anomalous MCMs (0 -π) via the dynamical octupole moment in the FTOTSC phase is the prime result of this article. To summarize, in this article, we prescribe a step-drive protocol to dynamically construct 2D FSOTSC and 3D FTOTSC hosting 0D MCMs. Exploiting the phase diagrams, we illustrate the emergence of both regular 0 and anomalous π-MCMs separately and simultaneously. We circumvent the elusive affair of complete topological characterization for available dynamical phases by analyzing PEO in both 2D and 3D. This allows us to tie up the dynamical quadrupole and octupole moments with Z 2 classifications and enable us to topologically characterize the FHOTSC phases. Along this direction, the stability of these dynamic phases in presence of strong disorder might also be an intriguing future direction. Note that, the Majorana-based qubit architectures have been studied for FSOTSC, hosting both 0 and anomalous π-modes, in the context of fault-tolerant quantum computing In the interval t ∈ T 4 , 3T 4 , the evolution operator becomes Whereas, in the final step i.e., t ∈ 3T 4 , T , the evolution operator reads After full time-period T , we obtain the Floquet operator as We can recast U dD (k, T ) in a form such that U dD (k, T ) = f dD (k)I -ig dD (k), where we have defined The eigenvalue equation for U dD (k, T ) reads: with each band being N 2 -fold degenerate. In our model we have considered eight-band model both in 2D and 3D. Hence, the bands are four-fold degenerate. We denote these bands as |Ψ ±Ei(k) , with +(-)E i (k) representing unfilled (filled) bands. The time evolution operator in a time periodic system can be decomposed into two parts t/T . Here, U dD, (k, t) = U dD, (k, t + T ) represents the anomalous periodized evolution operator encaptulating the dynamics of the system and [U dD (k, T )] t/T represents the normal static accumulative part. We can construct [U dD (k, T )] -t/T as follows With the [U dD (k, T )] -t/T in hand, one can obatin the periodized evolution operator using Eqs. (S1), (S2), and (S3) as -t/T . (S10) The absence of band physics for U dD, (k, t) enforces us to endeavour for a new quantity to encaptulate the evolution of polarization and other higher moments viz quadrupole, octupole etc, in the interval t ∈ [0, t]. The dynamical polarization, introduced in Ref. Following Resta's definition where, ĉim (ĉ † im ) represent quasiparticle annihilation (creation) operator at site i for m th degrees of freedom. We can use the Fourier transformed electronic operator as Then one can write x(t) in the form Thus, we obtain average polarization x as where, we have defined The eigen-problem for x can be solved by considering a L th x power of the same, such that where, we have defined the time-dependent Wilson loop operator as We can write down the eigenvalue equation for W x, ,k (t) as here, μ denotes all the N pseudospin degrees of freedom of the Hamiltonian, constituting differnt branches and number of first-order branch equals the number of pseudospin degrees of freedom. The eigenstates |ν x, ,μ (k, t) follows the relation ν x, ,μ1 (k, t)|ν x, ,μ2 (k, t) = δ μ1μ2 The significance of ν x, ,μ (k j =x , t) can be inferred in way that it bespeaks a relative motion of a particle by 2ν x, ,μ (k j =x , t) with respect to x i in the x-direction from time t = 0 to t. In contrast to the static counterpart, x(t) portrays the interference of polarization at two different time-instant t = 0 and t FIG. To proceed, out of N branches of ν x, ,μ (k j =x , t), we can group them into two separable sets ±ν x, and the secondorder polarization corresponds to the motion of the particle perpendicular to x-direction within each branch set ±ν x, . We choose y-direction to be the perpendicular direction and write down the mean polarization along y-direction as where, Q y, ,k (t) is given as We define the branch projector operator as We introduce the dynamical branch creation and annihilation operator as with γk μ1 (t), γ † k μ2 (t) = δ kk δ μ1μ2 . Thus we can rewrite the projector as We introduce the second-order dynamical branch creation and annihilation operator as We can rewrite the projector as The dynamical third-order polarization can be extracted by considering the motion of the particle perpendicular to both x and y-directions (i.e., along z-direction), projected to the branch set ±ν ±νx, y, . The mean polarization along z-direction is given as vii where, Q z, ,k (t) is given as where, we have defined where, the time dependent second-order nested Wilson loop W ±ν ±νx, is given as with the dynamical octupolar interference pattern is given as Finally, for a 3D system, one can obtain the average octupolar motion as Here, we briefly discuss the outlines to obtain the quasi-static multipole moments from Floquet operator U dD (k, T ) employing the nested Wilson loop technique Similar to the 2D FSOTSC, the 3D FSOTSC can be topologically characterized by the average quadrupolar motion except that we need to investigate the said quantity at a particular k z . From Fig. Here, Q x, ,k (t)'s are not unitary for a finite Lx. To perform the numerical calculations, one can do the singular-value decomposition (SVD), such that Q x, ,k (t) = U DV † and then redefine Q x, ,k (t) = U V † point.