One of the main developments in unconventional superconductivity in the past two decades has been the discovery that most unconventional superconductors form phase diagrams that also contain other strongly correlated states. Many systems of interest are therefore close to more than one instability, and tuning between the resultant ordered phases is the subject of intense research To establish the phase diagram of an unconventional superconductor, it is necessary to have both an effective means of tuning it and methods to investigate the resultant changes to its physical properties. In most of the systems studied so far, tuning methods such as chemical composition, magnetic field, electric field, hydrostatic and epitaxial pressure have been used. Each has its advantages and drawbacks, which ultimately determine the methods used to study the resultant phases and their interplay. An ideal method of study is one that has sensitivity to several phases simultaneously, and in particular to their boundaries. In magnetically tuned systems, the magnetocaloric effect has proved to be of particular utility. Under adiabatic conditions, the rate of change of the sample temperature with applied magnetic field H provides direct information on the heat capacity C H and entropy S, through the well-known relationship S T H which has been used to good effect to establish the H-T phase diagrams of, for example, URu 2 Si 2 (ref. in which C ε is the specific heat at constant strain ε and is the strain derivative of the entropy at constant temperature. In the special case of an isotropic volume strain Δε = ΔV/V, then -T T ε 1 Δ Δ measures the famous Grüneisen parameter Γ originally introduced in 1908 (ref. Although used widely in association with materials with large elastic responses, to the extent that it has been proposed for cooling technologies Sample raw data for isothermal strain sweeps at 8 K, 6 K, 4 K and 2 K are shown in Fig. When the temperature has been lowered to 6 K, the signal at the Van Hove strain ε 100 VHS remains similar, but a pronounced extra dip is seen in the signal at around ε 100 ≈ -0.6%. By 4 K, this dip has moved to slightly lower absolute strain and becomes stronger. The signal at 2 K looks similar to those at 4 K and 6 K at high strain but is very different in the region between -0.2% and -0.6% strain. Instead of a maximum of entropy at the Van Hove strain, there is now a minimum, along with a sharp step in the elastocaloric signal at ε 100 ≅ -0.23%. Remarkably, this large change in the entropic properties is the result of the onset of superconductivity, as demonstrated by constructing the empirical phase diagram shown in Fig. The high resolution of our experiments allows the straightforward identification of several key features from inspection of the raw data in Fig. To frame a more in-depth analysis of our data, we turn to the behaviour of the relevant Grüneisen parameter Γ ≡ - , converting the raw data to absolute units using the procedure described in Methods. In systems governed by a single energy scale, such as Fermi liquids, Γ is independent of temperature. As a result, Grüneisen scaling is expected with curves at all temperatures collapsing onto each other and deviations from this scaling indicating proximity to critical points or phase transitions expected for proximity to a quantum phase transition, in this case, the Lifshitz transition at ε 100 = -0.44%. For strains between -0.6% and -0.7%, the Grüneisen scaling is also poorly obeyed, supporting the hypothesis that the feature in this region (now a peak rather than a dip because of the sign convention of the Grüneisen parameter) marks a phase transition. As a complement to the experimental data, we have calculated the expected behaviour of the Grüneisen parameter as a function of [100] strain using a two-dimensional tight-binding model for the relevant γ band derived from a combination of de Haas-van Alphen and angle-resolved photoemission experiments on unstrained Sr 2 RuO 4 (ref. The results are shown in Fig. VHS is distinctive, especially given the simplicity of the model. The shape of the curves, the strain range over which the Grüneisen scaling is obeyed and even the zero crossing near zero strain (a consequence of the initial splitting of the zero-field Van Hove singularity owing to the Poisson effect) are all seen in both experiment and theory. By contrast, below 8 K, the behaviour for strains beyond ε 100 VHS is considerably different, emphasizing that the experimental data are picking up a phase transition not predicted by the tight-binding model. In isolation, the elastocaloric data give no microscopic information on the nature of the high-strain phase, but a point established in a recent muon spin relaxation measurement (marked by the yellow star in Fig. Fig. Arguably as interesting as what the model successfully describes is what it does not. The theory-experiment comparison in Fig. ) and the signature seen on entering the magnetic phase, which is a peak not in the entropy but in -(∂S/∂ε) T . Overall, although we cannot be absolutely certain, we believe that our data support a first-order transition into the magnetic phase. Taking the peak in Γ 100 as the transition point identifies it with the dark blue ridge in Fig. ) Fig. High-quality single crystals of Sr 2 RuO 4 were grown by a floating-zone method The elastocaloric effect was measured by an a.c. modulation method Strain is the change of the length of a sample Δl = l - l 0 divided by its length l 0 . The strain apparatus used in this study has a capacitor to measure the displacement Δd obtained by applying a voltage to the piezoelectric actuators (PEAs). However, the measured Δd is not the change in the sample length. Δl can be obtained by the change of the capacitor displacement Δd times a transfer efficiency e, which is defined by the properties of Stycast layers between the sample and the jaws of the strain apparatus In the case of Sr 2 RuO 4 in the current setup, a transfer efficiency e = 0.78 could be estimated on the basis of the known position of the maximum in T c for an applied stress along [100] at 0.7 GPa (ref. To obtain the large strains needed to investigate the phase diagram of Sr 2 RuO 4 , the inner and outer PEAs of the strain apparatus are used. To measure the elastocaloric effect, a further small a.c. voltage is imposed on the d.c. voltage applied on the inner PEA. The oscillation amplitude d exc can be measured using the capacitor mounted in parallel to the sample and the strain amplitude is then obtained following Equation (3): In our case, the displacement amplitude d exc is between 5 nm and 10 nm, in comparison with a sample length of approximately 2 mm. Strain is a tensor quantity, so a formal definition of ε 100 as used in the main text is ε = 100 e 100 Curves of ΔT against frequency at 0.5% compression are shown in Extended Data Fig. In principle, the absolute value of the elastocaloric effect can be obtained directly. However, owing to the smallness of the signal and uncertainties arising from sample configuration and material properties, it is more reliable to calibrate the elastocaloric effect ΔT ad /Δε, as described in the following. The elastocaloric effect can be described as an adiabatic temperature change ΔT ad as a function of strain ε: y z is the heat capacity at constant strain and S is the entropy. The relevant elastocaloric Grüneisen parameter Γ in our experiment is related to entropy through Please note that, throughout this section, ε refers to ε xx . At very low strains on the order of -0.1% at temperatures above the superconducting transition, one can treat the system as being a Fermi liquid whose parameters are a function of strain. In this case, the specific heat to the second order in strain is given by Here we further assumed that the phonon heat capacity in our case has a negligible strain dependence. This is justified by both the small strain limit considered and the fact that the phonon contribution is much smaller than the electronic heat capacity at the relevant temperatures in the first place. It directly follows that entropy S is given by In this limit, the elastocaloric Grüneisen parameter Γ can be expressed as and Furthermore, one can consider the second derivative of entropy with respect to strain in which we made use of the appropriate Maxwell relationship in the last step. Given that in the range considered here thermodynamic variables are well behaved, it follows that , , , , , , in which stress ε and strain σ are related by means of the compliance matrix s through = ε sσ. Hence , with s 11 being the 11 entry of s and the inverse of the Young's modulus. Combining Equations ( s 11 determined from resonant ultrasound experiments using methods described in ref. Here we describe the numerical scheme for the calculation of entropy shown in Fig. Our starting point is With the knowledge of the entropy at zero strain, S(ε = 0, T), one can integrate this partial differential to give is, at this stage, unknown. However, it is related to S(ε, T) through We therefore use an iterative scheme with the following steps. First, set C ε T C T ( , ) = (0, ). xx This is the zero-strain specific heat, known with very high accuracy for Sr 2 RuO 4 . Second, calculate S ε T ( , ) using Equation (19) and C ε T ( , ) xx for all available T. Third, calculate as a function of T and evaluating Equation (20). Finally, calculate S ε T ( , ) xx and Equation ( After a few iterations, no notable changes in S (n) (ε, T) are observed. This is not least due to the fact that, although C ε xx does vary overall, these variations are at most a few tens of per cent, enabling an effective convergence of the above scheme. The data shown in the main text correspond to S The theoretical analysis of the elastocaloric effect is on the basis of a quasiparticle description of Sr 2 RuO 4 . We use a strain-dependent quasiparticle dispersion ε k (ε αβ ) and determine the electronic contribution to the entropy of the system from f k is the Fermi distribution function with the above dispersion. The factor 2 refers to the electron spin and the sum goes over the momenta in the first Brillouin zone. The elastocaloric coefficient follows from the temperature and strain derivatives of the entropy. We use the following tight-binding parameterization for the γ-band of the system as determined from angle-resolved photoemission experiments with t x = t y = t 0 = 0.119 eV, t′ = 0.392t 0 and μ = 1.48t 0 . To describe the strain dependence of ε k (ε αβ ), we assume a linear dependence of the hopping elements with respect to the interatomic distance. The proportionality factor is chosen to reproduce the strain value at which the Van Hove singularity is reached. In the superconducting state, we use the Bogoliubov quasiparticle dispersion ε ε → +Δ 2 2 k k with superconducting gap Δ. The strain dependence is dominated by the electronic spectrum near the Van Hove point. In our theory, we consider a pairing state that is fully gapped at the Van Hove momentum. The strain dependence of the superconducting gap amplitude and of the transition temperature follow from the solution of the gap equation at fixed pairing interaction. For details, see the Supplementary Information. Extended Data Fig. Extended Data Fig. Extended Data Fig. Elastocaloric effect under 0.5% compression at 1 K and 8 K plotted against a logarithmic frequency scale. The applied strain oscillation is Δε = 3.45 × 10 -6 . Extended Data Fig. The spheres correspond to the data and the surface to Equation ( In our study of the elastocaloric effect we used the in situ determined displacement amplitude d exc to calculate the applied AC strain amplitude ∆ε. In the following we demonstrate that the applied displacement amplitude d exc displays only small variations as function of frequency, temperature, and strain in the parameter range of our measurements. The AC displacement amplitude exhibits a small temperature dependence. It monotonically increases by approximately 6% between 1 and 8 K. Figure The general behavior of d exc (ε) does not change with temperature. At all temperature the maximum change in d exc (ε) is less than 11 % over the range of strain used in our experiments. In section II A we provide a review on the relation between the elastocaloric effect and the uniaxial Grüneisen parameter Γ. In section II B we provide details of the calculation of Γ across the superconducting transition close to the strain-induced Van-Hove singularity of Sr 2 RuO 4 using a parametrisation of its γ-band; some results of this calculation are shown in the main text. Finally, in section II C we discuss the entropy quench across the superconducting transition within an effective theory valid close to the Van-Hove singularity, and we compare the scenario of a full gap versus a gap with nodes at the Van-Hove point in momentum space. We find that a nodal gap at the Van-Hove point is inconsistent with experimental signatures. In the case that the temperature T and uniaxial strain, say, along the x-axis ε xx can be controlled experimentally the entropy should be considered as a function S = S(T, ε xx ). Its differential is then given by where is the specific heat at constant uniaxial strain ε xx . Under adiabatic where Γ is the Grüneisen parameter generalized to the case of uniaxial strain ε xx . Up to a factor of T , it quantifies the change of temperature upon adiabatically varying ε xx and thus describes an elastocaloric effect. The Grüneisen parameter defined in Eq. S2 is dimensionless. The derivative ∂S ∂εxx T can be related to the uniaxial thermal expansion, , and Young's modulus, 1 given by ν xy ≈ 0.508 [4]. The Van-Hove singularity is reached in the experiment for a strain of ε xx = -0.44%, see above. The tight-binding dispersion exhibits a Van-Hove point at (k x , k y ) = (0, π) for a choice of the parameters α = α ′ ≈ 7.604, where we used α = α ′ for simplicity. This value is consistent with the calculations of Barber et al. [5]. The parameter α will determine the overall magnitude of the Grüneisen parameter. The corresponding density of states per spin is given by We have multiplied the integral by the area of the two-dimensional unit cell, a x a y , so that ν(ε) represent the number of states per energy and per unit cell. This density of states is independent of the lattice constants, as becomes manifest upon substituting the integration variables k x = kx /a x and k y = ky /a y . The strain dependence of ν(ε) thus arises from the hopping amplitudes in the dispersion of Eq. S4. ν(ε) and other densities of states that we use in the analysis of the Grüneisen parameter can be expressed in terms of elliptic integrals. The evolution of the energy-dependent density of states with uniaxial strain is illustrated in Fig. In order to account for the behavior of the Grüneisen parameter across the superconducting transition close to the Van-Hove singularity of Sr 2 RuO 4 , we consider the entropy per unit cell, where E(ε) = √ ε 2 + ∆ 2 with the superconducting gap ∆, and the Fermi function f (E) = (e E/(k B T ) + 1) -1 . The factor of 2 in front of the integral of Eq. S7 accounts for the spin degree of freedom. The superconducting gap ∆ is determined by the gap equation with a cutoff provided by the frequency ω 0 , and the coupling constant g > 0 with units of energy. Our choice for the cutoff frequency ħω 0 /k B = 400 K was informed by inelastic neutron scattering data on Sr 2 RuO 4 [6]. In order to reproduce the critical temperature T c ≈ 3.5 K as observed at the strain-induced Van-Hove singularity of Sr 2 RuO 4 , we need to choose g/k B ≈ 714 K. The gap ∆ = ∆(T, ε xx ) itself will not only depend on temperature T but also on strain ε xx , see Figure With the help of the entropy S7 the Grüneisen parameter can be evaluated using Eq. S2 by taking derivatives with respect to T and strain ε xx . The specific heat is given by For the strain derivative we obtain where we introduced the auxiliary function In the normal phase ∆ = 0 sufficiently far away from the Van Hove singularity where the density of states ν(ε) only smoothly varies in the range |ε| ≲ k B T around the Fermi energy, standard Fermi liquid behaviour is obtained. The entropy then depends linearly on temperature and the Grüneisen parameter reduces to a constant that quantifies the strain dependence of the density of states at the Fermi level ν(0). From this expression follows that the Grüneisen parameter in the Fermi-liquid limit will change sign at maxima as well as minima of ν(0) as a function of uniaxial strain ε xx . The pronounced A finite inter-plane hopping of electrons will eventually cut off the logarithmic divergence of the Van Hove singularity in the density of states and, as a consequence, weaken and broaden the associated thermodynamic signatures. Here, we estimate the temperature and strain scale at which this cut-off is expected to happen. We start the discussion with an extended tight-binding Hamiltonian following Ref. [7] that is based on the three t 2g Ru orbitals, Here, s = ±1 represents the spin degree of freedom, η is the spin-orbit coupling, and the with positive coefficients c 1 , c 2 , c 3 , and δε xx = ε xx -ε VH xx is the distance to the critical strain. This leads to a logarithmic singularity in the two-dimensional density of states The dispersion of the γ band resulting from the full three-dimensional model of Eq. S14 possesses close to (k x , k y , 0) = (0, π, k z ) the modified form We kept here only the first order Fourier components of k z except for the last term with coefficient c 6 that involves a second order 2k z Fourier component. We also neglected contributions of order O(k 2 x δε) and O((k y -π) 2 δε). Using the values of the hopping parameters of Ref. [7] we obtain for the coefficients the following estimates c 2 ≈ 0.395 eV, c 1 /c 2 ≈ 0.15, The resulting density of states for δε xx = 0 is approximately constant in the range |ε| < c 6 with two cusps, i.e., typical non-analyticities for a three-dimensional density of states at the two edges ε = ±c 6 , see Fig. The regularization of the logarithmic singularity in the density of states by the inter-layer hopping leads to a temperature scale T 3d ∼ c 6 /k B and a strain scale ε 3d xx ∼ c 6 /c 3 . Using the above estimates we obtain the values T 3d ≈ 5.8 K and δε 3d xx ∼ 3.8 × 10 -5 , i.e., approximately 10 -2 of the absolute value of the critical strain. The latter is consistent with comparing T 3d and the energy of the γ band at (k x , k y , k z ) = (0, π, 0) and zero strain that is 53 meV or 615 K using the ab initio parameters (compared to just over 10 meV measured experimentally). Both scales are reflected for example in the dependence of the specific heat coefficient of the normal state. In the low temperature limit, on the one hand, the specific heat coefficient is proportional to the density of states. In order to resolve the inter-layer regularization a strain resolution of order δε 3d xx would be required that is far beyond the experimental resolution. On the other hand, at the critical strain the specific heat coefficient diverges logarithmically as a function of decreasing temperature for the two-dimensional model. For the three dimensional model with inter-layer hopping this divergence is cut off, and the specific heat coefficient saturates but only below a temperature of order 0.1T 3d ∼ 0.6 K, see Fig. We can conclude for Sr 2 RuO 4 that its thermodynamics in the normal state is only barely affected by the inter-layer hopping. First, its signatures as a function of strain occur on a scale beyond the strain resolution of the experiment. Second, its signatures as a function of temperature are most pronounced at the critical strain but are negligible for temperatures T > T c,max ≈ 3.5 K ≈ 0.6T 3d . For lower temperatures the Van Hove singularity seems to be rather cut off by the superconducting order parameter masking the effect of the inter-layer hopping on the Van Hove singularity in density of states. Finally, note that the ab initio parameters overestimate the scales so that our estimates about the influence of inter-layer hopping are on the conservative side. The Van Hove singularity might in principle also be smeared out by elastic scattering off impurities. This becomes relevant once the elastic scattering rate ħτ -1 0 exceeds the scale for inter-layer coupling, which corresponds to several Kelvin [8]. We are, however, confident that the scattering rate must be significantly below this value. Sr 2 RuO 4 is known to be sensitive to pair-breaking due to non-magnetic impurities [9]. Hence, the very observation of a superconducting transition implies that ħτ -1 0 ≪ k B T c and elastic scattering events will not smear out the Van Hove singularity in the temperature regime of our measurements. C. Entropy quench for a superconducting gap with nodes at the Van Hove singularity In section II B it was assumed that the superconductor is fully gapped at the Van Hove point in momentum space. In this case, the calculated entropy, that is enhanced at the Van Hove singularity, gets strongly quenched upon entering the superconducting phase, see Fig. For this purpose, we consider an effective theory that is only valid close to the Van Hove singularity. Expanding the dispersion of Eq. S4 close to the Van Hove singularity at k y = π/a y , it acquires in lowest order the following form where r = -μ + 2(t y -t x ) + 4t ′ tunes the distance to the Van Hove point, the mass m = tx-2t ′ . We will supplement the effective theory with a hard energy cutoff (q 2 x + q 2 y )/(2m) ≤ ε 0 where ε 0 is on the order of the hopping; we will use ε 0 = 1 2maxay . We assume that the superconducting gap depends in general analytically on momentum, ∆ q = ∆γ q , and we consider the following three scenarios: a x a y (q 2 x -q 2 y ) scenario (2) a x a y 2q x q y scenario (3). The superconductor possesses the dispersion E q = ε 2 q + ∆ 2 q . For a momentumdependent gap, it is convenient to consider in this section the density of states defined as follows where the integral over wavevectors is evaluated with the hard energy cutoff ε 0 ≥ (q 2 x + q 2 y )/(2m). It is clear that ν(E) is symmetric in r because the case r < 0 can be mapped onto r > 0 by interchanging q x and q y in the definition of ν(E). In the following, we therefore focus on positive r > 0. The density of states is illustrated in Fig. The gap ∆ fulfils the gap equation with the coupling constant g, another cutoff E 0 ≪ ε 0 , and the auxiliary density of states is given by ν γ (E) = a x a y ε 0 dq x dq y (2π) 2 γ 2 q δ(E -ε 2 q + ∆ 2 q ). (S29) It turns out that the auxiliary density of states ν γ (E) for ∆ = 0 in the gap scenario (2) vanishes at the Van Hove point r = 0 as ν γ (E) ∝ E 2 log 1/E for E → 0. At zero energy, E = 0, and finite r it assumes a finite value ν γ (0) ∝ r 2 log 1/|r| for small r. As a result, the critical temperature T c (r) possesses a minimum at r = 0 and increases for increasing distance to the Van Hove point. As this behavior is inconsistent with the experimental signatures, we exclude this scenario (2) in the following. For the numerical evaluation, we choose for the cutoffs ε 0 = 0.1 eV and E 0 = 0.01 eV. Moreover, we demand that the critical temperature T c,max = 3.5 K, i.e., k B T c,max /ε 0 ≈ 0.003 at the Van Hove singularity, r = 0, in order to connect with experiment. The coupling constant g is chosen accordingly. The resulting phase diagrams for the scenarios (2) possesses a critical temperature T c (r) that is minimal at r = 0 and, as a consequence, it is not considered further. Here, we discuss the behavior of entropy close to the top of both superconducting domes in Fig. It is symmetric S(T, r) = S(T, -r) and we focus thus on positive r ≥ 0. The entropy as a function of r is evaluated for a few temperatures in Fig. The panels show the entropy divided by temperature because in the Fermi liquid limit this ratio is proportional to the density of states of the normal state, see also Eq. S12. This limiting behavior is expected for T > T c (r) and r ≫ k B T . As k B T c,max ≈ 0.003 ε 0 this amounts to r/ε 0 ≫ 0.003 for T ≈ T c,max . Due to the different scales for the tuning parameter on the x-axis, this limit is mostly fulfilled in Fig. As the superconducting dome is entered as a function of decreasing r, the entropy for the fully gapped scenario (1) exhibits a characteristic kink where the entropy changes slope A small quench only appears for finite r at T < T c (r) when the density of states develops a soft gap. This small quench is however not able to change the sign of the slope ∂ r S at least not down to temperatures of T = 0.6 T c,max . Close to the Van Hove singularity, r = 0, the strain sensitivity is mostly attributed to the strain dependence of the tuning parameter, r = r(ε xx ). As a consequence, the slope ∂ r S(r) is basically proportional to the strain derivative ∂ εxx S. A sign change of ∂ r S is thus directly reflected in a sign change of the elastocaloric effect. The behavior for the fully gapped scenario (1) is, as expected, consistent with the calculation of section II B. It is also consistent with the experimentally observed signatures whereas the nodal gap scenario is not. So we conclude that the conversion of the maximum in entropy S(ε xx ) into a minimum upon entering the superconducting dome at its top as derived from measurements of the elastocaloric effect on Sr 2 RuO 4 strongly suggests a superconducting order with a full gap at (%) a b c d Γ 100 Γ