Thin membranes are highly sought-after for nanopore-based single-molecule sensing and fabrication of such membranes becomes challenging in the ≲10 nm thickness regime where a plethora of useful molecule information can be acquired by nanopore sensing. In this work, we present a scalable and controllable method to fabricate silicon nitride (SixNy) membranes with effective thickness down to ~1.5 nm using standard silicon processing and chemical etching using hydrofluoric acid (HF). Nanopores were fabricated using the controlled breakdown method with estimated pore diameters down to ~1.8 nm yielding events >500,000 and >1,800,000 from dsDNA and bovine serum albumin (BSA) protein, respectively, demonstrating the high-performance and extended lifetime of the pores fabricated through our membranes. We used two different compositions of SixNy for membrane fabrication (near stoichiometric and silicon-rich SixNy) and compared them against commercial membranes. The final thicknesses of the membranes were measured using ellipsometry and were in good agreement with the values calculated from the bulk etch rates and DNA translocation characteristics. The stoichiometry and the density of the membrane layers were characterized with Rutherford backscattering spectrometry while the nanopores were characterized using pHconductance, conductivity-conductance and power spectral density (PSD) graphs. Obtaining information from single biomolecules transcends average ensemble approaches and enables methods capable of DNA and protein sequencing. Rapid, portable, low-cost methods and devices for single bio-molecule measurements have gained substantial traction and the current pandemic has recapitulated the need for such devices. Nanopores are often viewed as a modular platform capable of satisfying these criteria with applications spanning, but not limited to, genomics surface decoration Silicon nitride (SixNy) is the ubiquitous choice of material in most solid-state nanopore (SSN) studies (albeit having high capacitive noise) due to its mechanical, chemical, and thermal stability, availability of thin-film deposition tools, compatibility with silicon-based microelectronics and surface modification approaches. In most studies, the membrane thickness L ! exceeds ~10 nm with some notable examples of L ! ≤5 nm in literature Etching methods have mostly been overlooked for the fabrication of thin membranes for SSN studies partly due to the common usage of electron/ion-beam methods. However, unlike the traditional thinning methods, etching methods In this study, we seek to offer a simple, quick, and inexpensive way for creating membranes of any thickness, down to about 3 nm, conducive for biomolecule sensing and characterization applications. Additionally, this study compares the manufactured membranes with commercially available options and investigates the dependence and impact of the membrane film's composition on surface attributes. Thicker membranes (~150 nm and ~200 nm) are first fabricated using microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) processing followed by controlled etching through a series of different concentrations of hydrofluoric acid (HF) for the fabrication of <20 nm thick membranes reaching as low as ~1.5 nm (effective membrane thickness). The stoichiometry, density, and thickness of the fabricated membranes were investigated by Rutherford backscattering spectrometry (RBS) as those parameters can impact the surface charge as well as the pore fabrication characteristics. Typically, amorphous Si-rich SixNy membranes are used for CBD. Here, we present the fabrication of membranes from stoichiometric as well as Si-rich SixNy and the characterization of nanopores in these membranes fabricated using CBD. The nanopores were characterized using pH-conductance (pH-G ! ) and electrolyte conductivity-G ! measurements to evaluate the pore surface chemistry and surface charge density. Finally, double-stranded DNA (dsDNA) and bovine serum albumin (BSA) were used to explore the suitability of pores for single-molecule sensing. Events >500,000 from dsDNA and as high as ~1.8 million from BSA were achieved from a single solidstate nanopore which by far surpasses the previously reported highest reported number of ~300,000 events. The workflow for the fabrication of membranes is shown in Figure HF etching: HF etching to thin down the nitride window with and without the silica underlayer was carried out using concentrations of 10%, 5%, and 1% of HF prepared by dilution of 48% HF (Sigma-Aldrich, 695068). The etching was performed in a custom-made etching cradle. To stop the etching, the membranes were rinsed three times in DI water and air-dried. Electrolyte preparation: All electrolytes were prepared by first dissolving the as supplied salts (Sigma-Aldrich, KCl, P9333 and LiCl, L4408) in ~18 MΩ.cm DI water (Sartorius Arium® UV Ultrapure) with the HEPES buffer (Sigma-Aldrich, H0527) followed by filtering through a Millipore Express® PLUS PES filter of 0.22 μm pore size. The pH was tuned to the desired value (±0.1 tolerance) through dropwise addition of either concentrated HCl (Ajax-Finechem, AJA1367, 36%) or KOH (Chem Supply, PA161) and measured with an Orion StarTM pH meter. The membranes were mounted between two custom fabricated Poly (methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) half cells followed by filling each of the reservoirs with 1 M KCl buffered with 10 mM HEPES at pH ~7. An electric field of <1 V/nm was then applied using a source meter unit (Keithley 2450) until a rapid surge of current was observed which is indicative of pore formation. Afterwards, to characterize the pore size, a current-voltage (I-V) curve was obtained using the Elements eNPR system. The diameter of the pore can be estimated from the slope of the I-V curve (i.e., open-pore conductance, G ! ) with adequate knowledge of the membrane thickness L0 using the following equation: where G ! , r ! , K, σ, μ, α and β are the open pore conductance, nanopore radius, electrolyte conductivity, nanopore surface charge density, mobility of counter-ions proximal to the surface and model-dependent parameters (both α and β are set to 2) The open-pore conductance was measured as a function of the solution pH using 1 M KCl electrolyte and the data were fitted with eq. 1 using the following approximation for surface charge density (σ) which then permits the evaluation of the dissociation constant of surface head groups (pK ! ), where e, Γ, β, C *++ , and W are the elementary charge, number of surface chargeable groups, inverse of the thermal energy, effective Stern layer capacitance, and Lambert W function, respectively Biomolecule Sensing: Double-stranded DNA (Thermo-fisher SM0311) was added to the cis chamber to a final concentration of 8.3 ng/μL (~13 nM) and driven across the nanopore in response to a positive bias of 400 mV applied to the trans chamber. BSA (Sigma-Aldrich, A7030) was added to the cis chamber to a final concentration of 200 nM and driven across the nanopore in response to a positive voltage bias of 500 mV applied to the trans chamber. Data were filtered at 10 kHz and sampled at 200 kHz. Collected data were then analyzed using the EventPro (3.0) analysis platform Membrane fabrication details are outlined in Figure Figure After the controlled thinning of the membranes, pores were fabricated using the CBD method as shown in Figures Next, we looked at the surface chemical properties of the nanopores. The nanopore chemistry influences the translocation properties and can be tuned to slow down analyte transport The raw data were fitted with equations 1 and 2 which yielded a pKa of 8.0±0.4 (from 5 unique pores) for near-stoichiometric SixNy. This pKa value suggests that the surface is rich with acidic head groups and is in good agreement with that reported for silanol groups which would imply that the surface hydroxyl groups are responsible for the observed value Thus, we see a close agreement between the pI values of our membranes and the commercial ones with both categories in good agreement with the previously reported values The SiO2 underlayer has been previously shown to reduce the dielectric noise. After the fabrication of pores in thin membranes and the chemical characterization of the nanopore surface, we conducted translocation experiments using dsDNA and BSA. The purpose of using dsDNA in this study is twofold: (i) to show that the fabricated pores through the thinned down membranes are conducive for analyte translocation and (ii) to corroborate the membrane thickness from methods discussed previously using dsDNA translocation characteristics. Lorentzian-Gaussian mixture model. From the fits corresponding to ΔG " and ΔG % (SI figure Here we note, without the clustering of the single file and folded-over conformations, the ratio ΔG % /ΔG " from the fits shown in Figure Method is half the measured thickness. Such discrepancy is not uncommon Moreover, to see a growth of ~0.5 nm in the pore diameter (~10% change of the initial pore diameter), it would take ~9 hours of continuous operation of the pore provided the growth kinetics stay uniform throughout. Furthermore, for a 10% increase in the baseline noise, it would take about ~2.5 hrs. of continuous operation. Thus, we see that the pore noise increase ~3.6× faster compared to the pore diameter. This is somewhat expected since prolong translocation of an analyte through a pore often leads to an increase in the baseline noise. However, even after running the pore for ~5 hrs., the increase in the pore-noise was insignificant to interfere with the pore-quality needed for event extractions partly due to deeper event blockades observed with the translocation experiments (Figure However, the pore could be easily revived by the application of a zap-potential (a common practice in the field). Furthermore, the histogram corresponding to ΔG shows 2 peaks (Figure Moreover, the signatory dual peak distribution is still visible, yet, not as separated as those in Figure Protein sensing can be challenging for a multitude of reasons and more aggravated by their propensity to (non-specifically) stick to nanopore surfaces and thereby occluding the ion passage irreversibly. We chose one of the stickiest proteins, BSA, which is well known to nonspecifically bind to a host of surfaces. Furthermore, to test the temporal stability of the pore and its resilience against clogging by the protein, we used a high concentration (200 nM) of BSA for the translocation experiments. For the experiment shown in Figure While the growth kinetics of the pore used for DNA experiments are better than that used for the BSA experiments, in the context of the time it takes for a 10% change in the pore diameter and noise (~6 hrs. and ~4.5 hrs. respectively), the pores indicate great stability for lengthy experiments. Thus, we see that a significant change in the pore diameter or noise does not occur even after running the experiments for few hours. The ΔG distribution shows a bimodal distribution where the first peak appears to be a shoulder of the major peak centered at ~10 nS. We believe these originate from the different entrance trajectories and entrance shapes of the prolate BSA. taken together demonstrate the exceptional stability of the pores fabricated in our thin membranes and their suitability for long duration nanopore sensing efforts. In this study, we have demonstrated a controllable method to fabricate thin SixNy membranes on wafer-scale. Moreover, membranes of <10 nm thickness can be fabricated conveniently with the ability to reach thicknesses as low as ~1.5 nm (effective thickness). Both stoichiometric and Si-rich silicon nitride membranes were fabricated, and their chemistry was confirmed through RBS. Single nanopores were then formed using the CBD method and the surfaces of the fabricated pores were probed using pH-G ! and K-G ! curves. From the former, the nanopore surfaces through stoichiometric membranes were found to be rich in acidic head groups while those formed from non-stoichiometric (Si-rich) membranes were amphoteric in nature. The pKa for pores fabricated through stoichiometric membranes was found to be in close agreement with that of a silanol-rich surface. The isoelectric point of pores fabricated through Si-rich membranes was also in good agreement with reported values. The change in open-pore conductance for dsDNA translocations were measured with a range of pores which produced translocation characteristics commensurate with the structure of DNA and dimensions of the pore. The L ! calculated from dsDNA translocations further corroborated the thickness predicted by the surface profiler and ellipsometry techniques. The noise levels were compared with similar commercial products where the results demonstrated comparable performance. Furthermore, with dsDNA, we were able to collect events as high as >500,000-the highest reported from a single silicon nitride nanopore to the best of our knowledge. On the protein front, we were able to supersede this limit by collecting over ~1.8 million events. This, to the best of our knowledge is the first time where the 1 million event barrier was breached by a single solid-state nanopore. Our findings would be beneficial for the widespread adoption of nanopore technology as it presents a convenient and scalable membrane fabrication method conducive for nanopore fabrication by CBD and analyte translocations. Table The change in conductance because of dsDNA passage (ΔG dsDNA ) was used as an independent metric to estimate L ! (i.e., molecular capillary method). ΔG dsDNA can be modeled using, ΔG dsDNA = G 0 - (see equation 1 for the full form). Thus, the knowledge of ΔG dsDNA can be used to find L ! (or r ! ) and by extension r ! (or L ! ) as shown in SI Figure 