Advanced nanomaterials with enhanced optical and photocatalytic properties for the photodegradation of organic pollutants, in particular pharmaceuticals and personal care products (PPCPs), were successfully prepared by a swift one-pot synthesis. Nanostructured materials were synthesized through an integrated hydrothermal procedure which generates titanate nanotubes (TNTs) with different carbon dots (C-dots) contents, from an amorphous titanium oxide-based source and cork industry wastewaters (CIWW) as carbon source. Their structural, microstructural, morphological, and optical properties were studied by XRD, TEM, UV-Vis diffuse reflectance and photoluminescence spectroscopies. As aimed, the hybrid C-dots/TNT nanomaterials extend their light absorption towards the red, in comparison to pristine TNT, prompting them for a more efficient use of light in photocatalysis by widening the TNT energy uptake range. The decrease of bandgap energy with increasing sample's C-dots content seems to be originated from energy intermediate states formed within the TNTs' forbidden band resulting from TiOC bonds established between the TNTs and the C-dots that form tails of states. The as-synthesized C-dots/TNT samples were tested in the photodegradation of caffeine as a pollutant model for PPCPs. Rewarding results were obtained, with the hybrid C-dots/TNT nanomaterials showing significant enhanced photocatalytic ability toward caffeine degradation in comparison to pristine TNTs. Photocatalysis assays in the presence of scavengers and/or in the absence of oxygen were also performed aiming to characterize the most reactive species formed during the semiconductor photo-activation process and thus assessing to possible reactive pathways underpinning the photocatalytic activity of the hybrid C-dots/TNT nanomaterials. Among the emergent organic pollutants that have received the most concern and attention for their strong detrimental effects on the environment and their ability to induce adverse physiological effects at low doses, are compounds belonging to the so-called group of pharmaceutical and personal care products (PPCPs) One of the most promising techniques for organic pollutants removal is heterogeneous photocatalysis, which is based on radiation-induced redox reactions onto the surface of semiconductor photocatalysts that have the potential to mineralize organic pollutants by reducing them to simpler, non-toxic forms. Among the semiconductor materials, TiO 2 is the most studied photocatalyst due to its high photo-stability, low toxicity, and cost. Effectively, it has been widely investigated as photocatalyst in the decomposition of organic pollutants, soil, air, and wastewater contaminants, predominantly using ultraviolet radiation [57]. However, TiO 2 has a major drawback in solar photocatalytic processes. Due to its wide bandgap (~3.2 eV), it is unable to take advantage of the visible radiation reaching the earth's surface. In addition, it has a high recombination rate of the photogenerated electron-hole (e  /h + ) pairs which also limits its large-scale application as photocatalyst. Therefore, the synthesis of TiO 2based semiconductor materials with a range of light absorption extending to visible, and a lower charge recombination rate, would be a major achievement towards the development of new efficient photoactive materials to be used in photodegradation processes of organic pollutants. In this context, the development of efficient photocatalysts based on titanate elongated nanostructures such as titanate nanotubes (TNTs) were foreseen as very promising materials and thus subject of intense research. They combine the conventional properties of TiO 2 nanoparticles (e.g. photocatalytic activity) with the properties of layered titanates, (e.g. ionexchange ability) Carbon dots (C-dots), which in a simplistic approach may be viewed as small carbon-based nanoparticles (less than 10 nm in size), have attracted much interest in recent years, resulting in a tremendous growth of their applications in several research fields. Their unique optical properties, namely their photoluminescence and up-conversion capabilities, their ability to act as electron donors and acceptors upon photoexcitation, allied to high photostability and excellent biocompatibility, make C-dots very promising materials for applications in biomedicine, optronics, catalysis and sensing Herein, we report on new nanostructured materials produced by a swift one-pot synthesis which generates simultaneously TNTs and carbon dots (C-dots). Hybrid C-dots/TNT nanomaterials with different C-dots content were synthetized through an integrated and sustainable hydrothermal procedure at 200 oC for 12 h, using an amorphous titanium oxide source, cork industry wastewater (CIWW) as the carbon source, and ethylenediamine (EDA) as an additive. It is worth mentioning that this low-cost synthesis is suitable for large-scale production, in addition of using and valorising cork industry wastewaters that is an abundant and affordable, but environmental problematic, industrial effluent. As intended, the new hybrid C-dots/TNT materials present optical bandgap energies red shifted in comparison to pristine TNTs, prompting their more efficient use of light in photocatalysis. The hybrid C-dots/TNT samples were tested in the photocatalytic degradation of caffeine, here used as a pollutant model for PPCPs. Photocatalytic assays in the presence of scavengers and/or in the absence of oxygen were also performed aiming at identifying the most probable mechanisms underlying photodegradation process. An overall model for the photoactivation of the hybrid C-dots/TNT materials is proposed and discussed. All reagents were of analytical or syntheses grade and were used as received. Double-distilled water was used throughout the synthetic experiments and analysis. The cork industry wastewater (CIWW) was collected from an industrial cork processing unit in Montijo, Portugal. After collection, the CIWW was kept refrigerated at 15 oC in polyethylene bottles. Before each use, the CIWW was thermally equilibrated at ca. 20 oC and homogenized through vigorous shaking. C-dots were synthesized from CIWW by a hydrothermal carbonization process (HTC), following reported procedures The TNT precursor was prepared as described elsewhere Titanate nanotubes were synthesized via a hydrothermal method previously reported The same experimental procedure was applied to production of hybrid C-dots/TNT samples. In this case, the NaOH 10 M solution was prepared replacing part of the water by CIWW. To maintain the same experimental conditions used to produce C-dots, ethylenediamine (EDA) was added to the reaction media in a m EDA /m TSCIWW ratio of 0.8 in all the experiments, where m EDA stands for the mass of EDA and m TSCIWW for the mass of total solids present in the CIWW. After synthesis, the TNT powders containing C-dots were washed with water until pH = 7 in the filtrate. Complete removal of free-standing C-dots in C-dots/TNT materials was assured by monitoring the UV-Vis spectra of the washings. The different hybrid C-dots/TNT samples were labelled considering the nominal ratio between m TSCIWW and the mass of precursor, m prec , used. For instance, sample C-dots(1.9%)/TNT corresponds to a hybrid sample prepared with an m TSCIWW /m prec ratio of 1.9. The experimental parameters used to prepare the hybrid C-dots/TNT samples are presented in Table For control and comparison purposes, two other samples were prepared: an EDA/TNT sample using EDA alone (no CIWW was added) and CIWW/TNT sample using CIWW (no EDA was added); in both cases, the procedure used in the synthesis of C-dots (3.8%)/TNT was followed. The photocatalytic degradation experiments were conducted in a 250 mL refrigerated photoreactor. A 450 W Hanovia medium-pressure mercury-vapor lamp was used as radiation source, being the total irradiated energy 40-48% in the ultraviolet range and 40-43% in the visible region. The catalytic photodegradation runs were carried out using 20 mg of each catalyst in 150 mL of a 20 ppm caffeine aqueous solution. Prior to irradiation, the suspensions were stirred during 30 min in dark conditions to ensure that the adsorption equilibrium has been achieved. During irradiation, aliquots were withdrawn at regular intervals, centrifuged, and analysed by UV-vis spectroscopy. For convenience, the adsorption time is marked as 30 min in the graphics. To identify possible photo-reaction mechanisms involved in the caffeine degradation, photocatalytic experiments were also performed in the presence of radical scavengers and/or in the absence of oxygen. Using the C-dots(12%)TNT sample as photocatalyst, the following scavengers were added to the reaction media: ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA, 1mM), as hole scavenger, and tert-butyl alcohol (t-BuOH, 20 mM) as hydroxyl radical (  OH) scavenger. Two experiments were also performed in the absence of oxygen, aimed to evaluate the production of the hydroxyl radical via superoxide radical ( 2 O  ) reduction; under these circumstances, methanol (MeOH, 20 mM) was used as hole scavenger. X-ray powder diffraction (XRD) was performed with a Philips Analytical X-ray diffractometer (PW 3050/60) with automatic data acquisition (X' Pert Data Collector (v2.0b) software), using Cu Kα radiation ( = 0.15406 nm) and working at 40 kV/30 mA. The XRD patterns were collected in the 2 range of 5o  60o with a 0.02o step size and an acquisition time of 200 s/step. To calculate the samples' lattice parameters, the 2 angular position of the diffraction peaks was determined by fitting the experimental diffraction lines with a pseudo-Voigt function. Powder diffuse reflectance spectra (DRS) were obtained on an UV-Vis spectrophotometer Shimadzu UV-2600PC equipped with an ISR 2600 plus integrating sphere, in the wavelength range of 200-1400 nm. The same UV-Vis spectrophotometer was used for collecting the absorption spectra of the caffeine solutions and thus monitoring their photodegradation profiles throughout the intensity of the absorption band centred at ca. 272 nm, which is related to the purine-like ring structure that characterize the caffeine molecule. Photoluminescence (PL) spectra were obtained using a Spex Fluorolog 3-22/Tau 3 spectrofluorometer with a UV excitation radiation of  ex = 280 nm, for the different TNT and Cdots/TNT samples, and  ex = 340 nm for C-dots samples, for which a maximum PL intensity is observed. The spectra were acquired using aqueous suspensions (4 mg/mL) of each sample. The XPS measurements were performed with a Kratos Axis Supra spectrometer using a monochromatic Al K radiation and an X-ray power of 180 W. The pass energy was set at 80 eV for the survey scan and at 10 eV for the detail scans. From a macroscopic point of view, the pristine TNT(20012) sample have the appearance of a white powder. The C-dots/TNT hybrid samples are cream-coloured powders, whose colour tone is darker as the amount of CIWW used in the samples synthesis increases (Figure The XRD pattern of the pristine TNT(20012) sample is shown in Figure In fact, the XRD patterns of samples produced with higher CIWW amount are very similar to the patterns of TNT samples synthesized using the same hydrothermal route but under milder conditions of 160 oC and autoclave dwell time of 24 h. For such particles, a morphology consisting of homogeneous nanoparticles with a diameter less than 10 nm and a high length/diameter aspect ratio was previously reported Therefore, for comparison reasons, a control sample labelled as TNT(16024) was also prepared at 160 oC for 24 h. Its XRD pattern is also shown in Figure To clarify this point, the control EDA/TNT and CIWW/TNT samples were also analysed. The XRD pattern of the EDA/TNT sample (grown without CIWW) is very similar to that of pristine The effect of C-dots on the structure of TNTs was studied by analysing the lattice parameters and the unit cell volume, V cel , of the hybrid synthesized samples. The samples' lattice parameters as well as their unit cell volumes were determined considering the interplanar distances, d hkl , between the crystallographic planes (hkl) of a monoclinic crystal lattice given by the relationship where a, b, c and β are the four parameters that define the monoclinic crystal system. Calculations were performed considering the 2 angular peak positions of the (100), ( i. The results obtained for the sample TNT(16024) are similar to those reported in the literature for samples prepared under identical conditions ii. As foreseen from the above overall analysis of XRD data, there is a great similarity between the lattice parameters of C-dots(1.9%)/TNT and TNT(20012) samples and between the other hybrid samples, with higher C-dots contents, and TNT(16024); iii. Parameters a, c and β, and consequently V cel , tend to increase with the increasing m TSCIWW /m prec ratio, while parameter b is less sensitive to the C-dots content. The diffraction peak at 2θ ~ 10o resulting from the reflection of (100) plane is related to the distance between the TiO 6 octahedra nanosheets that form the layered TNT structure and host the Na + ions between them. Due to the high ion-exchange ability of these layered titanate materials, deviations from the angular position of this peak are, in general, indicative of the replacement of the Na + ion by other cationic species, e.g. Mn 2+ , Co 2+ , Fe 2+ and Ru 3+ Using with the reported values of pristine TNTs prepared under identical experimental conditions Figure sample TNT(20012) (Figure It should be noted that direct observation of C-dots in these hybrid samples was not possible because either of the inherent carbon low contrast in TEM and/or because most of the C-dots are incorporated into the titanate interlayers. Nevertheless, the presence of C-dots in the hybrid Cdots/TNT samples was indirectly evidenced by photoluminescence spectroscopy and by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy, as will be shown further on. The specific surface area, S B.E.T. , of the prepared powders was determined using the B.E.T. These results indicate a strong influence of the CIWW on the morphology and particle size of the hybrid C-dots/TNT materials, in accordance with the XRD results previously discussed. UV-Vis diffuse reflectance spectroscopy was used to assess the optical absorption profile of the prepared samples. Diffuse reflectance, R, can be related with the Kubelka-Munk function, F KM The normalized absorption spectra of prepared samples are shown in Figure The samples' optical band gap energies, E g , were calculated by plotting was observed in hybrid nanostructures involving interactions between TiO 2 and carbon quantum dots The Urbach energy, E U , that is associated with the Urbach tail width, follows the exponential law  =  0 exp (h/E U ) where  is the optical absorption coefficient and  0 is a constant. As mentioned above, F KM is proportional to the absorption, thus the samples' Urbach energy values can be estimated from the slopes of the ln F KM curves plotted as a function of photon energy, in the linear portion just below the optical bandgap. The calculated Urbach energies of the samples are given in Table As can be seen, E U varies from 133.1  1.6 meV to 624.9 has an E U value of 95.7  0.8 meV much lower than that determined for the later hybrid sample. The samples were further analysed by photoluminescence (PL) spectroscopy to indirectly infer the presence of carbon dots in the hybrid C-dots/TNT samples and to qualitatively compare the correspondent electron-hole pair recombination rates. Figure In the case of nanostructured titanates these defects are mainly due to oxygen defects: O  vacancies forming states close to the conduction band (shallow defects) and O 2 vacancies leading to states energetically close to the Fermi level (deep defects) Beyond the observed TNTs characteristic band, the PL spectra of the hybrid C-dots/TNT samples also show an emission broad band centred at about 440 nm that can be assigned to the C-dots in good match with the obtained emission spectrum of the C-dots sample (see inset of Figure Considering that all samples' spectra were measured in the same conditions and that the fluorescence intensity is proportional to the recombination rate of the photo-excited electrons, the relative intensities of the TNTs characteristic band centred at about 350 nm can be used to qualitatively compare the samples' (e  /h + ) pair recombination rates. As can be seen, the hybrid C-dots(1.9%)/TNT sample present a much lower intensity of this band when compared to that of pristine TNT(20012) and TNT(16024) samples, which seems to indicate that the incorporation of small amounts of C-dots contributes for a reduction of the recombination rate of the photoexcited electron-hole pairs. Note however that C-dots(3.8%)/TNT and C-dots(12.4%)/TNT samples present higher PL intensities than that of sample with the lower C-dots content (Cdots(1.9%)/TNT) and thus having a lower separation efficiency of photo-generated electronhole pairs. The reason why the (e  /h + ) pair recombination rate increase with increasing C-dots content is not yet clear but may be related to the formation of C-dots aggregates with larger dimensions in samples prepared with higher level of carbon dots, these aggregates acting as charge recombination centres rather than promote electron-hole separation, in a similar way to that reported for C-dots anchored in TiO 2 nanotubes To further confirm the presence of C-dots in the hybrid TNT samples, the C-dots(12.4%)/TNT sample was analysed by XPS. The XPS survey spectrum of this sample is presented in Figure whereas the peak at 531.18 eV has been ascribed, despite some contribution of the Na Auger peak (Na KLL), to functional groups of C-dots, e.g. isolated-OH/C=O/O-C=O Considering the reduced dimensions of the C-dots(12.4%)/TNT, XPS analysis was additional used to access the sample elemental composition. If Na 2 Ti 3 O 7 is taken as reference for TNT chemical composition, a slightly underestimated value of 12.17 at.% for the Na content was obtained for an amount of Ti of 22.07 at.%. The high content of oxygen (52.7 at.%) of the sample agrees with the presence of other species than TNT. The values for nitrogen (0.23 at.%) and for carbon (12.8 at.%) also support the co-existence of C-dots in the sample. The TNTs as well as the hybrid C-dots/TNT samples were evaluated as photocatalysts for caffeine photo-assisted oxidative removal. Caffeine is a psychoactive substance widely consumed in beverages, medicines, and personal care products. It has been detected in natural watercourses in many countries and is used as a chemical marker for pollution of lakes and rivers, persisting in water with a relatively long half-life time. Prior to the photocatalysis experiments, the ability of the prepared samples for adsorption of caffeine was evaluated in dark conditions for 30 min. Neither pristine TNTs nor C-dots/TNT samples demonstrated significant ability for caffeine adsorption. The absorption spectra of a 20 ppm caffeine aqueous solution during photolysis and using a 20 mg of the different samples as photocatalysts, show that absorption decreases as the irradiation time increases (Figure The best photocatalytic performance was attained for the hybrid C-dots(12.4%)/TNT sample, with which all the caffeine present in the solution was degraded after 120 min of irradiation. Also notice that, under these conditions, it takes only 60 min and 90 min of irradiation to degrade ~84% and ~96% of caffeine, respectively. Interesting to observe, is that the second-best photocatalytic performance for caffeine removal was attained by the hybrid C-dots(1.9%)/TNT sample. The reason why this hybrid sample shows a better photocatalytic performance than C-dots(3.8%)/TNT sample is not fully clear, but it may be related to the lower recombination rate of the photo-excited electrons inferred from the PL data, despite the lower specific surface area of the former hybrid sample. The caffeine photodegradation profiles previously discussed allow going further into the kinetics of the degradation processes studied. The photocatalytic degradation rate of most organic pollutants, including caffeine, can be described by a first order kinetics Thus, by plotting ln(C 0 /C) vs. t, the experimental data can be fitted by a straight line whose slope is the apparent first-order rate constant, k ap . On the other hand, the characteristic reaction half-life time, t 1/2 , can be calculated as t 1/2 = ln 2/k ap . Figure Furthermore, by using hybrid C-dots/TNT samples, all photoreactions present higher k ap values than those in which the pristine TNT(20012) and TNT(16024) samples were used as photocatalysts. In accordance, lower reactions half-life times were obtained for the former reactions in comparison to the latter ones. As expected, among the hybrid C-dots/TNT samples, it is the one with the higher C-dots content that leads to a reaction with the higher k ap value (23.0×10 3  0.4×10 3 min 1 ) and thus to a faster caffeine photodegradation process (t 1/2 = 30.2  0.5 min). Moreover, considering the conditions used in this study and the apparent first-order rate constant deduced for the caffeine photo-mineralization reaction using Cdots(12.4%)/TNT sample as catalyst, it can be inferred that this hybrid sample has a better photocatalytic performance than the most commonly photocatalysts used in caffeine photodegradation processes, such as TiO 2 and ZnO based nanomaterials To discuss possible mechanisms underlying the role of C-dots in the C-dots/TNT photo-assisted catalytic oxidation of caffeine, two distinct photodegradation experiments involving the use of radicals' scavengers were performed using the C-dots(12.4%)/TNT sample as photocatalyst. In one experiment, EDTA  a well-known h + scavenger was added to the reaction media, while in other t-BuOH was added aiming to quench hydroxyl radicals. As well known, holes play an important role in photocatalysis as they can react with adsorbed H 2 O/OH  to generate hydroxyl radicals. Therefore, it is expected that, by adding EDTA to the reaction media containing caffeine, a lower level of  OH production will be observed, together with a decrease on the degree of caffeine photodegradation. On the other hand, the addition of t-BuOH to the reaction media, assuming its capture of hydroxyl radicals, should induce a decrease in caffeine degradation rate but only if the  OH radical plays a relevant role in this pollutant oxidation process. Figure Besides the experiments with h + and  OH scavengers, caffeine photodegradation assays in the absence of oxygen were also performed with the aim of probing its influence on the effective production of oxidizing radicals. In general, adsorbed oxygen acts, in photocatalytic processes, as a scavenger of photoexcited electrons, giving rise to the appearance of the superoxide radical 2 (O )  . Depending on the energetic conditions, this radical may lead to the formation of H 2 O 2 which in turn can be reduced to hydroxyl radical Consequently, the production of hydroxyl radicals via reduction of adsorbed oxygen    will decrease. The photodegradation experiment performed in the absence of oxygen leaded to a very high rate of caffeine degradation (88%) at 30 min of irradiation (Figure To confirm this hypothesis and to further evaluate the impact of the C-dots in the prepared hybrid nanomaterials, a photocatalytic experiment was conducted in the absence of oxygen and with the photo-generated holes and  OH being quenched by MeOH, This result seems to favour the hypothesis that oxidant species arising from C-dots are formed, which also efficiently contribute for the caffeine photodegradation process. Considering the existence of nitrogen in the C-dots composition and reported works Based on the above-described results it is possible to perceive possible driving mechanisms underpinning the photocatalytic activity of the C-dots/TNT hybrid nanomaterials. Those mechanisms are schematically represented in Figure Aiming to develop advanced materials with enhanced optical and photocatalytic properties for the photodegradation of organic pollutants, novel C-dots/TNT hybrid nanostructured materials with C-dots nominal contents of 1.9%, 3.8% and 12.4% were successfully prepared. The structural and microstructural analysis of such hybrid samples showed that increasing the C-dots content leads to the formation of smaller titanate nanoparticles. In particular, the microstructure of both C-dots(3.8%)/TNT and C-dots(12.4%)/TNT samples is analogous to that of TNT(16024) sample prepared under milder conditions of 160 oC and autoclave dwell time of Among the synthetized samples, the best photocatalytic performance for caffeine removal was achieved by that with the higher C-dots content; using C-dots(12.4%)/TNT as photocatalyst, the complete photodegradation of a 20 ppm caffeine aqueous solution (150 mL) was reached after 120 min. The existence of C-dots combined with TNTs, contributes for the enhancement of O 2 reduction in the conduction band. In addition, as electron acceptors, C-dots will also promote the reduction of other species rather than O 2 that will have an important role in the photoassisted oxidation of the caffeine. Supported by these conclusions, an overall model for the possible mechanism of photo-activation of the hybrid C-dots/TNT nanocomposites was proposed. Finally, it is worth mentioning that the synthetic route to hybrid C-dots/TNT nanomaterials here described is based on the use of renewable carbon sources (CIWW), and its valorization. Overall, a low-cost synthesis of new photocatalysts with great potential applications in organic pollutants photodegradation processes was developed. control TNT(16024) sample has a higher S B.E.T. value of 229.9 m 2 g 1 due to its nanotubular structure and smaller particle size. Regarding the hybrid samples' specific surface areas, their values increase as the amount of CIWW used during synthesis increases, reaching a value of 279.8 m 2 g 1 for the hybrid sample with nominal 3.8% of C-dots, with just a slight decrease to 268.9 m 2 g 1 for sample with 12.4% of C-dots. Note that these S B.E.T. values are considerably higher (~15 times) than that of the pristine TNT(20012) sample and are of the same order of magnitude as the one measured for the TNT(16024) sample. Also note that despite both EDA/TNT and CIWW/TNT control samples have similar lattice parameters (Table a (nm) b (nm) c (nm)  (o) D a (nm) b (nm) c (nm)  (o)