The interaction of high-energy electrons and X-ray photons with soft semiconductors such as halide perovskites is essential for the characterisation and understanding of these optoelectronic materials. Using nano-probe diffraction techniques, which can investigate physical properties on the nanoscale, we perform studies of the interaction of electron and X-ray radiation with state-of-the-art (FA 0.79 MA 0.16 Cs 0.05 )Pb(I 0.83 Br 0.17 ) 3 hybrid halide perovskite films (FA, formamidinium; MA, methylammonium). We track the changes in the local crystal structure as a function of fluence using scanning electron diffraction and synchrotron nano X-ray diffraction techniques. We identify perovskite grains from which additional reflections, corresponding to PbBr 2 , appear as a crystalline degradation phase after fluences of ~200 e -Å -2 . These changes are concomitant with the formation of small PbI 2 crystallites at the adjacent high-angle grain boundaries, with the formation of pinholes, and with a phase transition from tetragonal to cubic. A similar degradation pathway is caused by photon irradiation in nano-X-ray diffraction, suggesting common underlying mechanisms. Our approach explores the radiation limits of these materials and provides a description of the degradation pathways on the nanoscale. Addressing high-angle grain boundaries will be critical for the further improvement of halide polycrystalline film stability, especially for applications vulnerable to high-energy radiation such as space photovoltaics. Halide perovskite materials exhibit promising characteristics for optoelectronics applications. These materials can be fabricated through facile processing techniques and yield high performance devices, albeit with large compositional and structural heterogeneities at multiple length scales. Understanding the interaction of the high-energy probe with the samples is critical for acquisition, data analysis, and detector applications. For example, the interaction of focused electron beams with halide perovskites has been reviewed and can be quantified with critical radiation values. These critical values are defined as particle fluences (in units of particles Å -2 ) representing the rate of characteristic irreversible structural changes under particle exposure. Here we use two advanced nanoprobe diffraction techniques, SED and nXRD, to understand the respective interaction of 200 keV electrons and 20 keV X-rays with the local nanostructure of solution-processed halide perovskite films of triple-cation composition (FA 0.79 MA 0.16 Cs 0.05 )Pb(I 0.83 Br 0.17 ) 3 . Thin films of (FA 0.79 MA 0.16 Cs 0.05 )Pb(I 0.83 Br 0.17 ) 3 were solution-processed following optimized protocols for device fabrication compatible with silicon nitride (SiN) grids, ensuring reproducible and comparable results to high-performance devices prepared on standard substrates, 5-dimensional datasets of the films were acquired by combining a time series (t) of SED frames. Each SED frame was acquired over the same region of the sample (x,y), wherein each scanned position contains an electron diffraction pattern (k x , k y ). Between each frame, the electron beam was digitally driven to a controlled beam-parking position within the field of view before being blanked, labeled with a cross in Figure The circular area around the beam parking position is disregarded, using the rest of the scan area for this study, only irradiated during beam rastering. The rich diffraction-based multidimensional dataset enables the investigation of the effects of cumulative electron beam exposure on the nanoscale. Repeated scans were acquired at total fluences from 12 e -Å -2 (1 frame) up to 900 e -Å -2 (75 frames), at which point the diffraction from the halide perovskite film had substantially degraded. Figure The grain labeled in Figure All diffraction patterns can be indexed to a tetragonal perovskite structure in the P4/mbm space group with lattice parameters of 9.00 and 6.36 Å, zone axis with slightly different crystal tilt relative to the electron beam (see Figure When sudden changes in crystal orientation are observed, different types of grain boundaries can be identified. Detailed analysis of the diffraction pattern shows the lattice being mirrored across the (021) plane, marked with a dashed line. \distinctly, the grain boundaries around the central grain are (iii) high-angle, as inferred from orientation analysis on the adjacent grains being near the zone axis instead (see Figure The evolution of the diffraction patterns in Figure We now consider further electron exposure by taking cumulative fluences up to 240 e -Å -2 , as shown in Figure These changes would increase scattering, as seen in the virtual images created from the annularly integrated vDF (Figure We now inspect how the diffraction patterns near the zone axis, taken from the central [100] grain, change in Figure Close assessment reveals that the patterns from this region are indexable to PbBr 2 at the [111] zone axis within a 0.01 Å -1 error, as shown in Figure (see indexation in Figure [100] zone axis within 0.01 Å -1 error, as shown in Figure (Figure These changes are local to the bottom-left corner of the grain, suggesting that lead halides nucleate non-uniformly across the grain. Degradation does not appear to originate from the twin boundaries, consistent with theoretical predictions, whereby the octahedron face-sharing present at the twin boundary stabilizes the twins. Intensity profiles for the perovskite , the PbBr 2 , and the PbI 2 reflections are plotted in Figure In the schematic in Figure These changes result in a tetragonal to cubic phase transition, the formation of small PbI 2 crystallites at the grain boundaries with pinholes, and the redeposition of some organics as a thin amorphous organic film on the surface of the specimen. A grain near the zone axis, which exhibits superlattice reflections attributed to the BX 6 [001] corner-sharing octahedra tilted away from perfect cubic symmetry towards the tetragonal perovskite phase, In this SED experiment the beam parking position was set at the center of the image frame, as shown in Figure [100] Finally, we perform analogous scanning probe synchrotron nXRD measurements to acquire a similar 5D dataset by combining a time series stack of multiple nXRD frames. Such acquisition allows us to study the interaction of highly converged 20 keV X-rays on nominally equivalent triple cation composition perovskite films as previously presented for electrons. The use of nXRD allows for close comparison with SED because it similarly involves scanning over a localized region of interest. Unlike SED, this technique cannot access subgrain features under these conditions, as the X-ray beam diameter is ~150 nm. Figure The main diffraction peaks are indexed to the same tetragonal P4/mbm perovskite phase as in SED. Some crystallographic plane reflections are more prevalent and decay more slowly, which can be linked to the crystal structure. , , and planes are the brightest reflections. The diffraction intensity at these planes is strongly affected by the loss of the halogen atoms from the unit cell since these planes cut mainly across halide positions (see the simulation in Figure strongly, and their relative intensity is more affected by the loss of the organic cations since all contain A+X ion sublattices. In fact, the and planes exhibit the slowest decay (220) (130) rate (see Figure Some weak and broad reflections appear after 5 frames (4,650 photons Å -2 ) in the range Å -1 (Figure The reflection at ~Å-1 matches the 4H-PbI 2 plane, but also matches 0. 436 ± 0. 003 (110) Our combined results offer an understanding of the changes induced by the interaction of electrons and X-rays with soft perovskite semiconductors. Each diffraction technique used offers some advantages over the other. nXRD provides excellent resolution in reciprocal space, but lower resolution in real space. X-ray based techniques are extremely useful to discern crystal structures with similar features. Since many of the degradation changes occur on the nanoscale, nXRD in general is unable to spatially resolve such changes. In contrast, SED offers excellent spatial resolution and allows mapping of crystallographic changes at the nanometer scale. However, in SED, points in reciprocal space are broadened by a shape factor and spread out forming disks, due to the use of thin samples and a finite convergence semi-angle, respectively. Multiple of these diffraction discs are intersected by the lower curvature of the Ewald sphere, compared to X-rays, limiting the resolution in reciprocal space of SED. Due to the similarity between pristine and intermediate perovskite degradation phases such as the 2H, 4H and 6H polytypes, Further studies using precession electron diffraction, which offers more complete integration of the diffraction space, could overcome the latter constraint if performed under low fluences. However, inelastic scattering is also always present in XRD, with a ratio of inelastic to elastic scattering cross-sections also inversely proportional to atomic number by for 20 50 • Z -1.7 keV photons. These ratios highlight the higher need to account for photon beam damage when X-rays are used on hybrid materials, especially for prolonged exposures (see estimations in the SI and Figure Our conclusions have implications for understanding the changes on the nanoscale of halide perovskites upon interaction with high-energy radiation, in particular electrons and X-rays. We have identified local changes on the nanostructure at extremely low radiation exposure, leading to changes in the orientation of the grains. At high radiation exposure, degradation of the perovskite phase involves iodine migration, producing decomposition to lead halide species. PbBr2 reflections appear within perovskite grains that exhibit PbI2 crystallites growing at their grain boundaries. Specifically, regions showing high-angle defective grain boundaries are important for degradation. Passivation and growth strategies targeting the removal of such high-angle defective grain boundaries will be critical for the further mitigation of halide perovskite instabilities, especially for applications vulnerable to high-energy radiation. Finally, the findings reported here provide a further understanding of the exposure limits of high-energy electron and photon beams, being <200 e-Å-2 at 200 keV and <5,000 photons Å-2 at 20 keV, respectively. These critical radiation exposures are crucial for any characterisation technique studying the nanoscale of halide perovskites and, more generally soft semiconductors, as well as to further understand the challenges that perovskite solar cells still face for space applications. Sample preparation: All procedures were followed inside an inert N 2 -gas glovebox. The perovskite precursors solutions were prepared by first dissolving FAI (1.0 M) and MABr (0.2 M), PbI 2 (1.1 M), and PbBr 2 (0.22 M) in a mixture of anhydrous DMF and DMSO (4:1 v:v). A solution of CsI (1.5 M in DMSO) was then added to the precursor solution as 5% of the total volume, yielding a (FA 0.79 MA 0.16 Cs 0.05 )Pb(I 0.83 Br 0.17 ) 3 perovskite precursor. Lead halide precursors were supplied by TCI, organic compounds were supplied by Greatcell Solar, CsI and solvents were supplied by Sigma. To fabricate thin electron-transparent specimens for SED, the perovskite solution was diluted in anhydrous DMF: DMSO 4:1 (v:v) in a 2:1 ratio of diluent to precursor solution, and spin-coated on SiN TEM grids with a 30-nm thick low-stress amorphous Si 3 N 4 membrane window (NT025X, Norcada). Spin-coating was followed in two steps at 2,000 and 6,000 rpm for 10 s and 35 s respectively, with 20 μl of chlorobenzene added 30 s before the end of the second step. The films were then annealed at 100 °C for 1 h, yielding films of ~200 nm. To fabricate thin films for the nXRD studies, the same protocol was used to prepare an almost identical perovskite precursor solution of (FA 0.79 MA 0.15 Cs 0.06 )Pb(I 0.85 Br 0.15 ) 3 . The precursor was then spin-coated on X-ray transparent windows (Norcada, NX7100C), following the same protocol as for the SED samples, and then annealed, yielding films of ~500-600 nm. SED: During SED microscopy, a 2D electron diffraction pattern is measured at every probe position of an electron beam in STEM mode. SED data was acquired on the JEOL ARM300CF E02 instrument at ePSIC (Diamond Light Source, Didcot-Oxford, UK). A monolithic Merlin/Medipix direct electron detector with 4 back-contacts was used to acquire fast low-dose SED. These direct electron detectors allow for better SNR under lower doses due to the superior quantum efficiency compared to traditional CCD. The detector was set to 6-bit, to maintain the targeted electron fluence and fast acquisition readout rate. In the initial frames of the acquisition, some diffraction patterns exhibited saturation at the direct beam position, due to the bit-depth limitations of the direct electron detector imposed by the fast low-dose acquisition conditions. Such saturated pixels are occasional but visible as the brightest pixels in Figure Post-processing of SED diffraction data was done using pyXem 0.12 (an open-source Python library based on HyperSpy-based for crystallographic electron microscopy). All diffraction patterns were distortion corrected and calibrated with an Au cross grating. The drift in the beam position of the non-scattered beam was corrected and centered for all frames using cross-correlation with a subpixel factor of 10. To display diffraction planes that match real-space features, all diffraction patterns shown in the main text were rotation corrected using a MoO 3 calibration sample. Dead pixels and detector junctions were masked. No sample drift correction was necessary. Finally, the background noise in all diffraction patterns was filtered, setting a threshold of detector pixels with single counts to zero. nXRD: Scanning nano-XRD data was acquired at the synchrotron beamline I14 of the Diamond Light Source (Didcot-Oxford, UK). 2D diffraction patterns were recorded at each stage position as the specimen was moved through the X-ray beam. An array of 3 Medipix 2048 x 512-pixel arrays in transmission mode (Excalibur 3M) was used to acquire diffraction data. To examine the effect of repeated maps on the same region of a film, a scan loop was measured within a 5 x 5 μm region until most of the diffraction spots were no longer visible. A 20 keV monochromatic X-ray beam (λ = 0.619 nm) was used, focused to ~150 nm. Samples were mounted onto the I14 standard sample holder and measured under a local flow of dry N 2 to suppress perovskite degradation that is accelerated by moisture and oxygen. 2D sum patterns across the scanned region were used without processing. 1D patterns were radially integrated using the Data Analysis WorkbeNch (DAWN) with a CeO 2 calibration standard and a mask to remove dead pixels and detector edges. All diffraction patterns in this work are reported in 'ordinary' wavevectors ( ). Note k = 1/d that these units differ from the "angular" wavevectors definition ( ) by a factor of q = 2π/d , which is often used in X-ray crystallography literature. 2π Crystal structure library: All diffraction patterns from this work can be closely indexed to a pseudo-cubic/tetragonal perovskite unit cell (P4/mbm) with lattice parameters of a = b = 9.00 and 6.36 Å. Despite the stoichiometry of the sample being the complex c = (FA 0.79 MA 0.16 Cs 0.05 )Pb(I 0.83 Br 0.17 ) 3 perovskite composition, it can be approximated as a simpler unit cell made from the predominant ion at each site (C, Pb and I) and with manually scaled lattice parameters to fit the experimental observations. Any variations that would occur in diffraction patterns between the simpler model used here and the more complex structure are minor and hard to discern in the reciprocal-space resolution of our SED technique (under acquisition conditions one pixel in the detector is 0.0046 Å -1 ). A series of different plausible degradation crystal structures were also considered, to attempt the indexation of some of the additional reflections appearing after radiation exposure. In the diffraction patterns discussed in this work. The structure files were retrieved from the crystallography open database. All diffraction simulations were performed using Single Crystal 4 (CrystalMaker Software Limited), adjusting the simulation parameters to resemble the experimental data (200 keV, detector spot size 0.025 Å -1 , saturation 10, gamma 2). Simulation files in '.scdx' format can be found in the Supporting Data. SED studies were supported by the access to e02 at ePSIC (MG25250) and nXRD studies were supported by access to the I14 beamline (SP-20420). Mohsen Danaie and Julia Parker are acknowledged for their support during the acquisition and calibration of the SED and nXRD data, respectively. To fabricate the samples for the static XRD studies, glass coverslips (18 mm x 18 mm, 0.13-0.17 mm thickness, Academy) were cleaned in acetone and isopropanol (10 minutes each) in an ultrasonic bath. The substrates were treated for 10 minutes in an oxygen plasma cleaner immediately before the spin-coating procedure and annealing thereafter. The same protocols as for the nXRD sample preparation were followed, yielding films of ~500-600 nm thickness. Static XRD: Static synchrotron XRD data was acquired at the European Synchrotron Radiation Source (ESRF, Grenoble, France). A 17.2 keV monochromatic X-ray beam (λ = 0.729 Å) was focused to a 'box beam' significantly larger than the individual grain size (~150nm), approximated as 1 μm 2 , ensuring that there was a uniform flux intensity across the beam, and that a large number of grain orientations were sampled. The diffracted X-ray signal mas collected by a FReLON CCD camera placed 0.188 m from the sample. A sample was irradiated, forming a 2D diffraction pattern, and then an image was acquired every 0.5 s (with a dwell time between frames of 1.14 s) until the diffraction spots were no longer visible. The incoming flux was indirectly measured using an ion chamber with N2 gas and with a picometer current detector. From the 2D detector images, the Python Fast Azimuthal Integration tool (pyFAI) was used to azimuthally integrate to 1D XRD patterns. ms, the overexposure during acquisition of the beam parking position is 500 ms per scan. Given the 1 ms dwell time during scanning, the overexposure at the parking position is ~x500 larger. Such overexposure is localised within the circular beam of ~5 nm diameter, yet its effects extend around the ~90 nm radius interaction volume. nXRD: Flux is defined as photons per second. In the nXRD experiment, flux was indirectly measured using a calibrator diode (Si). The diode outputs a flux value in Amperes (A) per s, but has a responsibility factor. Taking as the diode responsibility conversion factor 0.108 ± 0.0005 A/W (from calibrations in the DIAMOND centre), the flux can be converted to photon power in Watts (W). The rate of photons at a particular wavelength and power can be then calculated by using the equation for photon energy, E = hc/λ (where h is Planck's constant and λ = 0.619 nm from the beam energy of 20 keV), yielding a flux (photons per second). However, the diode measurements will be slightly lower than the flux values on the sample, as the diode was placed within 200 mm away from the sample holder. X-ray attenuation by the air can be estimated using the mass attenuation coefficient of dry air for a 20 keV beam from the NIST database, as μ/ρ = 1.7 × 10 -2 cm 2 /g. The diode current measurement was 1.13 × 10 -7 A, which can be converted to a photon power of 1.1 × 10 6 W. Without the need to account for the flux attenuation by the air, a final flux value of 3 × 10 9 photons/s is calculated for each frame. Fluence (flux density) is defined as photons per unit area, and can be calculated from the X-ray beam size (which matches the rastered pixel size of the detector of 150 nm) and the dwell time per pixel (0.5 s), yielding a fluence of 775 photons Å -2 for each frame. ). Adapted from CRC Press. The degree of the grain tilting in-plane can be estimated by fitting a Ewald circle passing though the brightest diffraction reflections and using Bragg's diffraction law: Where r is the radius of the fitted circle (in the same units as the wavelength) and λ = 2.5 pm is the wavelength of the electron beam. For some grains of interest, were initially off zone axis are estimated in Figure Similar comparable results on other halide perovskite samples are observed. Figure Figure Figure ) and the atomic number (Z) is found: Elastic and inelastic cross section ratio for X-rays: The elastic and inelastic cross sections for highenergy photons are retrieved from the XCOM Photon Cross Sections Database. Figure ) Again, these amount of charge carrier densities should be taken as over-simplistic approximations. However, the charge carrier densities from the two different techniques are in a similar order of magnitude, higher than the charge carrier densities of these materials under 1 sun illumination (10 14 to 10 16 e --h + -pairs cm -3 ). The electron spectra from the safer orbit near the planet Earth, and the harsher orbit in Jupiter were simulated using SPENVIS. Figure 