Josephson junctions containing ferromagnetic materials exhibit interesting physics and show promise as circuit elements for superconducting logic and memory. For memory applications, the properties of the junction should be controllable by changing the magnetic configuration inside the junction. To achieve good magnetic switching properties, one should choose a soft magnetic material such as NiFe (permalloy); however, NiFe exhibits poor supercurrent transmission in Josephson junctions. In this work we put thin layers of Ni on either side of the NiFe and characterize the magnetic behavior and supercurrent transmission properties of the Ni/NiFe/Ni trilayers as a function of Ni and NiFe thicknesses. Using a Ni thickness of 0.4 nm, we find that the magnetic switching behavior of the trilayers is not severely degraded relative to plain NiFe, while the maximum supercurrent in the π-state of the trilayer Josephson junctions is increased by a factor of four relative to that of NiFe junctions. We speculate that the supercurrent enhancement is due to the different spin-dependent transport properties of the Cu/Ni and Cu/NiFe interfaces. I-V curves were measured as a function of field, in fields up to 0.1 T in both directions. Josephson junctions containing ferromagnetic materials are the subject of intense study both because of their rich physics For memory applications it would be advantageous to be able to change the properties of a junction by changing the magnetic configuration inside the junction The applications mentioned above can be divided into two classes: those where the ferromagnetic Josephson junction acts as a passive phase shifter, always remaining in the supercurrent-carrying state, and those where the critical current is occasionally exceeded, * birge@msu.edu causing the junction to switch momentarily into the voltage state. In the former case, the junction is typically surrounded by conventional superconductor/insulator/superconductor (S/I/S) junctions, which undergo switching during logic or memory read operations. The ferromagnetic (S/F/S) junction must then have larger critical current (I c ) than the nearby S/I/S junctions to avoid switching of the S/F/S junction into the voltage state. While one can increase I c simply by increasing the lateral area of the junction, that is undesirable because it causes the magnetic layers to be in a multi-domain state, which is detrimental to their magnetic switching properties. Instead, it is preferable for the S/F/S junction to have a critical current density, J c , that is much larger than that of the nearby S/I/S junctions. In the latter case where the junction switches into the voltage state during logic operations, one desires instead to have a large I c R N product, where R N is the normal-state resistance of the junction, because the speed at which the junction switches from the supercurrent state to the voltage state is proportional to I c R N . That can be achieved by inserting a thin insulating barrier inside the junction in tandem with an extra superconducting layer to make a so-called S/I/s/F/S junction The Josephson junctions used in many of the junctionmodulation demonstrations mentioned earlier The moment vs field measurements for all sets of thin films were performed using a SQUID-based Vibrating Sample Magnetometer (VSM) at a temperature of 10 K. The detailed fabrication process for ferromagnetic Josephson junctions has been published previously The bottom lead photo-lithographic stencil was patterned on a Si substrate, and then [Nb(25)/Al(2.4)] 3 /Nb(20)/Cu(2)/F/Cu(2)/Nb(5)/Au We deposited three different sets of junctions: in the first set, the F layers consisted of Ni(0.4)/NiFe(d NiFe )/Ni(0.4) where d NiFe was varied from 0.4 to 3.4 nm in steps of 0.2 nm; in the second set, the F layers were Ni(0.2)/NiFe(d NiFe )/Ni(0.2) where d NiFe was varied from 0.2 to 1.6 nm in steps of 0.2 nm; in the third set the F layers were NiFe(d NiFe ) where d NiFe was varied from 1.0 to 3.7 nm in steps of 0.1 nm. The depositions were performed at similar substrate temperature and Ar pressure as our thin films described earlier. Elliptical junctions with lateral dimensions of 1.25 μm×0.5 μm and major axis oriented along the magnetic easy axis defined by the magnetocrystalline anisotropy were then patterned by e-beam lithography with a negative ma-N2401 e-beam resist followed by ion-milling. The area surrounding the junctions was then covered with SiO x in-situ to avoid shorting between the bottom and top superconducting electrodes. The e-beam resist was then removed, and the top lead stencil was patterned using photolithography. After 5 nm of the previous Au Josephson junctions were mounted on a probe with a built-in superconducting magnet and inserted inside a liquid helium dewar for transport measurements at 4.2 K. The samples were first initialized in a magnetic field of 0.2 T applied along the magnetic easy axis (elliptical major axis) to fully saturate the magnetic layers. Then Assuming that magnetization reversal in thin films proceeds largely by domain wall motion, the large coercivities of the thinnest films imply that domain wall pinning is dominated by surface effects. For applications in sub-micron Josephson junctions, it is advisable to make the junctions small enough so that the nanomagnets are single-domain and switch via coherent rotation of the magnetization (Stoner-Wohlfarth switching). In that case, shape anisotropy supplies an additional en- ergy barrier to switching. As a result, the coercive fields shown in Fig. Fig. Josephson junctions containing ferromagnetic materials exhibit overdamped dynamics in the absence of an insulating barrier in the junction. The I -V curves of these junctions can be fit to the Resistively Shunted Junction model: where I c0 is the maximum value of I c , J 1 is the Bessel function of the first kind, Φ 0 = 2 × 10 -15 Tm 2 is the flux quantum, and the total magnetic flux through the junction is given by: where λ eff is the effective London penetration depth, d N is the thickness of the normal layers, d F is the thickness of the ferromagnetic layers, M is a weighted average of the Ni and NiFe magnetizations, and w is the width of the junctions transverse to the field direction. (Note that Eqn. 3 neglects the very small demagnetizing field as well as any flux from the F layer that returns inside the junction -i.e. between the bottom and top S electrodes.) The solid lines in Fig. To obtain the maximum critical current density, J c0 , one would divide the measured value of I c0 for each junction by the junction area. Due to the process variation discussed in Appendix A and the difficulty in obtaining accurate values of the individual junction areas, we plot instead the product of I c times the measured normal state resistance, R N . The I c R N product is nearly independent of junction area and serves as a surrogate for J c . Figure The junctions in the latter study were fabricated and measured in our laboratory and exhibit I c R N products similar to those shown in the right panel of Fig. To obtain values of J c from the data shown in Fig. The behavior of I c R N versus ferromagnet thickness has been calculated theoretically Due to the rather short mean free path of minority electrons in NiFe our I c R N vs thickness data to the following equation: where V 0 sets the overall magnitude of I c R N , ξ F 1 and ξ F 2 are length scales that control the decay and oscillation period in the ferromagnet F, and d 0-π is the thickness where the first 0 -π transition occurs. Even though Ni and NiFe have different values of ξ F 1 and ξ F 2 , for simplicity we consider the Ni/NiFe/Ni trilayer as a single F layer instead of three separate ones. The solid lines in Fig. The enhancement of the critical current in the π-state of NiFe Josephson junctions has been achieved by adding 0.4 nm of Ni at each NiFe/Cu interface. But how does this "interface engineering" actually work? We offer several perspectives on this question. Conceptually, one may think of this effect as analogous to impedance matching of transmission lines. The major difference, of course, is that the impedance is a single number, whereas at a solid-solid interface one has to sum the transmissions of the k-states over the entire Fermi surfaces of both materials at the interface. Using simplified models of interfaces that neglect details of band structure, Pugach et al. Our own perspective on this issue is somewhat different, and derives from studies of Giant Magnetoresistance (GMR) of magnetic multilayers over the past 30 years As a final note, we mentioned in the Introduction that one can achieve high I c R N product in ferromagnetic junctions with structure S/I/s/F/S. For example, the junctions reported in Refs. In conclusion, supercurrent transmission through NiFe Josephson junctions can be enhanced by adding thin layers of Ni at the interface on both sides. The cost to magnetic switching properties is minimal for samples with Ni(0.2) and Ni(0.4) layers. For samples with Ni(0.4) layers, there was roughly a factor of 4-5 improvement in the supercurrent transmission in the π-state. We suggest that this is due to better band-matching at the Cu/Ni interface versus the Cu/NiFe interface. First-principles band-structure calculations coupled with calculations of Josephson junction supercurrent, similar to those performed in ref. Theoretical calculations show that the effective London penetration depth 2λ eff in Eqn. 3 is given by: where λ 1 , λ 2 are the London penetration depths and d 1 , d 2 are the thicknesses of the top and bottom leads, respectively For the data shown in Fig. 