Recent advancements in nanofabrication have enabled the creation of vacuum electronic devices with nanoscale free space gaps. These nanoelectronic devices promise the benefits of cold-field emission and transport through free-space, such as high nonlinearity and relative insensitivity to temperature and ionizing radiation, all the while drastically reducing the footprint, increasing the operating bandwidth and reducing the power consumption of each device. Furthermore, planarized vacuum nanoelectronics could easily be integrated at scale similar to typical micro and nanoscale semiconductor electronics. However, the interplay between different electron emission mechanisms from these devices are not well understood, and inconsistencies with pure Fowler-Nordheim emission have been noted by others. In this work, we systematically study the current-voltage characteristics of planar vacuum nano-diodes having few-nanometer radii of curvature and free-space gaps between the emitter and collector. By investigating the current-voltage characteristics of nearly identical diodes fabricated from two different materials and under various environmental conditions, such as temperature and atmospheric pressure, we were able to clearly isolate three distinct emission regimes within a single device: Schottky, Fowler-Nordheim, and saturation. Our work will enable robust and accurate modeling of vacuum nanoelectronics which will be critical for future applications requiring high-speed and low-power electronics capable of operation in extreme conditions. Free-electron devices based on field emission played an important role in the early days of electronic systems development. In fact, vacuum tubes constituted the main building blocks of the first electronic computers, including Colossus Despite these clear advantages, the underlying emission mechanisms of these devices is poorly understood. In literature, these devices are typically described using a pure Fowler-Nordheim tunneling emission model In this work, we compared the emission characteristics of metallic (Au) and refractory (TiN) vacuum-channel bow-tie diodes having few-nm radii of curvature and sub-20-nm air/vacuum gaps. This comparison is of interest as the TiN devices are more resilient, allowing us to reach higher current densities from the emitters and thus transition to different emission regimes. While prior work has focused on three-terminal devices, we have chosen to focus on two-terminal diodes which allowed us to simplify the device geometry and focus on the underlying emission physics. We showed that these vacuum nano-diodes can be operated reliably with turn-on voltages of < 10 V and from nA to μA-level operating currents per device. We demonstrated repeatable behavior over many devices and over several scans per device. We analyzed the measured IV characteristics under variable temperature and atmospheric pressure to reveal the dominant mechanisms responsible for electron emission, and to rule out substrate conduction. In particular, we isolated threee distinct emission regimes from single devices for the first time: Schottky, Fowler-Nordheim field emission, and saturation. The transition between these regimes is still under scrutiny from a theoretical perspective, where some important effort has been done to build a model that would encompass all three. To analyze the emission behavior of these planar vacuum nanoemitters we fabricated both metallic (Au) and refractory (TiN) planar nano vacuum channel (pNVC) bow-tie diodes having 10-20 nm vacuum gaps, using the procedures laid out in the methods section. Typical examples of the resulting structures are illustrated in the scanning electron microscope (SEM) micrographs shown in Fig. We found that introducing an undercut reliably eliminated this effect. An example of the effect of the undercut can be seen in Fig. After the fabrication, we proceeded with analyzing the I-V response of tens of devices fabricated to investigate the underlying emission mechanisms. The testing was performed in a vacuum chamber with pressure of 10 -6 mbar using a Keysight B2912A SMU. Fig. The inset shows the same curve plotted in a log(I) vs V 1/2 plot, which is useful for identifying emission in Schottky regime. The Schottky emission regime applies to field-enhanced thermionic emission. In the Schottky emission regime, the applied field reduces the work function barrier height, and enhances the thermionic emission. Schottky emission can be modeled as where γ is the field enhancement factor, T is the temperature, 0 is the vacuum permittivity, q is the electron charge, k B is the Boltzmann constant, V is the potential, and d is the gap between the tips. Schottky emission therefore would appear linear with a positive slope when plotting log(I) vs V 1/2 . As such, we refer to these plots as "Schottky plots" for simplicity throughout the remainder of this work. We can see that the tested gold device exhibits a linear characteristic in this plot over the entire range of bias voltages tested, indicating that Schottky emission could be dominant. To ensure our interpretation is correct, we also considered emission due to Fowler-Nordheim tunneling. The Fowler-Nordheim regime applies to cold-field-emission where the electrons tunnel through the work-function barrier from the Fermi surface of the material, and is the most commonly used theory for modeling field-induced electron emission in literature. Fowler-Nordheim emission can be modeled analytically as: In this plot, we can identify a Schottky regime which manifests as a linear dependence in the inset. This is followed by a superlinear regime and then a saturation. (d) TiN experimental results in Fowler-Nordheim plot. Here, we can identify that the superlinear regime that was visible in the Schottky plot is indeed driven by Fowler-Nordheim emission. In fact, this region can be fitted with a FN model, assuming a γ = 10×, which is consistent with the simulation. These tests were performed at 10 -6 mbar. where v(y) = 1 -y 2 -y 2 log(y)/3, y = 2 e 2 γV 16dπ 0 1 φ , φ work function and b = 6.83 eV -3/2 V nm -1 . For the FN fit we used a more complete version of this formula, which can be found in Kyritsakis e al. To investigate what impact the emitter material might have on the emission properties, we then performed similar testing on the TiN devices. Thanks to their more resilient nature and a thicker oxide, we were able to run the TiN devices at higher fields and current densities, which allowed us to see transitions between different emission regimes as can be seen in Figs. To further investigate our findings, we next tested the temperature dependence of the devices' IV response. Such tests should clearly differentiate between Schottky and Fowler-Nordheim emission as Schottky emkission depends strongly on temperature, while Fowler-Nordheim emission does not. The temperature tests were done by placing a heating stage inside the vacuum chamber in thermal contact with the sample. The results of this test are shown in Fig. On the other hand, for the TiN devices, we can clearly see all three regimes. In the Schottky regime, which dominates at the lowest voltages, there is a temperature dependence which manifests as vertically-spaced parallel traces in the Schottky plot in the inset of Fig. When the same data are plotted on a FN graph (Fig. We also investigated the influence of ambient air pressure on the devices. To do this, we initially tested the devices at 1e-6 mbar and then we vented the chamber and recorded the IV characteristic at different intervals after exposure to ambient air. The sub-20nm gaps ensure that even in ambient pressure the conduction through the emitter to collector gap happens in an effective vacuum, not mediated by the gas. This is a because the air molecules mean free path at atmospheric pressure is larger than the gap size. However, as can be seen in Fig. work function at the emission surfaces. In the case of TiN devices oxidation might also play a role. In both cases, the vacuum emission characteristics can be fully recovered after a few burn-in cycles (i.e. running a few IV sweeps that clean the emission surface from absorbed molecules) once they are placed back in vacuum. It is also noteworthy that the current drop experienced by the refractory devices when exposed to atmospheric pressure is less dramatic than that experienced by the metallic devices. Indeed, the refractory device in Fig. We investigated the emission physics of planar NVC diodes. To do so, we analyzed the IV characteristics of two different emitter materials, Au and TiN, under varying temperatures and atmospheric conditions. While past work had primarily used Fowler-Nordheim tunneling to model the emission The devices are first tested in a vacuum chamber with a 10 -6 mbar vacuum. Then the chamber is vented with air and a series of consecutive traces are recorded at different time intervals: 1, 5, 10, 30 and 60 min. The drop in current is due to adsorption on the tip surface and shows that the conduction is indeed in the vacuum channel with no significant contribution due to substrate conduction, which would not be affected by the pressure. physics of such devices, a large discrepancy was found between the fitted electric field enhancement factor and that expected from electromagnetic modeling. Upon closer inspection in this work, we found that Schottky emission tends to dominate at lower applied bias values. In particular, we found that for the Au devices we were only able to observe temperature-dependent Schottky emission before the onset of damage. Instead, for TiN, thanks to the possibility of exploring higher potentials given their higher physical robustness, we were able to identify the transition from Shottky to Fowler-Nordheim tunneling before a final transition to saturation. We ascribe the saturation regime to the Child-Langmuir space charge limitation. Depending on the device requirements (e.g. low voltage or high transconductance) devices could be designed to operate in different regimes. These findings mark an important step toward the development of accurate models necessary for the designa and realization of high-speed We explored two different materials for these devices: Au and TiN. Therefore, we developed two different fabrication techniques. The patterning of the Au devices is achieved through a lift-off process. Instead, the patterning of the TiN is achieved through etching using an hard mask. In the following we are going to illustrate the main steps of these fabrication. We developed this process for Au devices but, in general, it can be extended to the patterning of any metallic material that can be e-beam evaporated. Fig 5a is a graphical illustration of the different steps of the process: 1. EBL patterning of PMMA A2 resist on a thermal oxide on Si substrate: this step is performed to pattern the devices; 2. resist development and ebeam evaporation of 5 nm Cr and 20 nm Au; 3. lift off in heated NMP; 4. photolithography of a bilayer PMGI+S1813 resist: this step is performed to pattern the pads for the electrical connections; 5. resist development and ebeam evaporation of 30 nm Cr and 150 nm Au 6. lift off in NMP 7. CF4 RIE and 40s of (9:1) DI:BOE HF: step that creates an undercut at the tip We did some preliminary test without the last step, but we observed a low current and hysteretic IV characteristics of the devices. We concluded that such effect was caused by emitted electrons that gets trapped in the oxide creating a repulsive potential which prevented further electrons to be emitted. Once the etching step used to create the undercut was introduced the effect disappeared. An example of a completed structure done with this process is shown in Fig 1a. We developed this process for TiN devices but, in general, it can be adapted to the patterning of many hard materials, modifying the first etching step chemistry. Fig 5b is a graphical illustration of the different steps of the process: 1. reactive sputtering of TiN 2. EBL patterning of PMMA A2 resist on a thermal oxide on Si substrate: this step is performed to pattern the hard mask; 3. resist development and e-beam evaporation of bilayer hard mask (15 nm Al and 15 nm Cr). We determined that Cr hard mask gives the best results in terms of sidewalls steepness but it is hard to remove. Using a bilayer mask allows us to exploit the Cr benefits and then remove it with an Al lift-off; 4. lift off in heated NMP; 5. CF4/O2 RIE etching: this step is performed to pattern the devices; 6. EBL patterning of ZEP502A resist: this step is performed to pattern a region that will undergo the etching for creating the undercut; 