The nature and origin of electronic nematicity remains a significant challenge in our understanding of the iron-based superconductors. This is particularly evident in the iron chalcogenide, FeSe, where it is currently unclear how the experimentally determined Fermi surface near the M point evolves from having two electron pockets in the tetragonal state, to exhibiting just a single electron pocket in the nematic state. This has posed a major theoretical challenge, which has become known as the missing electron pocket problem of FeSe, and is of central importance if we wish to uncover the secrets behind nematicity and superconductivity in the wider ironbased superconductors. Here, we review the recent experimental work uncovering this nematic Fermi surface of FeSe from both ARPES and STM measurements, as well as current theoretical attempts to explain this missing electron pocket of FeSe, with a particular focus on the emerging importance of incorporating the dxy orbital into theoretical descriptions of the nematic state. Furthermore, we will discuss the consequence this missing electron pocket has on the theoretical understanding of superconductivity in this system and present several remaining open questions and avenues for future research. One of the reasons for the huge interest in FeSe over the past decade has been the sense that it holds the key to the wider understanding of the whole Fe-based superconductor family The measurement of the momentum-dependence of the superconducting gap in FeSe, between 2016 and 2018, was a particular experimental triumph. The data from both scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) A critical question required to understand this anisotropic superconducting gap is how does the nematic state influence the the low temperature Fermi surface and electronic structure of FeSe? Given that we have a second-order phase transition Unfortunately, the precise identification of specific parts of the band structure, the nematic energy scales and even the Fermi surface of FeSe has been complicated by the formation of orthorhombic domains upon entering the nematic state. In an orthorhombic crystal, conventional ARPES experiments measure a superposition of two perpendicularly orientated crystallographic domains, which doubles the number of bands observed in the experimental data and creates ambiguity about which bands arise from which domain. For this reason, a recent focal point of research has involved overcoming this technical challenge of orthorhombic domains, for example by applying uniaxial strain In this review we will overview the recent experimental arXiv:2201.11702v1 [cond-mat.supr-con] 27 Jan 2022 FIG. From both a theoretical and experimental point of view, the electronic structure of the tetragonal state is relatively well understood. Prior to the onset of nematicity at T s = 90 K, FeSe exhibits tetragonal symmetry with a P 4/nmm crystal structure The low energy electronic properties are governed by the partially-filled 3d xz , 3d yz and 3d xy orbitals of the two Fe atoms, which in momentum space gives rise to three hole bands around the Γ point and two symmetry-protected saddle point van-Hove singularities around the M point Of the three hole bands, two exist as a C 4 symmetric pair exhibiting predominantly d xz and d yz orbital weight (labelled h 1 and h 2 in Fig. The experimentally measured Fermi surface of FeSe at 100 K (or more precisely, a map of the experimental spectral function at the chemical potential) at approximately k z = π is shown in Fig. The third d xy hole band, h 3 , is observed to be much flatter and cross both h 1 and h 2 at an energy of approximately -50 meV. In most ARPES data sets, this band has a much lower intensity than the h 1 and h 2 bands, which is a consequence of photoemission-based matrix element effects, which ensures the intensity of photoelectrons originating from d xy states with momentum near |k| = 0 will be suppressed Near the corner of the Brillouin zone, both the d xy dominated electron band, connected to vH 2 , and the d xz /d yz electron band, connecting to vH 1 , are observed to cross the Fermi level. Here the outer four-fold symmetric electron pocket is dominated by d xy orbital character while the inner pocket is dominated by d xz and d yz orbital weight These two sets of electron bands connect to the saddle points which have an energy of approximately vH 1 = -20 meV and vH 2 = -40 meV at the high symmetry point. The exact position of these stationary points, however, are masked by the presence of self-energy interactions which give rise to a broadening of the electronic states around the M point. This broadening is also captured in theoretical simulations involving spin and charge fluctuations The ARPES data presented in Fig. There are, however, serious quantitative issues with DFTbased calculations, which severely limit its use in describing the low energy properties of FeSe. First, DFT-based calculations overestimate the bandwidth of the Fe 3d-bands by a factor of ∼3 Due to the current limitations in ab-initio modelling however, a substantial amount of work has gone into developing quantitatively accurate tight binding models of FeSe We now focus on the electronic structure in the nematic state. Here experimental measurements encounter a major challenge. The nematic state is accompanied by a tetragonal to orthorhombic structural transition, at which point multiple orthorhombic domains form in the crystal. It has been identified that these domains are typically on the order of 1-5 μm in size Multiple ARPES measurements on twinned crystals of FeSe have been reported The challenge now lies in identifying which of these pockets, comes from which domain. The two hole pockets can be easily understood as one ellipse from each orthorhombic domain. Measurements of the band dispersion around the hole pocket reveal that the inner hole band (h 2 ) undergoes a Lifshitz transition as a function of temperature and resides below the Fermi level at 10 K, whilst the outer hole band (h 1 ) elongates into an elliptical shape. As all three hole bands can be tracked as a function of temperature from the tetragonal to nematic state, there is little ambiguity about the shape of the hole pocket Fermi surface at low temperatures. However, it is not possible to identify the orientation of the elliptical hole pocket from a single domain, i.e to identify whether it elon-gates along the orthorhombic a or b axis simply from these twinned measurements. For the electron pocket, however, the understanding was less clear, and historically several distinct band structures have been interpreted from nearly identical data sets Compared to the measurements on twinned data, a much more preferable method to study the Fermi surface of FeSe would be to experimentally overcome the limitation imposed by these orthorhombic domains, and directly measure the electronic structure from a single crystallographic orientation. There are two strategies to overcome the twinning issue faced by ARPES measurements. Either 1) generate a sample with macroscopic ordering of the orthorhombic domains on length scales larger than the photon beam cross section, or 2) make the photon beam much smaller than the size of an orthorhombic domain. It has been known from earlier work on the 122 family of Fe-based superconductors that upon the application of "uniaxial" strain along the Fe-Fe direction, it becomes energetically favourable for a majority of the orthorhombic domains to align along that axis The first ARPES measurements on uniaxial strained samples of FeSe were performed in 2014 by Shimojima et. al. This finding of only a single electron pocket at the Fermi level was not the expected theoretical result A natural question when studying the evolution of the electronic structure of FeSe from the tetragonal to nematic state is to ask how do ARPES measurements evolve as a function of temperature. Many data sets on twinned samples exist (as discussed e.g by Coldea and Watson In twinnned crystals, the temperature dependence of the hole bands leaves little room for ambiguity, and can be neatly tracked as a function of temperature Unfortunately, the additional complication of uniaxial strain in detwinned measurements makes temperature dependent analysis technically even more challenging. By changing the temperature of your system, you inevitably alter the amount of strain applied to the sample due to thermal expansion of the rig, which in turn may alter the relative pop- ) ) 1st domain 2nd domain ) ) ulation of orthorhombic domains you are probing, and moreover the energetics of domain formation may be temperaturedependent. Cai et. al. On the other hand, Yi et. al. We conclude by noting that temperature-dependent ARPES measurements of the electron pocket are very challenging to perform, firstly because of the issue with orthorhombic domains, and secondly due to the intrinsic broadness of the van hove singularities measured by ARPES. One approach to overcome this limitation would be to systematically study the evolution of the low temperature electronic structure across the series of isoelectronic sulphur substituted FeSe 1-x S x crystals, extending the existing measurements on twinned samples There are experimental complications with performing ARPES measurements on uniaxially strained crystals, which may leave doubt as to the validity of the conclusions presented above. First, it is hard to fully exclude if the application of uniaxial strain has actually perturbed the underlying electronic structure of the crystal you are measuring. For example in the tetragonal material Sr 2 RuO 4 , uniaxial strain on the order of 1% shifts the position of the vHs by nearly 20 meV An entirely independent method to study the momentum resolved electronic structure within a single domain is to use scanning tunneling microscopy (STM). STM utilises quantum tunnelling, between the surface of a material and an atomically sharp tip, to study the electronic structure on the subnanometer scale. Information about the electronic structure can then be extracted in two ways. The first is by studying the differential conductance (dI/dV ) to obtain a quantity proportional to the local density of states of the system. The second is to measure quasiparticle interference (QPI), to measure the perturbations to the local density of states generated by the presence of defects such as impurities or atomic vacancies. The wavelength associated with this perturbation contains direct information about the allowed momentum dependent scattering vectors associated with an electronic structure at a constant energy via q = kk . Multiple STM measurements have been reported for FeSe, and information regarding the nematic The scattering vector vs energy dispersion along the q x and q y directions, taken from Ref. We note that due to the indirect nature of QPI measurements, there is a degree of interpretation and uncertainty about the assignment of the electronic states and often it is necessary to directly simulate the QPI dispersion from a theoretical assumption of the electronic structure and compare the agreement. Due to the intrinsic broadness of the experimentally measured scattering vectors, this can lead to differing conclusions based on initial assumptions. For example, Kostin et. al. As an aside, it is interesting to note that the hole band maxima in 4(h) extends to +25 meV While we have so far presented a unified picture of the electronic structure of FeSe and have focused on points where broad agreement is found in the recent literature, historically there have been many points of disagreement surrounding the identification of bands and the nature of the Fermi surface, and there remain some points of contention. Regarding the hole pockets, an outlying report is a recent claim from laser-ARPES measurements that there is additional splitting, most prominently resulting in two hole pockets at the Fermi level instead of one Regarding the electron pockets, while several groups have now coalesced around the one electron pocket scenario, it has previously been claimed that the ARPES data on twinned crystals is consistent with four features in the EDC at the M point As we have discussed, the low energy electronic structure of the tetragonal state of FeSe can be qualitatively understood just from symmetry based arguments regarding the crystal structure and the d xz , d yz and d xy orbitals of the Fe atoms. This band structure can be explained both from the framework of tight-binding modelling Within the nematic state, however, this is not the case. Following the previous logic, it would be assumed that the orthorhombic distortion produces a negligible change to the electronic structure, such that two hole pockets and two electron pockets should be present in the nematic state, which as the experimental data has revealed is clearly not the case. It is for this reason that the nematic state is believed to be of electronic or magnetic origin, yet the microscopic details still remain unclear. To address this, there has been a great deal of focus on trying to model how the nematic state evolves the electronic structure of a tetragonal-based model of FeSe, such as that shown in Fig. • Generates an elliptical hole pocket dominated by d xz orbital weight. • Removes one of the two electron pockets from the Fermi surface. Historically, the first attempt to describe such a mechanism assumed that the C 4 symmetry breaking was governed by a lifting of the energy degeneracy of the d xz and d yz orbitals where n xz/yz = c † A,xz/yz c A,xz/yz + c † B,xz/yz c B,xz/yz is the number operator for the xz or yz orbital respectively on atom A and B in a two atom unit cell model of FeSe, and Φ 1 is a scalar value used to describe the magnitude of the nematic order, which can in principle be fit to experiment. This term, referred to in the literature as ferro-orbital ordering, is the simplest form of C 4 symmetry breaking possible in this system. It acts in a momentum independent fashion to raise the binding energy of the d xz bands and lower the binding energy of the d yz band, similar to a Jahn-teller distortion Following the train of thought that the phenomenology of the nematic state may be captured by a degeneracy breaking of the d xz and d yz states, it was also noted that there are two additional B 1g symmetry breaking terms that can be defined and are equally valid in the nematic state Here, n xz/yz = c † A,xz/yz c B,xz/yz + c † B,xz/yz c A,xz/yz describes a hopping from an xz or yz orbital on atom A (B) to a xz or yz orbital on atom B (A). These two terms, referred to as d-wave nematic bond order (Φ 2 ) and extended-s wave bond order (Φ 3 ) respectively, in combination with the ferro orbital order (Φ 1 ) are the only possible nematic order parameters that can be defined for the d xz and d yz orbitals up to nearest neighbour hopping However, despite this vast amount of literature assuming these three d xz /d yz nematic order parameters as the starting point for theoretical analysis, there lies one big problem. No matter what values of Φ 1 , Φ 2 and Φ 3 are chosen, a Fermi surface consisting of one hole pocket and a single electron pocket can not be produced, at least not starting from a quantitatively accurate ARPES-based model of FeSe in the tetragonal state There is no experimental evidence for this large second electron pocket in the nematic state, and this discrepancy between theory and experiment has posed a major challenge for our theoretical understanding of nematicity. This is the central origin of the missing electron pocket problem. It has now become clear that a theory of nematicity only involving the physics captured in Eq. ( The earliest attempt to explain this discrepancy came from attempts to understand local spin fluctuations in tetragonal FeSe, such as those incorporated by DFT + dynamic mean field theory (DMFT). Within this framework it has been shown that the self-consistently determined quasiparticle weight (Z) of the d xy orbital was significantly smaller than the quasiparticle weight of the d xz/yz orbitals This argument however has not been supported by experimental measurements. Both in the tetragonal and nematic state, bands of d xy orbital character have been identified, particularly around the M point A similar, more phenomenological, approach was later employed by Kreisel et. al. In our view, however, the success of this approach is due to accurately generating a Fermi surface of FeSe that has the correct one hole pocket and one electron pocket structure, and not necessarily due to the underlying assumptions behind the ansatz of highly anisotropic quasiparticle weights. Indeed, a change in spectral weight, on the order of magnitude as proposed by this theory, is something that should be directly observable with ARPES based measurements. In the tetragonal state, the quasiparticle weight of the d xz and d yz orbitals must be equivalent by symmetry, and thus, under this assumption, there would be a strong sudden suppression of the d xz dominated bands upon entering the nematic state. This is not what is observed in experimental measurements, bands of d xz dominated weight are detected at all temperatures within the nematic state, with no obvious reduction to the spectral intensity More recent attempts to explain the missing electron pocket have gone back to studying the single-particle physics of FeSe. A recent DFT + U calculation by Long et. al. A stable E-type nematic order parameter was equally identified, within a tight-binding framework using parameters extracted from LDA-based calculations, by Steffensen et. al. This appears to suggest that long-range Coulomb repulsion can stabilise a C 4 symmetry breaking ground state in FeSe. However, in this scenario, the E-type order parameter would also reduce the crystal symmetry of FeSe from tetragonal to monoclinic. Currently, the experimental evidence suggesting a tetragonal to monoclinic structural distortion in FeSe is lacking. However, upon > 85% Te doping of the Se sites, a tetragonal to monoclinic transition has been realised When considering the relevant d xz , d yz and d xy orbitals of tetragonal FeSe within a tight binding framework, there are only four order parameters that can be defined which break the B 1g rotational symmetry of the material within a single unit cell. The first three, described in Eq. ( This term acts as a hopping anisotropy for nearest neighbour d xy orbitals, in a similar manner as (2) for the d xz and d yz orbitals. It was initially defined by Fernandes et. al. In Ref. However, in order to get quantitative agreement with the Fermi surface and low-energy electronic structure using Eq. ( Each theory proposed to describe the low-energy electronic structure of the nematic state of FeSe has it's relative strengths and weaknesses. Nevertheless a common theme in these dif- ferent attempts has begun to emerge. In all methods used to theoretically remove an electron pocket from the Fermi level, it has been necessary to modify the d xy orbital in some way. Whether that's suppressing its contribution via quasiparticle weights, gapping out the d xy band via hybridisation, or rigidly shifting the d xy band above the Fermi level. What we can gleam from this analysis therefore, is that we should view the nematic state in a new light, not originating from a specific orbital ordering mechanism of d xz and d yz states, but rather as a symmetry breaking phenomena which couples to every or-bital at the Fermi level. Further theoretical investigations are required in order to elucidate the origin of the nematic state. The importance of the d xy orbital has also been recently noted from NMR measurements One of the most striking properties of FeSe is it's highly tuneable superconducting transition temperature, ranging from 8 K in bulk crystals From an experimental point of view, the momentum dependence of the superconducting gap of bulk FeSe, has been extensively determined from ARPES In this section, we will review the experimental data of the momentum dependence of the superconducting gap, particularly from ARPES measurements, and discuss the theoretical consequence the updated Fermi surface topology has on the theoretical understanding of superconductivity in FeSe. The key findings from the multiple ARPES and QPI measurements are presented in Fig. Hashimoto et. al. additionally claimed that the gap structure produced a different behaviour with and without the presence of uniaxial strain. Without strain, they observed a cos(8θ) behaviour As for the electron pocket, the angular dependence of the gap from QPI measurements is presented in Fig. This extremely aniostropic gap structure for both the hole and electron pocket raises a question as to whether FeSe is a nodal or nodeless superconductor, which could have a profound effect on our understanding of the gap symmetry in this system. For example, neglecting the electron pocket, it was argued by Hashimoto et. al. that a nodal gap structure of the hole pocket would be consistent with p-wave superconductivity such as STM and specific heat measurements, do have sufficient energy and thermal resolution to tackle this issue, but here STM measurements of the density of states by Sprau et. al. The most striking result from the experimentally determined gap structure of FeSe, is the clear realisation that the size of the superconducting gap at the Fermi level is correlated with the magnitude of d yz orbital weight. This tells us that the superconducting pairing mechanism is sensitive to orbital character, and is evidence for superconductivity mediated by Coulomb interactions, such as via a spin-fluctuation mechanism of superconductivity. Although the idea that spin fluctuations govern the Cooper pairing in the iron-based superconductors, was originally proposed back when superconductivity in these materials were first discovered Indeed many theoretical simulations of the angular dependence of the superconducting gap in FeSe have been performed Initially, this was a confusing result, but with hindsight it is not that surprising. The presence of an extra electron pocket in the simulations would naturally influence the superconducting pairing. Due to the local nature of Coulomb repulsion, the pairing between electrons in real space will be largest for electrons located on the same atom in the same orbital. It follows from this argument, that the pairing of electrons in momentum space would be favoured if a spin scattering process occurs which couples electronic states of the same orbital character. In the nematic state of FeSe, spin-fluctuations are strongest when connecting the hole and electron pocket It has now been shown that irregardless of the theoretical mechanism employed to remove this second electron pocket from the superconducting calculation, whether that's orbital selective quasiparticle weights This review has been wholly focused on what at first glance might appear to be an esoteric point of discussion, namely, the characterisation and modelling of the Fermi surface of FeSe in the nematic state. However, we propose that after the hundreds of papers and many years of debate and controversy on the subject, that there are very important conclusions to be drawn, which have wider implications for our understanding of both nematic ordering and superconductivity across the wider family of Fe-based superconductors. The first conclusions surround nematic ordering, where the results establish • That nematic ordering affects all bands at the Fermi level, with the d xy derived bands playing as significant a role as the d xz and d yz derived bands. • That nematic order manifests in the band structure through a combination of all allowed symmetrybreaking terms, primarily anisotropic hopping terms, and cannot be exclusively treated by on-site orbital ordering. • That nematic ordering does not cause a minor perturbation of the electronic structure, but can lift an entire electron pocket away from the Fermi level. We believe that these conclusions should be widely applicable across other Fe-based superconductors. While these conclusions do not yet constitute a self-consistent microscopic mechanism of nematic order, they do present strong constraints to any proposed microscopic models. The crosses and dots are experimental data extracted from STM The second set of conclusions relate to the superconductivity: • The superconducting gap of FeSe is remarkably anisotropic. • The fact that the gap follows the d yz orbital character is strong experimental evidence that the pairing mechanism is sensitive to local orbital degrees of freedom, i.e. for spin-fluctuation pairing. • The superconducting gap of FeSe can be naturally reproduced by spin-fluctuation calculations assuming only one electron pocket at the Fermi level. There has long been a consensus that the superconductivity in the Fe-based systems is mediated by spin-fluctuation pairing, but we argue that FeSe provides some of the most direct experimental support for this. As long as one starts with the one-electron pocket Fermi surface, the further details of the calculation are not critical, because in this scenario the only orbital component which is present on both the hole and electron pockets is the d yz character, and so this channel dominates the structure of the gap. The success of this result justifies the use of similar spin-fluctuation pairing calculations on other Fe-based superconductors, although we emphasize the importance of starting with an experimentally accurate Fermi surface. Importantly this insight has only been unlocked once we understand that the true Fermi surface of FeSe consists of one hole pocket and a single electron pocket, rather than one hole pocket and two electron pockets as was initially believed. However, despite us emphasizing how the one electron pocket scenario is key to the understanding of the unusual properties of FeSe, we believe it is still an open question as to what mechanism really drives this modification of the electronic structure. The models of describing the electronic structure in the nematic state have grown more accurate and more sophisticated, yet there is a lack of intuition about what is the real driving force for the evolution of the electronic structure that we observe. In our opinion it remains a delicate and important open question, but solving it in the case of FeSe could unlock a wider understanding of nematicity in the iron-based superconductors. Additionally, whilst the experimental challenge imposed by measuring the electronic structure of orthorhombic crystals has always been present, the focus on an answer to the origin of nematicity in FeSe has particularly emphasised the continued development of detwinning methods in ARPES With an outlook to the future, there are still multiple open questions regarding the missing electron pocket problem, nematicity and superconductivity in FeSe. Firstly, can we experimentally identify the exact conditions when one of the electron pockets in the tetragaonal state appears or disappears from the Fermi level? So far, this has remained slightly ambiguous, with some experiments claiming a gradual disappearance of the electron pocket Another open question is how the missing electron pocket scenario can be reconciled with the QPI measurements as a function of sulphur doping Finally, an important avenue of research is how does the momentum-dependence of the superconducting gap change as nematicity is supressed, e.g as a function of sulphur doping. The momentum dependence of the superconducting gap for undoped FeSe has now been extensively characterised, and theoretical predictions of how the gap should evolve as nematicity is suppressed have been proposed As the study of the Fe-based superconductors has matured since they exploded onto the scene in 2008, the emphasis has shifted from basic characterisation of a wide variety of superconducting families, to detailed examination of particular cases. FeSe has been the subject of particularly focused attention, and the effort has been worthwhile, with two remarkable results emerging: the one electron pocket Fermi surface, and the highly anisotropic superconducting gap structure. We have argued that these two, taken together, provide strong evidence for spin-fluctuation pairing in FeSe, which is presumably applicable to the wider family of Fe-based superconductors. However, the extent to which the one electron pocket phenomenology may be applicable to the nematic phase of other material systems is a large open question; as well as FeSe 1-x S x and FeSe 1-x Te x , we propose NaFeAs 