We study the effect of carrier doping to the Mott insulator on the Penrose tiling, aiming at clarifying the interplay between quasiperiodicity and strong electron correlations. We numerically solve the Hubbard model on the Penrose-tiling structure within a real-space dynamical mean-field theory, which can deal with a singular selfenergy necessary to describe the Mott insulator and spatial inhomogeneity. We find that the strong correlation effect produces a charge distribution unreachable by a static mean-field approximation. In a small doping region, the spectrum shows a site-dependent gap just above the Fermi energy, which is generated by a singularly large self-energy emergent from the Mott physics and regarded as a real-space counterpart of the momentumdependent pseudogap observed in a square-lattice Hubbard model. Introduction -Carrier doping to the Mott insulator drastically changes the electronic structure 1 . A typical example is high-temperature superconducting cuprates, which show dwave superconductivity, pseudogap, strange metal, chargeordering, and Fermi-liquid phases, depending on the doping concentration and temperature Quasiperiodic structure manifests itself in quasicrystals Though these experimental discoveries have stimulated many theoretical works, the interplay between the quasiperiodicity and strong correlations remains largely unexplored. This is partly because the lack of periodicity severely limits applicable theoretical methods. An exception would be one dimension, where the effect of a quasiperiodic potential In two and three dimensions, the geometry of the quasiperiodic lattices comes into play In this paper, we explore the doping-induced Mott transition on the Penrose lattice, using the RDMFT. Because of the aperiodicity, the doped holes distribute in a site-dependent way, leading to a real-space differentiation of the electronic structure. This may be contrasted to the momentum-space differentiation observed in a square-lattice Hubbard model and intensively discussed in the literature as a key to the superconducting mechanism in cuprates. We find that the strong correlation effect totally changes the population tendency of the doped holes to the local geometries, leading to a charge distribution essentially different from that of weak couplings. In the electron density of states, we find a behavior similar to that of the pseudogap in the square-lattice Hubbard model while in our case the size and position of the gap depend on the real-space coordinate. Model -The Penrose tiling 64 is a prototypical structure of a two-dimensional quasicrystal, covering a plane with only two types of rhombuses [Fig. where ĉiσ (ĉ † iσ ) annihilates (creates) an electron of spin σ(=↑ , ↓) at site i and niσ ≡ ĉ † iσ ĉiσ . The electron hopping t = 1 is defined between the neighboring two sites (denoted by ij ) connected by the edge of the rhombuses. U represents the strength of the onsite Coulomb repulsion. The chemical potential μ is determined self-consistently to fix the average electron density, n ≡ 1 N i n i with n i ≡ σ niσ and the system size N , at a given value. We consider a finite cluster possessing the C 5v symmetry, which allows us to deal with a relatively large system of N = 4181, among which 444 sites are symmetrically inequivalent to each other. To avoid a peculiarity at the boundary, we use only inner sites satisfying r < 27 in the plots, where r is the distance from the center of the cluster in a unit of the edge length of the rhombuses. Note that the Penrose lattice is bipartite: Hence, n i ≡ 1 at half filling (n = 1) and hole and electron dopings are equivalent. Method -Within the RDMFT, the model ( with Here, δ ij is 1 only when i and j are connected by an edge of a rhombus and 0 otherwise. Equation (2) defines the Anderson impurity problem in the next step of the self-consistent loop. To solve the Anderson impurity problem, we use the exact diagonalization (ED) method For comparison, we have also implemented calculations with the Hartree-Fock approximation (HFA), using the kernel polynomial method Results -We first demonstrate the Mott transition at half filling (n = 1). Figure The confined states are broken for a finite U , where we can study a smaller doping region. In this region, we can see that all the sites are more or less doped [Figs. For U ≥ 8, we find an opposite tendency: The sites with a larger Z i are more doped. This will be to reduce the interaction energy due to the strong Coulomb repulsion: Since the larger-Z i sites have more chances to have a transfer of electrons from neighboring sites, it will be preferable to reduce the population of such sites. The change from weak to strong couplings is clearer in Fig. These results indicate that the charge distribution for U 6 essentially differs from that for U 6. We plot n i in the real space in Figs. 5(a) (U = 0) and 5(b) (U = 12) for n = 0.90. Besides the difference in the range of n i , the real-space structures look totally different. To see the connection with the local geometries, it is useful to plot n i in the perpendicular space Another quantity of interest is the double occupancy, d i ≡ ni↑ ni↓ , plotted in Fig. Although such quasiparticles, extending on the lattice, are absent on the Penrose lattice, there is a substantial low-energy spectral weight for 0 < U < U c , which disappears above U c (Fig. We now turn to the real-frequency properties of the doped Mott insulators. Figure We focus on this low-energy behavior in Fig. Discussion -In general, doping the Mott insulator generates a weight just above the Fermi level Our RDMFT results on the Penrose lattice are different from this conventional DMFT result in that the upper Hubbard band shifts to lower energy (i.e., the Mott gap shrinks) as the doping increases. This behavior is rather closer to the cluster-DMFT As we have noted above, this downward shift of the ingap state does not occur in the single-site DMFT. In the cluster DMFT, on the other hand, the self-energy acquires a momentum dependence and this degree of freedom allows the ingap state to shift downward with doping, generating the momentum-dependent pseudogap. Here, on the Penrose lattice, the self-energy, calculated with the RDMFT, has a dependence on the real-space coordinate. Although the gap we have seen on the Penrose lattice is located above the Fermi energy, the downward shift of the ingap state with doping, as well as the existence of the gap between the ingap state and the peaks around the zero energy, is common to the pseudogap behavior observed in the cluster DMFT. Such a gap just above the Fermi energy would have an interesting consequence on optical conductivity or other spectroscopic and transport properties. In particular, the thermoelectric property is of interest because the large asymmetry of the DOS around the Fermi energy generally gives a large Seebeck coefficient. The role of the self-similarity in these properties is an intriguing future issue. Summary -We have numerically studied the doped Mott insulator on the Penrose tiling through the RDMFT. We have shown that the hole distribution drastically changes from weak to strong couplings: At weak couplings, the holes tend to be doped more at the sites with a smaller coordination number while at strong couplings the tendency is reversed. Since this latter tendency is not captured within the Hartree-Fock ap-proximation, it is a manifestation of a nontrivial interplay between the quasiperiodicity and the strong correlation. Another interplay is found in the spectrum: The downward shift of the ingap state and the presence of the site-dependent gap above the Fermi energy are characteristic of the doped Mott insulators on the quasiperiodic lattice. Thus, doped Mott insulators on a quasiperiodic lattice have electronic states which have never been reached before. Their property and possible ordered phases under perturbations pose intriguing issues for future study.