Resonant Inelastic X-ray Scattering (RIXS), which probes the occupied and unoccupied electronic subspaces in an interrelated fashion, is one of the most detailed, complex and information-rich experimental techniques employed in the investigation of electronic structure across physics, chemistry and materials science. We introduce an ab-initio, accurate and efficient computational framework for simulation and analysis of RIXS spectra, which combines two diverse and established approaches to modeling electronic excited states. The Core-hole LinEAr-response RIXS (CleaRIXS) method not only ensures accurate incorporation of the interaction of electrons with core and valence holes, but also automatically maps the salient RIXS features to the relevant electronic excitations and de-excitations. Through direct comparison with previous methanol C K-edge RIXS measurements [J. Phys. Chem. A 120, 2260 (2016)], we show the efficacy of the formalism in modeling different regions of the RIXS spectrum and in gaining physical insight regarding their origins. The importance of including the valence electron-hole interactions is explored, in addition to the connection between CleaRIXS and determinant-based approaches for simulating X-ray absorption and nonresonant X-ray emission. CleaRIXS provides a robust and extendable framework for prediction and interpretation of RIXS processes and for the simulation of complex electronic excited states in general. The ability to decipher, analyze and manipulate electronic structure of materials has been one of the most promising achievements of modern human civilization. Besides their innate importance in terms of scientific enquiry, such efforts have immense technological potential in various practical aspects including electronics 1-3 , drug discovery However, experimental investigation of electronic structure is not a straightforward process. For example, attempts to probe the valence orbitals directly by creating charged excitations, i.e., by simply removing (photoemission) or adding (inverse photoemission) an electron has its drawbacks. Due to the relatively low energy and delocalized nature of such excitations, the resolution of such processes is often marred by various additional intrinsic or induced excitations, due to strong electron-electron and electron-phonon scattering. Similar issues are encountered in low-energy optical exploration of neutral excitations. One alternative, which provides the additional advantage of species-specificity, is to excite the strongly bound core electrons using X-ray photons, revealing details of occupied electronic structure using X-ray emission spectroscopy (XES) The RIXS process amounts to exciting a core-electron using incident photons of varying frequencies and recording, as a function of frequency, the intensity of the emission resulting from the de-excitation of this intermediate core-excited state. Roughly speaking, from the electronic perspective, the incident frequency can be tuned to excite a core-electron of a given atomic element to some unoccupied orbital, probing the so-called conduction or virtual levels. Subsequently, the coherent deexcitation of such core-excited states proceeds by annihilation of the so-called core hole by an electron from an occupied orbital. In soft X-ray RIXS, this is a valence electron and the resulting final state comprises a valence-only electron-hole pair, despite the initial involvement of a core electron. If we ignore any other loss processes, the energy of this electron-hole pair matches the energy loss defined by the incoming and outgoing photon energies. More generally, we can think of the RIXS process, by analogy with Raman processes, as providing access to a spectrum of lower-energy excitations (electron-hole pairs With the advent of new and advanced light sources and the refinement of detection-techniques, RIXS is becoming more and more popular and its usage is only expected to increase with time. Evidently, extraction of valuable electronic-structure information from such a complicated experimental process requires complementary theoretical research. Techniques based on exactdiagonalization Evidently, an accurate and efficient ab-initio computational technique for modeling RIXS must be rooted in methods capable of simulating electronic excitations and de-excitations. For this, the two most widely practised approaches built on top of the Kohn-Sham (KS) densityfunctional theory (DFT) framework are (a) the excited-state specific constrained-occupation approaches which directly approximate each excited-state as a Slater-determinant (SD) by imposing non-aufbau occupation within various possible levels of self-consistency (b) the response based perturbative methods which operate by creating explicit e-h pairs in the groundstate SD It must be noted that an efficacious theoretical contender for RIXS must satisfy two distinct criteria simultaneously: 1. it must provide accurate spectral plots at acceptable computational expense by efficiently modeling the attraction between the electrons and core-hole (in the intermediate state) and the valence hole (in the final state), and 2. it must help analyze the spectrum by associating the relevant electronic excitations/de-excitations with the spectral features. In this paper, we present Core-hole LinEAr-response RIXS (CleaRIXS), an efficient theoretical formalism with relatively lower computational demand which readily fulfills the aforementioned criteria by treating the electronhole (e-h) interaction in the intermediate and in the final state with the help of two distinct mechanisms. In particular, the interaction in the intermediate coreexcited state is modeled with the help of a constrainedoccupation based single-determinant approach (belonging to category (a) mentioned above) that uses a modified pseudopotential to simulate the effects of the core-hole while that in the final valence-excited state is modeled by employing the perturbative linear-response treatment (belonging to category (b) mentioned above) applied on the ground state. For the treatment of the final state, this method can, in principle, work in conjunction with any response-based technique or software For an incident (emitted) photon with energy ω in ( ω out ) and polarization along the unit vector p ( q ), denoting the ground state (GS) by |GS , the set of coreexcited states by {|X k }, and the total energy of any state |S by E S , the Kramers-Heisenberg formula where has been set to unity. Here O q = q • R ( R being the many-body position operator) is the dipole transition operator and the imaginary term iΓ k takes care of the spectral broadening caused by the core-hole lifetime and instrument resolution (which we approximate as independent of k here). The set of final states {|F } encompasses the GS as well as all the valence-excited states, including those with an unbound electron. The F = GS term, in fact, represents the elastic contribution where, following the core-excitation, the system reverts back to the ground state. On the other hand, when |F contains an unbound electron, we obtain the non-resonant XES cross-section, which is discussed in detail below. The GS of a system with N valence electrons and one (relevant) core electron can be written, by reference to a Hilbert space of single-particle orbitals (the solutions of the Kohn-Sham equations consistent with the GS electron density), within the single configuration approximation as a Slater determinant, where a † c creates an electron in the relevant core orbital |c while a † i creates as electron in the i-th valence GS orbital |i . On the other hand, in analogy with the configuration-interaction singles method, each valence-excited final state (i.e., any final state other than |F = |GS ) can be written as a linear combination of Slater determinants obtained by creating an electron in an unoccupied orbital (say, α) and a hole in an occupied orbital (say, β) of the GS Hilbert space. Thus any such final state is expressed as where C F α,β is the coefficient of linear expansion. Now, within a frozen orbital approximation for the core-excited state, for any k > N , an intermediate state can be written as where ã † i denotes the creation operator for | ĩ , the i-th valence orbital corresponding to the self-consistent field obtained in absence of the relevant core electron -socalled core-hole excited-state orbitals. Here we have ignored those intermediate states, which, in addition to the core-hole, contain holes in the valence subspace (this has been referred to as the f (1) approximation in our previous work) Finally, the many-electron transition operator Ô is written as where ôq = q • r (r being the single-particle position operator) is the single-particle dipole transition operator. Omitting the q-dependence for notational simplicity, for excitation of a core-electron, Eq. 6 can be re-written as where o m = m|ô|c . Significant computational simplification of Eq. 1 can be achieved with the help of linear algebra. Referring to the term X k | Ô|GS as the absorption-amplitude A a GS→X k , it can be shown where ξ i,j = j| ĩ is the single-particle overlap term, between the ground and core-excited orbital spaces. For all k > N , Eq. 8 is solved with the help of a reference matrix using a relatively inexpensive algebraic trick shown in Ref. Once again, omitting the dependence on the polarization (p) for simplicity, the emission amplitude where , where, in the second step, we have simply transposed the matrix (since that preserves the determinant) and partitioned the each sum over m into a term for the valence hole, β, and a sum over all the available conduction orbitals (m > N satisfying m = α). By defining the row vectors of Y k α,β as the expression can be simplified as where ∧ denotes a wedge-product (which is antisymmetric) and we have introduced the terms and Note that in the penultimate step of Eq. 11, we have used the fact that exchanging two rows changes the sign of a determinant. Thus, the task evaluating Y f α,β boils down to that of finding D k,α,β 1 and D k,α 2 . The following steps exploit the fact that these determinants are defined only for linear vector spaces of finite dimension, i.e., the dimension of the associated square matrix, which permits any unknown row-vector to be expressed as a finite linear expansion in some reference basis. In order to find D k,α,β 1 , we note that, for any α > N , introducing a set of yet-unknown coefficients {γ}, we can write where Now, plugging Eq. 14 into 12 and noting that the determinant vanishes if any two rows are equal, we can find where In Eq. 17, we have used the fact that the determinant remains unchanged upon transposing a matrix. Now, If there are M number of KS orbitals in total, then, in order to find the unknown coefficients {γ}, we note that the M -N linear equations Eq. 14 (one for each α > N ) can be written in matrix form as Denoting the three matrices (from left to right) in Eq. 18 as B k 1 , γ and B k ref , respectively, we can see that the unknown coefficients can be found by solving for γ using Evaluating D k,α 2 is relatively simpler. For any α > N , we express b k α as a finite linear expansion Plugging Eq. 20 into Eq. 13, we find the simplified relation where The unknown coefficients {κ k α,j } can now be found by multiplying both sides of the equation (which is essentially the matrix form of Eq. 20) by C k ref -1 . Thus, denoting the second matrix in Eq. 23 by κ , we obtain In summary, the entire RIXS calculation can be efficiently executed by initially calculating and retaining the reference matrices 2 ) using Eq. 16 and 19 (Eq. 21 and 24). A a GS→X k is found with the help of Eq. 8. With these ingredients, we can find the RIXS cross-section by plugging into Eq. 1 the revised form of Eq. 2, which now reads T ωin,F = (25) where, as before, we have omitted the polarizationdependence for simplicity. As a demonstrative example, in Fig. We can divide Fig. (1) Those along the diagonal line ω in = ω out correspond to elastic scattering (|F = |GS ). (2) Each point on a given horizontal line can roughly be associated with a specific core-excited state. In principle, all intermediate core-excited states {|X k } are included in the definition of T ωin,F (Eq. 2), however, the denominator makes sure that, for a given ω in , only those intermediate states for which ω in ≈ (E k -E GS ), within a small energy window controlled by Γ k can have appreciable contribution. For example, the intermediate state with an excited electron in the LUMO (LUMO+4) orbital is primarily responsible for the intense features on the horizontal line at ∼ ω in = 287.8 (290.7) eV, while the horizontally arranged intense features at ∼ ω in = 289.6 eV are mostly due to intermediate states having an electron in the near-degenerate orbitals (LUMO+2) and (LUMO+3). (3) In Eq. 1, the energy conservation term δ(ω outω in -[E F -E GS ]) arranges specific final state features along diagonals displaced by E F -E GS to the left of the elastic line. In practical calculations, this delta-function is replaced by a Gaussian with a half-width σ which blurs together final states within this small energy window. (4) By this logic, vertically aligned features in the RIXS plane (Fig. The interrelation between the RIXS spectral features and the various valence-excited final states can be better appreciated from Fig. In order to provide a visual representation of the excitation-de-excitation processes accessible within the CleaRIXS framework, in Fig. In order to explore the effects of valence e-h interactions in the final state, in Fig. An approximate relation between the RIXS spectrum and the conventional XAS spectrum can be established by noting that for a given input energy, the spectrum of observed emission must originate from the accessible intermediate states. So, the integrated emission intensity corresponding to any input energy ω in should be proportional to the associated XAS intensity. Under such circumstances, for any given ω in , the approximate XAS intensity can be obtained by integrating the RIXS spectrum over ω out . As seen in Fig. , a low XAS intensity corresponding to some input frequency ω in would typically imply low value of | X k | Ô|GS | for any intermediate state for which E k -E GS ≈ ω in . Therefore, from Eq. 2, one can conclude that, for such an input frequency ω in , the RIXS spectrum will not contain any intense emission peak. Such a trend is easily observed in Fig. A comparison between the simulated (Fig. 1. The high-energy unoccupied levels of the intermediate state can have appreciable contributions from the p-orbitals of higher principal quantum number, which are not included in the projector-augmented wave (PAW) based treatment 82 used for computing the single-particle transition dipole moments. Such underestimation of the absorption intensity in the high-energy region has been reported in several studies 2. In addition to the purely electronic transitions considered in the simulations, the incident photon can excite combined (electronic+vibrational) states, giving rise to additional peaks. For example, between the absorption peaks at ∼ 287.9 eV and ∼ 289.5 eV, the experimental XAS spectrum shows multiple features which have been associated mostly with combined electronic and vibrational effects. Similar effects are said to be responsible for several of the intense features beyond the sharp peak at ∼ 289.5 eV. In the context of RIXS, if, besides the promotion of the core-electron, additional vibrational excitations are created in the intermediate state, then the final valenceexcited state is also likely to contain vibrational excitations As the incident energy extends above the absorption edge, the non-resonant X-ray emission spectrum emerges revealing decay channels for the occupied valence subspace while the excited electron is emitted as an unbound final state. Formally, we can see this connection in the Kramers-Heisenberg expression (Eqs. 1 and 2). We partition the sums over states to make a distinction between bound and unbound excited states, using estimates of the first ionization potentials of the valence and core electron subspaces (for a specific core-excited atom). The unbound states are written as products of N -1 electron stationary states with the emitted/unbound electron represented as one wave with a well-defined energy from a continuous basis defined by the symmetry of the system (whether a finite molecule or cluster, a semi-infinite surface or a periodic condensed phase). In general, for a RIXS map, if IE is the first (or valence) ionization-energy of the system, then any feature to the right hand side of the line ω in -ω out = IE can only arise from bound final states. If -ε α is the QP energy of a valence occupied orbital |α , then any final state resulting solely from the ionization of this orbital can, in principle, contribute vertical features at points satisfying the condition (ω in -ω out ) > ε α . This, in fact, is true for points to the left of a straight line given by (ω in -ω out ) = ε α , which is parallel to the elastic line. If ω in ≥ core-ionization energy (or ionization potential, IP), any dominant intermediate state, with energy E FCH + ε k , can be written as |FCH ⊗ |k , where ε k is the energy of the unbound electron in orbital |k and E FCH is the energy of the lowest core-ionized (full corehole) state |FCH . For sufficiently high ω in , |k will be a scattering state with high-enough energy such that, the emission amplitude will be negligible unless the final state contains an unbound electron and can be written as |F = |F ⊗ |f , where |f (ε f ) is the state (energy) of the unbound electron and |F (ε F ) is the state (energy) of the rest of the system, comprising bound electrons. Under such circumstances, the RIXS cross-section can be written as Recognizing that in the non-resonant limit the initially emitted electron |k and the final unbound electron |f must be the same electron, we can simplify this expression significantly to with |F and |FCH approximated by the corresponding SDs. Eq. 27 is the expression used for simulating nonresonant XES (NXES) in the many-body X-ray emission spectroscopy (MBXES) method In conclusion, in this paper we introduce CleaRIXS, an accurate computational framework for simulating the RIXS spectrum by treating different levels of e-h interactions using different techniques. In the intermediate state, the attraction between the core hole and the excited electron is treated within the SCF approach employing a non-aufbau constrained occupation. On the other hand, the valence e-h interaction in the final state is incorporated using the linear-response formalism. Even though the CleaRIXS method, in its current state, considers only electronic excitations in the final state, extensions can be developed in a straightforward way to take additional excitations (e.g., ionic vibrations) into account. We show that, in addition to offering a fast and reliable simulation of the RIXS process, the aforementioned partitioning of the calculation enables us to easily map the RIXS features to the corresponding electronic excitations and de-excitations. Using the C K-edge spectrum of methanol as an example, we compare the simulated spectrum with the experimental one and demonstrate the requirement of the linear-response treatment for the final state. We qualitatively rationalize the presence of additional vertical features in the experimental map as results of vibrational excitations. Finally, we show, with theoretical considerations and computed examples, that, as limiting cases, the spectrum obtained with CleaRIXS matches with the XAS and NXES spectra obtained using recently developed determinant-based techniques. As a continuation of our development, in near future we plan to extend CleaRIXS to simulate RIXS in periodic systems and to incorporate ancillary functionalities to take into account additional excitations (e.g. vibrations, chargetransfer excitations, d-d excitations) in the final corefilled state. 