The family of titanium oxide superconductors exhibits many intriguing phenomena comparable to cuprates and iron pnictides/chalcogenides, and thus provides an ideal platform to contrastively study the unconventional pairing mechanism of high-temperature superconductors. Here, we successfully deposit superconducting Mg-Ti-O films on MgAl 2 O 4 substrates with three principal orientations by ablating a MgTi 2 O 4 target. Particularly, it is striking to observed that a single-crystalline film of an unintended structure has been grown on the (011)oriented substrate, with the highest zero resistance transition temperature (T c0 ) of 5.0 K among them. The film has a highly reduced Mg/Ti ratio and an orthorhombic Ti 9 O 10 -like structure (denoted as Mg: Ti 9 O 10 ), demonstrated by further characterizations of chemical composition and structure. Such a structure is unstable in bulk but favorable to be epitaxially stabilized on the (011)-surface of MgAl 2 O 4 due to a relatively small strain at the formed interface. An isotropic upper critical field (B c2 ) up to 13.7 T that breaks the Pauli limit is observed in the Mg: Ti 9 O 10 film, analogous to other superconducting titanium oxides. The similarity points to a common origin for the superconductivity in the family, which will provide valuable opinions for the mechanism of unconventional superconductivity in transition metal compounds. The strong coupling among charge, spin, orbital, and lattice of 3d electrons in transition metal compounds always gives rise to various emergent phenomena The family of titanium oxide superconductors (TOS) is an ideal candidate for contrastive study of high-temperature superconductivity. Many intriguing phenomena similar to that of high-temperature superconductors have been unveiled in TOS, such as pseudogap Nevertheless, extensive study on TOS is hampered by the lack of high-qualified single crystal sample owning to the thermodynamic or chemical instability of their crystal lattice In this Letter, Mg-Ti-O films with complete superconducting transitions are deposited by ablating a stoichiomet-ric MgTi 2 O 4 target on MgAl 2 O 4 (MAO) substrates with three principal orientations. However, the phases formed in the obtained films exhibit a remarkable orientational selectivity. In contrast to the spinel MgTi 2 O 4 (space group: Fd3m) phase on (001)-oriented MAO, a highly Mg-deficient phase with a higher T c but in a strikingly distinct structure emerges on the substrate with (011) orientation. Thorough structural characterizations demonstrate the orthorhombic Ti 9 O 10 -like structure of the film. Such a structure has a smaller mismatch with the (011)-oriented MAO substate than spinel MgTi 2 O 4 , so that its formation is unintended but reasonable. The Mg-Ti-O superconducting films are deposited under high vacuum by pulsed laser deposition (PLD) using a KrF excimer laser (λ = 248 nm) and a commercial stoichiometric MgTi 2 O 4 target. The chamber is evacuated to a base pressure better than 1 × 10 -6 Torr before growth. During deposition, the laser pulse energy, repetition rate, and grown temperature are fixed at 400 mJ, 4 Hz, and 840°C, respectively. Films are deposited on the MAO substrates with (001), (111), and (011) orientations in the same batch to ensure the uniformity of some crucial growth parameters. The thicknesses of the samples used for subsequent characterizations are ∼ 150 nm. Structural characterizations of the films are conducted by an x-ray diffractometer (XRD) at room temperature using Cu K α1 radiation (λ = 1.54056 Å). The electrical and magnetic transport properties are measured using Physical Property Measurement System (PPMS). The magnetization measurements are performed by the Magnetic Property Measurement System (MPMS). The high-angle annular dark-field scanning transmission electron microscopy (HAADF-STEM) images are collected to probe the microstructures for crosssectional samples. As shown in Fig. The Raman and in-plane XRD spectra are collected to clarify the structure of the film on MAO (011) substrate. The Raman spectrum of the film exhibits similar feature as the superconducting orthorhombic Ti 2 O 3 Although the crystal structure has been predicted for half a FIG. century The characteristic superconducting features of the Mg: Ti 9 O 10 film are also examined by magnetotransport measurements. The temperature dependent electrical resistance is measured under a series of magnetic fields, from 0 to 14 T. As shown in Fig. Overall, Mg-Ti-O films with complete superconducting transitions are successfully deposited on MAO substrates with different orientations using a MgTi 2 O 4 target. Notably, a single-crystalline film with a structure distinct from spinel MgTi 2 O 4 is formed on MAO (011), presenting the highest T c0 of 5.0 K among these samples. Thorough characterizations reveals that the film is in an orthorhombic Ti 9 O 10 -like structure with a highly reduced Mg content. Although such a structure is unstable in bulk, it can be epitaxially stabilized on the (011)-surface of MAO due to the relatively small strain at the obtained interface. Our work not only introduces a different member to the TOS family, but also demonstrates the considerable potenial of film deposition in exploring more superconductors or other functional materials via epitaxial stabi-lization. Furthermore, an isotropic B c2 breaking the Pauli limit is exhibited in the Mg: Ti 9 O 10 film, resembling those of some other TOS 