Electronic correlation is of fundamental importance to high temperature superconductivity. While the low energy electronic states in cuprates are dominantly affected by correlation effects across the phase diagram, observation of correlation-driven changes in fermiology amongst the ironbased superconductors remains rare. Here we present experimental evidence for a correlation-driven reconstruction of the Fermi surface tuned independently by two orthogonal axes of temperature and Se/Te ratio in the iron chalcogenide family FeTe 1-x Se x . We demonstrate that this reconstruction is driven by the de-hybridization of a strongly renormalized d xy orbital with the remaining itinerant iron 3d orbitals in the emergence of an orbital-selective Mott phase. Our observations are further supported by our theoretical calculations to be salient spectroscopic signatures of such a non-thermal evolution from a strongly correlated metallic phase into an orbital-selective Mott phase in d xy as Se concentration is reduced. The phase diagrams of the copper oxide superconductors and iron-based superconductors (FeSC) have often been compared to demonstrate a degree of similarity-a superconducting dome emerging from the suppression of a magnetic ground state However, it has also been recognized early on that the FeSCs exhibit moderate correlations where the d xy orbital contributes dominantly to the local spin susceptibility A question then arises-while the fermiology of the FeSCs is far from that of a Mott insulator, could the strong localization of a selective orbital be sufficient to induce significant modifications to the fermiology and associated low energy electronic states? Generically in a multiorbital material, this can be realized in an orbital-selective Mott phase (OSMP), where selected orbitals can become completely localized and gapped out from the Fermi level while other orbitals maintain a degree of itinerancy As the system evolves into an OSMP, the hybridization between the electrons belonging to the strongly localized orbitals and the itinerant orbitals gradually turns off, leading to a reconstruction of the fermiology. In the larger context of quantum materials, evidence for OSMP has been reported for Ca 2-x Sr x RuO 4 In this context, the strongly correlated iron-chalcogenide materials provide an opportunity to realize such correlation-driven Fermi surface reconstruction. To examine this, we consider the regime where evidence for a thermal crossover into an OSMP has recently been reported in FeTe 1-x Se x In this work, we present systematic evidence for a reconstruction of the Fermi surface driven by orbital-dependent correlation effects in the FeTe 1-x Se x family of superconductors as the phase diagram is traversed non-thermally along the Se-substitution axis as well as along the temperature axis. Remarkably, strong reorganization of the Fermi surface is observed in the absence of any symmetry-breaking electronic order. We demonstrate how the more coherent d-orbitals, in particular, the d z 2 orbital, serve as a transparent means to visualize the suppression of the d xy states at the Fermi energy by gradually appearing at the Fermi level as its hybridization with d xy is turned off. In addition, we show that the Fermi surface reconstruction is accompanied by an orbital-dependent mass enhancement and signatures of a lower Hubbard band as we tune from FeSe towards FeTe. Combined with the temperature axis, we not only arrive at a comprehensive phase diagram of the orbital-selectivity in FeTe 1-x Se x , the understanding of which is discussed in connection with anomalies reported in measurements of the Hall coefficient, resistivity, and magnetic excitations, but also achieve a direct k-space visualization of the correlation-driven reconstruction of the electronic states near the Fermi energy. We begin by presenting a summary of our key results on the evolution of the Fermi surface along both the temperature and Se substitution axes of the FeTe 1-x Se x phase diagram (Fig. In both the high temperature state of FTS44 and low temperature state of FTS11, the apparent fermiology has drastically changed in a similar fashion. The electron pocket at the M point is expanded while a new dominant arc-like spectral weight (marked in magenta and purple) appears along the BZ boundary centered at the X point. Interestingly, this arc feature is already present in the constant energy contours at -60 meV for all three measurement points, in contrast to the Fermi surface. This observation suggests that the modifications along the substitution and temperature axes may have a similar origin. To understand this fermiology change, we examine the evolution across each axis of the phase diagram in turn. We first present the measured Fermi surface of optimal FTS44 taken as a function of temperature from 18 K up to 174 K (Fig. Next, we present the measured Fermi surface of FeTe 1-x Se x along the substitution-axis at low temperatures across the phase diagram (Fig. The striking modifications to the low energy electronic states and fermiology via both temperature and the non-thermal substitution-axis in absence of any symmetry breaking phases calls for an examination of the electronic correlations in this phase diagram. To determine the orbital-dependent correlation strength, we focus on the low-temperature (10 K) band renormalizations across the phase diagram near the BZ center. Along the high symmetry direction Γ-M, three hole-like bands are observed near E F for all Se content which are better visualized from the second derivative plots (Fig. Since the effective mass for each band is proportional to the inverse of the band curvature, we can extract the orbital-dependent mass enhancement from a parabolic fitting of each band. The mass enhancement obtained from the ratio between the fitted effective mass m * to that of first-principle calculations m DFT is plotted as a function of Se content in Fig. To substantiate this qualitative picture, we have carried out calculations based on a fiveorbital Hubbard model for FeTe 1-x Se x using the U(1) slave-spin method (for the method and the details of the calculation, see Supplementary Note All salient features of our experimental observations presented are captured in this set of calculations, as shown by a direct comparison of the calculations for x = 0.1 and x = 0.5 (Fig. In the strongly correlated metallic phase calculated for x = 0.5 (Fig. We can experimentally track the disappearance of this hybridization as a function of Se ratio. In Fig. Besides the appearance of the arc-feature, the calculated d xz /d yz electron pocket enlarges, as observed experimentally, to compensate the hole pocket formed by the nearly vertical band around X. As a function of x, the calculated coherence factor, Z, for the d xz /d yz orbital is compared to that of the d xy orbital (Fig. Finally, taking all the results together, we arrive at the phase diagram for the FeTe 1-x Se x material family (Fig. Our understanding of the evolution from an orbital-dependent correlated metallic phase to an OSMP across the FeTe 1-x Se x phase diagram as observed from ARPES is also consistent with results reported by other probes. It has been reported that the compensated parent compounds of multi-band iron-based superconductors exhibit a negative Hall coefficient, R H , due to the dominance of the electron mobility. This is observed in isovalent-substituted BaFe 2 (As,P) 2 , where across the entire phase diagram, R H remains negative We also note that in a recent magneto-transport measurement, such coherent-incoherent crossover is also reported Previous studies of both Dynamic Mean Field Theory and ARPES have also identified the incoherent spectral weight in the high binding energy regime of FeSe as the lower Hubbard band (LHB), indicating the presence of strong electron correlations in this material system Further connection between our ARPES report of OSMP and magnetic excitations via inelastic neutron scattering can also be made. It has been reported that along both the temperature axis An OSMP is depicted by the coexistence of localized and itinerant orbitals within one material system Our high quality Fe y Te 1-x Se x single crystal series were synthesized using the flux method The excess Fe in all as-grown Fe y Te 1-x Se x single crystals was reduced by annealing in a Tevapor atmosphere 