Machine learning potentials (MLPs) for atomistic simulations have an enormous prospective impact on materials modeling, offering orders of magnitude speedup over density functional theory (DFT) calculations without appreciably sacrificing accuracy in the prediction of material properties. However, the generation of large datasets needed for training MLPs is daunting. Herein, we show that MLP-based material property predictions converge faster with respect to precision for Brillouin zone integrations than DFT-based property predictions. We demonstrate that this phenomenon is robust across material properties for different metallic systems. Further, we provide statistical error metrics to accurately determine a priori the precision level required of DFT training datasets for MLPs to ensure accelerated convergence of material property predictions, thus significantly reducing the computational expense of MLP development. First-principles-based simulations at the atomic level have made signicant strides in the past decade designing novel materials for batteries to microelectronics. Central to the success of molecular dynamics is the existence of force-elds or atomic potentials with sufficient delity to describe atomistic interactions. For instance, the embedded atom method (EAM) is widely used to describe metal-metal interactions. In standard DFT calculations, two main parameters signicantly impact the computational cost, precision, and convergence of accurate property predictions. One is the size of the basis functions needed to expand the Kohn-Sham orbitals, which is closely related to how electron-nucleus interactions are described. For example, in plane-wave calculations, the cutoff energy controls the number of plane-waves in the basis set with the energy of the system converging variationally with the size of the basis. The second is the k-space sampling density of the rst Brillouin zone (BZ) of the system. The appropriate number of k-points for a DFT calculation depends on the material system, the properties of interest, and the level of convergence desired. Convergence procedures for various properties are well-established in the DFT community, and several studies investigated non-traditional k-space sampling schemes for standard DFT calculations. Herein, we use k-space sampling density to control the precision of BZ integrations in DFT calculations and study the impact of variable precision on MLPs. Specically, we investigate the convergence of bulk Al, Cu, and Mg material properties in BCC, FCC, and HCP lattices calculated directly by DFT and indirectly by MLPs trained on DFT datasets. The overall work-ow of the study is summarized in Fig. We performed DFT calculations in VASP using the Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof (PBE) exchange-correlation functional with projector-augmented wave pseudopotentials. In our DFT calculations, we controlled the precision of the calculation by varying the linear density of k-space sampling (Dk) in the rst BZ. Dk denes the minimum spacing in units of ÅÀ1 between adjacent k-points in gamma-centered Monkhorst-Pack grids. To generate data to train MLPs, we performed ab initio molecular dynamics (AIMD)-based local-conguration sampling using VASP to map out the potential well around each conguration generated by DP-GEN. We trained MLPs on our AIMD-generated datasets using DeepMD-kit To evaluate the performance of our MLPs, we tested their predictions of material properties against DFT calculations. In particular, we compared MLP property predictions to DFT calculations at the same Dk value as the underlying training dataset for each MLP. With all datasets and models generated and trained in a fully-consistent and parametrically identical fashion, this analysis can reveal how the DFT precision (as controlled by Dk) propagates from the training dataset to MLP predictions. We calculated a variety of bulk mechanical and defect properties in each metal and lattice. Specically, we calculated the Eulerian-Birch 49 equation of state (EOS)-derived quantities such as equilibrium volume-per-atom and cohesive energy; linear-elastic mechanical properties including stiffness matrix elements, the Poisson ratio, as well as bulk, shear, and Young's moduli; and point defect formation energies for vacancies, O h , and T d self-interstitials. The equations and procedures for these property calculations have been fully described elsewhere. calculations and the DeepMD-kit-compatible version of LAMMPS To verify that our MLPs are effectively learning (i.e., accurately interpolating) the DFT training data, we tested the prediction parity of MLP predictions versus DFT training data across all 21 MLPs (Fig. The parity plot of Fig. Next, consider the MLP-predicted values of the vacancy energy in Fig. We adopt the mean absolute deviation (MAD) as a comparative measure of property prediction variability to quantify the apparent convergence acceleration and stability of MLPs below As we have shown, the MAD quantitatively captures the convergence acceleration and property prediction stability of MLPs that is intuitive from graphical comparison to DFT (Fig. where x(Dk) is the MLP or DFT property prediction at Dk, and MAD max is the larger of the DFT and MLP MAD over all Dk for a given property, metal, and lattice (e.g., MAD max 1⁄4 0.519 eV for the vacancy energy of FCC-Al, from Table To elucidate the mechanism of accelerated convergence of MLP material properties, we analyzed properties of DFT training data as a function of Dk. Since the training process is statistical, we focused on analyzing the overall statistical properties of DFT data. Moreover, since MLPs ultimately predict material properties by inferencing energies, forces, and virials of atomic congurations, we focused on analysis related to these quantities. For this purpose, we prepared a distinct test dataset (entirely separate from MLP training data) of 3600 structural congurations on which we performed single-point DFT calculations of energies, forces, and virials as a function of Dk in the range from 0.09 ÅÀ1 to 0.96 ÅÀ1 specied previously. This test dataset simulates a small sub-sample of an MLP training dataset and contains 100 variously scaled and perturbed congurations for each of the 36 combinations of metal, lattice, and structure type (pristine, vacancy, T d , and O h interstitial). Crucially, singlepoint calculations were performed on precisely the same 3600 congurations for each Dk value, such that any variation in energy, forces, or virial of any individual conguration is due solely to changes in Dk. We expected the numerical noise introduced by increasing Dk to have a measurable impact on the statistical properties of the training data, ultimately giving rise to instability in property prediction at Dk T . We used 4 statistical error metrics (SEMs) to analyze statistical properties of the test datasets: the averaged energy-peratom deviation (AEAD), the energy-per-atom RMSE (E-RMSE), the RMSE of each force component on each atom (F-RMSE), and the RMSE of each virial component per number of atoms (V-RMSE). In each case, the DFT calculations at Dk min 1⁄4 0.09 ÅÀ1 were used as reference values, such that the SEMs are precisely zero at Dk 1⁄4 Dk min . Furthermore, we calculated each SEM separately for groups of congurations with the same metal, lattice, and structure type (pristine, vacancy, T d , and O h interstitial). Finally, we imposed the same threshold criterion on material properties to dene Dk T for each SEM. For example, the E-RMSE SEM as a function of Dk with its calculated Dk T values is shown in Fig. We suggest that SEMs can be used to predict the convergence acceleration regime of MLP material properties (Fig. Our careful numerical investigations strongly indicate that the observed convergence acceleration of property predictions is due to the insensitivity of the MLP training process to random numerical noise introduced by reduced precision in the DFT training data if the noise remains below a system-and-propertydependent threshold. We hypothesize that convergence acceleration below threshold Dk is a general effect in neural networkbased MLPs trained on energy, force, and virial information. We further hypothesize that convergence acceleration is related to the empirical phenomenon well-known in the neural network research community of noisy training data improving neural network generalizability without harming accuracy. In this work, we conducted a quantitative study of the impact of the DFT calculation precision on material property prediction with MLPs trained on DFT datasets. We controlled precision with the k-space sampling density (Dk) and constructed parametrically identical training datasets of equal size and statistically equivalent sampling of the material conguration space to isolate the effect of Dk on our MLPs. Under these controlled conditions, we identied a surprisingly robust stability in MLP property prediction as the DFT precision is reduced (Dk increased) in the training dataset. We applied a scale-invariant criterion to dene threshold values of Dk below which MLPpredicted properties vary negligibly, and convergence is effectively accelerated with respect to Dk. On the other hand, DFT property predictions vary considerably with Dk, offering little guidance towards the selection of Dk at which material property predictions are uniformly converged. We then showed that statistical properties of DFT data derived from energies, forces, and virials can in principle be utilized to predict the convergence-acceleration threshold Dk without advance knowledge of the MLP convergence behavior of a material system. Finally, we demonstrated a method for determining Dk for MLP training that leverages property convergence acceleration to reduce the expenditure of computing resources on training data production without sacricing property prediction accuracy. Digital Discovery© 2022 The Author(s). Published by the Royal Society of Chemistry © 2022 The Author(s). Published by the Royal Society of Chemistry Digital Discovery