In 2014, Charge Gradient Microscopy (CGM) was first reported as a new scanning probe imaging mode, particularly well-suited for the characterisation of ferroelectrics. The implementation of the technique is straightforward; it involves monitoring currents that spontaneously develop between a passive conducting atomic force microscopy tip and Earth, as the tip is scanned across the specimen surface. However, details on the fundamental origin of contrast and what images mean, in terms of associated ferroelectric microstructures, are not yet fully understood. Here, by comparing information from CGM and Kelvin Probe Force Microscopy (KPFM), obtained from the same sets of ferroelectric domains (in both lithium niobate and barium titanate), we show that CGM reasonably reflects the spatial derivative of the measured surface potential. This is conceptually different from measuring local gradients in the surface bound-charge density or in any associated screening charges: after all, we see clear CGM signals, even when polarisation is entirely in-plane. We therefore suggest that CGM in ferroelectrics might be more accurately called Potential Gradient Microscopy (PGM). Intriguingly, in all cases examined, the measured surface potential (determined both through KPFM and by integrating the CGM signal) is of the opposite sign to that intuitively expected for a completely clean ferroelectric in vacuum. This is commonly observed and presumed due to a charge accumulation on the ferroelectric surface which is not easily removed. Historically, technological developments in microscopy have been extremely important for underpinning new insights into the nature and behaviour of ferroelectric materials. Over the last few decades, this has perhaps been most strikingly illustrated by the way in which aberration-corrected transmission electron microscopy (TEM) has facilitated picometre resolution images of local dipole vectors. Flux-closure Combining TEM with focused ion beam (FIB) microscope patterning has also allowed the response of ferroelectric domain patterns to nanoscale morphology to be firmly established One of the most recently discovered SPM imaging modes, relevant for ferroelectric characterisation (first reported by Hong et al. Practically, CGM involves scanning a conducting atomic force microscopy tip (usually solid platinum), in contact mode at a relatively high set-point, so that a firm connection between tip and sample is maintained. Imaging is passive, in the sense that no deliberate external electrical signal is supplied. Instead, any currents that spontaneously develop between the tip and Earth are simply measured and recorded as a function of tip position. A key observation is that, while the magnitude of local current spikes may be increased by increasing the scan speed during imaging, the total integrated charge (flowing to or from Earth) is independent of the rate of tip motion relative to the sample surface. Contrast is therefore associated with the way in which the local tip-sample electrostatic interactions lead to changes in the charge state at the tip; such changes can be developed quickly (generating larger currents) or slowly (generating smaller currents), depending on the scanning rate used. As noted in Hong et al.'s original paper, CGM gives strong signals from c+/c-180 o domain walls on z-cut periodically poled lithium niobate surfaces, where obvious spatial gradients in bound charge densities (and in any associated screening charge densities) should be expected In this paper, we do not make comment on the detail of the interaction between the tip and the screening charge. Instead, we show that the integration of the CGM current, as a function of tip position, maps well to the experimentally determined spatial variation in the electrostatic potential, measured directly using Kelvin Probe Force Microscopy (KPFM), for a number of different domain configurations: c+/c-180 o domains in periodically poled z-cut lithium niobate (with polarisation vectors perpendicular to the imaged surface), head-to-head 180 o domains in x-cut lithium niobate (with polarisation vectors parallel to the imaged surface) and a-c domains in {100} polished barium titanate (with polarisation alternately oriented parallel and perpendicular to the imaged surface). Results suggest that, while the CGM technique undoubtedly monitors changes in the charge state of the conducting tip, this charge state appears to be more directly related to spatial variations in the surface potential of the ferroelectric than to spatial variations of the surface bound charge density (or the density of any associated screening charges) occurring directly under the tip. In this sense CGM should be viewed as effectively imaging potential gradients, rather than charge gradients, on the ferroelectric surface. Initially, we established Charge Gradient Microscopy (CGM) images, similar to those obtained by Hong et al. However, CGM contrast on engineered head-to-head domain walls in x-cut lithium niobate, where the polarisation is almost entirely parallel to the imaged surface, was seen to be dramatically different (figure These observations on lithium niobate (both z and x-cut) mirror those seen previously by Guy et al. where x is the position along the line-scan, V is the local surface potential measured by KPFM in a small region (pixel) bounded by points x 1 and x 2 , and I CGM is the locally measured CGM current; k is a proportionality constant dependent on the microscope setup. The implication from equation 1 is that the CGM current is equivalent to the gradient in the surface potential along the scanning direction: To test this notion further, CGM and KPFM information was obtained for another set of domains, with both in-plane and out-of-plane polarisation present: a-c stripe domains in {100}pseudocubic polished single crystal BaTiO3. The typical surface domain microstructure can be seen in the PFM maps presented in figure The associated directly measured potential (using KPFM) for the same microstructural region, is shown in figure An aspect of the experimental work that should also be discussed concerns the signs of the CGM current, inferred surface potential determined by spatial integration of the CGM, and the directly measured surface potential. In figure The associated CGM currents are also opposite in sign to those of the calculated potential gradients (compare figure We had previously considered it likely that a factor of "-1" could be generated in the CGM data because of the internal circuitry of the scanning probe microscope, effectively monitoring currents from Earth to the tip, rather than the other way around By using scanning probe microscopy to examine different ferroelectric domain patterns, we present evidence that currents measured by Charge Gradient Microscopy (CGM) are generated by gradients in electrostatic surface potential, rather than gradients in surface bound charge or screening charge densities. This is best illustrated when the spatial integration of the CGM current is compared to the surface potential measured directly by Kelvin Probe Force Microscopy (KPFM). This conclusion makes the interpretation of CGM information relatively straightforward, as it simply offers an alternative to KPFM for determining the surface potential in materials. A possible advantage of the technique is that the strong tip-sample contact needed for CGM measurements means that surface potentials can be accessed even in environments where rapid accumulation of screening adsorbates would normally occur which would obscure KPFM contrast -the CGM scanning continually scrapes most of these adsorbates away. Charge gradient microscopy experiments were performed using an Asylum MFP-3D Infinity AFM system in the current-sensing mode (ORCA). The technique involves rastering a grounded conductive probe (25Pt300B from Rocky Mountain Nanotechnology) across the surface of a grounded sample at high scan speeds (~0.5mm/s) with a high deflection setpoint or tip pressure (18V, ~2μN force), while passively measuring any current that flows. The sign of the current flow depends on the scanning direction of the probe and reflects local changes in the electrostatic potential on the surface of the sample. Offset currents induced by the experimental set-up were removed for each sample. KPFM experiments were performed using the same AFM system. In these studies, a Pt/Ir-coated Si probe with a resonance frequency of ~70 kHz (Nanosensors, PPP-EFM) was used. KPFM is a two-pass technique, in which the surface topography is mapped during the first pass via conventional tapping mode, before withdrawing to a fixed height above the surface (20nm for our experiments) for the second pass. During this second pass, a d.c bias is applied to the probe such that it matches the contact potential difference between the probe and sample surface. This is done by nullifying the vibration of the probe, which is initially driven by the electrostatic force induced on the AFM probe, giving a true measurement of the local surface potential. Piezoresponse Force Microscopy experiments were performed with solid Pt probes (25Pt300B from Rocky Mountain Nanotechnology) using the MFP's internal lock-in amplifier. Imaging was carried out near resonance, with a frequency of ~100kHz for observing out of plane domains and ~200kHz for in plane domains. AC biases between 1-5V were used for these measurements. Validation of the domain structure was carried out using a Veeco Dimension 3100 AFM system (equipped with Nanoscope IIIa controller) in conjunction with an EG&G 7265 lock-in amplifier. For these experiments, Pt/Ir-coated Si probes (Nanosensors, PPP-EFM) were used and measurements were undertaken away from resonance at 20kHz with applied AC biases between 1-5V. Rotating the crystal orientation allowed for the relative polarisation orientations to be unequivocally determined using vector PFM (combination of vertical and lateral PFM). 