Triboelectricity was recognized millennia ago, but the fundamental mechanism of charge transfer is still not understood. We have recently proposed a model where flexoelectric band bending due to local asperity contacts drives triboelectric charge transfer in non-metals. While this ab-initio model is consistent with a wide range of observed phenomena, to date there have been no quantitative analyses of the proposed band bending. In this work we use a Pt0.8Ir0.2 conductive atomic force microscope probe to simultaneously deform a Nb-doped SrTiO3 sample and collect current-bias data. The current that one expects based upon an analysis including the relevant flexoelectric band-bending for a deformed semiconductor quantitively agrees with the experiments. The analysis indicates a general ratcheting mechanism for triboelectric transfer and strong experimental evidence that flexoelectric band-bending is of fundamental importance for triboelectric contacts. Triboelectricity is a wide-spread phenomenon of importance in areas ranging from the processing of pharmaceutical powders The current literature includes older experiments where hypotheses such as the "triboelectric series" were shown to be false We have recently 31 argued that the missing term is the flexoelectric effect, i.e., the coupling of strain gradients during asperity contacts and polarization, and subsequently extended it to include analysis of the local band bending Such an analysis has many components, some of which are already partially understood. Since the early works of Terris et al. When the two materials are a metal and semiconductor, in In this note, we develop a detailed band-bending model that quantitatively agrees with the force-dependent current-bias behavior in a CAFM Schottky diode between a Pt0.8Ir0.2 (PtIr) tip and Nb-doped strontium titanate (STO). The model follows conventional semiconductor analyses Figure We will first analyze the forward bias. Without any force, the system behaves as a Schottky diode with the Fermi level of the semiconductor pinned by defect states, where the pinning is with respect to the metal. (For completeness, an analysis with the pinning a fixed energy difference with respect to the semiconductor states can be found in the Supporting Information, and the results are not close to fitting the experiment.) The band structure of the zero-force case is illustrated in Fig. When force is applied to the tip, there is electromechanical band bending which shifts the valence/conduction bands. For forward bias using standard thermionic emission theory 49 and electromechanical bandbending, with the assumption that V ≫ k B T/q, the current as a function of both bias and applied force F is given by where A(F) is the contact area, B * the Richardson constant, T the temperature, q the electron charge, k B the Boltzmann constant, V EM (F) the potential due to electromechanical terms, and n the ideality factor. To interpret the experimental results, it is convenient to substitute φ eff (F) = φ + V EM (F). The area A(F) was modeled by a sphere-half-space Hertzian contact 50 as where R is the radius of the sphere (AFM probe tip) and ). We use for the Young's moduli and Poisson's ratios With A(F) determined, φ eff (F) and the ideality factor n were directly fit to each forwardbias I -V curve using equation (1). We assumed B * = 156 A cm -2 K -2 for Nb:STO samples 56 , and the experiments were performed at room temperature, T = 295 K. Details of the fitting process appear in the Supporting Information. By plotting φ eff as a function of the force, Figure Equation ( We use analytical solutions of Hertzian contact theory for a PtIr sphere with radius R indenting an STO half-space to calculate the strains and strain gradients necessary to quantitatively analyze equation ( where V is the average Coulomb potential in the crystal and we split into two known derivatives. The first, the strain-induced change in the conduction band level, is the conduction band-specific deformation potential D BS C , as described and calculated by Stengel 66 . This term describes the shift of the conduction band edge with respect to V, so we must also consider how the mean inner potential, V -E vac changes with strain. The important mean inner potential term has often been called a "surface flexoelectric" contribution 64,66 , but we prefer an interpretation consistent with electron diffraction as discussed in detail recently 64 . This is the second term in equation ( Returning to equation ( dx j (6) where μ ijkl is the flexoelectric tensor. We assume cubic symmetry (and switch to Voigt notation), with the values 70 for STO: μ 11 = -36.9 nC/m, μ 12 = -40.2 nC/m, and μ 44 = -1.4 nC/m. The potential is therefore with ε S = 365ε 0 the STO dielectric constant 71 . Beyond electromechanical effects, the applied bias and the formation of a depletion region near the surface of doped STO must both be accounted for in Φ DEP . We assume Φ DEP follows the form given for Nb-doped STO by Yamamoto 71 , depending only upon the distance z from the surface: where N is the dopant concentration, a and b parameterize the field (E) dependence of the permittivity of STO as ε STO = bε 0 /√a + E 2 and have values 1.64 ⋅ 10 15 V 2 /m 2 and 1.48 ⋅ 10 10 V/m respectively at room temperature 71 , V d = φ 0 + E F -E c -V/n is the diffusion potential, and V is the applied potential. We included the image charge potential, Φ IMG , generated as the electrons approach the surface of the semiconductor; however, it is very small relative to the other terms (details appear in the Supporting Information). Therefore, we have for E c : The total band bending (radially symmetric) for the PtIr-STO system is shown in Fig. Turning next to the reverse bias case, we considered a reverse threshold bias V Rev,t at which the current reaches some threshold magnitude, |I(V t )| = I t (see Fig. where m * is the STO conduction band effective mass and C is a path from the interface at radius ρ to a point in the STO far away (where E c is constant). Of the possible paths, that with the highest tunneling probability determines P Tunanother variational calculus problem. The experimentally observed current at the threshold applied bias V Rev,t and tip force F is given by equation By restricting the analysis to low currents, the thermally-assisted tunneling is almost exclusively through the lowest part of the barrier near the edge of the contact region, the same location of current flow calculated in the forward bias case. At higher currents, the tunneling occurs over a larger region, as detailed in the Supporting Information. A plot of V Rev,t with respect to the force F is shown in Fig. The experimental results and modelling herein are in excellent agreement, well within the experimental limits. The analysis only contains two unknown parameters, namely the ideality of the diode in forward and reverse bias and the value for the Schottky barrier between the PtIr tip and the STO substrate. All other relevant terms in the model, such as the elastic constants, flexocoupling voltage and strain derivative of the mean inner potential are either well known or are calculated ab-initio. For any specific system, the details depend on many terms, including the flexoelectric terms, temperature, elastic constants, and differences in work function. The Supporting Information discusses the contributions of the strain gradient and polarization components, and the Supporting Information discusses the contributions of the terms in equations ( One point of some importance in a general sense is that we obtained good agreement between experiment and calculations without having atomically ordered and clean surfaces. This is because the barriers for both forward and reverse bias are beneath the surface by 1 -3 nm (see the Supporting Information). This means that the behavior of a particular material will be somewhat consistent, which is what has been found experimentally. Of course, chemisorbed polar molecules or water will have an effect on the zero-force barrier, but they will not change that much the band-bending change due to the flexoelectric effect. Though the calculations do not explicitly address charge transfer, they offer some insights that agree with experiments for sliding Schottky generator experiments 43,51 that observe electron transfer from a semiconductor to a metal, surprisingly independent of the sign of the flexoelectric coefficients and details of shear versus indentation or plowing. What one has is a type of ratchetting charge pump. More details are provided in the Supporting Information; we will summarize here and in Fig. Similarly, details of shear versus compression or other types of asperity contact will change the exact magnitude of the region where the band bends significantly down, but the overall details will remain the same. We have presented a model of electromechanical band-bending in a triboelectric metalsemiconductor system that quantitatively agrees with the force-dependent current-bias experiments performed herein and qualitatively agrees with charge transfer observed in other works. This offers insight into the details of the triboelectric effect in metal-semiconductor systems and provides strong evidence of the importance of flexoelectric band-bending to triboelectricity. Rather complex mechanics, band-bending physics and device physics combine to end up producing a relatively simple and quite general result. While details are of course very strongly dependent upon specifics of the materials, broad-brush results for charge transfer are surprisingly invariant of, for instance, the amount of shear at the contact. If this was not the case, then the simple concepts such as the 19 th century triboelectric series would never have had even enough limited success such that it could be taught to generations of high-school students. Is triboelectricity as a ratchetting charge pump generalizable from the Schottky contacts herein to other cases? Perhaps. that the shapes and approximate location of these peaks do not change between probes, while the peaks of interest, with resonant frequencies between 20 and 25 kHz, do differ for different probes. The manufacturer's specification for the resonant frequency was 21 kHz ± 30%. Fitting these peaks, the spring constant for each probe can be determined with Sader's result where ρ f is the density of the fluid (air), w and L are the width and length of the cantilever, and Γ i is the imaginary component of the hydrodynamic function of RE, the Reynold's number. Using the online calculator provided by Sader [http://www.ampc.ms.unimelb.edu.au/afm/calibration.html] gave spring constants of about 6 -7 N/m, depending on the probe. The probe tip radius was determined by inspection of SEM images. Fig. The full set of I -V data referenced by Fig. Standard thermionic emission theory gives a current 48 where V is the applied bias, A the contact area, B * the Richardson constant, T the temperature, q the electron charge, k B the Boltzmann constant, φ eff the effective barrier, and n the ideality factor. For V/n ≫ k B T/q ≈ 0.025 V at room temperature, this gives Typical fits for n and φ eff are shown in Fig. Each of these measurements are averages of at least 10 I -V curves measured immediately after one another. The multiple measurements at a single value of F were separated by longer times or measurements at other values of F. Fig. The I -V measurements are quite sensitive to the quality of contact. Fig. The measurements exhibited resistive switching, a well-known phenomenon in perovskite oxides such as STO In addition to the switching observed during bias sweeps, we observed long-term (∼ 1 hr) hysteresis when particularly large reverse biases were applied. A point on the sample was held at a reverse bias V h for 1 minute. Immediately after, a series of CAFM images were obtained at 0 bias. For large V h , an increased current was observed in the images. The current was significantly different from the V h = 0 V control case when V h ≥ 5 V and the difference was especially large when V h ≥ 8 V, as shown in Fig. The data presented in Fig. We consider an electron in the semiconductor moving towards the interface with the metal. As it approaches the interface, it will feel a Coulombic image potential 80 equal to which causes a contribution to the band bending of where ε S is the dielectric constant of the semiconductor. Here, with ε S = 365ε 0 and a minimum useful value z = 0.1 nm, this shift is only 10 meV, which is very small compared to the shifts due to strains and strain gradients. While this effect was included in the calculations, it is ignored in the main text because it was always small. We consider an electron that starts far away from the interface and will cross the barrier. Without corrections to be discussed later, the barrier for a particular path the electron takes to the metal tip is the maximum potential along that path. Now, we assume the electron will take the path that has the smallest barrier (this approach turns out to be very close or exactly the path that follows a gradient-based approach where the electron moves based on the potential gradient at its position). Using this approach while forcing the path to end at the position (ρ, z = 0) (a position at the metalsemiconductor interface), we calculate the barrier φ calc,0 as a function of ρ. Fig. The value after this correction, φ calc,2 , is given by A third and final correction accounts for the position of the Fermi level with respect to the conduction band minimum. The Fermi level of 1-in-64 (0.80 wt%) Nb-doped STO was calculated using WIEN2k 81 using a 4x4x4 supercell with a single Nb atom substituting for Ti. Technical parameters were RMTs of 2.1, 1.9, 1.88 and 1.7 for the Sr, Nb, Ti and O respectively and an RKMAX of 6.5, using the PBEsol functional 82 as well as on-site hybrid methods we have used in previous work on STO (see Fig. Fig. Figs. Two cases are possible, in principle, for pinned states at the metal-semiconductor barrier: pinning to states that remain fixed relative to the metal Fermi level or pinning to states fixed relative to the semiconductor Fermi level. The band bending for the two cases is shown in Fig. The key difference in the calculations is V d . For the first case, V d = φ 0 + E F -E c -V/n while for the second case, V d = φ 0 + E F -E c . The resulting predictions are shown in Fig. Figs. S13-S14 show the strain gradient components and polarization components for F = 3 μN. Figs. S15-S16 show the contributions of each of these components to Φ FXE , i.e., the value of Φ FXE if all other components are artificially set to 0. These show that both polarization components and at least the five strain gradient components ε rrr , ε zzr , ε rrz , ε θθ z , and ε zzz , contribute significantly. Fig. The analysis and calculations ignore charge transfer, but some qualitative insight into charge transfer can be found from the calculations of the conduction band minimum E c . At a metalsemiconductor interface, there are many in-gap states. The effect of the calculated band-bending on electrons in these states qualitatively explains the direction of charge transfer, and why the direction is independent of the signs of the flexoelectric coefficients. Fig. A quantitative description of the charge transfer is outside the scope of our current analysis and is left to future work. We analyze the relative importance of the contributions to the total effective barrier (see equation (3)) by splitting the calculated potential into its components, shown in Fig. Ideality factor for each curve in Fig. An example of resistive switching in I -V measurements. The red curve is the initial forwardsweeping bias (-V to +V) and the blue curve is the reverse-sweeping (+V to -V) collect immediately after. Resistive switching for STO is well documented; we avoided all data where this occurred. Fig. Barrier heights φ eff from forward bias data plotted against the tip force F. The first pass collected three data points at each force, starting at the lowest force and increasing to the maximum force. The fourth data point was collected in a second pass immediately after, again starting at the lowest force and increasing to the maximum force. There is no consistent trend in the fourth point relative to the others, suggesting a lack of hysteretic effects. ] for the same reverse biases. These display, in E m -ρ space, where significant contributions to the current are. The maximum ρ are at the contact radius, a. The insets magnify the region from 0.9a ≤ ρ ≤ a and 0 ≤ E m ≤ 0.3 eV. Note that at very low currents, the tunneling only occurs in a small ring-shaped region near the edge of contact. Unlabeled contour lines are marked on the color bar.