The ground-state magnetic structures of the Eu 2+ spins in recently discovered RbEu(Fe1-xNix)4As4 superconductors have been investigated by neutron powder diffraction measurements. It is found that as the superconductivity gets suppressed with the increase of Ni doping, the magnetic propagation vector of the Eu sublattice diminishes, corresponding to the decrease of the rotation angle between the moments in neighboring Eu layers. The ferromagnetic Eu layers are helically modulated along the c axis with an incommensurate magnetic propagation vector in both the ferromagnetic superconductor RbEu(Fe0.95Ni0.05)4As4 and the superconducting ferromagnet RbEu(Fe0.93Ni0.07)4As4. Such a helical structure transforms into a purely collinear ferromagnetic structure for non-superconducting RbEu(Fe0.91Ni0.09)4As4, with all the Eu 2+ spins lying along the tetragonal (1 1 0) direction. The evolution from helical to collinear ferromagnetic order of the Eu 2+ spins with increasing Ni doping is supported by first-principles calculations. The variation of the rotation angle between adjacent Eu 2+ layers can be well explained by considering the change of magnetic exchange couplings mediated by the indirect Ruderman-Kittel-Kasuya-Yosida (RKKY) interaction. The discovery of iron-based superconductors in 2008 has stimulated worldwide research interests in the investigations of the interplay between magnetism and unconventional superconductivity in these novel materials. In 2016, superconductivity with the transition temperature (T SC ) of approximately 31-36 K was discovered in a new family of iron pnictides CaAFe 4 As 4 and SrAFe 4 As 4 (A = K, Rb, Cs) possessing the "1144"-type structure. Based on the magnetization and specific heat data obtained from high-quality powder samples, RbEuFe 4 As 4 was speculated to be a ferromagnetic superconductor with a robust coexistence of superconductivity and ferromagnetism. Here we present a systematic study of the magnetic structures of Ni-doped Eu1144 with different doping levels as determined by neutron powder diffraction. We find that as the superconductivity gets suppressed gradually with the increase of Ni doping, the magnetic propagation vector of the Eu sublattice diminishes, corresponding to the decrease of the rotation angle between the moments in neighboring Eu layers. No evidence of the proposed recovery of Fe-SDW order is observed within our experimental resolution. The variation of the rotation angle between adjacent Eu 2+ layers can be well explained by considering the change of magnetic exchange couplings mediated by the indirect Ruderman-Kittel-Kasuya-Yosida (RKKY) interaction. Polycrystalline samples of RbEu(Fe 1-x Ni x ) 4 As 4 (x = 0.05, 0.07 and 0.09) of ∼ 4 g were synthesized by the solidstate reaction method as described in Ref. 22. The phase purity was checked by x-ray diffraction (XRD) on a PANalytical x-ray diffractometer with a monochromatic Cu-K α1 radiation. The doping concentration of Ni in three samples was checked by energy-dispersive x-ray spectroscopy (EDS), to be 5.6(6) %, 7.1(8) %, 8.9(5) %, respectively, well consistent with the nominal values. A small amount of FeAs impurity was found to exist in the samples with x = 0.05 and 0.07, and small amounts of RbFe 2 As 2 and EuFe 2 As 2 impurities were identified in the sample with x = 0.09. Low-temperature neutron powder diffraction (NPD) measurements on the samples with x = 0.05 were performed on the high-intensity powder diffractometer Wombat 26 at the OPAL facility (Lucas Height, Australia) using incident neutrons with the wavelength of 2.41 Å and 1.54 Å, while the data of the sample with x = 0.07 were collected using the 1.54 Å wavelength only. NPD measurements on the sample with x = 0.09 were performed on the high-intensity powder diffractometer D20 at Institut Laue-Langevin (Grenoble, France) using incident neutrons with the wavelength of 2.41 Å and 1.30 Å. In order to minimize the effect of neutron absorption by the Eu atoms, we have filled the powder samples into the double-wall hollow vanadium cylinder. Refinements of both nuclear and magnetic structures were carried out using the FullProf program suite. The ground-state magnetic structures of the Eu 2+ spins in RbEu(Fe 1-x Ni x ) 4 As 4 with different Ni doping levels (x = 0.05, 0.07 and 0.09) are determined by NPD measurements and illustrated in Figure Figure According to the representation analysis performed using the BasIreps program also integrated in the FullProf suite (see the supplemental materials for details), for the space group of P 4/mmm, only two magnetic representations are possible for the Eu (1a) site with the propagation vector of k = (0, 0, 0.136(4)), which we label as Γ 1 and Γ 5 , respectively. Γ 1 allows the c-axis aligned ferromagnetic Eu layers stacking with modulated moment size values at different layers, which is not consistent with the easy-plane magnetization as revealed from the single-crystal sample with a similar Ni doping level. Figure In stark contrast to the magnetic satellite peaks displayed in RbEu(Fe 0.95 Ni 0.05 ) 4 As 4 arising from the helical magnetic structure of Eu, here at 2 K, well below T m , the magnetic scatterings due to the ordering of Eu 2+ spins appear on top of the nuclear reflections for RbEu(Fe 0.91 Ni 0.09 ) 4 As 4 , which is shown in Fig. As shown in Fig. It was reported recently that in isostructural CaK(Fe 1-x Ni x ) 4 As 4 , the Ni doping may lead to the emergence of a hedgehog-type spin-vortex crystal (SVC) order of the Fe moments, It is argued that the emergence of helical magnetic structure with a period of four unit cells along the c axis in undoped Eu1144 (k = (0, 0, 0.25)) is favored by the exchange interaction between superconductivity and ferromagnetism, 4 