We study nonequilibrium roughening during compressive plastic flow of initially flat Cu 50 Zr 50 metallic glass using large-scale molecular dynamics simulations. Roughness emerges at atomically flat interfaces beyond the yield point of the glass. A self-affine rough topography is imprinted at yield and is reinforced during subsequent deformation. The imprinted topographies have Hurst exponents that decrease with increasing strain-rate and temperature. After yield, the root-meansquare roughness amplitude grows as the square-root of the applied strain with a prefactor that also drops with increasing strain-rate and temperature. Our calculations reveal the emergence of spatial power-law correlations from homogeneous samples during plastic flow with exponents that depend on the rate of deformation and the temperature. The results have implications for interpreting and engineering roughness profiles. Roughness controls many interfacial phenomena. The most prominent examples are arguably the influence of roughness on friction Unlike crystalline metals, the fundamental deformation event in glasses is not a slip trace but a localized shear transformation or STZ (shear transformation zone) Glasses formed by quenching have surfaces that are well described by capillary waves Recent simulation studies have shown that deformation is one possible origin of selfaffinity. For example, Milanese et al. We here present evidence that -unlike in crystalline materials To study the emergence of surface roughness, we simulated 100 × 100 × 100 nm cubes of amorphous Cu 50 Zr 50 using molecular dynamics. The initial configuration shown in Fig. We compressed these samples by dynamically reducing the lengths of the simulation cell in the x-and y-directions, keeping the cross-section in the xy-plane square. We report results in terms of the applied engineering strain ε(t) = 1 -L(t)/L 0 , where L(t) is the linear length of the cell (at time t), and L 0 the initial initial length. Since a jump in the strain rate generates undesirable shock waves, we gradually increased ε(t) from zero to a constant value during the first 100 ps of the simulation. We carried out simulations at final strain rates of 10 7 s -1 and 10 8 s -1 . During deformation, we controlled the temperature using a dissipative particle dynamics (DPD) Plastic deformation roughened the initially flat sample surfaces, which we quantified from a pixel representation h xy (ε) of the topography with lateral pixel size L pix ≈ 3 A. h xy is the height of the topmost atom (bottommost for bottom surface) associated with the pixel with center coordinates x and y. We performed all statistical analysis on h xy , e.g., the root-meansquare roughness h rms = h 2 xy where • is the average over all pixels. We assume that all heights are leveled such that h xy = 0. Fig. The roughness amplitude generally decreases with increasing temperature and rate. At T = 500 K and ε = 10 8 s -1 , the height range is only 2 nm. Figure In all cases, h rms (see Fig. While h rms increases continuously, there is little qualitative difference between the topography formed during yield, and the topography at later stages of deformation. To quantify this observation, we calculated the cross-correlation between subsequent simulation snapshots with ∆ε = 0.0025 for the simulations with ε = 10 8 s -1 (Fig. In order to examine lateral correlation in the topography, we compute the power-spectral density (PSD), C 2D qxqy = L -2 | hqxqy | 2 (or rather its radial average C iso q ), where hqxqy is the discrete Fourier transform of h xy . (See Ref. We extract an estimate for the Hurst exponent from these calculations by fitting the simple model C iso q = C wn + C f q -2-2H to the PSD data, excluding data in the long wavelength region q < 0.18 nm -1 . The constant C wn is a white noise contribution and C f the amplitude of the fractal regime. The individual fits are shown as dashed gray lines in Fig. H depends on temperature and strain rate, with lower temperatures and lower strain rates leading to larger values of H. At low temperature and strain rate, the system is near the athermal quasistatic (or overdamped) regime of deformation bands that form topography by leaving steps on the surface. The corresponding h rms -curve in Fig. It is remarkable that the topography appears to be self-affine at large strain (Fig. Decreasing either rate or temperature increases both h rms and H. In this respect, the glass is different from metal crystals, where h rms and H due to roughening by plastic deformation are independent of rate and temperature The differences between our topographies appear to reflect the temperature and rate sensitivity of plastic flow in the glass. A finite rate and temperature limit the magnitude of plastic events We now attempt a similar scaling collapse of our data for the characteristic length in our system, the height amplitude h rms . We attempt to collapse the h rms (ε)-curves from those simulations where no system-spanning shear band is nucleated assuming the empirical relation h rms ∝ γη T κ . Before dividing by γη T κ , we subtracted the small baseline roughness h rms,0 of the undeformed state that reflects thermal fluctuations. We computed h rms,0 as the mean value of h rms (ε) for ε < 0.01. Fig. In summary, the evolution of the surface roughness of a deformed Cu 50 Zr 50 metallic glass reflects the dependence of plastic flow on rate ε and temperature T . At low values of these parameters, the topography is dominated by system-spanning shear bands. At higher temperatures and rates, a more diffuse topography emerges, with some traces of universality: At large strain, the root mean square roughness tends to grow as h rms ∝ ε α , with α ≈ 0.5, and lower values at the highest rates and temperatures. Moreover, h rms ∝ γη T κ at large strain with η ≈ -0.1 and κ ≈ -0.7. Regardless of rate and temperature, the power-spectral density of all surfaces can be described as the superposition of a self-affine part and constant noise from thermal fluctuations and quenched disorder. Our results remain valid for small-scale roughness of systems with evolving shear-bands. We note that similar to dislocations 