We consider the yielding behaviour of a model glass subjected to asymmetric cyclic shear deformation, wherein the applied strain varies between 0 and a maximum value γmax, and study its dependence on the degree of annealing of the glass and system size. The yielding behaviour of well annealed glasses (unlike poorly annealed glasses) display striking differences from the symmetric case, with the emergence of an intermediate strain regime with substantial plasticity but no yielding. The observed behaviour is satisfactorily captured by a recently proposed model. For larger system sizes, the intermediate strain regime narrows, leading to a remarkable reversal of yield strain with annealing. The response to applied mechanical stresses is a fundamental characteristic of solids that is of central relevance to their use as structural materials. For large enough applied stresses or deformations, plastic deformations contribute significantly to such response, leading eventually to yielding and flow. In the case of amorphous solids, ranging from hard glasses such as oxide glasses to soft solids, these plastic deformations are relevant for understanding their yielding behaviour and rheology A specific issue that has received considerable attention recently is the role of annealing of the glasses that are subjected to deformation, in determining the nature of yielding. Indeed, under both uniform shear and cyclic shear, it has been demonstrated that a qualitative change occurs in the yielding behaviour when the degree of annealing of the glasses increases. Under cyclic deformation Apart from the context of yielding, response to cyclic shear has been investigated in order to understand the reversible to irreversible transition, i.e. the transition from a dynamics towards an absorbing state to one where the dynamics is diffusive, as observed in non-Brownian colloidal suspensions, glasses, related systems and models thereof In many of these works, particularly when related to yielding, the cyclic deformations protocols have been symmetric, i.e. the applied strain of the system is varied through a cycle as 0 → γ sym max → 0 → -γ sym max → 0, where γ sym max is the amplitude of shear With the aim of investigating the dependence of the nature of plasticity and yielding on particular cyclic deformation protocols, here we consider the response to totally asymmetric cycles of shear, 0 → γ 1 max → 0 → γ 1 max . . . . Specifically, we simulate a model glass employing the athermal quasistatic (AQS) shear protocol, and study the response of samples with a widely differing degree of annealing, system size, and subjected to a range of strain amplitudes γ 1 max . The observed behaviour is found to be markedly different from the case of symmetric cyclic shear. For poorly annealed glasses (with initial energies above the threshold energy) the yielding behaviour follows the symmetric case, with a rescaling of the strain amplitudes, as we discuss below. For the well-annealed samples, for the smaller system sizes considered, we find an intermediate range of γ 1 max values over which the stress decreases from the maximum value attained, i.e. beyond the stress peak, but no diffusive behavior is present. The onset of diffusive behavior, at a larger γ 1 max value, is identified with yielding For symmetric cyclic shear Well-annealed glasses. The picture changes dramatically when we consider well-annealed glasses. In the case of symmetric shear, a well-annealed glass with N = 4000 and E init = -7.05 shows, under increasing strain amplitude γ sym max , no change in the minimum Energy E min and plastic strain of the cylic response until yielding, which occurs at γ sym max = 0.105 The corresponding results for the poorly annealed glasses with E init = -6.89 are shown in the SM, displaying a gradual change of both E min and γ Emin with N cycles as well as γ 1 max , but with yielding occurring only when γ 1 max > 0.15, as in the well annealed case. The SM also contains results to show the absence of anisotropy of the sheared glasses. The yielding diagram. We summarise the results for the full range of annealing of the glasses we considered in Fig. Irrespective of the degree of annealing, for γ 1 max > 0.15 the energies E min all increase along a common curve, and we identify γ diff ≈ 0.155 as the onset of the diffusive steady-state regime. A rationalisation of these results can be found in the behaviour of the plastic strain γ Emin shown in Fig. Unlike the symmetric shear case, the location of the stress maximum and the onset of diffusive behaviour do not coincide for asymmetric shearing of well annealed glasses, as seen in Fig. Simulations of a mesostate model. We next consider whether the observed behaviour can be reproduced by a mesostate model proposed to describe yielding under cyclic deformation, in given by E ,γmin (γ) = -+ κ 2 (γ -γ min ) 2 . The stability range of each mesostate is given by γ ± = γ min ± √ . Upon variation of strain when a given mesostate ( , γ min ) becomes unstable, a new state ( , γ min ) is drawn randomly subject to the condition E ,γ min (γ) < E ,γmin (γ). We study the model here subject to the additional range restrictions ∈ ( -δ , +δ ), γ min ∈ (γ min -δγ, γ min +δγ). Note that the restrictions imposed on and γ min (though not the exact values δ and δγ) are found to be important for reproducing the simulation results qualitatively, and we choose δ = 0.05, δγ = 0.1. As shown in Fig. In summary, we have investigated the yielding behaviour of a model amorphous solid under asymmetric cyclic shear deformation. We show that such yielding behaviour displays striking new features not observed for symmetric cyclic shear, including the emergence of an intermediate window of strain amplitudes dominated by significant plastic rearrangements and accompanied by a decrease of stress for well annealed glasses. Such a window is expected to vanish for N → ∞, as our system size results indicate. Nevertheless, our results reveal the central role played by the non-trivial evolution of plastic strain in the case of asymmetric cyclic shear in determining plastic response, in addition to the evolution of 0 0.06 0.12 0.18 0.24 energy. They provide insight into the behaviour of deformed glasses in general. The qualitative reproduction of these features by a mesostate model for yielding under cyclic shear, point to key aspects that merit attention in building realistic theoretical models of plasticity in amorphous solids on the mesoscale (for which the model is intended and applied here). Investigating finite size effects leads to the remarkable conclusion that for asymmetric shear, the yield strain amplitude is smaller for well annealed glasses, in a reversal of observations for symmetric shear.