Robots have been critical instruments to space exploration by providing access to environments beyond human limitations. Jumping robot concepts are attractive solutions to negotiate complex terrain. However, among the engineering challenges to overcome to enable jumping robot concepts for sustained operation, reduction of mechanical failure modes is one of the most fundamental. This study set out to develop a jumping robot with focus on minimal actuation for reduced mechanism maintenance. We present the synthesis of a Sarrus-style linkage to constraint the system to a single translational degree of freedom without the use of typical synchronising gears. We delimit the present research to vertical solid jumps to assess the performance of the fundamental main-drive linkage. A laboratory demonstrator assists the transfer of theoretical concepts and approaches. The laboratory demonstrator performs jumps with 63% potential-to-kinetic energy conversion efficiency, with a theoretical maximum of 73%. Satisfactory operation opens up design optimisation and directional jump capability towards the development of a jumping robotic platform for space exploration. The practicality of a mobile robot is often limited by its ability to negotiate obstacles. Various land locomotion methods enabled by limbs, wheels, tracks, body articulation, and non-contact locomotion, are used in mobile robots to negotiate terrain. Insurmountable obstacles are generally dealt with by a heading change, shortening the mean free path. This results in longer commutes and an increased requirement for steering capability. Conversely, if a robot can overcome all obstacles in its path, then no steering is required and there is potential to reduce the commute distance and time. Walking and crawling locomotion offer high terrain adaptability and obstacle negotiation at the cost of high control complexity; this cost is sometimes warranted in some specific applications, e.g., A jumping robot gains kinetic energy through contact reaction force from the ground. If slippage is limited during the contact phase a jumping system has the potential for reduced frictional cost of transport compared to walking or rolling systems. This may also imply reduced design complexity in the terrain adaptation system as contact wearing is reduced in comparison to other means of locomotion. One of the most appealing characteristics of jumping locomotion is the ability to traverse challenging terrain using a The main motivation for this work is to establish the mechanical foundation for the development of a nimble robotic platform capable of complex terrain exploration. Space exploration is a quintessential example of such activities. In general, such a robotic platform would be mainly used to access environments beyond human capabilities, and beyond the capabilities of traditional exploration robots e.g., wheeled explorers. To achieve this aim, this work reports the development process of a mechanism with sufficient reliability and versatility as to set the basis of a generic robotic explorer platform. Thus, we delimit our design using the following three constraints. Firstly, our design approach is driven by minimally actuated jumping robot concept. Research efforts are directed toward the development of the main-drive linkage responsible of transforming potential energy into jump kinetic energy. Jump directionality poses unique challenges, as discussed by The second design constraint is the objective physical scale of the platform. Over the last five to ten years, there has been an upward trend in investment and demand in robotics for planetary and microgravity applications. This trend is driven by the increasing need for on-orbit satellite servicing, debris removal, on-orbit manufacturing and assembly, and space exploration The third design constraint is set by the objective operational conditions. Terrain and environment characteristics are of paramount importance, not only regarding navigability, but also for robot endurance. Hostile ambient conditions such as thermal extremes and dust environments may represent sources of mechanical failure. Dust in particular is a common source of operative deterioration affecting movable joints due to its pervasive presence in most environments. Furthermore, hazardous dusts The robotic platform design resulting from these design goals is hereinafter referred to as Controlled Leap Operation for a Versatile Exploration Robot CLOVER. The design programme reported in this paper focuses on the take-off development stage, and is outlined by the following main design goals: 1. Design for minimal actuation of main-drive jump linkage (no thrust force vectoring) 2. Focus on linkage mechanism potential-kinetic energy conversion efficiency 3. Design for reduced linkage mechanism maintenance In the following Section 3 the theoretical design of the CLOVER is presented. In line with the first design goal of maintaining minimal actuation, and acknowledging that the jumping process involves mainly the development of linear momentum, mechanisms with one translational Degree Of Freedom (DOF) are considered. The simplest typical mechanisms that fulfil these criteria include the telescopic prismatic mechanism and the hinge rhomb linkage (Fig. An alternative mechanism commonly used for jumping robots is a hinge rhomb linkage In the hinge rhomb system, the spring carries tensile loading rather than compression loading. Higher design factors are used in extension springs as these are prone to hooks fatigue and more catastrophic failure than compression springs, representing more mass addition to this system. Notwithstanding, the progressive thrust force and absence of spring surge has shown more practical advantages than disadvantages The telescopic prismatic mechanism (A) and hinge rhomb linkage (B), with their characteristic ground reaction force with longitudinal displacement graph. From C-F, synthesis of a synchronous hinge rhomb linkage using a pair of synchronising gears. Dotted line extremes in graph B highlight singular or nonlinear behaviour of F N with y for specific geometry configurations; these aspects will be discussed in subsequent sections. may favour reduced weight. From this qualitative analysis, further synthesis of the proposed design is based on the hinge rhomb linkage. The implementation of the hinge rhomb linkage in a jumping robot requires the addition of links for functional purposes, e.g., a foot or platforms for onboard payloads. This practical requirement is often fulfilled with the addition of extra links separating the two main dyads acting as legs, i.e., from four links to five or six links. The resulting modified linkage changes the DOF of the end effector The well-known classical Sarrus mechanism is created when the dyad planes are orthogonal. The Sarrus mechanism is a spatial parallel mechanism with one translational DOF, consisting of two platforms interconnected with two dyads, each of them having three revolute joints (3-RRR) perpendicular to the translation axis. Note that despite the elegant simplicity of this alternative to the gear-synchronised 6-link planar mechanism, the line of action of the driver that connects the dyad centres lies outside the plane of the kinematic chain locates (mobility plane); this introduces lateral torques on the revolute joints. A natural way to overcome this new problem is by recovering mechanism symmetry about the axis of translation while preserving the dyads in different planes as mentioned before. This analysis in presented in the following subsection 3.1. In first instance, the mobility of the Sarrus mechanism can be investigated by exploring the geometry characteristics of the mechanism. In a general architecture of a Sarrus-based mechanism in Fig. Mobility analysis of mechanisms is typically carried out using the Grübler-Kutzbach Criterion (G-K), which is based on simple arithmetics. The G-K criterion can be successfully applied to almost all planar and some spatial mechanisms. However, when redundant constraint or over-constraint appears in a mechanism G-K fails in most cases The presented family of mechanisms also shows tensile loading arrows created by the spring, which originally connected the intermediate joints of the two dyads (hereinafter referred to as knee) in the hinge rhomb linkage in Fig. The approach implemented in the CLOVER robot design is based on the S -1 configuration illustrated in Fig. The masses of the components are labelled as m i from bottom to top, and are used in the following subsection. The value of h can be described with Eq. 1 in terms of the constants a, p, and the time varying θ. Similarly, b is given by Eq. 2. The distance l is given by Eq. 3. The thrust force is obtained from the spring force along l, F l , by applying the principle of virtual work in Eq. 4, yielding Eq. 5. F y = F l dl dh (4) (5) For the specific case of constant stiffness, that is F l = kΔl, with k the so-called spring constant, and Δl is the length difference between the distorted length l and undistorted length l 0 , the thrust force is given by Eq. 6. To illustrate the thrust profile, the specific case of single pin knee joint, i.e., p = q = 0 recovering the simplicity of the S -1 configuration, and equal leg length segments (a = b) in Eq. 6 can be analysed. The spring in this robot will be an elastic material, which is assumed to only apply a load to the system when it extends beyond its natural length, and no load when it is compressed. This is modelled in the system using a Heaviside step function H (Δl), collapses the thrust force to zero for cases where the spring is compressed. The resulting profile of F y is shown in Fig. Figure The linkage height at full spring distension, h F y d , is defined by Eq. 8 Note in Fig. In this subsection the equations of motion for the system during the decompression phase up to the instant of take-off are formulated. Assume the geometric positions of gravity centres are given by Eqs. 9. The velocities of the gravity centres in Eqs. 10 are derived from the geometric positions. Alejandro Macario-Rojas et al. The Lagrangian mechanics approach is used to derive the governing equations of motion. The Lagrangian, L ≡ T -V, is derived from the potential of the conservative forces of the system. From Eqs. 10, and from the substitution variables M i defined in Eqs. 11 used to simplify equation notations, the total kinetic energy T can be expressed by Eq. 12, with I 1 and I 2 as mass moments of inertia. From Eqs. 9, the total potential energy V is given by Eq. 12, with g as the gravitational acceleration. As not all the forces acting on the system are derivable from a potential, the Lagrange's equation can be written as in Eq. 14. d dt ∂L ∂ θ In this equation Q is the generalised forces term in Eq. 15 given by the thrust force and non-conservative damping torques for frictional losses with characteristic Coulomb coefficient μ C . Finally, by solving Eq. 14 for θ and after further mathematical manipulation, Eq. 16 presents the Dynamical Model governing equation, hereinafter referred to as DM. The dynamical model governing equation derived so far is meaningful only within the linkage decompression phase 0 ≤ t ≤ t off ending at take-off. After this time, the aerial phase takes place. Also note that the governing equation is independent of m 1 as this remains static, in contact with the floor during the linkage decompression phase. Thus, the issue at hand is now to derive an equation for the take-off velocity that includes m 1 in order to simulate the jump trajectory, as shown in Fig. During the time the linkage is decompressing moving upwards, the mass in motion is m T -m 1 with the total mass given by Eq. 19. Under this condition, the maximum value of Eq. 17 is reached when the value of Eq. 18 is zero. After the total mass reaches its maximum velocity ( h max ), the effect of gravity starts to slow down the motion but the upward movement continues while the robot is still on the ground. The instant of take-off, t off , occurs when the ground reaction force in Eq. 20 equals zero. And at this instant the velocity of the centre of mass is defined as h take-off . Immediately after take-off the velocity of the centre of mass is obtained by assuming conservation of linear momentum: Note that for a massless foot (m 1 = 0), v 0 = h (t off ); in any other case some of the momentum is transferred to the foot. Fig. This investigation set out to develop a minimally actuated linkage platform for planetary jumping robots. In this section, the design of a laboratory demonstrator used to assist the evaluation of the proposed linkage approach is discussed. It is known from Section. 3 that the proposed linkage has one translational DOF and is intended to develop linear momentum for a jump. It is worth mentioning that the take-off, aerial, and landing phases, each pose specific requirements for a practical jumping robot explorer. In practice, traverse mode would require thrust force vectoring, may require robot attitude control during aerial phase, and self-righting capability would be essential in preparation of a subsequent jump. Acknowledging this and that other robot design elements stem from the characteristics of the linkage dynamics, such as foot design and thrust force vectoring approach, the scope of the design of the laboratory demonstrator at hand is limited to the take-off development stage; specifically, the fundamental jumping ability metric, the potential-to-kinetic conversion efficiency is discussed in this section. Additionally, from Section. 3, note that the functional difference between the plates m 2 and m 5 in Fig. The overall design of the CLOVER robot laboratory demonstrator presented here embodies trade-offs between materials and components availability towards the intended desired functionality. Firstly, commercial off-the-shelf components and materials are preferred as a way to find rapid solutions to test fundamental design routes. In this tenor, the legs of the laboratory demonstrator are built with commercial carbon fibre box profile, and custom-made parts with PolyLactic Acid (PLA) through additive manufacturing. The selection of the carbon fibre box profile was made on the basis of bending resistance, light weight, and adequate subjection for leg attachments. For the CLOVER robot laboratory demonstrator TheraBand resistant band is identified as suitable energy storage drive because of its high snap resistance and availability material sizes and broad range of stiffness values The experimental force-stretch curve for uniaxial elongation of a stripe of TheraBand Latex used in the CLOVER robot laboratory demonstrator, shows a characteristic hyperelastic behaviour of rubber-like materials. Rubber-like elasticity is suitably modelled with the Gaussian theory, which is a statisticalmechanics-based equation of state in Eq. 22, where C 0 is a material constant, T is the temperature of the material, and deformation ratio λ = l l 0 . Although Gaussian theory breaks down at higher strains, it highlights the insightful relationship between force and temperature in rubber-like materials, i.e., the force is proportional to temperature. Therefore, temperature variations equally affect the restoring force. However, temperature and force are dependent variables of state in rubber-like materials. For example, a sudden deformation of the material that may render heat transfer from/to the environment negligible, i.e., quasi-adiabatic stretching, produces changes in the material temperature. In this way, if the material is suddenly stretched its temperature increases; conversely if it is suddenly distended its temperature decreases. TheraBand band stretching is a slow process in the CLOVER robot, which implies heat transfer from the band to the environment. Under this condition, an isothermal process taking place in the material is a reasonable assumption yielding force variation a sole function of the stretch. Band distension on the other hand, occurs in a fraction of a second enhancing the thermoelastic effect of the material. By comparing the thermoelasticity of a rubber band for a range of stretch values of interest for this research, i.e., 1 ≤ λ < 3, this supposes a temperature change of less than 1K A better fit of the experimental values is achieved with the use of the phenomenological Mooney-Rivlin model for hyperelastic materials. The Mooney-Rivlin equation for the uniaxial deformation force-stretch is given by Eq. 23. The values of C 1 and C 2 are found through statistical curve fitting and reported in Table The energy conversion efficiency in Eq. 24, is used to assess the laboratory demonstrator performance in transforming the potential energy into kinetic energy. The potential energy stored in the hyperelastic material is given by Eq. 25. The energy contained in the storage drive is ultimately released and transformed into various physical phenomena such as mechanical movement, heat, vibrations, etc. A key design objective in the design of jumping robots is the reduction of irreversibilities to transform most of the potential energy into kinetic energy available for the jump. Eq. 26 shows that the kinetic energy at take-off is given by its total mass m T and initial take-off velocity v 0 . The following subsections 4.1 and 4.2 discuss the compression and docking mechanism approaches implemented in the CLOVER robot laboratory demonstrator. The compression mechanism shown in Fig. The compression process gradually stores energy in the Theraband by the action of an electric motor. From the solutions of Eq. 16, the phase portrait of the trajectories of the DM can be traced in Fig. When the stored elastic potential energy is released from the spring the system follows an equi-energetic trajectory; examples of release trajectories from various initial leg angles θ 0 are shown in Fig. Another interesting feature shown in the phase portrait is a singular point of the centre type in the vicinity of π/2; the location of this stable manifold in the phase portrait is related to the design of F y requiring l 0 -c > 0 for thrust force peak before full distension of the TheraBand band. In other words, the stable manifold corresponds to the rest leg angle at E P = 0. In a damped system, the trajectory of the dynamical model will reach equilibrium position by traversing equi-energetic trajectories. In a particular practical case, for angles near θ = 0, it is common that the thrust force is lower than static friction in joints impeding the decompression. For this reason, a practical design should avoid proximity to θ = 0. Acknowledging this is fundamental in the design of the docking mechanism discussed below. Some examples of common energy release mechanism found in current jumping robots are overrunning clutches, snail cams, locking mechanisms, and detaching idler gears. In order to meet the sub-kilogram scale and low power consumption goals of the CLOVER robot design, the most suitable approach is to use a locking mechanism. The locking mechanism is a robust, simple, and small size solution for energy release. Fig. The first task in this section is to analyse the theoretical characteristic evolution of the distension force F l and thrust force F y . For this purpose, the CLOVER robot design parameters are presented in Table All parameters and known initial conditions of the laboratory demonstrator design allow us to make estimations of its theoretical conversion efficiency in Eq. 24, using the theory developed in Subsection 3.3. The theoretical undamped energy conversion efficiency sensitivity to the laboratory demonstrator with parameters in Table the laboratory demonstrator, i.e., proportions at 100% and θ 0 → 0, is 73%, which represents the maximum attainable value for the mass and geometric proportions of the demonstrator. In the first instance, efficiency is mostly influenced by the value of gravity acting against the linear vertical acceleration, h; a reduction in g value prompts an increase in η. From the body masses, the foot mass m 1 and the upper mass m 5 are the most influential; a value increase reduces η. Less detrimental variation on η is observed for knee mass (m 3 ) increment, which supports the CLOVER knee design approach. The initial leg angle, θ 0 , also affects the conversion efficiency as shown in Fig. Figure Section 4 introduced the concept of energy conversion efficiency to evaluate jumping ability. In this section the fundamental jumping ability of the laboratory demonstrator is evaluated through the analysis of vertical jump tests. To this aim, the CLOVER robot demonstrator, a Bluetooth dongle, a computer with MATLAB software, and a video camera were used in the experiments. In order to reduce energy damping losses between the ground and the robot to approximate the theoretical behaviour discussed above, jump tests are carried out on a flat solid horizontal surface. The robot foot sat flat on the horizontal surface before each jump experiment. Serial port communication was established between the MATLAB and dongle to read streaming data from the robot. The camera was set up to capture a perspective view of the robot jump. The research protocol started with the wireless connection between the robot and the dongle. The locking mechanism was manually assembled with the robot in idle stand position as shown in Fig. The experimental evolution of the dynamics of the laboratory demonstrator was registered externally by the video camera, and onboard by the 9DOF absolute orientation sensor. The camera captured 240 video frames per second and 44 100 audio samples per second, while the orientation sensor captured 150 samples per second during the jump tests. The time-of-flight characteristic to the vertical jump is a conspicuous phenomenon (Fig. The take-off velocity was inferred from the time-of-flight t aer as 2.9 m s -1 , yielding an estimated maximum jump height of 0.566 m verified by observations. The inferred take-off velocity was then used to estimate the characteristic mechanical system damping of the laboratory demonstrator, embodied by the Coulomb coefficient μ C in the DM (Subsection 3.3). The value of μ C = 16.811 × 10 -3 yielding the experimentally inferred value of v 0 was identified through its numerical iteration in the DM. The definition of μ C different from zero defined in turn the new kinematic curves for the resulting damped DM shown in Fig. This paper described the theoretical development and practical demonstration of a jumping robot. The study drew inspiration from the JPL planetary exploration robot, which utilised a nonlinear spring in order to increase elastic-to-kinetic energy transfer in comparison to a linear spring. The present study extends this approach using a Sarrus-style linkage to constrain the system to a single translation degree of freedom without the use of gears, while still retaining the favourable nonlinear force profile. This offers a route for feasible integration into future planetary robots, where the risk of dust ingress into gears is prohibitively high. Linkage flexion direction yielding symmetric (mirrored) tension on the elastic material in the practical demonstration was assisted by a pulley-lever system, which provided compression capability while enabling redundant least effort paths of compression. The configuration of pulley-lever system is designed to convey the dynamical system from the vicinity of a singular point of the saddle type when in linkage compression, to a stable one in linkage extension through a mechanically suitable path. These mechanical elements were realised as a functional hopping robot laboratory demonstrator. The robot demonstrates 63% potential-to-kinetic energy conversion efficiency, with a theoretical maximum of 73% for this particular spring and linkage system with no dissipative losses. The theoretical maximum is limited by the inertial component of the mechanism-ground interface, i.e., robot foot mass, and by the characteristic spring force-strain curve. Transformation of potential energy from the spring into kinetic energy of the linkage, is inherently related to the state of the mass configuration of the system at any specific time; this observation implies the existence of an optimum spring force-strain curve for maximum mechanical conversion efficiency for the masses and geometry of the linkage. These observations will be subject of future research. Screws defined by screw theory are used to express the instantaneous velocity and forces acting on a rigid body. Therefore the allowed free motions of a rigid body by its constraints can be represented by screws. A line vector S and a couple S 0 can be combined to form a screw S, a dual vector in the so called Plücker homogeneous coordinates consisting of six elements. A screw is represented by four factors in Eq. 27 namely position r, direction axis and magnitude of the screw S, and pitch of the screw h. For the special case when S ≠ 0, S • S 0 = 0, and h = 0 (S and S 0 are orthogonal) the screw expresses the Plücker homogeneous coordinates of a line; for S ≠ 0, h = ∞, S represents a couple. These two special cases are relevant for following descriptions. The between the motions and the constraints of a screw is obtained from reciprocal screw theory and will be discussed later in this section. In the analysis at hand, the degree of freedom of the terminal connector of the i-th kinematic chains is analysed first. Figure The screws of the first kinematic chain are obtained with the cartesian coordinates in three-dimensional physical space of the revolute joints r A 1 , r B 1 , and r C 1 at the fixed coordinate frame. It is important to bear in mind that the screw matrix denotes a six dimensional Euclidean space. The screw of the first kinematic chain can be expressed as the assembly of these three screws of the revolute joints as in Eq. 29. The screw of the i-th kinematic chain can be expressed similarly to Eq. 29. The constraints of the i-th kinematic chain can be obtained with reciprocal screw theory as mentioned before. Since the physical meaning of the reciprocal product of two screws, S 1 • S 2 = S 1 • S 0,2 + S 2 • S 0,1 , is the instantaneous work of the force to the motion of the body, the reciprocal product of a screw and its constraint screw must be zero. In other words, no work is produced by a pair of reciprocal screws. Furthermore, the constraint matrix of a fully restricted rigid body is expressed in a six-dimensional Euclidean space, just as the base space of the screw. The reciprocal product S A 1 B 1 C 1 • S r A 1 B 1 C 1 = 0, uses S A 1 B 1 C 1 denoting the motion of the i-th kinematic chain, and S r A 1 B 1 C 1 is the constraint of the mechanical system acting on it. The reciprocal screw of the i-th kinematic chain is given in Eq. 30 By comparing the form of these three constraint screws with Eq. 27, note that the pitch of S r 1 i is zero, which implies a force vector passing through the coordinate r C i . Similarly, S r 2 i and S r 3 i denote torques about their respective axes. In this way, the mechanical system exerts three constraints to the upper platform through this kinematic chain. If there exists a reciprocal screw that is reciprocal to all the screws, the reciprocal screw is defined as a common constraint of the mechanism . Thus, all n kinematic chains exert on the upper platform the common screw S r 2 i . This represents an over-constraint of a torque about e C , see Fig. Just as the first reciprocal screw represents dynamic constraints, the second-time reciprocal screw, i.e. the reciprocal screw of a constraint, indicates motion. Consequently the free motion of the upper platform, as well as its constraints are tightly connected by reciprocities. As the constraints of the upper platform are known, Eq. 31, its free motions can be equivalently found through reciprocal screw theory. The screw in Eq. 32 is obtained from solving S r C 1 C 2 •••C n • S P C 1 C 2 •••C n = 0 for S P C 1 C 2 •••C n , which denotes a translation along the vector e C and no rotation freedom in any axis; the same characteristics observed in the classical Sarrus mechanism with two dyads as discussed before. This result implies that the translational mobility remains unchanged independently on the number of kinematic chains added to the mechanism system, as long as there is at least a pair of chains laying in nonparallel π planes. Moreover, since all three revolute joints are parallel to the plane normal of the kinematic chain at any configuration, i.e. the axis directions of the three kinematic pairs are always parallel to its characteristic e i , the screw expressions are unchangeable, which in turn yields unchangeable common constraints and mobility. Therefore S P C 1 C 2 •••C n fully characterises the DOF of the upper platform at any instant. The number of DOFs of the upper platform is simply Rank S P C 1 C 2 •••C i = 1 and the type and direction is expressed by the corresponding screw. Theorem 3.1 in From Eq. 23 and from the general definition of potential energy stored in a lossless flexile material E P = ∫ l f lo F l dl This is a provisional file, not the final typeset article The University of Manchester