The magnetic van der Waals crystals (MnX2Te4)mm( Superconductivity and topological quantum state are two important fields of frontier research in condensed matter physics. Since the discovery of topological insulators (TIs), extensive investigations have been conducted for observing topological superconductivity (TSC) and Majorana fermions, which have potential applications to fault-tolerant topological quantum computation. (MnBi2Te4)m(Bi2Te3)nn crystallizes in a typical van der Waals layered structure, sharing a similar crystal structure with Bi2Te3, a typical TI under ambient conditions. Although the topological properties of these materials have been intensively studied in the past few years, no superconductivity has been observed either by chemical doping or apply pressure. Compared with (MnBi2Te4)m(Bi2Te3)nn, the (MnSb2Te4)mm(Sb2Te3)nn family remains much less explored. In particular, MnSb4Te7 (mm = 1, nn = 1), one member of the (MnSb2Te4)mm(Sb2Te3)nn family, is a magnetic topological system with versatile topological phases that can be manipulated by both carrier doping and magnetic field In this work, we report on the discovery of superconductivity on intrinsic MTI candidate MnSb4Te7 via the application of high pressure. Application of pressure effectively tunes physical properties and crystal structure of MnSb4Te7. Pressure-induced two highpressure phase transitions are revealed in MnSb4Te7, and superconductivity with a dome shape behavior is observed after MnSb4Te7 converts into a simple cubic phase. Single crystals of MnSb4Te7 were grown using the self-flux method. The starting materials Mn (piece, 99.99%), Sb (grain, 99.9999%), and Te (lump, 99.9999%) were mixed in an Ar-filled glove box at a molar radio of Mn : Sb : Te = 1 : 11.5 : 15. The mixture was placed in an alumina crucible, which was then sealed in an evacuated quartz tube. The tube was heated to 1023 K for 24 h and kept at that temperature for 20 h. Then, the tube was slowly cooled down to 881 K at a rate of 0.5 K/h followed by separating the crystals from the flux by centrifuging. Finally, the ampoule was taken out from the furnace and decanted with a centrifuge to separate MnSb4Te7 single crystals from the flux. MnSb4Te7 single crystals are stable in the air. The phase and quality examinations of MnSb4Te7 single crystal were performed on the Bruker AXS D8 Advance powder crystal x-ray diffractometer with Cu Kα1 (λ = 1.54178 Å) at room temperature. Magnetotransport measurements were performed on Physical Property Measurement System (PPMS). The magnetization measurement was carried on a Magnetic Property Measurement System (MPMS). High pressure measurements. High pressures were generated with diamond anvil cell (DAC) as described elsewhere Figure At a pressure of 32.1 GPa, a small resistivity drop appears at 1.9 K, indicating a superconducting phase transition (Figure Here, we determined Tc as the 90% drop of the normal state resistivity. The μ0Hc2 versus Tc can be fitted well with Ginzburg-Landau formula: μμ 0 HH cc2 (TT) = ⁄ , where t is the reduced temperature TT TT cc ⁄ . The obtained μμ 0 HH cc2 (TT) is 0.8 T and coherence length ξ is 20.3 nm (Figure MnBi4Te7 and MnSb4Te7 are sister compounds with the same structure (inset of Figure In order to trace the evolution of charge carriers upon compression, high-pressure Hall resistivity measurements was performed on MnSb4Te7 with pressure up to 74.1 GPa. Rxy(H) under various pressures. At 0.9 GPa, the Hall resistance curve exhibits a linear feature with a positive slope, indicating a hole-type conduction in agreement with the previous reports In summary, we have performed a comprehensive high-pressure study on the electrical transport properties and crystal structures of the intrinsic MTIs MnSb4Te7. Application of pressure effectively tunes crystal structure of MnSb4Te7. Superconductivity with a dome shape behavior is observed for the first time after MnSb4Te7 converts into a simple cubic phase. Considering both intriguing magnetic topology and superconductivity in this material, our results call for further experimental and theoretical studies on MnSb4Te7 and related materials for a better understanding of the relation between magnetic and superconductivity, and its potential application in realizing topological superconductivity.