Among the class of strongly-correlated oxides, La1-xSrxMnO3 -a half metallic ferromagnet with a Curie temperature above room temperature -has sparked a huge interest as a functional building block for memory storage and spintronic applications. In this respect, defect engineering has been in the focus of a long-standing quest for fabricating LSMO thin films with highest quality in terms of both structural and magnetic properties. Here, we discuss the correlation between structural defects, such as oxygen vacancies and impurity islands, and magnetism in La0.74Sr0.26MnO3/SrTiO3 (LSMO/STO) epitaxial heterostructures by systematic control of the growth temperature and post-deposition annealing conditions. Upon increasing the growth temperature within the 500 -700 ̊C range, the epitaxial LSMO films experience a progressive improvement in oxygen stoichiometry, leading to enhanced magnetic characteristics. Concurrently, however, the use of a high growth temperature triggers the diffusion of impurities from the bulk of STO, which cause the creation of off-stoichiometric, dendritic-like SrMoOx islands at the film/substrate interface. As a valuable workaround, postdeposition annealing of the LSMO films grown at a relatively-low temperature of about 500 ̊C permits to obtain high-quality epitaxy, atomically-flat surface as well as a sharp magnetic transition above room temperature and robust ferromagnetism. Furthermore, under such optimized fabrication conditions possible scenarios for the formation of the magnetic dead layer as a function of LSMO film thickness are discussed. Our findings offer effective routes to finely tailor the complex interplay between structural and magnetic properties of LSMO thin films via temperature-controlled defect engineering. La1-xSrxMnO3 (LSMO) is a mixed-valence manganese oxide known for exhibiting a robust inherent coupling between lattice, charge and spin degrees of freedom. Aiming at harnessing the magnetic properties of LSMO for potential technological applications, particular efforts have been devoted to explore the complex relation between microstructure and magnetism, A well-established strategy to manipulate magnetism in LSMO is to vary the degree of distortion of its perovskite structure, and thus bond lengths and angles, by adjusting the magnitude and kind (compressive vs. tensile) of epitaxial strain using lattice-compatible single-crystal substrates, e.g. SrTiO3 (STO), LaAlO3 (LAO), (La0.3Sr0.7)(Al0.65Ta0.35)O3 (LSAT), NdGaO3 (NGO) and MgO. From another perspective, structural defects are also of great importance when the purpose is to combine LSMO with other functional materials. Indeed, in several circumstances LSMO is implemented as a magnetic and/or conducting seed layer in combination with dielectric or ferroelectric materials, such as BFO, BTO or PZT. LSMO thin films were deposited onto (001)-oriented STO substrates by rf-magnetron sputtering (Createc Fischer GmbH). An unconventional characteristic of the used sputtering chamber is the large target-substrate separation of about 30 cm, which permits to find an optimum balance between film homogeneity, deposition rate and suppression of oxygen ion bombardment. LSMO films with a thickness in the range of 3 -15 nm were deposited from a commercial sputtering target with chemical composition La0.65Sr0.35MnO3, using a fixed pressure of 0.018 mbar in a 3/2 mixture of Ar/O2, which corresponds to an oxygen partial pressure of 0.007 mbar. The sputtering power was set to 4.4 W/cm 2 , which led to a deposition rate of about 0.044 Å/s. The growth temperature was varied between 500 -700 ̊C. After the growth process, the LSMO/STO samples were cooled down to room temperature at a rate of 10 K/min in pure oxygen atmosphere of 0.08 mbar. Post-deposition annealing was carried out by exposing the as-grown LSMO films to 900 ̊C for 1 hour in air inside a tube furnace. The LSMO films have been comprehensively characterized with a variety of experimental techniques. Rutherford Backscattering Spectroscopy was carried out on a LSMO film grown on MgO substrate in order to avoid the overlap of Sr signals and revealed a strontium content of about Sr = 0.26. The magnetic properties of LSMO films were investigated by superconducting quantum interference device (SQUID) magnetometry. The magnetic transition temperature of LSMO films was analyzed by carrying out field-cooled measurements in the 2 -350 K temperature range at a fixed magnetic field of 100 Oe applied parallel to the in-plane film direction. Magnetization saturation and coercivity have been evaluated by performing magnetic hysteresis loops up to a magnetic field of ± 9 T at a temperature of 10 K. The structural investigation by means of HRXRD reveals that all LSMO films with a thickness of about 13 nm deposited onto STO substrate in the 500 -700 ̊C temperature range are epitaxial and <001>-oriented along the out-of-plane direction (see Fig. The main influence of Tgr is to induce a systematic shift of the HRXRD peaks of LSMO. For Tgr ≈ 500 -550 ̊C the LSMO and STO peaks almost overlap, whereas upon increasing the Tgr up to 700 ̊C the LSMO reflections systematically shift towards higher angles (see Fig. The abundant presence of oxygen deficient sites at low deposition temperatures is further corroborated by analyzing the effect of post-deposition annealing at 900 ̊C for 1 hour in air on the as-grown samples. In this case, the HRXRD peaks of all LSMO films, which still feature neat Laue fringes, shift towards a common 2θ value, corresponding to an out-of-plane lattice parameter of about 3.86 Å (see Fig. The crystalline quality of the LSMO films was also inspected by studying the rocking curves (ωscans) of the LSMO (002) reflections (see Supplementary Fig. The surface morphology of the post-annealed LSMO films grown at various temperatures was investigated by atomic force microscopy (see Fig. The presence of flat terraces is the result of surface reconstruction after post-deposition annealing, since the as-grown films are atomically smooth, but do not have step-like features (see Supplementary Fig. Differently, at Tgr ≈ 700 ̊C the LSMO surface presents large dendritic-like islands with a lateral size of about 1 μm separated by wide portions of the LSMO surface with atomically-smooth, steplike terraces. This behavior suggests that Tgr acts as a driving force to promote initially islands formation (for Tgr > 600 ̊C) and then islands coalescence (for Tgr > 650 ̊C). Apparently, one may argue that such islands are composed of chemically-spurious species, that diffuse and merge at the top surface of the LSMO film. Previous studies already proposed that non-stoichiometric islands form on the uppermost layers of LSMO due to adatom inhomogeneities that do not overcome a critical island size On the one hand, the region of the heterostructure far from the surface island present a smooth top surface and cube-on-cube epitaxy of LSMO onto STO (see right side of Fig. Concerning the chemical composition, EDX analysis reveals that the interfacial grain is composed of a SrMoOx phase with a nearly 1-to-1 Sr/Mo ratio, whereas the other regions of the heterostructure correspond to LSMO and STO. The combination of STEM and EDX surveys indicate that the nucleation of SrMoOx grains occurs during the growth process of LSMO film as a consequence of temperature-driven diffusion of impurities from bulk STO. We note that the role of defect chemistry and the importance of background impurities in undoped STO are still under intensive evaluation. The fact that Tgr acts as a driving force for the formation of the interfacial grains is further proven by the following test: after simply exposing an original STO substrate to a high temperature of about 700 ̊C in the reducing atmosphere of the sputtering chamber (without LSMO deposition), dendritic-like islands form on its surface (see Supplementary Fig. We shall now discuss the influence of Tgr and post-deposition annealing on the magnetic properties of epitaxial LSMO thin films with a thickness of about 13 nm (Fig. After carrying out post-deposition annealing on the as-grown LSMO films, all samples exhibit similar magnetic characteristics with an increased Tc ≈ 320 K, a sharper magnetic transition (FWHM of dM/dT ≈ 25 K) and Ms above 3 μB/u.c. Notably, after post-deposition annealing the LSMO film grown at the lowest temperature of 500 °C undergoes a massive jump in Tc of about 200 K and the value of Ms more than doubles. Although all samples were exposed to the same post-deposition annealing protocol, the LSMO film grown at 700 °C reaches the highest Ms of about 3.5 μB/u.c.. On the one hand this is possibly related to a more uniform and complete oxidation achieved throughout the whole LSMO film thickness at a high Tgr of 700 °C ; on the other hand the use of a high Tgr of 700 °C may favor the formation of straightest Mn-O-Mn bonds, as supported by the sharpest values of rocking curve obtained in the XRD analysis (see Supplementary Fig. It is worth noticing that all LSMO films present a lower value of M S as compared to bulk LSMO (M Bulk = (4 -x)μ B ≈ 3.74 μ B /u. c. for a Sr content of x = 0.26). In literature this behavior is generally explained in terms of a magnetic dead layer (MDL) formed in LSMO thin films due to a variety of possible factors, comprising magneto-electronic phase separation, First, we observe that all LSMO films with a thickness below 12 nm present a pronounced kink with an upturn in the M(T) curves at about 105 K, which corresponds to the antiferrodistortive phase transition of the STO substrate. Therefore, the reduced degree of strain relaxation within the LSMO films and the high-quality of the fabricated heterostructures with cube-on-cube epitaxy suggest that possible effects related to the distortion of the perovskite unit cell of LSMO, e.g. affecting Mn-O-Mn bond lengths and angles, shall not predominantly contribute to the formation of the MDL in our samples. One possible aspect to consider is that during post-deposition annealing treatment the initial oxidation front formed at the LSMO surface may hamper the diffusion of further oxygen species towards the vacancy sites located deeper in the LSMO film. According to this scenario, ultrathin LSMO films undergo a more uniform and complete oxidation as compared to thicker LSMO films, thus explaining the smaller value of MDL encountered upon decreasing film thickness. Concurrently, however, ultrathin LSMO films may be more sensitive to local interfacial effects, such as film/substrate elemental interdiffusion and the nature of the termination layers on the LSMO film surface, such as missing Mn-O-Mn bonds or modification of the oxidation state of Mn ions. Although interfacial effects may play a role in the MDL formation, they are expected to mostly affect the value of magnetization Ms rather than the magnetic transition temperature Tc of the whole LSMO film. Indeed, it is anticipated that at least a few LSMO unit cells shall remain unaffected by interfacial effects and contribute to the onset of ferromagnetism via conventional double exchange interactions even in case of an ultrathin LSMO film with a thickness of 3 nm. Nonetheless, the fact that Tc does not seem to be simply related to a smeared out para-toferromagnetic transition, but rather to a clear shift towards lower temperatures as the thickness is progressively decreased, strongly suggests that additional factors must be taken into account. As supported by previous studies, In this work, the structural and magnetic properties of LSMO thin films grown onto (001)-oriented STO substrates have been investigated as a function of Tgr (500 -700 ̊C) and post-deposition annealing. The as-grown films deposited at Tgr < 540 ̊C are atomically flat, however the abundant presence of oxygen deficiencies causes a reduced TC and MS. The increase of the Tgr up to 700 ̊C leads to an enhanced oxygen incorporation, and thus also to a systematic improvement of the magnetic properties. In spite of that, at the same time the use of a high Tgr fosters the creation of spurious, dendritic-like islands at the film/substrate interface owing to the diffusion of bulk Mo and Sr impurities from the STO substrate. The preservation of the LSMO film epitaxy as well as the localized character of the SrMoOx grains suggest that such kind of defects shall not affect the magnetic properties of LSMO on a macroscopic scale. Still, they may cause deleterious effects when the purpose is to realize more complex heterostructures relying on the use of LSMO as an atomically-flat underlayer. High-temperature post-deposition annealing of the as-grown films at 900 ̊C for 1 h in air has the twofold effect of promoting surface reconstruction and improving the oxygen stoichiometry. Combining the results of XRD, AFM and SQUID analyses, the best compromise in terms of crystalline quality, surface smoothness and robustness of the magnetic properties is attained when employing a relatively-low Tgr ≈ 500 -540 °C followed by post-deposition annealing. Under such optimized growth conditions, various insights are inferred on possible factors contributing to the formation of the MDL in thin and ultrathin LSMO films, including interfacial effects, gradient in film oxidation and magneto-electronic phase separation. In conclusion, our study evaluates functional strategies for manipulating the structural and magnetic properties of epitaxial LSMO thin films via temperature-driven defect engineering, hence promoting their exploitation as effective building blocks for magnetoelectric and spintronic applications. 