Knowledge of phase diagrams is essential for material design as it helps in understanding microstructure evolution during processing. The determination of phase diagrams is thus one of the central tasks in materials science. When exploring new materials for which the phase diagram is unknown, experimentalists often try to determine the key experiments that should be performed by referencing known phase diagrams of similar systems. To enhance this practical strategy, we attempted to estimate unknown phase diagrams based on known phase diagrams using a machine learning-based classification approach. As a proof of concept, we focused on predicting the number of coexisting phases across the 800 K isothermal section of each of the 10 ternaries of the Al-Cu-Mg-Si-Zn system from the other 9 sections. To increase the prediction accuracy, we introduced new descriptors generated from the thermodynamic properties of the elements and CALPHAD extrapolations from lower-order systems. Using the random forest method, the presence of single-, two-, and three-phase domains was predicted with an average accuracy of 84% across all 10 considered sections with a standard deviation of 11%. The proposed approach represents a promising tool for assisting the investigator in developing new materials and determining phase equilibria efficiently. Phase diagrams are widely used as roadmaps to support the development of materials, from their synthesis to their applications. Detailed knowledge of phase equilibria and the underlying thermodynamics enables the establishment of the link between processing and microstructure, which is a crucial step in modern material design On the one hand, the combination of high-throughput experimentation (HTE) and ML has attracted attention. HTE techniques usually involve the synthesis of thin-film libraries using combinational sputtering In addition, an uncertainty sampling-based active learning strategy for recommending the most informative experiments to be performed for efficient determination of the phase diagrams has been proposed In this study, we attempt to estimate unknown phase diagrams based on known phase diagrams using a machine learning-based classification approach. Compared with the prediction of a given material property, the classification problem is complicated because a variety of phases may be stable depending on the constituent elements. Two ingenuities were introduced to succeed in this task. (i) Compositional descriptors suitable for phase diagram prediction are proposed. These are generated from the thermodynamic properties of the elements and CALPHAD (CALculation of PHAse Diagrams) extrapolations. (ii) The categories are narrowed by focusing on the number of coexisting phases instead of the phases. Although this is a simplified representation of phase diagrams, it still contains essential information on phase equilibria, and the predictions can thus be relevant for planning experiments. An overview of the workflow of this study is presented in Fig. As a demonstration, we focus on the constitutive ternary phase diagrams of the Al-Cu-Mg-Si-Zn system. This practical case is selected because reliable thermodynamic descriptions are available for each of these 10 ternaries, which are of significant industrial importance for light alloys. More specifically, the prediction of their 800 K isothermal section is examined. At this temperature, the descriptions are generally supported by many measurements, and the liquid phase begins to stabilize in the majority of systems. To predict ternary sections, the random forest The 10 ternary subsystems of the Al-Cu-Mg-Si-Zn quinary are set as the target for the present investigation. For each phase diagram, the phase equilibria data are retrieved across the entire 800 K isothermal section with steps of 2 at.% using the high-throughput calculation function of the Pandat software To predict the phase diagrams with a high accuracy, we use three types of descriptors called "Magpie," "Thermo," and "CALPHAD." These are generated based on the composition of each element. For the "CALPHAD" descriptors, CALPHAD assessments of lower-order systems are necessary, while the properties of the pure elements are used for "Magpie" and "Thermo." For each datapoint investigated, five features are first obtained from the atomic concentration of the elements (at.% Al, Cu, Mg, Si, and Zn). In addition, the mean and absolute deviation of the properties referred to as "Magpie" in Table The "Magpie" descriptors do not include any thermodynamic properties. However, such information can be expected to be useful for phase diagram prediction. Thus, in the second descriptor set, 10 new related features are introduced. The five thermodynamic properties referred to as "Thermo" in Table At constant temperature, pressure, and composition, thermodynamic equilibrium is characterized by a minimum of the Gibbs energy. Therefore, once this thermodynamic potential is known for all the phases of a system, its phase diagram can be accessed. Within the CALPHAD framework, the Gibbs energy of the phases is modeled based on a buildingblock approach. For instance, the Gibbs energy of the quinary Al-Cu-Mg-Si-Zn liquid is obtained from the description of the pure elements in the phase, their two-by-two interactions, and their relatively small ternary interactions. This implies that the thermodynamic description of a multicomponent system can be approximated using its subsystems. Herein, we propose the use of the information extrapolated from lower-order systems, i.e., from the binaries in the present case, as descriptors. Specifically, we introduce three features: (i) the number of coexisting phases extrapolated from binary descriptions, (ii) the Gibbs energy extrapolated from binary descriptions, and (iii) the excess Gibbs energy in the liquid phase extrapolated from binary descriptions. These are referred to as the "CALPHAD" descriptor set (Table For our demonstration target, the thermodynamic description of the constitutive binaries of the Al-Cu-Mg-Si-Zn system are gathered into a database: Al-Cu A Python script is available at https://github.com/GuillaumeDeffrennes/DesPD to easily obtain the excess thermodynamic properties in the liquid phase as extrapolated from the binaries. The random forest classifier (RFC) One advantage of using RFCs is that they provide a measure of the relative importance of each descriptor to the prediction model, thereby facilitating a straightforward feature selection. Besides, RFCs naturally provide probability estimates for each class. In this study, the RFC is implemented using the Scikit-learn library The ML workflow used in the present study is schematized in Fig. The optimization of each classification model is performed by non-random nine-fold crossvalidation; that is, each of the nine known ternaries is in turn taken as the validation set, while the remaining eight others form the training set. During this stage, hyperparameters are tuned, and features are selected such that the prediction accuracy is maximized following a threestep process. 1. A preliminary hyperparameter tuning is performed using a grid search approach in which "n_estimators" is varied from 50 to 200 in steps of 50, and "max_samples" Using this smaller feature set, the classification models are trained, and step (i) is repeated. Step (ii) is repeated over several iterations until the set of features that maximizes the prediction accuracy is obtained. For more information on the number of features eliminated at each iteration, the example provided in Supplementary Note B (Fig. 3. The final hyperparameter tuning is performed based on the optimal set of features using a grid search approach. "n_estimators" is varied from 100 to 400 in steps of 100, and "max_samples" is varied from 0.2 to 0.8 in steps of 0.1. All the other parameters are set to default values in Scikit-learn A classification model with a high predictive potential is thus obtained from the nine ternaries and applied to the prediction of the phase diagram that is considered unknown. A practical example of the model optimization procedure can be referred to in Supplementary Note B. The average of prediction accuracies realized using RFCs across the 10 considered ternary sections is summarized in Fig. Although the prediction accuracy is slightly increased, the "Magpie + Thermo" model does not significantly outperform the model trained using "Magpie" features only. However, as is presented shortly, "Thermo" descriptors rank high in the calculated feature importance, which implies that these descriptors must be important for predicting phase diagrams. It is also noted that the isothermal sections obtained using CALPHAD extrapolations from the binaries are on average more accurate than the ones predicted based on the "Magpie" and "Magpie + Thermo" descriptor sets. However, it is emphasized that CALPHAD extrapolations and RFC predictions are fundamentally different; each approach has its own strengths, as is discussed in Section 4. Moreover, these first two RFCs result in relatively accurate predictions based only on the composition and properties of the pure elements, whereas additional information is required to perform CALPHAD extrapolations. The ternary isotherms are on average best predicted by the RFC trained using the "Magpie + Thermo + CALPHAD" descriptor set. A 20% increase in the accuracy is observed as compared to the two other investigated models, i.e., "Magpie" and "Magpie + Thermo." This significant improvement resulted mainly from the addition of only three features. Among them, the number of coexisting phases calculated by extrapolation from the binaries ("Extrapolated n_phase") can be considered to be an estimate of the target variable. Therefore, the last RFC can be considered as a simplified case wherein the error from the CALPHAD extrapolations must be predicted rather than the number of coexisting phases. This is similar to the so-called crude estimation of property strategy used in ML Figure For the present classification task, we consider feature selection to be a critical part of the model optimization. Indeed, before and after this stage, which is described as step 2 in Section 2.2.2, a flat increase in accuracy of 8.4% is observed on average. In comparison, hyperparameter tuning performed during steps 1 and 3 only resulted in variations in accuracy of approximately 1%. After the feature selection, 11 features remained on average without any significant shift for the three descriptor sets. Figure These predictions provide insights into phase equilibria and can thus be useful for planning experiments. To illustrate this, the Cu-Mg-Zn ternary system is considered as an example. This system is rather complicated, notably owing to the formation of the ternary Laves C36 phase and the significant solubility of Zn in the Cu2Mg (Laves C15) phase. As a result, the 800 K isothermal section presented in Fig. Figures If both the extrapolated section obtained via CALPHAD calculations and the predicted section are available, the differences between these provide useful information for guiding experiments in a more objective manner. In Fig. The results obtained for each of the 10 isothermal sections and three descriptor sets considered are summarized in Supplementary Note D. In general, predictions by RFCs are useful in cases wherein the phase diagram features an appreciable proportion of single-phase domains, as in the Cu-Mg-Zn case discussed in Section 3.2 as well as the Al-Cu-Mg and Al-Cu-Zn systems. In contrast, limited information is obtained in the cases wherein three-phase domains are largely predominant, such as in the case of the Al-Cu-Si and Cu-Mg-Si systems. Therefore, a better performance is expected at relatively high temperatures close to the liquidus, where solutions extend into the diagram, but some compounds remain stable. Furthermore, the best prediction results are obtained when using the "Magpie + Thermo + CALPHAD" descriptor set for the Al-Mg-Si, Al-Si-Zn, and Mg-Si-Zn systems. In all three cases characterized by the absence of ternary phases, the 800 K isothermal section is predicted not only with a high level of accuracy, but also with a high level of confidence. It is emphasized that CALPHAD extrapolations and the present ML predictions are different in nature. In CALPHAD, phase diagrams are calculated from the thermodynamic description of their constitutive subsystems. The CALPHAD method is successful in extrapolating quaternary and higher-order phase diagrams from binaries and ternaries. However, extrapolations of ternaries from binaries are less consistent, and a binary cannot be reliably extrapolated from unaries. An important limitation of CALPHAD extrapolations is that a compound, or the solubility of an element in a phase, cannot be predicted if it does not already appear in the subsystems. In the present ML approach, phase diagrams are predicted by analogy with other systems. In contrast to CALPHAD extrapolations, ML can provide indications of the presence of new phases, as discussed in Section 3.3. Moreover, a measure of confidence in the predictions can be obtained from the class probability distribution. In the present dataset, the classes are relatively well-balanced. However, for other systems and temperatures, class imbalance can become a problem, in which case undersampling and oversampling techniques may be important in achieving good results. This study is focused on cases wherein the phase diagram of interest is completely unknown, except for its constitutive binaries. If partial data are available in the ternary phase diagram, they can be directly included in the training set. The strategies for guiding the experiments discussed herein can thus become part of an iterative process, such as black-box optimization We should emphasize that this study is our first attempt at predicting unknown phase diagrams from known phase diagrams. A certain degree of success is achieved, although only nine phase diagrams are used to train the models, and the prediction target is the number of coexisting phases. Future perspectives for improving the present approach include increasing the size of the dataset, introducing other appropriate labels for each phase, and accounting for temperature variations. To achieve this, the phase diagram data for various systems must be collected by performing CALPHAD calculations. These potential research directions are being considered for future works. Phase diagram prediction using ML was investigated by focusing on the ternary subsystems of the Al-Cu-Mg-Si-Zn quinary. Each of the 10 ternaries was considered to be unknown, and the number of coexisting phases across its 800 K isothermal section was predicted from the 9 others. Special emphasis was placed on introducing new descriptors for predicting the phase diagrams. It is emphasized that impactful features were obtained from CALPHAD extrapolations from the binary systems. To the best of our knowledge, this is a new strategy for generating descriptors, and it significantly improved the model performance in the present study. Using the most complete set of descriptors and a random forest algorithm, an average accuracy of 84% with a standard deviation of 11% was obtained across the 10 considered ternary sections. It should be noted that the accuracy is dependent on the system, temperature, and training set. It was demonstrated that the predictions can provide insights into phase equilibria in unknown materials systems, especially when combined with CALPHAD extrapolations. It is thus concluded that the proposed approach is promising for promoting more efficient determination of phase diagrams. We are currently working on the construction of a larger dataset to expand our approach to other elements. Appendix. CALPHAD extrapolation of the excess thermodynamic properties of a substitutional solution from its binary subsystems For a given A-B binary substitutional solution denoted by φ, the molar excess Gibbs energy G is modeled within the CALPHAD framework using a Redlich-Kister polynomial that includes interaction parameters: with x the molar fraction of constituent i, and v an integer. a , and b , form the interaction parameters of order v, which can be obtained from CALPHAD publications in tables under the notation L , . In thermodynamic databases in TDB format such as those available in NIMS CPDDB For a substitutional solution of n constituents (n > 2), the main contribution to the excess Gibbs energy is obtained by extrapolation from its binary subsystems. Various extrapolation methods are available, as discussed in Table 2.3.1. Random forest classifier