EuAl 4 and EuGa 4 are two candidate materials for studying the interplay between correlated-electron phenomena, topological spin textures, and topologically nontrivial bands. Both compounds crystallize in a centrosymmetric tetragonal BaAl 4 -type structure (space group I4/mmm) and show antiferromagnetic (AFM) order below T N = 15.6 and 16.4 K, respectively. Here, we report on systematic muon-spin rotation and relaxation (μSR) studies of the magnetic properties of EuAl 4 and EuGa 4 single crystals at a microscopic level. Transverse-field μSR measurements, spanning a wide temperature range (from 1.5 to 50 K), show clear bulk AFM transitions, with an almost 100% magnetic volume fraction in both cases. Zero-field μSR measurements, covering both the AFM and the paramagnetic (PM) states, reveal internal magnetic fields B int (0) = 0.33 T and 0.89 T in EuAl 4 and EuGa 4 , respectively. The transverse muon-spin relaxation rate λ T , a measure of the internal field distribution at the muon-stopping site, shows a contrasting behavior. In EuGa 4 , it decreases with lowering the temperature, reaching its minimum at zero temperature, λ T (0) = 0.71 μs -1 . In EuAl 4 , it increases significantly below T N , to reach 58 μs -1 at 1.5 K, most likely reflecting the complex magnetic structure and the competing interactions in the AFM state of EuAl 4 . In both compounds, the temperaturedependent longitudinal muon-spin relaxation λ L (T ), an indication of the rate of spin fluctuations, diverges near the onset of AFM order, followed by a significant drop at T < T N . In the AFM state, spin fluctuations are much stronger in EuAl 4 than in EuGa 4 , while being comparable in the PM state. The evidence of robust spin fluctuations against the external magnetic fields provided by μSR may offer new insights into the origin of the topological Hall effect and the possible magnetic skyrmions in the EuAl 4 and EuGa 4 compounds. Topological materials are at the forefront of quantum matter and material science research due to their great potential for applications Upon replacing Ba with Sr or Eu, or when replacing Al with Ga, all AE(Al,Ga) 4 (AE = Sr, Ba, and Eu) crystallize in the same tetragonal structure, while Ca(Al,Ga) 4 adopts a monoclinic crystal structure with a space group C2/m (No. 12) The topological Hall effect is considered to be the hallmark of spin textures with a finite scalar spin chirality. Such topological spin textures usually exhibit a nonzero Berry phase, here acting as an effective magnetic field, giving rise to the topological Hall resistivity As an extremely sensitive magnetic probe at a microscopic level, the muon-spin rotation and relaxation (μSR) technique lends itself naturally to studying the temperature evolution of the magnetic properties of EuAl 4 and EuGa 4 single crystals. As shown in detail below, we report: i) the intrinsic fields at the muon implantation sites in EuAl 4 and EuGa 4 across the respective phase diagrams in the absence of external magnetic fields; ii) the magnetic volume fraction in the AFM state; iii) evidence of strong spin fluctuations. Single crystals of EuAl 4 and EuGa 4 were grown by a molten Al-and Ga flux method, respectively, the details of growth being reported elsewhere μSR experiments were carried out at the general-purpose surface-muon (GPS) instrument at the πM3 beam line of the Swiss muon source (SμS) at Paul Scherrer Institut (PSI) in Villigen, Switzerland. In this study, we performed three kinds of experiments: weak transverse-field (wTF)-μSR, zero-field (ZF)-, and longitudinal-field (LF)-μSR measurements. As to the former, we could determine the temperature evolution of the magnetic volume fraction. As to the latter two, we aimed at studying the temperature evolution of the magnetically ordered phase and the dynamics of spin fluctuations. The aligned EuAl 4 and EuGa 4 crystals were positioned on a thin aluminum tape, with their c-axes parallel to the muon--momentum direction, i.e., p μ c [see inset in Fig. The magnetic transition temperatures T N and the evolution with temperature of the magnetic volume fraction in EuAl 4 and EuGa 4 single crystals were established by means of wTF-μSR measurements. A weak transverse field of 5 mT We report also the magnetic susceptibilities χ ZFC (right axes), measured in a field of μ 0 H = 0.1 T after zero-field cooling (ZFC). In both cases, the insets show the magnetic volume fraction vs temperature. Here, lines are fits to a phenomenological function [see Eq. ( was applied perpendicular to the initial muon-spin direction in the PM state, where it leads to oscillations, as shown in Fig. where A NM is the initial muon-spin asymmetry (i.e., the amplitude of the oscillation) for muons implanted in the nonmagnetic (NM) or PM fraction of EuAl 4 and EuGa 4 single crystals; γ μ B int is the muon-spin precession frequency, with γ μ = 2π × 135.5 MHz/T the muon gyromagnetic ratio and B int the local field sensed by muons (here almost identical to the applied magnetic field, i.e., B int ∼ 5 mT); φ is the initial phase, and λ is the muon-spin relaxation rate. Note that, in the AFM state, the very fast μSR relaxation was excluded and only the residual slow-relaxing asymmetry was analyzed (see the 1.5-K dataset in Fig. where erf(T ) is the error function. As shown by solid lines in the insets of Fig. Both samples show sharp transitions and can be considered as fully magnetically ordered at low temperatures, indicative a high sample quality. Note also that, the transition temperatures, as determined from V mag (T ), have their onset at ∼ 16.5 K and ∼ 16.7 K for EuAl 4 and EuGa 4 , both in very good agreement with the magnetometry data. To investigate the local magnetic order of EuAl 4 and EuGa 4 single crystals, ZF-μSR spectra were collected at different temperatures, covering both the PM and AFM states. The time evolution of ZF-μSR asymmetry, A ZF (t), encodes the local magnetic fields and their distribution at the muonstopping site. If the electronic magnetic moments fluctuate very fast (typically above 10 12 Hz in the PM state), they do not influence the muon-spin polarization. Randomly oriented slow fluctuating or static moments (below 10 4 Hz, such as nuclear spins, or electronic moments in spin glasses), give rise to incoherent precessions and a slow depolarization. Conversely, in case of ordered static moments, a fast depolarization and superimposed oscillations, reflecting the coherent precession of the muon spins, are observed In the PM state (T > T N ), the μSR spectra still exhibit a relatively fast muon-spin depolarization (∼ 2 μs -1 ), implying the existence of strong spin fluctuations, here further confirmed by LF-μSR measurements (see below). In absence of spin fluctuations, the muon-spin depolarization is usually due to the nuclear dipole fields (3) Here, α and 1 -α are the oscillating (i.e., transverse) and nonoscillating (i.e., longitudinal) fractions of the μSR signal, respectively, whose initial total asymmetry is equal to A 1 . λ T and λ L represent the transverse and longitudinal relaxation rates, while A 1 and A 2 represent the asymmetries of the two nonequivalent muon-stopping sites. In EuAl 4 , muons stopping at the second site do not undergo any precession, but show only a slow relaxation, here described by λ tail . In EuGa 4 , a single muon-stopping site is sufficient to describe the ZF-μSR spectra. Finally, B int , φ, and γ μ are the same as in Eq. (1). Similar expressions have been used to analyze the μSR data in other Eu-based magnetic materials, most notably, in the Eu122 iron pnictides In polycrystalline materials with a long-range magnetic order, one expects α = 2/3, since statistically one third of the muon spins are aligned parallel to the local field direction (i.e., S μ B int ) and, hence, do not precess. In EuAl 4 and EuGa 4 single crystals, we find α to be 0.87 and 0.46, respectively. Since the ZF-μSR spectra were collected in a rotated muon-spin configuration (i.e., S μ ⊥ p μ ), and the c-axis is parallel to the muon momentum (i.e., c p μ ), the internal magnetic fields at the muon-stopping sites should be mostly aligned along the [001]-direction in EuAl 4 , but along the [111]-direction in EuGa 4 . The derived fit parameters for both cases are summarized in Fig. to q 2 = (0.170, 0, 0) at 11.5 K and slightly to q 3 = (0.194, 0, 0) at 4.3 K Here, B int (0) is the internal magnetic field at zero temperature, while γ and δ are two empirical parameters. As indicated by the solid lines in Fig. The longitudinal μSR relaxation rates λ L shown in Fig. where ∆ is the amplitude of field fluctuations, while ν is their correlation frequency (i.e., 1/ν = τ, is the spin-correlation time) The vigorous spin fluctuations in these compounds are further supported by LF-μSR measurements. As shown in Fig. A s y m m e t r y FIG. First we discuss why the successive magnetic transitions of EuAl 4 remain undetected by μSR, an absence which might be due to different reasons. Firstly, the asymmetries obtained from wTF-μSR (see Figs. Since most of the skyrmion phases appear in a field range not easily accessible by standard μSR instruments, up to now, only a handful of results have been reported where LF-μSR is used to study the skyrmion compounds. These include GaV 4 (S,Se) 8 The observation of a topological Hall effect in the magnetic state is usually attributed to noncoplanar spin textures, such as magnetic skyrmions, characterized by a finite scalar spin chirality in real space. These magnetic skyrmions are stabilized by the Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction, often observed in noncentrosymmetric materials In summary, we investigated the temperature evolution of the local magnetic properties of EuAl 4 and EuGa 4 by means of μSR spectroscopy. wTF-μSR measurements confirm that EuAl 4 and EuGa 4 undergo an AFM transition at T N ∼ 16 and 16.5 K, which are consistent with the magnetization data. The magnetic volume fractions, as determined from wTF-μSR asymmetry, are 91% and 95% for EuAl 4 and EuGa 4 , respectively, implying a good sample quality in both cases. By using ZF-μSR measurements, we could follow the temperature evolution of the local magnetic fields and of spin fluctuations. The estimated internal fields at zero temperature are 0.33 and 0.89 T for EuAl 4 and EuGa 4 , respectively. EuAl 4 exhibits a more disordered internal field distribution than EuGa 4 , reflected in a large transverse muon-spin relaxation rate λ T far below T N , most likely related to its complex magnetic structure. The vigorous spin fluctuations revealed by both ZF-μSR and LF-μSR might be crucial for understanding the origin of topological Hall effect and of possible skyrmions in EuAl 4 and EuGa 4 . In future, it might be interesting to investigate the magnetic properties of EuAl 4 and EuGa 4 using the μSR technique under high magnetic fields, where the topological Hall effect appears. nor in the PM state, this implies that, in this type of materials, spin fluctuations exist over a wide temperature range, well above the AFM transition. We recall that, according to previous μSR studies on EuCd 2 As 2 , spin fluctuations are strongly enhanced below 100 K, thus causing the breaking of time-reversal symmetry and leading to the formation of magnetic Weyl fermions a Determined from the asymmetry of wTF-μSR spectra. b Determined from fits of ZF-μSR spectra.