The activity and stability of a platinum nanoparticle (NP) is not only affected by its size but additionally depends on its shape. To this end, simulations can identify structure-property relationships to make a priori decisions on the most promising structures. While activity is routinely probed by electronic structure calculations on simplified surface models, modeling the stability of NP model systems in electrochemical reactions is challenging due to the long timescale of relevant processes such as oxidation beyond the point of reversibility. In this work, a routine for simulating electrocatalyst stability is presented. The procedure is referred to as GREG after its main ingredients -a grand-canonical simulation approach using reactive force fields to model electrochemical reactions as a function of the galvanic cell potential. The GREG routine is applied to study the oxidation of 3 nm octahedral, cubic, dodecahedral, cuboctahedral, spherical, and tetrahexahedral platinum NPs. The oxidation process is analyzed using adsorption isobars as well as interaction energy heat maps that provide the basis for constructing electrochemical phase diagrams. Onset potentials for surface oxidation increase in the sequence cube ≈ dodecahedron ≤ octahedron ≤ tetrahexahdron < sphere < cuboctahedron, establishing a relationship between oxidation behavior and surface facet structure. The electrochemical results are rationalized using structural and electronic analysis. Platinum nanoparticles (NPs) are relevant for a wide range of electrocatalytic processes, including small molecule oxidation, 1 plasma catalysis, 2 the oxygen evolution reaction (OER), The relationship between shape and catalytic activity of Pt NPs has been studied extensively; reviews by Kleijn et al., Firstly, computational treatment of shaped NPs is methodologically challenging. Typical Pt NPs used in applications are 2-5 nm in diameter and thus contain too many atoms (250-4000 atoms) for treatment with electronic structure methods such as Density Functional Theory (DFT). Therefore, DFT calculations of high-indexed surface models have been used to approximate the properties of NPs. Examples include the works of Zhu et al., where the potential-and oxidation-induced formation of tetrahexahedral NPs was calculated, The ReaxFF 16 reactive force field approach overcomes the limitations of potentials rooted in classical mechanics by introducing bond order dependency into the potential terms, thereby allowing bonds to form or break during simulation time. While the ReaxFF method in principle allows us to study (electro-)chemical reactions on NP catalysts, a final piece is missing to enable efficient simulations of electrochemical processes: because the large size of the model system prohibits manual generation of input structures, an automated method is required to efficiently sample the configuration space spanned by the initial NP model system, the reactants, and the electrochemical conditions (temperature, pressure, pH, galvanic cell potential, etc.). One possible solution is to combine ReaxFF with a grand-canonical Monte Carlo algorithm. Notable works in this regard include those by Zhu and co-workers who used a ReaxFF-MD approach to study the oxidation of large, stepped Cu surfaces used as model systems for supported, island-like Cu cluster. The GREG routine is applied to shaped Pt NPs in the context of the ORR to investigate the oxidative degradation and in situ structure of fuel cell catalysts. The oxidation of 3 nm octahedral, cubic, dodecahedral, cuboctahedral, spherical, and tetrahexahedral NPs is simulated at various oxygen partial pressure and temperature conditions. EAITD theory is used to construct electrochemical phase diagrams from the datasets of oxidized structures to quantify the influence of particle shape on the onset potentials of different stages of oxidation. The obtained trends are rationalized using structural (generalized coordination numbers) and electronic (partial charge distributions, interaction energy heat maps) analysis. The ReaxFF-GCMC method was originally implemented by Senftle et al. The potential-dependent formation energy ∆E system F (∆φ) of an oxidized NP is calculated as 24 where E system is the total ReaxFF energy of the oxidized NP as obtained from GCMC calculations, E ref is the total free energy of the oxygen-free reference NP, N O is the number of oxygen atoms in the oxidized NP, μ O is the chemical potential of oxygen (where , and e is the elementary charge. The last term of eq. ( The interaction energy hypersurface (heat map) of atomic oxygen with a NP is estimated via the NP's solvent-accessible surface area (SASA). The GREG routine includes the following steps: 1. ReaxFF-GCMC simulations are carried out for a chosen combination of model system and reactant at different temperature and reactant partial pressure conditions to ensure appropriate sampling of the relevant configurational space. Individual simulation runs are analyzed (e.g., convergence tests, adsorption isobars, etc.) 2. All individual simulation runs of the same model system at different conditions are merged into one dataset for meta analysis. The combined dataset is analyzed using the EIATD approach, using an electrochemical reaction involving the reactant as basis, to obtain adsorption energy results that depend on the standard hydrogen electrode (SHE) potential. 3. The most stable reaction product structures are identified for increasing reactant coverage densities and are shown as a function of the electrode potential. The most stable structure at a given electrode potential of interest can then be used for further analysis of, for example, catalytic activity, or as input for the GREG routine with a second reactant in order to probe competitive reactions. The freeware Python3 program nanocut 27 is used to cut NPs from a ReaxFF-optimized FCC-Pt crystal structure (a = 3.94737 Å). ReaxFF-GCMC calculations are performed using SCM's implementation of ReaxFF 16,25,28 and the GCMC algorithm 17,18 in the Amsterdam Density Functional Suite version 2017.106. and corresponding to 400-1200 K at near-ambient pressure (NAP, p O 2 = 1 mbar) conditions. The latter choice is motivated by a recent combined experimental and theoretical study where NAP-XPS measurements on Pt(111) were able to confirm the presence of thermodynamically stable platinum surface oxide phases which were predicted using the GCMC scheme employed in this study. Up to 1000 energy relaxation steps are performed between GCMC steps, using a convergence criterion of 0.5 kcal mol -1 . Full charge equilibration is performed using the EEM scheme. The GREG routine is applied to the 3 nm NPs illustrated in Figure The cuboctahedral particle, which was the focus of a preceding study from our group, Individual runs are analyzed with regards to the gas phase oxygen chemical potential, . The oxygen-to-platinum ratio, x O = # of all O atoms # of all Pt atoms will be used to quantify the degree of oxidation. Adsorption isobars characterize the overall oxidation process, which can be divided into three stages. In the first stage from x O = 0.0 to x O = 0.3 (UHV: 1000-700 K, NAP: 1200-900 K), adsorption of oxygen atoms is observed mostly on the particles' vertices and edges. This initial stage will be referred to as surface oxidation. While oxidation appears to proceed similarly for all particles from a macroscopic per- spective of adsorption isobars, differences between particle shapes emerge under microscopic examination. Figure The second stage of oxidation is characterized by a sudden increase of x O from ca. 0.3 to 1.2 at a critical temperature of ca. 850 ± 50 K under NAP conditions. At UHV oxygen pressure, the increase is more gradual. Beyond x O ≈ 1.2, structures are fully oxidized and the dominant structural motif is of the previously reported agglomeration of clusters of Pt 6 O 8 stoichiometry. Electrochemical phase diagrams are constructed by merging all datasets generated by the GCMC algorithm for the same particle shape and finding the most stable structures as a function of the electrode potential using EAITD theory. Based on the total energy fluctuations of the averaged rearranged structures, an uncertainty of the surface oxidation onset potentials of 0.05-0.10 V is estimated (see Supporting Information for more details), which is in a similar order of magnitude as the general uncertainty expected from the ReaxFF model. In the following, three phases are considered: the clean particle phase extends up to the intersection between the 'rearranged' phase and the first phase representing surface oxidation (x O = 0.1-0.3); the adsorption and surface oxide phase, where oxygen atoms are incorporated into the surface layers, extends between this point and the intersection with a fully oxidized structure (x O ≈ 1.2); the fully oxidized phase featuring the Pt 6 O 8 motif extends beyond this point. Analyzing the electrochemical phase diagrams in Figure Note that the electrochemical phase diagrams presented here do not include solvation or thermochemical contributions. These contributions were previously shown to add up to an increase of the onset potential for surface oxidation and a decrease of the onset potential Table particle shape surface oxidation surface oxidation full oxidation (rearranged reference) (pristine reference) Including solvation and entropy contributions obtained by Kirchhoff et al. The surface oxidation onset potential trends can be rationalized by considering geometric and electronic effects. Firstly, a notable difference between systems a-c and d-f in Figure where CN (j) are the classical coordination numbers of neighboring atoms j and CN max is a weighing factor. CN max gives the largest possible coordination number and is 12 for an FCC crystal, 9 for a BCC crystal, etc. atom whereas GCNs increase for atoms closer to the particle center. The maximum GCN value is 12 for the NPs studied here. Particles with a low surface-to-volume ratio such as the sphere, cuboctahedron, and tetrahexahedron show an overall homogeneous distribution of GCN s. On the opposite, the octahedron and cube show a notably higher percentage of smaller GCN s than the other systems. The abundance of undercoordinated atoms therefore correlates with more negative surface oxidation onset potentials for the octahedron and cube. However, the early oxidation onset of the dodecahedron, for which an overall homogeneous GCN distribution is obtained as well, cannot be fully explained by this geometric descriptor. To investigate electronic effects, partial charge distributions are invoked as an electronic descriptor. 4 e -of test charges -assuming the 4 e -ORR pathway as benchmark case -are introduced to the systems and redistribution of the charges across the particles is studied using the EEM charge equilibration scheme. Figure The GREG routine was used to simulate oxidation of 3 nm NPs of various shapes. From the simulation results, trends connecting particle shape and oxidative stability can be derived and will be discussed in the following. Under non-electrochemical oxidation conditions, a broad ranking of the different particle shapes can be made with regards to their proclivity towards oxidation. Within this first phase of (surface) oxidation (x O = 0.0-0.3), the cuboctahedral and spherical particles appear to be most resistant towards oxidation as lower T are required to achieve the same x O compared to other particles; see Figure To fully explain the sequence of electrochemical onset potentials for surface oxidation of the different particle shapes obtained from electrochemical phase diagrams (Figure Only few experimental reports of measured oxidation onset potentials are available for comparison with the present simulations. Merte et al. report onset of O surface adsorption for small (ca. 1.2 nm) size-but not shape-selected NPs at ca. 0.3 V vs. RHE and formation of stable oxides beyond ca. 1.0 V. report that flattening of oxidized Pt NPs is observed on substrates and that the degree of flattening increases with increasing NP/support interaction strength. Finally, note that results from these oxidation simulations cannot be directly linked to experimentally measured ORR activity. The reaction mechanism of the ORR has not been considered in full; the present work focuses only on the (albeit critical) O intermediate and oxidative degradation in particular. Note however that experimental studies comparing the ORR activity of various NP shapes have so far been inconclusive. For example, Wang et al. compared the ORR activity of 3-7 nm Pt polyhedra, truncated cubes, and cubic particles. A simulation procedure for electrochemical reactions on nanoparticulate catalysts was presented. The procedure is referred to as GREG; the acronym highlights the important ingredients of this routine, namely usage of a grand-canonical Monte Carlo algorithm in combination with reactive force fields to study electrochemical reactions as a function of the galvanic cell potential. Using the GREG procedure, the electrochemical oxidative degradation of 3 nm octahedral, cubic, dodecehedral, cuboctahedral, spherical, and tetrahexahedral nanoparticles was studied. The oxidized structures were analyzed in the context of adsorption isobars and the overall oxidation process can be divided into three stages: 1) surface oxidation, starting at edges and vertices; 2) full oxidation involving disassembly of the original particle shape into an agglomerate of Pt 6 O 8 clusters; 3) decoration of the particle surface with dioxygen species. Electrochemical phase diagrams constructed from the oxidized structures reveal that surface oxidation occurs at lower electrode potentials for the octahedral, cubic, and dodecahedral particles (0.5-0.6 V vs. SHE) than for the tetrahexahedral (0.6 V), spherical (0.7 V), and cuboctahedral (0.8 V) particles. These differences were rationalized using structural (generalized coordination numbers) and electronic (partial charge distributions, interaction energy heat maps) analysis. Complete oxidation is observed beyond ca. 1.1-1.2 V vs. SHE in all cases. The GREG procedure proves to be a powerful tool to probe stability trends for model catalysts in electrochemical reactions and thus enables understanding-driven improvement of electrocatalysts. 