The 12442 compounds are a recently discovered family of iron-based superconductors, that share several features with the cuprates due to their strongly anisotropic structure, but are so far poorly understood. Here, we report on the gap structure and anisotropy of RbCa2(Fe1-xNix)4As4F2 single crystals, investigated by a combination of directional point-contact Andreev-reflection spectroscopy and coplanar waveguide resonator measurements. Two gaps were identified, with clear signatures of d-wave-like nodal structures which persist upon Ni doping, well described by a two-band d-d state with symmetry-imposed nodes. A large London penetration depth anisotropy was revealed, weakly dependent on temperature and fully compatible with the d-d model. The so-called 12442 family of iron-based superconductors (IBSs) is the youngest addition to this class of materials In this work, motivated by these considerations, we arXiv:2201.07593v1 [cond-mat.supr-con] 19 Jan 2022 report on a combined study of the gap symmetry and superfluid density of RbCa 2 (Fe 1-x Ni x ) 4 As 4 F 2 single crystals employing directional point-contact Andreevreflection spectroscopy (PCARS) and a coplanar waveguide resonator (CPWR) technique on samples with increasing Ni doping. The study of doped samples gives the possibility to investigate the persistence of nodal features in the presence of scattering provided by structural disorder, allowing us to speculate and possibly to discern whether they are symmetry-imposed or accidental Single crystals of RbCa 2 (Fe 1-x Ni x ) 4 As 4 F 2 with x = 0, 0.03 and 0.05 were grown by the self-flux method using RbAs Particularly important is to notice that the resistivity at T c increases with increasing Ni content (Fig. The number and symmetry of the SC energy gaps were determined via directional PCARS As in all the Fe-based compounds, in addition to the structures associated to the energy gap(s), the spectra present higher-energy shoulders (falling in the grey regions) that can instead be associated to the strong coupling between carriers and the bosonic mode responsible for the pairing As for the gap symmetry, a guess has to be made before trying to fit the spectra. Since specific-heat Despite this ostensible success, the existence of a nodal and a nodeless gap in the same system poses some questions from the theoretical point of view, and may not be the most reasonable explanation of the observed results. In particular, doubts might arise regarding the compatibility of this gap structure with the underlying I4/mmm point group symmetry and Fermi surface structure. Moreover, the electron-electron interaction in the IBSs is mainly provided by repulsive antiferromagnetic spin fluctuations (AFM-SF), that provide coupling over regions of the Fermi surface with opposite sign of the SC gaps. Thus, a single s-wave gap cannot exist within this picture, but two isotropic gaps with opposite sign (s ± state) are possible. Therefore, in an effective two-band model with s-and d-wave gaps, one needs to admit that two s-wave gaps with opposite sign open up on either band (∆ s,1 and ∆ s,2 ); as for the d-wave gap, it can be considered to exist in both the bands for the sake of generality: ∆ d,1 = ∆ d,2 . In other words, each band should host a s + d gap. This gap displays nodes only if the dwave component is larger than the s-wave one, in contrast with the experimental results of the fit (see also Supplementary Fig. Since the PCARS spectra (as well as the CPWR measurements, as discussed below) unambiguously point to the existence of nodes in the gap, it makes sense to fit them by assuming either a single nodal gap (which however does not allow properly fitting all the curves) or two nodal gaps. For simplicity, we chose a d x 2 -y 2 -wave symmetry for both of them, with the nodal direction at an angle π/4 with respect to the k x axis in the reciprocal plane (see Methods). Such a two-band d-d picture automatically: i) ensures the existence of nodes, ii) respects the overall symmetry of the system, and iii) does not pose problems of coexistence of the different gaps even in the simplest two-band model. In the following, we will show that it is also fully compatible with our PCARS and CPWR results. Fig. As a further check of the correctness of our approach, we report in Fig. When the whole series of measurements is considered, it turns out that the gap amplitudes extracted from the d -d fit are less scattered than in the s-d case: for x = 0, ∆ 1 ranges between 4.9 and 6.6 meV and ∆ 2 from 1.5 to 2.5 meV. Fig. As already mentioned, a combination of multiple bands and unconventional gap symmetry in 12442 compounds was also suggested on the basis of the low-temperature linear feature in the superfluid density observed by μSR in K-and Cs-12442 polycrystals Starting from the CPWR measurements of the London penetration depth of crystals with different shape factor, the penetration depth anisotropy parameter γ λ = λ c /λ ab can be extracted For long, a temperature dependence of this quantity was interpreted as a signature of the multiband nature of the system. However, recent calculations In conclusion, we have brought evidence for the existence of two nodal (possibly d-wave) gaps in Rb-12442 by using two techniques, PCARS and CPWR, that allow investigating the symmetry of the order parameter from different perspectives and yielded concording results. The shape of the PCARS spectra, as well as the low-temperature linear behaviour of the superfluid density measured by CPWR, clearly indicate the presence of nodes in the gap that persist upon Ni doping, suggesting that the nodes might be symmetry imposed. Moreover, both the PCARS spectra and the ρ s (T ) curve can be fitted very well within a d-d model (compatible with the Fermiology and symmetry of the system) yielding gap amplitudes in very good agreement. These facts, together with the unusually high values of the London penetration depth anisotropy, seem to tighten the similarity between the 12442 family of IBSs and the copper oxides, which makes the former an ideal platform to investigate the nature of superconductivity in both these classes of unconventional superconductors. The superconducting gap structure was investigated via pointcontact Andreev reflection spectroscopy (PCARS), which entails the measurement of the differential conductance (dI/dV ) of a pointlike contact between the superconductor (S) and a normal metal (N). Here, the contacts were fabricated via the so-called soft technique Proper PCARS measurement conditions require the contact to be smaller than the electronic mean free path, resulting in ballistic conduction with no Joule dissipation in the contact region, and a contact resistance largely exceeding the resistance of the normal bank Prior to fitting, the experimental dI/dV curves need to be normalized, i.e. divided by the normal-state differential conductance curve The normalized PCARS spectra were fitted to a two-band model, using either two d-wave gaps (as discussed in the Results and Discussion section), or one s-wave gap and a d-wave gap (summarized in Supplementary Figs. The superfluid density, surface impedance and London penetration depth anisotropy were measured by means of a coplanar waveguide resonator (CPWR) technique that has proven suitable to study IBS crystals 