This work provides unambiguous evidence for the occurrence of icosahedral quasicrystal (iQC) enhanced nucleation during selective laser melting of gas atomized commercially-pure Ni powders. This solidification mechanism, which has only been recently reported in a few alloys and has to date never been observed in pure metals, consists on the solidification of grains of the primary phase on the facets of iQCs formed due to the presence of icosahedral short range order in the liquid. The occurrence of iQC enhanced nucleation has been inferred from the observation in the SLM processed pure Ni samples of an excess fraction of partially incoherent twin boundaries and of clusters of twinned grain pairs sharing common <110> five-fold symmetry axes. This work further evidences that additive manufacturing methods may constitute an invaluable tool for investigating the fundamentals of solidification and for the design of unprecedented grain boundary networks. Selective laser melting (SLM), currently a widespread additive manufacturing method SLM involves several steps taking place far from thermodynamic equilibrium. More specifically, the raw materials are spherically-shaped gas atomized powders Most SLM activities, both fundamental and applied, have targeted metallic materials with applications within the aerospace and biomedical industries, including Ni superalloys The aim of this work is to gain a deeper understanding of the solidification mechanisms during selective laser melting of commercially-pure nickel, which has been chosen as a model face centred cubic (fcc) metal. With that purpose, SLM is carried out under several processing conditions and the resulting microstructures are thoroughly characterized by electron microscopy techniques. The raw material utilized in this study is gas atomized pure Ni powder, purchased from TLS Technik. The composition is summaryized in Table Prisms with dimensions 4x7x7 mm 3 were manufactured via SLM in a Renishaw AM400 system. SLM was performed using a bidirectional scanning strategy with 67° rotation per layer, a layer thickness of 30 μm and a hatch distance of 90 μm. Process parameter optimization was carried out using laser power values comprised between 200 and 300 W and scan speed values ranging from 0.75 m/s to 1.2 m/s. The three combinations of laser power and scan speed selected for this study are listed in Table They have been labelled from A to C, and are listed in descending order of volumetric energy density (EV). EV is defined as EV =P/vth, where P is the laser power (in J s -1 ), v the laser scanning velocity (in mm s -1 ), t the layer thickness (in mm) and h the hatch distance (in mm). EV ranges from 148 J/mm 3 in sample A to 92 J/mm 3 in sample C. In general, higher EV involves higher amount of heat transferred to the melted material and enhances the partial remelting of the previously deposited layers. Low EV values are associated with higher thermal gradients, faster solidification rates, and less intense heating of previously deposited layers. Table The microstructure, the microtexture, and the nature of grain boundaries (GBs) in the samples were characterized by electron backscattered diffraction (EBSD) using a FEI Helios NanoLab DualBeam 600i focused ion beam field emission gun scanning electron microscope (FIB-FEGSEM) with a step size of 1.1 μm, an accelerating voltage of 20 kV, and a beam current of 2.7 nA. The grain size was calculated from the EBSD inverse pole figure maps taking into consideration boundaries with misorientations higher than 15o, in agreement with common standards for microstructure quantification. A more detailed characterization of selected grain boundaries was carried out by transmission electron microscopy (TEM) in a FEI Talos F200x microscope operating at 200 KV. TEM lamellae were milled with a FIB from the areas of interest using a trenching-and-lift-out method, as described in Figures The misorientation distribution histograms corresponding to the prisms processed using the three SLM parameter sets investigated are compared in Fig. The EBSD GB maps corresponding to the areas of the printed pure Ni cubes depicted in Figs. Similar observations of an anomalously high fraction of twin boundaries were reported recently in a few fcc alloys processed by conventional casting, namely Al-20 wt.%Zn with 1000 ppm of Cr An unequivocal proof of the occurrence of iQc enhanced nucleation is thus the simultaneous presence of an excess of twin boundaries and of clusters of twinned grains sharing a <110> five-fold symmetry axis As mentioned earlier, the twin boundaries formed by icosahedral quasicrystal enhanced nucleation must accommodate a misorientation angle of 72° around <110> directions, an angle that is 1.5° larger than that characteristic of coherent å3 twin boundaries. A representative twin boundary of the pure Ni sample processed using the C parameter set was characterized by TEM to elucidate the accommodation mechanism. Fig. The rotation angle about the common <110> direction, measured from the SAD pattern, is 70.5°, i.e., the value associated to coherent å3 boundaries. Higher resolution TEM imaging (Fig. Our results are in full agreement with these results. In summary, this study reports the occurrence of iQC enhanced nucleation in pure Ni processed by selective laser melting. Evidence for this mechanism is given in the form of an excess fraction of twin boundaries and of clusters of twinned grain pairs with five-fold orientation symmetry. The structure of these twin boundaries consists of coherent segments parallel to {111} planes and steps in between to accommodate an extra 1.5° misorientation angle with respect to the fully coherent å3 twin boundary. We expect that, given the rapid solidification conditions inherent to selective laser melting, iQC enhanced nucleation might be found in other pure metals and alloys. This research also proves that SLM can be utilized to tailor the grain boundary network and, in particular, to tune the coherency of twin boundaries. 