With the example of LaInO3/BaSnO3, we demonstrate how both density and distribution of a two-dimensional electron gas (2DEG) formed at the interface between these perovskite oxides, can be efficiently controlled by a ferroelectric functional material. A polarization induced in a BaTiO3 layer pointing toward the interface enhances the polar discontinuity which, in turn, significantly increases the 2DEG density and confinement, while, the opposite polarization depletes the 2DEG. Our predictions and analysis, based on first-principles calculations, can serve as a guide for designing such material combinations to be used in electronic devices. A two-dimensional electron gas (2DEG) at the interface between two oxide perovskites was first observed at the combination of the polar material LaAlO 3 and the nonpolar compound SrTiO 3 Practical applications of such interfaces, e.g., in fieldeffect transistors (FET), require to control the 2DEG. To tune the 2DEG properties in terms of density and confinement, several external stimuli have been proposed, such as light illumination In recent years, perovskite oxide interfaces have developed rapidly, but the realization of functionality at room temperature is still challenging. The free chargecarrier mobility is a key parameter influencing the performance of any electronic device. At the LaAlO 3 /SrTiO 3 interface, it can reach 10 4 cm 2 (Vs) -1 at low temperature, but it decreases to 1 cm 2 (Vs) -1 at ambient conditions Cubic BaSnO 3 is attracting great interest To do so, state-of-the-art theory can play an important role by getting insight into the mechanisms driving the formation of 2DEGs. In this Letter, we predict by first-principles calculations that the 2DEG formed at the LIO/BSO interface can be tuned by a ferroelectric material and we rationalize the miscroscopic mechanism behind it. We choose the tetragonal perovskite BaTiO 3 , as it exhibits a polarization oriented along the [001] direction at room temperature, providing the possibility for pointing either toward or outward the interface In Fig. The interfacial polar discontinuity leads to the formation of a 2DEG at the BaSnO 3 side in order to compensate it. Upon increasing the LaInO 3 thickness (up to eight pseudocubic unit cells), its density increases, reaching a value of about 0.5 electrons per a 2 (a being the BaSnO 3 lattice parameter The in-plane lattice constants of the BTO/LIO/BSO heterostructures are fixed to √ 2a BSO , where a BSO =4.119 Å is obtained for cubic BaSnO 3 The magnitude of the ferroelectric polarization reported here is estimated using the cation-anion displacements and the Born effective charges (Z * ) computed for the bulk material. The same method is used for the BaTiO 3 block within the heterostructures. Z * are computed with the Berry-phase approach Including a BaTiO 3 overlayer of four unit cells thickness, we select the (BaO) 0 termination [Fig. Figure Turning to the ferroelectric cases, we consider for the magnitude of both P up and P down , a polarization of about 0.12 C/m 2 . As the in-plane unit cells of the heterostructures are fixed to that of BaSnO 3 , the latter value is lower than the polarization in pristine BaTiO 3 (∼0.29 C/m 2 To get a better understanding of the mechanism behind, we analyze the band structures and the local densities of states (LDOS) of the different systems and summarize our findings in Fig. To validate the previous findings, we vary the magnitude of the ferroelectric polarization and explore how it affects the 2DEG density within the BaSnO 3 block. As depicted in Fig. Let us finally comment on the BaTiO 3 thickness which can also be used to tune the induced electric field. Due to the computational complexity, we have limited our calculations to four BaTiO 3 unit cells. To understand, nevertheless, how the thickness impacts the 2DEG density, we reduce it to three BaTiO 3 unit cells (details will be provided in a forthcoming publication In conclusion, based on first-principles calculations, we have predicted a controllable 2DEG at the interface between the polar LaInO 3 perovskite and the nonpolar BaSnO 3 counterpart by adding a functional ferroelectric BaTiO 3 layer. A polarization pointing toward the interface enhances its polar discontinuity, causing an accumulation of the 2DEG at the BaSnO 3 side, i.e., enhancing its density. Switching the ferroelectric polarization outward of the interface depletes the 2DEG charge. Focusing on the ferroelectric side, we have found that the 2DEG density increases with its thickness. As epitaxial ferroelectric layers used experimentally are usually about tens of nanometers or more 