Hybrid organic-inorganic perovskites have drawn significant interest for applications in optoelectronics over the last few years. Despite rapid progress in understanding the photophysics of perovskite, there remains a need for improved understanding of the effect of microstructure on perovskite emission. Here, we combine unsupervised machine learning and cathodoluminescence microscopy of a prototypical hybrid perovskite film to decode photophysical processes that are otherwise lost with conventional Gaussian image processing. Hyperspectral maps are decoded with nonnegative matrix factorization, revealing components relating to primary band-edge emission, photon recycling, and defect emission. A blindspectral non-negative matrix factorization procedure provides additional understanding of changes in an intermediate perovskite phase under electron beam exposure and illustrates how traditional Gaussian techniques may hide relevant emission features that are critical to the development of environmentally robust perovskite devices. Over the last decade, hybrid organic-inorganic perovskites have garnered widespread interest for applications in photovoltaics, Various microscopy and spectroscopy techniques have been employed to characterize the effect of grain structure and morphology on charge carrier dynamics and transport. For example, transmission electron microscopy (TEM) has been used to characterize how leadrelated defects are formed and how they are localizes at boundaries. Cathodoluminescence microscopy is now a workhorse tool for the characterization of nanophotonic materials. When a high-energy converged electron beam interacts with a sample, the transmitted, secondary, and backscattered electrons are routinely used to characterize the sample morphology. The CL signal can provide a clear nanoscale picture of the energetics and dynamics of excited states in materials; it complements electron-energy loss spectroscopies (EELS) because EELS measures the energy lost by the electron beam as it interacts with matter while CL characterizes the photons emitted by matter after electron excitation. CL microscopy is often delineated into coherent and incoherent CL. NMF is a powerful tool for spectral unmixing that separates overlapping signals in hyperspectral images. Here, we use an unsupervised "blind-spectral" NMF where the only physical constraint is that the spectral components must be non-negative Previous reports of perovskite CL microscopies have relied on either maps of the CL intensity within given wavelength bins When performing blind-spectral NMF, we must first determine the appropriate number of components to include in the decomposition. Here, the explained variance ratio(EVR) was calculated for each accelerating voltage as shown in Figure Figure The SEM images in Figure At 5 kV, the electron beam probes the top 100 nm of the film, 28 and we see that the primary band-edge emission contribution outweighs the photon recycling contribution in Figures 2 and 4. This aligns with understanding of the photon recycling process, as the amount of available material to contribute to the process is smaller and primary band-edge emission dominates across the surface of the grain in a uniform manner as shown in the spatial map. The photon recycling contribution is most prominent at the center of the grain and lacks any contribution at the grain boundary. The electron-beam conditions for the data reported here were intentionally chosen to minimize PbI 2 damage, and the beam-induced damage is visibly minimized and localized to the grain boundary at 5 kV. At 10 kV, the weight of the two primary emission peak contributions flip, with the contribution assigned to photon recycling becoming the most prominent as a higher percentage of energy is deposited deeper within the grain. The contribution from primary bandedge emission localizes more along the interior of the grain in the spatial map and the photon recycling contribution remains strongest in the center of the grain. The PbI 2 contribution grows slightly but remains localized at the boundary of the grain. At 20 kV, the grain is now being damaged by the electron beam to a much larger degree. The primary band-edge contribution remains unchanged and is localized along the grain interior, with only slight variations due to the micro-structuring of the grain itself. Photon recycling can be seen to be entirely localized within the center of the grain. The intermediate degradation phase is substantially enhanced at 20 kV. This is consistent with past studies of the progression of damage in perovskite grains, 28,29 but it is captured here without distorting the contributions from relevant grain interior emission processes. Because the Gaussian-restricted NMF decomposition shown in Figure The blind spectral NMF shown in Figure In this study, we investigated the electronbeam energy-dependent hyperspectral CL of an MAPbI 3 perovskite grain with a spatial resolution of 10nm using a combination of Gaussianconstrained NMF and blind-spectral NMF. We highlighted four prominent components of the spectrum images, including the primary band-edge perovskite CL, photon recycling CL, an intermediate phase associated with localized beam induced heating, and a fully decomposed PbI 2 CL. While CL microscopy has become a well-used tool for probing perovskite films, the use of blind-spectral NMF allowed us to learn more about nanoscale perovskite photophysics, and, critically, to demonstrate a clear correlation between the intermediate perovskite phase and decomposed PbI 2 CL near grain boundaries. Indeed, this method allowed us to map the growth of the intermediate phase as a function of damage from the electron beam. This highlights the importance of understanding the optical properties of perovskite films near grain boundaries. Because the intermediate perovskite phase is chemically unstable, increased focus on understanding and minimizing the emergence of this intermediate phase will be critical to the development of environmentally robust perovskite devices. number 80NSSC19M0051) and UAB startup funds. Cathodoluminescence microscopy was conducted at the Center for Nanophase Materials Sciences, which is a DOE Office of Science User Facility. BSD acknowledges financial support from the Alabama Graduate Research Scholars Program (GRSP) funded through the Alabama Commission for Higher Education and administered by the Alabama EPSCoR. We thank Dr. Sergei Kalinin for insightful discussion about data analysis.