The continuous development of new multiphase alloys with improved mechanical properties requires quantitative microstructure-resolved observation of the nanoscale deformation mechanisms at, e.g., multiphase interfaces. This calls for a combinatory approach beyond advanced testing methods such as microscale strain mapping on bulk material and micrometer sized deformation tests of single grains. We propose a nanomechanical testing framework that has been carefully designed to integrate several state-of-the-art testing and characterization methods, including: (i) well-defined nano-tensile testing of carefully selected and isolated multiphase specimens, (ii) front&rear-sided SEM-EBSD microstructural characterization combined with front&rear-sided in-situ SEM-DIC testing at very high resolution enabled by a recently developed InSn nano-DIC speckle pattern, (iii) optimized DIC strain mapping aided by application of SEM scanning artefact correction and DIC deconvolution for improved spatial resolution, (iv) a novel microstructure-to-strain alignment framework to deliver front&rear-sided, nanoscale, microstructure-resolved strain fields, and (v) direct comparison of microstructure, strain and SEM-BSE damage maps in the deformed configuration. Demonstration on a micrometer-sized dual-phase steel specimen, containing an incompatible ferrite-martensite interface, shows how the nanoscale deformation mechanisms can be unraveled. Discrete lath-boundaryaligned martensite strain localizations transit over the interface into diffuse ferrite plasticity, revealed by the nanoscale front&rear-sided microstructure-to-strain alignment and optimization of DIC correlations. The proposed testing and alignment framework yields front&rear-sided aligned microstructure and strain fields providing 3D interpretation of the deformation and opening new opportunities for unprecedented validation of advanced multiphase simulations. In materials science and engineering, the design and manufacturing of new materials and alloys is increasingly important to adhere to the ever more demanding requirements for materials, such as increased strength, ductility and toughness, for automotive and other industries. Many of these new materials, often metal alloys, have a multiphase microstructure in which, for instance, a hard phase is combined with a soft phase to retrieve favourable global properties that reflect a combination of the individual phases Through recent advances in experimental mechanics, (in-situ) mechanical characterization of polycrystalline and multiphase metals at small scales is increasingly more accessible. Particularly, the development of Digital Image Correlation (DIC) patterning methods for in-situ Scanning Electron Microscopy based DIC (SEM-DIC) has lead to the capability of observing plastic deformation mechanisms from micrometer to nanometer scales In contrast to these microscale SEM-DIC experiments on "bulk" materials, a different class of small-scale mechanical testing techniques exists that is particularly suitable for single phases and single grains. Welldefined micro-pillar compression, micro-or nanotensile testing, and micro-bending experiments offer unique insights into the stress-strain behaviour and slip system activity of individual phases, when performed on individual grains or bi-crystals In this work, we present a new nanomechanical testing framework that addresses all these challenges as this framework allows to combine, for the first time, such a large number of state-of-the-art micromechanical testing and microscopic characterization tools to enable highly detailed investigation of nanoscale deformation mechanisms. These tools include (i) nano-tensile testing of "1D" (3.5 * 2.5 * 10μm) specimens In Section 2, the details of the nanomechanical testing framework will be provided based on its 4 pillars: (I) specimen selection and fabrication, (II) characterization and nano-DIC patterning, (III) nanoscale testing and DIC, and (IV) data alignment. Subsequently, in Section 3, the capabilities of the framework will be demonstrated on a nano-tensile specimen containing a single and clean martensite-ferrite interface. To this end, a commercial DP600 grade (0.092C-1.68Mn-0.24Si-0.57Cr wt.%) has been heat-treated (20 minutes austenization at 1000°C, followed by a cool down to 770°C in 50 minutes, 30 minutes inter-critical anneal at 770°C, and water quenching to room temperature) to produce a coarse ferrite-martensite microstructure with martensite volume fraction of 70±5% that allows for selection and fabrication of nano-tensile specimens with a single, continuous and straight ferrite-martensite interface that runs from the top surface to the bottom surface. Finally, discussion and conclusions follow in Section 4. The specimen fabrication and characterization methods are based on the work of Du et al. Figure The FIB milling procedure (done here with a FEI Nova Nano FIB-SEM Dual Beam) for specimens fabrication on the wedge tip is schematically shown in Figure SEM characterization is performed on the front and rear surfaces (colored blue and red respectively, in Figure Figure Subsequently, to enable strain measurements at the nanoscale, a scaleable and dense nano-DIC speckle pattern was applied using a recently developed novel patterning method, involving a single-step sputter deposition of a low temperature solder alloy that forms nanoscale islands during deposition After nano-DIC patterning, the specimens are again subjected to SEM characterization with high acceleration voltage (20 keV) for correlation of the DIC pattern with the exact underlying microstructure. The high acceleration voltage creates an interaction volume which penetrates through the nanometer thickness DIC speckle pattern, allowing for in-beam BSE (IB-BSE) and regular BSE imaging of the underlying microstructure For in-situ mechanical loading of the microscopic specimens, many types of testing setups can be used, such as an in-situ nano-indentation stage for micro-compression or micro-bending tests (e.g. using a Hysitron Picoindenter). Requirements for the stage include: (i) the capability for in-situ SEM at low acceleration voltages, and (ii) the ability to mount the wedge, and to load the specimens that are fabricated on the tip, to enable precise (axial) loading under one-sided in-situ SEM observation. Additionally, the rear (opposite the in-situ measured) surface nano-DIC pattern requires measurement ex-situ, i.e. before and after performing the in-situ test. In this work, the nano-tensile testing procedure of Refs. In-situ SEM-DIC uniaxial nano-tensile experiments (Figure During the in-situ test, we aim to acquire images at several increments with increasing plastic deformation, without fracture of the specimen, as imaging of the deformed rear surface is only possible after un-mounting the wedge from the tensile stage, here called the Post-mortem dataset. By avoiding fracture, SEM-DIC can be performed on the full rear surface (for the last deformation step), providing valuable information regarding the presence or absence of continuity of plasticity through the thickness. Local DIC is employed to correlate the artefact-corrected SEM-DIC images to retrieve the displacement field u. For noise reduction, a gaussian filter with a standard deviation of 3 datapoints is applied to the displacement data. Thereafter, the displacement gradient tensor ∇ 0 u is calculated by taking the direct (nearest-neighbours) spatial gradient of u and is used to compute the Green-Lagrange strain tensor: To simplify the analysis and the plotting of local strains, we employ the 2D equivalent von Mises strain measure, which has been shown to be a reliable indicator for local plasticity The DIC reference image and displacement/strain fields as described here, are, for the rest of this section, referred to as the SEM-DIC dataset. In this section all artefact-corrected SEM-DIC images have been correlated using the commercial DIC package "MatchID", using a pixel size of 7 nm, subset size of 29 pixels and a step size of 1 pixel (see also Table Table Microstructure Through the (in-situ) experiments, several datasets are acquired, yet a precise relation between the coordinate systems is missing. In general, errors between two SEM datasets are only induced by rigid body motion (RBM), i.e. translation and (minor) rotation, whereas the EBSD dataset is often severely warped and has inaccuracies of the absolute crystal orientations A novel data alignment framework is introduced, which is schematically shown in Figure Before the alignment framework with its different modules is explained, the improvements in alignment when using the framework is demonstrated for specimen S1 can be observed in Figure The data alignment framework is developed with Matlab using the MTex toolbox In these experiments, the front&rear-sided EBSD measurements allow us to assess the EBSD orientation accuracy by comparing the orientation of through thickness ferrite grains on front and rear sides. Figure With the orientation errors in both front and rear EBSD data sets minimized separately, a final "combined" correction (c) of front and rear is performed. Here, the assumption is made that a single throughthickness ferrite grain has the same crystallographic orientation on both sides of the specimen. In practice, not all grains (e.g. in martensite) are identifiable through the thickness, making it impossible to perform this correction on all grains individually. Instead, the complete front and rear EBSD datasets are corrected based on the misorientation of a single large, through-thickness grain (indicated with the white cross in Figure For all specimens in this work, direct alignment of the EBSD dataset to the Reference dataset is inhibited by the poor channeling contrast of small micro-structural features in the Reference (IB-)BSE images, which is caused by the InSn DIC speckle pattern obscuring the BSE signal and by the flat topography after FIB milling. Therefore, the EBSD data will first be warped, aligned and put on the same grid as the Microstructure data, which has better channelling contrast, using the points-based alignment module of the alignment framework (step (2) in Figure Several distinct points can be identified in the EBSD ND IPF with CI overlay and Microstructure SE/BSE overlay in Figure For all pairs of selection points the misalignments are calculated ( U = x REF -x EBSD ) and used to fit a polynomial displacement field needed to align the EBSD data to the Microstructure data. The polynomial order, individually determined for each alignment step, should be chosen as low as possible, as unnecessary high polynomial orders may introduce large errors with n constituting the polynomial order. For a total of N degrees of freedom (DOFs), e.g. N = 6 in the case of a first order polynomial, N 2 selection points are required, at a minimum, to (uniquely) describe the polynomial displacement fields, as each selection point yields both an x and y coordinate. The use of more selection points is recommended, as it results in least-squares fitting of the polynomial field, thereby minimizing errors that result from erroneous selection points. For specimen S1, 11 selection points could be identified and were used for fitting of a first order (affine) polynomial. Thereafter, the EBSD data is aligned, warped, linearly interpolated to the same grid as that of the Microstructure data. The results of this alignment step are displayed in Figure Despite the large (non-linear) warping in the EBSD data, alignment to the Microstructure data using affine (first order) displacement fields was found to yield the best (global) alignment results for these specimens. Several tests were performed using higher order polynomials, which resulted in a marginal (and very localized) error reduction around the selection points, with larger misfits between the EBSD grain and Microstructure BSE boundaries away from the selection points, see the zoom figures in Figure Both the Microstructure and SEM-DIC data sets are aligned, warped and interpolated to the grid of the Reference dataset using the points-based alignment module. Figure The results of the SEM-DIC to Reference alignment step can be seen in Figure For SEM-DIC to Reference alignment, many more DIC speckles are available that could be used to enhance the alignment accuracy, which is estimated to be half a speckle or 15 nm. Alternatively, alignment could be performed through global DIC, since both datasets show the same speckle pattern, although at different brightness and contrast. Such an approach could result in sub-pixel (< 7 nm) alignment accuracy. After all front and rear data sets are aligned in the, respective, front or rear Reference dataset configuration, the rear Reference data must be aligned to the front Reference data. Despite careful specimen selection and production, through-thickness changes in the microstructure will always be present, preventing correlation of the front and rear Reference datasets based solely on micro-structural features. Therefore, alignment is performed using the edge-based alignment module. For nano-tensile specimens, edge-based alignment relies on the edges of the T shaped specimen, which are visible on both sides of the specimen, to determine a theoretically identical alignment point (Figure Canny edge detection is employed to create a (binary) edge image from the Reference SE image, which is used to identify the gauge edges (solid green lines) and the gripper contact surfaces (solid red lines) for the front and rear (Figure Up to this point, all data used in the alignment framework was considered to be in the undeformed configuration, such that only translation, rotation or (minor) warping were required for alignment. However, Post-Mortem images, or in-situ images besides those used for DIC, may also require alignment to the microstructure and strain fields, e.g., to investigate the evolution of microstructure-resolved strain fields into cracks and/or damage The capabilities and results of the full nanomechanical testing framework will be demonstrated here on specimen S2, which contains a single ferrite-martensite interface with high crystallographic misorientation along the full gauge-length. A full overview of all aligned data of specimen S2, in deformed and amplifieddeformed configuration, will illustrate how the specimen deforms and how the plasticity occurs in the microstructure on two sides of the specimen. Subsequently, we employ a custom DIC code with varying DIC subset sizes, with and without "deconvolution" (explained below), on two smaller areas, employing different strain calculation methods to highlight the highest achievable spatial strain resolution and to identify both diffuse ferrite plasticity and discrete martensite plasticity. Finally, we utilize the aligned front&rear-sided strain and microstructure data fields to interpret the 3D and through-thickness deformation behaviour. All the steps of the framework, as described in Section 2, are applied to specimen S2 and result in the aligned data sets as shown in Figure The microstructure-correlated strain maps of front and rear in Figure Next, we will highlight both the accurate microstructure-to-strain alignment and the high spatial strain resolution, which will be pushed to the limit through optimized DIC, "deconvolution" and strain calculation methods. In martensite, the exact location of the discrete plasticity needs to be determined, while in ferrite, we want to unravel the diffuse slip bands. Improvements of the spatial strain resolution in SEM-DIC may be achieved by: (i) decreasing the nano-DIC speckle pattern size, (ii) decreasing the subset size, (iii) employing the recently proposed method of "deconvolution" of the DIC displacement fields Next, we assess the microstructure-to-strain alignment accuracy by considering the localization which occurs exactly at the lath boundary (indicated by the red arrow in Figure Finally, it is interesting to note that in the ferrite area in Figure Since both front and rear strain fields are available and are aligned with respect to each other and with respect to the microstructure, we can now attempt to link the deformations on both sides, with the aim of inferring how the deformation occurs in 3D. In Figure While the martensite slip bands align with the lath boundaries on front and rear, the lath boundaries are not visible on the side of the specimen. However, before deformation, we performed EBSD scans on a larger area around the specimen, which was used to perform a Prior Austenite Grain reconstruction Advancement in the understanding of complex nanoscale multiphase interface and grain boundary mechanics requires measurement of nanoscale deformation mechanisms on targeted microstructure configurations, a challenge that requires combination of two state-of-the-art methods: (i) well-defined microdeformations tests of carefully chosen specimens and (ii) measurement of nanoscale resolution microstructureresolved strain fields. In this work, we presented a nanomechanical testing framework that addresses this challenge by integrating the following state-of-the-art testing and characterization methods: • (I) specimen selection and fabrication: fabrication of micron-sized "1D" specimens that were isolated from the bulk microstructure at specific regions of interest; • (II) characterization and nano-DIC patterning: front&rear-sided microstructure characterization and front&rear-sided application of a recently developed ultrafine nano-DIC speckle pattern on the microspecimens; • (III) nanoscale testing and DIC: front&rear-sided high-resolution SEM-DIC strain mapping, under uniaxial loading conditions, aided by SEM scanning artefact correction and DIC deconvolution correction; • (IV) data alignment: alignment of all microstructure and strain data using a novel data alignment framework. A case study on a particularly interesting type of dual-phase steel specimen with an incompatible (i.e. high crystallographically misoriented) ferrite-martensite interface showed how the very high spatial strain resolution (after optimization of DIC and application of deconvolution) and the careful microstructure-tostrain alignment gives insight into the martensite, ferrite and (near-)interface deformation mechanisms at the nanoscale. Moreover, the front&rear-sided and aligned strain fields, in combination with the well-defined and isolated state of the multiphase specimen, gives opportunities to unravel the 3D deformations while only having access to in-plane strain fields. Additionally, the high degree of alignment between microstructure and strain fields allow plotting of microstructure and strain fields into an "amplified" deformed configuration, which eases interpretation of the general deformation of the specimen. The ferrite-martensite interface specimen presented in this work shows how discrete martensite plasticity protrudes through the interface into the ferrite and transits further in the ferrite into diffuse plasticity. Through analysis of the SEM-DIC nanoscale strain fields, EBSD-based habit plane identification in the martensite and multi-sided observation, all aligned with the here-proposed data alignment framework, the martensite plasticity is identified to be aligned with the lath boundaries, confirming previous observations of soft habit plane martensite plasticity. The isolated nature of these tests, under well-defined loading conditions, combined with front&rear-sided full-field knowledge of microstructure-resolved displacement and strain fields, provides ample opportunities for more extensive and more quantitative comparison to complex multiphase numerical simulations than was possible so far. Yet, even without simulation, identification of the slip systems in complex phases such as martensite and bainite, and identification of nanoscale interface deformation mechanisms, is feasible after application of the here-presented nanomechanical testing framework.