Over the recent years, there has been an extensive adoption of Machine Learning (ML) in a plethora of real-world applications, ranging from computer vision to data mining and drug discovery. In this paper, we utilize ML to facilitate efficient film fabrication, specifically Atomic Layer Deposition (ALD). In order to make advances in ALD process development, which is utilized to generate thin films, and its subsequent accelerated adoption in industry, it is imperative to understand the underlying atomistic processes. Towards this end, in situ techniques for monitoring film growth, such as Spectroscopic Ellipsometry (SE), have been proposed. However, in situ SE is associated with complex hardware and, hence, is resource intensive. To address these challenges, we propose an ML-based approach to expedite film thickness estimation. The proposed approach has tremendous implications of faster data acquisition, reduced hardware complexity and easier integration of spectroscopic ellipsometry for in situ monitoring of film thickness deposition. Our experimental results involving SE of TiO2 demonstrate that the proposed ML-based approach furnishes promising thickness prediction accuracy results of 88.76% within ± 1.5 nm and 85.14% within ± 0.5 nm intervals. Furthermore, we furnish accuracy results up to 98% at lower thicknesses, which is a significant improvement over existing SE-based analysis, thereby making our solution a viable option for thickness estimation of ultrathin films. Atomic Layer Deposition (ALD) is a method of film growth that makes use of two or more sequential self-limiting surface reactions. With ALD, one has the capability of producing thin films with a resolution in the order of angstroms. It is crucial to be able to measure the thickness of these films. Methods to determine film thickness include Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM), Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM), X-ray Reflectometry (XRR), and Spectroscopic Ellipsometry (SE). Of these techniques, SE provides the opportunity for in situ tracking of film thickness In order to execute the physics-based optical modeling, a modeling software must be used. This software and associated model libraries are supplied by the manufacturers of the SE equipment. The software makes use of a material model and attempts to fit that model to the raw polarization data obtained by the detector. By fitting this model to the raw data, properties like refractive index (n), extinction coefficient (k), and film thickness can be extracted. While this is an invaluable tool for ALD processes, it needs to be noted that SE is a technique in which the raw data must be fit to established models to obtain film properties. Another possibility for analysis of SE data is the use of machine learning. In situ SE produces a large volume of data -thousands of data points for a single process. If physicsbased models are known a priori, SE data and corresponding film thicknesses may be used to train an ML algorithm. Once trained, the algorithm could be used to extract thickness directly, without the need for a modeling step. Thus, the physics-based model serves only as a base on which an algorithm is trained. Machine learning is becoming increasingly popular for identifying key descriptors for a given material • This paper proposes an approach that incorporates machine learning to facilitate efficient estimation of film thickness in ALD. The proposed approach expedites film thickness estimation, with reliable prediction performance and consistent accuracy. • Our extensive experiments on TiO 2 substrate demonstrate that the proposed approach can predict film thicknesses with an accuracy of 88.76% within ±1.5 nm and 85.14% within ±0.5 nm. The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 outlines the background and principal motivation for this research. The proposed ML framework is explained in detail in Section 3, while the experimental results are analyzed in Section 4. Finally, the paper is concluded in Section 5. The use of ML to interpret characterization data is an efficient method to extract film properties -provided large databases are available for training. Prior research has investigated thin film characterization data involving SE using ML As an alternate to the above approach, we use ML-based algorithms to predict thickness solely from SE data. This data has been collected as part of in situ experiments conducted on an ALD system with an SE attached to its chamber. The data is a priori modeled for its thickness using a physics-based optical model. The optical modeling of the SE data provides us with the film thickness as a function of deposition time and serves as the training set for the ML algorithm. Here, we note that the quasi-continuous nature of the thickness data is important since it allows the ML algorithm to be trained across a wide range of thickness without having to resort to individual discrete experiments. In this context, the use of in situ data is particularly advantageous. 3 Proposed Methodology In this paper, we consider TiO 2 film thickness data, which as mentioned previously is quasi-continuous in nature, until 43 nm. First, this data is discretized by considering the integer values of thicknesses, as shown in Figure Hence, each class comprises a maximum of k subclasses (for k thickness values). Depending on the value of T , the number of subclasses constituting the final class ranges between one and k. Next, we leverage this multi-class dataset to train various ML algorithms towards a multi-class classification task. While binary classification involves two classes, multi-class classification is associated with a range of classes, thereby aligning with our objective of classifying Ψ and ∆ into one of C classes. Modeling such multi-class classification tasks primarily involves prediction of Multinoulli probability distribution for all data points; this, in our context, is equivalent to predicting the probability of a pair of Ψ and ∆ points belonging to each class. The ML approach is evaluated on five algorithms, namely (1) k-Nearest Neighbors (kNN), (2) Random Forest (RF), (3) Decision Tree (DT), (4) Support Vector Machines (SVM), and (5) Logistic Regression (LR) using the curated multi-class data. These algorithms have been selected due to their proficiency and efficiency in multi-class classification tasks Since the Ψ, ∆ and thickness correlations have been established previously, it is convenient to train ML models. The training and test data are selected randomly, in a 95:5 split. First, a comparative analysis of the classification performance of all algorithms is performed, where the confidence in predicting a pair of Ψ and ∆ into one of C classes is evaluated. For example, in our experiments, the final thickness (T ) of the TiO 2 film is 43 nm. By using a threshold (k) of 3 nm, we obtain C = 15 from Equation Next, this best model is assessed by incorporating a twolevel evaluation, where the accuracy of classifying data points into different subclasses, in addition to different classes, is examined. The class-and subclass-level accuracy scores are labeled as level-1 accuracy and level-2 accuracy, respectively. The term level-1 accuracy describes the efficacy of classifying data points into one of C classes and has a granularity of k nm. As mentioned earlier, the values of C and k associated with our experiments are 15 and 3, respectively. Hence, each class comprises 3 subclasses, corresponding to 3 thicknesses. On the contrary, level-2 accuracy is associated with an increased granularity of 1 nm, which represents the effectiveness of predicting film thickness, down to 1 nm. To better comprehend model performance, we analyze classification accuracy scores at different thicknesses, in order to provide an insight into the variation of accuracy with classes and thicknesses. The distribution of Ψ and ∆ values with respect to wavelength tends to contain a certain degree of redundancy, as depicted in Figure Towards this end, we employ two downsampling techniques, namely random and selective downsampling. Random downsampling involves removal of random Ψ and ∆ values from the dataset. Selective downsampling, on the other hand, involves removal of specific Ψ and ∆ values. As illustrated in Figure The substrate used for deposition in our experiments was silicon with native oxide. The substrate was ultrasonically cleaned in a mixture of isopropyl alcohol (IPA) and deionized H 2 O and dried with compressed air. The film was deposited using a Fiji Gen2 ALD System from Veeco®. The film grown was TiO 2 . The process consisted of alternate pulses of titanium tetraisopropoxide (TTIP 97%, Sigma Aldrich) and deionized water. The film thickness was tracked using an M-2000 spectroscopic ellipsometer from J. A. Woollam®. The light source and detector were mounted to the Fiji ALD system with 2.75 conflat flanges and quartz windows. The windows are purged, protecting them from deposition, with 50 sscm of gaseous argon. The angle of incidence of the light on the sample was 69.5°. The wavelengths used for data acquisition ranged from 271 -1688 nm, for a total of 661 different wavelengths per scan. The change in polarization from incident light to the reflected light was measured for the film. The quantities Ψ and ∆ are the raw data obtained from the ellipsometer, and they are representative of the change in polarization. A model was then used to fit the Ψ and ∆ as functions of wavelength to obtain film thickness. The optical model for the film was created using the Com-pleteEase software from J.A. Woollam®. The model for the TiO 2 was a Cauchy-based model The TiO 2 film thickness data ranges from 1 to 43 nm, i.e., the final thickness value of the film is T = 43 nm. By employing a threshold k = 3 nm, a classification dataset is curated to include 15 classes, as derived from Equation On the other hand, the second level of classification, called level-2 classification, is associated with increased granularity of 1 nm, and furnishes the thickness value best describing a pair of Ψ and ∆ values. Comparative Analysis This case study compares the performance of the various ML algorithms, as demonstrated in Figure LR performs the worst among all the models, producing an accuracy of 29.24%. This can be attributed to LR being inept at solving non-linear problems owing to its linear decision surface, the requirement of having an exhaustive dataset, and its sensitivity of outliers in the dataset. Due to its low accuracy score, LR is not considered for future experiments. Additionally, SVM too is excluded from subsequent case studies for two reasons, (1) high training time and (2) sub-par classification performance. kNN, which furnishes the best results among the five algorithms, is incorporated into all our subsequent analyses on TiO 2 SE data. The second case study evaluates the performance of kNN with increasing granularity in the prediction of film thickness. These results assume importance from a process perspective since it is imperative to comprehend the uncertainty in accuracy (i.e., delta thickness), which is inherently present in ML algorithms, and the uncertainty that is propagated as a function of the true physical thickness of the film. The accuracy scores of kNN at both level-1 and level-2 are illustrated in Figure As illustrated in Figure The third case study describes the results of random downsampling of data, where random Ψ and ∆ values are removed from the curated dataset. In this experiment, we seek to understand the correlation between spectroscopic data and classification performance of ML models, specifically the impact of limited SE data on classification accuracy. The downsampling rate is varied between 0 and 90% and the performance of the kNN algorithm is evaluated on this downsampled dataset. Figure From these results, we can infer that kNN is generally resilient to downsampling. This has major implications as it indicates that thickness prediction via ML can be effectively accurate at level-1 classification (to within ± 1.5 nm uncertainty) of a TiO 2 film ≤ 43nm, even if 90% of the spectral data is eliminated. For level-2 classification, however, negligible performance degradation is furnished until 65% downsampling. Hence, the above results are indicative of possible redundancy in the Ψ and ∆ samples constituting SE dataset, which can be eliminated without inducing significant performance degradation. This subsequently motivates us to pursue selective downsampling and investigate the possible correlation between specific Ψ and ∆ samples and classification performance of ML models. Selective Downsampling Since the ultimate objective involves ascertaining film thickness from minimum wavelength-based SE data samples, the fourth case study entails selective (non-random) downsampling of Ψ and ∆ values in the curated dataset. Towards this end, we select the first N samples from each class and subclass, starting from 271 nm, while eliminating the rest, as shown in Figure In this analysis, we consider N ranging from 100 to 300, in step sizes of 50. This corresponds to a spectral window from 271 to 427 nm and 271 to 743 nm for the first 100 and 300 samples, respectively, in step sizes of 76 nm. Figure The variation of level-1 accuracy and level-2 accuracy with thickness for the first 300 samples are illustrated in Figure Furthermore, the enhanced classification performance furnished by selective downsampling is accompanied by reduced data dimensionality; by selecting the first 300 out of the entire 661 data samples, we produce a dataset comprising a fraction (45.39%) of the original SE data, thereby furnishing 54.61% compression. Hence, such an approach facilitates an efficient, simple, and cost-effective thickness estimation procedure from SE data. This paper proposes an ML approach to estimate thicknesses of films, fabricated via ALD, in an efficient manner. Complex hardware required to monitor and estimate film thickness in existing in situ SE techniques renders them resource intensive. Our proposed approach incorporates ML to expedite film thickness estimation in a consistent and reliable manner. The Ψ and ∆ values obtained from physics-based optical models constitute our training dataset. The trained ML models are subsequently utilized to predict film thickness for a pair of random Ψ and ∆ values. Our experimental analyses demonstrate promising results of 88.76% prediction accuracy within ±1.5 nm and 85.14% accuracy within ±0.5 nm. Furthermore, we furnish prediction accuracy results up to 98% at lower thicknesses, which significantly outperforms existing SE-based analysis. Hence, the proposed ML approach is a promising, alternate solution for thickness estimation of ultrathin films. The implications of the proposed approach are faster data acquisition, reduced hardware complexity associated with film estimation and, subsequently, easier integration of spectroscopic ellipsometry for in situ monitoring of film thickness during deposition.