The lasting puzzle of the superconducting order parameter of Sr2RuO4 calls for theoretical studies that include seldom-considered effects. Here we include spin-orbit coupling effects on the electronic structure and then solve the linearized Eliashberg equation in a pseudospin basis, including the possibility that spin and charge fluctuations induce frequency-dependent superconducting order parameters. We find that spin-orbit coupling mixes even and odd contributions in orbital, spin and frequency spaces and that leading inter-pseudospin symmetries, B + 1g and A - 2g , have intra-orbital components respectively even and odd in Matsubara frequency. An accidental degeneracy between these could resolve apparent experimental contradictions. For several decades, the paradigm of s-wave superconductivity has been found inadequate to describe superconductivity in correlated systems. A large variety of superconducting order parameters (SCOP) have already been identified. For example, cuprate high-temperature superconductors are d-wave with B 1g symmetry Initially reckoned a spin-triplet state due to its constant Knight-shift Another critical characteristic of SRO is its two-component nature inferred by evidences of time-reversal (TR) symmetry breaking Consequently, various theoretical proposals have been formulated in replacement to the initial chiral p-wave Another possibility for two components is that they are degenerate by accident and transform like different irreps. The most natural of the two components is a d x 2 -y 2 B 1g state, since thermal conductivity and scanning tunneling microscopy point in this direction Accidental degeneracies should be lifted by small perturbations. Although not definitive, μSR measurements under isotropic conditions did not observe a split in the critical temperatures The broad richness of possible superconducting states in SRO is due to the extreme sensitivity of pairing interactions to the normal state electronic structure and many-body effects. Most theoretical studies have so far neglected SOC whose importance for SRO has been demonstrated in detailed comparisons between photoemission spectroscopy and firstprinciples calculations Normal state. -The layered perovskite structure of SRO is characterized by the D 4h space group. The main physics resides within the ruthenium (Ru) and oxygen (O) planes, making it quasi-2D. The Ru atom is at the center of an elongated octahedron of O atoms. The resulting crystal field splits its 4d electrons into the unoccupied e g and the partially filled t 2g subsets. The t 2g orbitals xy, yz, xz, hybridize with the O's p electrons to form the α, β and γ Fermi sheets shown in Fig. Since the e g orbitals are far from the Fermi level, the electronic fluctuations responsible for mediating superconductivity are be solely hosted by the t 2g orbitals. We compute the electronic structure from the projectedaugmented-wave pseudopotential Considering local SOC, the Hamiltonian can be block diagonalized into pseudospin up (+) and down (-) sectors de-noted by ρ = ±. Non-local k-dependent SOC effects arise from SOC on the O atoms when the Hamiltonian is downfolded onto t 2g orbitals. Through inter-layer coupling, this mechanism breaks pseudospin symmetry. However, this effect is negligibly small at the DFT level Linearized Eliashberg equation. -Details and derivations are given in the companion paper Boldface numerals such as 1 stand for Matsubara frequencies and quantum numbers described above. Overbars stand for implied integration/summation. Given the linear nature of the equation, the eigenvectors ∆ transform as the irreps of D 4h and a superconducting instability occurs when one of the eigenvalues λ reaches unity. The corresponding ∆ reflects the symmetry of the Gorkov function T τ ψ(1)ψ(2) just below the transition temperature. Here, ψ(1) is the destruction operator and T τ is the imaginary-time-ordering operator. Isoelectronic doping suggests that SRO lies in the vicinity of magnetic orderings Spin and charge fluctuations. -The bare interactions between electrons are diagonal in the basis of isolated atoms. We model these with the rotationally invariant Kanamori-Slater Hamiltonian (KSH) In the paring function V pp , the binding glue for electron pairs consists of low-energy collective modes formed by an avalanche of electron-hole pairs. In other words, electrons scatter-off each other through exchange of spin-and chargedensity fluctuations. These fluctuations are captured by the particle-hole (p-h) polarizability χ ph . Here, we compute χ ph using the random phase approximation (RPA) where the irreducible p-h vertex Γ ph is replaced by local interactions that have the symmetries of the local interactions described above. The resulting phase diagrams exhibit a rich variety of competing ordered states in either the p-h or the particle-particle (p-p) channels. The interaction-induced enhancement of spin (charge) fluctuations is quantified by the magnetic (density) Stoner factor S m(d) . We enforce S m(d) < 1 to prevent the system from falling into a magnetic (charge) ordered state. In spin-and charge-fluctuation mediated superconductivity, χ ph serves as an effective interaction for pairing electrons in the p-p channel. The irreducible pairing vertex Γ pp is expressed in terms of χ ph and Γ ph through Parquet-like equations, but without the self-consistency Pseudospin basis. -The KSH conserves spins but not pseudospins where K * ≡ (-iω m , k). In this basis, Eq. ( for α the e-p (o-p) channel, with the effective vertices V α KK given in Ref. Results. -In principle, the parameters U and J entering the KSH can be calculated, but their effective values are different due to screening. We thus explore this parameter space. Instead of U and J, we quantify the interactions by J/U and S m . In addition to J > 0, the repulsive nature of the KSH constrains J/U < 1/3 but we consider J/U ≤ 0.45 to allow some attractive interactions. S m quantifies the proximity to a magnetic transition. The closer to S m = 1, the larger the magnetic fluctuations. Because SRO is in proximity to magnetic orderings Fig. Another way to characterize SCOPs is to use the SP OT classification Only two different irreps appear in the phase diagram Fig. Because one of the paired xy electrons can propagate to the {xz, yz} orbitals by flipping a spin yet preserving pseudospin, SOC generates inter-l pairs which now have equal spins, i.e. + S. These xy; {yz, zx} inter-l components are comparable in magnitude to the xy; xy one. They transform globally like B 1g . There are two possibles SP OT characters that can entangle without affecting TR symmetry: + S + P -O + T and + S + P + O -T . In Fig. Moving to the (A - 2g ) SCOP shown in Fig. The interest in this SCOP is two-fold. First, it transforms like A 2g , consistent with ultrasound experiments. Second, intra-l odd-ω SCOP are gapless at the Fermi surface and their contribution to the specific heat could be extremely subtle. Consequently, an accidental degeneracy between B + 1g and A - 2g could explain the discrepancy between specific heat and μSR under uniaxial strain, motivating further investigations. Finally, the absence of the d yz ± id zx (E + g ) Summary. -We found that SOC leads to multi-orbital SCOP with multiple SP OT contributions. In proximity to a magnetic instability, we found the B + 1g state often considered to explain SRO. Further away from the magnetic instability, we found an A - 2g whose intra-l components are odd-ω. Their combination into an accidental degeneracy could explain superconducting SRO since this solution has the potential to explain all experiments, notably the discrepancy between specific heat and μSR for uniaxial strain. Their study requires calculations of observables for gap functions that contain oddω contributions.