van der Waals nanomaterials supporting phonon polariton quasiparticles possess unprecedented light confinement capabilities, making them ideal systems for molecular sensing, thermal emission, and subwavelength imaging applications, but they require defect-free crystallinity and nanostructured form factors to fully showcase these capabilities. We introduce bottom-upsynthesized α-MoO3 structures as nanoscale phonon polaritonic systems that feature tailorable morphologies and crystal qualities consistent with bulk single crystals. α-MoO3 nanoribbons serve as low-loss hyperbolic Fabry-Pérot nanoresonators, and we experimentally map hyperbolic resonances over four Reststrahlen bands spanning the far-and mid-infrared spectral range, including resonance modes beyond the tenth order. The measured quality factors are the highest from phonon polaritonic van der Waals structures to date. We anticipate that bottom-upsynthesized polaritonic van der Waals nanostructures will serve as an enabling high-performance and low-loss platform for infrared optical and optoelectronic applications. High-performance, low-loss photonic materials are enabling platforms for the scientific study of optical phenomena and the technological advancement of waveguide-and resonator-based systems. In the mid-infrared (MIR) and terahertz wavelength range, van der Waals (vdW) materials have emerged as an exciting and heavily studied class of materials due to their ability to support exceptionally high-quality phonon polariton (PhP) excitations, which occur in the Reststrahlen bands (RBs) between the longitudinal optical and corresponding transverse optical phonon frequencies. The gold standard approach for studying and implementing low-loss vdW PhP devices is to mechanically exfoliate bulk single crystals and characterize individual flakes. While this approach is sufficient for certain proof-of-concept experiments, it is time-consuming, low-yield, and not scalable. In addition, flake-based structures that localize light using geometric structuring, such as antennas, resonators, and waveguides, require top-down patterning and etching steps that introduce damage and contamination, In this Article, we report the growth, assembly, and characterization of ultrahigh quality polaritonic systems based on α-MoO3 microplates and nanoribbons, synthesized using the flame vapor deposition (FVD) method. We synthesize and prepare α-MoO3 nano-and micro-structures using the workflow illustrated in Figure The synthesis of α-MoO3 under fuel-lean flame conditions yields thermodynamically favorable conditions for crystalline, stoichiometric materials growth(see Methods). To control the α-MoO3 morphology while preserving its stoichiometry, we fix the fuel-to-air equivalence ratio of the premixed methane flame at 0.88 and vary the substrate and molybdenum source temperature and source area density. With these temperature and area density variations, we can reproducibly synthesize α-MoO3 with three different morphologies (Figure s-SNOM images of individual α-MoO3 structures grown under different conditions (Figure The FP resonance order can be tailored by selecting nanoribbons with differing thicknesses and widths. In the following sections, we will use the microplates to quantify PhP propagation characteristics and the nanoribbons to characterize PhP-based resonator behavior. To quantify the quality of the phonon resonances in FVD-grown α-MoO3 microplates with optical metrology methods, we utilize a combination of Raman spectroscopy and s-SNOM methods. With Raman spectroscopy, we can directly probe the in-plane anisotropic Raman response and extract the phonon lifetimes from the peak width. Representative Raman spectra for structures on oxidized silicon substrates are plotted in Figure To further engineer the α-MoO3 PhP propagation mode in a scalable manner that eliminates phonon-polariton interactions with the underlying substrate, we tape-transfer α-MoO3 microplates onto freshly template-stripped ultrasmooth gold substrates (Figure We study the dispersion of α-MoO3 microplates on ultrasmooth metal substrates at the RBY and RBZ2 bands and compare the results with microplates on SiO2/Si substrates. The PhP momenta are extracted through s-SNOM imaging. We also calculate theoretical dispersion plots using permittivity values published elsewhere. We also experimentally quantify the figure of merit (FoM) of the intrinsic PhP mode quality, defined as Re(q)/Im(q), by processing a series of microplate s-SNOM scans imaged at different wavelengths. The FoM is independent of the thickness (see Supporting Information), allowing direct comparisons among microplates with different thicknesses. s-SNOM scans for representative α-MoO3 microplates on the two different substrates, measured at 935 cm -1 in the lower RB, are shown in Figure superposition of both contributions can blur resonant features, particularly those involving highorder FP modes (see Supporting Information). These nanospectroscopy maps can be directly used to quantify the spectral characteristics of different FP modes in the nanoribbon, which are selectively excited and collected as a function of the probe's location on the resonator. We quantify the resonator Q-factors by fitting the data with multiple Lorentzian peaks (see Supporting Information) and find that the first, second, and third-order modes have minimum Qfactors of 718 (L3), 548 (L4), and 444 (L6) respectively. These Q-factors are the highest reported in a PhP resonator to date and result from the high crystal quality of the α-MoO3 nanoribbons, their smooth edges, and the use of an ultrasmooth gold substrate. We hypothesize that the lower Qfactors measured in modes probed at the sample center, compared to those at the sample edge, arise because the modes have relatively strong EZ components at the sample center that facilitate enhanced radiative out-coupling losses via the probe tip The spatial cross-sections of the FP modes for different mode orders, extracted from the experimental hyperspectral maps, are shown in Figures In summary, we have demonstrated that FVD-synthesized α-MoO3 micro-and nano-structures are ultrahigh quality phonon polaritonic systems with crystal qualities similar to exfoliated flakes. MIR and FIR s-SNOM studies of α-MoO3 nanoribbons, transferred onto ultrasmooth gold substrates, show that these systems support strong phonon-polariton resonances across four RBs with exceptionally high Q-factors. We anticipate that bottom-up-synthesized oxides will enable new research advances in high-performance and low-loss IR photonic systems along several lines. First, bottom-up synthesis allows for the direct, quick, and scalable production of high-quality polaritonic structures and their study on arbitrary substrates. Second, our FVD uniquely supports control over polaritonic structure morphology and composition, enabling tailoring of chemical doping and composition, defect engineering The synthesis of α-MoO3 micro-and nano-structures is based on our previously reported flame vapor deposition (FVD) method The area density of this Mo source is about 18 mg/cm 2 . α-MoO3 structures are grown on Si wafer, which is placed above Mo source. The temperature of the Mo source is tuned by adding steel cooling meshes between Mo mesh and burner, and the temperature of the growth substrate is controlled by adjusting the distance between Mo mesh and Si substrate. A K-type thermocouple is used to measure the temperature of Mo mesh and substrate. α-MoO3 with different morphologies are prepared by tuning the area density of Mo source and the temperatures of Mo source and Si substrate. Higher Mo source temperature (792 o C) is used to facilitate the Mo vapor generation, thus resulting in α-MoO3 microplates (Figure All the α-MoO3 samples are prepared by a 5 min deposition. Under such conditions, more than 1 cm 2 of the substrate can be uniformly covered by the flame-grown α-MoO3 structures. The asgrown α-MoO3 structures are then transferred onto different substrates (90 nm SiO2/Si and ultrasmooth gold/glass) using low adhesion cleanroom tape (UltraTape 1310) for optical characterizations. The dry transfer method is described as follows. We put a piece of tape on the as-grown sample and gently press on it; we slowly take the tape off and then put it on the target substrate; we gently press and scratch on the tape against the substrate, and then take off the tape slowly. We did not have any sample treatment (such as annealing or solution cleaning) after α-MoO3 transfer. The ultrasmooth Au substrate (Au thickness: 100 nm) is template stripped from a Si wafer (Platypus Technologies). The coverage of as-transferred micro-and nano-structures on the target substrate is also at the centimeter scale. The exfoliated α-MoO3 flakes for phonon lifetime comparison are tape exfoliated and transferred on 90 nm SiO2/Si substrates from commercially available bulk single crystals (2D Semiconductors). PhPs in the α-MoO3 nanostructures are imaged with a commercial s-SNOM system (Neaspec) and a tunable CO2 laser (Access Laser). Sharp metal-coated tips, tapping at ~280 kHz, are used to probe near-field signals in the pseudoheterodyne interferometric mode. The collected light is detected with a liquid-nitrogen cooled mercury-cadmium-telluride (MCT) detector (Kolmar KLD-