Recent experiments demonstrated robust ferroelectricity in Mg-doped ZnO (ZMO) of the wurtzite structure, hinting at a promising strategy to substantially expand the list of ferroelectrics by doping conventional piezoelectrics. We investigate the origin of ferroelectricity in ZMO with first-principles density functional theory (DFT). The general argument that the Mg alloying could soften the ionic potential energy surface of ZMO for polarization reversal is overly simplified. Our DFT calculations reveal that even at a high Mg concentration, the energy difference (∆U ) between the polar and nonpolar phases remains prohibitively large for ZMO systems when the strain is fixed to the polar phase. Interestingly, the magnitude of ∆U becomes substantially smaller when the strain relaxation is allowed, approaching the value of typical perovskite ferroelectrics such as PbTiO 3 with increasing Mg doping concentrations. The enabled switchability of ZMO systems is attributed to a hexagonal phase of MgO that is much lower in energy than its wurtzite counterpart. Detailed orbital and bonding analysis supports that the intra-atomic 3d z 2 -4p z orbital self-mixing of Zn plays an important role in stabilizing the polar wurtzite phase, the lack of which is responsible for the low-energy nonpolar hexagonal phase of MgO. Ferroelectrics afford two or more orientational states, each associated with a spontaneous electric polarization, and can be switched between these states by applying an electric field. The polarization is temperature dependent, and the switching of the polarization is often coupled with the strain change of the material. Therefore, all ferroelectrics are pyroelectrics/piezoelectrics but not vice versa as the polarization of some pyroelectrics/piezoelectrics are not reversible The discovery of ferroelectricity in doped HfO 2 Zinc oxide in the wurtzite structure (wz-ZnO) is a technologically important polar semiconductor with a direct band gap of 3.7 eV More recently, Ferri et al. reported a giant switchable polarization of > 100 μC/cm -2 in Zn 1-x Mg x O (ZMO) with x in the range between ∼30% and ∼37% and coercive fields below 3 MV/cm at room temperatures, serving as a convincing example of "ferroelectrics everywhere" First-principles DFT calculations are performed using QUANTUM ESPRESSO The exchange-correlation functional is treated within the generalized gradient approximation of Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof revised for solids (PBEsol) type as PBEsol improves equilibrium properties of densely packed solids For a given composition, the energy of a Zn 1-x Mg x O supercell depends on the arrangement of Zn and Mg ions. As the configuration space increases rapidly with the size of the supercell, it is computationally demanding to exhaust all possible configurations with DFT calculations. We performed test calculations with a 2 × 2 × 2 ZMO supercell of 32 atoms containing two Mg atoms. By comparing the energies of configurations with different Mg-Mg separations, we found that Mg dopants prefer to stay apart. Therefore, at each x, we construct 3 × 3 × 2 supercells with configurations generated using the Supercell program (v1.0.0) The chemical bonding situations in ZnO and MgO are analyzed with the projected Crystal Orbital Hamilton Population (pCOHP) method implemented in LOBSTER (v3.2.0) The pCOHP is an energy-resolved partitioning technique that transforms the delocalized electronic structure computed in the reciprocal space into the real space in an energy-resolved form. After a self-consistent electronic structure calculation using QUANTUM ESPRESSO with the same settings detailed above and projector-augmented wave pseudopotentials taken from PseudoDOJO For the two-end members of ZMO systems, the PBEsol lattice parameters are a ZnO The magnitude of the polarization often positively correlates with the coercive field of ferroelectrics We examine further the cohesive energies of ZMO systems based on a simple ionic model that treats atoms as fixed point charges. The Madelung energies (E M ) of polar ZnO, Zn 0.5 Mg 0.5 O, and MgO are computed using Bader charges obtained by partitioning the DFT charge density grid into Bader volumes pointed out that the layered hexagonal (h) structure in the space group of P 6 3 /mmc should be adopted in the Berry phase approach for polarization calculation Another subtlety is due to the sensitive dependence of the soft-mode potential energy surface on the strain and volume Regardless of the definitions, the magnitudes of ∆U clamp , ∆U relax , and ∆U free reflect the polarization switchability under different mechanical boundary conditions, and their varying magnitudes essentially manifest the coupling strength between ferroelectric distortions and strain/volume. It is expected that ∆U clamp > ∆U relax > ∆U free as more degrees of freedom are allowed to relax in sequence; indeed, for PbTiO 3 , we find ∆U clamp = 67.8 meV/atom, ∆U relax = 23.6 meV/atom, and ∆U free = 17.7 meV/atom using PBEsol. We will use these three types of ∆U to evaluate the polarization switchability of ZMO systems. At each x, we first obtain the optimized lattice constants of the polar wurtzite phase and then compute the energies of three nonpolar variants and the corresponding ∆U as discussed above. MgO appears to be slightly "softer" than ZnO at the same c (see solid lines in Fig. However, when the a-axis is fixed to the averaged value of a ZnO 0 and a MgO 0 (denoted as ā), that is equivalent to applying in-plane compressive strain to MgO and tensile strain to ZnO, MgO turns out to be much "harder" than ZnO at the same c (see dashed lines in Fig. In comparison, both the magnitudes of ∆U relax and ∆U free decrease with increasing Mg concentrations, and ∆U free is much smaller than ∆U relax and ∆U clamp at the same x (Fig. For example, at x = 0.444, ∆U clamp is 135 meV/atom, ∆U relax is 97.3 meV/atom, while ∆U free is only 16.7 meV/atom, even lower than that of PbTiO 3 ( 17.7 meV/atom). We attribute the small magnitude of ∆U free of ZMO to the hexagonal phase of MgO (h-MgO, see Fig. The finding that ∆U free ∆U clamp in Zn 1-x Mg x O solid solutions indicates that the strain relaxation is crucial for the observed ferroelectricity in ZMO systems. It will be helpful to construct the polarization-energy landscape E(P ) that takes the strain relaxation effect into account. This demands the optimization of crystal lattice parameters and atomic positions at a fixed P , a nontrivial task that is not easily implementable within DFT In recognition that the polarization of the wurtzite phase strongly correlates with the separation (denoted as u in the inset of The polarization reversal paths identified using NEB and VCNEB methods further emphasize the importance of the strain relaxation effect. We map out the MEP of polarization reversal using the NEB method in which the lattice constants of all the images along the switching pathway are fixed to the values of the ground-state ferroelectric phase. with the magnitude of Curie temperature (T C ), it is expected that T C of ferroelectric ZMO thin films will be higher than that of PbTiO 3 -based thin films since the former has a larger switching barrier. Finally, we compute the MEPs with VCNEB that allows both c and a to vary during the switching, and the results are reported in Fig. and it has been successfully employed to study many problems such as molecular chemical reactions Despite the nearly identical ionic radii of Zn 2+ and Mg 2+ , 0.57 Å versus 0.6 Å, h-ZnO and h-MgO are drastically different. As shown in Fig. We address this question from two different perspectives. First, the origin of ferroelectricity in perovskite oxides is often understood as a delicate balance between the long-range electrostatic dipole-dipole interaction and the shortrange repulsion, with the former favors the polar phase while the latter favors the nonpolar phase The thermodynamic stability of wz-ZnO over h-ZnO can also be understood by analyzing where the In 3+ ion has a fully occupied 4d orbital: it is the intra-atomic 4d z 2 -5p z orbital mixing of In followed by asymmetric 4d z 2 (In)-5p z (O) bonding along the c axis that drives the break of inversion symmetry and Zn-4p z orbitals results in an orbital φ m characterized with an asymmetric shape along the c axis. This orbital φ m is allowed by symmetry to hybridize with the O-2p z orbital. As shown in Fig. The hybridization of φ m and O-2p z , denoted as dp-p hybridization, is the driving force for the inversion-symmetry breaking that transforms two equal Zn-O bonds (EBs) to one short bond (SB) and one long bond (LB) along the c axis. In wz-ZnO, the energy gain of forming a stronger SB outcompetes the energy penalty of forming a weaker LB. We compute projected crystal orbital Hamilton population (pCOHP) curves for Zn-O bonds along the c axis in wz-ZnO and h-ZnO, respectively. The integrated COHPs (ICOHPs) for the SB is -1.46 eV per bond and -0.05 eV per bond for the LB in wz-ZnO, the total of which is larger (more negative) than the ICOHP sum of two EBs in h-ZnO, supporting the argument that Zn-O bonds in wz-ZnO are stronger than those in h-ZnO. In contrary, the electronic configuration of Mg 2+ is much simpler than Zn 2+ . As shown in the PDOS spectra of wz-MgO and h-MgO (Fig. The integration of ferroelectric functionalities into integrated circuits demands ferroelectrics that are compatible with the current semiconductor manufacturing process. Recent experimental efforts to make the polarization of silicon-compatible piezoelectrics switchable is a promising strategy to expand the list of CMOS-compatible ferroelectrics. We gauge the polarization switchability in magnesium doped zinc oxide with several key quantities such as polar-nonpolar energy differences and switching barriers computed from NEB and VCNEB based on first-principles density functional theory. The general explanation that Mg dopants flatten the ionic potential energy landscape of Mg-doped ZnO is overly simplified because both MgO and ZnO in the wurtzite phase appear to be comparably hard to switch in the absence of strain relaxation. In particular, unlike Sc-doped AlN, Mg alloying does not induce elastic softening in ZMO systems. We suggest that the hexagonal phase of MgO, being dynamically stable and lower in energy than its wurtzite counterpart, is responsible for the emergence of ferroelectricity in Mg-doped ZnO thin films. The polarization reversal process in ZMO systems is found to involve a large change in strain along the polar direction. This hints that the 180 • switching of wurtzite ferroelectrics may possess ferroelastic characters, an unusual feature not presented in perovskite ferroelectrics. 