In conventional superconductors, the electron-phonon coupling plays a dominant role in pairing the electrons and generating superconductivity. In high temperature cuprate superconductors, the existence of the electron coupling with phonons and other boson modes and its role in producing high temperature superconductivity remain unclear. The evidence of the electron-boson coupling mainly comes from the angle-resolved photoemission (ARPES) observations of the ∼70 meV nodal dispersion kink and the ∼40 meV antinodal kink. However, the reported results are sporadic and the nature of the involved bosons are still under debate. Here we report new findings of ubiquitous two coexisting electron-mode couplings in cuprate superconductors. By taking ultra-high resolution laser-based ARPES measurements, combined with the improved second derivative analysis method, we discovered that the electrons are coupled simultaneously with two sharp phonon modes with energies of ∼70 meV and ∼40 meV in different superconductors with different doping levels, over the entire momentum space and at different temperatures above and below the superconducting transition temperature. The observed electron-phonon couplings are unusual because the associated energy scales do not exhibit an obvious change across the superconducting transition. We further find that the well-known "peak-diphump" structure, which has long been considered as a hallmark of superconductivity, is also omnipresent and consists of finer structures that originates from electron coupling with two sharp phonon modes. These comprehensive results provide a unified picture to reconcile all the reported observations and pinpoint the origin of the electron-mode couplings in cuprate superconductors. They provide key information to understand the role of the electron-phonon coupling in generating high temperature superconductivity. High temperature cuprate superconductors are derived from doping the parent Mott insulators In this paper, we report new findings and new understanding of the electron-mode couplings from our comprehensive high resolution laser-based ARPES measurements of the Bi-based cuprate superconductors. We discovered that the ∼40 meV mode-coupling, which was observed only in Bi 2 Sr 2 CaCu 2 O 8+δ (Bi2212) near the antinodal region, is also present in Bi 2 Sr 2 CuO 6+δ (Bi2201); it is also observed off the antinodal region and even along the nodal direction. On the other hand, the ∼70 meV mode-coupling, which was observed mainly near the nodal area, is clearly revealed near the antinodal region. We have found the ubiquitous coexistence of the ∼40 meV and ∼70 meV mode-couplings in different cuprate superconductors over the entire momentum space, both in the normal and superconducting states and at different doping levels. The well-known "peak-dip-hump" structure, which is usually observed in the photoemission spectra of Bi2212 near the antinodal region in the superconducting state, is actually composed of a finer "peak-double dip-double hump" structure that originates from electron coupling with two sharp modes. These observations provide a unified picture to understand all the previous results and the nature of the electron-boson couplings in high temperature cuprate superconductors. ARPES measurements were performed using our lab-based laser ARPES systems equipped with the 6.994 eV vacuum-ultra-violet (VUV) laser and a hemispherical electron energy analyzer or a time-of-flight electron energy analyzer (ARToF) with the capability of simultaneous two-dimensional momentum space detection Figure As seen in the second derivative image in Fig. In the other second derivative image in Fig. The energy position of the two hump and two dip structures in EDCs does not change when the momentum moves away from the main band and they have the same energy position on both the left and right sides of the main band (Fig. We emphasize that the high resolution and high statistics data from our laser ARPES measurements are critical in revealing the fine electronic structures in Bi2212 (Fig. The peculiar fine structures in the measured nodal band structures of Bi2212 (Fig. First, as shown in Fig. The electron-boson coupling along the nodal direction has been studied extensively in Bi2212 and Bi2201 through the electron self-energy analysis and the ∼70 meV dispersion kink is ubiquitously observed The unusual fine structures in the measured band structures of Bi2212 (Fig. We note that, when the bandwidth is significantly larger than the mode energy, the electron-mode coupling produces kink in the dispersion near the mode energy as demonstrated in the simulated data of Fig. The electron-mode coupling has been observed in Bi2212 near the antinodal region, famously known as the ∼40 meV antinodal mode-coupling that is identified through the band dispersion and electron self-energy analysis Second, we have clearly observed the coexisting ∼40 meV and ∼70 meV energy scales near the antinodal region in Bi2212 and, for the first time, also in Bi2201. The dispersion kink at ∼70 meV was once observed in optimally-doped Bi2212 near the antinodal region in the superconducting state and was interpreted as due to the ∼40 meV mode-coupling with its energy position shifted by the superconducting gap Figure Two main energy scales can be observed with the low energy scale (LScale) getting relatively pronounced and becoming dominant when the momentum cuts change from the nodal direction to the near antinodal region. The two energy scales determined from the self-energy in Fig. We have observed the coexisting two mode-couplings in different superconductors with various doping levels. As seen from Fig. In order to understand the nature of the two coexisting mode-couplings, it is crucial to investigate their temperature dependence, particularly the change across the superconducting transition. To this end, we have taken high resolution laser ARPES data on Bi2212 and Bi2201 at different temperatures, as shown in Fig. The corresponding second derivative EDCs are plotted in Fig. These further indicate that the two mode-couplings are present above T * . In fact, the observation of the two energy scales even in the heavily overdoped non-superconducting Bi2201 (Fig. The energy scales of the two mode-couplings do not exhibit an obvious change across the superconducting transition or pseudogap temperature. Fig. Our new findings of the ubiquitous two coexisting sharp mode-couplings in different materials, in the entire momentum space, at different doping levels and at different temperatures have put strong constraints on the nature of the associated electron-boson coupling. The similar energy scales and the similar momentum-, doping-and temperature-dependences observed in Bi2201, Bi2212 and Bi2223 indicate that the two mode-couplings have a common origin. As the energy scales exhibit a weak temperature dependence and do not show abrupt change across T c and T * , the energy of the two modes can be determined with one being ∼70 meV and the other being ∼40 meV although the exact values may vary slightly with temperature, doping or in different materials. The previous observations of the nodal ∼70 meV mode-coupling The momentum and temperature dependences of the identified ∼70 meV and ∼40 meV mode-couplings are quite unusual in that their energy scales do not change with momentum and temperature in the d-wave superconductors. In a conventional picture where the electron-boson coupling vertex is momentum independent, an Einstein phonon mode with an energy Ω in the normal state is expected to be shifted to Ω+∆ 0 (∆ 0 is the maximum of the d-wave superconducting gap) in the superconducting state over the entire Fermi surface We have carried out similar simulations by considering phonon modes with a finite linewidth (Fig. Our discovery of the two coexisting sharp mode-couplings that is omnipresent in cuprate superconductors has significant implications on the origin of the well-known peak-dip-hump structure observed in the superconducting state of Bi2212 near the (π,0) antinodal region Our present work has provided new and comprehensive information on the electronphonon coupling in cuprate superconductors. The observation of the two coexisting sharp mode-couplings provides a unified picture to reconcile the previous results of the nodal kink and antinodal kink in cuprate superconductors. In conventional superconductors, the electron-phonon coupling is always present at different temperatures both above and below T c . This does not mean that the electron-phonon coupling is not relevant to superconductivity. Instead, it has been well established that it is the electron-phonon coupling that induces the electron pairing and the superconductivity In (b1,b2,b3), in addition to the main band, two features appear marked as LH and HH. In (c1,c2,c3), two features are observed marked as LD and HD. In (d1,d2,d3), the observed features are marked as HH, LH, HD and LD. Correspondingly, in (e1,e2,e3), the observed features are marked as HH, LH, HD and LD. As shown in Fig. Figure Figure High quality single crystals of these Bi-based cuprate superconductors were grown by the traveling solvent floating zone method Figure We simulated the single-particle spectral functions A(k, ω) in the normal state at zero temperature where f (ω, T ) is the Fermi-Dirac distribution function. The spectral function A(k, ω) is expressed as: in which (k) represents the bare band. The real part (Σ (k, ω)) and imaginary part (Σ (k, ω)) of the electron self-energy Σ(k, ω) can be expressed as: Here α 2 F (Ω) is the Eliashberg function and Es is the cutoff of the Eliashberg function. The first term of Σ (k, ω) is from impurity scattering, the second term of Σ (k, ω) is from the electron-electron interaction in the Fermi liquid picture and the third term comes from the electron-boson coupling. The electron-boson coupling strength, λ, is defined as: In order to simulate the electron coupling with sharp modes, we assume a Lorentzian form of the Eliashberg function for each mode: Here ω 0 is the mode energy, Γ is the linewidth of the Lorentzian peak (full width at half maximum, FWHM) and C is a constant. We first simulated the spectral function of the electron coupling with one mode as shown in Fig. In order to find out the mode energy when the mode involved in the electron-boson coupling has a finite linewidth, we simulated the spectral functions by considering different mode linewidth for the single mode case (Fig. 8. Doping dependence of the two coexisting mode-couplings in Bi2201, Bi2212 and Bi2223 Figure The two coexisting mode-couplings are observed in all the measurements near the antinodal region in Bi2201 and Bi2212 with different doping levels. We also carried out the simulation of the single particle spectral function in the superconducting state of Bi2212 by including electron coupling with one boson mode. The main purpose is to check on the effect of the superconducting transition on the spectral function and related mode-coupling. The simulations are performed by using the finite temperature Eliashberg equations The ARPES intensity is obtained by multiplying the spectral weight, A(k, ω), by the Fermi-Dirac distribution function, f (ω, T ). where The self-energies, Σ and χ, can be obtained by self-consistent Eliashberg equations: where α 2 F (kk , ε ) is the Eliashberg function and Here n(-ε ) is Boson-Einstein distribution function. We do not leave out the particle-hole asymmetric part of the self-energy, χ, for more realistic calculation. We simply assumed a d-wave superconducting gap: with ∆ 0 being the maximum gap at the antinodal region. We use ∆ 0 =20 meV. The pairing self-energy, φ, can then be obtained by: In the calculation, we choose the Eliashberg function as: Here we separate the energy dependence and momentum dependence part of the Eliashberg function. It has a single peak at ω b =65 meV and its width can be controlled by Γ. We use Γ=20 meV. For the momentum dependence of the Eliashberg function, we adopt Cu-O-Cu buckling-like mode. We set the value of the λ defined as below to be 0.5 by adjusting α 0 . where N (ω) is the density of state. The bare dispersion, ξ(k), is given by: where t 1 = 0.395, t 2 = 0.084, t 3 = 0.042 and μ = 0.474. Here, we set the saddle point energy to be 30 meV. The self-energy effect lifts the saddle point energy by 10 meV so that we have 20 meV of the renormalized saddle point energy. Figure We have carried out the simulations for three cases: 100 K in the normal state (Fig. Figure 10. Ubiquitous "peak-double dip-double hump" structure in Bi2212 and Bi2201 Figure Figure The "peak-double dip-double hump" structure can be commonly observed in these EDCs. 