We propose a universal mechanism for the Josephson diode effect in short Josephson junctions. The proposed mechanism is due to finite Cooper pair momentum and is a manifestation of simultaneous breaking of inversion and time-reversal symmetries. The diode efficiency is up to 40 %, which corresponds to an asymmetry between the critical currents in opposite directions Ic+/Ic-≈ 230 %. We show that this arises from both the Doppler shift of the Andreev bound state energies and the phase-independent asymmetric current from the continuum. Finally, we propose a simple scheme for achieving finite-momentum pairing, which does not rely on spin-orbit coupling and thus greatly expands existing platforms for the observation of supercurrent diode effects. Introduction. -Recently, there has been a surge of interest in nonreciprocal phenomena in superconductors. In particular, recent experiments have observed an asymmetry between forward and reverse critical currents I c+ ̸ = I c-in superconducting films The supercurrent diode effect can occur when the free energy is asymmetric under the sign change of the supercurrent. This requires time-reversal symmetry breaking, which can be achieved by an external magnetic field or an exchange field from magnetic proximity effect. As an example, in the presence of Zeeman field, a noncentrosymmetric superconductor with spin-orbit interaction can acquire finite Cooper pair momentum, resulting in the so-called helical superconducting state Supercurrent nonreciprocity has also been observed in a number of experiments on Josephson junctions were coupled by a thin flake of topological semimetal NiTe 2 . Moreover, the observed features of the Josephson diode effect, such as the temperature and the magnetic field dependence of ∆I c ≡ I c+ -I c-, were accounted for by a phenomenological model based on finitemomentum Cooper pairing In this work, we present a universal theory of Josephson diode effect due to Cooper pair momentum in short Josephson junctions. An analytical formula for the Josephson current is obtained for a short junction between finite-momentum superconductors, which generalizes the well-known result for zero-momentum superconductors. We find an asymmetry between the critical currents in opposite directions that is directly related to the Cooper pair momentum. We propose a simple scheme for achieving finite-momentum pairing and thus inducing the JDE, which is based on the Meissner effect. This scheme only involves a small magnetic field H < H c1 , does not require spin-orbit coupling, and is applicable to all superconductors. Thus, our work greatly expands the material platform for observing the JDE. Our mechanism of the Josephson diode effect has the arXiv:2201.00831v3 [cond-mat.supr-con] 25 Oct 2023 following origin. The presence of finite Cooper pair momentum results in Doppler energy shift of quasiparticle energies by ±qv F for left and right movers with momentum close to ±k F , respectively. Since left and right movers carry currents in opposite directions, by breaking their degeneracy the Doppler shift causes the Josephson current to be direction-dependent and thus gives rise to the Josephson diode effect, as we show below. We find that the contribution from the continuum of states plays important role for determining the magnitude of the asymmetry between the critical currents in opposite directions. Unlike previous proposals, the Josephson diode effect we found in short junctions is universal: it is independent of the junction parameters and occurs already in the ballistic limit. It arises from and provides a measure of the Doppler shift of quasiparticle energy due to Cooper pair momentum. The proposed mechanism does not rely on scattering between multiple conduction channels Finite-momentum pairing from the Meissner effect. -We consider a short weak link between two superconducting regions as shown in Fig. respectively, where φ is the overall phase difference between them. Note that q ̸ = 0 breaks both inversion and time-reversal symmetry, which is necessary for the Josephson diode effect. Our goal is to calculate the current-phase relation for this setup and demonstrate the asymmetry between the critical currents in opposite directions. While finite-momentum superconductivity is thought to be elusive, the finite-momentum Josephson junction -the subject of our study -can be achieved by placing a normal metal bridge or semiconductor wire on top of two conventional superconductors, as shown in Fig. By means of superconducting proximity effect, the induced pair potential in regions 1 and 2 of the normal metal or semiconductor bridge (see Fig. The current-phase relation. -We find the currentphase relation for a short junction with two superconducting regions at x < 0 and x > d, where the junction length is much smaller than the induced coherence length ∆ . The order parameters in the superconducting regions are given in eq. ( The BdG Hamiltonian in the superconducting regions is where ∆(x) in left and right superconducting regions are defined in Eq. where the notation '+/-' pertains to the states with momentum near ±k F , respectively. Note that in an infinite system described by this Hamiltonian, due to the Doppler effect from Cooper pair momentum, ∆ ± qv F , the quasiparticle dispersion possesses two spectral gaps for quasiparticles moving in the right and left directions, correspondingly. We use the scattering matrix formalism developed in refs. The effect of the normal reflection is discussed later in the text. Here, r ± A are up to a phase proportional to the Andreev reflection amplitudes at the interface for rightand left-moving particles: The presence of two different coefficients r ± A is a direct consequence of the broken time-reversal and inversion symmetries. In the absence of any normal reflection, the right-and left-moving states are decoupled and produce two separate bound states: where we introduced the notation φ = φ + 2qd. The constant phase 2qd is negligible in short junctions and is not relevant to the discussion of the supercurrent nonreciprocity. The spectrum is shown in Fig. The Josephson current can be determined as I = 2e ħ dF dφ , where F is the free energy of the system The first term is the contribution from the bound states and the second term corresponds to the current from the continuum of states; here, ν(E) is the density of states in the continuum. Thus, we decompose the total current as I = I bound + I cont . The contribution from the bound states equals Unlike in conventional short Josephson junctions, the branch change does not occur at π anymore but is determined by the zero of argument of sgn(..) function, namely φ 0 = 2 arccos qv F ∆ , which is shown in Fig. Let us now discuss the second contribution to the Josephson current. When time-reversal symmetry is broken, the continuum of states is known to contribute to the Josephson current (see refs. where s A and s N are the scattering matrices transforming the wavefunctions due to Andreev reflection at the interfaces and due to the propagation/scattering in the weak link; the 'const.' is the phase-independent part of the density of states. The expression det (1 -s A s N ) equals left-hand side of eq. ( We evaluate this integral analytically (see Supplementary) and find a phase-independent contribution to the current from the continuum of states: This part of the Josephson current is exactly equal to the supercurrent that would flow in an infinite single-mode superconducting wire in the presence of finite Cooper pair momentum q (a detailed discussion can be found in the Supplementary). Finally, the resulting total current through the junction equals It is plotted in Fig. Josephson diode effect.-The diode effect is quantified by the difference between the magnitudes of the critical currents in the opposite directions ∆I c = I c+ -I c-, which equals: (13) The first term is the nonreciprocal contribution from the continuum of states and the second term comes from the bound states. The contribution from the continuum of states is phase-independent, nonreciprocal, and its sign is determined by the direction of the Cooper pair momentum. The nonreciprocity from the current carried by the bound states at E < 0 can be understood as follows: the maximum current in the positive direction occurs at φ = π (as in the case of q = 0 Josephson junction), when the bound state is an equal weight superposition of right-moving electrons and left-moving holes. On the other hand, its partner formed from left-moving electrons and right-moving holes, which would carry the same current in the opposite direction, is inaccessible because it is shifted to E > 0 by the Doppler effect. Instead, the largest current in the reverse direction occurs at the branch change φ 0 . The phases corresponding to these points are marked in Figs. The Josephson diode efficiency defined as η ≡ |∆I c |/(I c+ + I c-) is shown in Fig. At small q, the diode effect is dominated by the contribution from the continuum of states. Because usually the continuum contribution through the short Josephson junction vanishes, this is a remarkable example where this contribution arises due to time-reversal and inversion symmetry breaking and plays a key role. Note that the first term in eq. ( At finite junction transparency T , the condition determining the spectrum of the states in the junction is generalized to: Using this condition and eq. ( As recent experiments show The mechnism for the JDE in short junctions considered in this work is universal because it does not depend on parameters of materials in the junction and its geometry and only relies on finite Coope pair momentum. This is not the case for long junctions; there, the transport occurring in the normal region becomes important; in particular, a finite-momentum Cooper pair will acquire an additional phase δ = 2qd as it propagates through the junction. This phase shift is not small in a long junction The effect of normal reflection.-In the presence of any amount of normal reflection, there are no true bound states in the range of energies ∆-|q|v F < |E| < ∆+|q|v F anymore. However, at small normal reflection, because of multiple Andreev reflections these states are quasi-bound and, when normal reflection is small, the analytical result above is still relatively accurate. We compare our analytical results for the case of transparent barrier with tight-binding calculation in Fig. The effect of disorder.-We examine the diode effect in the presence of the chemical potential disorder in the system. We performed tight-binding simulations and have found that the diode effect is robust and persists even in the presence of relatively strong disorder. Fig. Alternative ways to realize finite Cooper pair momentum.-Lastly, let us discuss other possible ways to realize finite Cooper pair momentum. In Fig. Conclusions.-In this work, we developed a theory for a universal microscopic mechanism for Josephson diode effect in short Josephson junctions originating from finite Cooper pair momentum q. We found a large asymmetry that reaches 40 % when qv F ∼ ∆, which does not depend on the details of the junction. We also proposed a simple way to realize finite-momentum pairing based on the Meissner effect, which makes this mechanism universally applicable. We linearize the problem and consider +/-(where +/-corresponds to the vicinity of ±k F , i.e. right-and leftmovers) and use the ansatz a + e e ik F x e i(k+q)x+iφ1,2/2 a + h e ik F x e i(k-q)x-iφ1,2/2 a - e e -ik F x e i(k+q)x+iφ1,2/2 a - h e -ik F x e i(k-q)x-iφ1,2/2 in superconducting lead 1 and similarly in lead 2. Here k ≡ k x . Recall that φ 1 = 0 and φ 2 = φ. Notice that normally, there should be wavefunction normalization by the quasiparticle current in order for the scattering problem to be unitary; however, we will use Andreev approximation, which makes this normalization unnecessary. We assume that 0 < qv F < ∆, and that the energies of the states will lie in the gap of the superconductor 0 < E < ∆ -qv F . The wavefunction for right-movers that decays as x → +∞ in SC 2 : The L state in SC 1 that decays as x → -∞ is: It is known Where r A is not necessarily the same constant for scattering on the left and right contacts. For the incoming holes, the problem is set up similarly. To obtain the amplitudes of Andreev reflection, we solve the condition ψ at each interface (x = 0 and x = d). In the case of perfectly transparent contacts, the scattering matrix at the interfaces is identity. We solve these equations (for both incoming electrons and holes at both interfaces) and obtain the matrix describing Andreev scattering at both interfaces: where the unfilled spaces correspond to zero entries, and we used the notation The scattering matrix of the normal region is: where in the limit of short junction ( ∆d v F ≈ d ξ , Ezd v F ≪ 1) the transmission and reflection are energy-independent. In our case, for one channel, r ′ = r and t ′ = t. The condition determining the spectrum of the ground states is det (1 -s N s A ) = 0, which translates into where T = |t| 2 , |t| 2 + |r| 2 = 1. In the absence of normal reflection t = e iqd , T = 1 and this simplifies to: from the main text, and the solutions to this equation produce the energies of the two bound states FIG. The free energy is where H 0 is the particle block of the BdG Hamiltonian and β is the inverse temperature. We neglect the contribution from the spatial integral d 2 r |∆| 2 |g| to the Josephson current because we assume that ∆ changes as a step-function at the contacts. Therefore, the free energy can be written as The density of states ν(E) in the junction can be evaluated as which is good for describing both bound and continnum states. Here s A and s N are the scattering matrices transforming the wavefunctions due to Andreev reflection at the interfaces and due to the propagation/scattering in the weak link; the 'const.' is the phase-independent part of the density of states. In the absence of normal reflection, we can rewrite the density of states as where, in order to work with energies of both bound and continuous states, we have to assume that E = E + i0, and perform proper analytic continuation where necessary. Lastly, we plug the expression for the density of states into the free energy and evaluate the current as I = 2e ħ dF dφ . We extend the symmetric integration to (-∞, +∞) and integrate by parts using that the boundary terms vanishing as ∝ 1/E. Thus, we obtain: which is equal We complete the contour in the upper half complex energy plane, picking up residues at each of the poles of the hyperbolic tangent at Matsubara frequencies E = iω n ≡ i(2n + 1)π/β to obtain a summation: Which, finally, can be brought into the form: The zero temperature result, which we are interested in, is given by turning the sum Here we derive the Josephson current at zero temperature using a slightly simpler approach than the one introduced in the section above. This approach will also allow us to distinguish the current contributions from bound states and continuous states. The Josephson current can be written as: Where the first term only counts contributions from the bound states and the second term corresponds to the current from the continuum. We are interested in the case when the temperature is zero, and the expression simplifies: The expression for the contribution from the bound states is given in the main text (eq. ( When T = 1, the expression is especially simple. The derivative over φ of the density of states for the continuum of states at qv F = 0.5∆ and φ = 0 is shown in fig. To compute the current from the continuum of states analytically, we change the order of derivatives and separate the contributions from left-and right-movers: Then we proceed to evaluate the derivative over φ: Next, we integrate by parts in order to obtain Note that Im i e -i φ -1 = Im i e i φ-1 = 1 2 . Thus, simplifying further: (recall that for continuous states (r ± A ) 2 = e 2arccosh E∓qv F ). We see that the imaginary part of the second term is identically zero and thus: which yields the result in eq. ( When qv F > ∆ and 0 < φ < 2π, we evaluate the current using eq. (S17) at zero temperature: The tails of the quantity dν(E)/dφ in the continuum have the opposite sign and cancel exactly when q = 0. When q ̸ = 0, the energies corresponding to the continuum states for right-and left-movers acquire Doppler shift ±qvF ; on top of that, there is no perfect cancellation anymore, as we show in the calculation above. We obtain: Which can be simplified to Here arg(z) refers to the argument of the complex number z. The maximum negative current occurs at φ = 0, |I c-| = 2e π (qv F -q 2 v 2 F -∆ 2 ). The maximal positive current occurs at φ = π, I c+ = 2e π (∆ sin -1 (∆/qv F ) -(qv F -q 2 v 2 F -∆ 2 )). Thus, the diode efficiency can be expressed as , where p ≡ ∆/qv F < 1. In the limit qv F ≫ ∆, the diode efficiency approaches p 2 /12 + 13p 4 /360 + . . . and thus vanishes as ∝ 1/q 2 . The expression for the supercurrent becomes symmetric in this limit I(φ)| qv F /∆→+∞ ≈ -e∆ 2 cos φ πqv F . argument: Let us discuss one perspective on how and why continuous spectrum at ∆ -|qv F | < E < ∆ + |qv F | contributes to the Josephson current. As we saw above, the current from continuous states is determined from In the cases considered in refs. Which immediately sets imaginary part of the determinant above zero. Thus, for a short junction with L/R-symmetric dispersion, the density of states is independent of φ and the current from the continuum (S31) vanishes. It is known that just time-reversal symmetry breaking (for example, induced by spin-splitting magnetic field, see For the rest of the discussion, assume that q is negative, which is the case in Fig. Let us compute the screening current that flows in an an infinite superconducting slab with ∆(x) = ∆e 2iqx . For energy range ∆ -|q|v F < |E| < ∆ + |q|v F the current comes from left movers only: which, as we see, is zero when q = 0. Analogously, the contribution from the true continuum states equals to a difference between the contributions: Thus, the screening current is Which, as we see, equals Energy dispersion in the junction (color depicts the sign of the current) FIG. We use the parameters ∆ = 2, t = 120, a = 1 in our simulation and fix the length N N = 4. In the figure labels below, we use L and N S interchangeably. In Fig. In Fig. 