Recent experiments on superconducting cavities have found that under large radio-frequency (RF) electromagnetic fields the quality factor can improve with increasing field amplitude, a socalled "anti-Q slope." Linear theories of dissipation break down under these extreme conditions and are unable to explain this behavior. We numerically solve the Bogoliubov-de Gennes equations at the surface of a superconductor in a parallel AC magnetic field, finding that at large fields there are quasiparticle surface states with energies below the bulk value of the superconducting gap. As the field oscillates, such states emerge and disappear with every cycle. We consider the dissipation resulting from inelastic quasiparticle-phonon scattering into these states and investigate the ability of this mechanism to explain features of the experimental observations, including the field dependence of the quality factor. We find that this mechanism is likely not the dominant source of dissipation and does not produce an anti-Q slope by itself; however, we demonstrate in a modified two-fluid model how these bound states can play a role in producing an anti-Q slope. Superconducting radio-frequency (SRF) cavities are useful in a variety of modern applications, such as freeelectron lasers and particle colliders Definitive theoretical explanations for the anti-Q slope remain elusive. Conventional theories of AC dissipation in superconductors predict no Q slope (constant quality factor). Mattis and Bardeen Extensions of the linear-response theory of Though some of these extensions can be used in the regimes of strong fields A simpler phenomenological model relying on the twofluid idea In Section II we introduce the Bogoliubov-de Gennes equations and describe quasiparticle surface states whose energies exhibit strong field dependence. In Section III we consider how quasiparticle-phonon scattering changes the occupation of these surface states during the RF cycle and can lead to dissipation. In Section IV we compute the field and frequency dependence of our dissipation mechanism and discuss its relevance to the anti-Q slope. Finally, in Section V we offer concluding remarks and possibilities for further study. To find quasiparticle states we solve the Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) equations with where e is the fundamental charge, c is the speed of light, and m is the mass of an electron. These equations must be solved self-consistently with the potentials given by where f n is the occupation of state n and V is a constant describing the strength of the interaction. To accomplish this numerically, we make an initial guess for the potentials, find all the solutions (u n , v n ), use them to compute a refined guess for the potentials, and iterate until the process settles on a set of (u n , v n ) consistent with U and ∆. Note that Eqns. (1) possess a symmetry: If (u, v) is a solution with energy E, (v * , -u * ) is a solution with energy -E. If one takes advantage of this symmetry one must also replace the state's occupation f with 1 -f in order to preserve Eqns. (1) at the surface of a superconductor in a parallel magnetic field: A = A 0 sin(ωt)e -z/λ ŷ, where λ is the London penetration depth of the superconductor. For simplicity we impose the vector potential externally, rather than using the current density and Maxwell's equations to solve for a new vector potential after each iteration of the self-consistency process. However, we can confirm that our current density, after reaching self-consistency with U and ∆, is also consistent with our vector potential. This accords with observations that λ does not change significantly for RF fields below H c1 For the sake of simplicity and generality we neglect the atomic potential U 0 and assume a spherical Fermi surface. To avoid simulating a semi-infinite half-space, we limit the domain to a depth L. Provided L λ, this truncation does not affect the energies of states localized near the surface. We also take the occupation fractions to be in equilibrium, f n = 1 + e βEn -1 , when selfconsistently finding the potentials, having verified numerically that this approximation is of little effect. Factoring out the dependence in the directions parallel to the surface, u(r) → e i(kxx+kyy) u(z) and likewise for v, we obtain a coupled system of differential equations: with k x and k y as parameters. Since the time depen-dence of the field A 0 (t) is much slower than quantum relaxation times (apart from inelastic scattering), we obtain the time dependence of the eigenstates simply by solving these equations at a series of times. For boundary conditions we set u(0) = u(L) = v(0) = v(L) = 0 to confine the quasiparticles to the slab. One can see from Eqns. (2) that this forces the potentials to vanish at the surface, which might seem to be a problem given that, for instance, ∆ should be a nonzero constant if the field is zero. However, the relevant length scale for features of ∆ is the correlation length, while the sums in Eqns. ( In the absence of a field, there is a uniform pair potential ∆(z) = ∆ 0 and all quasiparticle energies must be larger than ∆ 0 . Once the field is applied, states with energies less than ∆ 0 appear. These states are localized near the surface. Examples are plotted in Figure The fact that the scattering rate can change during the cycle complicates the dynamics. For any fermion state it is true that FIG. where τ h and τ p are the hole and particle lifetimes, respectively. Setting Eqn. ( We can use these relations to eliminate either of the two lifetimes: At least one of the lifetimes must be time-dependent if the energy is time-dependent, since The simplest approximation is to take one of the lifetimes to be constant and let the other be determined by Eqn. To refine the approximation, let us consider what might make the hole lifetime not constant. There is a simple phase space argument for the energy dependence of τ h in the low-temperature regime: Kaplan et al. provide well-known formulas for the inelastic scattering rates of quasiparticles in terms of the Eliashberg spectral function, α 2 F (Ω), which is approximately quadratic in the phonon energy Ω at low frequencies Furthermore, because bound state wave functions are concentrated within one penetration depth of the surface, the scattering rate between a bound state and a continuum state is roughly proportional to the local density of the continuum state at the surface. We can compute the average density of continuum quasiparticles within one penetration depth of the surface, ρ 1 , as a function of field and compare it to the average density at zero field, ρ 0 . Combining the phase space argument with the surface density effect, we conclude that the scattering rate is approximately proportional to α 2 F (Ω) • ρ 1 /ρ 0 . Thus, our refined approximation for the hole lifetime is where T c is the superconducting critical temperature and the constant τ 0 is set by demanding τ h = 100 μs at 2 K for a state at E = ∆ 0 . Even with these refinements, our model of τ h is still an approximation. We have not explicitly considered possible effects of surface ordering in enhancing T c at the surface With these scattering rates we can calculate f (t). Every time the field goes to zero the bound states return to the continuum, where they scatter elastically with continuum states and return almost instantaneously to f = f 0 , dumping their excess occupation into the reservoir of continuum states. The process repeats when the field starts to increase again and bound states reemerge. Thus, for each bound state we can find the net work done by the field in a single half cycle and multiply by ω/π to obtain the power dissipated: In this form it is clear that the dissipation comes from the changing energies of occupied states. Ultimately the excess energy is dumped via phonons, and to illustrate this one can integrate by parts to obtain an equivalent formula: The rate of phonon emission is df /dt, and the phonon energy is E 0 -E(t). The formula holds for any E 0 ; that is, any energy the quasiparticle may have come from before emitting the phonon. When using this formula one must be careful to handle the delta function in df /dt that occurs when the bound state returns to the continuum at the end of the half cycle. At large fields some bound states reach negative energies. When this happens one can use the 'quasi-hole' symmetry described in Section II. If the quasiparticle energy drops below -∆ 0 or, equivalently, the quasi-hole reaches an energy above ∆ 0 , the state can briefly scatter elastically with continuum states until it reenters the interval (-∆ 0 , ∆ 0 ). Figure One can see that f is larger in the second half of the plot because it lags behind f 0 . The second half is when dE/dt is positive, so this imbalance is the reason the field does positive net work. The size of the imbalance depends on τ : If inelastic scattering is much quicker than the field (ωτ 1), the state stays near equilibrium the whole time (f is close to f 0 ) and little dissipation occurs. If inelastic scattering is slow (ωτ 1), the state hardly ever gets filled (f barely changes) and again little dissipation occurs. The maximum imbalance occurs for ωτ ≈ 1. At typical SRF frequencies of a few GHz, niobium's τ p = 16 ns puts us in the ωτ 1 regime. We stress that this mechanism does not apply to unbound states, whose wave functions oscillate throughout the slab and are not concentrated near the surface. We discuss the dissipation due to these states in Section IV, using a modified two-fluid formalism After computing the dissipation over an infinitesimal area ds, we find the surface resistance R s from and the quality factor from where is the geometry factor, a parameter independent of the frequency and size of the SRF cavity. In order to, say, double the frequency of a cylindrical cavity, one must halve the radius of the cavity in order to keep it in the same wave guide mode, so G remains unchanged and is in fact purely geometrical. We use parameters realistic for an elliptical SRF cavity made from niobium: a Fermi energy of E F = 5.32 eV Additionally, we can use the Bogoliubov-de Gennes states we calculate as inputs into the two-fluid model, with superconducting electrons treated as an inductive channel and normal conducting electrons as a resistive channel. With these two channels in parallel, and in the limit that the inductive channel has a much lower impedance, the AC dissipation is proportional to the density of the normal fluid: where δ ≈ c (4πωσ 2 ) -1/2 is the skin depth, n n and n s are the densities of the normal and superconducting electrons, and τ n is the relaxation time of the normal electrons To estimate the local fraction of normal electrons in the superconducting phase, we compute the proportion of electrons relative to the normal phase available for conduction where N (0) denotes the electronic density of states at the Fermi level. This quantity, and other normal-phase properties, are readily computed within the Bogoliubovde Gennes framework by forcing ∆ = 0 in Eqns. If the bound states have a different relaxation time than the continuum states, we treat them as two parallel resistive channels with conductivity where n b and n c are the densities of bound and continuum states, and τ b and τ c are their respective relaxation times. These densities are calculated using Eqn. ( A decrease in σ 1 causes more current to flow through the inductive channel, ultimately reducing R s . Near the surface, as the field increases the density of bound states increases and the density of continuum states decreases. Accordingly, any source of scattering that makes τ b τ c can cause a decrease in σ 1 and thus an anti-Q slope in our three-fluid model. Figure As noted earlier, the parameters for a typical niobium cavity put us in the slow-scattering regime, wherein dissipation would increase if the scattering rates were to increase. A tenfold increase in scattering rates would make the quality factor ten times lower. Given the rough nature of our approximations and the strong influence of τ h on the dissipation, more precise calculations of both the 0 5 10 15 20 3. Quality factor vs. field amplitude for a niobium cavity at frequency 1.3 GHz. The dashed lines show the quality factor computed from our inelastic scattering disequilibrium mechanism, using either a constant τ h or the time-dependent τ h (t) in Eqn. magnitude and field dependence of scattering rates are likely warranted. Another important consideration is the frequency dependence of the quality factor. In the ωτ 1 regime, dissipation is limited by the rarity of scattering events that fill a given bound state. Doubling the frequency leads to half as many scattering events and thus half as much dissipation per cycle, but with twice as many cycles per second the energy dissipated per second remains constant. On the other hand, in the ωτ 1 regime the dissipation is limited by the fact that the bound states stay close to equilibrium. Increasing the frequency leads to more disequilibrium and more cycles per second, so the result is that dissipation is proportional to frequency squared. Numerical computation verifies that dissipation goes with ω 2 when ωτ 1 and flattens out once ωτ 1. Inelastic scattering rates in bulk niobium suggest ωτ 1, so unless the filling of surface states is much faster than what we have inferred from bulk estimates, dissipation from this mechanism is independent of frequency within the typical SRF range. We also compute the dissipation resulting from the three-fluid model, using our Bogoliubov-de Gennes states to calculate the densities of the two normal fluids. The relative sizes of τ c and τ b depend on the nature of the scattering. Accurate descriptions of surface scattering will depend on factors such as the cavity's impurity profiles, surface roughness Given the uncertainty about the ratio τ b /τ c , in Figure As the field strength increases, the density of the bound state fluid near the surface grows while the density of the continuum state fluid shrinks. The increase in bound states exceeds the decrease in continuum states, so if τ b = τ c the net effect is to increase σ 1 , drawing more current through the resistive channel and dissipating more energy. However, if τ b is negligible compared to τ c , the net effect is to decrease σ 1 , causing less dissipation and yielding an anti-Q slope. We estimate an anti-Q slope to appear approximately when τ b < τ c /5. The magnitude of the quality factor could change significantly depending on the value of τ c , but the main point is the difference in slope: These results suggest that one could manipulate the Q slope by modulating any scattering sources that affect the bound states more than the continuum states. It is worth noting that in the two-and three-fluid models, as in the conventional linear response theory, the dissipation has an ω 2 dependence. If a mechanism with such dependence produces an anti-Q slope, the addition of a mechanism with flat frequency dependence and no anti-Q slope-such as our inelastic scattering disequilibrium mechanism-would explain why the anti-Q slope becomes more pronounced at higher frequencies. While this argument is speculative, it nonetheless demonstrates the potential for bound states to contribute to the anti-Q slope. For superconductors in large AC fields there are quasiparticle states for which a linear response approach to dissipation is inadequate. These states are bound to the surface with energies below the value of the bulk superconducting gap, and their energies change throughout an AC cycle. By focusing on these fundamentally nonperturbative bound states we have made a stark departure from the conventional theories derived in a weak field setting. For the range of parameters we expect in a typical niobium SRF cavity, the dissipation from inelastic quasiparticle-phonon scattering into these states is independent of frequency and is likely not the dominant source of dissipation. However, if inelastic scattering is much stronger at the surface of the superconductor than it is in bulk, the dissipation from this mechanism could become important. More refined calculations of scattering rates are a sensible next step to build on these results. Moreover, we argue that when the relaxation time of the bound states differs from that of the continuum states, the two-fluid model should be modified to consider the continuum and bound quasiparticles as two separate normal-conducting fluids in addition to the superconducting fluid. Depending on whether the relaxation time of the bound state fluid is comparable to or much smaller than that of the continuum state fluid, the resulting quality factor could either increase or decrease with field strength. Our estimations suggest that some kinds of scattering can indeed affect the bound states more than the continuum states. If one can identify and control the concentration of such scattering sources in an SRF cavity, in principle one could use them to activate the anti-Q slope.