 Diffusion in Ge and Si films growing on Si 3 N 4 /SiO 2 /Si substrates is studied  Ge (Si) grains coarsen with the increase in poly-Ge (Si) film thickness  H atoms come off N-H bonds in Si 3 N 4 to move into growing Ge (Si) films  Ge (Si) atoms migrate into Si 3 N 4 layer to replace H atoms via bonding to N  Ge (Si) layer thickness controls the diffusion processes in growing film 1 Influence of the thickness of Si and Ge films deposited on Si3N4/SiO2/Si Currently, silicon nitride (Si 3 N 4 ) films are extensively used in micro and optoelectronics as insulation and passivation layers and antireflection coatings LPCVD Si 3 N 4 films possess nearly stoichiometric composition and have low hydrogen atom content that ensure their superior electrical properties and thermal stability in comparison with PECVD Si 3 N 4 ones. For example, LPCVD Si 3 N 4 layers can be used to protect III-N structures in situ to avoid exposure to the atmosphere that would degrade their electrical parameters A base of passivation process is the diffusion of hydrogen atoms from a silicon nitride film into an interface domain of an active element, e.g., Si 3 N 4 /Si or Si 3 N 4 /SiO 2 structure, and the inactivation of electrically active centers (traps) there Hydrogen atoms form bonds with nitrogen or silicon atoms in Si 3 N 4 , which are deep traps for migrating hydrogen atoms. Breaking of the N-H and Si-H bonds and escaping of hydrogen atoms from a Si 3 N 4 layer could lead to the formation of dangling bonds of N and Si atoms, which become deep traps for charge carriers In this article, we present results the study continuing our previous explorations of diffusion processes taking place during the growth of the silicon and germanium films on dielectric substrates with the topmost layer of LPCVD Si 3 N 4 Polycrystalline silicon and germanium films usually have the columnar structure and their growth on an amorphous surface starts from fine grains, which gradually expand to large sizes Experimental samples were prepared by depositing the Si or Ge layers on Si 3 N 4 /SiO 2 /Si(001) dielectric substrates. A detailed description of the used techniques of the sample production including preliminary chemical treatments of Si 3 N 4 /SiO 2 /Si(001) substrates can be found in our previous work The Si and Ge films were deposited from molecular beams in an ultra-high vacuum EVA 32 (Riber) molecular-beam epitaxy (MBE) chamber using solid sources with electron beam evaporation of Si and Ge. Before the processes, the growth chamber had the pressure of about 4×10 -11 Torr, which did not exceed 2×10 -9 Torr during the deposition. Si and Ge deposition rates were about 0.3 Å/c. The film deposition was controlled with the Inficon XTC751-001-G1 (Leybold-Heraeus) film thickness monitor. The thicknesses of the Si layers were 20 Å, 50 and 200 nm and those of Ge films were 20 Å, 50, 100 and 200 nm. The samples with the thin (50 and 100 nm) and thick (200 nm) films were subjected to the heat treatment for the same total time due to the additional annealing of the thinner samples after the flux shutoff of Si or Ge atoms. The film growth temperatures were 30, 450 and 500°C. Samples were heated with tantalum radiative heaters from the rear side both in the pretreatment chamber and in the MBE chamber. The growth temperature was controlled using chromel-alumel and tungsten-rhenium thermocouples of the heaters. An IMPAC IS12-Si infrared pyrometer (LumaSense Technologies) was used for temperature monitoring and thermocouple graduation. The growth surface structure was monitored using an RH20 RHEED tool (Staib Instruments). An RGA-200 residual gas analyzer (Stanford Research Systems) was used for residual atmosphere monitoring before and during the deposition process. The main experimental methods were RHEED, FTIR spectral analysis and Raman spectroscopy. The RHEED images were collected in situ during the deposition processes and after sample cooling to the room temperature. The RHEED patterns were processed as those of polycrystalline silicon and germanium surfaces. FTIR transmission and reflection spectra of the samples were explored using a vacuum IFS-66v/S spectrometer (Bruker) with the spectral resolution of 10 cm -1 . The spectrometer was pumped out to the pressure of 2 mbar during spectra recording that enabled a considerable reduction of the interferences from carbon dioxide and water vapor bands. A detailed description of the measurement technique can be found in our previous works Raman spectra were registered was performed by using an inVia Qontor spectrometer (Renishaw). The spectra acquisition was realized using vertically polarized laser excitation at the wavelengths of 405, 532, 633 and 785 nm with the emission power of 15, 0.1, 1.7 and 5.4 mW, respectively. A diffraction grating with 1200 gr/mm was used for 785-nm and 633-nm lasers and that with 2400 gr/mm was applied for 405-nm and 532-nm ones; a 50× objective was employed in all the experiments. Using lasers with several wavelengths enabled obtaining the information from different depths in the sample. The measurements were carried out at room temperature. Voigt functions were used for the peak analysis of Raman bands. RHEED technique was used to characterize the surface of growing crystalline silicon and germanium films. Figure Another scenario is observed for the Ge deposition. In this case, broken rings form with the increasing Ge film thickness as well (Figure For the Raman spectroscopy, the samples with the 50 and 200 nm thick polycrystalline silicon (poly-Si) films were used. The Raman spectra obtained using different lasers for the sample with the 200 nm thick poly-Si layer grown at 450°C are depicted in Figure The peak analysis of Raman spectra obtained using 532-nm, 633-nm and 785-nm lasers has revealed the same peaks as those shown in Figure Thus, we can suppose that Peak 1 relates to the TO(c-Si) vibration band of the crystalline silicon phase in the poly-Si film (i.e. to interior parts of grains), whilst Peak 2 and Peak 3 appear due to Raman scattering at Si grain boundaries. The analysis of the Raman spectra of the sample with 200 nm thick Si film grown at 500°C (Figure The samples with the 50 nm, 100 nm and 200 nm thick Ge films grown at 500°C on the Si 3 N 4 /SiO 2 /Si(001) substrate were used for the Raman spectroscopy study. According to RHEED results, all these films were polycrystalline (Figure Comparison Raman spectra obtained using three different lasers with the wavelengths of 532 nm, 633 nm and 785 nm has shown that the exciting radiation passed though the samples with 50 nm and 100 nm thick poly-Ge films and was scattered in the substrate that led to the appearance of the TO(c-Si) peak in the spectra. Regarding 200 nm thick sample, only the radiation of the 785-nm laser penetrated into the substrate. In all the spectra, the strongest vibrational band was that peaked at 300 cm -1 . A result of the deconvolution of the vibrational band at ~300 cm -1 excited with the 785 nm laser for the 200 nm thick the poly-Ge sample is shown in Figure All the spectra have one strong band at ~300 cm -1 , the position of which does not depend on the sample thickness. For the thinner samples, the increase in the intensity of the spectra near 290 cm -1 is observed. The analysis of the vibrational band at ~300 cm -1 of the Raman spectra of the 50 and 100 nm thick poly-Ge films revealed that regardless of the used exciting laser it consisted of the same peak components as ones shown in Figure The Raman observations enable supposing that the analyzed polycrystalline silicon and germanium films having different thickness below 200 nm are characterized by the same values of internal stresses emerged in them. The same result was obtained for the amorphous germanium films with different thickness. The polycrystalline film samples have the oriented structure formed by grains with crystalline interior, with the sizes of grains increasing with increasing layer thickness. IR absorbance spectra of the samples with Ge and Si films were recorded in the range from 400 to 4600 cm -1 . Figure Figure Figure The changes in the intensity of the Si-N absorption band at ~500 cm -1 depending on the thickness of the poly-Ge or α-Ge films are shown in Figure The growth of the α-Ge films at 30°C leads to the decrease in the Si-N absorption band intensity (Figure Notice that we have also observed a matte surface of this film in the visible light region that verifies the above statement. Figure The deposition of the Si or Ge films on the Si 3 N 4 /SiO 2 /Si(001) dielectric substrates led to modification of the IR absorption spectra detected as decreasing intensity of the N-H absorbance bands peaked at ~1150 cm -1 and ~3340 cm -1 (Figure To explain of the obtained results, we employ the model of the hydrogen diffusion proposed in Hydrogen atoms bonding with deep traps (Si-H), due to higher bond energy, occupy a lower level than μ H . Hydrogen atoms migrating via interstitial states (week Si-Si (Ge-Ge) bonds), due to a lower bond energy, occupy a higher level than μ H (the so-called transport level). If crystal structure has some disorder, then hydrogen atoms can transfer from μ H to the transport level and easy diffuse. The μ H level depends on the concentration of hydrogen atoms: the greater is concentration of hydrogen atoms, the higher is the μ H level. In the structure formed by layers with different hydrogen content, a transfer of the hydrogen atoms from a part with a higher hydrogen atom content (a higher level of μ H ) to one with a low hydrogen atom content (a low level of μ H ) can be observed. The migration lasts until the chemical potential of hydrogen atoms becomes equal in both layers. This diffusion model originally brought forward for an amorphous layer is quite applicable to polycrystalline ones. Initially, hydrogen atoms are connected on the N-H bonds in the Si 3 N 4 layer and diffusion can only begin when this energy barrier is overcome, e.g., due to a greater hydrogen atom content (a higher level of μ H ) in the Si 3 N 4 layer than in the growing film. A way of hydrogen atom diffusion in polycrystalline films is similar to that in amorphous ones (via interstitial states), and dangling silicon (germanium) bonds are deep traps for hydrogen, especially in the regions near grain boundaries In this study, the Si 3 N 4 dielectric layers had a higher content of hydrogen atoms than others did and hydrogen could diffuse into the growing Si (Ge) films; this process activated already at the growth temperature as low as 30°C. Comparison of the IR absorbance spectra has shown that the higher the thickness of the deposited film was, the more hydrogen atoms left the Si 3 N 4 layer during the growth of the amorphous and polycrystalline layers. This effect could be explained within the above model. During the film deposition, a region near the growth surface can be considered as a domain with the lowest hydrogen atom content. Thus, the gradient of the hydrogen atoms concentration (that of the chemical potential of hydrogen atoms) always exists in a growing layer and facilitates the transfer of hydrogen atoms from the enriched domain to the depleted one near the growth surface. As soon as the deposition process is stopped, the hydrogen atom diffusion is also finished. Probably, some content of hydrogen atoms remains in the Si (Ge) film, but since we have not observed the Si-H (Ge-H) absorption bands, either hydrogen atoms content was small or they formed such bonds with Si (Ge) atoms, which were inactive for the detection by FTIR. The N-H band intensity decreased more noticeably in polycrystalline samples than in amorphous ones (for the 200 nm thick Ge films) that could be explained by higher growth temperatures (Figure The deposition of the Si(Ge) films also changed the strength of the Si-N and Si-O (~960 cm -1 ) absorption bands in the IR spectra (Figure The results of FTIR and Raman spectroscopy studies of silicon and germanium films with the thickness from 50 to 200 nm deposited on a dielectric Si 3 N 4 /SiO 2 /Si(001) substrate are presented in this work. A considerable reduction of the strength of the N-H absorption bands in the IR spectra has been observed as a result the growth of the silicon (germanium) films; the thicker the film was grown, the more significant the decrease in the intensity of the N-H band. This trend was observed during the depositing of both the amorphous and polycrystalline Si and Ge films. According to Raman spectroscopy results, the main band in the spectra related to the samples with the polycrystalline silicon films was located around 520 cm -1 and decomposed to three components peaked at ~519 cm -1 , ~518 cm -1 and ~500 cm -1 . The first of them relates to the TO(c-Si) and corresponds to the inner crystalline region of the grains. The latter two peaks are due to Raman scattering at the grain boundaries of polycrystalline layer. The main band in the spectra of the samples with the germanium films reached maximum at ~300 cm -1 and consisted of two peaks at ~300 cm -1 and ~290 cm -1 , which were connected with the TO(c-Ge) phonons of the internal crystalline part of the grains and grain boundaries of the polycrystalline film, respectively. An increase in the thickness of a grown film led to significant shifts in peak positions in the Raman spectra for neither the silicon layers nor the germanium ones. The presented experimental results may be explained using a model proposed in Ref. 