Microwave loss in niobium metallic structures used for superconducting quantum circuits is limited by a native surface oxide layer formed over a timescale of minutes when exposed to an ambient environment. In this work, we show that nitrogen plasma treatment forms a niobium nitride layer at the metal-air interface which prevents such oxidation. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy confirms the doping of nitrogen more than 5 nm into the surface and a suppressed oxygen presence. This passivation remains stable after aging for 15 days in an ambient environment. Cryogenic microwave characterization shows an average filling factor adjusted two-level-system loss tangent Fδ TLS of (2.9 ± 0.5) • 10 -7 for resonators with 3 μm center strip and (1.0 ± 0.3) • 10 -7 for 20 μm center strip, exceeding the performance of unpassivated samples by a factor of four. Increasing the coherence time of superconducting qubits while maintaining reasonable gate speeds enables more powerful quantum processors Nitride superconductors such as NbN and TiN are known to only have a thin native surface oxide layer at room temperature and therefore are expected to have fewer TLSs at the MA interface Nitrogen doping In this Letter, we demonstrate nitrogen doping of Nb CPW resonators without introducing potentially performancelimiting defects related to high temperature. We utilize a radio frequency (RF) plasma to satisfy the activation energy required for nitrogen doping. We show that a N 2 plasma at 300 • C for 10 minutes dopes the top 5 nm of the Nb surface with N which suppresses the growth of Nb oxides at the surface. Furthermore, we demonstrate that the passivation remains robust in an ambient air environment for sufficiently long periods of time to incorporate passivated Nb structures into complex, multi-layer quantum processors. Our process can be easily manifested with equipment available in typical industrial and academic facilities. The films used in this study are fabricated by first cleaning a 2-inch instrinsic Si (111) wafer 35 with resistivity greater than 8000 Ω•cm in piranha solution (3:1 mixture of H 2 SO 4 and H 2 O 2 ) at 120 • C for 10 minutes followed by a BOE clean (7:1 mixture of NH 4 F and HF) for 5 minutes. We then load the wafer into an electron-beam evaporation chamber (AJA ATC-ORION-8E) in less than 3 minutes. We evaporate 250 nm of Nb (99.95% purity) at a chamber pressure of 3 • 10 -9 Torr and a rate of 2 nm/min The resonator pattern is defined after we deposit the Nb film and before the passivation steps. We utilize a positive photoresist (MicroChem Shipley S1805) and a 375 nm optical directwrite laser lithography system (Heidelberg DWL 66+) to pattern the film. We etch the patterned film using a mixture of SF 6 and Ar in an RIE system (Oxford Plasma Lab 100 ICP). Our etching recipe produces a 550 ± 20 nm deep trench in the Si substrate. We then oxygen plasma ash the samples (100 W, 15 sccm O 2 ) for 30 s and finally soak them in MicroChem Remover PG for > 8 hours at 70 • C to remove the remaining resist. To passivate the samples, we start by performing a BOE clean for 30 minutes to remove all the surface oxide before transferring the wafer into a plasma enhanced chemical vapor deposition (PECVD) chamber (Oxford Instruments Nanofab). The transfer time between removal from the BOE solution and evacuation of the PECVD chamber is kept below 3 minutes. We first let the wafer sit at 300 • C for 10 minutes with 1200 sccm N 2 flow and a chamber pressure of 1 Torr. We then start a 20 W RF plasma at the same chamber condition for 10 minutes. Lastly, we cool down the chamber to 100 • C with 100 sccm of N 2 flow over the course of one hour before removing the sample. The passivation process forms a ∼ 2 nm thick SiN x layer at the exposed Si surface in the trench area. We perform a third BOE clean for 15 s to remove this thin SiN x layer. The PECVD system uses a routine process to remove oxides from the chamber walls. This process introduces residual F in the chamber which reacts with the Nb films. To mitigate contamination from F, we deposit ∼ 1 μm of SiO x on a dummy wafer and the chamber wall immediately before passivating our sample. We characterize the surface atomic species of passivated and unpassivated Nb films using X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy (XPS). The XPS system (Physical Electronics 5000 VersaProbe II Scanning ESCA Microprobe) uses an Al K α line source and in-situ Ar ion milling to facilitate analysis of material at depth. Figure Figure The study of N and O 1s electrons confirms a suppressed oxygen concentration near the surface for passivated samples. We now examine the Nb 3d electrons to investigate the oxides present near the surface of the films. Figure To study the effect of the passivation process on the quality of the Nb films, we measure the direct-current (DC) resistance of the passivated and the untreated films as a function of temperature using a 4-point technique inside a Quantum Design physical property measurement system (PPMS). Both samples are diced from the same Nb film deposited on the same Si (111) wafer allowing us to attribute the change in film proper-ties to the passivation process alone. We extract the residual resistivity ratio (RRR) by taking the ratio between the resistance value at 297 K and 10 K. We find that the untreated sample has a RRR of 4.86, which is similar to our previous result on Si (100) Figure We utilize cryogenic microwave measurements to extract the power-dependent quality factor of CPW resonator structures, and to study the effect of passivation on the TLSinduced loss in the devices. We apply the passivation process to the resonators after the CPW structures are defined with RIE so that the sidewalls of the resonators are also passivated. The resonators are capacitively coupled to a transmission line with coupling quality factor Q c 0.5 × 10 6 . Hanger-style resonators A vector network analyzer (VNA) is used to measure the transmission through the sample. The Q i of each resonator is extracted at different average circulating photon numbers n ranging from ~1 to ~10 7 using the diameter correction method where h is the Planck constant, f is the resonant frequency of the resonator, k B is the Boltzmann constant, T is the temperature of the resonator, and n c is the critical photon number that differentiates the high and low power regions. When n is large, the contribution to microwave loss from saturable TLSs approaches zero, so Q HP i gives a good estimate of the other sources of loss which mainly result from quasiparticles, trapped magnetic flux, and radiation. Figure To test the stability of the passivated samples over time, we allow some of the samples to age in an ambient environment for 45 days. Figure Our study demonstrates a recipe for passivation of Nb structures with nitrogen plasma which dopes the top 5 nm of the Nb surface with N atoms. These N atoms suppress the O concentration and therefore reduce the amount of TLS defects that induce microwave loss. The N and O populations are stable after 15 days of aging in ambient air according to XPS measurements. Cryogenic microwave measurements confirm that our passivation process reduces the microwave loss of CPW resonators of two different design geometries. Our process removes the stringent time sensitivity associated with the regrowth of NbO x and allows for the incorporation of low microwave loss Nb structures into state-of-the-art quantum processors. Our process also creates a platform on which other sources of microwave loss can be further studied. Although T c and XRD measurements suggest that our process creates a more disordered superconductor, which may increase the susceptibility to losses caused by quasiparticle and magnetic vortices, these mechanisms do not yet dominate the microwave loss. While the side effect of suppressed superconductivity may be reduced by starting with Nb films with large grain size and longer electron mean free path, the suppressed superconductivity may also be useful in producing low loss kinetic-inductance-based sensors 