This work presents a frequency multiplexed 3-limit cycles network in a multimode microelectromechanical nonlinear resonator. The network is composed of libration limit cycles and behaves in an analogous manner to a phase oscillator network. The libration limit cycles, being of low frequency, interact through the stress tuning of the resonator, and result in an all-to-all coupling that can be described by a Kuramoto model. Beyond the typically present cubic nonlinearity the modes in question do not require any special frequency ratios. Thus an interconnect free Kuramoto network is established within a single physical device without the need for electrical or optical coupling mechanisms between the individual elements. Introduction.-Oscillator networks, where a number of oscillators are coupled in such a way as to observe the emergence of a network-wide dynamics, are a topic of intense ongoing scientific and technological investigation Usually, an oscillator network, Kuramoto-type or otherwise, is experimentally constructed by establishing a number of individual (self-sustained) oscillators be they Josephson junctions In this work we construct a frequency multiplexed limit cycles network, where the different modes of the same structure form the oscillators, and the required coupling is generated via the nonlinear mode-coupling present in micro-and nano-electromechanical systems (M/NEMS). In nonlinear mode-coupling, which essentially is a non-resonant four-wave mixing, one mode would experience a frequency shift due to the added average strain that is generated by the amplitude of vibration of another mode To leverage the non-resonant nonlinear modecoupling as a foundation for connecting frequency multiplexed limit-cycles in a network imposes two conditions. First, the mode-coupling transmits information about the amplitude and not the phase, thus a scheme is required to establish an amplitude-phase coupling so as to enable the structural mode-coupling to transmit the phase information between the different modes. Second, the information needs to be transmitted in a dc or quasi-dc fashion, since the non-resonant mode-coupling is a time average effect. Here, by quasi-dc we mean no more than a perturbation order frequency component, i.e. ω quasi-dc ∼ O( ). Both of these requirements are fulfilled by using libration limit cycles Self-sustained libration (or libration limit cycles or librators) are limit cycles taking place in the rotating frame of a harmonically driven resonator. More intuitively, it is possible to think of a traditional limit cycle phase oscillator as a circular trajectory in the laboratory frame phase-space. Whereas in a librator, the limit cycle is created around a harmonic drive with a force (F d ), and a frequency (ω d ), such that the rotating frame phase space exhibits a limit cycle. This implies that these libration limit cycles, also approximated by a circular trajectory, are centered around the driven response of the system to F d , and not centered around the origin of the rotating frame. The off-center position of the libration limit cycle couples the phase and the amplitude, while the nature of the libration limit cycle is such that its frequency is equally a perturbation order frequency component, i.e, ω L ∼ O( ) Therefore, whereas traditional networks involve a number of coupled nearly identical oscillators. This work studies networks that are formed by limit cycles that are nearly identical when considered in the rotating frame of their respective harmonic drives, and are coupled via the nonlinear mode-coupling. The dynamics of the librator are not equivalent to those of a forced limit cycle oscillator, as the creation of the librator requires making the forced response itself unstable. To construct a librator requires a loop that feedbacks the rotating frame components (i.e., the quadratures), as shown schematically in Fig. The ability to synchronize librators to an externally injected tone has yet to be explored, let alone the ability to mutually synchronize coupled librators and establish a network. This is not necessarily as straightforward as synchronization of oscillators Model.-To account for the synchronizing influence, we modify the governing equation of the librator dynamics where the subscript i identifies the mode number. x i is the modal displacement, and γ i , β i , α i are respectively the modal linear damping, nonlinear damping, and Duffing nonlinearity of the i th mode (note that the equation is normalized so that the natural frequency ω 0i = 1). sync and ω sync denotes the magnitude and frequency of the quasi-dc frequency shift due to an externally applied synchronizing tone (ω sync 1). F di and ω di are the amplitude and frequency of the i th mode driving force, and f i (t) is the modal feedback term that generates the libration limit cycle. We also introduce a detuning parameter δ i such that ω di = ω 0i × (1 + δ i ). Note that all the above parameters are considered to be perturbation order terms, i.e. γ i , β i , α i , sync , ω sync , F di , f i (t), and δ i ∼ O( ). Eq. ( The application of the RFA leads to a dynamical equation, that reads where δ Li and γ Li are respectively the effective detuning and effective linear damping of the i th mode libration motion A Li . C Li is a complex constant that depends on the modal parameters, the driving force, and the feedback loop To explore the possibility of synchronization it is first necessary to presume a periodic oscillation for the libration motion, thus A Li is supposed to take on the following form , where B i is the periodic component of the libration motion, and B 0i is a non-zero static component that results from the non-symmetric shape of the libration orbit, knowing that B 0i = U 0i e iφ0i , and For convenience, we also express the steady state driven response as A 0i = R 0i e iθ0i . In essence, the introduction of B Li and B 0i , amounts to a second rotating frame approximation, or a second order perturbation analysis, meaning the time scales associated with these dynamics are ∼ O( -2 ). By inserting the expansion of A Li into Eq. ( where Ω i is an effective detuning parameter between the i th mode libration frequency and the synchronizing influence [39], P i is the synchronization forcing, and Φ Li represents an effective phase difference between the libration limit cycle and the synchronizing influence. For synchronization to take place requires that ΦLi = 0, while the terms Ω i , P i , and Φ Li need to be derived from the governing equations. These terms differ depending on whether synchronization is a result of an external forcing or mutual synchronization between interacting libration limit cycles. Injection locking.-First, we consider the synchronizing effect of an applied external force where two cases will be treated, these are ω sync ≈ ω Li , and ω sync ≈ 2ω Li . By retracing the steps for each one of these cases we derive expressions for the forcing parameter in Eq. ( The locking range is calculated by setting ΦLi = 0 in Eq. ( We experimentally investigate the synchronization dynamics of librator limit cycles using a piezoelectrically actuated GaAs MEMS clamped-clamped beam device that is 100 μm in length, 20 μm wide, and 600 nm in thickness, see The device in question possesses two electrodes on each end of the structure length, see representation in Fig. We generate libration limit cycles using feedback loops that are functionally equivalent to the ones shown in Fig. To study synchronization due to an external forcing, we choose the case of zero detuning, i.e., δ di = 0, and apply a weak tone on top of the dc bias. Naturally, when investigating external synchronization only one librator feedback loop is active at a time so as not to have mutually interacting librators. Since the injected signal frequency is on the order of the librator frequency and hence much smaller than the modal frequencies, i.e. ω sync ∼ ω Li ω di , its effect is to modulate the resonance frequencies of the structure, by modulating the dc bias, rather than to directly force the resonant modes, as depicted schematically in Fig. Thereafter, the frequency of the injected signal is swept producing a noticeable locking interval which is typically seen and expected from phase-locked systems These plots provide reassuring evidence of the validity of the perturbation analysis and the resulting Eq. ( Mutual synchronization.-Having established the potential of librator limit cycles to phase-lock to an external source, we now investigate the ability of multiple librator limit cycles, each centered around a different mode, to interact and synchronize. In this case, structural mode-coupling that is present in nonlinear M/NEMS devices For mutual librator synchronization the parametric frequency tuning term in Eq. ( . However, the modal amplitudes are no longer constant, as they are slowly modulated by the libration terms. Therefore, they can be written as By placing the modulated amplitudes in the mode-coupling terms and developing, we obtain the following phase rela-tionship (see supplementary materials for derivation where j denotes all the modes that couple to the ith mode, Ω i is an effective detuning parameter, and ∆φ ij represents the phase difference between the two limit cycles, i.e. ∆φ ij = φ j -φ i . The constants k ij and ψ 0j are rather involved amplitude and phase parameters (see supplementary material It is significant that Eq. ( In order to investigate the behaviour of mulimode librator networks, we first start with the simplified case of only two coupled librators i and j. Thus, only two phase equations are necessary, those of φi and φj . By considering only the difference between the two equations, i.e., ∆ φij = φiφj , Eq. ( where ∆Ω ij is the frequency difference between the two free librators, and μ and ν are rearranged constants (see supplementary materials [39]). Equation ( Experimentally, we investigate this regime by generating two libration limit cycles around the modes of interest. Since the libration limit cycles frequencies depend, amongst other things, on the force detuning term δ i then by sweeping the latter the libration frequencies are adjusted until nearing a 1:1 ratio, upon which they should lock. An experimental example of synchronization between the mode 3 librator and mode 5 librator is shown in Fig. The effect of frequency locking between the librators is also shown in the insets of Fig. By expanding these mutual synchronization measurements to 2-dimensional sweeps, where the drive frequencies of both modes are swept, and then plotting the resulting phase difference ∆φ ij , new features become apparent, as shown in Fig. The results shown in Fig. An undesirable effect is equally visible in Fig. Network. -If the number of librators is increased further then the dynamics changes significantly as N 3, since with 3 or more nodes the system becomes a network, see Fig. We proceed to study the 3-node network dynamics by activating all three feedback loops simultaneously, and changing the dc from -1V to -1.5V while accounting for the slight shift in resonance frequencies. Seeing the substantial size of the parameter space, an exhaustive, or even systematic, sweep is impractical. Instead a linear search procedure is used to adjust the values of the detunings (i.e., δ 1 , δ 3 , δ 5 ), whereas all other experimental parameters are kept constant. The linear search has for objective the minimization of the libration frequencies spread. As the libration limit cycles frequencies are brought closer together, they transition from an unsynchronized state, to a partially synchronized state (2 modes synchronized), to a fully synchronized state, depending on their respective detunings. These states can be seen by plotting the modes' X-quadratures against each other in a 3D plot, as shown in Fig. Once the synchronization parameters are established, we explore a small volume in the δ 1 , δ 3 , δ 5 space around those parameters. To quantify the degree of synchronization we use the time average of the Kuramoto order parameter r, where r(t)e iΨ(t) = i e iφi(t) The parameters Ω i , k ij , and ψ 0j can all be manipulated experimentally (to some extent) by changing the drive forces' detuning and magnitude (δ i , F di ) as well as the phase of the feedback loops (Θ i ). The presence of the phase term ψ 0j in Eq. 4 could lead to frustration in the system Conclusions.-To summarize, this work builds on the recently introduced MEMS librator to demonstrate the potential of the librator limit cycles to be synchronized to an outside force as well as to each other. This latter effect is mediated through the structural modecoupling, where the libration motion, being of low frequency, couples through the stress-tuning of the structure. The emergent network thus formed is best described by a Kuramoto model, despite the various limit cycles and their collective mean field taking place at largely different frequencies. This work therefore dispenses with the need for electrical or optical coupling mechanisms as well as provides experimental means to control the network properties. With a more streamlined experimental setup, e.g., replacing the lock-ins with RF power detectors, it would be possible to scale the number of nodes using simple ofthe-shelf MEMS devices and control electronics. Furthermore, the principles described in this work are equally applicable to other types of systems with Kerr-type nonlinearity, like optical resonators and microwave cavities. 