Large-area single-crystal monolayers of two-dimensional (2D) materials such as graphene and hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN) can be grown by chemical vapour deposition (CVD). However, the high temperatures and fast timescales at which the conversion from a gas-phase precursor to the 2D material appear, make it extremely challenging to simultaneously follow the atomic arrangements. We utilise helium atom scattering to discover and control the growth of novel 2D h-BN nanoporous phases during the CVD process. We find that prior to the formation of h-BN from the gas-phase precursor, a metastable (3 × 3) structure is formed, and that excess deposition on the resulting 2D h-BN leads to the emergence of a (3 × 4) structure. We illustrate that these nanoporous structures are produced by partial dehydrogenation and polymerisation of the borazine precursor upon adsorption. These steps are largely unexplored during the synthesis of 2D materials and we unveil the rich phases during CVD growth. Our results provide significant foundations for 2D materials engineering in CVD, by adjusting or carefully controlling the growth conditions and thus exploiting these intermediate structures for the synthesis of covalent self-assembled 2D networks. Two-dimensional (2D) materials such as graphene and hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN) offer technological promise Figure While it is crucial to understand the growth process, mechanistic and kinetic studies are rare and mostly focus on the growth of nanocarbons. Our experimental results are complemented by van der Waals (vdW) corrected density functional theory (DFT) calculations which confirm the nature of the system, helping us to determine which self-assembled structures are compatible with the experimental results. The adsorption of the precursor gas (borazine, B 3 N 3 H 6 ) on the Ru substrate has been investigated in several other studies using Auger electron spectroscopy, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy, electron energy loss spectroscopy and low energy electron diffraction. All experimental data was obtained with the Cambridge spin-echo apparatus which uses a nearly monochromatic atomic beam of with k i being the incident wavevector and θ i and θ f the incident and final angles with respect to the surface normal, respectively. First, we describe how borazine exposure at low temperature (T < 880 K) reveals a precursor structure on Ru(0001), which by further annealing at T = 880 K can be converted to h-BN. The purple line in Figure Since a (3 × 3) superstructure composed of intact borazine molecules shows only weak binding to the substrate, the observed BN I structure, as shown later in our DFT calculations, must be composed of partly dehydrogenated borazine molecules, in line with the reported low experimental dehydrogenation temperature on other substrates. We understand the BN I structure to consist of partially dehydrogenated, polymerised borazine analogous to the synthesis of bulk h-BN. Thus it is apparent that the 2D growth occurs in a step-by-step process and that not all hydrogen atoms are expected to be removed at the same time, due to the different bonding strengths to N and B atoms, as well as the bond formation between the N and the Ru atoms. Based on this attribution, we have made a vdW-corrected DFT investigation into the energetics of the BN I structure, from adsorption of the precursor gas to the complete h-BN overlayer. We start by considering a single borazine molecule in a (3 × 3) supercell (see Computational Methods in the Supporting Information), and move on to partially dehydrogenated borazine polymers. From the adsorption energies of isolated borazine molecules we observe that the bonding becomes much stronger with dehydrogenation, but the calculations cannot provide a definitive answer in terms of the dehydrogenation sequence (dehydrogenation of the B atoms is slightly more favourable than of the N atoms by ≈15 meV). However, as shown later for two borazine molecules per supercell, the N atoms can dehydrogenate more easily than the B atoms and the candidate structures for our observations can be clearly distinguished in terms of the adsorption energies. Table In Table Based on bulk h-BN studies we conclude that it is more likely that polymerised networks are formed. The calculations for two intact borazine molecules per supercell (2B 3 N 3 H 6 , not shown) yield weak binding, since the H atoms start to overlap resulting in a tilt of the complete molecules with respect to the surface. Moreover, due to desorption of hydrogen atoms from the borazine at low temperatures it is unlikely that intact borazine will remain and so intact molecules will not be considered further. The structure in Figure In addition to providing us with real-space structures of the observed BN I precursor, there are several points which we note from the vdW DFT calculations: Dehydrogenation of borazine always gives rise to a stronger bonding to the substrate and the results show that the thermodynamically most stable configuration for three adsorbed borazine molecules is h-BN (Supplementary Figure So far, we have described the formation of a BN I structure at T ≥ 750 K, which is converted to h-BN at T ≥ 880 K. However, upon complete conversion of the BN I structure to h-BN, exposing the surface to excess borazine results in the emergence of an additional structure with a (3×4) periodicity, which we label BN II . The green line in Figure As shown in a two-dimensional diffraction scan in Supplementary Figure To monitor the growth of the BN II structure we use a smaller borazine overpressure while holding the sample temperature at 915 K. Figure The measurement was repeated at an even lower dosing pressure, while holding the sample at the lower temperature of 880 K. In Figure With continuing borazine exposure to 20 L in Figure From Figure The latter may open up the possibility to study the growth of h-BN/graphene heterostructures From our experiments it is likely that the BN II structure is a second chemisorbed layer on top of already grown h-BN. Earlier works on an Ir(111) substrate showed the evolution of additional compact reconstructed regions with a (6 × 2) superstructure, which were attributed to reconstructed boron areas. The BN II structure, as a second chemisorbed layer, consists of partly or completely dehydrogenated borazine molecules with a desorption temperature slightly above our performed measurements, since we see an adsorption/desorption equilibrium at temperatures <≈ 1000 K with an ultimate desorption at temperatures above this value. The existence of such a structure might be a precursor to multilayer synthesis if the original h-BN layer is of poor quality providing a high density of growth nuclei and thus explaining the reports of multilayer growth. The combination of measurements and DFT calculations allows us to conclude that the whole system passes through various structural phases: with the outcome depending strongly on substrate temperature, borazine exposure and the point where one stops. In particular, the surface temperature strongly influences the kinetics and thus the duration and appearance of the additional superstructures. Combining the experimental results we derive a growth diagram as shown in Figure Below 750 K no periodic overlayer structure on the Ru(0001) surface is found. Between 750 and 880 K the BN I structure forms on the surface which upon further borazine exposure vanishes and leaves a disordered phase behind. The minimum temperature to form a h-BN overlayer on the surface was determined to be 880 K. Above this temperature we observe additional structures, starting with a (3 × 3) structure (BN I ) followed by a (3 × 4) periodic diffraction pattern (BN II ). These structures always appear in addition to the h-BN layer and ultimately vanish, leaving a complete h-BN overlayer behind (see Figure As further illustrated in h-BN periodicity in the SI, the h-BN periodicity and superstructure are strongly dependent on the experimental parameters, in particular the growth temperature. The exact h-BN periodicity and the Moiré pattern upon h-BN formation on Ru(0001) In summary, we investigated the growth of h-BN on a Ru(0001) substrate using helium atom scattering. Employing various growth conditions, characteristic periodic structures are measured during borazine exposure in addition to the h-BN diffraction peak as outlined in the diagram of Figure It is clearly evident from our observations that a precursor structure precedes the growth of h-BN at lower temperatures and an additional structure co-exists with h-BN at higher temperatures. Both are strongly dependent on the growth conditions, but always transform into a fully h-BN covered substrate at sufficiently high temperatures, thus confirming that the latter is the thermodynamically most stable structure. Our study of the structural evolution during the arrangement of h-BN from the precursor gas illustrates steps in the formation process itself and we hope to encourage future studies linking our structural information with chemical characterisation. We believe that these intermediate metastable struc-tures may be present in many more systems where 2D materials are grown based on precursor-based CVD, at least at lower temperatures and for higher amounts of excess hydrogen compared to the "ideal" growth conditions (see Outlook for other 2D materials in the supplementary information). In the case studied here, they ultimately always transform into the complete 2D layer -and thus usually higher temperatures are reported as the "ideal" growth conditions for h-BN in the literature. These intermediate structures seem to have been largely overlooked so far. Possibly, because they are difficult to detect owing to experimental complications since the structural advent of 2D materials is often not investigated during the growth itself, or is only accessible ex situ. More importantly, with increasing growth temperature the transformation to h-BN may occur so fast that they are easily missed. All measurements were performed with the Ru sample can be heated radiatively and by electronbombardment from backside of the crystal and cooled via a thermal connection to a liquid nitrogen reservoir. The entire beamline is held at high vacuum to avoid any attenuation of the helium beam, and the sample and detector chamber require ultra high vacuum levels to maintain cleanness of the sample and a low The Ru(0001) surface was cleaned by Ar-sputtering and annealing to 1300 K with subsequent O 2 treatment to not less than 20 L at 700 K. The adsorbed O 2 was removed by repeated flashing cycles to 1200 K. The cleanliness of the sample was determined by helium reflectivity measurements and diffraction scans to show no features of adsorbed species. After reaching reflectivities of ≈ 23% the sample was ready for the various dosing conditions. h-BN overlayers were removed by oxygen treatment at a sample temperature of 900 K, followed by the cleaning explained above. Borazine was supplied to the sample by backfilling the chamber through a leak-valve with typical overpressures between 1 × 10 -9 and 5 × 10 -8 mbar. For the DFT calculations we employed CASTEP, 2 a plane wave periodic boundary condition code. The plane wave basis set was truncated at an electron energy cut-off of 400 eV and we employ Vanderbilt ultrasoft pseudopotentials. The adsorption energies E ads are defined to be: where E tot (x + n y) is the total energy of the system, E tot (x) is the energy of the substrate, E tot (y) is the energy of the adsorbate and n is the number of adsorbed molecules. The more negative E ads , the more thermodynamically favourable it is for the species to adsorb. In order to compare the intermediate structures with a different number of atoms we calculate the binding energy E bin relative to Ru(0001) + 3 borazine molecules (3 borazine molecules are needed to form h-BN on a (3 × 3) cell) by appropriately adding or subtracting the energy of H 2 and borazine in the gas phase, to preserve stoichiometry: where E tot is the total energy of the system, E tot (H 2 ) and E tot (BZ) are the energies of H 2 and borazine which remain in the gas phase, respectively and E tot (Ru) and E tot (3BZ) are the total energies of pristine Ru(0001) and 3 borazine molecules in the gas phase. The more negative E bin , the stronger the binding and it becomes thermodynamically more favourable for the species to form. From the side view in Supplementary Figure The h-BN periodicity and superstructure are strongly dependent on the experimental parameters, in particular the growth temperature. It is well known that h-BN forms a Moiré pattern on the Ru(0001) surface due to the small lattice mismatch between a h-BN = 2.505 Å and a Ru(0001) = 2.706 Å. Looking at the thermal expansion coefficients of bulk h-BN and the Ru(0001) surface gives a rough estimation for the temperature at which the 13/12 superstructure is favourable. The thermal expansion of bulk h-BN Here the lattice constant for Ru a Ru = 2.706 Å was taken for a surface temperature of 293 K, with 297 K for a h-BN , hence the subtraction of these values. The Ru thermal expansion is depicted in the upper left panel of Supplementary Figure In the following we discuss further scenarios of the BN II structure. As mentioned in the main text, the surface temperature strongly influences the kinetics and thus the duration and appearance of the additional superstructures. At temperatures above 1000 K the (3 × 4) structure (BN II ) slowly vanishes (see Figure In the following we provide several scenarios for the origin of the (3 × 4) structure and discuss their plausibilities. The results could be interpreted as if borazine converts upon adsorption to both h-BN and a (3 × 3) structure (BN I ). However, given the results which are reported in the main paper, it is clear that borazine only adsorbs in a (3 × 3) superstructure, and at 880 K a (relatively fast) conversion to h-BN occurs. The h-BN and BN I structure grow together until the BN I reservoir is depleted, and no more h-BN is created. At this point we can conclude that the (3 × 4) (BN II ) is not a precursor to h-BN and is also not converted from the BN I structure. Since the (3 × 3) peaks degrade completely, the rise of the BN II structure does not compete with the conversion of the BN I structure to h-BN. When looking at Figure Another possible scenario would be the growth of a superstructure in-between the already grown h-BN islands. As mentioned in the main manuscript an earlier work investigated the CVD growth of h-BN on Ir(111) and identified a (6 × 2) superstructure in-between the h-BN islands. We hope that our initial findings encourage future investigations to give insight on the peculiar intermediate structures during the CVD growth of h-BN on Ru(0001). In fact we note that there is some preliminary experimental evidence as shown in Supplementary Figure 