Perovskites like LaAlO 3 (or SrTiO 3 ) undergo displacive structural phase transitions from a cubic crystal to a trigonal (or tetragonal) structure. For many years, the critical exponents in both these types of transitions have been fitted to those of the isotropic three-components Heisenberg model. However, field theoretical calculations showed that the isotropic fixed point of the renormalization group is unstable, and renormalization group iterations flow either to a cubic fixed point or to a fluctuation-driven first-order transition. Here we show that these two scenarios correspond to the cubic to trigonal and to the cubic to tetragonal transitions, respectively. In both cases, the critical behvior is described by slowly varying effective critical exponents, which exhibit universal features. For the trigonal case, we predict a crossover of the effective exponents from their Ising values to their cubic values (which are close to the isotropic ones). For the tetragonal case, the effective exponents can have the isotropic values over a wide temperature range, before exhibiting large changes en route to the first-order transition. New renormalization group calculations near the isotropic fixed point in three dimensions are presented and used to estimate the effective exponents, and dedicated experiments to test these predictions are proposed. Similar predictions apply to cubic magnetic and ferroelectric systems. Perovskite materials exhibit intriguing physical properties, and have been extensively explored for both practical applications and theoretical modeling The behavior of a system at the vicinity of its transition temperature T c can be expressed by critical exponents. When the transition at T c is continuous, the correlation length diverges as ξ ∝ |t| -ν and the orderparameter approaches zero (for temperatures T < T c ) as | Q | ∝ |t| β , where t = T /T c -1. The critical exponents ν and β are expected to be universal, i.e., having the same values for many physical systems. The exponents describing other physical properties, e.g., α and γ for the * aaharonyaa@gmail.com † orawohlman@gmail.com ‡ andrewkudlis@gmail.com specific heat and for the order parameter susceptibility, are obtained via scaling relations, dν = 2 -α = 2β + γ, where d is the dimensionality. The T -dependence of the order-parameters of SrTiO 3 and LaAlO 3 had been measured by Müller and Berlinger Here we show theoretically that the cubic to trigonal and the cubic to tetragonal phase transitions do not share the same critical behavior. In fact these two transitions are characterized by different behaviors of the renormalization-group (RG) iterations. We find that systems undergoing a cubic to trigonal transitions have second-order transitions, with the universal critical exponents of the cubic fixed point (FP). However, since the cubic and the isotropic fixed points turn out to be very close to each other (see below), it is indeed difficult to distinguish between their asymptotic critical exponents even without any uniaxial symmetry breaking. As we show, these asymptotic exponents are expected only very close to T c . For a large range of t we predict effective exponents, which vary with t. In contrast, the cubic to tetragonal transitions become fluctuation-driven first-order at small |t|, with different effective exponents over an intermediate range of t. These effective exponents are characterized by the isotropic fixed point, which dominates the crossover to the first-order transition. This conclusion extends to quite a number of other systems as well. Our predictions for the effective exponents come from a novel way to obtain analytic solutions to the RG recursion relations in the vicinity of the isotropic and cubic fixed points. After a short review of the theory of the RG on cubic systems in Sec. II, Sec. III presents our new calculation. Our predictions are compared with the above experimental information in Sec. IV, where we also propose dedicated measurements to test our results and list other cubic systems, which are expected to exhibit similar behaviors. Section V contains our conclusions. The Appendices describe the resummation technique and the analytic solution of the recursion relations. Fifty years ago, Wilson The RG analysis of cubic systems has been mainly based on the Landau theory where u is a system-dependent parameter, while r = T /T MF c -1, with the mean-field transition temperature T MF c (the parameter t, mentioned above, contains the downwards shift from T MF c to T c by the fluctuations). The cubic symmetry is characterized by adding the term U v (Q) = vΣ n i=1 Q 4 i to the free energy, with v a system-dependent coefficient In the absence of the ordering field h, the parameters which flow under the RG iterations are r , u and v. The Wilson-Fisher RG at d = 4 -is performed in Fourier space, eliminating large momentum (small length scale) components of the order-parameter and the β functions (not to be confused with the critical exponent β) are expanded in powers of their arguments. The fixed points u * , v * are found as the zeroes of these functions, with values which are series in . For v = 0, this procedure gives two FP's, one at u * G = 0, termed Gaussian, and the other, termed the isotropic FP, with u * I (n) = O[ ] > 0. For d < 4 the Gaussian FP is unstable, i.e., λ G u > 0, so that systems for which u > 0 flow towards the stable isotropic FP The RG analysis of the cubic model, Eq. ( As seen in Fig. However, this scenario is now known to be wrong. Four accurate methods (Monte Carlo simulations of lattice O(n) models Without even looking at the specific numerical values of the locations of the FP's, the right panel of Fig. As mentioned above, the cubic and the isotropic FP's are close to each other at n = d = 3 Indeed, the calculated asymptotic critical exponents (expected only at very small |t|) are ν I 0.706, ν C 0.700, β I .366, β C 0.368. This closeness also implies that the stability exponent of the stable cubic FP, λ C 3 0 and that of the unstable isotropic FP, λ I v 0, are small, indicating slow flows towards and away from these FP's. The experimental exponents should therefore be compared with effective exponents, e.g., β eff ≡ ∂ log |Q|/∂ log |t|, which depend on |t|. For v > 0, the cubic FP is stable, with two negative stability exponents, λ C 4 < λ C 3 < 0 (for flows in the u -v plane). Therefore β eff approaches the asymptotic β C slowly, with corrections of order 3 is small. For v < 0, β eff first approaches the isotropic FP value β I , but then (for smaller |t|, i.e., larger number of iterations ), it moves away from that value, and |Q| has a discontinuity. To quantify the above qualitative statements, we used existing 6 -order expansions Critical exponents are found from the RG recursion relations for the various scaling fields. To linear order in μ i ( ) these have the form where the effective exponent λ i is expanded in powers of its arguments and then resummed. At a fixed point, u * and v * are replaced by their -expansions, and the series for λ i are resummed to give asymptotic values at d = n = 3 As mentioned, v varies slowly near the isotropic and cubic FP's. Therefore, we need to solve the recursion equations (3) as functions of the number of iterations , and then estimate the effective critical exponents λ i ( ) at finite values of , up to the total number of iterations f . Since t( ) = t(0)e λ 1 , a larger f implies a smaller t(0), i.e., an initial state closer to the critical point. The divergence of the u-and v-dependent series for β u , β v and λ i prevents their use in solving the differential equations where δu = u -u * I and the coefficients a ij and b ij , which are given in Table The operation Rsm denotes resummation of the expansions at = 1 (and n = 3) of the derivatives, using the procedure described in Appendix A. Specifically, λ I u ≡ λ u = a 10 and λ I v ≡ λ v = b 01 are the stability exponents of the isotropic FP, known accurately from resummations of the 6 series To solve the recursion relations ( Here and below we keep only quadratic terms in δu and v, since the recursion relations used that approximation. Using the coefficients this scaling field obeys the linear equation with the solution Since λ u = a 10 = -0.7967 The explicit solution of the differential equations is presented in Appendix B. We first express δu( ) in terms of g u ( ) and v( ), from Eq. ( This line is universal, since its coefficients are fully determined by the isotropic fixed point. Keeping terms up to quadratic order in g u ( ) and v( ) yields a single differential equation, with the solution where A = b 11 g u (0)/λ u , B = -(b 11 /a+b 02 /2) and Γ[s, z] is the incomplete gamma function. Figure As explained in Appendix B, the flow at large can be described by Since λ v is very small, the variation of the second term in the denominator with is slow, explaining the second part above.. Since B = 0.3706 > 0, this implies a slow variation in v for positive v, approaching the cubic fixed point v * C = λ v /B. However, for v(0) < 0 v( ) becomes more negative. At first it decreases slowly, but when e λ v becomes of order unity this decrease becomes faster (the points at integer become less dense), and v( ) diverges at = 2 , when ]. This value is larger for smaller |v( 1 )| [and therefore also for smaller |v(0)|]. Within our quadratic approximation, we are not allowed to follow this solution beyond some finite value, say v < -.2. However, it is reasonable that a full solution will also continue downwards, on the asymptotic trajectory, and reach the first order transition at v( ) = -u( ). The effective critical exponents β and γ are given by with the coefficients listed in Table In the tetragonal case, v(0) < 0, the beginning of the trajectories is similar to that described above, depending only on the sign of the initial g u (0), which is not universal. Once the asymptotic line is reached, the initially slow growth of |v|, causes the effective exponents to approach slowly (mostly below) the isotropic asymptotic values, but then they turn downwards, diverging at a value = 2 that depends on the value of v( 1 ). Since the decrease in the exponents in part 3 of the flow is fully determined by the flow on the universal asymptotic line, and depends only on v( 1 ), one can collapse the two full curves in Fig. Based on the mean-field region of the experiments, Müller et al. On the other hand, LaAlO 3 (L in Fig. To the best of our knowledge, there are no experiments showing first-order transitions into the trigonal phase To test our predictions in detail, we propose a repeated analysis of existing experiments, and new dedicated experiments, in which the critical exponents will be measured over several separate ranges of t, to check how they vary with t (which is equivalent to their dependence on the number of iterations ). As mentioned in Sec. I, polishing the surfaces of the crystals SrTiO 3 and LaAlO 3 caused a crossover from the n = 3 critical behavior to that of the Ising (n = 1) critical behavior. This crossover is due to an axially anisotropic Hamiltonian, , where g rep-resents the uniaxial stress. Such uniaxial stress has also been applied directly, yielding information on the corresponding exponent λ g . Existing experiments gave a range of values for λ g . A detailed application of our theory to these exponents will be presented separately. One way to vary v experimentally is to use mixed crystals, e.g. Sr 1-x Ca x TiO 3 Three-component order-parameter vectors Q with cubic symmetry are abundant. Examples include ferroelectric transitions from cubic to tetragonal or trigonal, ferromagnets and antiferromagnets with the magnetization ordering along an axis or a diagonal. Close to their transitions, these cubic crystals may be described by Eq. ( In conclusion, we have shown that for systems having cubic symmetry, universality is not determined merely by the symmetry above the transition. Rather, the critical behavior of such systems depends on their symmetry below the transition. Cubic systems split into two groups -those that become trigonal, which belong to the cubic FP universality class, and those that become tetragonal, which undergo a fluctuation driven first-order transition. In both cases, there is a wide temperature range in which slow-varying effective exponents, which exhibit universal features, are expected. For systems like SrTiO 3 , the cubic to tetragonal transition exhibits effective exponents close to those of the isotropic FP, but then cross over to a fluctuation-driven first-order transition. This crossover is accompanied by large changes in the effective exponents, which await experimental detection. These results resolve a long standing confusion about the universality of the displacive phase transitions in the perovskites, and leaves its complete confirmation to future dedicated experiments, concentrating on the t-dependence of the effective exponents.