Epitaxial superconductor/semiconductor heterostructures combine superconductivity with strong spin-orbit interaction resulting in synthetic Rashba superconductors. The theoretical description of such superconductors involves Lifshitz invariants that are predicted to feature numerous exotic effects with so far sparse experimental evidence. Using a new observable -vortex inductance-we investigate the pinning properties of epitaxial Al/InAs-based heterostructures. We find a pronounced decrease of the vortex inductance with increasing inplane field which corresponds to a counterintuitive increase of the pinning force. When rotating the in-plane component of the field with respect to the current direction, the pinning interaction turns out to be highly anisotropic. We analytically demonstrate that both the pinning enhancement and its anisotropy are consequences of the presence of Lifshitz invariant terms in the Ginzburg-Landau free energy. Hence, our experiment provides access to a fundamental property of Rashba superconductors and offers an entirely new approach to vortex manipulation. Breaking the inversion symmetry in superconductors has numerous important consequences One possibility to engineer synthetic 2D Rashba superconductors consists in proximitizing a 2D electron gas (2DEG) with large Rashba SOI by a standard s-wave superconductor. This can be realized, e.g., by epitaxially growing an Al film on a shallow InAs quantum well Besides the microscopic description in terms of the Bogoliubov-de Gennes or Gor'kov equations, the effects of SOI and magnetic field on the superconducting condensate can be accounted for phenomenologically by adding new terms into the underlying Ginzburg-Landau free energy. Such terms-called Lifshitz invariants Vortices can be used to probe the structure of the order parameter Ψ(x, y), because |Ψ(x, y)| 2 near the vortex core is proportional to the potential U(r) that confines a vortex near a point-like pinning site, with r = (x, y) being the vortex displacement from the pinning center at (x 0 , y 0 ), see Fig. where B z is the out-of-plane magnetic field, Φ 0 = h/(2e) the superconducting flux quantum and N = l/w being the ratio of length l and width w of the film In this work, we demonstrate an unusual, anisotropic decrease of the vortex inductance when varying the magnitude and spatial orientation of the in-plane magnetic field. We interpret this observation as an experimental signature for the so far elusive Lifshitz invariant terms in the Ginzburg-Landau equations for Ψ(x, y). In presence of an in-plane field, an enhancement of the pinning force is observed that reflects an elliptic contraction of the order parameter profile. Such pinning enhancement is hard to explain by other known mecha-nisms, and offers a direct insight into the unusual structure of the order parameter near the vortex cores of Rashba superconductors. Figure Our synthetic Rashba-superconductor is fabricated starting from a InAs/InGaAs quantum well capped by an epitaxial Al film of nominal thickness d = 7 nm The sample holder is mounted on a piezo rotator, whose rotation axis is parallel to the ẑ axis, i.e., perpendicular to the film. A superconducting coil provides an in-plane magnetic field parallel to the ŷ axis, while an orthogonal pair of coils provides a small out-of-plane field in the ẑ direction. The device under study is embedded in a RLC resonant circuit located on the sample holder, see Fig. Figure More generally, any pair-breaking mechanism tends to reduce the curvature k. As another example, Fig. Having established the vortex inductance as a sensitive probe of the pinning strength k, we now come to our main observation, namely, an entirely unexpected increase of the pinning strength controlled by the in-plane magnetic field. Figure Panels c-f of Fig. x U(x, y). Thus, for B ip > 0 the contour lines of constant |Ψ(x, y)| 2 become ellipses with minor axis directed along B ip . By rotating B ip , the elliptic core will rotate accordingly. Such anisotropic vortex squeezing is the main result of our work. It is important to stress that it is the in-plane field B ip that breaks the rotational symmetry. On the other hand, to detect such anisotropy in the experiment, we use the supercurrent direction (x I) as a reference. Since in our device vortices oscillate along the ŷ ⊥ I direction, the largest curvature k ⊥ (i.e., the smallest inductance) is probed for B ip ⊥ I (θ = 90 • , Fig. anomalously decreases with the applied in-plane field; (ii) the decrease is anisotropic, with a two-fold symmetry, (iii) it is maximal (minimal) when the field is perpendicular (parallel) to the current density; (iv) the effect is visible only in epitaxial Al/InAs 2DEG devices, while it is absent in the control Al/GaAs samples without 2DEG and with largely reduced SOI. where the unit vector n (along the polar axis) is normal to the plane of the superconducting film. We estimate the Rashba coupling α R and the g-factor in the Zeeman Hamiltonian H Z = gμ B B • σ to be of the order of α R = 15 meV•nm and g = -10, respectively. On the other hand, as shown by Edelstein (2) where the last two terms correspond to the magnetic energy density and to the (isotropic) Lifshitz invariant The Lifshitz invariant is the direct manifestation of Rashba SOI at the Ginzburg-Landau level. In the above expressions Ψ stands for the condensate wave function, A for the vector potential, B = rot A for the corresponding (in-plane + outof-plane) magnetic field, and D = h i ∇ -2eA for the covariant momentum operator (|e| is the elementary charge). Here and below we assume Rashba SOI with (at least) C 4v pointgroup symmetry in the sample plane. The whole symmetry of F[Ψ, A] is, however, lowered to C 2v when the in-plane magnetic field and current drive are present. On the phenomenological level, a figure of merit quantifying the impact of the non-centrosymmetry is given by the parameter κ or the Lifshitz-Edelstein length κ : where μ B is the Bohr magneton, and p F and v F stand for the Fermi momentum and velocity (for a complete derivation, including the numerical prefactor, see Ref. The goal of our analytical calculation is to describe the wave function of the vortex order parameter, Ψ v (x, y), in the vicinity of the vortex core at (x 0 = 0, y 0 = 0), therefore we assume the following asymptotic form where the real parameters K, δ , p, q and r can be determined [65] from the Ginzburg-Landau equations including the Lifshitz term In the limit of a point-like pinning defect, the effective vortex potential U(x, y) mirrors The theoretical values of the curvatures k x = ∂ 2 x U(0, 0) 2K 2 and k y = ∂ 2 y U(0, 0) 2K 2 δ 2 of U(x, y) can be directly linked to the experimentally determined curvatures (inductances) k (L v, ) and k ⊥ (L v,⊥ ), where the subscripts and ⊥ discriminate correspondingly between the mutual orientations of B ip and I in the experiment, particularly, k = k x and k ⊥ = k y . The independently measured input parameters for our model are ξ = 73 nm, λ = 227 nm and B z = 10 mT. Theory provides a set of algebraic equations for k x and k y as functions of B ip . The equations contain the Lifshitz-Edelstein length κ and the effective thermodynamic critical field B * c as parameters that can be determined by fitting data in Fig. In order to further substantiate our interpretation of the reduced vortex inductance as an enhanced pinning strength, we investigate an entirely different signature of pinning, i.e., the depinning critical current. If the local minima of U(r) become sharper in in-plane field, then one would expect that not only its bottom curvature will increase, but also its maximal slope, i.e. max[|∂ r U(r)|]. This corresponds to the maximal restoring force that pinning centers can exert before the depinning point. On the basis of the vortex inductance measurements just discussed, the depinning current is expected to display a similar peculiar increase with the in-plane field. We performed such measurements on a separate sample from the same wafer that was designed in a standard Hall bar geometry. The width was reduced to 2.3 μm, leading to a smaller critical current and thus less Joule heating. Owing to the large contact resistance of this particular sample, a large heat is generated at the bonding pads of the device which reaches the device through the substrate in a fraction of a second. Therefore, the IV traces were acquired in 9 ms, with 30 s waiting time needed to cool the system back to the base temperature T = 0.1 K. The sweep time was chosen in such a way that a further reduction of the sweep time did not affect the depinning current anymore. Each measurement point corresponds to the average of the depinning currents resulting from 45 repetitions of the IVs. The results of these depinning current measurements for B z = 5 mT are shown in Fig. Before concluding, we want to briefly discuss alternative (or additional) mechanisms that might be responsible for the anisotropic vortex inductance in 2D Rashba-superconductors. The simplest possible origin of anisotropy in U(r) is through a magnetic field-induced anisotropy in the coherence length ξ , e.g., by an anisotropic Fermi velocity. The Rashba SOI spin-splits the Fermi surface while preserving its circular symmetry. An applied in-plane magnetic field shifts and distorts the two circular Fermi surfaces. However, for a realistic Rashba coefficient α R = 15 meV•nm Another interesting possibility is that in an InAs 2DEG proximitized by an epitaxial Al layer the pairing function is not purely of s-wave type, but rather admixed of p x + ip y -wave. Without an in-plane field, the modulus of the pairing function is still isotropic both in the reciprocal and in the real space. The application of an in-plane field gradually projects the p x + ip y -wave pairing into its p y -wave component. The anisotropic ∆(k) produces, upon Fourier transform, an anisotropic coherence length ξ . This argument does not explain, per se, the increase in the pinning force with the magnetic field. However, Hayashi and Kato In conclusion, we have demonstrated experimentally that in 2D Rashba-superconductors the application of an in-plane field squeezes the vortex cores, leading to an enhanced pinning. The vortex squeezing is anisotropic-vortex cores are more compressed if the in-plane magnetic field is orientated perpendicular to the supercurrent. By rotating the in-plane field, the inductance measurements provide a tomography of order parameter profile near the vortex core. These results constitute a clear manifestation of Lifshitz invariants in a macroscopic observable of a synthetic Rashba superconductor. Similar to Skyrmions and chiral solitons (an insulator or normal metal): 1st GL-Eq: 0 where νout (in general not necessarily related with n) is the outer normal vector pointing from the superconductor to the vacuum (an insulator or normal metal). For a completeness, the 2nd GL equation can be written in the form of a Maxwell equationnamely the Ampere law: rot H = j s , where magnetic field intensity: (S.15) In what follows we assume that: • the superconducting film is quasi-2D, lies in xy-plane, and is terminated on both sides by a vacuum i.e. ±ν out n = ẑ = (0, 0, 1), • the film has an extrapolation length d and extends in the transverse direction within the interval z ∈ [-d 2 , + d 2 ]; the extrapolation length d = d geo + O(1)ξ , where d geo is the true geometrical (i.e., physical) thickness of the Al film and ξ is the GL coherence length, • the film is without pronounced in-plane crystallographic anisotropies, i.e., we assume in-plane C 4v (or higher C) symmetry-this is imprinted in the form of H R , • the vortex-generating (out-of-plane) component of magnetic field, B z = B z ẑ = (0, 0, B z ), is perpendicular to the film, • the in-plane component of magnetic field B ip is pointing along the y-axis, i.e. B ip = B y ŷ = (0, B y , 0), then • then the total magnetic field vector B = B z + B ip = (0, B y , B z ), and the corresponding vector potential in the Coulomb gauge As a comment, B z and B y are local magnetic fields near the vortex core and in principle they differ from the corresponding laboratory values. However, we expect the difference to be small owing to the fact that the film thickness is much smaller than both ξ and λ . Thus, the in-plane field is not expected to be significantly affected by the negligible in-plane screening currents. However, in this respect, it is difficult to model the role of the 2DEG, which is relatively thicker compared to the Al film. Also the out-of-plane component is expected to be similar to the applied B z field, since the Pearl length 2λ 2 /d is of the order of many micrometers. We will solve the 1st GL equation near the vortex core region, for which we assume that B y and B z are not varying in space on the length scale of the coherence length ξ , and therefore we treat them as constants. Let us elaborate in detail on the 1st GL equation, Eq. (S.10): We consider each term individually. • • shifting the y-coordinate y = y new -2κmB y /(eB z ) ⇒ The shift of the y coordinate is mathematically immaterial, since it can be absorbed into a change of the origin of y-axis and in a redefinition of the order parameter wave function: For simplicity of notation and minimal proliferation of symbols, we denote y new by y and ψ(x, y, z) by ψ(x, y, z). On the physical ground ∆y = 2κmB y eB z gives a displacement of the vortex core centre-defined as a minimum of |ψ|-from the position of a maximum of the out-of-plane magnetic field penetrating the vortex. After shifting and renaming the equation (S.16) reads: We look for a solution ψ that separates the in-plane dependence from the transverse one: where Ψ(x, y) accounts for the in-plane and Φ(z) for the out-of-plane order parameter wave function, respectively. Assuming Φ(z) is a real-valued function (transverse domain is simply connected), then Now, we average the last equation along the transverse direction within the extrapolation length d = d geo + O(1)ξ : where the meaning of the angular brackets (transverse averaging) is as follows: Doing so, we obtain: = 0, (S.27) In the equations above, we set to zero ∂ zz Φ and ∂ z Φ . This is due to the boundary conditions, Eq. (S.12), that should be satisfied at two interfaces located at z = ± d 2 (ν out = ±ẑ), we treat both in conjunction: The above two equations should be satisfied, correspondingly, for any point with z = ± d 2 and arbitrary x and y, therefore, in the case when B y = 0, the easiest way is to require that the function Φ(z) has the following properties: We point out that, in principle, B z and B y alone are sufficient to introduce a certain vortex anisotropy even for κ = 0, as it can be deduced from Eq. S.34. This corresponds to the known effect of vortex axis tilt for superconductors of finite thickness in the presence of Meissner currents, here introduced by the field B y . The shear force exerted by the Meissner currents makes the vortex axis leaning towards the x-direction, instead of being parallel to the z-axis as in the B y = 0 case. The intersection of a tilted cylinder with the xy-plane is an ellipse, which is a way to interpret the anisotropy in Eq. S.34. Such trivial anisotropy is not relevant for our situation since (i) the thickness in our case is so small (7 nm of Al minus 2 nm of typical oxide) compared to ξ = 73 nm, that the resulting weak screening currents can only produce a very minor tilt; (ii) even a major tilt could not explain the large squeeze along both axes, which is the main results of our work. As explained below, the observed effect requires a finite Lifshitz invariant, namely, a finite B y and a finite κ. Experimentally, the necessity of the spin-orbit (i.e. of the Lifshitz invariant) for the observation of the effect is confirmed by our control measurements on the Al/GaAs heterostructure, cf. gray symbols in Fig. In the ensuing we solve approximately for the vortex the following generic equation of the Gross-Pitaevskii type: where the following coefficients link Eq. (S.34) with Eq. (S.35): Because of a certain similarity of Eq. (S.35) with the harmonic oscillator problem (apart from the β term) we are interested in a vortex solution in the form: where the approximation on the right side is valid only close to the center of the vortex core. The term (x + i δ y) defines a vorticity of the solution Ψ; for δ > 0 (< 0) it wraps counter-clock-wise (clock-wise). Moreover, the asymptotic form of our ansatz for Ψ has in the vortex core region the same functional dependence on x and y (including the third powers) as the original Abrikosov solution, see e.g. Tinkham To obtain an analytical expression for the vortex curvatures, we shall need some further approximations. Approximation 1: We linearize in (S.35) the non-linear term proportional to β: where k x ∝ K 2 and k y ∝ δ 2 K 2 are the vortex curvatures along x and ŷ, respectively. Since we are interested in the vortex core region x 2 + y 2 < ξ λ , we consider only the lowest order terms in |Ψ| 2 in Eq. (S.35). Doing so we get linear partial differential equations with the modified quadratic-potential terms: Plugging the ansatz, Eq. (S.38), into the above equation, we get a system of non-linear algebraic equations for the unknown parameters K, δ , p, q, r (the first two, K and δ , enter also C 1 and C 2 ): For convenience of analytical calculation, we change the roles of δ and K with C 1 and C 2 , i.e., we are assuming as unknowns: p, q, r, C 1 , C 2 , and as parameters: A, B, α, δ . For a given sign of B, we have the freedom to choose the sign of δ -both enter as parameters in the above equations. However, the basic physics of the superconducting vortices tells us that for B z > 0 (implying also B > 0) the vortex should wrap counterclock-wise. This means that in our ansatz, Eq. (S.38), we should have for a positive (negative) B z also positive (negative) δ -this physical requirement implies that combinations like Bδ or B/δ are always positive quantities. Solving Eqs. (S.41)-(S.45), we obtain two sets of solutions-C + 1 and C + 2 -and-C - 1 and C - 2 -both can be compactly written as follows: the formulas for p, q, r are not given since we do not need them explicitly-we are looking just for the functional form of Ψ in the first order in x and y. We now need to solve Eqs. (S.46) and (S.47) for K and δ , which is pretty difficult owing We also use the derived quantities: We now define a dimensionless Cooper pair wave function: We have now all the ingredients to compute the curvatures of |ψ| 2 near the vortex core. Equation (S.64) links k x and k y with K and δ , which in turns are the solutions of the algebraic equations (S.51) and (S.52). The result below is made explicit for the "+" case: since this set of equations turns out to provide a reasonable fit of the experimental data for small in-plane magnetic fields. Due to the significant non-linearity of the problem, it is not, however, excluded that at a certain elevated value of the in-plane field the system can come into a transition point, from which the "-" case solutions would start to be realized by nature. Impact of the crystal structure symmetry. It is important to stress that the above derivation assumes C 4v crystallographic symmetry, which is higher than the actual symmetry of InAs-based 2DEG that is possessing the crystal symmetry C 2v . In principle, for a C 2v -symmetric crystal one might introduce two different Lifshitz lengths κ1 and κ2 for two different main crystallographic axes-or the so called anisotropic Lifshitz invariant: ). It turns out, however, that the best fit of our data does not require anisotropic Lifshitz invariant in order to produce the striking curvature enhancement as observed in the experiment. In other words, an isotropic spin-orbit interaction stemming from an isotropic Fermi surface is sufficient to produce an anisotropic vortex squeezing. The vortex anisotropy is exclusively due to the interplay of spin-orbit-coupling with the in-plane magnetic field. Equations (S.65) and (S.66) are the final output of our model: they implicitly link the curvature along the x and y-axis (k x and k y , respectively) to the Lifshitz length κ and to the effective thermodynamic critical field B * c . We have experimentally determined the following constants: In particular, B c2 is determined as the B z value (at base temperature and zero bias) for which a resistance emerges such that the RLC circuit resonance is damped. This resistance is, for the present experimental conditions, of the order of 65 which is much less that of half the normal resistance 0.5R n = 0.5 • 3074R n, = 14.17 kΩ, where R n, = R n /3074 = 9.22 Ω is the normal sheet resistance. Therefore the B c2 value above is slightly less than the conventional value, which is such that R(B z = B c2 ) = 0.5R n . The value of ξ immediately follows from that of B c2 since B c2 = Φ 0 /(2πξ 2 ). The value of λ is determined from the sheet kinetic inductance (L s /N ) at zero field and base temperature, which equals 13 pH. The sheet kinetic inductance provides directly λ via L s, = μ 0 λ 2 /d. We can numerically solve Eqs. (S.65) and (S.66) for k x and k y as functions of the in-plane field B y , using the experimentally given values of ξ , λ , and B z , see Eq. (S.67), as fixed parameters. The Lifshitz length κ and the effective condensation energy e * c -or equivalently B * c , since e * c = (B * c ) 2 /(2μ 0 )-are taken as the fitting parameters. In order to fit the experimental data displayed in Fig. where L v,⊥ (L v, ) is the vortex inductance measured for B ip ⊥ I (B ip I). Apart of κ and B * c we also fit the conversion parameter L 0 that serves as a global scaling factor, its theoretical value depends on the microscopic details of the pinning strength. If we restrict the fitting range of the in-plane field to [-0.1 T, 0.1 T] we obtain the solid line curves in Fig. We notice that the model nicely captures the prompt decrease of the vortex inductance with the in-plane magnetic field, and the magnitude of the vortex inductance anisotropy. The fit quantitatively reproduces the data up to fields of the order of 100 mT. Above that field range, it systematically overestimates the vortex squeezing effects. A possible explanation for this overestimate is the suppression of the order parameter in the proximitized 2DEG, which recent experiments showed to take place precisely in this magnetic field range Figure It is interesting to verify whether the measured slope L v /B z = 118 nH/mT is compatible with Eq. 1 of the main text, with a reasonable assumption for k. From the theory we know that k ≈ 0.25dB 2 c /μ 0 Figure Panel c shows a magnified view of the inductance curve for the B z = 0 case in Fig. From Fig. Figure The graph in Fig. Figure We notice a small anisotropy (of the order of 8%) in B c,ip , which implies the same anisotropy for ξ ∝ B c,ip . Since the width and thus the curvature of the potential U(r) scale as ξ , in principle the anisotropy in ξ should determine an anisotropy in the measured vortex inductance. From a quantitative point of view, however, the observed ξ anisotropy is too small to justify a large difference between L v (θ = 0 • ) and L v (θ = 90 • ). In fact, the ratio L v (θ = 0 • )/L v (θ = 90 • ) (i.e. the ratio k ⊥ /k ) is about 4.7 at B ip = 1 T, see Fig. What we learn from the small anisotropy in the in-plane critical field B c,ip (Fig. The study of these peaks is beyond the scope of this article. Investigation on these peaks is ongoing, and it will be discussed elsewhere. -0.15 -0.10 -0.05 0.00 0.05 0.10 0.15 0.9 In this section we shall discuss further measurements of the in-plane field dependence of the depinning current. These measurements were performed with different orientations of the in-plane magnetic field with respect to the current (θ = 0 θ = 90 • ). At the end of the section, we also present measurements on a different device. Figure We stress that the depinning current measurements here shown were much more difficult compared to inductance measurements, owing to the fact that the devices we used had a very large contact resistance. These required the use of very fast (9 ms) IV sweeps, followed by long cooling times (30 s). More importantly, the large resistance made it impossible to make use of the compensation field routine described in the next section, which we followed for the inductance measurements. In this case we followed a different routine, described in the following: 1. The desired in-plane field B ip is set. 2. The B z field component is set to the expected zero value. 3. The sample is heated above T c , then a waiting time of 15 minutes allows the sample to cool down to base temperature. After B comp (B ip ) is determined, we start the final measurement of the depinning current versus B ip , by applying for each B ip the corresponding compensation field plus 5 mT, i.e., B comp z (B ip ) + 5 mT. Then, the sample is heated above T c , cooled down back to base temperature, then finally 45 IVs are measured as discussed in the main text. As an alternative, we applied the compensation routine at each B ip point. This is the case of the θ = 0 • points (blue symbols) in Fig. In Fig. Owing to misalignment of the different parts of the cryostat, the sample surface will hardly be perfectly parallel to the axis of the main superconducting coil, which we use to apply the in-plane field B ip . Owing to the large inductive contribution of vortices, the undesired out-of-plane component of B ip will have a significant impact on the inductance measurements. In particular, it will mask the measurement of the kinetic inductance of the condensate. For measurements that demand zero out-of-plane magnetic field, residual out-of-plane field components must be manually compensated using additional orthogonal coils. In this section we outline the procedure we used to zero the out-of-plane field in inductance measurements. The ideas is to identify a physical quantity which is very sensitive to the absolute perpendicular fields, as e.g. the resistance near the superconducting transition near the critical temperature. In Fig. The perpendicular field B comp needed to compensate for the sample misalignment is therefore B comp (B ip ) = B ip sin(α), (S. 