We studied a qubit based on flux-pinning effects in ∆H=∆B region of a superconductor. When volume defects are many enough in a superconductor, ∆H=∆B region on M-H curve is formed, which is the region that increased applied magnetic field (∆H) is the same as increasing magnetic induction (∆B). Magnetization (M) is constant in the region by 4πM = B -H. Here we show that the behavior of fluxes in ∆H=∆B region can be a candidate of qubit. Pinned fluxes on volume defects would move as a bundle in the region by repeating flux-pinning and pick-out depinning process from the surface to the center of the superconductor. During the process, magnetic fluxes would exist as one of states that are flux-pinning state at volume defects and pick-out depinning state in which fluxes are moving in the superconductor. A difference of diamagnetic property occurs between pinning state at volume defects and depinning state from the volume defects. Thus, diamagnetic properties of the superconductor would oscillate in ∆H=∆B region and the behavior would be observed in M-H curve. The oscillation can be used for qubit by setting the pinning state at volume defects as |1 and the depinned state as |0 . This method can operate at higher temperatures than that of using Josephson Junctions. In addition, it is expected that the device is quite simple and decoherences can be almost negligible. Quantum computers can display an outstanding performance than conventional computers for special works such as code decryption and artificial intelligence. Their displaying speeds were expected to be rise exponentially with the number of quantum bits There are several methods to create quantum bits such as photon We have challenged to find a new qubit. Recently, an oscillation behavior was found in M-H curve (magnetic field dependence of magnetization curve) of home-made superconductor. Here we introduce a new platform for creating qubit, which is based on manipulating fluxpinning effects of a superconductor. Noting things are that oscillating energy of the behavior is high enough to be detected by current SQUID (Superconducting Quantum Interference Device) system, thus there is almost no decoherency by environment owing to its high energy. In addition, the qubit behavior is possible even 25 K when MgB 2 superconductor are used as a base material because MgB 2 showed flux-pinning effects of volume defects at 25 K If a magnetic field is applied to a superconductor containing defects, free energy density of the superconductor increases by H 2 /8π before fluxes penetrate into the superconductor by Meissner effect, where H is applied magnetic field before H c1 . However, the free energy density of defects would remain as they were because the defects are not a superconductor. Therefore, the defects which are in relatively lower free energy state than that of the superconductor would pin quantum fluxes that are penetrated into the superconductor over H c1 , which are called flux-pinning effects of superconductor. If the defects in the superconductor existed in a kind of volume defects, flux-pinning effects are more strong because of relatively larger volume comparing with planar and line defects (∆G def ect = -(H-B) 2 8π × 4π 3 r 3 , where H, B, and r are applied magnetic field, magnetic induction, and radius of a volume defect, respectively). The pinned fluxes at volume defects would increase the max-diamagnetic property and form ∆H=∆B region on M-H curve if the number of volume defects is many, which is the region that increased applied magnetic field (∆H) is the same as the increasing magnetic induction (∆B) The difference of diamagnetic property oscillates whenever fluxes would move from a volume defect to another. Therefore, a qubit can be made as a two-level system which is prepared in arbitrary superpositions of its two eigenstates, usually denoted as |1 and |0 . In this paper, we would represent the mechanism, dynamics and experimental results for the behaviors. The number of quantum fluxes (n 2 ) pinned at a volume defect at a magnetic field (H) after H c1 in a static state is where α is aL H c2 Φo √ P c , n 2 is the number of quantum fluxes pinned at a spherical volume defect of radius r, H c2 is upper critical field of the superconductor, Φ o is flux quantum which is 2.07×10 -7 G•cm 2 , c is the velocity of light, aL is average length of quantum fluxes which are pinned and bent between volume defects (a is an average bent constant which is 1 < a < 1.2 and L is the distance between volume defects in vertically packed state as shown in Fig. By repeating flux-pinning and pick-out depinning process, diamagnetic property continues to increase, and at last the superconductor reaches its maximum diamagnetic property. The reason that a superconductor reaches its maximum diamagnetic property is because a volume defect has its flux-pinning limit. The flux-pinning limit of a volume defect is related to upper critical field (H c2 ) of the superconductor. When the shortest distance between pinned fluxes at a volume defect is the same as the distance between the fluxes at H c2 , the pinned fluxes are pick-out depinned from the volume defect and move into an inside of the superconductor. Flux-pinning effects of a superconductor could not establish if the neighborhoods of volume defect begin to be non-superconducting state. The pick-out depinning was named because the fluxes are depinned from the volume defect all at once. When a volume defect reaches its flux-pinning limit, the diamagnetic property of the superconductor does not increase any more Flux-pinning limit of a volume defect is the maximum number of pinned fluxes at a volume defect. And the flux-pinning limit of a volume defect of radius r is where r, d, and ξ are a radius of a volume defect, the shortest distance between quantum fluxes pinned at a volume defect when they have square structure, and coherence length of a superconductor, respectively When there are many volume defects in a superconductor, the superconductor forms ∆H=∆B region after reaching the maximum diamagnetic property in the M-H curve. The region is formed because volume defects have pinned fluxes its flux-pinning limit The pinned fluxes on volume defects would move as a bundle due to the tension of them when they are depinned where n 2 , m cps , and Φ 0 are the number of quantum fluxes pinned at a volume defect, the number of volume defects which are vertically closed packed state, and flux quantum, respectively Resonated moving fluxes in ∆H=∆B region according to a radius of volume defects is where m cps × 2r is unit (cm) and H c2 is Φ 0 2πξ 2 . Eq. ( In addition, diamagnetic difference (∆M) of the oscillating behavior is as follows. When H is infinitesimally increased, the pinned fluxes are pick-out depinned from the volume defect in the state that a volume defect have pinned fluxes to its flux-pinning limit. If H is set as 0, the amplitude of the oscillation would be ∆M=B bundle /4π by B -H = 4πM. Therefore, amplitudes of the oscillations are dependent on radius of volume defects and upper critical field of the superconductor. Furthermore, the energy difference in an oscillation is It is natural that ∆G osc increase if B bundle increases by Eq. ( Figure Eq. ( The oscillation behavior does not happen when radius of volume defects is too large. An increase of radius of a volume defect means that the amount of fluxes that are moving at the same time increases when they are pick-out depinned, and the moving distance of the fluxes become longer before they are pinned again at other volume defect. If many fluxes are pick-out depinned at the same time and the moving distance became longer, those behavior would generate a lot of heat Considering a state that radii of volume defects are the same and distribution of them are irregular, the amplitude of oscillation (∆M) will be very small because flux-pinning and pick-out depinning processes of volume defects are continuous from a volume defect to another (B bundle =n 2 Φ o ). Therefore, it is difficult to observe an oscillation behavior in M-H curve although ∆H=∆B region is formed. Another state would be considered, which is the state that various radii of volume defects are present in a superconductor and the distribution of them is irregular. As shown in Fig. Main concerns are that oscillation behaviors occur in non-uniform and irregular state of volume defects, and whether the behavior can be detected or not. If a magnetic field is applied to the superconductor which contains volume defects in the state, penetrated flux quanta will show flux-pinning and pick-out depinning processes by each volume defect. Therefore, a difference of magnetization by an applied magnetic field is where ∆M iii , m, and m are a difference of magnetization by a volume defect, the number of volume defects along an axis (x, y), and the number of volume defects having pinned fluxes along an axis (z), respectively. Therefore, a difference of magnetization has to appear in ∆H=∆B region of the superconductor by a segregation of volume defects if they are in non-uniform and irregular state. On the other hand, considering a situation that different sweeping rates are applied, it is predicted that a frequency of the oscillation will be changed because the number of volume defects (m 2 m ) affected by an applied field are changed. Figure T. Figure And volume defects corresponding to 4.4 planes performed the process when magnetic field are applied by 30 Oe, average amplitudes of oscillations (∆M) are pointed as shown in Fig. We studied a qubit based on flux-pinning effects of a superconductor. When a superconductor contains volume defects many enough, magnetization (M) of the superconductor oscillates in ∆H=∆B region, which provides a basis for creating quantum bit evolution. The fluxes pinned on volume defects in a superconductor always move as a bundle, qubit behavior came from the fact that diamagnetic property increases when the fluxes are pinned at a volume defect and diamagnetic property decreases when they are pick-out depinned from the volume defect. V. METHOD 5 wt.% (Fe, Ti) particle-doped MgB 2 specimens were synthesized using the nonspecial atmosphere synthesis (NAS) method 