Most transition-metal trihalides are dimorphic. The representative chromium-based triad, CrCl3, CrBr3, CrI3, is characterized by the low-temperature phase adopting the trigonal BiI3-type while the structure of the high-temperature phase is monoclinic of AlCl3 type (C2/m). The structural transition between the two crystallographic phases is of the first-order type with large thermal hysteresis in CrCl3 and CrI3. We studied crystal structures and structural phase transitions of vanadium-based counterparts VCl3, VBr3, and VI3 by measuring specific heat, magnetization, and X-ray diffraction as functions of temperature and observed an inverse situation. In these cases, the high-temperature phase has a higher symmetry while the lowtemperature structure reveals a lower symmetry. The structural phase transition between them shows no measurable hysteresis in contrast to CrX3. Possible relations of the evolution of the ratio c/a of the unit cell parameters, types of crystal structures, and nature of the structural transitions in V and Cr trihalides are discussed. Van der Waals (vdW) magnetic materials, including the transition-metal (TM) trihalides TMX3 (X = Cl, Br, I), have gained immense popularity in recent years after being studied for decades primarily as magnetic model structures in layered compounds. The crystal structure of TM trihalides given by a graphene-like honeycomb network of TM ions and their magnetic ordering at finite temperatures provide promising opportunities for spintronic device applications CrI3 has been the most extensively studied due to its ferromagnetism Recent research activities were successful in exploring one more TMX3 ferromagnet, namely VI3 The CrX3 compounds and probably most of the other TM trihalides are dimorphic Contrary to this behavior the high-temperature phase of VI3 adopts the BiI3-type trigonal structure Similarly, the room-temperature BiI3-type trigonal structure is reported for VBr3 and VCl3 The apparent controversy between the structural evolution in CrX3 and VX3 motivated us to extend our X-ray diffraction, specific-heat, and magnetization investigation on VBr3 and VCl3 to investigate the high-temperature (HT) and low-temperature (LT) crystal structures and the character of structural phase transition between them. After these experiments, we can confirm that the HT crystal symmetry of VCl3, VBr3, and VI3 is reduced below certain own characteristic temperature Ts. The phase transition between the two structure phases is most probably of the first-order type. Contrary to ferromagnetism in VI3, VCl3 and VBr3 order AFM as demonstrated by specific heat in magnetic fields. No symmetry lowering is observed in VBr3 in connection with the transition to the AFM state. The change in the thermal evolution of the crystal symmetry of the crystal structure in the TMX3 halides between the V and Cr-based compounds will be discussed concerning the variations of structure parameters c, a, and the c/a ratio. Single crystals of VBr3 were synthesized by chemical vapor transport technique by recrystallization of the powder precursor VBr3 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) sealed in a silica tube under vacuum. The tube was placed in a gradient horizontal tube furnace with the hot end at 480 °C and the cold end at 350 °C for approximately two weeks. We obtained shiny plate-like single crystals with dimensions of several square millimeters fast degrading in air similarly to VI3 The VCl3 powder (97% purity) was obtained commercially from Sigma-Aldrich. The powder was pressed into pellets for specific heat and magnetization measurements. For the lowtemperature X-ray powder diffraction, we attached the powder to the sample holder with a thin layer of Apiezon grease and aligned the flat surface of the sample without pressing it. Initial attempts to grow single crystals of VCl3 chemical vapor transport were not successful so far, showing that their preparation might be not that straightforward compared to the other VX3 compounds. Concerning the moisture sensibility, we minimized the sample's exposure to the necessary mounting time only in the case of all performed experiments. The specific heat and magnetization were measured using a Quantum Design physical property measurement system at temperatures down to 2 K. The X-ray diffraction measurement from 300 K down to 5 K was performed using the diffractometer D500-HR-4K equipped with the closed cycle He cryostat (101J Cryocooler from ColdEdge), helium chamber, and the Attocube ANR 31 sample holder. Figure Figure Due to the scattered polycrystalline VCl3 data, no peak or bump revealing the structural transition was observed, unlike the Néel transition, as shown in Figure The hexagonal unit cell for the trigonal crystal system and the corresponding H K L indices were considered according to previous studies . The temperature dependence of the specific heat of the VX3 (X = Cl, Br, I) compounds in zero magnetic field showing the regions with the structural transition at Ts and magnetic transition at Tm (where Tm corresponds to TC in case of VI3, according to the notation used in Ref. From the XRD, magnetization, and specific heat data, one can notice four aspects, which differ the behavior of VBr3 and VCl3 from the VI3 system. Primarily, in the first two systems, we observe only one transition related to the peak splitting and thus, symmetry breaking at Ts, and second, this structural transition is not magnetic-field dependent contrary to VI3. Next, we observe different magnetic ground states, AFM in VBr3 and VCl3 vs FM in VI3, together with different magnetic anisotropy in the single-crystalline materials. The question of how are these differences related to different inter-and intralayer exchange interactions reflected in stacking faults, dimerization, etc. is a subject of further study. If we look at Table Generally, the first-order phase transitions are characterized by the release of the latent heat and a step-like change in the volume. In the case of the second-order phase transition, the volume is a continuous function of temperature and the latent heat is not released. Instead, the discontinuities in specific heat, isobaric thermal expansion, and isothermal compressibility are present. Experimentally, this theoretical classification might not be so obvious, if the volume change and latent heat are very small, which is the case of structural transitions. The V(T) of VI3 seems to be an almost continuous function in the vicinity of the transition while the V(T) of VBr3 exhibits a very small, but visible step change of the volume. Concerning the presence of latent heat, the situation gets complicated. Its presence leads to the divergence of specific heat while its absence is reflected in a step change and a lambda-type anomaly. However, the measured shape of the anomaly in the specific heat of VI3 and VBr3 does not support the firstorder type scenario convincingly. Thus, the step-change in the volume of VBr3 is the only clear indication for the first-order transition. Due to the similarity of transitions in VI3 and VCl3, we can assume that these structural transitions are of the first order, too. Another character that seems to be typical of these structural transitions is the athermal growth of low-or high-temperature new phases during the transition. The measurement of reciprocal space maps takes around 1.5 hours and during this time the temperature is kept constant. Also, the ratio of both phases seems to be constant and is only changed by the further change of the temperature. This behavior is similar to the one observed in martensitic transformations We have demonstrated by the results of measurements of X-ray diffraction, specific heat, and magnetization at various temperatures on VCl3, VBr3, VI3 that these compounds are dimorphic similar to most of the other transition-metal trihalides. The structure of the LT phase is probably monoclinic whereas the structure of the HT phase has a higher symmetry (trigonal BiI3-type in case of VI3). The behavior of VBr3 in the vicinity of the structural phase transition gives several hints that suggest the first-order nature of the transition; however, this scenario has to be confirmed by further experiments. These findings are in striking contrast with the structural behavior of compounds in the corresponding chromium-based triad, CrCl3, CrBr3, CrI3. In these materials, the LT phase has a higher-symmetry trigonal (BiI3-type) whereas the HT phase is monoclinic. The structural transition in CrCl3 and CrI3 is of the first-order type associated with a large thermal hysteresis with the coexistence of both phases. The CrX3 compounds seem to be exceptional within the family of 3d-transition metal trihalides concerning the symmetry evolution between the high-and low-temperature phase. They also exhibit the largest c/a values within the series of chlorides, bromides, and iodides, respectively.