Extensive studies have been performed on layered compounds, ranging from layered cuprates to van der Waals materials with critical issues of intergrowths and stacking faults. However, such structures have been studied less because of experimental difficulty. We present characteristic defect structures of intergrowths in the Ruddlesden-Popper Ca2.46Sr0.54Ti2O7, which is known to exhibit hybrid improper ferroelectricity. Transmission electron microscopy reveals that numerous intergrowths composed of seven and 15 layers are introduced in the ferroelectric domains. Elemental maps demonstrate that Sr ions are selectively substituted into the perovskite layers of intergrowths. Density functional theory calculations support the site-selective substitution of Sr ions, favorably located in the intergrowths. The stabilization of the Ruddlesden-Popper phase and intergrowths via Sr substitution can be explained by the ionic-radius difference between Ca and Sr ions. The study reveals detailed defect structures originating from the layered perovskite structure of Ca2.46Sr0.54Ti2O7, and shows the usefulness of elemental mapping in probing the substitution effects in oxides. Ferroelectrics are used in science and medical fields and several other industrial applications. BaTiO3 and Pb(ZrxTi1-x)O3 are typical ferroelectric materials used as commercial capacitors and filters. For example, BaTiO3 is the main material in multilayer ceramic capacitors, and Pb(ZrxTi1-x)O3 is used in devices utilizing elastic vibration, such as actuators. Recently, many ferroelectric materials have been predicted based on theoretical calculations, and various ferroelectric materials are found in the perovskite (ABO3) and layered perovskite structures Ca3Ti2O7 is predicted to exhibit ferroelectricity as per the first-principles calculations Ca2.46Sr0.54Ti2O7 exhibits an interesting ferroelectric domain structure composed of various head-tohead and tail-to-tail type charged domain walls In this study, defect structures of intergrowths were examined in the Sr-substituted Ca3Ti2O7 (Ca2.46Sr0.54Ti2O7) via the atomic-resolution HAADF-STEM combined with energy-dispersive x-ray spectroscopy (EDS). In addition to characteristic ferroelectric domain structures, site-selective substitution of intergrowths was found in improper ferroelectric Ca2.46Sr0.54Ti2O7. High-resolution HAADF-STEM with EDS revealed the microstructures of Ca2.46Sr0.54Ti2O7. The atomic-resolution EDS mapping can distinguish elements, that are difficult to detect via HAADF-STEM Figure Considering the composition of Ca2.46Sr0.54Ti2O7, the ratio of Ca and Sr is approximately 5:1. Conversely, the ratio of sites for the alkaline-earth-metal elements (Ca and Sr) in the rock-salt and perovskite layers is 2:1. Thus, half of the perovskite layer sites are occupied by Ca ions with Sr ions occupying the other half. Other Ca ions occupy the rock-salt layer sites if Sr ions preferentially occupy the perovskite layer sites. Consistent with this prediction, the perovskite layer sites show both Ca and Sr ions. Previous DFT studies show that Sr ions preferably occupy the perovskite layer sites Next, the region around the defect in a charged domain wall marked in yellow was investigated. The observation is reflected in Figure DFT calculations were performed to evaluate the Sr stability in the perovskite and rock-salt sites in the n = 3 intergrowth. Supplementary Figure Here, N = 68 is the total atoms in the unit cell. The first, second, third, and fourth terms represent the energies of Sr-substituted Ca3Ti2O7, face-centered Ca, face-centered Sr, and Ca3Ti2O7. As listed in Supplementary Table The observation results show that the intergrowths are formed by Sr substitution as Ca ions can occupy the sites of the rock-salt layer and Sr ions prefer to occupy the sites of the perovskite layer. The intergrowth structure is a simple perovskite structure without the rock-salt layer. DFT calculations also show that Sr ions prefer the perovskite layer sites. Thus, Sr substitution should induce the intergrowths, as observed in this study. The tendency is also validated by the results that the intergrowths of any numbers are composed of Sr-rich layers. Notably, the intergrowths could not change macroscopic properties, such as the dielectric constant and transition temperature due to small volume fraction of intergrowths. However, the intergrowths may affect the local ferroelectric phenomena. As shown in Figure Empirically, growing a large single crystal of Ca3Ti2O7 is difficult. However, Sr substitution makes it easier and stabilizes the n = 2 Ruddlesden-Popper phase, possibly due to the stabilization of the layered perovskite structures by Sr ions, while Ca ions are not stable in the sites of the perovskite layer, as demonstrated in this study. The ionic radius of Sr 2+ (rsr = 1.58Å) is larger than that of Ca 2+ (rca = 1.48Å). The sites in perovskite layers are bigger than rock-salt layers, and Ca ions are small to occupy the perovskite sites. In other words, the tolerance factors t = (rA + rO)/√2 (rB + rO) in Sr and Ca are 1.00 and 0.966, respectively. (rA, rB, and rO represent the ionic radii of A site, B-site (Ti 4+ ), and O 2-ions in the perovskite ABO3, respectively.) In fact, bulk SrTiO3 has a cubic structure of Pm3 ̅ m while bulk CaTiO3 has an orthorhombic structure of Pbnm with oxygen octahedral rotations. To elucidate the effect of substituting Sr ions at the Ca site, HAADF-STEM combined with EDS was applied to Ca2.46Sr0.54Ti2O7 because high-resolution HAADF-STEM observation with EDS analysis was highly effective in understanding the local defect structures in ferroelectric materials. This study revealed that the layered perovskite structure of the Ruddlesden-Popper phase has numerous intergrowths in improper ferroelectric Ca2.46Sr0.54Ti2O7. The EDS maps demonstrate that the intergrowths are composed of Sr and Ti ions. The intergrowths are stabilized by Sr ions as they prefer the perovskite layer sites, as confirmed by DFT calculations. The large Sr ionic radius should contribute to the stabilization of the n = 2 Ruddlesden-Popper phase in crystal growth. The results indicate that the stabilization of the Ruddlesden-Popper structure is influenced by the substitution elements. 