Recent experiments have shown that the reduced multilayer rare-earth (RE) nickel oxides of form REp+1NipO2p+2 may belong to the novel family of superconducting lanthanide nickelates. Here, the correlated electronic structure of Pr4Ni3O8 and Nd6Ni5O12 is studied by means of an advanced realistic many-body framework. It is revealed that the low-energy physics of both systems is dominated by an interplay of Ni-d x 2 -y 2 and Ni-d z 2 degrees of freedom. Whilst the Ni-d x 2 -y 2 orbitals are always highly correlated near an (orbital-selective) Mott-insulating regime, the Ni-d z 2 orbitals give rise to intriguing non-dispersive features. At low temperature, the Pr compound still displays QP-like Ni-d x 2 -y 2 -derived states at the Fermi level, but the interacting fermiology of the Nd compound is outshined by an emergent Ni-d z 2 -controlling flat band. These findings translate well to the previous characterization of doped infinite-layer nickelates, and hence further make the case for a mechanism of unconventional superconductivity which is distinct from the one in high-Tc cuprates. The physics of layered nickelate compounds has recently (re)gained enormous interest due to the discovery of superconductivity in Sr-doped thin films of infinitelayer NdNiO 2 In fact, the quest for superconductivity in playered nickelates RE p+1 Ni p O 3p+1(,2p+2) of Ruddlesden-Popper(-like) structure with rare-earth ion RE (the oxygen stoichiometry in braces marking the topotactically reduced compounds without apical O) has a rather long history This story has a further level of complexity, since the actual electronic structure and the resulting superconducting scenario of the infinite-layer nickelates might be not of straightforward cuprate kind and is still heavily debated (see e.g. Refs. 19, 21-24 for recent reviews). Main issues are the degree of correlation strength, the role of apparent self-doping bands, and the relevance of a Ni-d x 2 -y 2 vs. a Ni-multiorbital setting at low energy. Against this challenging background, we here report a comparing first-principles many-body investigation of Pr 4 Ni 3 O 8 (p = 3) and the recently highlighted Nd 6 Ni 5 O 12 (p = 5). In our previous studies of infinite-layer nickelates To reveal the correlated electronic structure of Pr 4 Ni 3 O 8 and Nd 6 Ni 5 O 12 , the charge self-consistent combination In the following the calculational settings are described in more detail. A 11 × 11 × 11 k-point mesh is utilized for Pr 4 Ni 3 O 8 , and a 5 × 5 × 5 one for Nd 6 Ni 5 O 12 . The plane-wave cutoff energy is set to E cut = 13 Ry and localized basis orbitals are introduced for Pr/Nd(5d), Ni(3d) as well as O(2s, 2p). The Pr/Nd(4f ) states are put in the pseudopotential frozen core, since they are not decisive for the key physics of infinite-layer nickelates The DFT characterization (to be compared with previous studies Starting with Pr 4 Ni 3 O 8 , it is seen that the Ni-t 2gdominated bands are mostly full and only the Ni-e gderived bands are partially occupied. Note that there is no self-doping band as in infinite-layer nickelates The DFT spectrum of the Nd compound displays further-increased complexity (see Fig. Finally, we want to comment on the charge-transfer energy ∆ = ε d -ε p , whereby ε d,p are the respective band centre of Ni(3d) and O(2p). Using the DFT+sic approach, a value ∆ NdNiO2 = 5.0 eV was obtained for infinite-layer NdNiO 2 Let us turn to the interacting problem beyond DFT by first focussing on the trilayer Pr compound. Intuitively, from the anticipated similarity to the overdoped infinite-layer system Let us finally compare to experiment. Zhang et al. Very much in parallel to the discussion of the correlated electronic structure of Pr 4 Ni 3 O 8 in the last section, the focus is henceforth on the p = 5 Nd compound. Figure . 4 displays the k-resolved data, with obvious low-energy differences to the trilayer Pr system. The seemingly non-dispersive spectral weight just above the Fermi level for the latter compound, appears here more or less right at ε F for both investigated temperatures (cf. Fig. Note that the self-doping bands forming electron pockets around Γ and M in the previous DFT picture are shifted well-above the Fermi level and do not play a role in the fermiology. Compared to infinite-layer NdNiO 2 , Finally, the fermiology at T = 50 K looks quite different from the one of Pr 4 Ni 3 O 8 and rather intriguing (see Fig. The k-integrated spectra plotted in Fig. Comparison to experiment is even more difficult in the quintuple-layer case. First, there is so far only the thinfilm work by Pan et al. The revealed data for the paramagnetic correlated electronic structure of Pr 4 Ni 3 O 8 and Nd 6 Ni 5 O 12 shows that the two compounds share certain similarities, but possess a rather different low-energy nature. Similar to both systems is the way higher susceptibility to temperature effects than for the stoichiometric NdNiO 2 compound. Akin to the infinite-layer nickelate is the orbital-selective scenario of a highly correlated, (near) Mott-insulating Nid x 2 -y 2 orbital sector and an itinerant Ni-d z 2 sector. However while the latter is close to complete filling and only weakly-correlated in stoichiometric NdNiO 2 , the correlation effects are here more severe due to a lower filling with stronger overall Ni-e g inter-orbital processes. These processes are apparently based on a sophisticated interplay between orbital-selectivity, Hund-driven mechanisms and flat-band physics within the two-orbital Ni-e g manifold. The very details of this interplay have to be addressed in a tailored model-Hamiltonian study and are not subject of the present investigation. But as result thereof, due to a different doping scenario, the trilayer Pr compound still displays Ni-d Trying to rationalize this behavior, let us first focus on the Ni-d x 2 -y 2 part. From DFT+sicDMFT calculations for NdNiO 2 Concerning the Ni-d z 2 part, the difference between the 'non-dispersive' dispersion just above the Fermi level in the trilayer Pr compound and the 'flat band' right at ε F in the quintuple-layer Nd compound has to be understood. Key is the observation that as in doped NdNiO 2 a flat band (there in the k z = 1/2 plane because of a missing layer differentiation) shifts through the Fermi surface with growing hole content. This is illustrated in Fig. On the other hand for the Nd 6 Ni 5 O 12 compound, it is easily observed in the right panel of Fig. Let us finally note, that recent DFT+DMFT studies on multilayer nickelates The present DFT+sicDMFT study predicts emergent flat-band character of Ni-d z 2 type in the quintuple-layer nickelate Nd 6 Ni 5 O 12 . It is due to the formation of near Mott-insulating Ni-d x 2 -y 2 states in an orbital-selective manner within the Ni-e g subshell, in conjuction with the effective (optimal) hole doping compared to stoichiometric infinite-layer NdNiO 2 . Multiorbital correlations of seemingly Hund-driven kind are also observable, but those are stronger for the trilayer nickelate Pr 4 Ni 3 O 8 . The latter compound is in a nominal hole-overdoped regime compared to NdNiO 2 , however still displays as QP-like Ni-d x 2 -y 2 -dominated fermiology. Whilst the principal mapping between doped infinite-layer and multilayer nickelates exists as envisoned, some caution has to be taken concerning the details. Still in the end, the present results for the p = 3, 5 multilayers are consistent with our previous results on infinite-layer nickelates 