We performed a crystal growth to obtain chirality-controlled enantiopure crystals using a laser-diode-heated floating zone (LDFZ) method with a compositiongradient feed rod. It has been argued that the crystal handedness of T Si (T : transition metal) is fixed depending on T in the case of the ones grown by the conventional methods. We found that right-handed single crystals of CoSi and MnSi were grown from the composition gradient feed rods that consist of FeSi-CoSi and FeSi-MnSi, respectively. The obtained CoSi and MnSi crystals inherit the chirality from the seed part of FeSi, which grows in a right-handed structure, and thus have the chirality opposite to that for the crystals in the literature. The LDFZ method with the feed rods with various combinations of T Si compounds enables a flexible control of the chirality of T Si and will be useful for clarifying the interplay between the crystalline chirality and chirality-induced physical responses. Chirality, which represents handedness of the objects, is one of the most fundamental characteristics in nature. In chiral helimagnetism, it is important to understand the interplay between crystallographic and magnetic chiralities In inorganic chiral compounds, it is still a challenge to control the crystallographic chirality of materials. It is difficult to prevent inorganic materials from forming racemic-twinned crystalline grains of left-and right-handedness during a crystal growth. One possible method of controlling the crystallographic chirality is an application of spontaneous crystallization process in a stirring solution, which enables a growth of crystals of single handedness Intermetallic compounds T Si (T : transition metal) with a B20 type chiral crystal structure are one of the representative chiral magnetic compounds investigated in the community because of the formation of Skyrmion lattice In this paper, we report the chirality control of T Si single crystals by using a laser-diode-heated floating zone (LDFZ) method together with a feed rod of T Si with a composition gradient of T along the growth direction. Indeed, we grew T Si single crystals stabilized in a crystal structure with the handedness opposite to that of the ones grown by the conventional method. Such chirality-controlled crystals can be utilized as a seed crystal for the successive crystal growth. Experiments with the enantiopure crystal with the fixed handedness will contribute to revealing the interplay between crystallographic and magnetic chiralities. The crystal structures of T Si belong to the space group P 2 1 3, which allows the rightand left-handed crystal structures. When the structures are viewed along the <111>, T and Si chains are twisted right-or left-handed, as shown in Fig. T and Si atoms occupy Wyckoff 4a positions, as expressed by (u, u, u) and its equivalent positions in P 2 1 3. The handedness of the helices depends on whether a value of u is smaller or larger than 0.5. An inversion operation switches the chirality of the crystal, giving the equivalent atomic position of (1 -u, 1 -u, 1 -u) for 4a. Absolute structure analysis using X-ray shows that the values of u take about 0.14-0.16 for Si and 0.84-0.86 for T in the right-handed crystals, while about 0.84-0.86 for Si and 0.14-0.16 for T in the left-handed crystal To prepare the feed and seed rods used for the LDFZ method, the polycrystalline samples of T Si were synthesized by an arc melting method. A stoichiometric mixture of T and Si in the molar ratio of 1 : 1 was melted in an Ar atmosphere. The obtained ingots were pulverized to powders and then the rod-shaped polycrystals were prepared by sintering the powders. Single crystals of T Si were obtained by the LDFZ furnace (equipped with five 200 W lasers, Crystal Systems Corporation). The crystal growth was performed under an Ar atmosphere, and the Ar flowing rate was about 3 l/min. To grow single crystals, traveling speeds of the feed and seed rods were set to be the same at 5-10 mm/h. To obtain a stable molten zone, the feed and seed rods were rotated in the opposite directions at 4 and 5 rpm, respectively. The floating zone (FZ) method is known as a technique to obtain single crystals of centimeters in length and several millimeters in diameter. The feed and seed rods for the FZ crystal growth generally consist of the same compound. However, in some compounds, it is difficult to grow single crystals due to technical reasons such as a very slow speed of the crystal growth and instability of the molten zone. These problems are sometimes solved by using a composition-gradient feed rod. In the case of superconducting copper oxide compounds La 2-x Sr x CuO 4 (La214) These studies indicate that the crystal growth, initiated with the feasible composition and followed by the growth with the composition of unstable regime, would be useful for stabilizing the crystal growth. However, these compounds form centrosymmetric crystal structures. It is still unknown whether the crystal growth with composition-gradient feed rods inherits chiral crystal structures. In this study, we have tried to use the crystal growth method with composition-gradient feed rods in synthesizing chiral magnetic crystals with the controlled chirality. The crystallographic chirality of T Si was evaluated by X-ray absolute structure analysis using anomalous scattering. In a non-centrosymmetric system including a chiral system, the intensities of a pair of reflections at (h, k, l) and ( h, k, l), termed Bijvoet pairs Here, I obs and I cal are the observed and calculated intensities, respectively. The I cal (h, k, l) and I cal ( h, k, l) are calculated from the assumed absolute structure in the analysis and the inverted one, respectively. Therefore, if the refined Flack parameter x is 1, the assumed chiral crystal structure has to be inverted into that with the opposite handedness. If the refined Flack parameter x is 0, the assumed chiral crystal structure is correct. To evaluate the crystallographic chirality of single crystals of T Si obtained by the FZ method, we cut some small portions, and examined them by means of X-ray oscillation photograph. The data were collected using Rigaku R-AXIS RAPID and Bruker D8-QUEST with Mo Kα radiation at room temperature. With applying an empirical absorption correction to the observed intensity, the absolute structures were solved by the direct method and refined using the SHELXL software package First, the crystal syntheses were performed with the seed and feed rods consisting of the single compound of B20 materials. The single crystals of FeSi, CoSi, and MnSi were successfully obtained by the LDFZ method. The results of the absolute structure analysis of these crystals are summarized in Table Table The first experiment was performed with the composition-gradient feed rod #1 shown in the table in Fig. Figure To evaluate the crystal chirality of the single crystal grown by the compositiongradient feed rod consisting of FeSi and CoSi, some small portions were cut at both the regions of FeSi and CoSi. The crystal chirality of these portions was determined by the deducted Flack parameter x in the absolute structure analysis using X-ray oscillation photograph. The results are summarized in Table !"#$ parameters of all the portions of T Si are the same within three-sigma error bar. The Flack parameter x of CoSi is almost zero with the parameters of the atomic position u T and u Si being approximately 0.86 and 0.16, respectively. As discussed in the literature The second example is the single crystal growth of MnSi with the compositiongradient feed rod #2 shown in the table in Fig. In summary, we successfully grew enantiopure single crystals of FeSi, CoSi, and MnSi using the LDFZ method. Monosilicide compounds T Si are known as an example to form only left-or right-handed crystal domain, and the chirality depends on the elements of T site In inorganic chiral compounds, enantiopure crystal growth has been mainly performed in a spontaneous crystallization from a stirring water solution. However, such a technique is not applicable in most of inorganic compounds because they are not soluble in water. On the other hand, the present LDFZ technique holds a molten zone at high temperature just above the melting temperature of the compound. It can crystallize the domain with a desired handedness by inheriting the crystallographic orientation and chirality from the seed crystal. In this sense, this technique may be applicable in many kinds of inorganic chiral compounds. It is still unclear why the T Si compounds spontaneously form the crystalline structure with the single handedness. Nevertheless, the present study revealed the importance of a usage of the seed crystal with the controlled chirality. Similar technique has been already demonstrated in the Cz process with an enantiopure seed crystal using a tri-arc furnace On the other hand, in the LDFZ method, as explained above, the precise temperature control is feasible in order to keep the molten zone stabilized by the wellfocused laser. This is likely to work well in inheriting the crystallographic information of the seed crystal into the connection region. Furthermore, the sequent crystal growth using the composition-gradient feed rod keeps the crystallographic information between the regions A and B consisting of different compounds. Therefore, the advantages of the LDFZ method can be found in flexible choice of material combination and chirality as well as the size of the grown crystals. The chirality-controlled enatiopure crystals obtained by the present LDFZ method will be useful for clarifying the interplay between the crystalline chirality and chirality-induced physical responses such as magnetochiral effect 