In order to perform automated calculations of defect and dopant properties in semiconductors and insulators, we developed a software package, Defect and Dopant ab-initio Simulation Package (DASP), which is composed of four modules for calculating: (i) elemental chemical potentials, (ii) defect (dopant) formation energies and transition energy levels, (iii) defect and carrier densities and (iv) carrier dynamics properties of high-density defects. DASP uses the materials genome database for quick determination of competing secondary phases and calculation of the energy above convex hull when calculating the elemental chemical potential that stabilizes compound semiconductors, so it can perform high-throughput prediction of thermodynamic stability of multinary compounds. DASP calls the ab-initio softwares to perform the total energy, structural relaxation and electronic structure calculations of the defect supercells with different structure configurations and charge states, based on which the defect formation energies and transition energy levels are calculated and the corrections for electrostatic potential alignment and image charge interaction can be included. Then DASP can calculate the equilibrium densities of defects and electron and hole carriers as well as the Fermi level in semiconductors under different chemical potential conditions and different growth/working temperature. For high-density defects, DASP can calculate the carrier dynamics properties such as the photoluminescence (PL) spectrum, defectrelated radiative and non-radiative carrier capture cross sections, and recombination lifetime of non-equilibrium carriers. DASP is expected to act as an automatic and reliable toolbox for calculating the defect and dopant properties, which can be compared to or used to interpret the experimental characterization results of defects using electrical and optical techniques such as PL and deep level transient spectroscopy (DLTS). Here we will introduce its unique functions including the maximumly-cubic supercell generation, distorted defect structure searching and wavefunction initialization which can reduce computational cost and improve accuracy, and also show three examples about its applications in undoped GaN, C-doped GaN and quasi-onedimensional SbSeI. Intrinsic point defects are indispensable in crystals at a finite temperature and can have important influences on the fundamental properties of crystalline materials. Many experimental techniques have been developed for the characterization of defects and dopants in semiconductors, such as the photoluminescence (PL) spectrum, positron annihilation spectroscopy (PAS), electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) and deep-level transient spectroscopy (DLTS). For ternary, quaternary and multinary compound semiconductors, there probably exist a large number of secondary phases competing against the host material, which may all limit the stable range of elemental chemical potentials. Therefore, if some important secondary phases are not considered in the determination of elemental chemical potentials, the calculations of defect/dopant formation energies and densities and even the stability of the compound can be wrong. (iii) For low-symmetry and multinary compound semiconductors, the possible defect/dopant types can be many and various. For each type of defect/dopant, there may be multiple non-equivalent sites and structural configurations, which can change for different charge states. If some important defecttypes/sites/configurations/charge-states are not considered, the calculated results are incomplete and inaccurate. (iv) The finite supercell size corrections, such as the corrections for the electrostatic potential alignment and image charge interaction, (ii) DEC: the formation energies of defects and dopants in different charge states, as functions of the elemental chemical potentials and Fermi level (electronic chemical potentials), from which the charge-state transition energy levels can be derived; (iii) the equilibrium-state Fermi level, densities of electron and hole carriers, and densities of the defects and dopants in different charge states, as functions of the elemental chemical potentials at growth temperature and working (measuring) temperature; (iv) the carrier capture cross sections, the radiative and non-radiative carrier recombination rates and lifetime, and the PL spectra. Among the four modules, the most fundamental one is DEC, whose core function is for calculating the defect/dopant formation energy using the supercell model and ab-initio DFT calculations. In the supercell model, the formation energy of a point defect α in the charge state q can be calculated as, In the following, we will briefly introduce the four modules: TSC Module: As shown in Eq. (1), the defect (dopant) formation energy and thus the defect density are functions of the elemental chemical potentials, so the calculation of defect properties requires the elemental chemical potentials as inputs. The TSC (Thermodynamic Stability Calculation) module is for calculating the chemical potential ranges through considering the influences of all the competing secondary compounds that can limit the thermodynamic phase stability of the host compound semiconductor. In order to make the consideration of secondary compounds as complete as possible, the material genome database (Materials Project The DEC (Defect Energy Calculation) module can generate the maximumlycubic supercell structures of the host semiconductor, based on which the defect and dopant supercell structures can be generated with all the possible defect/dopant types, atomic sites and structural configurations considered. Then ab-initio softwares, such as Vienna Ab-Initio Simulation Package (VASP) Based on the results of TSC and DEC, the DDC (Defect Density Calculation) module solves the charge-neutrality equation self-consistently to determine the equilibrium defect/dopant densities, Fermi level, and carrier densities, as shown by the purple part of Fig. For a given chemical potential condition, the formation energies of defects and dopants in different charge states are treated as input for a two-step self-consistent calculation, which solves the chargeneutrality condition equations at high growth temperature and low working (measuring) temperature to determine the Fermi level of the semiconductor samples. Then the equilibrium densities of defects and dopants and the densities of electron and hole carriers can be calculated under the given chemical potential condition. Through changing the chemical potentials, the defect/dopant and carrier densities can be calculated as functions of the chemical potential conditions, which can be used for the defect/dopant engineering based on the growth condition control. For the high-density defects or dopants identified by DDC module, the CDC (Carrier Dynamics Calculation) module can calculate their excited-state carrier dynamics properties. The transition energy levels from the DEC module and the Fermi level from the DDC module will be used to screen for the transitions between the defect levels and the VBM or conduction band minimum (CBM) level which may produce the PL peaks or cause the fast nonradiative recombination of carriers. Then the phonon spectrum of the defect/dopant supercell, electron-phonon coupling matrix and transition dipole moments between the defect/dopant states and VBM or CBM states will be calculated, based on which the radiative and non-radiative transition rates (carrier capture cross sections) and the lineshape of photoluminescence spectra induced by defects and dopants can be calculated. Such calculations may be performed based on the single-phonon-mode one-dimensional configuration coordinate diagram The formation of defects or the doping of extrinsic elements in semiconductor lattice involves the exchange of atoms between the semiconductor lattice and the external environment, so the formation energies of defects and dopants in Eq. ( Firstly, at the equilibrium state of the compound Cu 2 ZnSnS 4 , the weighted sum of the chemical potentials of its component elements should be equal to the formation energy of the compound, where ΔH f (Cu 2 ZnSnS 4 ) is the compound formation energy of Cu 2 ZnSnS 4 relative to the Cu, Zn, Sn and S elemental phases. That means the chemical equilibrium state is arrived for the reaction 2Cu + Zn + Sn + 4S → Cu 2 ZnSnS 4 , so the product compound Cu 2 ZnSnS 4 is stable. Secondly, to make the synthesized sample be pure-phase Cu 2 ZnSnS 4 , the formation or coexistence of the competing secondary phases, such as the binary and ternary compounds CuS, Cu 2 S, ZnS, SnS, SnS 2 and Cu 2 SnS 3 , and the elemental phases Cu, Zn, Sn, S, should be avoided. Therefore, the weighted sum of the chemical potentials of their component elements should be lower than their corresponding formation energies (the formation energies of elemental phases are 0), as described by the following inequations, The allowed chemical potential range of Cu, Zn, Sn and S that stabilizes the pure-phase Cu 2 ZnSnS 4 is limited by these equations and inequations. If the formation energies of the host and all the competing compounds are known, the ranges can be calculated and plotted in the chemical potential space, as shown in Ref. The four elements Cu, Zn, Sn and S can form many binary, ternary and quaternary compounds, which can all act as the competing secondary phases of Cu2ZnSnS4. In principle, for the accurate calculation of the chemical potential range, one should take account of all the possible competing compounds, whose number can be large, especially for quaternary or multinary compounds. In DASP, the TSC (Thermodynamic Stability Calculation) module provides an automated solution for the quick screening of the critical competing phases and thus the accurate calculation of the chemical potential range. With the chemical formula of the compound, TSC will visit the materials genome database, such as Materials Project (MP) database In the real semiconductor lattices, the densities of defects and dopants are usually much lower than the densities of atoms, e.g., there is only one defect or dopant among 10 4 -10 7 atoms for defects or dopants with a density of 10 15 -10 18 cm -3 . Therefore, the distance between two defects or dopants is usually very large. However, in the periodic supercell model, the distances between the defect and the periodic image defects in the neighboring supercell are actually not very large since the supercell has only several hundred atoms. Therefore, the supercell model causes unphysical interaction between defects or dopants, which may induce errors in the calculated defect properties. To reduce the errors caused by the finite supercell size and achieve better supercell size convergence, DASP always tends to generate the supercells that are nearly cubic, so that the defectdefect (dopant-dopant) distance is maximized and the unphysical interaction is minimized. As illustrated in Fig. Besides the advantage in maximizing the defect-defect distance, the nearly-cubic supercell also leads to the orthogonality of the reciprocal lattices, which may accelerate the ab-initio calculation and achieve better convergence. The generation of the nearly-cubic supercell in DASP is through the maximumly-cubic supercell generation function, which firstly transforms the primitive cell into the nearly-orthogonal supercell and then expands it to get the nearly-cubic supercell which maximizes the cubic degree of the supercell with a given number of atoms. To search for the nearly-orthogonal supercell, we developed a traversal searching method through trying different conversion matrices that can transform the lattice vectors of the primitive cell to the nearly-orthogonal lattice vectors. The conversion matrix should be non-singular because the lattice vectors are not coplanar. In addition, only swapping the lattice vectors will not change the shape of the cell, so there is no need to consider the exchange operation during the transformation. Therefore, the matrix satisfies the LU decomposition condition, and can be written With the nearly-orthogonal supercell, we can just expand it directly to get nearly-cubic supercell. The cubic degree is described by the ratio , where Vsupercell is the volume of the supercell, Vcube is the volume of the cube that can envelop the whole supercell. If the degree is 1, the shape of the supercell is ideally cubic. Considering the computational cost, the number (N atom ) of atoms in the supercell is limited, e.g., 200-1000 atoms. Although very large N atom can give very cubic supercell and thus tend to increase the cubic degree to 1, the cubic degree does not necessarily increase monotonically as N atom increases from 100 to 1000. Therefore, when selecting a supercell for defect calculation, DASP considers both the cubic degree and N atom in order to maximize the defect-defect distance under the constraint of the limited N atom . An empirical quantity β is defined to balance the two factors and used as the criterion for choosing supercells, V supercell V cube + 0.001 N atom The maximumly-cubic supercell is generated by DASP through maximizing the quantity β in a given range of N atom . After the supercell is generated, DASP can generate structures of defects and dopants in the primitive-cell region of the supercell. The common defect types will be considered automatically. For example, the intrinsic defects of the quaternary compound Cu2ZnSnS4 that DASP considered include the Cu, Zn, Sn and S vacancies (VCu, VZn, VSn and VS), interstitials (Cui, Zni, Sni, Si) and antisites (CuZn, CuSn, CuS, ZnCu, ZnSn, ZnS, SnCu, SnZn, SnS, SCu, SZn, SSn). Meanwhile, for the lowenergy donor and acceptor defects, they can form donor-acceptor compensated defect complexes, which can also be considered by DASP. For low-symmetry semiconductors, the structure may have several non-equivalent atomic sites for one element, and the same-type defects on non-equivalent sites may have different properties. When generating vacancy, interstitial and antisite defects, DASP will consider all non-equivalent sites. For interstitial defects, DASP will search for the largest void region in the structure and meanwhile consider the Coulomb repulsion to determine the possible interstitial sites of cations and anions. For low-energy interstitial defects, DASP will also generate 10-20 different configurations randomly in the primitive-cell region of the supercell (different interstitial sites are ensured to be not close to each other). For low-energy vacancy and antisite defects, there may be other distorted or metastable structure configurations, such as the DX centers Ionized defects in different charge states are fundamental to the basic understanding of defect physics, but there are still several open questions during the calculation of the properties of charged defects. The first one is how to determine the range of defect charge q for an ionized defect. In the past, the octet rule was often selected as a criterion to judge the charge range of a defect, which simply adopts the nominal charge of the single element. For instance, the sulfur vacancy should take 0, 1+, 2+ charges according to the simple octet rule, however, in non-conventional semiconductors such as MoS2, neither 1+ nor 2+ state of the sulfur vacancy is stable while the 1charge state exists. The hybrid functional (such as HSE) is recommended for the static self-consistent calculations to obtain the more reasonable band gap and more reasonable location of the defect levels. As shown in Fig. Figure In Eq. ( The correction of potential alignment to the formation energy of a defect in the charge state q is q∆V q/b , and is automatically included in the term E corr . The spurious Coulomb interaction between charged defect and its periodic images, as well as charged defect and the neutralizing background charge should be corrected from the calculated formation energies of ionized charged defects, which are called image charge corrections. DASP can currently perform the corrections according to two schemes. The first one is the Lany-Zunger scheme, where α is the Madelung constant, ε is the static dielectric constant, and L is the linear supercell dimension. Since DASP will always tend to generate a nearly-cubic supercell, the default value of c sh is set to -1/3. (1) can be separated into, E corr = q∆V q/b + ∆E LZ DASP also provides an interface with the code sxdefectalign written by Freysoldt, which implements the Freysoldt-Neugebauer-Van de Walle (FNV) scheme where E lat is the Madelung energy and V model is the potential obtained from the chosen model (such as Gaussian) charge density. Note that in the FNV scheme, the potential alignment defined in 2.3.4 is already included. The two correction schemes mentioned above may be not valid for the charged defects in lowdimensional layered semiconductors, such as those in monolayer MoS2 or WSe2. A series of new correction schemes have been successfully developed in the past decade for the charged defect correction in layered semiconductors, The formation of a defect or dopant causes the change of the electronic wavefunction and the redistribution of charge density in the semiconductor lattice, which produces new electronic states (defect states) in the band gap. Although the wavefunction and charge density near the defect site can be changed dramatically, the area far from the defect should be weakly influenced. Therefore, for different defects or dopants in different charge states, the wavefunction and charge density in the region far from the defect site should be similar to those of the defect-free supercell. Since the self-consistent calculations of the wavefunction and charge density will be repeated hundreds of times, it will save a large amount of computational cost if we take advantage of the slightly changed wavefunction and charge density in the region far from the defect site to reduce the number of selfconsistent calculation steps. In DASP, the initial charge density of the neutral defect/dopant supercell is generated based on the converged wavefunction and charge density of the bulk host supercell, i.e., the charge density in the region far from the defect site is the same as that of the bulk host, while the charge density in the sphere around the defect is generated by a superposition of atomic charge densities and the charge density in the interface region is smoothed and rescaled according to the number of valence electrons of the defect supercell. Then the self-consistent calculations are performed to obtain the converged charge density and wavefunction of the neutral defect/dopant supercell. For the charged defect/dopant, its initial charge density is generated based on the converged wavefunction and charge density of the neutral defect through changing the occupation number of the defect states. With the initial charge density, the ab-initio self-consistent calculations can reach convergence with much less steps. The saving of computational cost can be more significant when large supercells are used. Under thermodynamic equilibrium, the density of a defect α in the charge state q is determined by its formation energy according to, where Nsites is the density of the possible defect sites, gq is the charge-dependent degeneracy factor, ΔEf is the defect formation energy at the given Fermi level and elemental chemical potentials as described by Eq. ( ; while the negatively charged acceptor defects with q<0 produce hole carriers, and their summed charge is ∑ [q * n(α, q)] α;q<0 . The final densities of electron and hole carriers are contributed by both the thermal excitation and the ionization of all these defects (dopants). The equilibrium-state Fermi level can be calculated through solving the charge neutrality equation, are the summed charges of negatively charged defects and positively charged defects, weighted by the charge q. n0 and p0 are free carrier densities, which can be defined as, n 0 = ∫ g C (E)f(E)dE +∞ ε CBM where g C (E) and g V (E) are the density of states (DOS) for the conduction and valence bands, respectively, and f(E) is the Fermi-Dirac occupation function. g C (E) and g V (E) can be calculated from both the parabolic band approximation and the exact integration of the ab-initio calculated band structure. The default setting in DASP is from the parabolic band approximation which requires the calculation of electron and hole effective masses, but it can be changed to the exact DOS from ab-initio calculations. The semiconductors are usually grown or synthesized at a high temperature and then go through a rapid annealing process to a lower working (measuring) temperature. Therefore, the defects are usually formed at the high temperature and then the densities of different charge states will redistribute during the rapid annealing. The DDC module is developed in accordance with such fabrication process, The calculation of defect and carrier densities using DDC module in DASP is quite easy. After finishing the calculation of TSC and DEC, DDC can be calculated based on the output files of TSC and DEC. The defect (dopant) densities, carrier densities and Fermi level can be plotted or saved as functions of the elemental chemical potentials and growth/measuring temperatures. After calculating the defect densities using DDC module, one may identify a portion of high density defects (dopants), which may be critical to the optical and electrical properties of the host semiconductor. For those important defects, we implement in the CDC module three functions for studying the excited-state carrier dynamics properties based on the phonon spectrum and electronphonon coupling calculation: (i) photoluminescence (PL) lineshape of defects; (ii) radiative carrier capture coefficient of defects; (iii) phonon-assisted nonradiative carrier capture coefficient (cross section) of defects. In the following, we will mainly introduce how to calculate the PL lineshape, while the details of the calculation on carrier capture will not be discussed here. More details can be found in Ref. In order to evaluate the overlap integral in Eq. ( where Riα and Rfα are the Cartesian coordinates of the atom α in initial and final supercell structures, and mα is its mass. Using configuration coordinate diagram, the effective phonon frequencies ω im and ω fn can be obtained by fitting the potential energy surfaces, and the integral can also be numerically calculated. Configuration coordinate diagram is also useful for further calculating the radiative and nonradiative carrier capture coefficient of such process, which requires the exact calculation of transition dipole moment and electron-phonon coupling matrix element. In the current version, DASP only supports the one-dimensional static coupling method for calculating nonradiative carrier capture; In the following, we will show three examples about the application of DASP in the calculation the defect and dopant properties of semiconductors, including the intrinsic point defect properties of the benchmark system GaN, the intrinsic point defect properties of the low-symmetry quasione-dimensional SbSeI, and the PL spectrum of C-doped GaN. GaN is a well-studied wide-band-gap semiconductor whose intrinsic defects have been studied by many groups since 1990s, so it is a good benchmark system for testing our DASP software. In The formation energies of these point defects in neutral states are relatively high in GaN, no matter under Ga-rich or N-rich condition. Among them, the donor defect, N vacancy VN, has the lowest formation energy, but it still cannot produce a high density of electron carriers or good ntype conductivity and shift the Fermi level to close to the CBM level, even under the Ga-rich condition. Therefore, the formation of intrinsic point defects should not produce good n-type conductivity in GaN. For VN, the DASP calculations based on the spin-polarized and hybrid functional ab-initio calculations show a (+/3+) transition level lying 0.4 eV above the VBM, and a (0/+) level close to the CBM. The (+/3+) transition level was usually not found in the early calculations based on the LDA or GGA to the exchange correlation functional, Antimony selenoiodide (SbSeI) has a quasi-one-dimensional structure, as shown in Fig. Besides them, there are also several other defects with formation energies lower than 1 eV and deep transition levels in the band gap, e.g., SeSb and VI, which are both amphoteric with deep (0/+) and (0/-) transition levels. Although the two dominant defects, the SeI acceptor and the ISe donor, have quite high density As we can see, Figs. The PL spectrum is a widely used optical characterization method of defects in semiconductors. Usually the origin of the PL peaks is attributed to different defects according to the energy differences between the defect level and band edge levels. However, such kind of attribution is questionable, especially when there are several defects whose energy levels are nearly degenerate. DASP can calculate the PL lineshape of different defects, which provide an extra criterion for the identification of the defect origin of PL peaks. Here we show an example about the calculated PL lineshape of the CN dopant in GaN. Using DEC module, we find CN has a (0/+) transition level of 0.39 eV, and a (0/-) transition level of 1.07 eV above the VBM level, which agree with the calculations of Lyons et al. between the initial and final states. We developed a software DASP composed of four modules, TSC, DEC, DDC and CDC, for the automated calculation of defect and dopant properties in the crystalline semiconductors (insulators). DASP just needs the input of the crystal structure file of the semiconductor, then it can visit the materials genome database and call the ab-initio DFT software such as VASP to calculate the defect and dopant properties, including, (i) the chemical potential range of component elements that stabilizes the compound semiconductor (a descriptor of the thermodynamic stability of the compound) and the highest allowed chemical potential of dopant elements; (ii) the formation energies of defects and dopants in different charge states, as functions of elemental chemical potentials and Fermi level, and their charge-state transition energy levels; (iii) the equilibrium densities of defects and dopants, Fermi level, densities of electron and hole carriers, as functions of elemental chemical potentials at growth and working temperature; and (iv) the carrier capture cross sections, radiative and non-radiative carrier recombination rate and lifetime, and the PL spectra. DASP is designed to be an automatic toolbox for the theoretical calculation studies on defects and dopants in semiconductors, and can be used not only for interpreting the electrical and optical characterization experiments of defects and dopants, but also for the quantitative defect and dopant engineering in functional semiconductor devices.