Looking for new materials with Dirac points has been a fascinating subject of research. Here we report the growth, crystal structure, and band structure of HfGe0.92Te single crystals, featuring three different types of Dirac points. HfGe0.92Te crystalizes in a nonsymmorphic tetragonal space group P4/nmm (No. 129), having square Ge-atom plane with vacancies about 8%. Despite the vacancies on Ge site, the Dirac nodal line composed of conventional Dirac points vulnerable to spin-orbit coupling (SOC) is observed using angleresolved photoemission spectroscopy, accompanied with the robust Dirac line protected by the nonsymmorphic symmetry against both SOC and vacancies. Specially, spin-orbit Dirac points (SDPs) originated from the surface formed under SOC are hinted to exist according to our experiments and calculations. Quasi-two-dimensional (quasi-2D) characters are observed and further confirmed by angular-resolved magnetoresistance. HfGe0.92Te is a good candidate to explore exotic topological phases or topological properties with three different types of Dirac points and a promising candidate to realize 2D SDPs. Exotic topological phases have aroused a lot attention especially for the potential applications of the dissipationless gapless edge states in spintronic devices WHM-type materials (W = Zr, Hf, La, H = Si, Ge, Sn, Sb, M = O, S, Se, Te) featuring H square nets, have been found to be a large pool of topological materials with Dirac points and linear dispersions in large energy range near EF Up to now, WHM-type materials having Si Here we report the growth, crystal structure, and band structure of HfGe0.92Te single crystals with vacancies on Ge square net. The experimentally observed band structures of HfGe0.92Te using in-situ ARPES can be well described using the seven-unit-cell-thick slab of HfGeTe. The Ge vacancies only induce a little hole doping by lowering the EF about 0.2 eV, showing the robust band structure against small perturbations. Dirac-cone-like band structure with linear dispersions in large energy range (E 0.6 eV) was observed along M -Γ -M , with the crossing points near EF, which would be gapped under SOC. At high symmetry point X , Dirac points at E -EF = -0.4 eV protected by nonsymmorphic symmetry were observed, accompanied with anisotropic electron pockets with the cone point at E -EF = -0.2 eV. For the electron pockets, a split was observed along X -M , which may hint the existence of intrinsic SDPs robust against SOC according to our calculation. The ARPES intensity map below EF was also displayed and the quasi-2D characters were observed from the non-dispersive X -R bands and typical two-fold anisotropic angular-resolved magnetoresistance (AMR) with AMR ∝ () 2 , showing the formation of Dirac lines along X -R . Thus three types of Dirac points, the conventional Dirac points vulnerable to SOC forming Dirac nodal line, the robust Dirac points protected by the nonsymmorphic symmetry against both SOC and vacancies forming Dirac lines, and SDPs coming from the surface, were observed coexisting in HfGe0.92Te, indicating that HfGe0.92Te is a good platform to explore exotic topological phases or topological properties, especially promising to realize the 2D SDPs considering its quasi-2D nature. Single Crystal Growth and Characterization. The single crystals of HfGe0.9Te were grown by high temperature solution method using Ge flux. The hafnium powder (Alfa Aesar, 99.5%), germanium powder (Alfa Aesar, 99.999%), and tellurium powder (Alfa Aesar, 99.9%) were mixed using a molar ratio of 2:11:1 in a fritted alumina crucible set (Canfield crucible set) First-Principles Calculations. We used the crystal structure of HfGeTe to simulate the electronic structures by lowing the EF about 0.2 eV in our calculations. The first-principles calculations were performed by using the Vienna ab initio simulation package (VASP) Based on the results of SCXRD (Table Figure As predicted in HfGeTe monolayer, a 2D SDP robust against both the SOC and vacancies can be formed for the split caused by Rashba SOC effect of Hf, and the location of the 2D SDP can be tuned by uniaxial strain and biaxial strain or vacancies The band structure along X -R has been measured by varying the photon energy from 20 eV to 54 eV. As shown in Figure In conclusion, we successfully grown the single crystals of HfGe0.92Te, a member of WHM family but with vacancies on its Ge square net. The ARPES-observed band structures of HfGe0.92Te can be well described using the seven-unit-cell-thick slab of HfGeTe, whereas the Ge vacancies only induce a little hole doping and lower EF about 0.2 eV. The Dirac-cone-like band structure with linear dispersions in large energy range (  E ~0.6 eV) was observed along Γ -M with its crossing points near EF, which would be gapped under SOC. At high symmetry point X , Dirac points protected by nonsymmorphic symmetry and anisotropic electron pockets were observed. For the electron pockets, a split was observed along X -M , which hint the existence of SDPs under SOC according to our calculation. Quasi-2D characters arise from the non-dispersive X -R bands and typical two-fold anisotropic AMR with AMR ∝ () 2 , showing the formation of Dirac lines along X -R . Thus three types of Dirac points, the conventional Dirac points vulnerable to SOC forming Dirac nodal line, the robust Dirac points protected by the nonsymmorphic symmetry against both SOC and vacancies forming Dirac lines along X -R , and possible SDPs coming from the surface, coexist in HfGe0.92, indicating that HfGe0.92Te is a good candidate to explore exotic topological phases or topological properties, especially promising to realize the 2D SDPs considering its quasi-2D nature.