Magnon excitations in antiferromagnetic materials and their physical implications enable novel device concepts not available in ferromagnets, emerging as a new area of active research. A unique characteristic of antiferromagnetic magnons is the coexistence of opposite spin polarization, which mimics the electron spin in a variety of transport phenomena. Among them, the most prominent spin-contrasting phenomenon is the magnon spin Nernst effect (SNE), which refers to the generation of transverse pure magnon spin current through a longitudinal temperature gradient. We introduce selected recent progress in the study of magnon SNE in collinear antiferromagnets with a focus on its underlying physical mechanism entailing profound topological features of the magnon band structures. By reviewing how the magnon SNE has inspired and enriched the exploration of topological magnons, we offer our perspectives on this emerging frontier that holds potential in future spintronic nano-technology. Data processing, storage, and transmission with lower energy consumption without sacrificing the speed of operation has been a lasting call in the realm of electronics since the advent of very-large-scale integration circuits. Compared to conventional semiconductors using electrons to carry information, magnetic insulators in which information can be encoded by magnetic excitations emerge as a promising alternative because manipulating magnetic excitations does not involve physical motion of charges, hence obviating Joule heating at a fundamental level In collinear antiferromagnetic (AFM) materials, however, magnetic order is characterized by the Néel vector whereas the macroscopic magnetization vanishes. Accordingly, there are two magnon species carrying opposite spin polarization, i.e., both up and down spins with respect to the Néel vector As will be detailed below, the magnon SNE in collinear AFM materials is far from a simple extension of the magnon Hall effect with the participation of opposite spin species. The profound topological structure of magnon dynamics revealed by the magnon SNE is distinct from its FM counterpart. While the prediction of magnon SNE aroused a series of theoretical generalizations under various physical contexts, heretofore it has only been measured experimentally in MnPS 3 In this Perspective, we first introduce the physical mechanism of the magnon SNE in an archetypal 2D AFM insulator (with honeycomb lattice, perpendicular Néel order, etc.), followed by a discussion about the concomitant spin diffusion effect taking place in real devices which could substantially affect the electronic detection of the magnon SNE. Then we discuss the material candidates to realize the magnon SNE and the experimental progress along with practical challenges. We also discuss several recent developments pertaining to the physical origin of the magnon SNE in collinear and noncollinear AFM systems as well as paramagnets without longrange ordering. With layered MnPS 3 or its variances in mind, let us consider a 2D honeycomb AFM with collinear order normal to the plane, as illustrated in Fig. where i, j and i, j denote summations over the nearest and second-nearest neighboring bonds, respectively, J 1 > 0 is the exchange interaction, K < 0 is the easy axis anisotropy, D is DM interaction along the ẑ z z direction (arising from the in- version symmetry breaking of second-nearest neighbors), and ξ i j = 1(-1) when S S S i and S S S j are arranged in a counterclockwise (clockwise) manner as shown in Fig. To find the magnon band structure, we invoke the linearized Holstein-Primakoff transformation 3,6 followed by Fourier transformations with S the spin magnitude and N the total number of unit cells. Then Eq. ( where where K eff = K(2S -1)/S is the effective anisotropy and ± distinguishes the two spin species. When retrieving the ignored J 2 and J 3 , the first term on the right-hand side of Eq. (3) becomes very complicated, but it always satisfies c 6 (6-fold rotational) symmetry in the Brillouin zone. It will become clear later that the magnon SNE is enabled by the ±Dg(k k k) term which respects c 3 symmetry in the Brillouin zone and is not affected by J 2 and J 3 . Using material parameters of MnPS 3 , we plot the magnon bands numerically along the path of Γ-K-M-K -Γ [depicted in Fig. As a comparison, we plot in Fig. Different from the AFM case, the two FM magnon bands have the same spin polarization. If the DM interaction vanishes, the two bands are degenerate at the K and K points where they form two Dirac cones analogous to the Dirac electrons in graphene. The DM interaction opens gaps at the Dirac points, leading to a topological phase transition from a trivial magnon insulator to a topological magnon insulator In the AFM case, by contrast, the magnon bands of opposite spin polarization are deformed in just opposite ways around the K and K valleys because of the DM interaction, leaving the bands degenerate only at the Γ and M points. Since the total spin ) commutes with the Hamiltonian, S z = ±h is conserved for each band. This situation is quite different from the spin Hall effect of electrons, where none of the spin component is conserved. What drives the transverse motion of magnons is the Berry curvature acting as an artificial magnetic field in the momentum space. In our context, the magnon Berry curvature is defined as where ± corresponds to the band ε ± with wavefunction |ψ ± (k k k) , ∇ k k k is the gradient over k k k, σ z is the Pauli matrix in the spin space, τ 0 is the identity matrix in the pseudospin space (A -B sublattices), and ⊗ is the tensor product. In 2D systems, Ω Ω Ω ± (k k k) reduces to a pseudo scalar that only has a z component. While at any k k k point the Berry curvatures from the four bands directly solved from the Hamiltonian add up to zero, in the subspace of physical solutions, however, we have , the spin-up and spin-down bands share the same Berry curvature, which is plotted in Figure Driven by an in-plane temperature gradient ∇T , the transverse magnon current contributed by each magnon band reads where Given the total spin current: j j j s = h( j j j +j j j -) ≡ -σ ẑ z z × ∇ ∇ ∇T , the SNE coefficient can be defined as σ = σ +σ -, which is plotted in Fig. There exists a different convention in reducing the four bands to the physical solution, which ends up with two degenerate bands for both spin species even when D = 0. In that case, however, magnons of opposite spin polarization are subject to opposite Berry curvatures, i.e., Ω Ω Ω + (k k k) = -Ω Ω Ω -(k k k). Therefore, Eq. ( As shown in Fig. Similar to the SNE of electrons where τ ± is the phenomenological magnon relaxation time and v ± = ∂ ε ± (k k k)/h∂ k x is the magnon group velocity. While θ SN for magnons is conceptually parallel to its electronic counterpart, we are not able to estimate its value in MnPS 3 and other candidate materials, because converting the magnon Seebeck current (which is a heat current) into j x is rather difficult, let alone that the magnon Seebeck effect is itself an open question in 2D magnets. Similar to the spin Hall effect of electrons, here the absence of thermal Hall effect (σ + = -σ -, so j j j + + j j j -= 0) is protected by the time reversal symmetry. A finite thermal Hall current can be induced by applying a perpendicular magnetic field B. However, the B field only shifts the dispersion relations by an overall constant depending on the spin polarization while leaving the eigenstates and the Berry curvature unchanged. In the presence of B field, σ + (B) = σ /2 + ∆σ 1 and σ -(B) = -σ /2 + ∆σ 2 where ∆σ 1 is different from ∆σ 2 . Accordingly, the SNE coefficient becomes σ If B is reversed, symmetry dictates that σ + (-B) = σ /2 -∆σ 2 and σ -(-B) = -σ /2 + ∆σ 1 , which yields σ (-B) = σ (B), i.e., the SNE coefficient is an even function of B. Consequently, to the lowest order, the transverse spin current j j j s must scale as B 2 . In other words, while a perpendicular B field can induce a net magnetization on top of the Néel order by polarizing the equilibrium magnons, it only introduces a higher order effect in the nonequilibrium magnon transport. The magnon SNE was originally proposed as a ballistic effect without considering the influence of boundaries and spin diffusion Solving the spin diffusion equations on both sides of each boundary with boundary conditions reflecting the four spin- dependent scattering processes depicted in Fig. where ∂ x T is the temperature gradient along x direction, θ s is the spin Hall angle, e is the electron charge, L, w and d describe the device geometry shown in Fig. Concerning reliability, we believe that optical detection, which is devoid of thermoelectric effects, should be superior to electronic detection so long as the spatial resolution is sufficient to resolve the non-equilibrium magnon distribution in the transverse direction. Without metallic leads, the magnon SNE will generate opposite spin accumulations on opposite transverse edges, and the detection scheme should be similar to the optical detection of the spin Hall effect Until now, we are aware of only one experimental study of the magnon SNE Following the investigation of MnPS 3 as a promising candidate to verify the magnon SNE In the above, the magnon SNE and its manifestations in various AFM materials all requires the system to be longrange ordered. However, recent studies found that the SNE phenomenon also manifests in the disordered paramagnetic phase above the Néel temperature Another interesting playground of the magnon SNE is AFM insulators with noncollinear ground states. For example, KFe 3 (OH) 6 (SO 4 ) 2 has a Kagome lattice with in-plane 120 • spin alignment. A single layer sample can exhibit the magnon SNE Finally, we would like to point out that physical mechanisms other than the DM interaction could be responsible for the magnon SNE even in the simple collinear case. References Similar to the magnon-phonon hybridization, other forms of quasi-particle hybridization may also enable the magnon SNE so long as the hybridized bands with anti-crossing gaps are topologically different from the non-hybridized bands. For example, the magnon SNE has been recently extended into the nonlinear response regime in which the spin Hall current of magnons is proportional to (∇T ) In summary, we discussed the underlying mechanism and the topological nature of the magnon SNE in 2D collinear AFM insulators and how its detection is affected by spin diffusion. The pioneering studies of the magnon SNE in MnPS 3 inspired fruitful investigations into various materials and more complicated structures, including other mechanisms than the DM interaction. In spite of plenty theoretical extensions, the magnon SNE has so far been measured experimentally in very limited materials, calling for more experimental studies in the near future which not only provides more insights into the physical origin but also facilitates the development of practical magnonic devices. This work is supported by the Air Force Office of Scientific Research under grant FA9550-19-1-0307. The authors are grateful to A. Balandin, D. Xiao, S. Okamoto and X. Chen for helpful discussions. ε ± (k k k)/S = (3J 1 -K eff ) 2 -|J 1 f (k k k)| 2 ± Dg(k k k),(3)(c) (d) AFM ε(k)