Thermo-gelling polymers have been envisioned as promising smart biomaterials but limited to their weak mechanical and thermodynamic stabilities. Here we propose a new thermo-gelling vitrimer, which remains at a liquid state because of the addition of protector molecules preventing the crosslinking, and with increasing temperature, an entropy driven crosslinking occurs to induce the sol-gel transition. Moreover, we find that the activation barrier in the metathesis reaction of vitrimers plays an important role, and experimentally one can use catalysts to tune the activation barrier to drive the vitrimer to form an equilibrium gel at high temperature, which is not subject to any thermodynamic instability. We formulate a mean field theory to describe the entropy driven crosslinking of the vitrimer, which agrees quantitatively with computer simulations, and paves the way for design and fabrication of novel vitrimers for biomedical applications. Thermo-gels are the polymer that undergoes a sol-gel transition with increasing temperature. Over the past decades, thermo-gels have gained extensive attention in biomaterials and biomedical sciences, Vitrimers are a unique type of crosslinked polymer networks with dynamic and exchangeable covalent bonds. We consider a system of volume V consisting of N poly polymer chains, and each polymer chain comprises n connected hard spheres of diameter σ as the backbone, on which m precursors P are uniformly distributed. As shown in Fig. Small molecules B, C and D are modelled as hard spheres of diameter σ and controlled by the chemical potential μ B , μ C and μ D , respectively. We assume that densities of small molecules in the reservoir remain constant for all temperature, i.e., βμ B , βμ C and βμ D do not change with T . Here β = 1/k B T with k B and T the Boltzmann constant and temperature of the system, respectively. The packing fraction of polymer backbones is φ p = πN poly nσ 3 /6V , and N i is number of bonds or molecules in the system, where i = P, PC, PD, P 2 C, B, C and D. An infinitely deep square-well potential is employed to mimic the covalent bonds in the system, where r bond is the cut-off distance of the covalent bond. We use the square-well potential to model the van der Waals short range attraction between polymer backbones: where χ att and r att are the strength and interaction range of the attraction, respectively. To be experimentally relevant, we choose n = 100, m = 8 and r bond = r att = 1.5σ throughout all simulations in this work. The free energy of the system can be written as where Λ is the de Broglie wavelength. The first summation is on the ideal gas terms of polymer blobs (poly), byproduct molecules (B), free crosslinkers (C) and protectors (D). The second summation is on the ideal gas terms of precursors P, PC bonds, PD bonds and P 2 C bonds on a polymer confined within the volume V p , which can been as the volume occupied by a polymer, and n i = N i /N poly is the number of bonds per polymer with i = P, PC, PD, P 2 C. ∆S accounts for the entropy change of the system by forming a P 2 C crosslinking bond, and F att is the free energy contribution from the van der Waals short range attraction between polymer backbones. It is known that the structure of a homogeneous fluid is mainly determined by the repulsion between molecules. is a function of the total packing fraction of the system φ, which can be seen as the total number of non-bonded attractive pairs of backbone beads formed in the system. F ex HS is the excess free energy accounting for the crowding effect, which we approximate with the Carnahan-Starling hard-sphere equation of state We define the crosslinking degree of the system as f P 2 C = 2N P 2 C /(N poly m) and the fraction of other bonds or molecules as f i = N i /(N poly m) with i = P, PD, PC, B, C, D, and With the saddle point approximation, i.e., ∂F/∂{f j } = 0 with j = PC, PD, P 2 C, we have , where μ ex HS is the excess free energy of hard spheres with packing fraction φ, which can be calculated by self-consistent iterations (see Supplementary Materials S1). Here we note that ∂F att /∂f j ≈ -χ att (∂g/∂φ)(∂φ/∂f j ) ≈ 0, with the assumption that the system is mainly composed of polymer backbones, and the metathesis reactions have minor effects on the packing fraction of the system, i.e., ∂φ/∂f j ≈ 0. Substituting these terms into Eq. 4, we obtain with Moreover, V p and ∆S can be obtained by considering the chemical and reaction equilibrium (see Supplementary Materials S2): where K 1 and K 2 are reaction constants of the first two metathesis reactions in Fig. We perform Monte Carlo (MC) simulations to investigate the equilibrium properties of the thermo-crosslinking vitrimer. Assuming the bulk density conservation of B, C and D when temperature varies, we employed grand canonical βμ B μ C μ D -N poly V T MC simulations to simulate the coarse-grained hard-sphere-chain system, with the temperature unit /k B . Simulations are performed with N poly polymer chains with n beads per chain, where periodic boundary conditions are applied in all three dimensions with the cubic box volume The translational moves of particles are implemented by the straight event-chain algorithm, where x initial and x final are the projection of initial and final particle positions on the chain direction of each event chain, ρ is number density of the particles and • chains calculates the average over all event chains. Molecules B, C and D are inserted or removed using the conventional grand canonical MC method. Besides, we devise a simple bond swap algorithm to simulate reversible bond swap metathesis reactions in the vitrimer system (see below), respecting the detailed balance. The ratio of three types of trial moves, translational moves, inserting/removing molecules and bond swaps, is 1 : 4 : 5. In each simulation, we perform 10 9 MC moves for equilibration and 10 9 MC moves for sampling. We perform the hybrid event-driven molecular dynamics -Monte Carlo (EDMD-MC) simulation Each simulation consists of 10 6 τ MD for equilibration and 10 6 τ MD for sampling. An Anderson thermostat which calculates over all backbone beads with position r on the vitrimers. In our MC simulations, a typical reversible single bond-swap reaction is One can see the above bond swap move does not change the number of neighbor potentially reactive particles and bonds of a, hence both before and after a bond swap move, For the first and third reaction in Fig. We randomly choose each specific bond swap move in three steps: A bond swap attempt first needs to overcome the energy barrier with probability acc b = exp (-∆G b /k B T ), and then is accepted with the probability where ∆G is the bond swap reaction free energy. First we investigate the crosslinking in the system without any short range van der Waals attraction, i.e., χ att = 0, and in Fig. At γ = 1, f P 2 C reaches two different positive plateaus at T → 0 and T → ∞, respectively, and with increasing temperature, f P 2 C increases to reach a maximum at temperature T * then decreases to approach the same plateau at high temperature, which does not depend on γ. These can be understood as follows. At the high temperature limit, β → 0, the crosslinking in the system is solely determined by entropy, and with which does not depend on γ. This can be further used to calculate f ∞ P 2 C using Eq. 6. Moreover, at the low temperature limit, i.e., β → ∞, when γ = 1, the saddle-point solution of Γ can be obtained by the Lagrange multiplier method (see Supplementary Materials S4): with which we can calculate the low temperature plateau f 0 P 2 C for γ = 1 with Eq. 6. One can see that Γ ∞ > Γ 0 , which implies f ∞ P 2 C < f 0 P 2 C , as Eq. 6 is a monotonically decreasing function of Γ. When γ > 1, as the formation of PD bonds is more energetically favourable than that of PC bonds, the crosslinking is prevented at the low temperature limit, and at small γ, the competition between entropy driven crosslinking and enthalpy driven protection by PD bonds leads to the non-monotonic behaviour of f P 2 C with increasing T . The optimal temperature T * , where f P 2 C reaches the maximum can be obtained by solving ∂f P 2 C /∂β = 0 equivalent to ∂Γ/∂β = 0, which is T * is a positive number when the protecting effect of PD bonds is too strong, and f P 2 C increases monotonically with increasing temperature. As shown in Fig. As in realistic vitrimers, there are always some short range van der Waals attraction between polymer backbones driving the gelation at low temperature, we investigate the system with weak attraction. In Fig. Next, we perform molecular dynamics (MD) simulations to investigate the thermo-induced gelation of vitrimers. We assume all metathesis reactions sharing the same activation barrier ∆G b , and the rate of reaction k = ν 0 exp (-β[∆G b + max (∆G, 0)]) with ∆G the reaction free energy. ν 0 = 1/τ MD is the kinetic prefactor. The activation barrier ∆G b does not change any thermodynamic property of the system, while it does control the dynamic properties. In conclusion, we have proposed a novel thermo-gelling vitrimer, in which at low temperature, the crosslinking is prevented by the protector, i.e., D molecules, and with increasing temperature, the entropy driven crosslinking occurs, which drives the gelation of the system. We formulate a mean field theory to describe the crosslinking, which agrees quantitatively with coarse grained computer simulations above the gas-liquid phase separation temperature induced by the short range van der Waals attraction in the system. Further molecular dynamics simulations show that the activation barrier of the metathesis reaction plays a crucial role during the thermo-gelling process, and it can be controlled by using different catalysts experimentally. Moreover, we show that the resulting thermo-induced gelation is an equilibrium gel not subject to any thermodynamic instability. Similar thermo-gelling systems were studied previously in patchy colloidal systems All data needed to evaluate the conclusions in the paper are presented in the paper and/or the Supplementary Materials. Additional data related to this paper may be requested from the authors. 