Nickel-based superconductors provide a long-awaited experimental platform to explore possible cuprate-like superconductivity. Despite similar crystal structure and d electron filling, these systems exhibit several differences. Nickelates are the most polar layered oxide superconductor, raising questions about the interface between substrate and thin film -thus far the only sample geometry to successfully stabilize superconductivity. We conduct a detailed experimental and theoretical study of the prototypical interface between Nd 1-x Sr x NiO 2 and SrTiO 3 . Atomic-resolution electron energy loss spectroscopy in the scanning transmission electron microscope reveals the formation of a single intermediate Nd(Ti,Ni)O 3 layer. Density functional theory calculations with a Hubbard U term show how the observed structure alleviates the strong polar discontinuity. We explore effects of oxygen occupancy, hole doping, and cation structure to disentangle the contributions of each for reducing interface charge density. Resolving the nontrivial interface structure will be instructive for future synthesis of nickelate films on other substrates and in vertical heterostructures. The stabilization of superconductivity in thin film hole-doped infinite-layer rare-earth nickelates, RNiO 2 (R = La, Nd, Pr), provides the first experimental platform in which to explore a possible analogue to the high-T c cuprates and Ni 1+ O 2- 2 ) An atomic-scale understanding of both the chemical and electronic structure of the substratenickelate interface is therefore of great interest to the field. Are the interface and surface electronically distinct from the rest of the thin film? Is superconductivity in the experimentally available thin films representative of the bulk state? If the observed superconductivity is significantly impacted by interface effects, will stabilizing the same response ever be possible in bulk-grown samples? As stated by Botana, et al., "the first important question to clarify is which interface is actually realized in these systems" Here, we used atomically-resolved electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS) to resolve the atomic-scale lattice and electronic structure of the NdNiO 2 -SrTiO 3 interface, providing key insights into the role of the interface for the observed superconductivity in infinite-layer nickelates. Our measurements show the formation of a single intermediate Nd(Ti,Ni)O 3 layer between the substrate and nickelate film, which forms during the perovskite phase growth and persists after the topotactic reduction to the infinite-layer phase. Density functional theory calculations with a Hubbard U term (DFT+U ) show that the experimentally observed interface structure effectively quenches the formation of an interface 2DEG, consistent with the lack of excess interface charge measured experimentally by EELS. Systematic variation of the model interface disentangles the contributions from the atomic stacking sequence, oxygen occupancy, and lattice distortions. Together, our experimental measurements and theoretical calculations provide important insights needed to establish a realistic picture of this novel superconducting system. Furthermore, it is thus far also observed in all nickelate films stabilized on SrTiO 3 , regardless of chemical (Sr) doping or rare-earth species (La, Pr, Nd; see Extended Data S1-S4 and The universality of these observations suggest that this interface layer is not an artefact of very specific growth conditions, but rather some inherent mechanism within the system. Namely, the atomic interface structure may help alleviate the very strong polar discontinuity described above that would otherwise form at an abrupt interface The impact of excess Ti at the interface on potential charge buildup is examined using density functional theory (DFT). Previous work has shown that an abrupt interface between SrTiO 3 and NdNiO 2 would host a high carrier density 2DEG, but that a single intermediate perovskite NdNiO 3 layer may be sufficient to prevent the formation of such a 2DEG an abrupt transition from perovskite to infinite-layer, such that all Nd-containing planes are solely Nd and devoid of oxygen (Figure The DFT+U calculations demonstrate how the presence of excess interface charge depends strongly on the oxygen stoichiometry of each layer. The first two cases in particular show pronounced band-bending (dashed red lines) especially in the substrate. Each of the structures features a finite occupation of Ti 3d states, particularly d xy orbitals. The total charge of the 2DEG, calculated by progressively integrating the states between -0.7 eV and E F , is comparatively smallest for the SrTiO 3 -NdTiO 3 -NdNiO 3 -NdNiO 2 interface structure shown in Figure While the annular dark-field (ADF) collection geometry used for the left-most STEM image in Figure Empty and filled apical oxygen sites in the infinite-layer and perovskite structures in the NdNiO 2 film and SrTiO 3 substrate respectively are indeed visible on either side of the interface in an atomicresolution ABF-STEM image (Extended Data S5), but the technique is not suited to the kind of quantitative measurements at the intermediate layers which are required to distinguish between the three models in Figure In addition to elemental mapping, STEM-EELS provides the capability to measure local charge modulations and interface effects from Figure while the substrate layers show no sign of induced oxygen vacancies Intriguingly, the Ti-L 2,3 spectra show very little modification across the interface, other than a reduction in overall intensity consistent with the observed stoichiometry (Figure edge is likely more reflective of subtle changes to the coordination environment in the interface layer induced by the change in A-site cation from Sr to Nd and the partial Ni occupancy in this layer so far neglected in our models. By comparison, the O-K edge, which can be used to track chemical and electronic states as well as bonding environments in complex oxides DFT+U calculations validate this experimentally-derived structure by calculating the perlayer reduction energy required to remove apical oxygens from the perovskite phase of each layer in the interface. Figure With this more precise atomic picture of the interface, we revisit the model presented in Figure Finally, we consider in conjunction the role of Ni partial occupancy in the interface layer and more subtle structural distortions which may play a role in accommodating the excess charge. Quantitative high-angle annular dark-field (HAADF)-STEM measurements can be used to track the c-axis lattice spacing in each unit cell across the interface (Figure Two other possibilities may contribute to the lack of superconducting bulk samples: 1) the substrate provides important structural support during the chemical reduction process, or 2) some degree of lattice strain is necessary to stabilize superconductivity. In the first case, it may be possible to explore other routes of oxygen reduction which will not require the mechanical support of a substrate. An extreme example of the second case has been demonstrated previously in rutile RuO 2 , an otherwise metallic compound, which can be made superconducting through very high epitaxial strain imposed by certain substrate orientations In superconducting films are realized on other substrates The infinite-layer NdNiO 2 on SrTiO 3 film presented here was synthesized under the 'high-fluence' conditions using precise laser imaging conditions described elsewhere Atomic-resolution STEM, EELS Electron transparent TEM samples of each film were prepared on a Thermo Fisher Scientific Helios G4 UX focussed ion beam (FIB) using the standard liftout method. Samples were thinned to <30 nm with 2 kV Ga ions, followed by a final polish at 1 kV to reduce effects of surface damage. All specimens were stored in vacuum to prevent possible degradation in air. High-angle annular dark-field (HAADF) scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) was performed on an aberration-correction FEI Titan Themis at an accelerating voltage of 300 kV with a convergence angle of 30 mrad and inner and outer collection angles of 68 and 340 mrad, respectively. Elemental maps were recorded with a 965 GIF Quantum ER spectrometer and a Gatan K2 Summit direct electron detector operated in counting mode. Layer-resolved EELS across the substrate-film interface (Figure Spectra were recorded as line profiles across the interface extending from the SrTiO 3 substrate into the NdNiO 2 film with sampling density on the order of ∼1 pm per spectrum. Integrating over ∼0.2 Å centered on each B-site yielded layer-resolved spectra for each data set, several of which have been summed to produce the high signal-to-noise series presented here. All spectra have been normalized by the total contributed exposure time for each. We performed first-principles calculations in the framework of density functional theory Wave functions and density were expanded into plane waves up to cutoff energies of 45 and 350 Ry, respectively. Ultrasoft pseudopotentials Paxton smearing We modeled different infinite-layer nickelate/SrTiO 3 (001) interfaces with varying stoichiome- The layer-by-layer reduction energies 