Recently, much interest has emerged in fluid-like electric charge transport in various solid-state systems. The hydrodynamic behavior of the electronic fluid reveals itself as a decrease of the electrical resistance with increasing temperature (the Gurzhi effect 1,2 ) in narrow conducting channels 3,4 , polynomial scaling of the resistance as a function of the channel width 5 , substantial violation of the Wiedemann-Franz law 6,7 supported by the emergence of the Poiseuille flow 4,8-10 . Similarly to whirlpools in flowing water, the viscous electronic flow generates vortices, resulting in abnormal sign-changing electrical response driven by the backflow of electrical current 11 . Experimentally, the presence of the hydrodynamic vortices was observed in low-temperature graphene as a negative voltage drop near the current-injecting contacts 12 . However, the question of whether the long-ranged sign-changing electrical response can be produced by a mechanism other than hydrodynamics has not been addressed so far. Here we use polarization-sensitive laser microscopy to demonstrate the emergence of visually similar abnormal sign-alternating patterns in charge density in multilayer tungsten ditelluride at room temperature where this material does not exhibit true electronic hydrodynamics 13 . We argue that this pseudo-hydrodynamic behavior appears due to a subtle interplay between the diffusive transport of electrons and holes. In particular, the sign-alternating charge accumulation in WTe2 is supported by the unexpected backflow of compressible neutral electron-hole current, which creates charge-neutral whirlpools in the bulk of this nearly compensated semimetal. We demonstrate that the exceptionally large spatial size of the charge domains is sustained by the long recombination time of electron-hole pairs. Tungsten ditelluride (WTe2) is a remarkable representative of a family of non-magnetic layered transition-metal dichalcogenides, which provides a ubiquitous arena for investigation of diverse quantum effects including the quantum spin Hall effect The electronic transport in semimetallic WTe2 at temperature 20 K demonstrates collective hydrodynamic behavior that appears to be in sharp contrast with the expected diffusive drift of a Fermi liquid The hydrodynamic flow of electrons can lead to a nonlocal macroscopic signature of viscosity We experimentally observe visually similar sign-alternating patterns of charge accumulation close to the injection electrodes in a film of semimetallic WTe2 with a thickness of about 70 nm at room temperature (see Methods and SM S1, S2). The observed structures in electronic charge density possess exceptionally long relaxation profiles of the micrometer length scale exceeding by three orders of magnitude the electrostatic screening length. Despite the bulk WTe2 does not exhibit true electronic hydrodynamics at room temperature We induce charge accumulation on WTe2 by applying an electrical bias. To visualize charge distribution, we use the optical microscopy technique (see Methods and SM S3). Charge accumulation affects the optical refractive index via the electro-optic effect An entirely different distribution of charge emerges when electrical current is injected at the edges of the WTe2 device through two long metal electrodes (Fig. To clarify the origin of the long-relaxing charge distribution, we fabricate a device that has four narrow electrodes a width of 2.5 <m attached to the edges of a WTe2 flake. The electrodes are aligned along aand b-axis as shown in Fig. WTe2 is a nearly compensated semimetal that hosts both types of charge carriers, electrons, and holes. In the disorder-dominated regime, the two-carrier models admit simple kinetic descriptions with deep consequences for transport properties in confined geometries where L $ and N $ are the diffusion constants and the normalized conductivities, respectively. The electron and hole currents are not separately conserved due to the e-h recombination process characterized by relatively long recombination time O ' . The charge density G8 = G8 ( -G8 ) satisfies the following fourth-order differential equation (SI 9): (Δ -9 * +, )(Δ -9 , +, )G8(P) = 0, where Δ = Q - , + Q . , is the two-dimensional Laplacian appropriate for a thin-film geometry. In a near-neutrality regime, the length parameters in Eq. ( One notices that charge-density structures characterized by a length scale shorter than the recombination length 9 ' , Eq. ( imposed on the stream function ψ in a real electronic fluid system. The stream function describes the electronic velocity V = W X × JU of a two-dimensional incompressible electric current Z = -MV in a one-component conductor (here W X is a unit out-of-plane vector). Equation (3) can be derived from the linearized Navier-Stokes equation which describes, for example, the non-Ohmic electron flow Z = -MV in graphene with conductivity N % . The quantity L 5 ∝ ]^ plays a role of a diffusion constant expressed via the electronic shear viscosity ^. At zero viscosity, ^= 0, the diffusion constant vanishes, L 5 = 0, and the Navier-Stokes equation ( An unexpected analogy of the diffusive two-component system (1) with hydrodynamics can also be established in the opposite limit of large distances where the geometric features of charge accumulation domains are set by the recombination length 9 ' . In this regime, the pseudoparticle current, V ≡ `= a ( + a ) , is described by the suggestive linearized Navier- -^̅ ΔV -Sc ̅ + Here the ellipsis denotes the higher-derivative (Burnett-like 29 ) terms that are irrelevant in the long-distance limit, g ≫ 9 ' , but important to maintain the potential nature of the non-conserved, compressible flow P. If the quasiparticle current P were conserved, then the lowest-derivate terms in (5) would acquire the hydrodynamic form (4). As we show below, at these large distances, the system (1) supports the formation of whirlpools and backflow of the neutral quasiparticle current, hence we call this regime "pseudo-hydrodynamics". In Eq.( The whirlpools in the electrically neutral quasiparticle current P cannot be detected experimentally in a direct way. However, outside of the neutrality point, the quasiparticle flow is known to lead 27,28 to accumulation of local electric charge density G8(\) at the boundaries (SM S10) which can detectable experimentally. Our optical data allows us to reconstruct the quasiparticle current via theoretical analysis. In Figs. 2c,f, we show the theoretical results for the charge distribution corresponding to the experimentally realized geometry of Figs. The almost symmetric charge accumulation pattern (Fig. The asymmetric charge accumulation pattern (Fig. Contrary to the seven disentangled regions produced in the symmetric arrangement of the electrodes, Fig. Device fabrication: WTe2 multilayer with a thickness about 70 nm is exfoliated onto SiO2/Si substrate by using the scotch tape method inside a glove box with an argon environment to prevent oxidation. The sample is then coated by a PMMA layer before being taken out for device fabrication. The thickness and the in-plane crystal orientation (a-and b-axes) of the exfoliated WTe2 flake is determined by using atomic force microscopy and an angle-dependent polarized Raman spectroscopy, respectively (SM S1). The Cr/Au metal electrodes are fabricated along these two axes by the e-beam lithography and e-beam evaporation processes. The device is then etched by a reactive ion etching system using SF6 gas to form a well-defined shape and coated by a thin SiN passivation layer to prevent surface degradation of WTe2 during the electrical and optical measurements. The temperature dependence and crystal-axis dependence of the electrical resistivity manifest the metallic behavior of WTe2 (SM S2). A linearly polarized laser beam is incident onto WTe2 devices in a surface normal direction with a center wavelength of 780 nm. After passing through a 50x objective, the beam radius is about 1.4 <m, and the input power density is about 1 mW/<m , . The charge accumulation on WTe2 rotates the polarization of the reflected light. The polarization angle of the incident laser beam was controlled by using a motorized rotational stage and a half-wave plate. The reflected laser beam is passing through a quarter-wave plate, half-wave plate, and Wollaston prism successively, and its polarization rotation is detected by a balanced detector. With the initial polarization along the azimuthal angle of " to the a-axis of WTe2 (the inset in Fig. ( Sections 8-13). The electrical characterization of the fabricated device is conducted at room temperature in a high vacuum (< 10 -6 Torr) using a probe station with a semiconductor analyzer (Keithley 4200 system). Temperature-dependent transport measurements are carried out in a Physical Property Measurement System (PPMS-Quantum Design). The linear current-voltage characteristic and the decrease of resistance with a temperature of the fabricated devices manifest the metallic behavior of WTe2 thin film An optical setup in Fig. The laser beam was incident onto the WTe2 devices by passing through a 50x objective lens at the surface normal direction. The beam waist is about 1 !m, and power is about 5 mW. For adjusting the azimuth angle of the light polarization, a half-wave plate (HWP1) was used. After reflection from the sample, the reflected light is separated from the incident light by a beam splitter (BS), passes through a half-wave plate (HWP2), then goes to a balanced detector. Given the complex nature of the dielectric constant of WTe2, we measured the complex polarization rotation angle (Δ# $ ) with and without the quarter-wave plate (QWP), which is in between BS is the objective lens, BS is 5:5 beam splitter, HWP is half-wave retarder plate, QWP is quarterwave retarder plate, and WP is Wollaston prism. In our optical system, the dominant noise source is the intensity fluctuation of our laser. We measure the relative intensity noise (RIN) from the laser fluctuation as, where the spectral Vrms is the voltage reading on the lock-in amplifier by the laser fluctuation per √Hz, and VDC is the DC voltage by the average laser power. The repetition of pulsed laser is injected into a normal Si photodetector. The photocurrent output from the photodetector is connected to the input of the lock-in amplifier. The Vrms is measured at reference frequencies of 10~100,000 Hz. The VDC is determined as / +, = 0 (-./% × 2 0#%#$%1& × 3 (1$23-4 , where Ilight is the average power of the laser, Rdetector is the responsivity of the photodetector of 0.4 A W -1 , and Zlock-in is the input impedance of the lock-in amplifier of 50 Ω. The measured RIN decreases with frequency (Fig. WTe2 is an optically anisotropic material with a reflectivity anisotropy of 4 where 9 77 and 9 88 are the reflection coefficients for the light's polarization along the aand baxes, respectively (Fig. A balanced detection with an application of electric current can be described as, Finally, the lock-in detects the difference between Δ0(>) and Δ0(> = 0) with the current alternates between j and 0 with a modulation frequency of 3 kHz. In our experiment, the dielectric tensor can acquire contributions to its off-diagonal and diagonal elements. In a case, when the charge current affects the off-diagonal part of the dielectric tensor, the dielectric tensor modulation takes the following form: where the off-diagonal element U 78 can be generated, for example, by the current-induced magnetization such as the valley Hall effect When the charge current modifies the diagonal part of the dielectric tensor, then the dielectric tensor modulation can be represented as follows: where the corrections U 77 and U 88 could be driven by the charge carrier accumulation. In this case, the complex angle shift Δ# shows a distinctive sin(2#) behavior with the maximum signal at appearing, without any offset, at # = 45° (Fig. The dependence of Δ# on the anisotropy ratio 9 = is shown in Fig. The relaxation length can be obtained by adopting the convolution procedure with the biexponential function: We assume that the signal profile Δ#(_) has a sinh H To study the effects of the anisotropy of Wte2, we conduct 2D spatial mappings for the charge accumulation of the devices where the electrical current is injected separately in the aand b-axes of the same flake as shown in Fig. (shown in Figs. In this theoretical section of the Supplementary Material, we first review known transport and charge-accumulation properties in two-component electron-hole systems. Then we present new calculations which support the pseudo-hydrodynamic interpretation of the charge-accumulation patterns observed experimentally. In our considerations below, we do not advocate any particular model of the electronic band structure. Instead, we use a remarkably transparent and simple parabolic two-band model used in Refs. [13-15] which we follow closely in this introductory subsection. This model has a rather generic character. We consider a generic two-component, electron-hole system which stays slightly away from charge neutrality point and possesses a weakly broken electron-hole symmetry. In a steady-state regime, the electronic (↵ = e) and hole (↵ = h) currents j ↵ , and the local fluctuations of the respective charge densities n ↵ (r) = n ↵ (r) n 0,↵ with respect to the constant background densities n 0,↵ are described, in the background of electric E and magnetic B fields, by the following macroscopic equations: where ) is the friction force between the flows of electrons and holes controlled by the small parameter . The electron and hole currents are proportional to the corresponding drift velocities u ↵ : The electric charges of holes and electrons are, respectively, e e = e and e h = +e, where e = +|e| is the elementary electric charge. The transport equations (S14) involve the di↵usion coe cients the appropriate conductivities, and the cyclotron frequencies ) which are expressed in terms of the masses m ↵ , the momentum relaxation times ⌧ ↵ , the background charge densities n 0,↵ , and the electric charges of electrons (e e = e) and holes (e h = +e) calculated in units of the fundamental electric charge e = +|e|. The quantities ⌫ 0,↵ in Eq. ( The recombination rates that enter the current conservation equations ( are expressed via a model-dependent coe cient which describes the electron-hole recombination process. To avoid unnecessary complications that do not a↵ect the qualitative features of the system, we set the equal masses for electrons and holes m h = m e = m, so that the cyclotron frequencies (S20) get simplified: It is also convenient to work at the exact charge-neutrality point in terms of electron and hole populations, n 0,e = n 0,h = n 0 . This condition simplifies calculations without restricting the generality of our results. Furthermore, we take into account that the electron and hole recombination rates are the same (S22): where we denoted by ⌧ R the common electron-hole recombination time. It is convenient to introduce the charged current j and the neutral current of the quasiparticles P : and the charge and quasiparticle density fluctuations, respectively: The electric current and the electric charge are defined, respectively, as follows: In order to discriminate between J and j, we will call them the electric current and the charged current, respectively (and likewise for the densities Q and n). The linear combinations of Eqs. (S14) for electrons and holes give us the equations for charged and neutral currents and their densities in the disorder-dominated regime: where we used the following combinations for the conductivities, momentum relaxation times and the di↵usion coe cients, respectively [13, 14]: We assume a (small) di↵erence in the momentum relaxation times and the di↵usion coe cients for electrons and holes, so that none of the quantities (S29), (S30) and (S31) is vanishing. The transport relations (S28) should be supplemented by the continuity condition for the electric current, the relaxation for the neutral particle current, and the Maxwell equation: The relaxation law (S33) follows from Eqs. (S15) and (S24). The presence of (nearly) compensated charge carriers produces profound e↵ects on transport properties in confined geometries [14]. For example, in the Hall experiment, in the regime of perfect electron-hole symmetry, the Hall currents of electrons and holes propagating in opposite directions cancel each other completely. As a result, the lateral voltage drop disappears. If the electron-hole symmetry is violated, then the classical Hall e↵ects generated by electrons and holes do not cancel each other, and the Hall voltage is formed. Our observations show that for perfectly oriented crystals of WTe 2 at room temperature, the classical Hall current is relatively small, thus indicating an approximate validity of the electron-hole symmetry. A slight deviation from charge neutrality allows us to explain the observed charge accumulation pattern and nonlocal conductivity of the system. In our paper, we are interested in the charge and quasiparticle accumulation e↵ects in the absence of the background magnetic field. Since the Oersted magnetic field induced by the electric current is negligibly small, we set the cyclotron frequencies (S20) to zero for the rest of our considerations. In addition, we exclude the thermal transport from our considerations neglecting the local temperature fluctuations T (r) = 0, which should play a subleading role. In the disorder-dominated regime, the thermalization between the electronic subsystem (which includes both hole and electron flows) and the crystal lattice is much faster than the electron-hole recombination time, ⌧ ph ⌧ ⌧ R implying that the charge accumulation e↵ects emerge in the already locally thermalized system. To simplify our calculations, we do not consider slight friction between electron and hole flows (S16) which does not bring any qualitatively new e↵ects. By setting a vanishing magnetic field B = 0 and zero electron-hole friction = 0, we bring the transport equations (S28) to the symmetric form: which can also be derived from Eq. ( Applying the divergence operator to these equations and using Eqs. (S32), (S33), and (S34), we get two coupled second-order di↵erential equations for charged and quasiparticle densities: where are two (squared) lengths expressed via the combinations of the electron and hole parameters, and is an e↵ective length associated with the electron-hole recombinations. Notice that the parameter 2 in Eq. (S37) can take negative values. Excluding the quasiparticle density ⇢ from Eqs. (S36), we get the following equivalent equations for the charge density n and the quasiparticle density ⇢: where are the two new length scales which control the spatial variation of the charge density n in the sample. Notice that both lengths (S40) are nonvanishing, real-valued parameters. The first screening length (S40a) is expressed via the recombination length (S38) as well as the Thomas-Fermi length: In the illustrative example when the electron/hole average velocities and the corresponding susceptibilities satisfy the relation hv 2 i e /⌫ 0,e = hv 2 i h /⌫ 0,h , the electron and hole di↵usivities (S18) are proportional to the corresponding relaxation times, D e /⌧ e = D h /⌧ h , implying, together with Eq. (S29), that + = = TF , were the Thomas-Fermi length takes the familiar form: (S42) This particular situation can be realized when the electron-hole symmetry is almost exact, with the only di↵erence in the relaxation times, ⌧ e 6 = ⌧ h . What is the hierarchy of the length scales (S40) close to the neutrality point? The Thomas-Fermi length, given by Eq. (S41) or Eq. (S42), determines the distance scale of the electrostatic screening. In typical metals, the charge screening length is very short, of the order of a few nanometers while the e-h recombination length varies from hundreds of nanometers to centimeters depending on material and temperature [13]. Given the large di↵erence in these lengths, R TF . (S43) we can neglect the relaxation length in Eq. ( implying that ⇠ 2 ⇠ 1 due to the natural scale hierarchy of the e-h relaxation and charge screening lengths (S43). It is convenient to rewrite Eq. (S39) in the form of Eq. ( where the quantities characterize two new inverse length scales 1 and 2 via the length parameters ⇠ 1 and ⇠ 2 given explicitly in Eq. (S40). In Eq. (S46), the signs "+" and " " correspond, respectively, to the quantities { 1 and { 2 arranged according to the hierarchy: In the near-neutrality regime with the natural di↵erence between the length scales (S43), one gets: ) Using Eq. (S44), we conclude that the quantities { 1 and { 2 are determined by the Thomas-Fermi length and the electron-hole recombination length, respectively: In electronic fluids, the hydrodynamic behavior of electrons naturally leads to negative values of the local (vicinity) resistance R v . The e↵ect appears due to the emergence of the electronic backflow caused by the whirlpools in a viscous electronic fluid that are created, for instance, near current-injecting contacts. The striking example of the nonlocal electrostatic response emerges in graphene [16-21]. The e↵ect can be described by hydrodynamics of onecomponent electronic fluid with the local velocity u = u(r) which satisfies the Navier-Stokes equation for a steady flow: where ⌘ and ⇣ are the shear and bulk viscosities of the fluid, P is the pressure and n is the local electronic density. We do not consider the magnetic-field background and omit the terms nonlinear in the fluid velocity u since our experimental data indicates that the Oersted magnetic fields are negligible while the optical experiment implies the absence of nonlinearities because we do not observe higher-harmonic responses in our experiments. The first term in the right-hand side of Eq. ( It includes the gradient of pressure P which can be considered, in general, as a consequence of an external force f ext = rP applied to the sample [16]. Following closely Ref. [16] in this subsection, we neglect the e↵ects related to the pressure inhomogeneities by setting rP = 0. The second term in Eq. ( where is the electrostatic potential. The last term in the right-hand-side of Eq. (S51) involves, via the parameter ⌫ = mn/⌧ e , the momentum-relaxation scattering time ⌧ e which characterizes the di↵usive relaxation of the electronic momentum density p = mnu due to the lattice disorder and interactions with the phonons [16]. Here the quantity m plays a role of the e↵ective mass of the particle. The validity of hydrodynamics requires that the momentum-conserving electron-electron scattering proceeds with shorter relaxation times ⌧ mc as compared to the momentum-relaxing disorder scattering, ⌧ mc ⌧ ⌧ mr . The flow generates the local electric current density subjected to the conservation equation: For the charged fluid velocities smaller than the plasmonic velocities, the electronic density can be safely considered as a spatially homogeneous quantity, n(r) = n 0 . The conservation of electric charge (S55) then implies that the electronic fluid is described by a divergenceless velocity field, r • u = 0 and corresponds to an incompressible flow. Consequently, the second term in the left-hand side of the Navier-Stokes equation (S51) vanishes, and the bulk viscosity does not play any role. With all these simplifications, the Navier-Stokes equation (S51) reduces to the following di↵erential equation [16, 17]: where is the Drude-like conductivity for the particles with electric charge e, density n 0 , and mass m which scatter over each other with the momentum-relaxing time ⌧ e . Equation (S56) corresponds to Eq. ( The quantity D v has the dimension of length and plays the role of a di↵usion constant. In the absence of viscous behavior, ⌘ = 0, the di↵usion constant vanishes, D v = 0, and the Navier-Stokes equation (S56) reduces to the Ohmic flow J = 0 E with the conductivity (S57). It is convenient to describe a two-dimensional incompressible flow via the stream function = (r), where ẑ is a unit out-of-plane vector. In the components, u x = @ y and u y = @ x , implying that the vorticity of the incompressible flow (S58) takes the simple form: r ⇥ u = ẑ . Applying the curl operator to the Navier-Stokes equation (S56) and using Eq. (S54), we then get the following equation for the stream function [17]: which is also given in Eq. ( The Navier-Stokes equation (S59) for the stream function in the single-component electronic system is strikingly similar to Eq. (S39) which describes the behavior of the charge density n in the two-component, electron-hole system close to the neutrality point. The role of the stream function is played by the charge density n, while the di↵usion length D v is associated with the first length scale ⇠ 1 given in Eq. (S40a). Using the association of the length scales (S50), we notice that at for the lengths of the order of the shortest length in the system, |x| ⇠ TF ⌧ R , the equation for the particle density (S45) resembles the hydrodynamic equation (S59) for the stream function with 2 TF n(r) ' 0. (S57) The particle-hole recombination is not e cient at short length scales, and the number of quasiparticles is conserved. In this limit, Eq. (S60) acquires a formal mathematical resemblance with the hydrodynamic relation (S59). While this curious association may seem to have a very formal character, we show below that the neutral quasiparticle current P develops large whirlpool-like structures in the bulk of the sample and the backflow in close vicinity of the current-injecting contacts. These structures are responsible for the experimentally observed sign-changing charge accumulation pattern discussed in our paper. The reason is that the high-derivative nature of Eq. (S60) allows for the appearance of the non-harmonic solutions, which lead to the emergence of a non-Ohmic component of the neutral quasiparticle current P . As we show below, the latter, non-harmonic component of the neutral quasiparticle flow P is responsible for the sign-alternating charge accumulation pattern of electric charge density n observed near the contacts. Moreover, the very same, non-harmonic property of the system leads to the sign-alternating pattern of electrostatic potential observed in graphene [16]. Thus, the analogy of Eq. (S60) with the hydrodynamic relation (S59) is closer than one might seem from first sight. Finally, we notice that similarly to the electric current j, the quasiparticle current P possesses zero curl, r ⇥ P ⌘ 0, because P is a pure gradient flow according to Eqs. (S35b) and (S53). The quasiparticle flow velocity v = P / ⇢ can, however, can exhibit signatures of nonzero vorticity, r ⇥ v = (P ⇥ r ⇢)/ ⇢ 6 = 0, because the quasiparticle current P represents a compressible flow and the local quasiparticle density ⇢ = ⌧ R r • P is not a globally uniform quantity. The two-component system of electrons and holes (S35) possesses two types of currents: the conserved (S32) electric current J and the non-conserved (S33) neutral particle current P . The electric current J represents a non-hydrodynamic flow which is described, as we will see below, by a coordinate-independent quantity in one spatial dimension and by a harmonic function in two dimensions. In the regimes considered in this article, the charged current does not exhibit a backflow and cannot lead, for example, to a negative resistance, similar to the e↵ect found in graphene. Curiously enough, the neutral current P , given by a chargeless sum of the electrons and holes, can be interpreted as a hydrodynamic flow of compressible fluid described by a Navier-Stokes equation equipped with higher-order derivatives and generalized forces. In order to demonstrate this property, we apply the operator D + 2 + to Eq. ( Despite its cumbersome form, this equation resembles quite closely the linearized Navier-Stokes equation (S51): • The first two terms at the left-hand side of these two equations have the same differential form if one associates the current P with the velocity u of a fluid [we can safely ignore the di↵erence in dimensions of these two quantities given the linearity of Eq. ( • The first term in the right-hand side of Eq. (S61) perfectly matches the exact Navier-Stokes counterpart in Eq. (S51): it describes the momentum relaxation of a fluid volume element. The recombination time ⌧ R plays the role of the momentum-relaxation time ⌧ mr . • The second term in the right-hand side depends only on the background electric field and thus can be associated with a generalized force F which also appears in the linearized Navier-Stokes equation (S51). • The only principal di↵erence between the di↵erential equation (S61) that describes the neutral current P and the usual Navier-Stokes equation (S51) emerges in the third term of the left-hand side of Eq. (S61). This four-derivative term is absent in the standard Navier-Stokes equation, but it can appear in the higher-order generalizations of the hydrodynamic equations known as Burnett and super-Burnett equations [22]. However, due to the high order of derivatives, this term is irrelevant for long wavelengths and can be neglected in the infrared limit. The lowest-order terms of the Navier-Stokes equation (S61) are represented in Eq. ( The association of the hydrodynamical variables (the kinematic share viscosity ⌘, the kinematic bulk viscosity ⇣, the Burnett coupling ⇤, and the e↵ective force acting on the neutral quasiparticle flow f e↵ ) with the parameters of the electron-hole system (conductivities, diffusion constants, recombination time) is shown in Table fluid velocity u P Thus, we demonstrated analytically that the neutral quasiparticle current P could be associated with a compressible fluid that obeys a linearized Navier-Stokes equation equipped with a higher-derivative velocity term and a generalized force acting on a fluid element. Moreover, in the long-wavelength limit, at the distances more extended than the Thomas-Fermi length (⇠ + ), the higher-derivative (super)Burnett term and a higher-derivative correction to the generalized force drop out from the Navier-Stokes equation (S62) which then reduces to the standard linearized hydrodynamic equation for the neutral flow shown in Eq. ( Finalizing this subsection, we stress that the formal resemblance of the transport equation (S62) with the higher-order Navier-Stokes equation does not mean in any way that we have real hydrodynamics in our system for which the momentum-conserved length scalethat governs the collisions between electrons and holes -is shorter than the momentumrelaxing length (the latter quantity is given by mean scattering length of electrons or holes with impurities or phonons). While the hydrodynamic regime in WTe 2 is known to be realized around 20 K, it is excluded at room temperature [23] which we consider in our article. On the other hand, we show theoretically that the Navier-Stokes-like form of the transport equation for the neutral current in the two-carrier systems (S62) leads to the hydrodynamiclike features marked by the appearance of the backflow and whirlpools. Moreover, while the neutral current itself cannot be observed in our experiments, we show that the neutral particle backflow produces the sing-alternating patterns of electric charge accumulation that we were able to detect experimentally in room-temperature WTe 2 . To stress the hydrodynamic features in the non-hydrodynamic regime, we use the term "pseudo-hydrodynamics" concerning the two-carrier transport in WTe 2 . In the passing, we notice that the pseudohydrodynamic regime appears because of the deviation from the charge neutrality regime and, simultaneously, due to the existence of the long recombination time. The latter property implies that the inelastic, momentum-relaxing recombination of electrons and holes proceeds slower than any other processes in the system, including the momentum-preserving kinetic equilibration within either electron and hole subsystems and the momentum-relaxing scattering over phonons and impurities. The accumulation of electric charge density and quasiparticle density naturally occurs in the background of the magnetic field in the Hall geometry [13, 14]. The e↵ect appears due to the transverse voltage gradient caused by the Lorentz force acting on the drifting charge carriers. In this section of Supplementary Material, we discuss the features of the charge accumulation in the absence of a background magnetic field. The e↵ect occurs in the longitudinal direction parallel to the Ohmic drift of the charge carriers. Before addressing the two-dimensional problems, it is instructive to consider the simplest one-dimensional example, which illustrates the basic properties of the two-carrier system close to the neutrality point. Despite its simplicity, even this one-dimensional example has some nontrivial properties, which are the precursors of a more complicated behavior that emerges in the two-dimensional case, which we will consider in detail later. A similar nontrivial one-dimensional behavior is also observed for the lateral charge accumulation in the Hall e↵ect in two-component nearly-compensated conductors [13, 14]. As there are geometrical di↵erences in the charge-accumulation mechanisms in our one-dimensional setup and the nearly-compensated Hall e↵ect, we discuss the one-dimensional case in very detail. Consider a wide uniform conductor with the length L and width W much larger than the recombination length, L R and W R . Given the linearity of the equations of motion, the transport in the middle of the sample features a one-dimensional current flow shown in Fig. have no dependence on the coordinate x along the boundary, so that the solution inside the sample has a one-dimensional character: ⇢ = ⇢(y), n = n(y), etc. Notice that according to Eq. (S27), the electric current J is related to the charged current j via the relation J = ej. The continuity (S32) of the electric current j(x, y) = (0, j y (y)) implies @ y j y (y) = 0. Therefore, the charged current is a constant quantity inside the sample j y (y) = j, which coincides with the value that the current (S63) takes at each sides of the slab. In one spatial dimension, the equation for the charge density (S45) reduces to the simple di↵erential equation: with the general solution The solution is entirely characterized by four arbitrary parameters n ± 1,2 which will be fixed later via appropriate boundary conditions. The electric field E(x, y) = (0, E y (y)) is related to the electric charge density (S65) with the help of the one-dimensional Maxwell equation (S34): @ y E y (y) = 4⇡e n(y). (S66) Its solution, e s a e s{ay , (S67) contains a homogeneous, coordinate-independent contribution E 0 supplemented by the inhomogeneous, space-dependent part. The latter is rigidly tightened to the charge density (S65), and its parameters n ± 1,2 , via the four amplitudes: where the proportionality coe cients are as follows: In the near-neutrality regime, Notice that in the chosen near-neutrality regime, ) which implies the following hierarchy: (S73) In our regime, and The neutral and charged particle currents take the following form (S35): According to Eq. ( In the conventional notations, this relation corresponds to the Ohm law for the electric current: with the electric conductivity ⌘ e + . The consistency of the solution requires that the homogeneous part of the electric field E 0 should be related to the charged current j -which consists only of a homogeneous part -via the Ohm law (S78). This requirement implies the following relation for the electric field (S67) at the boundaries of the sample: The very same equation (S77a), applied now to the inhomogeneous components of the densities n and ⇢, as to the electric field (S67), gives us the particle density: with the amplitudes: where the proportionality coe cients are as follows: Finally, the last transport equation (S77b) determines the quasiparticle flow P = (0, P y (y)) through the sample: This quantity is expressed via the following amplitudes: where An analog of the Ohm law determines the homogeneous contribution to the neutral quasiparticle current (S84) for the neutral current (S78): Contrary to the electric current (S78), the uniform contribution to the neutral quasiparticle current (S87) naturally vanishes at the perfect neutrality point ( = e h = 0) due to the exact compensation of the electron and hole currents. Finally, the relaxation law for the quasiparticle current (S33), expressed in one spatial dimension as @ y P y (y) = ⇢(y)/⌧ R , is automatically satisfied by virtue of Eqs. (S40), (S46) and (S77b). The boundary condition determines the precise form of the solution on the electric field at the boundaries of the slab (S80) accompanied by the hard-wall condition for the neutral quasiparticle current. As a result, the quasiparticles cannot exit the sample, and therefore the normal component of the quasiparticle current vanishes at upper and lower electrodes of the sample, Fig. We remind that the only free (external) parameter of the system is the electric current J ⌘ ej. This parameter determines, via the Ohm law (S78), the homogeneous part of the electric field, which, in turn, fixes the homogeneous part of the neutral current (S88). Next, the condition for the neutral current (S87) relates the homogeneous part of the neutral current to the inhomogeneous component of the same neutral current; both are seen in Eq. (S84). This chain of relations determines the whole solution of the system since the amplitudes n ± 1,2 , e ± 1,2 , ⇢ ± 1,2 , and p ± 1,2 , that characterize the inhomogeneous parts of the appropriate quantities, are already linked to each other in Eqs. (S68), (S82), (S85). We get the following result for the coe cients: where we used the relation j = J/e between the charged current j and the electric current J. The explicit solutions for the charged component of the density n ⌘ Q/e, the neutral density ⇢, the electric field E y , the electrostatic potential , the neutral current P y , and the electrically charged current J y are, respectively, as follows: , (S90d) J y (y) = J ⌘ ej . (S90f) The electrostatic potential (S90d) is related to the electric field (S90c) via Eq. ( It is also instructive to write separately the densities of particles and holes given by the linear combinations (S26) and (S27) of the first two equations in Eq. (S90): . The solutions (S90) possess specific exciting properties which are worth discussing before proceeding to the analysis of a more complicated two-dimensional case. In our experiments, the longest length { 1 2 associated with the variation of the electric charge density is approximately one order of magnitude smaller than the linear size L of our samples. Due to the hierarchy of the inverse length scales (S47), we fix, to mimic the realistic case, the length scales as { 2 L ' L/ R = 10 and consider the dependence of the electric charge density (S90a) on the other length scale { 1 1 . The corresponding charge accumulation patterns are shown in Fig. At large values of the second length { 1 2 (i.e., at small { 2 ), there are two regions of space detect the two-zone accumulation pattern rather than the four-zone one. Notice that the sign of the accumulated charge density depends not only on the direction of the electric current J but also on the relative magnitude of the di↵usion constants D e and D h : For the same current J, the change in the sign of the di↵erence D = (D e D h )/2 also reverses the charge accumulation pattern to the opposite one. This property will be discussed later in detail. We have just seen that, in the general case, a passing electric current leads to the accumulation of electric charges at both sides of the sample. In this short subsection, we stress that the asymmetry in the conductivities of holes and electrons plays a decisive role in charge accumulation. If the electron and hole conductivities are equal to each other, = e h = 0, then, according to Eq. ( In this case, the electric field becomes a featureless coordinate-independent expression given by the standard Ohm law: E = J/(e + ). Equation ( The sign of the charge accumulation is determined by the direction of the current J, as well as by the relative magnitude of the conductivities of charges and holes. For example, the same current J can induce a positive electric charge (with a dominant presence of holes) or a negative electric charge (with a dominant presence of electrons) at the vicinity of the same electrode depending on which conductivity, of charges or holes, is higher. These observations can be interpreted as follows. The background electrostatic field E y generates the oppositely directed currents of electrons (j e,y ) and holes (j h,y ). If the conductivities of electrons and holes are not equal, e 6 = h , then the magnitudes of these currents do not match each other. Therefore, a nonvanishing total particle current, P y = j e,y + j h,y 6 = 0, is generated (S90e). Since the particle current vanishes at the boundary of the sample, the nonvanishing bulk current produces a nonzero total particle density in the vicinity of the boundaries of the sample (S90b). This particle density is an electrically neutral quantity, implying that the neutral particle current brings the electrons and holes to the boundaries in the same proportions. However, if the di↵usion rate of particles and holes are di↵erent, D e 6 = D h , then these excitations di↵use di↵erently from the boundaries to the bulk of the sample, thus leaving the corresponding charged imprint in the form of the nonzero charge density (S90a) in the vicinity of the boundary. It is the charge accumulation e↵ect that we detect in the experiment. Thus, for the e↵ect of the charge accumulation to be realized at the boundary, we need an electron-hole asymmetry both in their conductivities, e 6 = h , and in their di↵usivities, D e 6 = D h . Below, we set > 0, which corresponds to the case when the electron conductivity is higher than the conductivity of holes. In the case, < 0, the charge accumulation pattern remains precisely the same in its amplitude but gets reversed in its sign. Given by the theoretical expression (S90a), the charge accumulation could provide us with direct access to the evaluation of at least the longest one of the inverse lengths { 1 and { 2 from the experiment. As we will see below, our experimental data indicate that the slope of the charge accumulation near the boundaries can be excellently described by a single exponent, thus indicating that one of the lengths is much larger than another. This conclusion fits well our expectation (S50) that the parameters 1/{ 1 and 1/{ 2 correspond to the Thomas-Fermi and recombination lengths, respectively, with the hierarchy { 1 { 2 which is expected to hold in two-component systems [13, 14]. Therefore, our experimental results justify our choice to consider the limit of large { 1 which simplifies the subsequent analysis. According to Eq. (S40), the spatial features of the solution are controlled by a single (inverse) length scale { ⌘ { 2 ' 1/ R . Neglecting small near-boundary terms, we simplify the solution (S90) in the limit ⇢(y) ' E y (y) ' The expression of the electric current (S90f) remains, obviously, unchanged. Notice that the significant value of inverse length { 2 ' 1/ TF leads to the diminishing of the amplitudes of the inhomogeneities in all discussed quantities, while the spatial size of the inhomogeneities is controlled by another, smaller quantity { 1 which remains finite. The densities of particles and holes (S91) become, respectively, as follows: where the quantity characterizes the magnitude of the accumulated density of electrons and holes. We also used Eqs. (S29) and (S31). Now let us simplify the solution further by considering the case when the di↵usivities of the electrons and holes are the same, D e = D h = D while their conductivities are di↵erent, e 6 = h . In this limit, the symmetrized Thomas-Fermi length (S37) and the relaxation length (S38) become, respectively, as follows: In agreement with our previous calculations, we find that for D e = D h the electric charge accumulation is absent, n(y) = 0, because the densities (S94) of electrons and holes coincide at each point of the sample, n e (y) = n h (y). The electric field E y is a coordinateindependent quantity related to the electric current via the Ohm law: J = e( e + h )E y . The quasiparticle density and the quasiparticle current (S93e) are, however, not vanishing. The main conclusion arising from the analysis of Eq. ( According to the phase diagram of Fig. shown by the red dot in Fig. We illustrate the normalized profiles of all the quantities (S93) for various relative diffusivities and conductivities in Fig. It is the relative magnitude of the electron-hole di↵usivities, D e and D h , and conductivities, e , and h , that determines the sign of the charge accumulation (S93a) near the boundaries at the fixed sign of the electric current. In other words, the accumulated charge (S93a) flips its sign if we pass from the higher di↵usivity for electrons, D e > D h , to the higher di↵usivity for holes, D e < D h (with all other parameters fixed), while the Ohmic part of the potential stays the same. Summarizing, in order for the charge accumulation (S90a) to occur, the electrons and holes must possess both non-equal di↵usivities D e 6 = D h and non-equal conductivities, e 6 = h . On the contrary, if any of these quantities are the same for particles and holes, the charge accumulations do not occur. In the previous Section, we demonstrated that in a two-carrier system with imbalanced electrons and holes, the background electric field leads to the longitudinal charge accumulation near the system's boundaries, even in the absence of a background magnetic field. The word "longitudinal" is used here to stress that the charge accumulation emerges in the direction of the electric field. While we studied the one-dimensional case, the e↵ect also appears in the two-dimensional samples provided the electric field is aligned with one of the axes of the crystal while the boundary is perpendicular to the direction of the field as shown in Fig. The longitudinal accumulation of electric charge is a close counterpart of the transverse charge accumulation in the Hall systems, which appears due to the emergence of the transverse voltage in the isotropic two-component conductors in the magnetic field background [13-15]. In our experiments, the transverse charge accumulation appears as well (see Figs. Consider the case of a spatially anisotropic crystal for which all quantities that characterize the dynamics of electrons and holes (conductivities, di↵usion parameters, and, consequently, kinetic and recombination times, etc.) are spatially anisotropic. Then the transport equations (S35) get promoted to the matrix relations with the parameters D ± and ± that takes a matrix form. Finally, these relations are supplemented with the continuity equation for the electric current (S32), the recombination equation for the quasiparticle current (S33), and the Maxwell equation (S34) which are not a↵ected by the anisotropy. To simplify our considerations, let us assume that the anisotropy a↵ects only the electric conductivity while leaving the di↵usion parameter isotropic. In the basis of the orthogonal a and b axes, the electric conductivity matrix has the diagonal form where aa and bb are conductivities along the principal axes a and b, respectively. The anisotropy implies that aa 6 = bb . Let us rotate the crystal counterclockwise around the c axis by the angle ✓. The conductivity in the rotated sample is represented by the symmetric matrix, where the rotation in the ab plane is given by the matrix The components of the conductivity matrix (S98) in the rotated crystal, are, respectively, given by the longitudinal conductivities along the x and y axes and the o↵-diagonal conductivity. Let take the electric field E = (0, E y ) parallel to the boundaries of the crystal in the y direction as shown in Fig. It is clear that the currents and the densities of charges and quasiparticles, along with the electric field, are independent of the y coordinate due to the translational symmetry in the longitudinal direction. Therefore, the electrostatic potential should be a linear function of the y coordinate only, (x, y) = f 1 y + f 0 , where f 0 and f 1 are constants (if these constants were functions of the x coordinate, then the electric field would depend on y what contradicts the translational symmetry along y). Thus we arrive that the electric field along the y axis, E y = f 1 , does not depend on the transversal x coordinate. The electric charge conservation (S32) along with the independence of the electric current on the y coordinate, j(x, y) = j(y), implies the independence of the transverse current j x on the x coordinate, @ x j x = 0. However, the transverse current should be globally vanishing, j x = 0, since the electric charge cannot quit the crystal at transverse boundaries. Then the x component of Eq. ( Here the superscript "(0)" reminds us that we consider only the x-independent component of the electric field. In the one-dimensional case considered earlier, this coordinate-independent component corresponds to the uniform electric field given by the first term in the square brackets of Eq. (S90c). The transverse electric field (S101) produces -in a distant similarity to a Hall system [13, 14] and in close resemblance of the results on the one-dimensional case discussed in detail in the previous section -the charge accumulation in the transverse direction: which shares similarity with its one-dimensional analogue (S90a). Here the inverse lengths  1 and  2 are given by Eqs. (S40) and (S46), where the conductivities are associated with the transverse diagonal components, ± ⌘ xx ± . To keep our considerations short, we do not pursue this discussion further, but we notice that the coe cients n 1 and n 2 that define the electric charge accumulation in Eq. (S102) can be calculated similarly to the approach described earlier in the one-dimensional case. It is interesting to notice that the behavior of the accumulated electric charge density is determined by the boundary conditions on the neutral quasiparticle currents. The charge accumulated patterns in two-dimensional geometries with finite-sized electrodes will be discussed below. The essential message of this Section is that the coe cients n 1,2 are nonzero in the imbalanced system so that a misaligned crystal should exhibit the transverse charge accumulation (S102) illustrated in Fig. We assume that the electric current is injected at the y = L/2 (lower) side of the slab and then gets absorbed at the y = L/2 (upper) side as illustrated in Fig. where O k (y) are the Fourier coe cients which are given by the inverse Fourier transformation: and k ⌘ k x is the Fourier momentum along the x axis. Substituting into Eq. (S45) the representation (S103) for the charge density O = n(r), we get the following equation for the Fourier coe cients: where we choose the positively-defined "frequencies": A general solution of Eq. (S105) can be expressed in the following form: where n ± a,k with a = 1, 2 are four arbitrary parameters which depend on the momentum k. Using the set of equations (S36), one also gets the corresponding representation for the Fourier coe cient of the quasiparticle density: where the parameters (a = 1, 2) with the coe cients C (⇢) a given in Eq. (S83), are linked to the coe cients n ± a,k that determine the charge density (S107). The electric field E satisfies the Maxwell equation (S34). Expressing the field E in terms of the electrostatic potential via Eq. (S53), the Maxwell equation becomes as follows: (r) = 4⇡e n(r). (S110) The general solution of Eq. ( The harmonic part of the solution can also be represented in the form (S103) with the coe cients: and To keep our equations simple, we allow ! 0,k to take any sign in contrast to the previously defined frequencies (S106). As we will see below, the (non-)harmonic component of the solution in two spatial dimensions is the analog of the (non-)homogeneous part of the onedimensional solution discussed earlier. In the following, we represent n in terms of the Fourier integral (S103). The explicit solution of the Maxwell equation (S110) with the source density (S107) reads as follows: where the non-harmonic coe cients ± 1,k and ± 2,k are again related to the charge density (S107) via the following relation: while the harmonic coe cients ± 0,k ⌘ ± k of the electrostatic potential remain still undetermined at this stage. The Fourier components E k (y) of the electric field (S53) then become rigidly fixed: The non-harmonic part of the quasiparticle current (S120) is given by where, similarly to the one-dimensional case, the new coe cients can be calculated with the use of Eqs. (S37), (S109), and (S115). The coe cients C (P ) a are given by Eq. (S86). The non-harmonic part (S123) represents the non-Ohmic component of the neutral quasiparticle current (S120) which leads to the accumulation of the electric charge observed in the experiment. We will see below that the Ohmic and non-Ohmic components of the quasiparticle current are related to each other via the boundary conditions on the neutral quasiparticle current P . Identifying the normally injected (or taken away) currents at the upper and lower sides of the strip ) and implementing Eq. (S104) to rewrite Eq. (S125) in the Fourier space, we determine the coe cients ± 0,k ⌘ ± k via Eq. (S119b) using the relations: Inverting this matrix equation, we fix the harmonic coe cients of the solution as follows: Notice that the solution is self-consistent if and only if the global conservation of electric charge is respected. Indeed, if the total injected charge and the total charge taken away are equal to each other, ) or ) as k ! 0. We get for the parameters ± 0,k = O(k 1 ) so that the Fourier coe cients (S119) are finite in the infrared limit, j y,k (y) = O(k 0 ), implying that the electric currents j(r) are not divergent inside the slab due to the infinite charge accumulation caused by an imbalanced source and drain flows of the electric current. The electric current (S118) is given by the harmonic components (S119) which are completely determined -in our setup -via the boundary conditions for the electric current (S128). On the other hand, the electric charge accumulation and quasiparticle distributions possess also a non-harmonic component which remains undetermined at this stage. More concretely, we are now left with the task to find the four remaining coe cients n ± 1,2 which determine the charge density (S107). These coe cients can subsequently be used to express the coe cients for the neutral quasiparticle density ⇢ ± 1,2 , the electric potential ± 1,2 , and the neutral quasiparticle current p ± 1,2 via the relations (S109), (S115), and (S86), respectively. While the intrinsically harmonic electric current is entirely defined by its Ohmic flow, the non-harmonic components of the quasiparticle current can only be constrained by the behavior of the quasiparticle current at the boundaries. The quasiparticle current P possesses both harmonic and non-harmonic components, with the harmonic component linking tightly to the electric current (S121). Therefore, the non-harmonic part of P can only be fixed by certain boundary constraints. The first pair of equations for the non-harmonic coe cients n ± 1,2 is set by the boundary condition that the quasiparticle current P cannot quit the sample at the upper and lower edges of the slab: Written in the Fourier space, the condition (S131) for the normal component reads as follows: P y,k (y = ±L/2) = 0. The remaining two relations on n ± 1,2 should, in principle, be set by the conditions to the tangential P x component of the quasiparticle current at the upper and lower edges. What are these conditions? In our idealized setup, the harmonic part of P cannot be constrained at all since it is tightly linked, via the system of Eqs. (S35), to the Ohmic flow of the electric current. Moreover, similarly to the electric current, it is easy to check that the tangential component of the harmonic part of the quasiparticle current P is not vanishing at the boundary similarity to the tangential component of the charged current. This property becomes evident if we notice that the harmonic parts of both currents constitute the same Ohmic flow. It is not clear ab initio what should be the constraints on the tangential non-harmonic component of the quasiparticle current at the boundary. Restricting ourselves to the most straightforward cases, one could assume that this current component is vanishing at the border or equals the minus harmonic component (in the latter case, the total tangential current vanishes at the boundary). One can also generalize this condition by assuming that the tangential parts of both components, given in the Fourier images by Eqs. (S120), are proportional to each other: The coe cient of proportionality, g, determines phenomenologically the property of the boundary that (de)couples the harmonic (h) and non-harmonic (nh) components. The two simplest cases, mentioned above, correspond to g = 0 and g = 1, respectively. In general case, the set of the boundary equations for the tangential component of the quasiparticle current becomes as follows (with s, r = ±1): where the following combinations give the functions on the right-hand side: Equations ( The explicit form of the boundary conditions (S133) for the quasiparticle current is as follows: The right-hand side of this matrix equation is related to the harmonic modes of the solution and is fixed by the form of the injected and absorbed electric current (S128). The coe cients ± k at this side also determine the lines of the electric current (S119) inside the sample. The left-hand determines of Eq. (S135) gives the coe cients p ± a,k which, along with the coe cients ± k , provide us with the density of the electric charge (S107), the neutral quasiparticle density (S108), the lines of the electric fields (S116), and the neutral quasiparticle currents (S135) via the relations (S109), (S115), and (S86). Thus, we get the complete description of the two-component transport system. Let us consider the -function sources located, respectively, at the points x = +a/2 and x = a/2 of the upper, y = +L/2, and lower, y = L/2, edges of the slab: The Fourier components of the normal boundary currents (S126), give us the following harmonic coe cients of the solution (S128): thus leading us to the following source functions (S134): cosh kL e ika/2 sinh kL , (S139a) At the head-on location of the point-like sources, a = 0, the harmonic coe cients (S128) and the source functions (S134) are respectively, as follows: The electric current (S118) is determined by the harmonic component of the electrostatic potential which takes the following form in the mixed coordinate-momentum representation: The solution in the coordinate space can be obtained by application of the Fourier transform (S103) to the above expression. Consider now the extended electrodes of the width b each, centered at the points +a/2 and a/2 at upper (lower) edges of the band, Fig. The electric current at the edges is then: so that the total current entering (leaving) the sample at lower (upper) edges is I 0 . The Fourier transform of the current with the finite-sized electrodes (S144) is ) which di↵ers from the point-like source (S137) by multiplication by the factor 2 sin(bk/2)/(bk). Consequently, the functions F ± ±,k and ± k for the finite-sized extended electrodes (S144) are easily obtained from the expressions for ± k (a) given in Eq. (S138) and F ± ±,k (a), Eq. (S139), that correspond to the point-like electrodes: The electric current is determined solely by the harmonic component which takes, for the wide electrodes of the finite width b and zero o↵set a = 0, the following form: In this Appendix, we discuss an electron-hole system with specially chosen parameters that were presented, at one hand, to enhance the geometric e↵ects and make the presence of the backflow in the quasiparticle flow visually appealing, and, at the other hand, to match the experimental setup closely. Unfortunately, given the multitude of di↵erent parameters which describe the two-dimensional solution (involving, notably, unknown conductivities e , h , the di↵usion coe cients D e , D h and the boundary parameter g), the accuracy of our experiment does not allow us to fix them reliably apart from the scale of the recombination length around R ⇠ 1 μm within the range R ' (0.5 2.0) μm. Moreover, the theoretical solutions cannot be obtained in a closed analytical form, making the analysis even more complicated. However, we found via matching of the results of the numerical analysis with the experimental data that in a particular wide scale of these parameters, the theoretical result for the geometry of the charge accumulation region matches, albeit inevitably significant systematical uncertainty, the experiment very well. We consider an infinitely long strip of the width L with two finite-width electrodes, the source (+I 0 ) and the sink ( I 0 ), placed in front of each other at, respectively, the lower and upper edges of the strip. In notations of Fig. In order to support the electric charge accumulation in the vicinity of the electrodes, we require -following the one-dimensional example that we considered earlier -that the electrons and hole possess di↵erent di↵usion consants and di↵erent conductivities: D e 6 = D h and e 6 = h . The solution is determined with the help of the boundary conditions (S135) that fix the parameters p ± 1,2 of the quasiparticle flow. The latter coe cients are related to the electric charge components n ± a via the relation (S124) and the coe cients 1,2 given in Eq. (S86) as an involved function of the di↵usion coe cients and conductivities for electrons and holes. We choose for the ratio C 2 . The influence of the length-scale hierarchy, { 1 1 and { 1 2 , as well as the value of the boundary condition parameter g on the geometry of the charge accumulation domains and the quasipaticle currents will be briefly discussed closer to the end of this section. This set of parameters allows us to model the geometrical picture of the electric charge accumulation, which correctly matches the optical experiment. The comparison of experimental results and the theoretical model is shown in Fig. Figure The quasiparticle current, Fig. The di↵erence in the electrostatic potentials between the source and the drain generates the harmonic Ohmic flow of the electric charge, Fig. The carriers, accumulated at the boundaries, tend to spread back towards the bulk of the sample due to the di↵usion. While the quasiparticle current brings equal electrons and holes towards the boundary, these charge carriers di↵use di↵erently due to the imbalanced di↵usion constants. The latter e↵ect produces the alternating charge and particle densities in the vicinity of the electrodes, shown in Fig. Since the quasiparticle number is not a conserved quantity, the harmonicity condition does not apply to the quasiparticle current. This property explains, in particular, the qualitative di↵erence between the charged flow in Fig. We would also like to notice that the association of the sign of the electric charge density n with the sign of the variation of the quasiparticle density ⇢ and the direction of the electric j and quasiparticle P currents depends on the relative magnitude of the electric conductivities ↵ and the di↵usive coe cients D ↵ of the electrons and holes, ↵ = e, h. This property is demonstrated in the one-dimensional example shown in Fig. Our simulations indicate that the size and the position of the pseudo-hydrodynamic vortices in the quasiparticle current depend not only on the recombination length R but also on the size of the electrodes, the distance to the boundaries and, to a smaller extent, on other parameters of the system such as the boundary parameter g. The same statement is also valid for the quasiparticle backflow, which determines the sign-alternating pattern of the experimentally observable charge accumulation near the electrodes. In order to make our discussion simpler and exclude one parameter, the electrode size, from our considerations, we discuss below the case of a pointlike electrode. The relevant formulae were already obtained in Section S12 C. In Fig. This equation is obviously valid for the bulk of the sample, at |y|  L/2 TF , and not at the very narrow region of close to the boundary. Therefore, Eq. (S93e) is not valid at the points y = ±L/2 that cannot be probed in our optical experiment anyway.