Proximity-induced superconductivity in a ferromagnet can induce Cooper pairs with a finite center-of-mass momentum 1,2 . The resultant spatially modulated superconducting order parameter is able to stabilize Josephson junctions (JJs) with π phase difference in superconductor-ferromagnet heterostructures and realize "quiet" phase qubits 3-5 . The emergence of two-dimensional (2D) layered superconducting 6-9 and magnetic materials 10- 12 promises a new platform for realizing π JJs with atomically sharp interfaces by van der Waals stacking 13 . Here we demonstrate a thickness-driven 0-π transition in JJs made of NbSe2 (an Ising superconductor) with a Cr2Ge2Te6 (a ferromagnetic semiconductor) weak link. By systematically varying the Cr2Ge2Te6 thickness, we observe a vanishing supercurrent at a critical thickness around 8 nm, followed by a re-entrant supercurrent upon further increase in thickness. Near the critical thickness, we further observe unusual supercurrent interference patterns with vanishing critical current around zero in-plane magnetic field. They signify the formation of 0-π JJs (with both 0 and π regions) likely induced by the nanoscale magnetic domains in Cr2Ge2Te6. Our work highlights the potential of van der Waals superconductor-ferromagnet heterostructures for the explorations of unconventional superconductivity and superconducting electronics. Superconductivity and ferromagnetism are two generally incompatible states of matter and do not coexist in a homogeneous material 1 . At a superconductor-ferromagnet interface, however, Cooper pairs can leak into the ferromagnet and give rise to exotic states, such as the Fulde-Ferrell-Larkin-Ovchinnikov (FFLO) state 1,2 , spin triplet superconductivity techniques In this study, we report π JJs and a 0-π transition in SFS heterostructures that are made of multilayer NbSe2 (3-10 nm) and Cr2Ge2Te6 (CGT for short, 3-13 nm) (Fig. We examine the Josephson critical current of the junctions as a function of the in-plane magnetic field B and the CGT thickness d . The critical current, I c , is determined by measuring the differential resistance of the junction, R = dV dI , versus a dc bias current I (V denoting the dc voltage across the junction). The junctions are nearly rectangular in shape. The magnetic field is applied along one of the principal axes. Because the junction dimension is negligible compared to the Josephson penetration depth (Methods), the junctions are point-like in space; the magnetic flux is uniform in the 2D plane and the Josephson supercurrent has negligible effects on the flux distribution. Unless otherwise specified, all results are obtained at T = 1.6 K, a temperature that is substantially lower than the superconducting transition temperature (T c ≈ 6-7 K) of our devices. See Methods for details on the device fabrication and measurements. The basic characterization of the JJs is illustrated in Fig. Figure We now investigate the CGT thickness dependence of the JJ characteristics. We use the geometry-independent quantity V c = I c R n to characterize the Josephson coupling strength We approximate the saturated V c by its value at 1.6 K, the lowest measurement temperature in this study, and show its dependence on the CGT thickness d (bottom axis) and layer number N (top axis) in Fig. ). ( The best fit (solid line) corresponds to amplitude V c0 ≈ 0.94 mV (which is comparable to the NbSe2 superconducting gap Δ) and coherence lengths ξ F1 ≈ 2.5 ± 0.5 nm and ξ F2 ≈ 2.4 ± 0.5 nm for CGT. In general, the coherence lengths, ξ F1,2 ≈ √ ħv f l E x ∓πk B T , of a ferromagnetic weak link are determined by its scattering mean free path (l), out-of-plane Fermi velocity (v f ) and exchange interaction energy (E x ) with ħ and k B denoting the Planck and Boltzmann constants, respectively. Because the CGT Curie temperature 64 K is much higher than the NbSe2 superconducting transition temperature ≈ 6 K, the coherence lengths are short below T c , and the use of Eqn. (1) for diffusive SFS junctions is justified. The coherence lengths are also nearly temperature independent; for the entire range of 0 < T < T c they change by about 0.1 nm, which is substantially smaller than the CGT interlayer distance of ~ 0.7 nm. Temperature-driven 0-π transitions are thus not expected at any fixed CGT thicknesses near d c . The different temperature dependence of the JJ behavior with different weak link thicknesses (Fig. The discussion above treats the CGT weak link as a ferromagnetic conductor with a constant carrier density. The semiconducting nature of CGT and the charge transfer process at the NbSe2-CGT interfaces are expected to give rise to a non-uniform charge density distribution inside the CGT weak link. Indeed, the junction resistivity (ρ n ≡ R n A) in the normal state scales with the CGT thickness d exponentially (inset of Fig. Finally, we examine in Fig. The sensitivity to magnetic-field and thermal cycles is only observed for JJs with d ≈ d c . The vanishing I c for d ≈ d c (for one scanning direction) indicates the presence of regions of opposite-direction supercurrent within the junction area that nearly cancels each other at B = 0 T. A finite magnetic field destroys the perfect supercurrent cancellation and yields two nearly symmetric critical current lobes around B = 0 T. Such unusual interference pattern is an experimental signature of the formation of a 0-π JJ, a special JJ that possesses spatially separated regions with a 0-and π-phase difference The possibility of stabilizing a 0-π JJ by magnetic domains in a ferromagnetic weak link of uniform thickness is suggested in Ref. In conclusion, we have demonstrated π JJs and a 0-π transition in NbSe2/CGT/NbSe2 SFS heterostructures by systematically varying the CGT thickness. Signatures of 0-π JJs are also observed for thicknesses near the critical thickness d c . Because of the small band gap and unintentional hole doping in CGT, the JJs are in the diffusive limit. Future studies using large band gap ferromagnetic barriers, such as CrBr3 and CrCl3 (Ref. Device fabrications. The NbSe2/CGT/NbSe2 heterostructures are assembled using the standard layer-by-layer transfer technique Here μ 0 is the vacuum permeability and j c is the critical current density. Because the NbSe2 thickness is substantially smaller than its out-of-plane penetration depth of ~ 120 nm, λ J is determined by the total thickness d tot ~10 -30 nm of the JJ. For JJs with thin CGT in our experiment (d tot ≈ 15 nm), the typical junction width is ~ 2 μm; j c is about 2 × 10 7 A/m 2 . The Josephson penetration depth is λ J ~ 30 μm, which is much larger than the junction width. For JJs with thicker CGT, the typical junction width increases to ~ 10 μm in order to measure the small I c . Meanwhile, j c decreases exponentially with thickness, and correspondingly, λ J increases exponentially and remains much larger than the junction width. All JJs in this study are safely in the small junction limit with uniform supercurrent and magnetic flux through the entire junction area. Due to charge transfer at the NbSe2/CGT interface, the interfacial CGT layers are expected to be more hole-doped than the interior layers when the CGT thickness is long compared to its screening length, which is inversely proportional to the square root of its thermodynamic density of states. (Because of the large density of states associated with the Cr d-orbitals and the large out-of-plane band mass due to the layered structure of CGT, a short screening length is expected.) The strong density dependence of the CGT resistivity near its mobility edge 24 therefore explains the observed exponential dependence of ρ n on d in Fig. Electrical measurements. The differential resistance measurements are performed in an Oxford TeslatronPT closed cycle He-4 cryostat with a base temperature of ~ 1.6 K.