Coexistence of intrinsic ferrovalley (FV) and nontrivial band topology attracts intensive interest both for its fundamental physics and for its potential applications, namely valley-polarized quantum anomalous Hall insulator (VQAHI). Here, based on first-principles calculations by using generalized gradient approximation plus U (GGA+U ) approach, the VQAHI induced by electronic correlation or strain can occur in monolayer RuBr2. For perpendicular magnetic anisotropy (PMA), the ferrovalley (FV) to half-valley-metal (HVM) to quantum anomalous Hall (QAH) to HVM to FV transitions can be driven by increasing electron correlation U . However, there are no special QAH states and valley polarization for in-plane magnetic anisotropy. By calculating actual magnetic anisotropy energy (MAE), the VQAHI indeed can exist between two HVM states due to PMA, a unit Chern number/a chiral edge state and spontaneous valley polarization. The increasing U can induce VQAHI, which can be explained by sign-reversible Berry curvature or band inversion between dxy/d x 2 -y 2 and d z 2 orbitals. Even though the real U falls outside the range, the VQAHI can be achieved by strain. Taking U =2.25 eV as a concrete case, the monolayer RuBr2 can change from a common ferromagentic (FM) semiconductor to VQAHI under about 0.985 compressive strain. It is noted that the edge states of VQAHI are chiral-spin-valley locking, which can achieve complete spin and valley polarizations for low-dissipation electronics devices. Both energy band gap and valley splitting of VQAHI in monolayer RuBr2 are higher than the thermal energy of room temperature (25 meV), which is key at room temperature for device applications. It is found that electronic correlation or strain have important effects on Curie temperature of monolayer RuBr2. These results can be readily extended to other monolayer MXY (M = Ru, Os; X/Y=Cl, Br I). Our works emphasize the importance of electronic correlation and PMA to study FV materials, and provide a pathway to realize VQAHI. The valleys, namely the extrema on the valence/conductuion band, provide a different degree of freedom to manipulate information analogous to charge and spin (called as valleytronics), which has attracted intensive attention Since the quantum spin Hall (QSH) state is discovered in graphene It's a natural idea to combine valleytronics and band topology, namely VQAHI. The valley-polarized quantum anomalous Hall effect (VQAHE) can be realized in the Co decorated In-triangle adlayer on a Si(111) surface We perform spin-polarized first-principles calculations within DFT We use strain-stress relationship (SSR) method to attain elastic stiffness tensor C ij . The 2D elastic coefficients where the L z is the length of unit cell along z direction. The edge states are calculated with the maximal localized Wannier function tight-binding model by employing the d-orbitals of Ru atoms and the p-orbitals of Br atoms The RuBr 2 monolayer possesses P 6m2 symmetry with space group No.187, which consists Br-Ru-Br sandwich layer, shown in Figure The dynamical and thermal stabilities of RuBr 2 monolayer have been proved by phonon spectra without soft modes and the molecular-dynamics simulations Electronic correlations have significant impact on the magnetic, topological and electronic properties of 2D materials For U <1.8 eV, the gap firstly increases, and then decreases, which is due to the transformation of valence band maximum (VBM) . At small U , the RuBr 2 monolayer is an indirect gap semiconductor. The conduction band minimum (CBM) is at the -K point, whereas the VBM occurs at the one point being close to M point. With increasing U , the system becomes a direct gap semiconductor with both VBM and CBM being at -K point. Around the U =1.8 eV, the HVM with conduction electrons being intrinsically 100% valley polarized The SOC induces valley polarization, which is contributed by the intra-atomic interaction: where λ, L and Ŝ are the coupling strength, the orbital moment and spin angular moment, respectively. Due to the magnetic exchange interaction, the Ĥ0 dominates λ L • Ŝ. For out-of-plane magnetization, the Ĥ0 SOC can be expressed as: The orbital basis for -K and K valleys with the group symmetry being C 3h can be written as in which the subscript τ represent valley index (τ = ±1). At K and -K valleys, the resulting energy can be expressed as: If the -K and K valleys are dominated by d x 2 -y 2 and d xy orbitals, the valley splitting |∆E| can be expressed as: For the d z 2 orbitals, the valley splitting |∆E| is given as: If considering Ĥ1 SOC , the valley splitting |∆E| at K and -K valleys mainly from the d z 2 orbitals is not equal to zero. These can explain U dependence of valley splitting for conduction or valence bands. When U is between 1.8 eV and 2.105 eV, the d x 2 -y 2 and d xy orbitals dominate the -K valley in the conduction bands and K valley in the valence band, and the d z 2 orbitals dominate -K valley in the valence bands and K valley in the conduction band (see Figure In other words, it can be seen that the band inversion of d xy /d x 2 -y 2 and d z 2 orbitals occurs at -K valley with U across 1.8 eV, and the band inversion appears again with U crossing 2.105 eV. It is noted that the gap of RuBr 2 monolayer closes, reopens, and then closes. The band inversion and novel change of gap suggest some topological phase transitions, and QAH insulator phases may exist between the two HVM states. Similar phenomenon can be observed in FeCl 2 and FeClF monolayers These electronic state transitions are related with the variation of Berry curvature. In considered U range, the Berry curvature is calculated, which is shown in Figure Next, we assume that the magnetocrystalline direction of RuBr 2 monolayer is in-plane. By using GGA+SOC, the energy band gaps as a function of U are plotted in Figure For a given material, the correlation strength U should be fixed, and should be determined from experiment. The competition between kinetic and interaction energies the strength of electronic correlation where D and ε xx /ε yy are deformation potential and strain along x/y axis, ŝ0 and σz denote the Pauli matrices. The H ε can induce band inversion, producing QAH phase. Therefore, the RuBr 2 monolayer can be tuned into FV, HVM and QAH states, even though the actual U is larger than 2.07 eV. We use U =2.25 eV as a example to prove the assumption, where the RuBr 2 monolayer is a common FM semiconductor. The a/a 0 is used to simulate the biaxial strain, in which a and a 0 are the strained and unstrained lattice constants. Here, the compressive strain (a/a 0 <1) is applied to achieve the transition of electronic states. To confirm the FM ground states, the total energy differences between AFM and FM ordering by using rectangle supercell are calculated as a function of a/a 0 , as shown in Figure Firstly, we assume that the magnetocrystalline direction of RuBr 2 monolayer is along the out-of-plane one. At some representative a/a 0 , the energy band structures are plotted in FIG. -y 2 and d z 2 orbitals, being similar to varied U . Next, the magnetocrystalline direction of RuBr 2 monolayer is supposed to be in-plane. The energy band gaps vs a/a 0 are plotted in Figure Both electronic correlation effects (U ) and compressive strain (a/a 0 ) can effectively tune the strength of FM interaction, which can produce important effects on Curie temperature T C of monolayer RuBr 2 . The T C is estimated at representative U (1.0 and 2.5 eV) and a/a 0 (1.0 and 0.95) values with the Wolf algorithm based on the Heisenberg model, which can be expressed as: in which S i /S j and S z i are the spin vectors of each Ru atom and the spin component parallel to the z direction, and J and A are the nearest neighbor exchange parameter and MAE. The J with normalized spin vector (|S|=1) can be attained by comparing energies of the AFM (E AF M ) and FM (E F M ) configurations with rectangle supercell, and the corresponding J can be written as: The calculated normalized J are 53.67 meV and 13.95 meV for U =1.0eV and 2.5 eV, and are 19.55 meV and 45.41 meV at a/a 0 =1.0 and 0.95 with U =2.25 eV. The normalized magnetic moment and auto-correlation vs temperature at representative U (1.0 and 2.5 eV) and a/a 0 (1.0 and 0.95) values are plotted in Figure The novel electronic state of RuBr 2 monolayer, like FV, HVM and QAH states, depends on U , which should be determined from experiment result. However, novel electronic state can also be achieved from common one by strain. That is to say, the FV, HVM and QAH states can indeed be realized in RuBr 2 monolayer. These analysis and results can be readily extended to monolayer MXY (M = Ru, Os; X/Y=Cl, Br I). The VQAHI uniquely combines valleytronics and spintronics with nontrivial band topology, which needs appropriate energy band gap and valley splitting for the practical application. For RuBr 2 monolayer, the band gap of VQAHI is about 26 meV (see Figure In summary, we have demonstrated the possibility of realizing VQAHI in RuBr 2 monolayer, as a representative of the monolayer MXY (M = Ru, Os; X/Y=Cl, Br I). The varied U can tune interplay among magnetic, correlation and SOC, which can result in different electronic state, like FV, HVM and QAH states. The VQAHI can be achieved between two HVM states, which possesses exotic chiral-spin-valley locking edge states. It is found that strain is a effective method to achieve VQAHI from a common FM semiconductor. These topological phase transitions are related with sign-reversible Berry curvature and band inversions of d xy /d x 2 -y 2 and d z 2 orbitals at -K and K valleys. It is found that correlation strength and strain can observably tune magnetic interaction, which is related with Curie temperature. Our works provide a comprehensive understanding of RuBr 2 monolayer, which can be used as a candidate material with complete spin and valley polarization, combining valleytronics, spintronics and topological electronics. d