Advanced photonic nanostructures have enabled the maximization of synthetic chiroptic activities. The unique structuring of these building blocks has empowered chiral selective interactions with electromagnetic waves in plasmonic structures and dielectric media. Given the repertoire of optimized chiral surfaces in the literature and the ubiquity of chirality in the organic realm, the natural direction to consider is the operation of these devices in larger optical systems much like their chiral organic counterparts. In this review, we recapitulate advances in active and nonlinear chiral metamaterials. Many of the results, such as the magneto-chiral anisotropy and thirdharmonic Rayleigh scattering optical activity, are relatively unknown members of the more conventional family of tuning methodology and nonlinear processes. We believe they are poised to play an instrumental role in designing advanced chiroptic systems for applications in biochemistry, valleytronics, spintronics, and chiral quantum optics. Chiral electromagnetism, often referred to as optical activity, has two main properties that can describe the way a wave interacts with a given chiral medium. The first is optical rotatory dispersion (ORD) in which the polarization of a wave is rotated as it passes through a chiral medium. The second is circular dichroism dispersion (CD) which describes the asymmetric absorption of light upon incidence with a chiral medium. For instance, D-glucose is naturally occurring in organic life and is capable of being broken down into an energetic form for the human body, while L-glucose is simply passed through the digestive system unutilized by the metabolism; even though both forms of glucose retain the same molecular components, their conformation (not configuration) is slightly different. This alternate conformation arises from the tetrahedral nature of carbon; the bonding angles of these atoms induce alternate forms even if the atoms are connected in the same delineation in both molecules. This naturally occurring asymmetry requires extreme care in the asymmetric synthesis of chemicals and pharmaceuticals. Research in this field has led to Nobel prizes in 2001 and 2021. The goal of this review is to focus on the temporal modulation of these materials, rather than the fixed tailorable response. In the past five years, there has been a surge of research on the modification of the local or effective refractive index of media, thus enabling the research of a diverse set of switchable or temporally-tailorable optical properties. Many paths of research that are related, but out of the scope of this review, include a review on multidimensional nanoscopic chiral optics As we understand in the previous section, the chiroptical signal generated by chiral metamaterials can largely surpass that of its organic counterparts, due to the strong coupling between electric and magnetic fields in the chiral nanostructures. With this understanding in mind, one could envision many practical applications from sensing to communications, by studying how external stimuli can modify the effective chiral features of the material, including the spectral location and magnitude. For practical reasons, active chiral metamaterials with static structures are desirable. To change the coupling strength between electric and magnetic fields while keeping the structures intact, researchers use active constituting materials whose properties change with external stimuli. In the electromagnetic region, these material properties are the permittivity, permeability, or refractive index. It is possible that the electromagnetic properties of a given material are sensitive to external stimuli such as a secondary optical wave, magnetic flux, a thermal flux, etc. As chiral metamaterials are often composites of two or more materials, the effective index determined by the structuring of these materials has more opportunities to modify light than a standard bulk medium. For this reason, active chiral metamaterials can be created with static devices because the electromagnetic coupling strength that signifies the strength of chirality can be modulated with and without the stimuli. As an example, some phase-changing materials such as VO2 can change from a metallic state to a dielectric state, whose electromagnetic properties are dramatically different upon the application of heat. As a result, by employing active materials as constituents in artificial chiral structures, researchers have various methods to manipulate chirality correspondingly. Among the variety of active stimuli to manipulate metamaterials, secondary optical sources are of great interest as they often are associated with high-speed modulation depths. The typical materials used for optical modulation are semiconductors because the conductivity changes dramatically with optical pumping at an energy higher than the bandgap (Figure Compared to optical methods, thermal activation methods are usually much slower, occurring on a timescale of seconds for large bulk materials. This longer thermal time constant for activation is related to the diffusion of heat required to articulate sufficient changes in the bulk properties of the thermally active materials. However, at the nanoscale these heat induced material property changes may occur more rapidly. The most vastly available thermally modulated materials are phase change materials, whose electromagnetic properties change dramatically upon application of heat. The heat breaks the chemical bonds in the material and changes the phase of the material from crystalline to amorphous. More importantly, when the temperature cools down, the amorphous phase changes back to the more stable crystalline phase. The reversible characteristics of thermally transduced phase change materials opens a slew of real-world applications. One thing of note is that phase change materials not only can be controlled by heat, but also by other methods such as light and electricity. In this section however, we limit ourselves to the discussion of thermal methods. An example of a phase change material is Ge3Sb2Te6 (GST-326). By applying a thermal gradient to the design of a chiral metamaterial that utilizes this phase change materials, researchers have been able to spectrally tune the resonant wavelength of the active chiral metamaterial. An alternate method for the direct tuning of chiral metamaterials is to use electrical control, which is attractive because of the compatibility with existing information processing systems, telecommunications, and so on. Unfortunately, electrical tuning of CD and optical activity (OA) is extremely challenging as the electrical doping level is hardly comparable with the total density of states in bulk materials. However, this scenario is dramatically different in two-dimensional (2D) materials. By integrating 2D graphene in a chiral metamaterial, Kim et al. tuned the transmission of a right-handed circularly polarized (RCP) light while maintaining the transmission constant for the other circular polarization. In this way, the authors were able to tune the CD by applying a gate voltage. Here, the magneto-chiroptical properties of metamaterials are investigated. Naturally, to achieve a modulation depth in the optical spectrum via magnetic tuning, the effective refractive index of the metamaterial must be reliant on a magnetically tunable material. To this end, the goal is to implement a type of interaction that is typically observed in chiral liquids known as the Cotton-Mouton effect or in more general substances, as the Faraday effect. To demonstrate this magnetic tunability, researchers introduced cobalt into the fabrication of a layered silver nanohole array, thus demonstrating a change in the modulation depth of 0.035° using this chiral metamaterial. The interplay between the two materials and the geometrical structure of the hole array enables stronger magnetic circular dichroism. reported the first observation of a magneto-chiral response to excitons with a record-high magnetochiral anisotropy of ~4% in twisted van der Waals crystals. Photoexcitation for chiral metamaterials with static structures can switch the handedness. On the other hand, static structures with active materials lack enantiomeric symmetry, which results in asymmetric optical activity spectra. Therefore, there is a considerable need for an active chiral metamaterial with the switching capability and symmetrical optical activity spectral shapes between the different handedness structures. Mechanically reconfigurable chiral metamaterials fulfill the need. In this section, we review several mechanically reconfigurable structures that are actuated by various stimuli. In the THz region, Kan et al. proposed and experimentally demonstrated a micro electro mechanical systems (MEMS) chiral metamaterial facilitated by a deformable 3D chiral structure. In the visible region, Kuzyk et al. used DNA as both a construction material to organize individual plasmonic nanoparticles, as well as fuel for driving the metamolecule to distinct conformational states. by the Zhao group for the creation of chiral nanostructures as well, Despite the demonstration of mechanically reconfigurable individual chiral metamolecules with DNA, active regulation of chirality with a collective motion of metamolecules, particularly in the visible spectral region, still faces significant challenges. Duan et al. demonstrated a new class of hybrid plasmonic metamolecules composed of magnesium and gold nanoparticles. Also, worth discussing in this review are modulated chiral systems, where modulation occurs near or around the chiral metamaterial, but not directly impacting the refractive index of the metamaterial itself. Examples of this are shown in Figure Light-matter interactions in traditional chiral materials manifest in magnetic dipolar interactions, which is usually much weaker than the electric dipolar interactions that dominate the linear optical phenomena such as transmission, reflection, and absorption. Consequently, chiroptical properties, including CD and optical rotatory dispersion (ORD), are typically more than two-order smaller than linear optical properties such as scattering. While CD designates distinct absorptions from incident left circularly polarized (LCP) and right circularly polarize (RCP) light, ORD designates the polarization rotating ability of a chiral material. Nonlinear optical interactions such as secondharmonic generation (SHG) and sum-frequency generation (SFG), however, allow the electric dipolar interactions in media without inversion symmetry. Therefore, the nonlinear chiral responses are comparable with achiral nonlinear responses in chiral materials. For this reason, nonlinear, optical excitation tools such as SHG-CD and two-photon luminescence (TPL) CD have been developed to better identify and realize features unrecognized under linear excitation conditions. The simplest but basic nonlinear optical process is SHG, in which two photons at the same frequency generate a new photon with frequency doubled in nonlinear media. The SHG is sensitive to symmetry breaking and surface conditions, therefore, it has been a critical nonlinear optical tool for investigating chiral metamaterials. Valev et al. use chiral metamaterials with the Slavic shape and its mirror-image to unambiguously observe the large distinct SHG from LCP and RCP light, Figure As described previously, optical properties are generally associated with refractive index of a medium. When the refractive index changes with the intensity of the light, it generates a nonlinear optical phenomenon that typically relates to the third-order nonlinearity. In chiral metamaterials, such third-order nonlinearity leads to a novel phenomenon called nonlinear optical activity. A comprehensive study on the third-harmonic circular dichroism of bilayer metamaterials is provided by Gui et al., in which they utilized a Born-Kuhn analog to understand the chirality of nanorods arranged in C4 symmetry. To summarize, we have reviewed the recent advancements in chiral metamaterials with a designated focus on the active and nonlinear aspects. Other than more conventional methods, such as photoexcited carriers, phase-change materials, and electrical doping, we also summarized a relatively new mechanism of magneto-chiral effect for active tuning. The figure of merit for this effect is the magneto-chiral anisotropy, which has been improved dramatically lately. It would be even more fascinating to find new mechanisms or scenarios that could further increase magnetochiral anisotropy for practical applications in chemistry and pharmaceutical fields. Another promising way to achieve active tuning is to reconfigure the structures of chiral metamaterials, for example, using mechanical methods and biochemicals. Besides directly modulating the chiral metamaterials, the modulation can also occur near to the metamaterial using liquid crystals or mechanical membranes. In the nonlinear optical regime, chiral metamaterials are particularly useful for investigating chiroptical properties. We thus also reviewed nonlinear chiral metamaterials based on second and third-order nonlinearities. Interestingly, the third-harmonic Rayleigh scattering optical activity observed recently is very user-friendly, which may find many applications in identifying nonlinear chiroptical properties in biomedical and chemical species. One of the challenges for tuning chirality is to achieve a high modulation depth or to switch the handedness completely at strong circular dichroism or optical activity with low energy consumption. To address that challenge, the first step is to create chiral metamaterials that only respond to one selected handedness while being inert to the other. One example is to use spin preserving meta-mirrors with structured metals so that one handedness of the circularly polarized light has zero reflection. From the device perspective, creating monolithic devices using chiral metamaterials hybridized with two-dimensional materials can dramatically reduce the device footprints, thus potentially decreasing energy consumption. For example, detecting the full-Stokes polarization of light is vital for many applications but typically demands complex and bulky optical systems. Li et al. achieved this functionality in a monolithic chiral device by integrating chiral metamaterials with graphene. This kind of deposition process, also known as shadow lithography, has been studied at length