only an integral Raman response from the whole ununiformed Ga NPs ensembles on graphene was investigated, the RISE technique has enabled us to detect graphene Raman peaks enhanced by single Ga islands and particularly to correlate the Raman signal with the shape and size of these single particles. In this way and by a support of numerical simulations, we have proved a plasmonic nature of the Raman signal enhancement related to localized surface plasmon resonances (LSPR). It has been found that this enhancement is island-size dependent and shows a maximum for medium-sized Ga islands. A reasonable agreement between the simulations of the plasmon enhancement of electric fields in the vicinity of Ga islands and the experimental intensities of corresponding Raman peaks proved the plasmonic origin of the observed effect known as the Surface Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy. Enhanced near fields of localized surface plasmons in metal nanostructures form a basis of a widespread non-destructive analytic method known as Surface Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy (SERS) enabling high sensitive detection down to single molecular level The Raman scattering itself has a very low cross section (≈ 10 -28 cm 2 .sr In our work, we directly tackle this challenge by the application of correlative Raman Imaging and Scanning Electron microscopy (RISE) to Ga islands grown on a graphene/SiO2 substrate at different substrate temperatures (RT-500 o C). By this method, we have correlated the Raman signal collected from the areas of single Ga islands with the shape and size of these particles. In this way and by a support of numerical simulations, we have proved a plasmonic nature of the Raman signal enhancement related to localized surface plasmon resonances (LSPR). It is worth mentioning that gallium on graphene is a proper testing system for investigation of SERS, since Ga atoms weakly bind to graphene and do not perturb to a great extent its electronic structure Deposition of Ga atoms on CVD single domain graphene flakes was carried out at different substrate temperatures. The goal was to prepare samples with Ga islands -droplets on graphene possessing a sufficient mutual separation and enabling thus to take the Raman signal from single Ga islands. SEM images of the samples after Ga deposition are shown in Fig. Gallium islands grown at 350 o C substrate temperature were visible even by optical microscopy (Fig. In accordance with our findings described above, it was possible to distinguish two types of structuressphere-like and flat islands, visible by SEM as the bright spots in b) and c). The flat islands having mostly larger diameters and approximately half of the spheres heights. The profiles of typical sphereslike and flat island measured by AFM are in Fig. Compared to the enhancement reported in One can hypothesize the enhancement of the Raman signal by Ga islands is caused by plasmon effects. The incident laser beam generates local surface plasmons (LSP) in Ga islands which leads upon resonance to a big enhancement of electromagnetic near-field in their vicinity To prove this hypothesis and shed more light on our results, we carried out numerical simulations of electric field enhancement by Ga islands using a finite-difference-time-domain (FDTD) software (Lumerical). An electromagnetic pulse (plain-waves package) was directed at a model sample with a Ga hemisphere on its top, as depicted in Fig. The fourth power of the electric field enhancement corresponding to a narrow spectral range around the Raman excitation laser wavelength (532 nm) is plotted in Fig. To be sure that the signal enhancement is not just given by the effect of Fabry-Perot resonances (multiple-reflection interference) in our multilayer system, we have also carried out numerical simulations (Lumerical) of the signal reflected from a Ga/SiO2/Si layered model (graphene layer was neglected) as the function of the Ga layer thickness. As can be seen in Fig. Finally, to demonstrate the capability of the correlative RISE, the maps of the Raman peak (G, 2D) shifts measured over the sample area are shown in Fig. Ga islands were deposited at different substrate temperatures on CVD graphene transferred on a Si(100) substrate with a 280 nm-thick SiO2 layer. Depending on these temperatures, Ga islands of distinct diameters (40 -300 nm), shape (spheres, disks), and spacing (up to 1 m) were grown. Such a system exhibited graphene Raman peaks enhanced by individual Ga islands. Utilizing the correlative Raman imaging and SEM (RISE), it was found that this enhancement was island-size dependent and showed a maximum for medium-sized Ga islands. To prove the plasmonic nature of this effect, the enhancement of electric fields in the vicinity of Ga islands caused by localized surface plasmon resonances in these islands was simulated. A reasonable agreement between these simulations and the experimental intensities of Raman peaks confirms the plasmonic origin of the observed effect known as the Surface Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy. Single domain graphene flakes were grown by a standard low pressure CVD method The graphene flakes were then transferred on a non-conductive SiO2 (280nm) layer covering a p-doped Si(100) substrate (resistivity of 1.5×10 -3 Ωcm, provided by ON Semiconductor) using a PMMA-assisted wet transfer method [11]. After loading the sample into an UHV chamber with a base pressure of p = 3×10 -8 Pa, the sample was annealed at T = 300°C for 24 hours to clean the graphene surface prior Ga deposition. The temperature was measured with an optical pyrometer (emissivity = 0.7). The annealing removes atmospheric adsorbates and PMMA residues which results in a decrease of graphene roughness. Ga atoms of thermal energy were evaporated by an effusion cell (Omicron EMF 3) from a PBN boat inside a Mo crucible. The Ga atom flux was kept at a constant value of 5.2x10 