Diamond offers good optical properties and hosts bright color centers with long spin coherence times. Recent advances in angled-etching of diamond, specifically with reactive ion beam angled etching (RIBAE), have led to successful demonstration of quantum photonic devices operating at visible wavelengths. However, larger devices operating at telecommunication wavelengths have been difficult to fabricate due to the increased mask erosion, arising from the increased size of devices requiring longer etch times. We evaluated different mask materials for RIBAE of diamond photonic crystal nanobeams and waveguides, and how their thickness, selectivity, aspect ratio and sidewall smoothness affected the resultant etch profiles and optical performance. We found that a thick hydrogen silesquioxane (HSQ) layer on a thin alumina adhesion layer provided the best etch profile and optical performance. The techniques explored in this work can also be adapted to other bulk materials that are not available heteroepitaxially or as thin films-on-insulator. Diamond is a promising material for realizing photonic devices due to its high refractive index (n = 2.4), its wide bandgap (5.5 eV) and transparency window, and large-power handling capability. Leveraging these properties, devices such as nanowires, One often pursued approach relies on fabrication of thin diamond films -free-standing or on low index substrates. In this technique, devices are etched into thin films, which can be created either by using a combination of laser slicing and reactive ion etching, or using ion implantation and electrochemical etching. Recently, a variant of this approach has been developed that uses diamond regrowth and fusion bonding before electrochemical etching to remove the damaged layer. More recently, angled etching of diamond devices has been performed via reactive ion beam angled etching (RIBAE). To address these challenges, we compared different mask materials suitable for RIBAE. We examined the requirements for different nanophotonic geometries, such as photonic crystal nanobeam cavities and waveguides. These results provide insights into the nature of lateral erosion of masks during angled diamond etching, enabling improved optical performance of fabricated devices. We also benchmark the measured optical Q of devices fabricated in RIBAE with different mask materials against previous devices fabricated using Faraday cage angled etching. We begin by offering a general analysis of the problem of angled ion beam etching of photonic devices. A proper mask material for angled etching processes should be sufficiently thick, have high selectivity, good aspect ratio tolerance, high resolution and smooth sidewalls. A sufficiently thick mask is required to withstand erosion during both vertical and angled etches. The mask should also have a high selectivity to diamond during the etching processes, since low selectivities lead to high vertical and lateral erosion rates in both vertical and angled etches, which will change the mask shape and deform the final device geometry. For photonic crystal nanobeams, which are nanobeam waveguides with quasi-periodic perforations along its length, the mask needs to be made thick enough to protect the incident ion beam from etching into the perforations and inducing sidewall roughness. As these geometries have features with small lateral dimensions relative to the thickness, the mask would need a good tolerance to high aspect ratios; this also requires high resolution in the lithography process for the mask to be accurately defined throughout the depth of the mask. Finally, smooth sidewalls are needed for the mask material, as roughness in the mask that is transferred into diamond during the etching processes will result in higher optical scattering loss rates. We evaluated several combinations of mask materials in this work: (i) hydrogen silesquioxane (HSQ) on titanium (Ti) adhesion layer (hereafter shortened to HSQ-Ti); (ii) HSQ on niobium (Nb) adhesion layer, (HSQ-Nb); (iii) templated Nb or alumina using poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA); and (iv) HSQ on alumina adhesion layer (HSQ-alumina). The fabrication process we used to evaluate different mask materials consists of four steps [Fig. Prior to mask definition, the diamond substrate was cleaned in 49% hydrofluoric acid (HF) for 5 minutes, piranha solution (96% sulfuric acid and 30% hydrogen peroxide in 3:1 ratio) for 5 minutes, then ultrasonic agitation in acetone followed by methanol, and finally dried with a nitrogen gun. Following the mask definition process, which will be explained in further details for each mask material, a vertical oxygen etch was performed in a PlasmaTherm Versaline ICP-RIE system to transfer the mask pattern into diamond. This recipe used a flow of 40 standard cubic centimeters per minute (sccm), pressure of 10 milliTorr, bias and ICP powers of 100 W and 700 W. Angled etching with RIBAE was done with an Intlvac Nanoquest Ion Beam Etching System using oxygen ion beams from a Kaufman & Robinson ion beam source. Two recipes were used in this work: (i) beam voltage 200 V, accelerator voltage 26 V, beam current 100 mA, ICP power 170 W, oxygen flow 38 sccm; (ii) beam voltage 150 V, accelerator voltage 22 V, beam current 80 mA, ICP power 130 W, oxygen flow 30 sccm. For both recipes, the stage angle was = 45 • . For mask removal, the diamond substrate with devices was immersed in a solution of 49% HF and 60% nitric acid in 1:1 ratio for 5 minutes, followed by piranha solution for 5 minutes, and lastly dried through a critical point drying process with carbon dioxide. The photonic crystal devices in this work consist of a clamp on one end, followed by the photonic crystal, a tapered support to provide tethering to the substrate via a thin fin that does not induce coupling losses, Racetrack resonators in this work are designed to have resonances in the telecommunication wavelength range, and are tethered to the substrate by a thin fin at the bottom apex of the cross section. This provides structural stability while minimizing optical losses into the substrate. We first considered a mask with hydrogen silesquioxane (HSQ; FOx-16, from Dow-Corning) and titanium (Ti) [Fig. The automatic stage rotation during RIBAE improved the etch cross-section uniformity. Previously, with Faraday cage angled-etching, a lack of stage rotation during the etch would result in asymmetric cross-sections [Fig. With RIBAE using the recipe with 200 V beam voltage, the HSQ-Ti mask stack has been used to angle-etch racetrack resonators with optical Q's of 286 000, While visible-wavelength photonic crystals have been successfully fabricated using HSQ-Ti mask stack and used to demonstrate memory-enhanced quantum communication, To overcome the large extent of mask erosion arising from HSQ mask, we explored the use of a metal mask for oxygen RIBAE, as many metals form a resistant oxide layer upon oxidation. Metals such as chromium, To fabricate diamond photonic devices with Nb masks, a ∼ 200 nm layer of Nb was sputtered using a magnetron sputtering system with a 2-inch niobium target (AJA International) onto cleaned diamond substrates, and a 1 m layer of HSQ was then spin-coated on top of niobium. Following EBL and development, the mask pattern defined in HSQ is transferred into the niobium layer with an anisotropic Ar/Cl 2 etch, and then transferred into the diamond substrate using an anisotropic oxygen etch for 10 mins. This was then followed by oxygen RIBAE with 200 V beam voltage to suspend the photonic structures, and mask removal to remove HSQ and niobium. The lateral etch rate of diamond during RIBAE was approximately 3.8 nm/min. Although HSQ was not removed prior to angled etching, it did not serve as the primary mask material here as it was eroded at a faster rate compared to niobium during the oxygen RIBAE step [Fig. We first used the HSQ-Nb mask to etch cantilevers, using the recipe with 200 V beam voltage, and observed their cross-section. This mask resulted in a well-defined triangular cross-section without mask redeposition and roughness along the waveguide edges as compared to the HSQ-Ti mask stack [Fig. To demonstrate the effectiveness of the improved triangular cross-section, we fabricated ring resonators with HSQ-Nb mask [Fig. For ring resonators fabricated with HSQ-Nb mask stack, a total optical Q of 730 000 with an intrinsic optical Q of 776 000 were measured [Fig. However, metal masks possess grain structure, which subsequently transfers into diamond as sidewall roughness. [Fig. To fully planarize the PMMA template through sputtering, the required material thickness is equal to half the width of the widest feature if the deposition is conformal. In our photonic crystal devices, this would correspond to the clamps of 3 m width, which would require a 1.5 m-thick layer of niobium to be sputtered. In the case of incomplete planarization, an etchback that uses conventional top-down etching would etch niobium at the bottom of unplanarized features, leading to an absence of mask in those regions. To avoid the need for a thick niobium layer, we employed an argon ion beam at grazing incidence for the etchback process instead. With the correct choice of ion beam incidence angle and thickness of the sputtered niobium layer, unplanarized features can be preserved by virtue of its sidewall coating shadowing the argon ion beam from reaching the bottom of the unplanarized region. The grazing-incidence argon ion beam milling was performed in the same Intlvac Nanoquest tool used for oxygen RIBAE, with the following parameters: argon flow 15 sccm, beam voltage 300 V, accelerator voltage 36 V, beam current 100 mA, ICP power 110 W, stage angle 20 • . After the milling step to remove excess niobium on top of PMMA, thereby leaving the niobium mask surrounded by exposed PMMA, the PMMA was removed by immersion in Remover PG (MicroChem) for 24 hours to complete the mask definition process [Fig. In turn, the insufficient mask thickness resulted from physical limitations in the sputtering process. This was because sputtering is not perfectly conformal; sharp convex corners at the top of trenches see a greater flux of incoming adatoms as compared to concave corners at bottom of trenches. Complete coating is possible for sufficiently low aspect ratios, given as the ratio of the height of a trench to its width. Above a critical aspect ratio, the disparity in coating at top corners of trenches compared to bottom corners would result in insufficient sidewall coating and voids within the mask. A mask with voids and incomplete sidewall coating would be compromised in its ability to withstand lateral erosion, especially over long durations of oxygen RIBAE for telecommunication wavelength photonic crystals. The optical reflection spectrum of a telecommunication photonic crystal, fabricated with template-patterned Nb mask, is shown in Fig. The low measured optical Q's of telecommunication wavelength photonic crystals using PMMA/Nb mask as compared to those achieved with HSQ-Ti mask (with Faraday cage angled etching) shows that a thick mask is needed to shadow the photonic crystal holes from being etched and produce high optical Q's. However, it is difficult to deposit thick layers of commonly used hard mask materials without accumulating stress and/or without grain structure. A compromise was reached by using a thick HSQ layer, but with a thin alumina underlayer instead of a metallic underlayer as in the HSQ-Ti process [Fig. We first fabricated cantilevers with the HSQ-alumina mask stack to demonstrate smooth triangular cross-sections during and after the RIBAE process [Fig. The cross-section of a cantilever fabricated using the HSQ-alumina mask has a top apex angle of ∼ 58 • , [Fig. Telecommunication-wavelength photonic crystals were then fabricated with HSQ-alumina mask with the process outlined above, using the same design that was used for the PMMA/Nb process, but with the waveguides widened to account for mask erosion during RIBAE. The waveguides were deliberately made wider at the lithography step to account for lateral erosion during RIBAE, given the significant HSQ erosion rate observed when HSQ-based masks were used. A scanning electron micrograph (SEM) of a completed device is shown in Fig. The lack of high-quality diamond materials grown through heteroepitaxial methods has motivated the development of nanofabrication techniques in bulk substrates. The angled-etching technique is studied in particular here owing to the success of fabricating quantum photonic devices in the visible wavelength range using the reactive ion beam angled etching (RIBAE) technique. To extend this success of angled-etching to devices in the telecommunication wavelength range, various mask choices were evaluated based on their ability to produce smooth triangular cross-sections reliably. The cross-sections should have no roughness due to mask redeposition or insufficient shadowing during the angled etching process. This work outlines the requirements for a good mask stack: it should be sufficiently thick, have high selectivity, good aspect ratio tolerance, high resolution and smooth sidewalls. However, we found that it was not possible to satisfy all five criteria simultaneously through measurements of optical Q's of photonic devices fabricated using various masks. We summarize the measured optical Q's in Table 