Light-matter interaction is one of the key routes to understanding and manipulating geometric and electronic behaviors of materials, especially two-dimensional materials which are optically accessible owing to their high surface to volume ratio. In the current work we focus on the recently discovered two-dimensional sliding ferroelectric materials, in which the out-of-plane electric polarization can be switched with a small horizontal translation in one layer. Combining symmetry analysis and first-principles calculations, we predict that light illumination could inject non-equilibrium magnetic moments into the sliding ferroelectrics. Such magnetic moment is composed of both spin and orbital degrees of freedom contributions. We use ZrI2, WTe2, and MoS2 bilayer ferroelectrics to illustrate our theory. Under intermediate light illumination, one can yield non-equilibrium magnetic moments on the order of 0.1 -1 μB in these systems, which also depends on the polarization nature of incident light. Furthermore, we show that such photo-injected magnetism changes its sign when the sliding dipole moment switches. This photo-magnetization can be detected by magneto-optical methods (such as Kerr or Faraday effect), which serves as an indicator of sliding ferroelectricity. Hence, one can use an all-optical pump and probe setup to measure and detect the subtle sliding ferroelectric phase. Two-dimensional (2D) ferroelectric materials hold their potential applications in ultrafast information storage and data memory with low energy cost and high volumetric density In addition to these inherent ferroelectric 2D structures, very recently, Wu et al. have proposed another type of 2D ferroelectrics, based on the vertical stacking mismatch between two or more vdW layers Subsequently, another type of sliding ferroelectric (SFE) materials, Td-WTe2, has been theoretically predicted The first experimental observation of 2D sliding ferroelectrics was reported in 2018 based on WTe2 Since the energy barrier separating the two SFE states (dipole moment up and down, denoted as P ⇑ and P ⇓ , respectively) is low, one has to reduce direct and strong interactions between the tip and samples during its operation. Hence, non-contacting approaches would be more preferable for probing these states, compared with electrical or mechanical schemes which usually require direct contacts and may introduce unwanted impurities and disorders. Note that in the pioneer work Optical illumination, on the other hand, is a widely accepted method to detect and manipulate materials without direct contacts does not possess such property -its photocurrent magnitude and direction remain unchanged under dipole flip. Hence, it would be ideal to resort to other all-optical method which can detect and distinguish bilayer SFE P ⇑ and P ⇓ states. In this work, we predict that light irradiation induced static magnetism, namely, photo-magnetization, could be a simple and addressable approach. By analyzing the symmetry of these two types of bilayer SFE materials, we show that light induced static magnetization can be opposite in the P ⇑ and P ⇓ states. The photo-magnetization is evaluated according to quadratic response theory When light irradiates into a material, it excites electronic interband transitions between valence and conduction bands. In the quadratic optical process, the system absorbs one photon and emit another, leaving a perturbed state with magnetization change. This process can be expressed as where a, b, c are Cartesian coordinates and E(ω) is the Fourier transformation of alternating electric field (light) with ω being angular frequency. The complex conjugate of electric field is E * (ω) = E(-ω). This equation explicitly indicates that under a two-photon (polarization along b and c respectively) process with opposite phase, the system could generate magnetization 〈δm % 〉 which points along direction-a. This photo-magnetization is static, i.e., its angular frequency is zero. According to previous works According to the second order Kubo response theory, the total NLE response function can be explicitly evaluated in the independent particle framework Here S D.F. is the area of a simulation unit cell, and integral is performed in the 2D first Brillouin zone. Operator O D indicates spin ( S ) or orbital ( L ) angular momentum operator. It involves three band transitions among band-l, m, and n. We use velocity gauge with velocity matrix v B@ = 〈l|v J|m〉 and angular momentum matrix O @A % = 〈lKO D % Km〉 . f B@ = f B -f @ and ω @B = ω @ -ω B are occupation and frequency difference between bands m and l. All the k-dependence on the velocity, occupation, and frequency matrices are omitted. The Landé g-factor g 8 for spin and orbital degrees of freedom are 2 and 1, respectively. In order to phenomenologically incorporate environmental scatterings such as disorder, impurity, electron-phonon coupling, etc., we include carrier lifetime τ. Note that this lifetime should be different for different states (band index n and momentum k), but a complete evaluation is impossible, even in a perfect crystal. Hence, we follow previous works Since we are treating 2D materials which is ultrathin in the out-of-plane dimension, local field effect would be marginal and independent particle approximation is appropriate. This NLE response function gives the photo-magnetization injected in one simulation unit cell. Considering the phase difference between the LPL and CPL, we can use the symmetric real and asymmetric imaginary parts of χ &' % (ω) as We will use them to evaluate the NLE responses under LPL and CPL, respectively. In order to distinguish the subscript between the LPL and CPL, we use ↺ and ↻ to denote the left-handed and right-handed CPL (instead of subscripts xy and yx in ξ), respectively. Since both spin and orbital are angular momenta, and they show same symmetry transformation under mirror M, rotation C, and time reversal T. We will only discuss their total contributions to magnetization. We now discuss NLE responses of ZrI2 bilayers (Fig. . In this structure, the two layers are related to each other by a glide operation, , where x IG and x I5 are atomic coordinates of the lower (L1) and higher (L2) layers, respectively. This indicates that the centrosymmetric points of each layer are vertically aligned in Pm21b . Hence, this structure is still centrosymmetric without spontaneous polarization. However, according to previous works Note that all of these three states contain a M $ mirror symmetry. These spatial symmetry imposes constraints on the NLE response functions. We denote the numerator of the integrand in Eq. ( The denominator in Eq. ( Next, we focus on the 〈δm # 〉 that is nonzero under CPL irradiation. In the timereversal symmetric T systems, previous works Here the commutator or interband Berry curvature Ω B@ 2 , and (O @@ % -O BB % ) measures the angular momentum difference between band m and l. The Eq. ( where |ψ = 〉 represent Wannier functions centered at the j-th layer (j = 1, 2). Then we multiply the angular momentum operators in Eqs. ( We plot the band structure of P ⇑ -ZrI2 bilayer in Fig. . We only show our results for ξ ↺ # (ω), which represents photo-magnetization under left-handed CPL. The right-handed CPL produces opposite magnetisms as This can be clearly seen from the position commutation in Eq. ( From Fig. When the L2 layer slides 0.28 Å, the system reaches high symmetric SD structure. show that a small distance translation could drastically change the NLE response, so that this photo-magnetization could serve as a sensitive method to detect vdW sliding, which only demands marginal energy with very small geometric variation. Furthermore, another 0.28 Å sliding would bring the system into P ⇓ -ZrI2 structure. Our results show that the NLE response ξ ↺ # (ω) is opposite to that in P ⇑ -ZrI2. In detail, the ξ ↺ # (ω)@L1 in P ⇑ equals to -ξ ↺ # (ω)@L2 in P ⇓ , and ξ ↺ # (ω)@L2 in P ⇑ equals to -ξ ↺ # (ω)@L1 in P ⇓ . Hence, the total photo-magnetization 〈δm # 〉 also flips its sign from P ⇑ to P ⇓ . This can be understood by noting that C 5# x K ⇓ = x K ⇑ . Again we look at the numerator in Eq. ( In particular, one notes that the operation C 5# maps the L1 in P ⇑ to L2 in P ⇓ (L2 in P ⇑ to L1 in P ⇓ ), so the layer contribution also flips. These are consistent with our numerical calculations. We schematically plot this sliding induced layer-magnetization in Fig. Then we briefly discuss WTe2 bilayer. Note that WTe2 is semimetallic without a finite bandgap, here we also include intraband contribution from the Fermi surface Here |n⟩ and E Z is the Fermi energy. The Dirac delta function δ(ħω A -E Z ) indicates Fermi surface contribution. This Fermi surface effect mainly comes from the off-diagonal element contribution in the perturbed density matrix, and it has been applied to evaluate photocurrent in metals Flipping the SFE through a ~0.7 Å sliding of L1 could yield a 0.2 μB moment change. We plot their NLE distributions in the k-space, which show dominant peaks at k $ = ±0.2 Å. Again, one has to note that the above calculations and discussions are based on left-handed CPL irradiation. If right-handed CPL is used, all signs will be reversed, which will not be discussed in detail. We also consider another type of SFE material, bilayers of honeycomb lattice. We use transition metal dichalcogenide MoS2 as the exemplary system. The high symmetry MoS2 bilayer stacking is an eclipsed pattern where L2 is fully on top of L1, usually denoted as AA stacking (layer group of P6 • m2). However, this stacking pattern is dynamically unstable, and it would spontaneously slide into two structures with nonzero out-of-plane dipole moment. Their atomic geometries are shown in Fig. \ A^x I5 = x IG . Similar argument holds for the P ⇓ -MoS2. We can also use mirror symmetry to connect these two SFE states, namely, M H x K ⇑ = x K ⇓ . This is illustrated in Fig. One may wonder that unlike CPL, the LPL does not break time-reversal symmetry T, hence it seems counterintuitive that LPL could inject magnetization. This can be understood that energy dissipation from damping effect (finite carrier lifetime τ ) breaks T. Here only photo-magnetization along x (⟨δm $ ⟩) is nonzero, while the other two directions are symmetrically forbidden. In Figs. symmetry yields η $$ $ (ω) = -η ## $ (ω) . Hence, we will only focus on the x-LPL irradiation, and the y-LPL irradiation results would be similar (with a sign flip). In the In order to see the ferroelectric switch effect clearly, we add the layer-resolved responses together (L1 and L2) and plot their NLE responses in Fig. Another interesting question would be if the NLE response flip can be seen in conventional ferroelectrics. We note that the linear (inverse) Edelstein effect, which is one of the key approaches for spin-charge conversion, shows electric polarization dependence in ferroelectrics Edelstein effect (which is under static electric field). In a lot of conventional ferroelectric materials, such as BaTiO3 perovskite, they usually belong to a higher space group symmetry than 2D SFEs. The P ⇑ and P ⇓ states are usually connected via inversion symmetry P (Px K ⇑ = x K ⇓ ). If we examine the response function χ, it is even under P. Hence, the polarization switch does not flip photo-magnetization in these ferroelectrics. Even though this is not always the case in conventional ferroelectrics, polarization dependent photo-magnetization only exists when the materials and experimental setups are carefully designed. In the 2D sliding ferroelectric materials, the reduction in the out-of-plane dimension downgrades the space group symmetry into layer group symmetry, yielding more symmetry allowed photomagnetization situations. For example, in the current study, the two vdW layers are connected by either C 5 rotation or mirror reflection M , which allows photomagnetization flipping under dipole switch. Hence, we suggest that the NLE effect is an appropriate way to be observed in SFE over conventional ferroelectrics. One may wonder if optical irradiation could also switch the sliding polarization. In order to discuss this, let us briefly consider symmetry analysis. The hitherto discussed sliding ferroelectrics are mainly out-of-plane (z) polarized, and the flip between P ⇑ and P ⇓ is subject to a C 5 rotation or mirror reflection M. However, in most cases, the light alternating electric field does not break such symmetry. Therefore, under light irradiation, the Gibbs free energies of both P ⇑ and P ⇓ remain degenerate 10 and the dipole switch does not easily occur. Nevertheless, one can consider two possible approaches. One is to design 2D sliding ferroelectric materials that is out-of-plane symmetry broken, such as using 2D Janus TMD systems We expect this photo-magnetization in SFE can be observed in experiments due to the following reasons: (1) The NLE is a local effect which is evaluated in each unit cell. Hence its characteristic length scale can be as short as a few Å. This is different from nonlocal responses such as electric current generation, which depends on ferroelectric domain distributions. Since the energy barrier of coherent SFE switch is low, it can be anticipated that domain wall formation energy is also small, which corresponds to stacking fault and may occur with rippling of one layer. Therefore, the photomagnetization may be advantageous than nonlocal effects. (2) According to our estimate, the photo-magnetization can be on the order of 0.1 -1 μB per unit cell. This magnitude is large enough to be observed in experiments. (3) In order to obtain observable magnetization, intermediate laser pump with its intensity on the order of 10 10 W/cm 2 is required. Such laser intensity is not too strong to damage the sample, especially when the sample is in 2D nature, which significantly reduces direct laser absorption. In conclusion, we use nonlinear optics theory to predict light injecting magnetization in SFE materials, which can be referred to as NLE responses. We use ZrI2, WTe2 and MoS2 bilayers to show that CPL or LPL irradiation could trigger observable magnetic moments in their vdW layers. The stacking pattern could serve as an effective tuning parameter to modulate the NLE response functions. Particularly, we apply symmetry analysis and first-principles density functional theory calculations to suggest that this photo-magnetization can be opposite in the two SFE states. Even though the P ⇑ and P ⇓ states are spatially close (~1 Å sliding of one layer) and energetically degenerate, this photo-magnetization can be used as a sensitive method to probe and distinguish them. Unlike measuring nonlinear Hall conductance, Methods. Our first-principles calculations are based on density functional theory with its exchange correlation interaction treated in the form of Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof (PBE) form Projector augmented wave method 62 is used to treat the core electrons, and the valence electrons are represented by planewave basis set with a kinetic cutoff energy set to be 400 eV. This approach would yield similar computational quality compared with allelectron calculations. Periodic boundary condition is used, which includes a vacuum space of ~15 Å in the out-of-plane z-direction, to eliminate the artificial interaction between the periodic images. Dipole corrections are adopted 